pɹeɪz fəɹ ðə wil ə taɪm "ðə bæɾəl sinz əv ðə bɹɛθləs ɝdʒənsi ʌv fɝsthæn ɪkspɪɹiəns, ən ði . . . ivəl leɪst ɪndə ðə fɔɹsɪz ʌv ɡʊd, ðə deɪnʒɝz leɪɾənt ɪn ɛni pɹɑməst sælveɪʃən, ðə sɛns ə ði ʌnəvɔɪɾəbəl ɔnslɔɾ ʌv ʌnpɹɪdɪktəbəl ɪvɛns bɛɹ ðə mɑɹks ʌv əmɛɹəkən næʃənəl ɪkspɪɹiəns dʊɹɪŋ ðə læs θɹi dɛkeɪdz."

Praise for THE WHEEL OF TIME "The battle scenes have the breathless urgency of firsthand experience, and the . . . evil laced into the forces of good, the dangers latent in any promised salvation, the sense of the unavoidable onslaught of unpredictable events bear the marks of American national experience during the last three decades."

 - ðə nu jɔɹk taɪmz "hɪz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪz dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt . . . baɪ ðə ɹɪtʃnəs ʌv ɪts fæbɹɪk, wɪð ɔl ðə tʃɑɹm ən nɑivəteɪ ʌv ðə bɹʌðɝz ɡɹɪm, ən ðə soʊʃəlslæʃmɔɹəl kɑməntɛɹi ʌv hʌksliz bɹeɪv nu wɝld. wɪð ɪz wɛl-flɛʃt-aʊt kæɹɪktɝz, dɑɹk ɪmədʒɹi, kɑmɪk ɹɪlif, vɪvəd lændskeɪps, ən ə fæsəneɪɾɪŋ sɛns ə taɪmləsnəs, dʒɔɹɾən əz kɹieɪɾəd ə kɑmplɛks lɪɾɝətʃɝ wɪð ə læŋɡwədʒ ən ɹiæləɾi ɔl ɪts oʊn."

 - The New York Times "His writing is distinguished . . . by the richness of its fabric, with all the charm and naivete of the Brothers Grimm, and the social/moral commentary of Huxley's Brave New World. With his well-fleshed-out characters, dark imagery, comic relief, vivid landscapes, and a fascinating sense of timelessness, Jordan has created a complex literature with a language and reality all its own."

 - bɹustɝ mɪltən ɹɑbɝtsən, bʊkpɪdʒ "θɹuaʊt dʒɔɹɾənz pɹiɛmənən haɪ-fæntəsi sɑɡə . . . ðə kæɹɪktɝz (maɪnɝ əz wɛl əz meɪdʒɝ), ðə wɝld, ən ðə sɔɹs ə paʊɝz əv ɹɪmeɪn ɹɪmɑɹkəbli ɹɪtʃ ən kənsɪstənt - noʊ min fit. . . . əmɪɾ ɔl ðə stɝm ən dʒɹæŋ, haʊɛvɝ, ɪz ə faɪnli tun kɑmɪk stʃɹeɪn ðət boʊθ lɛvənz ðə stɔɹi ən ædz tə ɪts dɪvɛləpmənt. ə meɪdʒɝ fæntəsi ɛpɪk."

 - Brewster Milton Robertson, BookPage "Throughout Jordan's preeminent high-fantasy saga . . . the characters (minor as well as major), the world, and the source of powers have remained remarkably rich and consistent - no mean feat. . . . Amid all the Sturm and Drang, however, is a finely tuned comic strain that both leavens the story and adds to its development. A major fantasy epic."

 - bʊklɪst "tʃɹuθ ɪz nɑɾ oʊnli stʃɹeɪnʒɝ, ɪts ɹɪtʃɝ ðən fɪkʃən, bʌt dʒɔɹɾənz fɪkʃənəl junəvɝs əpɹoʊtʃɪz ðə vɝaɪəɾi ən kəmplɛksəɾi ʌv ðə ɹil. . . . plɔtlaɪnz [ɑɹ] stʃɹʌmd wɪð ɹɛzəneɪɾɪŋ lɔŋ-weɪv ɹɪðəmz sʌmθɪŋ laɪk beɪɾoʊvənz ɝɔɪkə."

 - Booklist "Truth is not only stranger, it's richer than fiction, but Jordan's fictional universe approaches the variety and complexity of the real. . . . Plotlines [are] strummed with resonating long-wave rhythms something like Beethoven's Eroica."

 - ɹɑbɝt nɑks,  nuzpeɪpɝz "ædvɛntʃɝ ən mɪstɝi ən dɑɹk θɪŋz ðət muv ɪn ðə naɪt - ə kɑmbəneɪʃən ə ɹɑbən hʊɾ ən stivən kɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz hɑɹd tə ɹɪzɪst. fɝðɝmɔɹ, dʒɔɹɾən meɪks ðə ɹiɾɝ pʊt daʊn ðə bʊk ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðə weɪt fəɹ ðə nɛks taɪɾəl ɪn ðə sɪɹiz."

 - Robert Knox, MPG Newspapers "Adventure and mystery and dark things that move in the night - a combination of Robin Hood and Stephen King that is hard to resist. Furthermore, Jordan makes the reader put down the book regretting the wait for the next title in the series."

 - mɪlwɔki sɛntənəl "ðə wil ə taɪm [ɪz] ɹæpədli bɪkʌmɪŋ ðə dɪfɪnɪɾɪv əmɛɹəkən fæntəsi sɑɡə. ɪts ə fæntəsi teɪl sɛldəm ikwəld ən stɪl lɛs ɔfən sɝpæst ɪn ɪŋɡlɪʃ."

 - Milwaukee Sentinel "The Wheel of Time [is] rapidly becoming the definitive American fantasy saga. It is a fantasy tale seldom equaled and still less often surpassed in English."

 - ʃəkɑɡoʊ sʌn-taɪmz "ɪn ðə dɛkeɪdz sɪns dʒeɪ ɑɹ ɑɹ toʊkinz lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɹɪŋz tʃɹɪlədʒi wɑz pʌblɪʃt, mɛni fæntəsi ɹaɪɾɝz əv tʃɹaɪd tə kæptʃɝ ðə spɪɹəɾ ə ðət sɛmənəl wɝk. waɪl mɛni hæv bɪn eɪbəl tə ɪməteɪt ðə staɪl, dɪvɛləp ə sɪməlɝli swɪft ən kɑmplɛks plɑt, ən kɹieɪt kənvɪnsɪŋ kæɹɪktɝz, nʌn hæd kæptʃɝd ðə spɪɹəɾ ə smɔl mɛn ən maɪɾi, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ əɡɛnst ə fɔɹs ʌv oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ ivəl. ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən hæz."

 - Chicago Sun-Times "In the decades since J. R. R. Tolkien's Lord of the Rings trilogy was published, many fantasy writers have tried to capture the spirit of that seminal work. While many have been able to imitate the style, develop a similarly swift and complex plot, and create convincing characters, none had captured the spirit of small men and mighty, struggling against a force of overwhelming evil. Robert Jordan has."

 - ɑɾəwɑ sɪɾəzən "mædʒɪk ən peɪsɪŋ ən dɪteɪl ən hjumən ɪnvɑlvmənt, wɪð ə sɝɾən sʌɾəlti ʌv pɹɛzənteɪʃən ən ə ɡɹæn sɛntʃɹəl vɪʒən. ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən . . . ɪz ə lɑɾ ə ɹaɪɾɝ!"

 - Ottawa Citizen "Magic and pacing and detail and human involvement, with a certain subtlety of presentation and a grand central vision. Robert Jordan . . . is a lot of writer!"

 - pɪɹz ænθəni "dʒɔɹɾən əz ə paʊɝfəl vɪʒən ʌv ɡʊɾ ən ivəl - bʌt wʌt stʃɹaɪks mi əz moʊs plɛʒɝəbəl . . . ɪz ɔl ðə fæsəneɪɾɪŋ pipəl muvɪŋ θɹu ə ɹɪtʃ ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ wɝld."

 - Piers Anthony "Jordan has a powerful vision of good and evil - but what strikes me as most pleasureable . . . is all the fascinating people moving through a rich and interesting world."

 - ɔɹsən skɑt kɑɹd "dʒɔɹɾən kən ɔlweɪz bi kaʊntəɾ ɑn tə ɡɹaʊn ɪz dɪziɪŋ ɪntʃɹiɡz ɪn sɑləd tʃʌŋks ə kʌltʃɝəl dɪteɪl, ən hɪɹ i ɹaɪzəz tə ði əkeɪʒən, wɪð tʃæptɝz əz dɛns əz spɛnsɪɹiən stænzəz wɪð sɪmbəlz ən ɹɪtʃuəlz. . . . hi mənɪpjəleɪts ðə dɪsɔɹɾɝ ə hɪz næɹəɾɪv tə kɹɛɾəbli kənveɪ ə sɛns ʌv ən ɛmbæɾəld wɝld ɑn ðə vɝdʒ ə sɛlf-dɪstʃɹʌkʃən, ən i ɛntɝteɪnɪŋli dʒʌkstəpoʊzɪz ðə kɔɹtli səvɪləɾi ʌv ɪz vɪlənz wɪð ðə pɹikɛɹiəs keɪɑs ðeɪ kɑz."

 - Orson Scott Card "Jordan can always be counted on to ground his dizzying intrigues in solid chunks of cultural detail, and here he rises to the occasion, with chapters as dense as Spenserian stanzas with symbols and rituals. . . . He manipulates the disorder of his narrative to credibly convey a sense of an embattled world on the verge of self-destruction, and he entertainingly juxtaposes the courtly civility of his villains with the precarious chaos they cause."

 - pʌblɪʃɝz wikli "dʒɔɹɾən kəntɪnjuz tə juɾəlaɪz ɪz taʊɝɪŋ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən tə kənstʃɹʌk plɑts ʌv ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl ɪnʒənuəti ən dɪvɛləp θimz hɪɾən, səmtaɪmz kwaɪt dipli, ɪn ɝliɝ ɪnstɔlməns. əz ɛvɝ, dʒɔɹɾən ɹaɪts ɪntɛlɪdʒənli ən lɪɹɪkli - wʌn ə ðə moʊs lɪɾɝɛɹi ɪkspoʊnəns ə ðə ʒɑnɹə."

 - Publishers Weekly "Jordan continues to utilize his towering imagination to construct plots of incredible ingenuity and develop themes hidden, sometimes quite deeply, in earlier installments. As ever, Jordan writes intelligently and lyrically - one of the most literary exponents of the genre."

 -  mæɡəzin "dʒɔɹɾənz bɛstsɛlɪŋ haɪ fæntəsi sɪɹiz kæɹiz ɑn . . . kəlɑsəl, dɔntɪŋli kɑmplɛks stɔɹitɛlɪŋ. . . . ðə næɹəɾɪv ɛmplɔɪz ɛləməns ə ɹilɪzəm ɹɛɹ ɪn haɪ fæntəsi."

 - SFX magazine "Jordan's bestselling high fantasy series carries on . . . colossal, dauntingly complex storytelling. . . . The narrative employs elements of realism rare in high fantasy."

 - pʌblɪʃɝz wikli (stɑɹd ɹivju)

 - Publishers Weekly (starred review)

"dʒɔɹɾənz kæɹɪktɝz [ɑɹ] flɛʃt aʊt wɪð ðə stʃɹɛŋkθs ən wiknəsəz ə ɹil mɛn ən wɪmən. . . . ɪnvoʊks ði ɛnd-ʌv-ðə-wɝl mɪljʊ ʌv stivən kɪŋz ðə stænd."

"Jordan's characters [are] fleshed out with the strengths and weaknesses of real men and women. . . . Invokes the end-of-the-world milieu of Stephen King's The Stand."

 - ðə poʊst ən kɝiɝ (tʃɑɹlstən, saʊθkɑɹləlinə)

 - The Post and Courier (Charleston, SC)

"dʒɔɹɾən ɹaɪts wɪð ðə stɑɹk vɪʒən ə laɪɾ ən dɑɹknəs, ən səmtaɪmz tʃaɪldlaɪk sɛns ʌv wʌndɝ, ðət pɝmieɪts dʒeɪ ɑɹ ɑɹ toʊkinz wɝks. hɪz staɪl ɪz ʌndbeɪɾəbli hɪz oʊn."

"Jordan writes with the stark vision of light and darkness, and sometimes childlike sense of wonder, that permeates J. R. R. Tolkien's works. His style is undebatably his own."

 - ðə pɪtsbɝɡ pɹɛs "dʒɔɹɾənz mʌltɪvəljum ɛpɪk kəntɪnjuz tə lɪv ʌp tə ɪts haɪ æmbɪʃənz. kɑmplɛks plɑɾɪŋ, ən ɝeɪ ʌv stʃɹɔŋ kæɹɪktɝz, lævɪʃ dɪteɪl, ən ə pænɝæmɪk skoʊp meɪk ðɪs sɪɹiz ə fis fəɹ fæntəsi əfɪʃənɑɾoʊz. . . . ɹɪtʃli dɪteɪld ən vɪvədli ɪmædʒənd."

 - The Pittsburgh Press "Jordan's multivolume epic continues to live up to its high ambitions. Complex plotting, an array of strong characters, lavish detail, and a panoramic scope make this series a feast for fantasy aficionados. . . . Richly detailed and vividly imagined."

 - laɪbɹɛɹi dʒɝnəl "dʒɔɹɾənz ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪz klɪɹ ən ɪz vɪʒən ɪz fæsəneɪɾɪŋ, əz ɑɹ ðə fəlɑsəfiz wɪtʃ ɹʌn ɪz kæɹɪktɝz. ən spikɪŋ ə kæɹɪktɝz, ə mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ bʌntʃ aɪ wəd bi hɑɹd pʊt tə neɪm."

 - Library Journal "Jordan's writing is clear and his vision is fascinating, as are the philosophies which run his characters. And speaking of characters, a more interesting bunch I would be hard put to name."

 - saɪəns fɪkʃən ɹivju "ðə kɑmplɛks fəlɑsəfi bɪhaɪn ðə wil ə taɪm sɪɹiz ɪz ɪkspaʊndəd soʊ sɪmpli ðə ɹiɾɝ ɔfən ɡɪvz ə stɑɹɾ ə sɝpɹaɪz ət ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə ɹil wɝld. ɹændz ædvɛntʃɝz ɑɹ nɑt fɪnɪʃt ən niðɝ ɪz ðɪs θɪŋkɪŋ pɝsənz fæntəsi sɪɹiz."

 - Science Fiction Review "The complex philosophy behind The Wheel of Time series is expounded so simply the reader often gives a start of surprise at returning to the real world. Rand's adventures are not finished and neither is this thinking person's fantasy series."

 - bɹʌnzwɪk sɛntənəl (ɔstʃɹeɪljə)

 - Brunswick Sentinel (Australia)

"ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən kən ɹaɪt wʌn hɛl ʌv ə stɔɹi. . . . [hi] kips ðə səspɛns əkjuɾ ən ðə sɝpɹaɪzəz ən ɪnvɛnʃən bjuɾəfli peɪst. kəmpɛlɪŋ. ən ɪɡzɪlɝeɪɾɪŋ ɪkspɪɹiəns."

"Robert Jordan can write one hell of a story. . . . [He] keeps the suspense acute and the surprises and invention beautifully paced. Compelling. An exhilarating experience."

 - aɪzək æsɪmɑvz saɪəns fɪkʃən mæɡəzin "[ðə wil ə taɪm ɪz] ə wɝk ə dʒɛnjəwən ən ɔfən stɝɪŋ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən."

 - Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine "[The Wheel of Time is] a work of genuine and often stirring imagination."

 - kɝkɪs ɹivjuz "fɔɹ ðoʊz u laɪk tə kip ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ə fæntəsi wɝld, ɪts hɑɹd tə bit ðə kɑmplɛks, dɪteɪld wɝl kɹieɪɾəd hɪɹ."

 - Kirkus Reviews "For those who like to keep themselves in a fantasy world, it's hard to beat the complex, detailed world created here."

 - loʊkəs "dʒɔɹɾən əz nɑt mɪɹli pʊɾ oʊld waɪn ɪndə nu bɑɾəlz: hiz kloʊðd oʊl boʊnz wɪð nu flɛʃ."

 - Locus "Jordan has not merely put old wine into new bottles: he has clothed old bones with new flesh."

 - ʃəkɑɡoʊ sʌn-taɪmz ðə wil ə taɪm baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ðə ʃædoʊ ɹaɪzɪŋ ðə faɪɝz ə hɛvən lɔɹɾ ə keɪɑs eɪ kɹaʊn ə sɔɹdz ðə pæθ ə dæɡɝz wɪntɝz hɑɹt kɹɔsɹoʊdz ə twaɪlaɪt naɪf ə dʒɹimz baɪ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən ən bɹændən sændɝsən ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ stɔɹm wɪntɝz hɑɹt ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən eɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts bʊk nu jɔɹk ðɪs ɪz ə wɝk ə fɪkʃən. ɔl ə ðə kæɹɪktɝz, ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃənz, ən ɪvɛns pɔɹtʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ðɪs nɑvəl ɑɹ iðɝ pɹɑɾəkts ə ði ɔθɝz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən əɹ ɑɹ juz fɪktɪʃəsli.

 - Chicago Sun-Times THE WHEEL OF TIME by Robert Jordan The Eye of the World The Great Hunt The Dragon Reborn The Shadow Rising The Fires of Heaven Lord of Chaos A Crown of Swords The Path of Daggers Winter's Heart Crossroads of Twilight Knife of Dreams by Robert Jordan and Brandon Sanderson The Gathering Storm WINTER'S HEART ROBERT JORDAN A TOM DOHERTY ASSOCIATES BOOK NEW YORK This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.

wɪntɝz hɑɹt kɑpiɹaɪt  tuθaʊzən baɪ ðə bændɝsnætʃ ɡɹup, ɪŋk.

WINTER'S HEART Copyright  2000 by The Bandersnatch Group, Inc.

ðə fɹeɪzəz "ðə wil ə taɪm" ən "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ən ðə sneɪk-wil sɪmbəl, ɑɹ tʃɹeɪdmɑɹks ə ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən.

The phrases "The Wheel of Time" and "The Dragon Reborn," and the snake-wheel symbol, are trademarks of Robert Jordan.

ɔl ɹaɪts ɹɪzɝvd.

All rights reserved.

fɹʌntispis baɪ  mæps baɪ ɛlisə mɪtʃəl ɪntɪɹiɝ ɑɹt baɪ mæθju si nilsən ən ɛlisə mɪtʃəl eɪ tɔɹ bʊk pʌblɪʃt baɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts,  wʌnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntifaɪv fɪfθ ævənu nu jɔɹk, nujɔɹk wʌnzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊwʌnzɪɹoʊ

Frontispiece by TK Maps by Ellisa Mitchell Interior art by Matthew C. Nielsen and Ellisa Mitchell A Tor Book Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC 175 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10010

wwwtɔɹ-fɔɹdʒkɑm tɔɹ ɪz ə ɹɛdʒəstɝd tʃɹeɪdmɑɹk ə tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts, .

www.tor-forge.com Tor is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.

 naɪnsɛvəneɪt-wʌn-fɔɹθaʊzəntuhʌndʒɹədnaɪntinaɪn-sɪkszɪɹoʊsɪkseɪt-sɛvən

ISBN 978-1-4299-6068-7

fɝst ədɪʃən: noʊvɛmbɝ tuθaʊzənd

First Edition: November 2000

fɝst i-bʊk ədɪʃən: dʒun twɛntiɾɛn

First E-book Edition: June 2010

mænjəfæktʃɝɾ ɪn ðə junaɪɾəd steɪts ʌv əmɛɹəkə zɪɹoʊ naɪn eɪt sɛvən sɪks faɪv fɔɹ θɹi tu wʌn

Manufactured in the United States of America 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

ɔlweɪz fəɹ hɛɹiət.

Always for Harriet.

ɔlweɪz.

Always.

kɑntɛns mæps pɹoʊlɑɡ: snoʊ wʌn livɪŋ ðə pɹɑfət tu teɪkən θɹi kʌstəmz fɔɹ ɔfɝz faɪv flæɡz sɪks ðə sɛn ə mædnəs sɛvən ðə stʃɹits ə keɪɛmlɪn eɪt si foʊk ən kɪn naɪn eɪ kʌp ə ti tɛn eɪ plæn səksidz ɪlɛvən aɪdiəz ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾəns twɛlv eɪ lɪli ɪn wɪntɝ θɝtin wʌndɝfəl nuz fɔɹtin wʌɾ ə veɪl haɪdz fɪftin ɪn niɾ ʌv ə bɛlfndɝ sɪkstin ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪɾ ɪnkaʊntɝ sɛvəntin pɪŋk ɹɪbənz eɪtin ən ɔfɝ naɪntin θɹi wɪmən twɛnti kwɛstʃənz ə tʃɹizən twɛntiwʌn eɪ mæɾɝ ə pɹɑpɝɾi twɛntiɾu aʊɾ ə θɪn ɛɹ twɛntiθɹi tə luz ðə sʌn twɛntifɔɹ əmʌŋ ðə kaʊnsəlz twɛntifaɪv bɑnz twɛntisɪks ɛkspɛkteɪʃən twɛntisɛvən tə sɝpɹaɪz kwinz ən kɪŋz twɛntieɪt nuz ɪn ə klɔθ sæk twɛntinaɪn ənʌðɝ plæn θɝɾi koʊld, fæt ɹeɪndʒɹɑps θɝɾiwʌn wʌt ði æɛlfɪn sɛd θɝɾitu eɪ pɔɹʃən ʌv wɪzdəm θɝɾiθɹi blu kɑɹp stʃɹit θɝɾifɔɹ ðə hʌmɪŋbɝdz sikɹət θɝɾifaɪv wɪð ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl ɡlɔsɝi ðə silz ðət hoʊl bæk naɪt ʃæl wikən, ən ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv wɪntɝ ʃæl wɪntɝz hɑɹt bi bɔɹn əmɪd ðə weɪlɪŋ ə ləmɛnteɪʃənz ən ðə næʃɪŋ ə tiθ, fəɹ wɪntɝz hɑɹt ʃæl ɹaɪɾ ə blæk hɔɹs, ən ðə neɪm ʌv ɪts dɛθ.

CONTENTS MAPS PROLOGUE: Snow 1 Leaving the Prophet 2 Taken 3 Customs 4 Offers 5 Flags 6 The Scent of Madness 7 The Streets of Caemlyn 8 Sea Folk and Kin 9 A Cup of Tea 10 A Plan Succeeds 11 Ideas of Importance 12 A Lily in Winter 13 Wonderful News 14 What a Veil Hides 15 In Need of a Bellfounder 16 An Unexpected Encounter 17 Pink Ribbons 18 An Offer 19 Three Women 20 Questions of Treason 21 A Matter of Property 22 Out of Thin Air 23 To Lose the Sun 24 Among the Counsels 25 Bonds 26 Expectation 27 To Surprise Queens and Kings 28 News in a Cloth Sack 29 Another Plan 30 Cold, Fat Raindrops 31 What the Aelfinn Said 32 A Portion of Wisdom 33 Blue Carp Street 34 The Hummingbird's Secret 35 With the Choedan Kal GLOSSARY The seals that hold back night shall weaken, and in the heart of winter shall winter's heart be born amid the wailing of lamentations and the gnashing of teeth, for winter's heart shall ride a black horse, and the name of it is Death.

 - fɹəm ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl:

 - from The Karaethon Cycle:

ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən 
The Prophecies of the Dragon 
pɹoʊlɑɡ snoʊ



PROLOGUE Snow

θɹi læntɝnz kæst ə flɪkɝɪŋ laɪt, mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf tə ɪlumɪnɪt ðə smɔl ɹum wɪð ɪts stɑɹk waɪt wɔlz ən silɪŋ, bʌt sin kɛpt əɹ aɪz fɪkst ɑn ðə hɛvi wʊɾən dɔɹ. ɪlɑdʒɪkəl, ʃi nu; fulɪʃ ɪn ə sɪɾɝ fəɹ ðə waɪt. ðə wiv ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ʃi hæd pʊʃt ɝaʊn ðə dʒæm bɹɔɾ əɹ əkeɪʒənəl wɪspɝz ə dɪstən fʊtstɛps ɪn ðə wɔɹən ə hɔlweɪz aʊtsaɪd, wɪspɝz ðət feɪɾəd əweɪ ɔlmoʊst əz sun əz hɝd. ə sɪmpəl θɪŋ lɝn fɹəm ə fɹɛn ɪn əɹ lɔŋ-əɡoʊ nɑvəs deɪz, bʌt ʃi wʊɾə wɔɹnɪŋ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn keɪm nɪɹ. fju pipəl keɪm daʊn əz dip əz ðə sɛkən beɪsmənt, ɛniweɪ.

Three lanterns cast a flickering light, more than enough to illuminate the small room with its stark white walls and ceiling, but Seaine kept her eyes fixed on the heavy wooden door. Illogical, she knew; foolish in a Sitter for the White. The weave of saidar she had pushed around the jamb brought her occasional whispers of distant footsteps in the warren of hallways outside, whispers that faded away almost as soon as heard. A simple thing learned from a friend in her long-ago novice days, but she would have warning long before anyone came near. Few people came down as deep as the second basement, anyway.

hɝ wiv pɪkt ʌp ðə fɑɹ-ɔf tʃɪɾɝɪŋ ə ɹæts. laɪt! haʊ lɔŋ sɪns ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɹæts ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɪn ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf? wɝ ɛni ʌv əm spaɪz fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn? ʃi wɛɾ əɹ lɪps ənizəli. lɑdʒɪk kaʊntəd fəɹ nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðɪs. tʃɹu. ɪf ɪlɑdʒɪkəl. ʃi wɑntəd tə læf. wɪð ən ɛfɝt ʃi kɹɛp bæk fɹəm ðə bɹɪŋk ə hɪstɛɹiə. θɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ bɪsaɪdz ɹæts. sʌmθɪŋ bɪsaɪdz . . . ə mʌfəl skwil ɹoʊz ɪn ðə ɹum bɪhaɪn hɝ, fɔltɝɾ ɪndə mjuɾɪd wɪmpɝɪŋ. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp ʌp əɹ ɪɹz. kɑnsəntʃɹeɪt!

Her weave picked up the far-off chittering of rats. Light! How long since there had been rats in Tar Valon, in the Tower itself? Were any of them spies for the Dark One? She wet her lips uneasily. Logic counted for nothing in this. True. If illogical. She wanted to laugh. With an effort she crept back from the brink of hysteria. Think of something besides rats. Something besides . . . A muffled squeal rose in the room behind her, faltered into muted whimpering. She tried to stop up her ears. Concentrate!

ɪn ə weɪ, ʃi ən əɹ kəmpænjənz hæd bɪn lɛd tə ðɪs ɹum kəz ðə hɛdz ə ði ədʒəz sim tə bi miɾɪŋ ɪn sikɹət. ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd ɡlɪmps fɛɹən nhɝən wɪspɝɪŋ ɪn ə sɪkluɾɪd nʊk ə ðə laɪbɹɛɹi wɪð dʒɛsi biləl, hu stʊd vɛɹi haɪ əmʌŋ ðə bɹaʊnz ɪf nɑɾ ət ðə vɛɹi tɑp. ʃi θɔt ʃi wɑz ɑn fɝmɝ ɡɹaʊn kənsɝnɪŋ swænə dʒɹeɪɡənd, ʌv ðə jɛloʊz. ʃi θɔt soʊ. bʌt waɪ hæd fɛɹən ɡɔn wɔkɪŋ wɪð swænə ɪn ə sɪkluɾɪd pɑɹɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ɡɹaʊnz, boʊθ swɑðd ɪn pleɪn kloʊks? sɪɾɝz ə dɪfɹən ədʒəz stɪl tɔk tə wʌn ənʌðɝ oʊpənli, ɪf koʊldli. ði ʌðɝz hæd sin sɪməlɝ θɪŋz; ðeɪ wəd nɑt ɡɪv neɪmz fɹəm ðɛɹ oʊn ədʒəz, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt tu hæd mɛnʃən fɛɹən. ə tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ pʌzəl. ðə taʊɝ wɑz ə siθɪŋ swɑmp ðiz deɪz, ɛvɹi ədʒɑ əɾ ɛvɹi ʌðɝ ədʒɑz θɹoʊt, jɛt ðə hɛdz mɛɾ ɪn kɔɹnɝz. noʊ wʌn aʊtsaɪɾ ən ədʒɑ nu fəɹ sɝɾən u wɪðɪn ɪt lɛd, bʌɾ əpɛɹənli ðə liɾɝz nu itʃ ʌðɝ. wʌt kəd ðeɪ bi ʌp tə? wʌt? ɪt wɑz ənfɔɹtʃənət ðət ʃi kəd nɑt sɪmpli æsk fɛɹən, bʌɾ ivən hæd fɛɹən bɪn tɑlɝən ʌv ɛniwʌnz kwɛstʃənz, ʃi dɪd nɑt dɛɹ. nɑt naʊ.

In a way, she and her companions had been led to this room because the heads of the Ajahs seemed to be meeting in secret. She herself had glimpsed Ferane Neheran whispering in a secluded nook of the library with Jesse Bilal, who stood very high among the Browns if not at the very top. She thought she was on firmer ground concerning Suana Dragand, of the Yellows. She thought so. But why had Ferane gone walking with Suana in a secluded part of the Tower grounds, both swathed in plain cloaks? Sitters of different Ajahs still talked to one another openly, if coldly. The others had seen similar things; they would not give names from their own Ajahs, of course, but two had mentioned Ferane. A troubling puzzle. The Tower was a seething swamp these days, every Ajah at every other Ajah's throat, yet the heads met in corners. No one outside an Ajah knew for certain who within it led, but apparently the leaders knew each other. What could they be up to? What? It was unfortunate that she could not simply ask Ferane, but even had Ferane been tolerant of anyone's questions, she did not dare. Not now.

kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ əz ʃi wʊd, sin kəd nɑt kip əɹ maɪn ɑn ðə kwɛstʃən. ʃi nu ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ ən wɝiɪŋ ət pʌzəlz ʃi kəd nɑt sɑlv dʒʌs tə əvɔɪd lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. təwɔɹd ðə sɔɹs ə ðoʊz staɪfəld wɪmpɝz ən snʌfəlɪŋ ɡɹoʊnz.

Concentrate as she would, Seaine could not keep her mind on the question. She knew she was staring at the door and worrying at puzzles she could not solve just to avoid looking over her shoulder. Toward the source of those stifled whimpers and snuffling groans.

əz ɪf θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə saʊnz kəmpɛl hɝ, ʃi lʊk bæk sloʊli tə hɝ kəmpænjənz, hɝ bɹɛθ ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ ənivən əz əɹ hɛd muv baɪ ɪntʃəz. snoʊ wɑz fɔlɪŋ hɛvəli ɑn tɑɹ vəlɑn, fɑɹ oʊvɝhɛd, bʌt ðə ɹum simd ʌnəkaʊntəbli hɑt. ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf si!

As if thinking of the sounds compelled her, she looked back slowly to her companions, her breath growing more uneven as her head moved by inches. Snow was falling heavily on Tar Valon, far overhead, but the room seemed unaccountably hot. She made herself see!

bɹaʊn-fɹɪnd ʃɔl lupt ɑn əɹ ɛlboʊz, sɹɪn stʊd wɪð əɹ fit plæntəɾ əpɑɹt, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə hɪlt ə ðə kɝvd ɔltɑɹən dæɡɝ θɹʌs bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt. koʊld æŋɡɝ dɑɹkən əɹ ɑləv kəmplɛkʃən ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə skɑɹ əlɔŋ əɹ dʒɔ stæn aʊɾ ɪn ə peɪl laɪn. pɛvɑɹə əpɪɹd kɑmɝ, ət fɝst ɡlæns, jɛt wʌn hænd ɡɹɪpt əɹ ɹɛd-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd skɝts taɪtli ən ði ʌðɝ hɛl ðə smuð waɪt sɪləndɝ ə ði oʊθ ɹɑd laɪk ə fʊt-lɔŋ klʌb ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə juz. ʃi maɪt bi ɹɛɾi; pɛvɑɹə wɑz fɑɹ tʌfɝ ðən əɹ plʌmp ɪkstɪɹiɝ sədʒɛstəd, ən dɪtɝmən ɪnʌf tə meɪk sɹɪn sim ə ʃɝkɝ.

Brown-fringed shawl looped on her elbows, Saerin stood with her feet planted apart, fingering the hilt of the curved Altaran dagger thrust behind her belt. Cold anger darkened her olive complexion enough to make the scar along her jaw stand out in a pale line. Pevara appeared calmer, at first glance, yet one hand gripped her red-embroidered skirts tightly and the other held the smooth white cylinder of the Oath Rod like a foot-long club she was ready to use. She might be ready; Pevara was far tougher than her plump exterior suggested, and determined enough to make Saerin seem a shirker.

ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə tʃɛɹ ə ɹɪmɔɹs, taɪni jukɪɝi hæɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ɹæp taɪtli ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf; ðə lɔŋ sɪlvɝi-ɡɹeɪ fɹɪnʒ ɑn əɹ ʃɔl tʃɹɛmbəld wɪð əɹ ʃɪvɝz. lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps, jukɪɝi kæst ə wɝid ɡlæns ət ðə wʊmən stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd hɝ. dʌsin, lʊkɪŋ mɔɹ laɪk ə pɹɪɾi bɔɪ ðən ə jɛloʊ sɪstɝ ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɹipjut, dɪspleɪd noʊ ɹiækʃən tə wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ. ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn æktʃəli  mənɪpjəleɪɾɪŋ ðə wivz ðət stʃɹɛtʃt ɪndə ðə tʃɛɹ, ən ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, foʊkəsɪŋ soʊ hɑɹɾ ɑn əɹ wɝk ðət pɝspɝeɪʃən biɾɪd ɑn əɹ peɪl fɔɹhɛd. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl sɪɾɝz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə tɔl wʊmən ɹaɪðɪŋ ɑn ðə tʃɛɹ.

On the other side of the Chair of Remorse, tiny Yukiri had her arms wrapped tightly around herself; the long silvery-gray fringe on her shawl trembled with her shivers. Licking her lips, Yukiri cast a worried glance at the woman standing beside her. Doesine, looking more like a pretty boy than a Yellow sister of considerable repute, displayed no reaction to what they were doing. She was the one actually manipulating the weaves that stretched into the Chair, and she stared at the ter'angreal, focusing so hard on her work that perspiration beaded on her pale forehead. They were all Sitters, including the tall woman writhing on the Chair.

swɛt dʒɹɛntʃt tælin, mæɾɪŋ əɹ ɡoʊldən hɛɹ, soʊkɪŋ əɹ lɪnən ʃɪf tɪl ɪt klʌŋ tə hɝ. ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ kloʊðz meɪɾ ə dʒʌmbəl paɪl ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ. hɝ kloʊzd aɪlɪdz flʌɾɝd, ən ʃi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə kɑnstən stʃɹim ə stʃɹæŋɡəl moʊnz ən mulɪŋ, hæf-ʌɾɝd pliz. sin fɛlt ɪl, bʌt kəd nɑt dʒɹæɡ hɝ aɪz əweɪ. tælin wɑz ə fɹɛnd. hæd bɪn ə fɹɛnd.

Sweat drenched Talene, matting her golden hair, soaking her linen shift till it clung to her. The rest of her clothes made a jumbled pile in a corner. Her closed eyelids fluttered, and she let out a constant stream of strangled moans and mewling, half-uttered pleas. Seaine felt ill, but could not drag her eyes away. Talene was a friend. Had been a friend.

dɪspaɪɾ ɪts neɪm, ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil lʊk nʌθɪŋ laɪk ə tʃɛɹ, dʒʌst ə lɑɹdʒ ɹɛktæŋɡjəlɝ blɑk ə mɑɹbəld ɡɹeɪ. noʊ wʌn nu wʌɾ ɪt wɑz meɪɾ ʌv, bʌt ðə mətɪɹiəl wɑz hɑɹɾ əz stil ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɪksɛp ðə slæntəd tɑp. ðə stætʃuɛsk ɡɹin sæŋk ə lɪɾəl ɪndə ðæt, ən sʌmhaʊ ɪt moʊldəɾ ɪtsɛlf tə hɝ noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ʃi twɪstəd. dʌsinz wivɪŋz floʊɾ ɪndə ði oʊnli bɹeɪk ɛniwɛɹ ɑn ðə tʃɛɹ, ə pɑm-saɪzd ɹɛktæŋɡjəlɝ hoʊl ɪn wʌn saɪd wɪð taɪni nɑtʃəz speɪst ənivənli ɝaʊn ɪt. kɹɪmənəlz kɑɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn wɝ bɹɔt daʊn hɪɹ tə ɪkspɪɹiəns ðə tʃɛɹ ə ɹɪmɔɹs, tə ɪkspɪɹiəns kɛɹfəli səlɛktəd kɑnsəkwɛnsəz ə ðɛɹ kɹaɪmz. ɑn ɹilis, ðeɪ ɪnvɛɹiəbli flɛd ði aɪlənd. ðəɹ wɑz vɛɹi lɪɾəl kɹaɪm ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. kwizəli, sin wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðɪs wɑz ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðə jus ðə tʃɛɹ hæd bɪn pʊt tə ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz.

Despite its name, the ter'angreal looked nothing like a chair, just a large rectangular block of marbled gray. No one knew what it was made of, but the material was hard as steel everywhere except the slanted top. The statuesque Green sank a little into that, and somehow it molded itself to her no matter how she twisted. Doesine's weavings flowed into the only break anywhere on the Chair, a palm-sized rectangular hole in one side with tiny notches spaced unevenly around it. Criminals caught in Tar Valon were brought down here to experience the Chair of Remorse, to experience carefully selected consequences of their crimes. On release, they invariably fled the island. There was very little crime in Tar Valon. Queasily, Seaine wondered whether this was anything like the use the Chair had been put to in the Age of Legends.

"wʌɾ ɪz ʃi . . . siɪŋ?" hɝ kwɛstʃən keɪm aʊɾ ə wɪspɝ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. tælin wəd bi mɔɹ ðən siɪŋ; tə hɝ, ɪɾ ɔl wəd sim ɹil. θæŋk ðə laɪt ʃi hæd noʊ wɔɹɾɝ, ɔlmoʊst ənhɝɾ ə fəɹ ə ɡɹin. ʃi hæd kleɪmd ə sɪɾɝ hæd noʊ nid fəɹ wʌn. dɪfɹən ɹizənz keɪm tə maɪnd, naʊ.

"What is she . . . seeing?" Her question came out a whisper in spite of herself. Talene would be more than seeing; to her, it all would seem real. Thank the Light she had no Warder, almost unheard of for a Green. She had claimed a Sitter had no need for one. Different reasons came to mind, now.

"ʃi ɪz blʌɾi biɪŋ flɑɡd baɪ blʌɾi tʃɹɑləks," dʌsin sɛd hɔɹsli. tʌtʃəz ə hɝ neɪɾɪv kɛɹhin hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs, sʌmθɪŋ ðət sɛldəm hæpən ɪksɛpt ʌndɝ stʃɹɛs. "wɛn ðeɪ ɑɹ dʌn. . . . ʃi kən si ðə tʃɹɑləks' kʊk kɛɾəl bɔɪlɪŋ oʊvɝ ə faɪɝ, ən ə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ. ʃi mʌs noʊ ɪɾəl bi wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ nɛkst. bɝn mi, ɪf ʃi dʌzn bɹeɪk ðɪs taɪm. . . ." dʌsin bɹʌʃt pɝspɝeɪʃən fɹəm əɹ fɔɹhɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli ən dʒɹu ə ɹæɡəd bɹɛθ. "stɑp dʒɑəlɪŋ maɪ ɛlboʊ. ɪts bɪn ə lɔŋ waɪl sɪns aɪ dɪd ðɪs."

"She is bloody being flogged by bloody Trollocs," Doesine said hoarsely. Touches of her native Cairhien had appeared in her voice, something that seldom happened except under stress. "When they are done. . . . She can see the Trollocs' cook kettle boiling over a fire, and a Myrddraal watching her. She must know it will be one or the other next. Burn me, if she doesn't break this time. . . ." Doesine brushed perspiration from her forehead irritably and drew a ragged breath. "Stop joggling my elbow. It has been a long while since I did this."

"θɹi taɪmz ʌndɝ," jukɪɝi mʌɾɝd. "ðə tʌfəst stʃɹɔŋɡɑɹm ɪz bɹoʊkən baɪ hɪz oʊn ɡɪlt, ɪf nʌθɪŋ ɛls, æftɝ tu! wʌɾ ɪf ʃiz ɪnəsənt? laɪt, ðɪs ɪz laɪk stilɪŋ ʃip wɪð ðə ʃɛpɝd wɑtʃɪŋ!" ivən ʃeɪkɪŋ, ʃi mænədʒ tə əpɪɹ ɹiɡəl, bʌt ʃi ɔlweɪz saʊndəd laɪk wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn, ə vɪlədʒ wʊmən. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ɝaʊn ət ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm ɪn ə sɪkli fæʃən. "ðə lɔ fɝbɪdz juzɪŋ ðə tʃɛɹ ɑn ɪnɪʃiəts. wɪl ɔl bi əntʃɛɹd! ən ɪf biɪŋ θɹoʊn aʊɾ ə ðə hɔl ɪzən ɪnʌf, wɪl pɹɑbli bi ɛɡzaɪld. ən bɝtʃt bɪfɔɹ wi ɡoʊ, dʒʌs tə dʒɹɑp sɔlt ɪn əɹ ti! bɝn mi, ɪf wɝ ɹɔŋ, wi kəɾ ɔl bi stɪld!"

"Three times under," Yukiri muttered. "The toughest strongarm is broken by his own guilt, if nothing else, after two! What if she's innocent? Light, this is like stealing sheep with the shepherd watching!" Even shaking, she managed to appear regal, but she always sounded like what she had been, a village woman. She glared around at the rest of them in a sickly fashion. "The law forbids using the Chair on initiates. We'll all be unchaired! And if being thrown out of the Hall isn't enough, we'll probably be exiled. And birched before we go, just to drop salt in our tea! Burn me, if we're wrong, we could all be stilled!"

sin ʃʌɾɝəd. ðeɪ wəɾ ɪskeɪp ðət læst, ɪf ðɛɹ səspɪʃənz pɹuvd ɹaɪt. noʊ, nɑt səspɪʃənz; sɝɾəntiz. ðeɪ hæd tə bi ɹaɪt! bʌɾ ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ, jukɪɝi wɑz kɝɛkt əbaʊt ðə ɹɛst. taʊɝ lɔ sɛldəm əlaʊd fəɹ nəsɛsəɾi, əɹ ɛni səpoʊz haɪɝ ɡʊd. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪt, ðoʊ, ðə pɹaɪs wɑz wɝθ peɪɪŋ. pliz, ðə laɪt sɛn ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪt!

Seaine shuddered. They would escape that last, if their suspicions proved right. No, not suspicions; certainties. They had to be right! But even if they were, Yukiri was correct about the rest. Tower law seldom allowed for necessity, or any supposed higher good. If they were right, though, the price was worth paying. Please, the Light send they were right!

"ɑɹ jə blaɪn ən dɛf?" pɛvɑɹə snæpt, ʃeɪkɪŋ ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ət jukɪɝi. "ʃi ɹəfjuz tə ɹɛswɛɹ ði oʊθ əɡɛnst spikɪŋ ən əntʃɹu wɝd, ən ɪt hæd tə bi mɔɹ ðən stupəd ɡɹin ədʒɑ pɹaɪɾ æftɝ wiɾ ɔl dʌn əz mʌtʃ ɔlɹɛɾi. wən aɪ ʃildɪd hɝ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə stæb mi! dʌz ðət ʃaʊɾ ɪnəsəns? dʌz ɪt? fəɹ ɔl ʃi nu, wi dʒʌs mɛn tə tɔk əɾ əɹ əntɪl əɹ tʌŋz dʒɹaɪɾ ʌp! wʌt ɹizən wəd ʃi hæv tə ɪkspɛk mɔɹ?"

"Are you blind and deaf?" Pevara snapped, shaking the Oath Rod at Yukiri. "She refused to reswear the Oath against speaking an untrue word, and it had to be more than stupid Green Ajah pride after we'd all done as much already. When I shielded her, she tried to stab me! Does that shout innocence? Does it? For all she knew, we just meant to talk at her until our tongues dried up! What reason would she have to expect more?"

"θæŋk jə boʊθ," sɹɪn pʊɾ ɪn dʒɹaɪli, "fɔɹ steɪɾɪŋ ði ɑbviəs. ɪts tu leɪt tə ɡoʊ bæk, jukɪɝi, soʊ wi maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡoʊ fɔɹwɝd. ən ɪf aɪ wɝ ju, pɛvɑɹə, aɪ wʊdn bi ʃaʊɾɪŋ ət wʌn ə ðə fɔɹ wɪmən ɪn ðə hoʊl taʊɝ aɪ nu aɪ kəd tʃɹʌst."

"Thank you both," Saerin put in dryly, "for stating the obvious. It's too late to go back, Yukiri, so we might as well go forward. And if I were you, Pevara, I wouldn't be shouting at one of the four women in the whole Tower I knew I could trust."

jukɪɝi flʌʃt ən ʃɪftəɾ əɹ ʃɔl, ən pɛvɑɹə lʊkt ə tʃɹaɪfəl əbæʃt. ə tʃɹaɪfəl. ðeɪ maɪɾ ɔl bi sɪɾɝz, bʌt sɹɪn hæd moʊs dɛfənətli teɪkən tʃɑɹdʒ. sin wɑz ənʃʊɹ haʊ ʃi fɛlt əbaʊt ðæt. ə fju aʊɝz əɡoʊ, ʃi ən pɛvɑɹə hæd bɪn tu oʊl fɹɛnz əloʊn ɑn ə deɪnʒɝəs kwɛst, ikwəlz ɹitʃɪŋ dɪsɪʒənz təɡɛðɝ; naʊ ðeɪ hæɾ ælaɪz. ʃi ʃəd bi ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ mɔɹ kəmpænjənz. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɪn ðə hɔl, ðoʊ, ən ðeɪ kəd nɑt kleɪm sɪɾɝz' ɹaɪts ɑn ðɪs. taʊɝ haɪɹɑɹkiz hæd teɪkən oʊvɝ, ɔl ðə sʌɾəl ən nɑt-soʊ-sʌɾəl dɪstɪŋkʃənz əz tə hu stʊd wɛɹ wɪð ɹɪspɛk tə hum. ɪn tʃɹuθ, sɹɪn hæd bɪn boʊθ nɑvəs ən æksɛptɪd twaɪs əz lɔŋ əz moʊst ə ðɛm, bʌt fɔɹɾi jɪɹz əz ə sɪɾɝ, lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls ɪn ðə hɔl, kaʊntəd fəɹ ə ɡɹeɪt dil. sin wəd bi lʌki ɪf sɹɪn æskt əɹ əpɪnjən, mʌtʃ lɛs əɹ ædvaɪs, bɪfɔɹ dəsaɪɾɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. fulɪʃ, jɛt ðə nɑlədʒ pɹɪk laɪk ə θɔɹn ɪn əɹ fʊt.

Yukiri flushed and shifted her shawl, and Pevara looked a trifle abashed. A trifle. They might all be Sitters, but Saerin had most definitely taken charge. Seaine was unsure how she felt about that. A few hours ago, she and Pevara had been two old friends alone on a dangerous quest, equals reaching decisions together; now they had allies. She should be grateful for more companions. They were not in the Hall, though, and they could not claim Sitters' rights on this. Tower hierarchies had taken over, all the subtle and not-so-subtle distinctions as to who stood where with respect to whom. In truth, Saerin had been both novice and Accepted twice as long as most of them, but forty years as a Sitter, longer than anyone else in the Hall, counted for a great deal. Seaine would be lucky if Saerin asked her opinion, much less her advice, before deciding anything at all. Foolish, yet the knowledge pricked like a thorn in her foot.

"ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ dʒɹæɡɪŋ əɹ təwɔɹd ðə kɛɾəl," dʌsin sɛd sʌɾənli, hɝ vɔɪs ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ. ə θɪn kinɪŋ ɪskeɪp θɹu tælinz klɛntʃt tiθ; ʃi ʃʊk soʊ hɑɹd ʃi sim tə vaɪbɹeɪt. "aɪ - aɪ də nɑt noʊ ɪf aɪ kən . . . kən fleɪmɪŋ meɪk maɪsɛlf . . ."

"The Trollocs are dragging her toward the kettle," Doesine said suddenly, her voice grating. A thin keening escaped through Talene's clenched teeth; she shook so hard she seemed to vibrate. "I - I do not know if I can . . . can flaming make myself . . ."

"bɹɪŋ əɹ əweɪk," sɹɪn kəmændəd wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænsɪŋ əɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls tə si wʌt ðeɪ θɔt. "stɑp sʌlkɪŋ, jukɪɝi, ən bi ɹɛɾi."

"Bring her awake," Saerin commanded without so much as glancing at anyone else to see what they thought. "Stop sulking, Yukiri, and be ready."

ðə ɡɹeɪ ɡeɪv əɹ ə pɹaʊd, fjʊɹiəs stɛɹ, bʌt wən dʌsin lɛɾ əɹ wivz feɪɾ ən tælinz blu aɪz flʌɾɝd oʊpən, ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd jukɪɝi ən ʃi ʃildɪd ðə wʊmən laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə tʃɛɹ wɪθaʊɾ ʌɾɝɪŋ ə wɝd. sɹɪn wɑz ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, ən ɛvɹiwʌn nu ɪt, ən ðət wɑz ðæt. ə vɛɹi ʃɑɹp θɔɹn.

The Gray gave her a proud, furious stare, but when Doesine let her weaves fade and Talene's blue eyes fluttered open, the glow of saidar surrounded Yukiri and she shielded the woman lying on the Chair without uttering a word. Saerin was in charge, and everyone knew it, and that was that. A very sharp thorn.

ə ʃil hɑɹdli sim nɛsəsɛɹi. hɝ feɪs ə mæsk ə tɛɹɝ, tælin tʃɹɛmbəld ən pæntɪɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd ɹʌn tɛn maɪlz ət tɑp spid. ʃi stɪl sæŋk ɪndə ðə sɑf sɝfəs, bʌt wɪθaʊt dʌsin tʃænəlɪŋ, ɪt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɔɹmd ɪtsɛlf tə hɝ. tælin stɛɹɾ ət ðə silɪŋ wɪð bʌlʒɪŋ aɪz, ðən skwizd əm ʃʌt, bʌt ðeɪ pɑpt ɹaɪɾ oʊpən əɡɛn. wʌtɛvɝ mɛmɹiz leɪ bɪhaɪn əɹ aɪlɪdz wɝ nʌθɪŋ ʃi wɑntəd tə feɪs.

A shield hardly seemed necessary. Her face a mask of terror, Talene trembled and panted as though she had run ten miles at top speed. She still sank into the soft surface, but without Doesine channeling, it no longer formed itself to her. Talene stared at the ceiling with bulging eyes, then squeezed them shut, but they popped right open again. Whatever memories lay behind her eyelids were nothing she wanted to face.

kʌvɝɪŋ ðə tu stʃɹaɪdz tə ðə tʃɛɹ, pɛvɑɹə θɹʌs ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ət ðə dɪstʃɹɔt wʊmən. "fɔɹswɛɹ ɔl oʊðz ðət baɪn jə ən ɹiteɪk ðə θɹi oʊðz, tælin," ʃi sɛd hɑɹʃli. tælin ɹikɔɪl fɹəm ðə ɹɑɾ əz fɹəm ə pɔɪzənəs sɝpənt, ðən dʒɝk ði ʌðɝ weɪ əz sɹɪn bɛn oʊvɝ hɝ.

Covering the two strides to the Chair, Pevara thrust the Oath Rod at the distraught woman. "Forswear all oaths that bind you and retake the Three Oaths, Talene," she said harshly. Talene recoiled from the Rod as from a poisonous serpent, then jerked the other way as Saerin bent over her.

"nɛks taɪm, tælin, ɪts ðə kʊkpɑt fəɹ ju. əɹ ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz tɛndɝ ətɛnʃənz." sɹɪnz feɪs wɑz ɪmplækəbəl, bʌɾ əɹ toʊn meɪɾ ɪt sim sɑf baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən. "noʊ weɪkɪŋ ʌp bɪfɔɹ. ən ɪf ðət dʌzn du, ðɛɹəl bi ənʌðɝ taɪm, ən ənʌðɝ, əz mɛni əz ɪt teɪks ɪf wi mʌst steɪ daʊn hɪɹ əntɪl sʌmɝ." dʌsin oʊpən əɹ maʊθ ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst bɪfɔɹ ɡɪvɪŋ oʊvɝ wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs. oʊnli ʃi əmʌŋ əm nu haʊ tə ɑpɝeɪt ðə tʃɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪn ðɪs ɡɹup, ʃi stʊɾ əz loʊ əz sin.

"Next time, Talene, it's the cookpot for you. Or the Myrddraal's tender attentions." Saerin's face was implacable, but her tone made it seem soft by comparison. "No waking up before. And if that doesn't do, there'll be another time, and another, as many as it takes if we must stay down here until summer." Doesine opened her mouth in protest before giving over with a grimace. Only she among them knew how to operate the Chair, but in this group, she stood as low as Seaine.

tælin kəntɪnjud tə stɛɹ ʌp ət sɹɪn. tɪɹz fɪld əɹ bɪɡ aɪz, ən ʃi bɪɡæn tə wip, ɡɹeɪt ʃʌɾɝɪŋ, hoʊpləs sɑbz. blaɪnli, ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt, ɡɹoʊpɪŋ əntɪl pɛvɑɹə stʌk ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ɪndə hɝ hænd. ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs, pɛvɑɹə tʃænəld ə θɹɛɾ ə spɪɹəɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɑd. tælin ɡɹɪp ðə ɹɪst-θɪk ɹɑd soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ əɹ nʌkəlz tɝnd waɪt, jɛt ʃi dʒʌs leɪ ðəɹ sɑbɪŋ.

Talene continued to stare up at Saerin. Tears filled her big eyes, and she began to weep, great shuddering, hopeless sobs. Blindly, she reached out, groping until Pevara stuck the Oath Rod into her hand. Embracing the Source, Pevara channeled a thread of Spirit into the Rod. Talene gripped the wrist-thick rod so hard that her knuckles turned white, yet she just lay there sobbing.

sɹɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd. "aɪ fɪɹ ɪts taɪm tə pʊɾ əɹ bæk tə slip, dʌsin."

Saerin straightened. "I fear it's time to put her back to sleep, Doesine."

tælinz tɪɹz ɹidʌbəld, bʌt ʃi mʌmbəl θɹu ðɛm. "aɪ - fɔɹswɛɹ - ɔl oʊðz - ðət baɪn mi." wɪð ðə læst wɝd, ʃi bɪɡæn tə haʊl.

Talene's tears redoubled, but she mumbled through them. "I - forswear - all oaths - that bind me." With the last word, she began to howl.

sin dʒʌmpt, ðən swɑloʊd hɑɹd. ʃi pɝsənəli nu ðə peɪn ə ɹimuvɪŋ ə sɪŋɡəl oʊθ ən hæd spɛkjəleɪɾəd ɑn ði æɡəni ʌv ɹimuvɪŋ mɔɹ ðən wʌn ət wʌns, bʌt naʊ ðə ɹiæləɾi wɑz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. tælin skɹim tɪl ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bɹɛθ lɛft ɪn hɝ, ðən pʊld ɪn ɛɹ oʊnli tə skɹim əɡɛn, əntɪl sin hæf ɪkspɛktəd pipəl tə kʌm ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ðə taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. ðə tɔl ɡɹin kənvʌlsd, flɪŋɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz əbaʊt, ðən sʌɾənli ɑɹtʃt ʌp tɪl oʊnli hɝ hilz ən hɛd tʌtʃt ðə ɡɹeɪ sɝfəs, ɛvɹi mʌsəl klɛntʃt, hɝ hoʊl bɑɾi spæzəmɪŋ waɪldli.

Seaine jumped, then swallowed hard. She personally knew the pain of removing a single oath and had speculated on the agony of removing more than one at once, but now the reality was in front of her. Talene screamed till there was no breath left in her, then pulled in air only to scream again, until Seaine half expected people to come running down from the Tower itself. The tall Green convulsed, flinging her arms and legs about, then suddenly arched up till only her heels and head touched the gray surface, every muscle clenched, her whole body spasming wildly.

əz əbɹʌpli əz ðə siʒɝ hæd bɪɡʌn, tælin kəlæps boʊnləsli ən leɪ ðəɹ wipɪŋ laɪk ə lɔs tʃaɪld. ði oʊθ ɹɑd ɹoʊl fɹəm əɹ lɪmp hæn daʊn ðə sloʊpɪŋ ɡɹeɪ sɝfəs. jukɪɝi mɝmɝd sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ðə saʊn ʌv ə fɝvən pɹɛɹ. dʌsin kɛpt wɪspɝɪŋ, "laɪt!" oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ ɪn ə ʃeɪkən vɔɪs. "laɪt! laɪt!"

As abruptly as the seizure had begun, Talene collapsed bonelessly and lay there weeping like a lost child. The Oath Rod rolled from her limp hand down the sloping gray surface. Yukiri murmured something with the sound of a fervent prayer. Doesine kept whispering, "Light!" over and over in a shaken voice. "Light! Light!"

pɛvɑɹə skupt ʌp ðə ɹɑɾ ən kloʊz tælinz fɪŋɡɝz ɝaʊn ɪɾ əɡɛn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɝsi ɪn sinz fɹɛnd, nɑɾ ɪn ðɪs mæɾɝ. "naʊ swɛɹ ðə θɹi oʊðz," ʃi spæt.

Pevara scooped up the Rod and closed Talene's fingers around it again. There was no mercy in Seaine's friend, not in this matter. "Now swear the Three Oaths," she spat.

fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ɪt sim tælin maɪt ɹəfjuz, bʌt sloʊli ʃi ɹɪpiɾɪd ði oʊðz ðət meɪɾ əm ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ ən hɛld əm təɡɛðɝ. tə spik noʊ wɝd ðət wɑz nɑt tʃɹu. nɛvɝ tə meɪk ə wɛpən fəɹ wʌn mæn tə kɪl ənʌðɝ. nɛvɝ tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən ɪksɛpt əɡɛns dɑɹkfɹɛnz əɹ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, əɹ ɪn dɪfɛns ə hɝ laɪf, əɹ ðəɾ ə hɝ wɔɹɾɝ əɹ ʌv ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ. ət ði ɛnd, ʃi bɪɡæn wipɪŋ ɪn saɪləns, ʃeɪkɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ə saʊnd. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ði oʊðz taɪɾənɪŋ daʊn ɑn hɝ. ðeɪ wɝ ənkʌmftəɹbəl wən fɹɛʃ. pɝhæps.

For an instant, it seemed Talene might refuse, but slowly she repeated the oaths that made them all Aes Sedai and held them together. To speak no word that was not true. Never to make a weapon for one man to kill another. Never to use the One Power as a weapon except against Darkfriends or Shadowspawn, or in defense of her life, or that of her Warder or of another sister. At the end, she began weeping in silence, shaking without a sound. Perhaps it was the oaths tightening down on her. They were uncomfortable when fresh. Perhaps.

ðən pɛvɑɹə toʊl ði ʌðɝ oʊθ ðeɪ ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə hɝ. tælin flɪntʃt, bʌt mʌɾɝd ðə wɝdz ɪn toʊnz ə hoʊpləsnəs. "aɪ vaʊ tə oʊbeɪ ɔl faɪv ə jə æbsəlutli." ʌðɝwaɪz, ʃi oʊnli stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd dʌli, tɪɹz tʃɹeɪlɪŋ daʊn əɹ tʃiks.

Then Pevara told the other oath they required of her. Talene flinched, but muttered the words in tones of hopelessness. "I vow to obey all five of you absolutely." Otherwise, she only stared straight ahead dully, tears trailing down her cheeks.

"ænsɝ mi tʃɹuθfəli," sɹɪn toʊl hɝ. "ɑɹ jə ʌv ðə blæk ədʒɑ?"

"Answer me truthfully," Saerin told her. "Are you of the Black Ajah?"

"aɪ æm." ðə wɝdz kɹikt, əz ɪf tælinz θɹoʊt wɝ ɹʌsti.

"I am." The words creaked, as if Talene's throat were rusty.

ðə sɪmpəl wɝdz fɹoʊz sin ɪn ə weɪ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd. ʃi hæd sɛɾ aʊt tə hʌn ðə blæk ədʒɑ, æftɝ ɔl, ən bɪlivd ɪn əɹ kwɔɹi əz mɛni sɪstɝz dɪd nɑt. ʃi hæd leɪd hænz ɑn ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ, ɑn ə sɪɾɝ, hæd hɛlp bʌndəl tælin əlɔŋ dɪzɝɾɪd beɪsmən hɔlweɪz ɹæpt ɪn floʊz ʌv ɛɹ, hæd bɹoʊkən ə dʌzən taʊɝ lɔz, kəmɪɾəd sɪɹiəs kɹaɪmz, ɔl tə hɪɹ ən ænsɝ ʃi hæd bɪn nɪɹli sɝɾən ə bɪfɔɹ ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz æskt. naʊ ʃi hæd hɝd. ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɹɪli dɪɾ ɪɡzɪst. ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ə blæk sɪstɝ, ə dɑɹkfɹɛn u wɔɹ ðə ʃɔl. ən bɪlivɪŋ tɝn aʊt tə bi ə peɪl ʃædoʊ ʌv kənfɹʌntɪŋ. oʊnli hɝ dʒɔ klɛntʃt nɪɹ tə kɹæmpɪŋ kɛpt əɹ tiθ fɹəm tʃæɾɝɪŋ. ʃi stʃɹʌɡəl tə kəmpoʊz hɝsɛlf, tə θɪŋk ɹæʃənəli. bʌt naɪtmɛɹz wɝ əweɪk ən wɔkɪŋ ðə taʊɝ.

The simple words froze Seaine in a way she had never expected. She had set out to hunt the Black Ajah, after all, and believed in her quarry as many sisters did not. She had laid hands on another sister, on a Sitter, had helped bundle Talene along deserted basement hallways wrapped in flows of Air, had broken a dozen Tower laws, committed serious crimes, all to hear an answer she had been nearly certain of before the question was asked. Now she had heard. The Black Ajah really did exist. She was staring at a Black sister, a Darkfriend who wore the shawl. And believing turned out to be a pale shadow of confronting. Only her jaw clenched near to cramping kept her teeth from chattering. She struggled to compose herself, to think rationally. But nightmares were awake and walking the Tower.

sʌmwʌn ɛksheɪl hɛvəli, ən sin ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn u faʊn əɹ wɝl tɝn ʌpsaɪd daʊn. jukɪɝi ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ðən fɪkst əɹ aɪz ɑn tælin əz ðoʊ dɪtɝmən tə hoʊl ðə ʃild ɑn əɹ baɪ wɪlpaʊɝ ɪf nid bi. dʌsin wɑz lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps, ən smuðɪŋ əɹ dɑɹk ɡoʊldən skɝts ənsɝteɪnli. oʊnli sɹɪn ən pɛvɑɹə əpɪɹɾ əɾ iz.

Someone exhaled heavily, and Seaine realized she was not the only one who found her world turned upside down. Yukiri gave herself a shake, then fixed her eyes on Talene as though determined to hold the shield on her by willpower if need be. Doesine was licking her lips, and smoothing her dark golden skirts uncertainly. Only Saerin and Pevara appeared at ease.

"soʊ," sɹɪn sɛd sɔfli. pɝhæps "feɪnli" wɑz ə bɛɾɝ wɝd. "soʊ. blæk ədʒɑ." ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, ən əɹ toʊn bɪkeɪm bɹɪsk. "ðɛɹz noʊ mɔɹ nid fəɹ ðæt, jukɪɝi. tælin, jə woʊn tʃɹaɪ tə ɪskeɪp, əɹ ɹɪzɪst ɪn ɛni weɪ. jə woʊn soʊ mʌtʃ əz tʌtʃ ðə sɔɹs wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən fɹəm wʌn ʌv ʌs. ðoʊ aɪ səpoʊz sʌmwʌn ɛls wɪl teɪk ðɪs fɔɹwɝd wʌns wi hæn jə oʊvɝ. jukɪɝi?" ðə ʃild ɑn tælin dɪsəpeɪɾɪd, bʌt ðə ɡloʊ ɹɪmeɪn ɝaʊn jukɪɝi, əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌs ði ɪfɛkt ə ðə ɹɑɾ ɑn ə blæk sɪstɝ.

"So," Saerin said softly. Perhaps "faintly" was a better word. "So. Black Ajah." She drew a deep breath, and her tone became brisk. "There's no more need for that, Yukiri. Talene, you won't try to escape, or resist in any way. You won't so much as touch the Source without permission from one of us. Though I suppose someone else will take this forward once we hand you over. Yukiri?" The shield on Talene dissipated, but the glow remained around Yukiri, as if she did not trust the effect of the Rod on a Black sister.

pɛvɑɹə fɹaʊnd. "bɪfɔɹ wi ɡɪv əɹ tə ɪleɪɾə, sɹɪn, aɪ wɑnə dɪɡ aʊɾ əz mʌtʃ əz wi kæn. neɪmz, pleɪsəz, ɛniθɪŋ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi noʊz!" dɑɹkfɹɛnz hæd kɪl pɛvɑɹəz ɪntaɪɝ fæmli, ən sin wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi wəd ɡoʊ ɪndə ɛɡzaɪl ɹɛɾi tə hʌn daʊn ɛvɹi læs blæk sɪstɝ pɝsənəli.

Pevara frowned. "Before we give her to Elaida, Saerin, I want to dig out as much as we can. Names, places, anything. Everything she knows!" Darkfriends had killed Pevara's entire family, and Seaine was sure she would go into exile ready to hunt down every last Black sister personally.

stɪl hʌɾəld ɑn ðə tʃɛɹ, tælin meɪɾ ə saʊn hæf bɪɾɝ læf, hæf wipɪŋ. "wɛn jə də ðæt, wəɹ ɔl dɛd. dɛd! ɪleɪɾə ɪz blæk ədʒɑ!"

Still huddled on the Chair, Talene made a sound half bitter laugh, half weeping. "When you do that, we are all dead. Dead! Elaida is Black Ajah!"

"ðæts ɪmpɑsəbəl!" sin bɝst aʊt. "ɪleɪɾə ɡeɪv mi ði ɔɹɾɝ hɝsɛlf."

"That's impossible!" Seaine burst out. "Elaida gave me the order herself."

"ʃi mʌs bi," dʌsin hæf wɪspɝd. "tælinz swɔɹn ði oʊðz əɡɛn; ʃi dʒʌs neɪm hɝ!" jukɪɝi nɑɾəd viəmənli.

"She must be," Doesine half whispered. "Talene's sworn the oaths again; she just named her!" Yukiri nodded vehemently.

"juz jəɹ hɛdz," pɛvɑɹə ɡɹaʊld, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ oʊn ɪn dɪsɡʌst. "ju noʊ əz wɛl əz aɪ də ɪf jə bɪliv ə laɪ, jə kən seɪ ɪt fəɹ tʃɹuθ."

"Use your heads," Pevara growled, shaking her own in disgust. "You know as well as I do if you believe a lie, you can say it for truth."

"æn ðəɾ ɪz tʃɹuθ," sɹɪn sɛd fɝmli. "wʌt pɹuf dʒju hæv, tælin? hæv jə sin ɪleɪɾə ət jəɹ . . . miɾɪŋz?" ʃi ɡɹɪpt əɹ naɪf hɪl soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ əɹ nʌkəlz peɪld. sɹɪn hæd hæd tə faɪt hɑɹɾɝ ðən moʊs fəɹ ðə ʃɔl, fəɹ ðə ɹaɪt tə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə taʊɝ əɾ ɔl. tə hɝ, ðə taʊɝ wɑz mɔɹ ðən hoʊm, mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən əɹ oʊn laɪf. ɪf tælin ɡeɪv ðə ɹɔŋ ænsɝ, ɪleɪɾə maɪt nɑt lɪv tə feɪs tʃɹaɪəl.

"And that is truth," Saerin said firmly. "What proof do you have, Talene? Have you seen Elaida at your . . . meetings?" She gripped her knife hilt so hard that her knuckles paled. Saerin had had to fight harder than most for the shawl, for the right to remain in the Tower at all. To her, the Tower was more than home, more important than her own life. If Talene gave the wrong answer, Elaida might not live to face trial.

"ðeɪ doʊn əv miɾɪŋz," tælin mʌɾɝd sʌlənli. "ɪksɛp ðə səpɹim kaʊnsəl, aɪ səpoʊz. bʌt ʃi mʌs bi. ðeɪ noʊ ɛvɹi ɹipɔɹt ʃi ɹəsivz, ivən ðə sikɹət wʌnz, ɛvɹi wɝd spoʊkən tə hɝ. ðeɪ noʊ ɛvɹi dɪsɪʒən ʃi meɪks bɪfɔɹ ɪts ənaʊnst. deɪz bɪfɔɹ; səmtaɪmz wiks. haʊ ɛls, ənlɛs ʃi tɛlz ðɛm?" sɪɾɪŋ ʌp wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə fɪks əm itʃ ɪn tɝn wɪð ən ɪntɛn stɛɹ. ɪɾ oʊnli meɪɾ əɹ aɪz sim tə dɑɹɾ æŋkʃəsli. "wi hæv tə ɹʌn; wɪv tə faɪn ə pleɪs tə haɪd. əl hɛlp jə - tɛl jə ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ noʊ! - bʌt ðəl kɪl əs ənlɛs wi ɹʌn."

"They don't have meetings," Talene muttered sullenly. "Except the Supreme Council, I suppose. But she must be. They know every report she receives, even the secret ones, every word spoken to her. They know every decision she makes before it's announced. Days before; sometimes weeks. How else, unless she tells them?" Sitting up with an effort, she tried to fix them each in turn with an intent stare. It only made her eyes seem to dart anxiously. "We have to run; we have to find a place to hide. I'll help you - tell you everything I know! - but they'll kill us unless we run."

stʃɹeɪnʒ, sin θɔt, haʊ kwɪkli tælin hæd meɪɾ əɹ fɔɹmɝ kɹoʊniz "ðeɪ" ən tʃɹaɪd tə aɪdɛntəfaɪ hɝsɛlf wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm. noʊ. ʃi wɑz əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə ɹil pɹɑbləm, ən əvɔɪɾəns wɑz wɪtləs. hæɾ ɪleɪɾə ɹɪli sɛɾ əɹ tə dɪɡ aʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ? ʃi hæd nɛvɝ wʌns æktʃəli  mɛnʃən ðə neɪm. kəd ʃi hæv mɛn sʌmθɪŋ ɛls? ɪleɪɾə hæɾ ɔlweɪz dʒʌmp daʊn ðə θɹoʊɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn u ivən mɛnʃən ðə blæk. nɪɹli ɛni sɪstɝ wəd də ðə seɪm, jɛt . . .

Strange, Seaine thought, how quickly Talene had made her former cronies "they" and tried to identify herself with the rest of them. No. She was avoiding the real problem, and avoidance was witless. Had Elaida really set her to dig out the Black Ajah? She had never once actually mentioned the name. Could she have meant something else? Elaida had always jumped down the throat of anyone who even mentioned the Black. Nearly any sister would do the same, yet . . .

"ɪleɪɾəz pɹuvən hɝsɛlf ə ful," sɹɪn sɛd, "æn mɔɹ ðən wʌns aɪv ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd stændɪŋ fəɹ hɝ, bʌɾ əl nɑt bɪliv ʃiz blæk, nɑt wɪθaʊt mɔɹ ðən ðæt." taɪt-lɪpt, pɛvɑɹə dʒɝkt ən əɡɹiɪŋ nɑd. əz ə ɹɛd, ʃi wəd wɑn mʌtʃ mɔɹ.

"Elaida's proven herself a fool," Saerin said, "and more than once I've regretted standing for her, but I'll not believe she's Black, not without more than that." Tight-lipped, Pevara jerked an agreeing nod. As a Red, she would want much more.

"ðæts əz meɪ bi, sɹɪn," jukɪɝi sɛd, "bʌt wi kænɑt hoʊl tælin lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡɹinz stɑɹɾ æskɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi ɪz. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə . . . ðə blæk. wid bɛɾɝ dɪsaɪd wʌt tə də fæst, əɹ wɪl stɪl bi dɪɡɪŋ ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə wɛl wən ðə ɹeɪnz hɪt." tælin ɡeɪv sɹɪn ə fibəl smaɪl ðət wɑz pɹɑbli mɛn tə bi ɪnɡɹeɪʃieɪɾɪŋ. ɪt feɪɾəd ʌndɝ ðə bɹaʊn sɪɾɝz fɹaʊn.

"That's as may be, Saerin," Yukiri said, "but we cannot hold Talene long before the Greens start asking where she is. Not to mention the . . . the Black. We'd better decide what to do fast, or we'll still be digging at the bottom of the well when the rains hit." Talene gave Saerin a feeble smile that was probably meant to be ingratiating. It faded under the Brown Sitter's frown.

"wi doʊn dɛɹ tɛl ɪleɪɾə ɛniθɪŋ əntɪl wi kən kɹɪpəl ðə blæk ət wʌn bloʊ," sɹɪn sɛd faɪnəli. "doʊn ɑɹɡju, pɛvɑɹə; ɪts sɛns." pɛvɑɹə θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz ən pʊɾ ɑn ə stʌbɝn ɪkspɹɛʃən, bʌt ʃi kloʊzd əɹ maʊθ. "ɪf tælin ɪz ɹaɪt," sɹɪn wɛn ɑn, "ðə blæk noʊz əbaʊt sin əɹ sun wɪl, soʊ wi mʌst ɛnʃʊɹ əɹ seɪfti, əz mʌtʃ əz wi kæn. ðət woʊn bi izi, wɪð oʊnli ðə faɪv ʌv ʌs. wi kæn tʃɹʌst ɛniwʌn əntɪl wəɹ sɝɾən ə ðɛm! ət list wɪv tælin, ən u noʊz wʌt wɪl lɝn bɪfɔɹ ʃiz ɹʌŋ aʊt?" tælin ətɛmptəd tə lʊk wɪlɪŋ tə bi ɹʌŋ aʊt, bʌt noʊ wʌn wɑz peɪɪŋ əɹ ɛni maɪnd. sinz θɹoʊt hæd ɡɔn dʒɹaɪ.

"We don't dare tell Elaida anything until we can cripple the Black at one blow," Saerin said finally. "Don't argue, Pevara; it's sense." Pevara threw up her hands and put on a stubborn expression, but she closed her mouth. "If Talene is right," Saerin went on, "the Black knows about Seaine or soon will, so we must ensure her safety, as much as we can. That won't be easy, with only the five of us. We can't trust anyone until we are certain of them! At least we have Talene, and who knows what we'll learn before she's wrung out?" Talene attempted to look willing to be wrung out, but no one was paying her any mind. Seaine's throat had gone dry.

"wi maɪt nɑt bi ɪntaɪɝli əloʊn," pɛvɑɹə sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. "sin, tɛl əm jəɹ lɪɾəl skim wɪð zɛɹə ən əɹ fɹɛnz."

"We might not be entirely alone," Pevara said reluctantly. "Seaine, tell them your little scheme with Zerah and her friends."

"skim?" sɹɪn sɛd. "huz zɛɹə? sin? sin!"

"Scheme?" Saerin said. "Who's Zerah? Seaine? Seaine!"

sin ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "wʌt? oʊ. pɛvɑɹə ən aɪ ənkʌvɝɾ ə smɔl nɛst ə ɹɛbəlz hɪɹ ɪn ðə taʊɝ," ʃi bɪɡæn bɹɛθəli. "tɛn sɪstɝz sɛn tə spɹɛd dɪsɛnt." sɹɪn wɑz gɑnə meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz seɪf, wɑz ʃi? wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz æskɪŋ. ʃi wɑz ə sɪɾɝ hɝsɛlf; ʃi hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ ɔlmoʊst ə hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti jɪɹz. wʌt ɹaɪt hæd sɹɪn əɹ ɛniwʌn tə . . . ? "pɛvɑɹə ən aɪ hæv bɪɡʌn pʊɾɪŋ ən ɛn tə ðæt. wiv ɔlɹɛɾi meɪd wʌn ə ðɛm, zɛɹə dɑkən, teɪk ðə seɪm ɛkstʃɹə oʊθ tælin dɪd, ən toʊld əɹ tə bɹɪŋ bɝneɪl ɡɛlbɑɹn tə maɪ ɹumz ðɪs æftɝnun wɪθaʊt ɹaʊzɪŋ əɹ səspɪʃənz." laɪt, ɛni sɪstɝ aʊtsaɪd ðɪs ɹum maɪt bi blæk. ɛni sɪstɝ. "ðɛn wɪl juz ðoʊz tu tə bɹɪŋ ənʌðɝ, əntɪl ðeɪv ɔl bɪn meɪd tə swɛɹ oʊbiɾiəns. ʌv kɔɹs, wɪl æsk ðə seɪm kwɛstʃən wi pʊt tə zɛɹə, ðə seɪm wi pʊt tə tælin." ðə blæk ədʒɑ maɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv əɹ neɪm, ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ ʃi hæd bɪn sɛt hʌntɪŋ ðɛm. haʊ kəd sɹɪn kip əɹ seɪf? "ðoʊz u ɡɪv ðə ɹɔŋ ænsɝ kən bi kwɛstʃənd, ən ðoʊz u ɡɪv ðə ɹaɪt kən ɹipeɪ fəɹ ə lɪɾəl ə ðɛɹ tʃɹɛtʃɝi baɪ hʌntɪŋ ðə blæk ʌndɝ əɹ dɝɛkʃən." laɪt, haʊ?

Seaine gave a start. "What? Oh. Pevara and I uncovered a small nest of rebels here in the Tower," she began breathily. "Ten sisters sent to spread dissent." Saerin was going to make sure she was safe, was she? Without so much as asking. She was a Sitter herself; she had been Aes Sedai for almost a hundred and fifty years. What right had Saerin or anyone to . . . ? "Pevara and I have begun putting an end to that. We've already made one of them, Zerah Dacan, take the same extra oath Talene did, and told her to bring Bernaile Gelbarn to my rooms this afternoon without rousing her suspicions." Light, any sister outside this room might be Black. Any sister. "Then we will use those two to bring another, until they have all been made to swear obedience. Of course, we'll ask the same question we put to Zerah, the same we put to Talene." The Black Ajah might already have her name, already know she had been set hunting them. How could Saerin keep her safe? "Those who give the wrong answer can be questioned, and those who give the right can repay for a little of their treachery by hunting the Black under our direction." Light, how?

wən ʃi wɑz dʌn, ði ʌðɝz dɪskʌs ðə mæɾɝ ət səm lɛŋθ, wɪtʃ kəɾ oʊnli min ðət sɹɪn wɑz ənʃʊɹ wʌt dɪsɪʒən ʃi wəd meɪk. jukɪɝi ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ɡɪvɪŋ zɛɹə ən əɹ kənfɛɾɝeɪts oʊvɝ tə ðə lɔ ɪmiɾiətli - ɪf ɪt kəd bi dʌn wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn sɪtʃueɪʃən wɪð tælin. pɛvɑɹə ɑɹɡjud fəɹ juzɪŋ ðə ɹɛbəlz, ðoʊ hæfhɑɹɾɪdli; ðə dɪsɛn ðeɪ hæd bɪn spɹɛɾɪŋ sɛntɝɾ ɝaʊn vaɪl teɪlz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ ən fɔls dʒɹæɡənz. dʌsin sim tə bi sədʒɛstɪŋ ðət ðeɪ kɪdnæp ɛvɹi sɪstɝ ɪn ðə taʊɝ ən fɔɹs əm ɔl tə teɪk ði æɾəd oʊθ, bʌt ði ʌðɝ θɹi peɪd lɪɾəl ətɛnʃən tə hɝ.

When she was done, the others discussed the matter at some length, which could only mean that Saerin was unsure what decision she would make. Yukiri insisted on giving Zerah and her confederates over to the law immediately - if it could be done without exposing their own situation with Talene. Pevara argued for using the rebels, though halfheartedly; the dissent they had been spreading centered around vile tales concerning the Red Ajah and false Dragons. Doesine seemed to be suggesting that they kidnap every sister in the Tower and force them all to take the added oath, but the other three paid little attention to her.

sin tʊk noʊ pɑɹɾ ɪn ðə dɪskʌʃən. hɝ ɹiækʃən tə ðɛɹ pɹɪdɪkəmənt wɑz ði oʊnli pɑsəbəl wʌn, ʃi θɔt. tɑɾɝɪŋ tə ðə nɪɹəs kɔɹnɝ, ʃi vɑməɾəd nɔɪzəli.

Seaine took no part in the discussion. Her reaction to their predicament was the only possible one, she thought. Tottering to the nearest corner, she vomited noisily.

ɪleɪn tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə ɡɹaɪn əɹ tiθ. aʊtsaɪd, ənʌðɝ blɪzɝd pɛltɪd keɪɛmlɪn, dɑɹkənɪŋ ðə mɪddeɪ skaɪ ɪnʌf ðət ðə læmps əlɔŋ ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹumz pænəld wɔlz wɝ ɔl lɪt. fɪɹs ɡʌsts ɹæɾəld ðə keɪsməns sɛɾ ɪndə ðə tɔl ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz. flæʃɪz ə laɪtnɪŋ lɪt ðə klɪɹ ɡlæs peɪnz, ən θʌndɝ bum hɑloʊli oʊvɝhɛd. θʌndɝ snoʊ, ðə wɝs kaɪndə wɪntɝ stɔɹm, ðə moʊs vaɪələnt. ðə ɹum wɑz nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli koʊld, bʌt . . . spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə lɔɡz kɹæklɪŋ ɪn ðə bɹɔd mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪs, ʃi kəd stɪl fil ə tʃɪl ɹaɪzɪŋ θɹu ðə kɑɹpəts leɪɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə flɔɹ taɪlz, ən θɹu hɝ θɪkəs vɛlvət slɪpɝz, tu. ðə waɪd blæk fɑks kɑlɝ ən kʌfs ɑn əɹ ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt ɡaʊn wɝ pɹɪɾi, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðeɪ æɾəd ɛni mɔɹ tə ɪts wɔɹmθ ðən ðə pɝlz ɑn ðə slivz. ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə lɛt ðə koʊl tʌtʃ əɹ dɪd nɑt min ʃi wɑz ʌnəwɛɹ.

Elayne tried not to grind her teeth. Outside, another blizzard pelted Caemlyn, darkening the midday sky enough that the lamps along the sitting room's paneled walls were all lit. Fierce gusts rattled the casements set into the tall arched windows. Flashes of lightning lit the clear glass panes, and thunder boomed hollowly overhead. Thunder snow, the worst kind of winter storm, the most violent. The room was not precisely cold, but . . . Spreading her fingers in front of the logs crackling in the broad marble fireplace, she could still feel a chill rising through the carpets layered over the floor tiles, and through her thickest velvet slippers, too. The wide black fox collar and cuffs on her red-and-white gown were pretty, but she was not sure they added any more to its warmth than the pearls on the sleeves. Refusing to let the cold touch her did not mean she was unaware.

wɛɹ wɑz nɪneɪiv? ən vændin? hɝ θɔts snɑɹəld laɪk ðə wɛðɝ. ðeɪ ʃəd bi hɪɹ ɔlɹɛɾi! laɪt! aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəd lɝn tə ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt slip, ən ðeɪ teɪk ðɛɹ swit taɪm! noʊ, ðət wɑz ənfɛɹ. hɝ fɔɹməl kleɪm fəɹ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn wɑz oʊnli ə fju deɪz oʊld, ən fəɹ hɝ, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls hæd tə teɪk sɛkən pleɪs fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ. nɪneɪiv ən vændin hæɾ ʌðɝ pɹaɪɔɹəɾiz; ʌðɝ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾiz, əz ðeɪ sɔ ðɛm. nɪneɪiv wɑz ʌp tə hɝ nɛk plænɪŋ wɪð ɹin ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl haʊ tə spɪɹət kɪnswɪmən aʊɾ ə sintʃæn-kəntʃɹoʊld lænz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ dɪskʌvɝɾ ən kɑlɝd. ðə kɪn wɝ vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət steɪɪŋ loʊ, bʌt ðə sintʃæn wəd nɑt dʒʌs pæs əm baɪ fəɹ waɪldɝz ðə weɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz hæd. səpoʊzədli, vændin wɑz stɪl ʃeɪkən baɪ hɝ sɪstɝz mɝɾɝ, bɛɹli iɾɪŋ ən hɑɹdli eɪbəl tə ɡɪv ædvaɪs ʌv ɛni sɔɹt. ðə bɛɹli iɾɪŋ pɑɹt wɑz tʃɹu, bʌt faɪndɪŋ ðə kɪlɝ kənsum hɝ. səpoʊzədli wɔkɪŋ ðə hɔlz ɪn ɡɹif əɾ ɑɾ aʊɝz, ʃi wɑz sikɹɪtli hʌntɪŋ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛn əmʌŋ ðɛm. θɹi deɪz ɝliɝ, dʒʌs ðə θɔɾ ə ðət kəd meɪk ɪleɪn ʃɪvɝ; naʊ, ɪt wɑz wʌn deɪnʒɝ əmʌŋ mɛni. mɔɹ ɪntəmət ðən moʊst, tʃɹu, bʌɾ oʊnli moʊst.

Where was Nynaeve? And Vandene? Her thoughts snarled like the weather. They should be here already! Light! I wish I could learn to go without sleep, and they take their sweet time! No, that was unfair. Her formal claim for the Lion Throne was only a few days old, and for her, everything else had to take second place for the time being. Nynaeve and Vandene had other priorities; other responsibilities, as they saw them. Nynaeve was up to her neck planning with Reanne and the rest of the Knitting Circle how to spirit Kinswomen out of Seanchan-controlled lands before they were discovered and collared. The Kin were very good at staying low, but the Seanchan would not just pass them by for wilders the way Aes Sedai always had. Supposedly, Vandene was still shaken by her sister's murder, barely eating and hardly able to give advice of any sort. The barely eating part was true, but finding the killer consumed her. Supposedly walking the halls in grief at odd hours, she was secretly hunting the Darkfriend among them. Three days earlier, just the thought of that could make Elayne shiver; now, it was one danger among many. More intimate than most, true, but only most.

ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tæsks, əpɹuvd ən ɛnkɝɪdʒ baɪ ɛɡwin, bʌt ʃi stɪl wɪʃt ðeɪ wəd hɝi, sɛlfɪʃ ðoʊ ɪt maɪt bi. vændin hæɾ ə wɛlθ ʌv ɡʊɾ ædvaɪs, ði ædvæntɪdʒ ə lɔŋ ɪkspɪɹiəns ən stʌɾi, ən nɪneɪivz jɪɹz dilɪŋ wɪð ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl ən ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild ɡeɪv əɹ ə kin aɪ fəɹ pɹæktəkəl pɑlətɪks, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ʃi dɪnaɪɾ ɪt. bɝn mi, aɪ hæv ə hʌnʒɹəd pɹɑbləmz, səm ɹaɪt hɪɹ ɪn ðə pæləs, ən aɪ nid ðɛm! ɪf ʃi hæɾ əɹ weɪ, nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə wɑz gɑnə bi ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ædvaɪzɝ tə ðə nɛks kwin ʌv ændɝ. ʃi niɾəd ɔl ðə hɛlp ʃi kəd faɪnd - hɛlp ʃi kəd tʃɹʌst.

They were doing important tasks, approved and encouraged by Egwene, but she still wished they would hurry, selfish though it might be. Vandene had a wealth of good advice, the advantage of long experience and study, and Nynaeve's years dealing with the Village Council and the Women's Circle back in Emond's Field gave her a keen eye for practical politics, however much she denied it. Burn me, I have a hundred problems, some right here in the Palace, and I need them! If she had her way, Nynaeve al'Meara was going to be the Aes Sedai advisor to the next Queen of Andor. She needed all the help she could find - help she could trust.

smuðɪŋ əɹ feɪs, ʃi tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ðə bleɪzɪŋ hɑɹθ. θɝtin tɔl ɑɹmtʃɛɹz, kɑɹv sɪmpli bʌt wɪð ə faɪn hænd, meɪɾ ə hɔɹsʃu ɑɹk ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. pɛɹədɑksəkli, ðə pleɪs ʌv ɑnɝ, wɛɹ ðə kwin wəd sɪɾ ɪf ɹəsivɪŋ hɪɹ, stʊd fɑɹðəs fɹəm ðə faɪɝz hit. sətʃ əz ɪt wɑz. hɝ bæk bɪɡæn tə wɔɹm ɪmiɾiətli, ən əɹ fɹʌn tə kul. aʊtsaɪd, snoʊ fɛl, θʌndɝ kɹæʃt ən laɪtnɪŋ flɛɹd. ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ hɛd, tu. kɑm. ə ɹulɝ hæɾ əz mʌtʃ niɾ ə kɑm əz ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Smoothing her face, she turned away from the blazing hearth. Thirteen tall armchairs, carved simply but with a fine hand, made a horseshoe arc in front of the fireplace. Paradoxically, the place of honor, where the Queen would sit if receiving here, stood farthest from the fire's heat. Such as it was. Her back began to warm immediately, and her front to cool. Outside, snow fell, thunder crashed and lightning flared. Inside her head, too. Calm. A ruler had as much need of calm as any Aes Sedai.

"ɪt mʌs bi ðə mɝsənɛɹiz," ʃi sɛd, nɑt kwaɪt mænɪdʒɪŋ tə kip ɹəɡɹɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ vɔɪs. ɑɹmmɪn fɹəm əɹ ɪsteɪts ʃʊɹli wəd bɪɡɪn ɝaɪvɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ə mʌnθ - wʌns ðeɪ lɝnd ʃi wɑz əlaɪv - bʌɾ ɪt maɪt bi spɹɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɛni səɡnɪfɪkənt nʌmbɝz keɪm, ən ðə mɛn bɝdʒɪt wɑz ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ wəd ɹikwaɪɝ hæf ə jɪɹ əɹ mɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ fɪt tə ɹaɪɾ ən hændəl ə sɔɹɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "æn hʌntɝz fəɹ ðə hɔɹn, ɪf ɛni wɪl saɪn ən swɛɹ." ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv boʊθ tʃɹæpt ɪn keɪɛmlɪn baɪ ðə wɛðɝ. tu mɛni ʌv boʊθ, moʊs pipəl sɛd, kəɹaʊzəŋ, bɹɔlɪŋ, tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ wɪmən u wɑntəd noʊ pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ ətɛnʃənz. ət list ʃi wəd bi pʊɾɪŋ əm tə ɡʊd jus, tə stɑp tʃɹʌbəl ɪnstɛɾ ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ɪt. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wɑz stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns hɝsɛlf ə ðæt. "ɪkspɛnsɪv, bʌt ðə kɑfɝz wɪl kʌvɝ ɪt." fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl, ðeɪ wʊd. ʃi hæd bɛɾɝ stɑɹt ɹəsivɪŋ ɹɛvənuz fɹəm əɹ ɪsteɪts sun.

"It must be the mercenaries," she said, not quite managing to keep regret out of her voice. Armsmen from her estates surely would begin arriving inside a month - once they learned she was alive - but it might be spring before any significant numbers came, and the men Birgitte was recruiting would require half a year or more before they were fit to ride and handle a sword at the same time. "And Hunters for the Horn, if any will sign and swear." There were plenty of both trapped in Caemlyn by the weather. Too many of both, most people said, carousing, brawling, troubling women who wanted no part of their attentions. At least she would be putting them to good use, to stop trouble instead of beginning it. She wished she did not think she was still trying to convince herself of that. "Expensive, but the coffers will cover it." For a little while, they would. She had better start receiving revenues from her estates soon.

wʌndɝ ʌv wʌndɝz, ðə tu wɪmən stændɪŋ bɪfɔɹ əɹ ɹiæktəɾ ɪn mʌtʃ ðə seɪm fæʃən.

Wonder of wonders, the two women standing before her reacted in much the same fashion.

daɪɛlɪn ɡeɪv ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd ɡɹʌnt. ə lɑɹdʒ, ɹaʊn sɪlvɝ pɪn wɝkt wɪð tæɹɑvɪnz aʊl ən oʊk wɑz fæsən ət ðə haɪ nɛk ə hɝ dɑɹk ɡɹin dʒɹɛs, hɝ oʊnli dʒuəlɹi. ə ʃoʊ ʌv pɹaɪɾ ɪn əɹ haʊs, pɝhæps tu mʌtʃ pɹaɪd; ðə haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tæɹɑvɪn wɑz ə pɹaʊd wʊmən ɔltəɡɛðɝ. ɡɹeɪ stʃɹikt əɹ ɡoʊldən hɛɹ ən faɪn laɪnz wɛb ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ aɪz, jɛɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz stʃɹɔŋ, hɝ ɡeɪz lɛvəl ən ʃɑɹp. hɝ maɪnd wɑz ə ɹeɪzɝ. əɹ meɪbi ə sɔɹd. ə pleɪnspoʊkən wʊmən, əɹ soʊ ɪt simd, hu dɪd nɑt haɪɾ əɹ əpɪnjənz.

Dyelin gave an irritated grunt. A large, round silver pin worked with Taravin's Owl and Oak was fastened at the high neck of her dark green dress, her only jewelry. A show of pride in her House, perhaps too much pride; the High Seat of House Taravin was a proud woman altogether. Gray streaked her golden hair and fine lines webbed the corners of her eyes, yet her face was strong, her gaze level and sharp. Her mind was a razor. Or maybe a sword. A plainspoken woman, or so it seemed, who did not hide her opinions.

"mɝsənɛɹiz noʊ ðə wɝk," ʃi sɛd dɪsmɪsɪvli, "bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ hɑɹd tə kəntʃɹoʊl, ɪleɪn. wən jə niɾ ə fɛðɝ tʌtʃ, ðəɹ laɪəbəl tə bi ə hæmɝ, ən wən jə niɾ ə hæmɝ, ðəɹ laɪəbəl tə bi ɛlswɛɹ, ən stilɪŋ tə but. ðeɪ ɑɹ lɔɪəl tə ɡoʊld, ən oʊnli əz lɔŋ əz ðə ɡoʊld læsts. ɪf ðeɪ doʊn bɪtʃɹeɪ fəɹ mɔɹ ɡoʊl fɝst. aɪm ʃʊɹ ðɪs wʌns leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt wɪl əɡɹi wɪð mi."

"Mercenaries know the work," she said dismissively, "but they are hard to control, Elayne. When you need a feather touch, they're liable to be a hammer, and when you need a hammer, they're liable to be elsewhere, and stealing to boot. They are loyal to gold, and only as long as the gold lasts. If they don't betray for more gold first. I'm sure this once Lady Birgitte will agree with me."

ɑɹmz foʊldəd taɪtli bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts ən hil buts plæntəd waɪd, bɝdʒɪt ɡɹɪməst, əz ɔlweɪz wən ɛniwʌn juzd əɹ nu taɪɾəl. ɪleɪn hæd ɡɹæntəɾ əɹ ən ɪsteɪɾ əz sun əz ðeɪ ɹitʃt keɪɛmlɪn, wɛɹ ɪt kəd bi ɹɛdʒəstɝd. ɪn pɹaɪvət, bɝdʒɪt ɡɹʌmbəld ɪnsɛsənli oʊvɝ ðæt, ən ði ʌðɝ tʃeɪnʒ ɪn əɹ laɪf. hɝ skaɪ-blu tʃɹaʊzɝz wɝ kʌt ðə seɪm əz ðoʊz ʃi juʒəwəli wɔɹ, bɪloʊɪŋ ən ɡæðɝɾ ət ði æŋkəlz, bʌɾ əɹ ʃɔɹt ɹɛd koʊt hæɾ ə haɪ waɪt kɑlɝ, ən waɪd waɪt kʌfs bændɪd wɪð ɡoʊld. ʃi wɑz ðə leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən ən ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd, ən ʃi kəd mʌɾɝ ən waɪn ɔl ʃi wɑntəd, soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi kɛpt ɪt pɹaɪvət.

Arms folded tightly beneath her breasts and heeled boots planted wide, Birgitte grimaced, as always when anyone used her new title. Elayne had granted her an estate as soon as they reached Caemlyn, where it could be registered. In private, Birgitte grumbled incessantly over that, and the other change in her life. Her sky-blue trousers were cut the same as those she usually wore, billowing and gathered at the ankles, but her short red coat had a high white collar, and wide white cuffs banded with gold. She was the Lady Birgitte Trahelion and the Captain-General of the Queen's Guard, and she could mutter and whine all she wanted, so long as she kept it private.

"aɪ du," ʃi ɡɹaʊld ənwɪlɪŋli, ən ɡeɪv daɪɛlɪn ə nɑt-kwaɪt-saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlɛɹ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn kæɹid wʌɾ ɪleɪn hæd bɪn sɛnsɪŋ ɔl mɔɹnɪŋ. fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən, ɪɹɪteɪʃən, dɪtɝməneɪʃən. səm ə ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn ə ɹəflɛkʃən ə hɝsɛlf, ðoʊ. ðeɪ mɪɹɝɾ itʃ ʌðɝ ɪn sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ weɪz sɪns ðə bɑndɪŋ, ɪmoʊʃnəli ən ʌðɝwaɪz. waɪ, hɝ kɔɹsəz hæd ʃɪftəd baɪ mɔɹ ðən ə wik tə mætʃ ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz!

"I do," she growled unwillingly, and gave Dyelin a not-quite-sidelong glare. The Warder bond carried what Elayne had been sensing all morning. Frustration, irritation, determination. Some of that might have been a reflection of herself, though. They mirrored each other in surprising ways since the bonding, emotionally and otherwise. Why, her courses had shifted by more than a week to match the other woman's!

bɝdʒɪts ɹɪlʌktəns tə teɪk ðə sɛkənd-bɛst ɑɹɡjəmənt wɑz klɪɹli ɔlmoʊst əz ɡɹeɪɾ əz əɹ ɹɪlʌktəns tə əɡɹi. "hʌntɝz ɑɹən mʌtʃ blʌɾi bɛɾɝ, ɪleɪn," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "ðeɪ tʊk ðə hʌntɝz oʊθ tə faɪn ædvɛntʃɝ, ən ə pleɪs ɪn ðə hɪstɝiz ɪf ðeɪ kæn. nɑt tə sɛɾəl daʊn kipɪŋ ðə lɔ. hæf ɑɹ supɝsɪliəs pɹɪɡz, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ fleɪmɪŋ noʊzɪz əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls; ðə ɹɛs doʊn dʒʌs teɪk nɛsəsɛɹi tʃænsəz, ðeɪ lʊk fəɹ tʃænsəz tə teɪk. ən wʌn wɪspɝ ʌv ə ɹumɝ ə ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ən jəl bi lʌki ɪf oʊnli tu ɪn θɹi vænɪʃ oʊvɝnaɪt."

Birgitte's reluctance to take the second-best argument was clearly almost as great as her reluctance to agree. "Hunters aren't much bloody better, Elayne," she muttered. "They took the Hunter's Oath to find adventure, and a place in the histories if they can. Not to settle down keeping the law. Half are supercilious prigs, looking down their flaming noses at everyone else; the rest don't just take necessary chances, they look for chances to take. And one whisper of a rumor of the Horn of Valere, and you'll be lucky if only two in three vanish overnight."

daɪɛlɪn smaɪld ə θɪn smaɪl, əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd wʌn ə pɔɪnt. ɔɪl ən wɔɾɝ wɝ nɑɾ ɪn ɪt kəmpɛɹd tə ðoʊz tu; itʃ mænədʒd wɛl ɪnʌf wɪð nɪɹli ɛniwʌn ɛls, bʌt fəɹ səm ɹizən ðeɪ kəɾ ɑɹɡju oʊvɝ ðə kʌlɝ ə tʃɑɹkoʊl. kəɾ ən wʊd. "bɪsaɪdz, hʌntɝz ən mɝsənɛɹiz əlaɪk, nɪɹli ɔl ɑɹ fɔɹənɝz. ðət wɪl sɪt pʊɹli wɪð haɪ ən loʊ əlaɪk. vɛɹi pʊɹli. ðə læs θɪŋ jə wɑn ɪz tə stɑɹɾ ə ɹɪbɛljən." laɪtnɪŋ flɛɹd, bɹifli laɪɾɪŋ ðə keɪsməns, ən ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli laʊd pil ə θʌndɝ pʌŋktʃueɪɾɪd əɹ wɝdz. ɪn ə θaʊzən jɪɹz, sɛvən kwinz ʌv ændɝ hæd bɪn tɑpəl baɪ oʊpən ɹɪbɛljən, ən ðə tu hu sɝvaɪv pɹɑbli wɪʃt ðeɪ hæd nɑt.

Dyelin smiled a thin smile, as though she had won a point. Oil and water were not in it compared to those two; each managed well enough with nearly anyone else, but for some reason they could argue over the color of charcoal. Could and would. "Besides, Hunters and mercenaries alike, nearly all are foreigners. That will sit poorly with high and low alike. Very poorly. The last thing you want is to start a rebellion." Lightning flared, briefly lighting the casements, and a particularly loud peal of thunder punctuated her words. In a thousand years, seven Queens of Andor had been toppled by open rebellion, and the two who survived probably wished they had not.

ɪleɪn staɪfəld ə saɪ. wʌn ə ðə smɔl ɪnleɪd teɪbəlz əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz hɛld ə hɛvi sɪlvɝ ɹoʊpwɝk tʃɹeɪ wɪð kʌps ən ə tɔl pɪtʃɝ ə hɑt spaɪst waɪn. lukwɔɹm spaɪst waɪn, naʊ. ʃi tʃænəl bɹifli, faɪɝ, ən ə θɪn wɪsp ə stim ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə pɪtʃɝ. ɹihiɾɪŋ ɡeɪv ðə spaɪsəz ə slaɪt bɪɾɝnəs, bʌt ðə wɔɹmθ ə ðə wɝkt-sɪlvɝ kʌp ɪn əɹ hænz wɑz wɝθ ɪt. wɪð ən ɛfɝt ʃi ɹɪzɪstɪd ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə hit ði ɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹum wɪð ðə paʊɝ ən ɹilis ðə sɔɹs; ðə wɔɹmθ wəd nɑɾ əv læstəɾ ənlɛs ʃi meɪnteɪn ðə wivz, ɛniweɪ. ʃi hæd kɑŋkɝɾ əɹ ənwɪlɪŋnɪs tə lɛt ɡoʊ ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi tʊk ɪn seɪaɪdɑɹ - wɛl, tə səm ɪkstɛnt - jɛɾ ə leɪt, ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə dʒɹɔ mɔɹ ɡɹu ɛvɹi taɪm. ɛvɹi sɪstɝ hæd tə feɪs ðət deɪnʒɝəs dɪzaɪɝ. ə dʒɛstʃɝ bɹɔt ði ʌðɝz tə pɔɹ ðɛɹ oʊn waɪn.

Elayne stifled a sigh. One of the small inlaid tables along the walls held a heavy silver ropework tray with cups and a tall pitcher of hot spiced wine. Lukewarm spiced wine, now. She channeled briefly, Fire, and a thin wisp of steam rose from the pitcher. Reheating gave the spices a slight bitterness, but the warmth of the worked-silver cup in her hands was worth it. With an effort she resisted the desire to heat the air in the room with the Power and released the Source; the warmth would not have lasted unless she maintained the weaves, anyway. She had conquered her unwillingness to let go every time she took in saidar - well, to some extent - yet of late, the desire to draw more grew every time. Every sister had to face that dangerous desire. A gesture brought the others to pour their own wine.

"ju noʊ ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən," ʃi toʊl ðɛm. "oʊnli ə ful kəd θɪŋk ɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt daɪɹ, ən jəɹ niðɝ ə jə fulz." ðə ɡɑɹdz wɝ ə ʃɛl, ə hændfʊl ʌv æksɛptəbəl mɛn ən ə dʌbəl hændfʊl ə stʃɹɔŋɡɑɝmz ən tʌfs bɛɾɝ suɾəd tə θɹoʊɪŋ dʒɹʌŋks aʊɾ ə tævɝnz, əɹ biɪŋ θɹoʊn aʊt ðɛmsɛlvz. ən wɪð ðə sɑldəiənz ɡɔn ən ði il livɪŋ, kɹaɪm wɑz blumɪŋ laɪk widz ɪn spɹɪŋ. ʃi wʊɾə θɔt ðə snoʊ wəd dæmp ɪt daʊn, bʌɾ ɛvɹi deɪ bɹɔt ɹɑbɝi, ɑɹsən ən wɝs. ɛvɹi deɪ, ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən ɡɹu wɝs. "æt ðɪs ɹeɪt, wɪl si ɹaɪəts ɪn ə fju wiks. meɪbi sunɝ. ɪf aɪ kæn kip ɔɹɾɝ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ɪtsɛlf, ðə pipəl wɪl tɝn əɡɛns mi." ɪf ʃi kəd nɑt kip ɔɹɾɝ ɪn ðə kæpəɾəl, ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl ənaʊns tə ðə wɝl ðət ʃi wɑz ənfɪt tə ɹul. "aɪ doʊn laɪk ɪt, bʌɾ ɪts tə bi dʌn, soʊ ɪɾəl bi." boʊθ oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz, ɹɛɾi tə ɑɹɡju fɝðɝ, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv əm noʊ tʃæns. ʃi meɪɾ əɹ vɔɪs fɝm. "ɪt wɪl bi dʌn."

"You know the situation," she told them. "Only a fool could think it anything but dire, and you're neither of you fools." The Guards were a shell, a handful of acceptable men and a double handful of strongarms and toughs better suited to throwing drunks out of taverns, or being thrown out themselves. And with the Saldaeans gone and the Aiel leaving, crime was blooming like weeds in spring. She would have thought the snow would damp it down, but every day brought robbery, arson and worse. Every day, the situation grew worse. "At this rate, we'll see riots in a few weeks. Maybe sooner. If I can't keep order in Caemlyn itself, the people will turn against me." If she could not keep order in the capital, she might as well announce to the world that she was unfit to rule. "I don't like it, but it has to be done, so it will be." Both opened their mouths, ready to argue further, but she gave them no chance. She made her voice firm. "It will be done."

bɝdʒɪts weɪst-lɔŋ ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd swʌŋ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, jɛt ɡɹʌdʒɪŋ æksɛptəns fɪltɝd θɹu ðə bɑnd. ʃi tʊk ə dɪsaɪɾədli ɑd vju ʌv ðɛɹ ɹileɪʃənʃɪp əz ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɔɹɾɝ, bʌt ʃi hæd lɝn tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz wən ɪleɪn wəd nɑt bi pɹɛst. æftɝ ə fæʃən ʃi hæd lɝnd. ðəɹ wɑz ði ɪsteɪɾ ən taɪɾəl. ən kəmændɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹdz. ən ə fju ʌðɝ smɔl mæɾɝz.

Birgitte's waist-long golden braid swung as she shook her head, yet grudging acceptance filtered through the bond. She took a decidedly odd view of their relationship as Aes Sedai and Warder, but she had learned to recognize when Elayne would not be pressed. After a fashion she had learned. There was the estate and title. And commanding the Guards. And a few other small matters.

daɪɛlɪn bɛn əɹ nɛk ə fɹækʃən, ən pɝhæps əɹ niz; ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ə kɝtsi, jɛɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz stoʊn. ɪt wɑz wɛl tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət mɛni hu dɪd nɑt wɑn ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn wɑntəd daɪɛlɪn tæɹɑvɪn ɪnstɛd. ðə wʊmən hæd bɪn nʌθɪŋ bʌt hɛlpfəl, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɝli deɪz jɛt, ən səmtaɪmz ə nɪɡəlɪŋ vɔɪs wɪspɝɾ ɪn ðə bæk ʌv ɪleɪnz hɛd. wɑz daɪɛlɪn sɪmpli weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əɹ tə bʌŋɡəl bædli bɪfɔɹ stɛpɪŋ ɪn tə "seɪv" ændɝ? sʌmwʌn səfɪʃənli pɹuɾənt, səfɪʃənli diviəs, maɪt tʃɹaɪ ðət ɹut, ən maɪɾ ivən səksid.

Dyelin bent her neck a fraction, and perhaps her knees; it might have been a curtsy, yet her face was stone. It was well to remember that many who did not want Elayne Trakand on the Lion Throne wanted Dyelin Taravin instead. The woman had been nothing but helpful, but it was early days yet, and sometimes a niggling voice whispered in the back of Elayne's head. Was Dyelin simply waiting for her to bungle badly before stepping in to "save" Andor? Someone sufficiently prudent, sufficiently devious, might try that route, and might even succeed.

ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə ɹʌb əɹ tɛmpəl bʌt meɪɾ ɪɾ ɪndə ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ. soʊ mʌtʃ səspɪʃən, soʊ lɪɾəl tʃɹʌst. ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz hæɾ ɪnfɛktəɾ ændɝ sɪns ʃi lɛft fəɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn. ʃi wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ əɹ mʌnθs əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ mɔɹ ðən lɝnɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. deɪz deɪmɑɹ wɑz bɹɛθ ən bɹɛd, tə moʊst sɪstɝz. ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ tɑmz titʃɪŋ, tu. wɪθaʊt boʊθ, ʃi maɪt nɑɾ əv sɝvaɪvd əɹ ɹɪtɝn əz lɔŋ əz ʃi hæd. ðə laɪt sɛn tɑm wɑz seɪf, ðəɾ i ən mæt ən ði ʌðɝz hæɾ ɪskeɪp ðə sintʃæn ən wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn. ɛvɹi deɪ sɪns livɪŋ ɛbu dɑɹ ʃi pɹeɪd fəɹ ðɛɹ seɪfti, bʌt ðət bɹif pɹɛɹ wɑz ɔl ʃi hæd taɪm fɔɹ, naʊ.

Elayne raised a hand to rub her temple but made it into adjusting her hair. So much suspicion, so little trust. The Game of Houses had infected Andor since she left for Tar Valon. She was grateful for her months among Aes Sedai for more than learning the Power. Daes Dae'mar was breath and bread, to most sisters. Grateful for Thom's teaching, too. Without both, she might not have survived her return as long as she had. The Light send Thom was safe, that he and Mat and the others had escaped the Seanchan and were on their way to Caemlyn. Every day since leaving Ebou Dar she prayed for their safety, but that brief prayer was all she had time for, now.

teɪkɪŋ ðə tʃɛɹ ət ðə sɛntɝ ə ði ɑɹk, ðə kwinz tʃɛɹ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk laɪk ə kwin, bæk stʃɹeɪt, hɝ fɹi hæn ɹɛstɪŋ laɪtli ɑn ðə kɑɹv tʃɛɹ ɑɹm. lʊkɪŋ ə kwin ɪz nɑɾ ɪnʌf, hɝ mʌðɝ hæd toʊld əɹ ɔfən, bʌɾ ə faɪn maɪnd, ə kin ɡɹæsp ʌv əfɛɹz, ən ə bɹeɪv hɑɹt wɪl ɡoʊ fəɹ nʌθɪŋ ɪf pipəl də nɑt si jə əz ə kwin. bɝdʒɪt wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ kloʊsli, ɔlmoʊst səspɪʃəsli. səmtaɪmz ðə bɑnd wɑz dɪsaɪɾədli ɪnkənvinjənt! daɪɛlɪn ɹeɪzd əɹ waɪnkʌp tə hɝ lɪps.

Taking the chair at the center of the arc, the Queen's chair, she tried to look like a queen, back straight, her free hand resting lightly on the carved chair arm. Looking a queen is not enough, her mother had told her often, but a fine mind, a keen grasp of affairs, and a brave heart will go for nothing if people do not see you as a queen. Birgitte was watching her closely, almost suspiciously. Sometimes the bond was decidedly inconvenient! Dyelin raised her winecup to her lips.

ɪleɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. ʃi hæd hɛɹid ðɪs kwɛstʃən fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ʃi nu, ən ʃi kəd si noʊ ʌðɝ weɪ. "bɝdʒɪt, baɪ spɹɪŋ, aɪ wɑn ðə ɡɑɹdz tə bi ən ɑɹmi ikwəl tə ɛniθɪŋ tɛn haʊsəz kən pʊɾ ɪn ðə fild." ɪmpɑsəbəl tə ətʃiv, laɪkli, bʌt dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ mɛn kipɪŋ ðə mɝsənɛɹiz u saɪnd naʊ ən faɪndɪŋ mɔɹ, saɪnɪŋ ɛvɹi mæn u ʃoʊd ðə list ɪnkləneɪʃən. laɪt, wʌɾ ə faʊl tæŋɡəl!

Elayne took a deep breath. She had harried this question from every direction she knew, and she could see no other way. "Birgitte, by spring, I want the Guards to be an army equal to anything ten Houses can put in the field." Impossible to achieve, likely, but just trying meant keeping the mercenaries who signed now and finding more, signing every man who showed the least inclination. Light, what a foul tangle!

daɪɛlɪn tʃoʊkt, hɝ aɪz bʌlʒɪŋ; dɑɹk waɪn spɹeɪd fɹəm əɹ maʊθ. stɪl spləɾɝɪŋ, ʃi plʌkt ə leɪs-ɛdʒ hæŋkɝtʃɪf fɹəm əɹ sliv ən dæbd əɾ əɹ tʃɪn.

Dyelin choked, her eyes bulging; dark wine sprayed from her mouth. Still spluttering, she plucked a lace-edged handkerchief from her sleeve and dabbed at her chin.

ə weɪv ə pænɪk ʃɑt daʊn ðə bɑn fɹəm bɝdʒɪt. "oʊ, bɝn mi, ɪleɪn, jə kæn min . . . ! aɪm æm ɑɹtʃɝ, nɑɾ ə dʒɛnɝəl! ðæts ɔl aɪv ɛvɝ bɪn, doʊn jə ʌndɝstæn jɛt? aɪ dʒʌs dɪd wʌɾ aɪ hæd tə du, wʌt sɝkəmstænsəz fɔɹst ɑn mi! ɛniweɪ, aɪm nɑt hɝ, ɛnimɔɹ; aɪm dʒʌs mi, ən . . . !" ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, ɹilaɪzɪŋ ʃi maɪɾ əv sɛd tu mʌtʃ. nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. hɝ feɪs wɛn kɹɪmzən əz daɪɛlɪn aɪɾ əɹ kjʊɹiəsli.

A wave of panic shot down the bond from Birgitte. "Oh, burn me, Elayne, you can't mean . . . ! I'm am archer, not a general! That's all I've ever been, don't you understand yet? I just did what I had to do, what circumstances forced on me! Anyway, I'm not her, anymore; I'm just me, and . . . !" She trailed off, realizing she might have said too much. Not for the first time. Her face went crimson as Dyelin eyed her curiously.

ðeɪ hæd pʊɾ ɪɾ əbaʊt ðət bɝdʒɪt wɑz fɹəm kændɝ, wɛɹ kʌntʃɹi wɪmən wɔɹ sʌmθɪŋ laɪk əɹ kloʊðz, jɛt daɪɛlɪn klɪɹli səspɛktəd ðə laɪ. ən ɛvɹi taɪm bɝdʒɪt lɛɾ əɹ tʌŋ slɪp, ʃi keɪm kloʊsɝ tə lɛɾɪŋ əɹ sikɹət slɪp, tu. ɪleɪn ʃɑɾ əɹ ə lʊk ðət pɹɑməst ə tɔkɪŋ-tə, leɪɾɝ.

They had put it about that Birgitte was from Kandor, where country women wore something like her clothes, yet Dyelin clearly suspected the lie. And every time Birgitte let her tongue slip, she came closer to letting her secret slip, too. Elayne shot her a look that promised a talking-to, later.

ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv θɔt bɝdʒɪts tʃiks kəd ɡɛɾ ɛni ɹɛɾɝ. mɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən dʒɹaʊn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ðə bɑnd, flʌɾɪŋ θɹu əntɪl ɪleɪn fɛlt əɹ oʊn feɪs kʌlɝɪŋ. kwɪkli ʃi pʊɾ ɑn ə stɝn ɪkspɹɛʃən, hoʊpɪŋ əɹ kɹɪmzən tʃiks wəd pæs fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən ən ɪntɛns dɪzaɪɝ tə skwɝm ɪn əɹ sit wɪð bɝdʒɪts hjumɪlieɪʃən. ðət mɪɹɝɪŋ ɪfɛkt kəd bi mɔɹ ðən mɪɹli ɪnkənvinjənt!

She would not have thought Birgitte's cheeks could get any redder. Mortification drowned everything else in the bond, flooding through until Elayne felt her own face coloring. Quickly she put on a stern expression, hoping her crimson cheeks would pass for something other than an intense desire to squirm in her seat with Birgitte's humiliation. That mirroring effect could be more than merely inconvenient!

daɪɛlɪn weɪstəɾ oʊnli ə moʊmən ɑn bɝdʒɪt. tʌkɪŋ əɹ hæŋkɝtʃɪf bæk ɪn ɪts pleɪs, ʃi kɛɹfəli sɛɾ əɹ kʌp bæk ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ, ðən plæntəɾ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps. hɝ feɪs wɑz ə θʌndɝhɛd, naʊ. "ðə ɡɑɹdz əv ɔlweɪz bɪn ðə kɔɹ ʌv ændɝz ɑɹmi, ɪleɪn, bʌt ðɪs. . . . laɪts mɝsi, ðɪs ɪz mædnəs! jə kəd tɝn ɛvɹi hæn əɡɛns jə fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn tə ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst!"

Dyelin wasted only a moment on Birgitte. Tucking her handkerchief back in its place, she carefully set her cup back on the tray, then planted her hands on her hips. Her face was a thunderhead, now. "The Guards have always been the core of Andor's army, Elayne, but this. . . . Light's mercy, this is madness! You could turn every hand against you from the River Erinin to the Mountains of Mist!"

ɪleɪn foʊkəst ɑn kɑm. ɪf ʃi wɑz ɹɔŋ, ændɝ wəd bɪkʌm ənʌðɝ kɛɹhin, ənʌðɝ blʌd-soʊk læn fɪld wɪð keɪɑs. ən ʃi wəd daɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, ə pɹaɪs nɑt haɪ ɪnʌf tə mit ðə kɑst. nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ wɑz ənθɪŋkəbəl ən ɪn ɛni keɪs wəɾ əv ðə seɪm ɹɪzʌl fəɹ ændɝ əz feɪljɝ. kul, kəmpoʊzd, stili kɑm. ə kwin kəd nɑt ʃoʊ hɝsɛlf əfɹeɪd, ivən wən ʃi wɑz. ɪspɛʃli wən ʃi wɑz. hɝ mʌðɝ hæɾ ɔlweɪz sɛd tə ɪkspleɪn dɪsɪʒənz əz sɛldəm əz pɑsəbəl; ðə mɔɹ ɔfən jə ɪkspleɪnd, ðə mɔɹ ɛkspləneɪʃənz wɝ nɛsəsɛɹi, əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɔl jə hæd taɪm fɔɹ. ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn sɛd tə ɪkspleɪn ɪf jə kʊd; jəɹ pipəl dɪd bɛɾɝ ɪf ðeɪ nu ðə waɪ əz wɛl əz ðə wʌt. tədeɪ, ʃi wəd fɑloʊ ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn. ə ɡʊd mɛni vɪktɝiz hæd bɪn wʌn baɪ fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm.

Elayne focused on calm. If she was wrong, Andor would become another Cairhien, another blood-soaked land filled with chaos. And she would die, of course, a price not high enough to meet the cost. Not trying was unthinkable and in any case would have the same result for Andor as failure. Cool, composed, steely calm. A queen could not show herself afraid, even when she was. Especially when she was. Her mother had always said to explain decisions as seldom as possible; the more often you explained, the more explanations were necessary, until they were all you had time for. Gareth Bryne said to explain if you could; your people did better if they knew the why as well as the what. Today, she would follow Gareth Bryne. A good many victories had been won by following him.

"aɪ hæv θɹi dɪklɛɹd tʃælənʒɝz." ən meɪbi wʌn nɑt dɪklɛɹd. ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf mit daɪɛlɪnz ɡeɪz. nɑɾ æŋɡɹəli; dʒʌst aɪz miɾɪŋ aɪz. əɹ meɪbi daɪɛlɪn dɪd teɪk ɪt fəɹ æŋɡɝ, wɪð əɹ dʒɔ taɪɾ ən əɹ feɪs flʌʃt. ɪf soʊ, soʊ bi ɪt. "baɪ hɝsɛlf, ɛɹəmɪlə ɪz nɛɡlədʒəbəl, bʌt næsən əz dʒɔɪn haʊs kɝən tə hɝ, ən wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt hiz seɪn, hɪz səpɔɹt minz ʃi mʌs bi kənsɪɾɝd. nɑiən ən ɛləniə ɑɹ ɪmpɹɪzənd; ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn ɑɹ nɑt. nɑiənz pipəl meɪ dɪðɝ ən ɑɹɡju əntɪl ðeɪ faɪn ə liɾɝ, bʌt dʒɑɝɪɾ ɪz haɪ siɾ ə sɑɝənd, ən hɪl teɪk tʃænsəz tə fiɾ ɪz waɪfs æmbɪʃən. haʊs bɛɹɪn ən haʊs ænʃɝ flɝt wɪð boʊθ; ðə bɛst aɪ kən hoʊp ɪz ðət wʌn ɡoʊz wɪð sɑɝən ən wʌn wɪð ɑɝɔn. naɪntin haʊsəz ɪn ændɝ ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf ðət smɔlɝ haʊsəz wɪl fɑloʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ lɛd. sɪks ɑɹ ɝeɪɾ əɡɛns mi, ən aɪ hæv tu." sɪks soʊ fɑɹ, ən ðə laɪt sɛnd ʃi hæd tu! ʃi wəd nɑt mɛnʃən ðə θɹi ɡɹeɪt haʊsəz ðət hæɾ ɔl bʌt dɪklɛɹd fəɹ daɪɛlɪn; ət list ɛɡwin hæɾ əm taɪd daʊn ɪn mʊɹændi fəɹ naʊ.

"I have three declared challengers." And maybe one not declared. She made herself meet Dyelin's gaze. Not angrily; just eyes meeting eyes. Or maybe Dyelin did take it for anger, with her jaw tight and her face flushed. If so, so be it. "By herself, Arymilla is negligible, but Nasin has joined House Caeren to her, and whether or not he's sane, his support means she must be considered. Naean and Elenia are imprisoned; their armsmen are not. Naean's people may dither and argue until they find a leader, but Jarid is High Seat of Sarand, and he will take chances to feed his wife's ambition. House Baryn and House Anshar flirt with both; the best I can hope is that one goes with Sarand and one with Arawn. Nineteen Houses in Andor are strong enough that smaller Houses will follow where they lead. Six are arrayed against me, and I have two." Six so far, and the Light send she had two! She would not mention the three great Houses that had all but declared for Dyelin; at least Egwene had them tied down in Murandy for now.

ʃi moʊʃən tə ə tʃɛɹ nɪɹ hɝ, ən daɪɛlɪn sæt, kɛɹfəli ɝeɪnʒɪŋ əɹ skɝts. ðə stɔɹm klaʊdz hæd lɛf ði oʊldɝ wʊmənz feɪs. ʃi stʌɾid ɪleɪn, ɡɪvɪŋ noʊ hɪn əz tə hɝ kwɛstʃənz əɹ kənkluʒənz. "aɪ noʊ ɔl ðəɾ əz wɛl əz ju, ɪleɪn, bʌt lwɑn ən ɛlɹin wɪl bɹɪŋ ðɛɹ haʊsəz tə ju, ən æbəl wɪl əz wɛl, aɪm ʃʊɹ." ə kɛɹfəl vɔɪs, tu, bʌɾ ɪt ɡæðɝd hiɾ əz ʃi wɛn ɑn. "ʌðɝ haʊsəz wɪl si ɹizən, ðɛn. əz lɔŋ əz jə doʊn fɹaɪɾən əm aʊɾ ə ɹizən. laɪt, ɪleɪn, ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ə səksɛʃən. tʃɹəkən səksidz tʃɹəkənd, nɑɾ ənʌðɝ haʊs. ivən ə səksɛʃən əz sɛldəm kʌm tə oʊpən faɪɾɪŋ! meɪk ðə ɡɑɹdz ɪndə ən ɑɹmi, ən jə ɹɪsk ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

She motioned to a chair near her, and Dyelin sat, carefully arranging her skirts. The storm clouds had left the older woman's face. She studied Elayne, giving no hint as to her questions or conclusions. "I know all that as well as you, Elayne, but Luan and Ellorien will bring their Houses to you, and Abelle will as well, I'm sure." A careful voice, too, but it gathered heat as she went on. "Other Houses will see reason, then. As long as you don't frighten them out of reason. Light, Elayne, this is not a Succession. Trakand succeeds Trakand, not another House. Even a Succession has seldom come to open fighting! Make the Guards into an army, and you risk everything."

ɪleɪn θɹu hɝ hɛd bæk, bʌɾ əɹ læftɝ hɛl noʊ əmjuzmənt. ɪt fɪt ɹaɪɾ ɪn wɪð ðə pilz ə θʌndɝ. "aɪ ɹɪskt ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðə deɪ aɪ keɪm hoʊm, daɪɛlɪn. jə seɪ nɔɹwlɪn ən tʃɹæmən wɪl kʌm tə mi, ən pɛnʒɹ? faɪn; ðən aɪ hæv faɪv tə feɪs sɪks. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ði ʌðɝ haʊsəz wɪl 'si ɹizən,' əz jə pʊɾ ɪt. ɪf ɛni ʌv əm muv bɪfɔɹ ɪts klɪɹ əz ɡʊd ɡlæs ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ɪz maɪn, ɪɾəl bi əɡɛns mi, nɑt fɔɹ." wɪð lʌk, ðoʊz lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz wəd ʃaɪ əweɪ fɹəm əsoʊsieɪɾɪŋ wɪð kɹoʊniz ʌv ɡeɪbɹəl, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn lʌk. ʃi wɑz nɑt mæt kɔθən. laɪt, moʊs pipəl wɝ ʃʊɹ ɹænd hæd kɪld əɹ mʌðɝ, ən fju bɪliv ðət "lɔɹd ɡeɪbɹəl" hæd bɪn wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. mɛndɪŋ ðə dæmədʒ ɹɑvɪn hæd dʌn ɪn ændɝ maɪt teɪk əɹ ɪntaɪɝ laɪftaɪm ivən ɪf ʃi mænədʒ tə lɪv əz lɔŋ əz ðə kɪnswɪmən! səm haʊsəz wəd stæn əsaɪd fɹəm səpɔɹɾɪŋ əɹ kəz ə ði aʊtʃɹeɪdʒɪz ɡeɪbɹəl hæd pɝpətʃɹeɪɾɪd ɪn mɔɹɡeɪsəz neɪm, ən ʌðɝz kəz ɹænd hæd sɛɾ i ɪntɛndəd tə "ɡɪv" hɝ ðə θɹoʊn. ʃi lʌv ðə mæn tə hɝ toʊz, bʌt bɝn ɪm fəɹ ɡɪvɪŋ vɔɪs tə ðæt! ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz wʌt ɹeɪn ɪn daɪɛlɪn. ðə minəs kɹɔftɝ ɪn ændɝ wəd ʃoʊldɝ ɪz saɪð tə pʊl ə pʌpət fɹəm ðə laɪən θɹoʊn!

Elayne threw her head back, but her laughter held no amusement. It fit right in with the peals of thunder. "I risked everything the day I came home, Dyelin. You say Norwelyn and Traemane will come to me, and Pendar? Fine; then I have five to face six. I don't think the other Houses will 'see reason,' as you put it. If any of them move before it's clear as good glass the Rose Crown is mine, it will be against me, not for." With luck, those lords and ladies would shy away from associating with cronies of Gaebril, but she did not like depending on luck. She was not Mat Cauthon. Light, most people were sure Rand had killed her mother, and few believed that "Lord Gaebril" had been one of the Forsaken. Mending the damage Rahvin had done in Andor might take her entire lifetime even if she managed to live as long as the Kinswomen! Some Houses would stand aside from supporting her because of the outrages Gaebril had perpetrated in Morgase's name, and others because Rand had said he intended to "give" her the throne. She loved the man to her toes, but burn him for giving voice to that! Even if it was what reined in Dyelin. The meanest crofter in Andor would shoulder his scythe to pull a puppet from the Lion Throne!

"aɪ wɑnə əvɔɪɾ ændɔɝən kɪlɪŋ ændɔɝən ɪf aɪ kæn, daɪɛlɪn, bʌt səksɛʃən əɹ noʊ səksɛʃən, dʒɑɝɪɾ ɪz ɹɛɾi tə faɪt, ivən wɪð ɛləniə lɑkt əweɪ. nɑiən ɪz ɹɛɾi tə faɪt." bɛs tə bɹɪŋ boʊθ wɪmən tə keɪɛmlɪn əz sun əz pɑsəbəl; tu mʌtʃ tʃæns ə ðɛm slɪpɪŋ mɛsədʒəz, ən ɔɹɾɝz, aʊɾ ʌv ɑɹɪŋɡəl. "ɛɹəmɪlə ɪz ɹɛɾi, wɪð næsənz mɛn bɪhaɪn hɝ. tə ðɛm, ðɪs ɪz ə səksɛʃən, ən ði oʊnli weɪ tə stɑp əm fɹəm faɪɾɪŋ ɪz tə bi soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðeɪ doʊn dɛɹ. ɪf bɝdʒɪt kən bɪl ðə ɡɑɹdz ɪndə ən ɑɹmi baɪ spɹɪŋ, wɛl ən ɡʊd, kəz ɪf aɪ doʊn əv ən ɑɹmi bɪfɔɹ ðɛn, əl əv niɾ ʌv wʌn. ən ɪf ðəɾ ɪzən ɪnʌf, ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə sintʃæn. ðeɪ woʊn bi sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð tæntʃəkoʊ ən ɛbu dɑɹ; ðeɪ wɑn ɛvɹiθɪŋ. aɪ woʊn lɛɾ əm əv ændɝ, daɪɛlɪn, ɛni mɔɹ ðən əl lɛɾ ɛɹəmɪlə." θʌndɝ ɹɔɹɾ oʊvɝhɛd.

"I want to avoid Andoran killing Andoran if I can, Dyelin, but Succession or no Succession, Jarid is ready to fight, even with Elenia locked away. Naean is ready to fight." Best to bring both women to Caemlyn as soon as possible; too much chance of them slipping messages, and orders, out of Aringill. "Arymilla is ready, with Nasin's men behind her. To them, this is a Succession, and the only way to stop them from fighting is to be so strong they don't dare. If Birgitte can build the Guards into an army by spring, well and good, because if I don't have an army before then, I will have need of one. And if that isn't enough, remember the Seanchan. They won't be satisfied with Tanchico and Ebou Dar; they want everything. I won't let them have Andor, Dyelin, any more than I'll let Arymilla." Thunder roared overhead.

twɪstɪŋ ə lɪɾəl tə lʊk bæk ət bɝdʒɪt, daɪɛlɪn mɔɪsən əɹ lɪps. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz plʌkt ʌnkɑnʃəsli əɾ əɹ skɝts. vɛɹi lɪɾəl fɹaɪɾənd hɝ, bʌt teɪlz ə ðə sintʃæn hæd. wʌt ʃi mɝmɝd, ðoʊ, əz ɪf tə hɝsɛlf, wɑz, "aɪ hæd hoʊp tə əvɔɪɾ aʊtʃɹaɪt sɪvəl wɔɹ." ən ðət maɪt min nʌθɪŋ, əɹ ə ɡɹeɪt dil! pɝhæps ə lɪɾəl pɹoʊbɪŋ maɪt ʃoʊ wɪtʃ.

Twisting a little to look back at Birgitte, Dyelin moistened her lips. Her fingers plucked unconsciously at her skirts. Very little frightened her, but tales of the Seanchan had. What she murmured, though, as if to herself, was, "I had hoped to avoid outright civil war." And that might mean nothing, or a great deal! Perhaps a little probing might show which.

"ɡɔɪn," bɝdʒɪt sɛd sʌɾənli. hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən hæd laɪɾənd, ən soʊ hæd ði ɪmoʊʃənz floʊɪŋ ðoʊ ðə bɑnd. ɹɪlif stʊɾ aʊt stʃɹɔŋ. "wɛn i kʌmz, hɪl teɪk kəmænd. hɪl bi jəɹ fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd."

"Gawyn," Birgitte said suddenly. Her expression had lightened, and so had the emotions flowing though the bond. Relief stood out strong. "When he comes, he'll take command. He'll be your First Prince of the Sword."

"mʌðɝz mɪlk ɪn ə kʌp!" ɪleɪn snæpt, ən laɪtnɪŋ flɛɹɾ ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz fəɹ ɛmfəsəs. waɪ dɪd ðə wʊmən əv tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə sʌbʒɪkt naʊ? daɪɛlɪn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ən hit flʌɾəd bæk ɪndə ɪleɪnz feɪs. baɪ ði oʊldɝ wʊmənz ɡeɪpɪŋ maʊθ, ʃi nu ɪɡzækli haʊ kɔɹs ðət kɝs wɑz. stʃɹeɪnʒli ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ, ðæt; ɪt ʃəd nɑɾ əv kaʊntəd fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət daɪɛlɪn hæd bɪn əɹ mʌðɝz fɹɛnd. ənθɪŋkɪŋ, ʃi tʊk ə dip swɑloʊ ʌv waɪn - ən nɪɹli ɡæɡd ət ðə bɪɾɝnəs. kwɪkli ʃi səpɹɛst ɪmədʒəz ə lini θɹɛɾənɪŋ tə wɑʃ aʊɾ əɹ maʊθ ən ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf ðət ʃi wɑz ə ɡɹoʊn wʊmən wɪð ə θɹoʊn tə wɪn. ʃi daʊɾɪd əɹ mʌðɝ hæɾ ɛvɝ faʊn hɝsɛlf filɪŋ fulɪʃ soʊ ɔfən.

"Mother's milk in a cup!" Elayne snapped, and lightning flared in the windows for emphasis. Why did the woman have to change the subject now? Dyelin gave a start, and heat flooded back into Elayne's face. By the older woman's gaping mouth, she knew exactly how coarse that curse was. Strangely embarrassing, that; it should not have counted for anything that Dyelin had been her mother's friend. Unthinking, she took a deep swallow of wine - and nearly gagged at the bitterness. Quickly she suppressed images of Lini threatening to wash out her mouth and reminded herself that she was a grown woman with a throne to win. She doubted her mother had ever found herself feeling foolish so often.

"jɛs, hi wɪl, bɝdʒɪt," ʃi wɛn ɑn, mɔɹ kɑmli. "wɛn i kʌmz." θɹi kɝiɝz wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ivən ɪf nʌn mænədʒ tə ɡɛt pæst ɪleɪɾə, ɡɔɪn wəd lɝn ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðət ʃi hæd meɪɾ əɹ kleɪm, ən i wəd kʌm. ʃi niɾəd ɪm dɛspɝətli. ʃi hæd noʊ ɪluʒənz ə hɝsɛlf əz ə dʒɛnɝəl, ən bɝdʒɪt wɑz soʊ fɪɹfəl ʃi kəd nɑt lɪv ʌp tə ðə lɛdʒənz əbaʊɾ əɹ ðət səmtaɪmz ʃi simd əfɹeɪd tə tʃɹaɪ. feɪs ən ɑɹmi, jɛs; lɛɾ ən ɑɹmi, nɛvɝ ʌndɝ ðə sʌn!

"Yes, he will, Birgitte," she went on, more calmly. "When he comes." Three couriers were on their way to Tar Valon. Even if none managed to get past Elaida, Gawyn would learn eventually that she had made her claim, and he would come. She needed him desperately. She had no illusions of herself as a general, and Birgitte was so fearful she could not live up to the legends about her that sometimes she seemed afraid to try. Face an army, yes; lead an army, never under the sun!

bɝdʒɪt wɑz wɛl əwɛɹ ə ðə tæŋɡəl ɪn əɹ oʊn maɪnd. ɹaɪt ðət moʊmən əɹ feɪs wɑz fɹoʊzən, bʌɾ əɹ ɪmoʊʃənz wɝ fʊl ə sɛlf-æŋɡɝ ən ɪmbɛɹəsmənt, wɪð ðə fɝst ɡɹoʊɪŋ stʃɹɔŋɝ baɪ ðə moʊmənt. wɪð ə stæb ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən, ɪleɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə pɝsu daɪɛlɪnz mɛnʃən ə sɪvəl wɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi bɪɡæn ɹəflɛktɪŋ bɝdʒɪts æŋɡɝ.

Birgitte was well aware of the tangle in her own mind. Right that moment her face was frozen, but her emotions were full of self-anger and embarrassment, with the first growing stronger by the moment. With a stab of irritation, Elayne opened her mouth to pursue Dyelin's mention of civil war before she began reflecting Birgitte's anger.

bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ ʌɾɝ ə wɝd, ðoʊ, ðə tɔl ɹɛd dɔɹz oʊpənd. hɝ hoʊps fəɹ nɪneɪiv əɹ vændin wɝ dæʃt baɪ ði ɛntʃɹəns ə tu si foʊk wɪmən, bɛɹfʊt dɪspaɪt ðə wɛðɝ.

Before she could utter a word, though, the tall red doors opened. Her hopes for Nynaeve or Vandene were dashed by the entrance of two Sea Folk women, barefoot despite the weather.

ə klaʊɾ ə mʌski pɝfjum wɑftɪɾ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, ən baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz ðeɪ meɪɾ ʌp ə pɹəsɛʃən ɪn bɹaɪt bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd sɪlk tʃɹaʊzɝz ən blaʊsəz, dʒuəl dæɡɝz ən nɛkləsɪz ʌv ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi. ən ʌðɝ dʒuəlɹi. stʃɹeɪt blæk hɛɹ wɪð waɪɾ ət ðə tɛmpəlz nɪɹli hɪd ðə tɛn smɔl, fæt ɡoʊldən ɹɪŋz ɪn ɹɪneɪl dɪn kəlɑnz ɪɹz, bʌt ði ɛɹəɡəns ɪn əɹ dɑɹk aɪz wɑz əz pleɪn əz ðə mədæljən-leɪɾən ɡoʊldən tʃeɪn ðət kənɛktəd wʌn ɪɹɪŋ tə hɝ noʊz ɹɪŋ. hɝ feɪs wɑz sɛt, ən dɪspaɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪsfəl sweɪ tə hɝ wɔk, ʃi əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə stʃɹaɪd θɹu ə wɔl. nɪɹli ə hænd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən əɹ kəmpænjən ən dɑɹkɝ ðən tʃɑɹkoʊl, zeɪɾə dɪn pɑɹid wɔɹ hæf əɡɛn əz mɛni ɡoʊldən mədæljənz dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɑn əɹ lɛf tʃik ən kæɹiɾ ən ɛɹ ə kəmæn ɹæðɝ ðən ɛɹəɡəns, ə ʃʊɹ sɝɾənti ðət ʃi wəd bi oʊbeɪd. ɡɹeɪ flɛkt əɹ kæp ə taɪt blæk kɝlz, jɛt ʃi wɑz stʌnɪŋ, wʌn ə ðoʊz wɪmən u ɡɹu mɔɹ ən mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl əz ðeɪ eɪdʒɪd.

A cloud of musky perfume wafted ahead of them, and by themselves they made up a procession in bright brocaded silk trousers and blouses, jeweled daggers and necklaces of gold and ivory. And other jewelry. Straight black hair with white at the temples nearly hid the ten small, fat golden rings in Renaile din Calon's ears, but the arrogance in her dark eyes was as plain as the medallion-laden golden chain that connected one earring to her nose ring. Her face was set, and despite a graceful sway to her walk, she appeared ready to stride through a wall. Nearly a hand shorter than her companion and darker than charcoal, Zaida din Parede wore half again as many golden medallions dangling on her left cheek and carried an air of command rather than arrogance, a sure certainty that she would be obeyed. Gray flecked her cap of tight black curls, yet she was stunning, one of those women who grew more and more beautiful as they aged.

daɪɛlɪn flɪntʃt ət saɪɾ ə ðɛm, ən hæf ɹeɪzd ə hæn tə hɝ noʊz bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑp hɝsɛlf. ə kɑmən ɪnʌf ɹiækʃən ɪn pipəl ənjuz tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ. ɪleɪn ɡɹɪməst, ən nɑt fəɹ ðɛɹ noʊz ɹɪŋz. ʃi ivən kənsɪɾɝd ənʌðɝ kɝs, sʌmθɪŋ stɪl mɔɹ . . . pʌnʒənt. ɛksɛptɪŋ ðə fɔɹseɪkən, ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv neɪm tu pipəl ʃi wɑntəd lɛs tə si ɹaɪt ðɛn. ɹɪn wɑz səpoʊz tə si ðɪs dɪd nɑt hæpən!

Dyelin flinched at sight of them, and half raised a hand to her nose before she could stop herself. A common enough reaction in people unused to the Atha'an Miere. Elayne grimaced, and not for their nose rings. She even considered another curse, something still more . . . pungent. Excepting the Forsaken, she could not have named two people she wanted less to see right then. Reene was supposed to see this did not happen!

"fɝɡɪv mi," ʃi sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ smuðli, "bʌɾ aɪm vɛɹi bɪzi, naʊ. mæɾɝz ə steɪt, jə ʌndɝstænd, əɹ aɪ wəd ɡɹit jə əz jəɹ steɪʃənz dɪzɝv." ðə si foʊk wɝ stɪklɝz fəɹ sɛɹəmoʊni ən pɹəpɹaɪəɾi, ət list ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn tɝmz. vɛɹi laɪkli ðeɪ hæd ɡɑɾən pæs ðə fɝs meɪd baɪ sɪmpli nɑt tɛlɪŋ əɹ ðeɪ wɑntəd tə si ɪleɪn, bʌt ðeɪ izəli maɪt teɪk əfɛns ɪf ʃi ɡɹiɾəd əm sɪɾɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə kɹaʊn wɑz hɝz. ænd, ðə laɪt bɝn boʊθ ə ðɛm, ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə əfɛnd. bɝdʒɪɾ əpɪɹɾ əɾ əɹ saɪd, boʊɪŋ fɔɹməli tə teɪk əɹ kʌp; ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn kæɹid wɛɹinɪs. ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz dʒɪnʒɝ ɝaʊn ðə si foʊk; ʃi hæd lɛɾ əɹ tʌŋ slɪp ɝaʊn ðɛm, tu. "aɪ wɪl si jə leɪɾɝ ɪn ðə deɪ," ɪleɪn fɪnɪʃt, æɾɪŋ, "ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ." ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ wɝ ɡɹeɪt wʌnz fəɹ sɛɹəmoʊniəl tɝnz ə fɹeɪz, ən ðət wʌn ʃoʊd kɝɾəsi ən ɡeɪv ə weɪ aʊt.

"Forgive me," she said, rising smoothly, "but I am very busy, now. Matters of state, you understand, or I would greet you as your stations deserve." The Sea Folk were sticklers for ceremony and propriety, at least on their own terms. Very likely they had gotten past the First Maid by simply not telling her they wanted to see Elayne, but they easily might take offense if she greeted them sitting before the crown was hers. And, the Light burn both of them, she could not afford to offend. Birgitte appeared at her side, bowing formally to take her cup; the Warder bond carried wariness. She was always ginger around the Sea Folk; she had let her tongue slip around them, too. "I will see you later in the day," Elayne finished, adding, "the Light willing." They also were great ones for ceremonial turns of phrase, and that one showed courtesy and gave a way out.

ɹɪneɪl dɪd nɑt stɑp əntɪl ʃi stʊd ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪleɪn, ən mʌtʃ tu kloʊs. wʌn tætud hæn dʒɛstʃɝd kɝt pɝmɪʃən fəɹ əɹ tə sɪt. pɝmɪʃən! "ju hæv bɪn əvɔɪɾɪŋ mi." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz dip fəɹ ə wʊmən, ən əz tʃɪl əz ðə snoʊ fɔlɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹuf. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ aɪm wɪndfɪndɝ tə nɛstə dɪn ɹiz tu munz, mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ. jə stɪl mʌs fʊlfɪl ðə ɹɛst ə ðə bɑɹɡən jə meɪd fəɹ jəɹ waɪt taʊɝ." ðə si foʊk nu ʌv ðə dɪvɪʒən ɪn ðə taʊɝ - baɪ ðɪs taɪm, ɛvɹiwʌn ən əɹ sɪstɝ nu - bʌɾ ɪleɪn hæd nɑt sin fɪt tə æd tə hɝ dɪfəkəltiz baɪ meɪkɪŋ pʌblɪk wɪtʃ saɪd ʃi wɑz ɑn. nɑt jɛt. ɹɪneɪl fɪnɪʃt ɑn ən ɪmpɪɹiəs, kəmændɪŋ noʊt. "ju wɪl dil wɪð mi, ən naʊ!" soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ sɛɹəmoʊni ən pɹəpɹaɪəɾi.

Renaile did not stop until she stood right in front of Elayne, and much too close. One tattooed hand gestured curt permission for her to sit. Permission! "You have been avoiding me." Her voice was deep for a woman, and as chill as the snow falling on the roof. "Remember that I am Windfinder to Nesta din Reas Two Moons, Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere. You still must fulfill the rest of the bargain you made for your White Tower." The Sea Folk knew of the division in the Tower - by this time, everyone and her sister knew - but Elayne had not seen fit to add to her difficulties by making public which side she was on. Not yet. Renaile finished on an imperious, commanding note. "You will deal with me, and now!" So much for ceremony and propriety.

"ʃi hæz bɪn əvɔɪɾɪŋ mi, aɪ θɪŋk, nɑt ju, wɪndfɪndɝ." ɪn kɑntʃɹæs tə ɹɪneɪl, zeɪɾə saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ mɪɹli meɪkɪŋ kɑnvɝseɪʃən. ɹæðɝ ðən ɹʌʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə kɑɹpəts, ʃi muvd aɪdli əbaʊt ðə ɹum, pɔzɪŋ tə tʌtʃ ə tɔl veɪs ə θɪn ɡɹin pɔɹsələn, ðən ɹaɪzɪŋ ɑn əɹ toʊz tə pɪɹ θɹu ə fɔɹ-bæɹəl kəlaɪɾəskoʊp ətɑp ə tɔl stænd. wən ʃi ɡlæns təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn ən ɹɪneɪl, ən əmjuzd ɡlɪn twɪŋkəld ɪn əɹ blæk aɪz. "æftɝ ɔl, ðə bɑɹɡən wɑz wɪð nɛstə dɪn ɹiz, spikɪŋ fəɹ ðə ʃɪps." ɪn ədɪʃən tə weɪvməstʃɹəs ə klæn kæɾɪlɝ, zeɪɾə wɑz ən æmbæsəɾɝ fɹəm ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps. tə ɹænd, nɑɾ ændɝ, bʌɾ əɹ wɔɹənt ɡeɪv ði əθɔɹəɾi tə spik ən baɪn fəɹ nɛstə hɝsɛlf. tʃeɪnʒɪŋ wʌn ɡoʊld-tʃeɪs bæɹəl fəɹ ənʌðɝ, ʃi wɛn ɑn tɪptoʊ tə lʊk θɹu ði aɪpis əɡɛn. "ju pɹɑməs ði æθɑn maɪɹ twɛnti titʃɝz, ɪleɪn. soʊ fɑɹ, juv dɪlɪvɝd wʌn."

"She has been avoiding me, I think, not you, Windfinder." In contrast to Renaile, Zaida sounded as though she were merely making conversation. Rather than rushing across the carpets, she moved idly about the room, pausing to touch a tall vase of thin green porcelain, then rising on her toes to peer through a four-barreled kaleidoscope atop a tall stand. When she glanced toward Elayne and Renaile, an amused glint twinkled in her black eyes. "After all, the bargain was with Nesta din Reas, speaking for the ships." In addition to Wavemistress of Clan Catelar, Zaida was an ambassador from the Mistress of the Ships. To Rand, not Andor, but her warrant gave the authority to speak and bind for Nesta herself. Changing one gold-chased barrel for another, she went on tiptoe to look through the eyepiece again. "You promised the Atha'an Miere twenty teachers, Elayne. So far, you have delivered one."

ðɛɹ ɛntʃɹəns hæd bɪn soʊ sʌɾən, soʊ dʒɹəmæɾɪk, ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si mɛɝɪlɪl tɝn fɹəm kloʊzɪŋ ðə dɔɹz. ʃɔɹɾɝ stɪl ðən zeɪɾə, ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ wɑz ɛləɡən ɪn dɑɹk blu wʊl tʃɹɪmd wɪð sɪlvɝi fɝ ən soʊn wɪð smɔl munstoʊnz əkɹɔs ðə bɑɾəs, jɛt bɛɹli mɔɹ ðən tu wiks titʃɪŋ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz hæd bɹɔt tʃeɪnʒəz. moʊst wɝ paʊɝfəl wɪmən wɪð ə θɝs fəɹ nɑlədʒ, mɔɹ ðən ɹɛɾi tə skwiz mɛɝɪlɪl laɪk ə ɡɹeɪp ɪn ðə waɪnpɹɛs, dɪmændɪŋ ðə læs dʒɹɑp ə dʒus. wʌns, ɪleɪn hæd θɔɾ əɹ sɛlf-pəzɛs bɪɑn ði əbɪləɾi tə sɝpɹaɪz, bʌt naʊ mɛɝɪlɪl wɑz kɑnstənli waɪd-aɪd, hɝ lɪps ɔlweɪz ə lɪɾəl pɑɹɾəd, əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd dʒʌs bɪn stɑɹɾəld hæf aʊɾ ə hɝ wɪts ən ɪkspɛktəd tə bi stɑɹɾəld əɡɛn ɛni moʊmənt. foʊldɪŋ əɹ hænz əɾ əɹ weɪst, ʃi weɪɾəd baɪ ðə dɔɹweɪ, ən əpɪɹd ɹɪliv tə bi aʊɾ ə ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ətɛnʃən.

Their entrance had been so sudden, so dramatic, that Elayne was surprised to see Merilille turn from closing the doors. Shorter still than Zaida, the Gray sister was elegant in dark blue wool trimmed with silvery fur and sewn with small moonstones across the bodice, yet barely more than two weeks teaching the Windfinders had brought changes. Most were powerful women with a thirst for knowledge, more than ready to squeeze Merilille like a grape in the winepress, demanding the last drop of juice. Once, Elayne had thought her self-possessed beyond the ability to surprise, but now Merilille was constantly wide-eyed, her lips always a little parted, as though she had just been startled half out of her wits and expected to be startled again any moment. Folding her hands at her waist, she waited by the doorway, and appeared relieved to be out of the center of attention.

hæɹəmfɪŋ laʊdli, daɪɛlɪn ɡɑt tə hɝ fiɾ ən skaʊld ət zeɪɾə ən ɹɪneɪl boʊθ. "hæv ə kɛɹ haʊ jə spik," ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "ju ɑɹ ɪn ændɝ, naʊ, nɑɾ ɑn wʌn ə jəɹ ʃɪps, ən ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd wɪl bi kwin ʌv ændɝ! jəɹ bɑɹɡən wɪl bi mɛɾ ɪn ɡʊd taɪm. fəɹ naʊ, wɪv mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz tə kəntɛnd wɪð."

Harrumphing loudly, Dyelin got to her feet and scowled at Zaida and Renaile both. "Have a care how you speak," she growled. "You are in Andor, now, not on one of your ships, and Elayne Trakand will be Queen of Andor! Your bargain will be met in good time. For now, we have more important matters to contend with."

"ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, ðəɹ ɑɹ nʌn mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt," ɹɪneɪl ɹʌmbəld ɪn tɝn, ɹaʊndɪŋ ɑn hɝ. "ju seɪ ðə bɑɹɡən wɪl bi mɛt? soʊ jə stænd ʃʊɹəɾi. noʊ ðəɹ wɪl bi ɹum tə dæŋɡəl jə baɪ jəɹ æŋkəlz ɪn ðə ɹɪɡɪŋ əz wɛl ɪf - "

"Under the Light, there are none more important," Renaile rumbled in turn, rounding on her. "You say the bargain will be met? So you stand surety. Know there will be room to dangle you by your ankles in the rigging as well if - "

zeɪɾə snæpt əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ðət wɑz ɔl, bʌɾ ə tʃɹɛmɝ pæs ðoʊ ɹɪneɪl. snætʃɪŋ ðə ɡoʊldən sɛnt-bɑks dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm wʌn ə hɝ nɛkləsɪz, ʃi pɹɛst ɪt tə hɝ noʊz ən bɹið dipli. wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps ʃi maɪt bi, ə wʊmən ʌv ɡɹeɪɾ əθɔɹəɾi ən paʊɝ əmʌŋ ði æθɑn maɪɹ, bʌt tə zeɪɾə, ʃi wɑz . . . ə wɪndfɪndɝ. wɪtʃ ɡɹeɪɾɪd əɹ pɹaɪɾ ɪksɛsɪvli. ɪleɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɹ mʌs bi ə weɪ tə juz ðət tə kip əm aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛɹ, bʌt ʃi hæd nɑt faʊn ɪt, jɛt. oʊ, jɛs; fəɹ ɡʊɾ əɹ ɪl, deɪz deɪmɑɹ wɑz ɪn əɹ boʊnz, naʊ.

Zaida snapped her fingers. That was all, but a tremor passed though Renaile. Snatching the golden scent-box dangling from one of her necklaces, she pressed it to her nose and breathed deeply. Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships she might be, a woman of great authority and power among the Atha'an Miere, but to Zaida, she was . . . a Windfinder. Which grated her pride excessively. Elayne was sure there must be a way to use that to keep them out of her hair, but she had not found it, yet. Oh, yes; for good or ill, Daes Dae'mar was in her bones, now.

ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd ɝaʊn ə saɪlənli fjʊɹiəs ɹɪneɪl əz ɪf ɝaʊn ə kɑləm, ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹum, ðoʊ nɑt təwɔɹd zeɪɾə. ɪf ɛniwʌn hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə bi kæʒəwəl hɪɹ, ʃi dɪd. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə ɡɪv zeɪɾə ə hɛɹ ʌv ædvæntɪdʒ, əɹ ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs wəd ʃeɪv əɹ skælp fəɹ ðə wɪɡ-meɪkɝz. ət ðə faɪɝpleɪs, ʃi spɹɛɾ əɹ hænz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə fleɪmz əɡɛn.

She glided around a silently furious Renaile as if around a column, a part of the room, though not toward Zaida. If anyone had a right to be casual here, she did. She could not afford to give Zaida a hair of advantage, or the Wavemistress would shave her scalp for the wig-makers. At the fireplace, she spread her hands in front of the flames again.

"nɛstə dɪn ɹiz tʃɹʌstɪd wi wəd fʊlfɪl ðə bɑɹɡən, əɹ ʃi nɛvɝ wʊɾə əɡɹid tə ɪt," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. "ju hæv ɹiɡeɪn ðə boʊl ə ðə wɪnz, bʌɾ əsɛmbəlɪŋ naɪntin mɔɹ sɪstɝz tə dʒɔɪn jə ɹikwaɪɝz taɪm. aɪ noʊ jə wɝi əbaʊt ðə ʃɪps ðət wɝ əɾ ɛbu dɑɹ wən ðə sintʃæn keɪm. hæv ɹɪneɪl meɪk ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə tɛɹ. ðəɹ ɑɹ hʌnʒɹədz ʌv æθɑn maɪɹ vɛsəlz ðɛɹ." ɛvɹi ɹipɔɹt sɛd soʊ. "ju kən lɝn wʌt ðeɪ noʊ, ən ɹidʒɔɪn jəɹ pipəl. ðəl əv niɾ ə ju, əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn." ən ʃi wəd bi ɹɪɾ ə ðɛm. "ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz wɪl bi sɛn tə jə əz sun əz kən bi ɝeɪnʒd." mɛɝɪlɪl dɪd nɑt muv fɹəm ðə dɔɹweɪ, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs tʊk ɑn ə ɡɹin tɪnʒ ə pænɪk ət ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv biɪŋ əloʊn əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk.

"Nesta din Reas trusted we would fulfill the bargain, or she never would have agreed to it," she said calmly. "You have regained the Bowl of the Winds, but assembling nineteen more sisters to join you requires time. I know you worry about the ships that were at Ebou Dar when the Seanchan came. Have Renaile make a gateway to Tear. There are hundreds of Atha'an Miere vessels there." Every report said so. "You can learn what they know, and rejoin your people. They will have need of you, against the Seanchan." And she would be rid of them. "The other sisters will be sent to you as soon as can be arranged." Merilille did not move from the doorway, but her face took on a green tinge of panic at the possibility of being alone among the Sea Folk.

zeɪɾə ɡeɪv oʊvɝ lʊkɪŋ θɹu ðə kəlaɪɾəskoʊp ən aɪɾ ɪleɪn saɪdweɪz. ə smaɪl kwɝkt əɹ vɛɹi fʊl lɪps. "aɪ mʌst ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ, ət list əntɪl aɪ spik wɪð ɹænd ælθɹ. ɪf i ɛvɝ kʌmz." ðət smaɪl taɪɾənd fəɹ ən ɪnstən bɪfɔɹ blumɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ; ɹænd wəɾ əv ə hɑɹd taɪm wɪð hɝ. "æn əl kip ɹɪneɪl ən əɹ kəmpænjənz, fəɹ ðə taɪm. ə hændfʊl ʌv wɪndfɪndɝz mɔɹ əɹ lɛs wɪl meɪk noʊ ɡɹeɪt dɪfɝəns əɡɛns ðiz sintʃæn, ən hɪɹ, ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, ðeɪ meɪ lɝn wʌt wɪl bi jusfəl." ɹɪneɪl snɔɹɾɪd, dʒʌs laʊdli ɪnʌf tə bi hɝd. zeɪɾə fɹaʊn bɹifli ən bɪɡæn fɪdlɪŋ wɪð ði aɪpis ðət stʊd lɛvəl wɪð ðə tɑp ə hɝ hɛd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ faɪv ɛɛs sədaɪ hɪɹ ɪn jəɹ pæləs, kaʊntɪŋ jɝsɛlf," ʃi mɝmɝd θɔtfəli. "pɝhæps səm ə jə maɪt titʃ." əz ðoʊ ði aɪdiə hæd dʒʌst əkɝd tə hɝ. ən ɪf ðət wɝ soʊ, ɪleɪn kəd lɪf boʊθ si foʊk wɪmən wɪð wʌn hænd!

Zaida gave over looking through the kaleidoscope and eyed Elayne sideways. A smile quirked her very full lips. "I must remain here, at least until I speak with Rand al'Thor. If he ever comes." That smile tightened for an instant before blooming once more; Rand would have a hard time with her. "And I will keep Renaile and her companions, for the time. A handful of Windfinders more or less will make no great difference against these Seanchan, and here, the Light willing, they may learn what will be useful." Renaile snorted, just loudly enough to be heard. Zaida frowned briefly and began fiddling with the eyepiece that stood level with the top of her head. "There are five Aes Sedai here in your palace, counting yourself," she murmured thoughtfully. "Perhaps some of you might teach." As though the idea had just occurred to her. And if that were so, Elayne could lift both Sea Folk women with one hand!

"oʊ, jɛs, ðət wəd bi wʌndɝfəl," mɛɝɪlɪl bɝst aʊt, teɪkɪŋ ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd. ðən ʃi ɡlænst ət ɹɪneɪl ən səbsaɪɾɪd, ə blʌʃ sʌfjuzɪŋ əɹ kɛɹhinɪn pælnəs. foʊldɪŋ əɹ hænz əɾ əɹ weɪst wʌns mɔɹ, ʃi snætʃt miknəs ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf laɪk ə sɛkən skɪn. bɝdʒɪt ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn əmeɪzmənt. daɪɛlɪn stɛɹɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin ði ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪfɔɹ.

"Oh, yes, that would be wonderful," Merilille burst out, taking a step forward. Then she glanced at Renaile and subsided, a blush suffusing her Cairhienin paleness. Folding her hands at her waist once more, she snatched meekness around herself like a second skin. Birgitte shook her head in amazement. Dyelin stared as if she had never seen the Aes Sedai before.

"sʌmθɪŋ meɪ bi wɝkt aʊt, ɪf ðə laɪt plizɪz," ɪleɪn sɛd kɔʃəsli. nɑt ɹʌbɪŋ əɾ əɹ tɛmpəlz tʊk ɛfɝt. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd bleɪm ði eɪk ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ skʌl ɑn ði ɪnsɛsən θʌndɝ. nɪneɪiv wəɾ ɪɹʌpt ət ðə sədʒɛstʃən, ən vændin laɪkli wəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ɛni sətʃ ɔɹɾɝ, bʌt kɛɝin ən sɝaɪðə maɪt bi pɑsəbəl. "fɔɹ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə fju aʊɝz ə deɪ, jə ʌndɝstænd. wən ðeɪv taɪm." ʃi əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət mɛɝɪlɪl. ivən kɛɝin ən sɝaɪðə maɪt ɹəbɛl ət biɪŋ tɔst ɪndə ðət waɪnpɹɛs.

"Something may be worked out, if the Light pleases," Elayne said cautiously. Not rubbing at her temples took effort. She wished she could blame the ache inside her skull on the incessant thunder. Nynaeve would erupt at the suggestion, and Vandene likely would ignore any such order, but Careane and Sareitha might be possible. "For no more than a few hours a day, you understand. When they have time." She avoided looking at Merilille. Even Careane and Sareitha might rebel at being tossed into that winepress.

zeɪɾə tʌtʃt ðə fɪŋɡɝz ə hɝ ɹaɪt hæn tə hɝ lɪps. "ɪɾ ɪz əɡɹid, ʌndɝ ðə laɪt."

Zaida touched the fingers of her right hand to her lips. "It is agreed, under the Light."

ɪleɪn blɪŋkt. ðət wɑz ɑmənəs; ɪn ðə weɪvməstʃɹəsəz aɪz, əpɛɹənli, ðeɪ hæd dʒʌs meɪɾ ənʌðɝ bɑɹɡən. hɝ lɪməɾəd ɪkspɪɹiəns ə dilɪŋ wɪð ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɑz ðət jə wɝ lʌki tə wɔk əweɪ wɪð jəɹ ʃɪft. wɛl, ðɪs taɪm θɪŋz wɝ gɑnə bi dɪfɹənt. fəɹ ɪnstəns, wʌt wɝ ðə sɪstɝz tə ɡeɪn ɪn ɪt? ðəɹ hæd tə bi tu saɪdz tə ə bɑɹɡən. zeɪɾə smaɪld, əz ɪf ʃi nu wʌɾ ɪleɪn wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ən wɑz əmjuzd. wʌn ə ðə dɔɹz oʊpənɪŋ əɡɛn wɑz ɔlmoʊst ə ɹɪlif, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ən ɪkskjus tə tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ðə si foʊk wʊmən.

Elayne blinked. That was ominous; in the Wavemistress's eyes, apparently, they had just made another bargain. Her limited experience of dealing with the Atha'an Miere was that you were lucky to walk away with your shift. Well, this time things were going to be different. For instance, what were the sisters to gain in it? There had to be two sides to a bargain. Zaida smiled, as if she knew what Elayne was thinking and was amused. One of the doors opening again was almost a relief, giving her an excuse to turn away from the Sea Folk woman.

ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ slɪpt ɪndə ðə ɹum wɪð dɛfɝəns bʌt wɪθaʊt sɝvɪləɾi, ən əɹ kɝtsi wɑz ɹistʃɹeɪnd, suɾəbəl fəɹ ðə haɪ siɾ ʌv ə paʊɝfəl haʊs tə hɝ kwin. bʌt ðɛn, ɛni haɪ sit wɝθ ə pɪntʃ ə sɔl nu ɪnʌf tə ɔfɝ ɹɪspɛk tə ðə fɝs meɪd. hɝ ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ wɑz ɝeɪnʒd ɪn ə bʌn, laɪk ə kɹaʊn ətɑp əɹ hɛd, ən ʃi wɔɹ ə skɑɹlət tɑbɝɾ oʊvɝ əɹ ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt dʒɹɛs, wɪð ðə waɪt laɪən ʌv ændɝz hɛd ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn əɹ fɔɹməɾəbəl bʊzəm. ɹɪn hæd noʊ seɪ ɪn u wəd sɪɾ ɑn ðə θɹoʊn, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ədɑptəd fʊl fɔɹməl dʒɹɛs ɑn ðə deɪ ʌv ɪleɪnz ɝaɪvəl, əz ɪf ðə kwin ɔlɹɛɾi wɝ ɪn ɹɛzəɾəns. hɝ ɹaʊn feɪs hɑɹɾənd moʊməntɛɹəli ət ðə saɪɾ ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɪmən u hæd baɪpæs hɝ, bʌt ðət wɑz ɔl ðə noʊɾəs ʃi ɡeɪv ðɛm. fəɹ naʊ. ðeɪ wəd lɝn tə ðɛɹ kɑst wʌɾ ɪnkɝɪŋ ði ænəmɑsəɾi ʌv ðə fɝs meɪɾ ɪnteɪld.

Reene Harfor slipped into the room with deference but without servility, and her curtsy was restrained, suitable for the High Seat of a powerful House to her Queen. But then, any High Seat worth a pinch of salt knew enough to offer respect to the First Maid. Her graying hair was arranged in a bun, like a crown atop her head, and she wore a scarlet tabard over her red-and-white dress, with the White Lion of Andor's head resting on her formidable bosom. Reene had no say in who would sit on the throne, but she had adopted full formal dress on the day of Elayne's arrival, as if the Queen already were in residence. Her round face hardened momentarily at the sight of the Atha'an Miere women who had bypassed her, but that was all the notice she gave them. For now. They would learn to their cost what incurring the animosity of the First Maid entailed.

"mæzɹim teɪm əz kʌm ət læst, maɪ leɪɾi." ɹɪn mænədʒ tə meɪk ðət saʊn vɛɹi laɪk "maɪ kwin." "ʃæl ðəfɝs tɛl ɪm tə weɪt?"

"Mazrim Taim has come at last, my Lady." Reene managed to make that sound very like "my Queen." "Shall I tell him to wait?"

nɑt bɪfɹtaɪm! ɪleɪn mʌɾɝd ɪn əɹ hɛd. ʃi hæd sʌmən ðə mæn tu deɪz əɡoʊ! "jɛs, mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ. ɡɪv ɪm waɪn. ðə θɝd bɛst, aɪ θɪŋk. ɪnfɔɹm ɪm ðəɾ əl si hɪm əz sun əz aɪ - "

Not beforetime! Elayne muttered in her head. She had summoned the man two days ago! "Yes, Mistress Harfor. Give him wine. The third best, I think. Inform him that I will see him as soon as I - "

teɪm stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum əz ðoʊ hi oʊn ðə pæləs. ʃi dɪd nɑt niɾ ɪm neɪmd. blu-ænd-ɡoʊl dʒɹæɡənz woʊv ɹaʊn ðə slivz ə hɪz blæk koʊt fɹəm ɛlboʊz tə kʌfs, ɪn ɪməteɪʃən ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz ɑn ɹændz ɑɹmz. ðoʊ ʃi səspɛktəɾ i wəd nɑɾ əpɹiʃieɪt ði ɑbzɝveɪʃən. hi wɑz tɔl, nɪɹli əz tɔl əz ɹænd, wɪð ə hʊk noʊz ən dɑɹk aɪz laɪk ɔɡɝz, ə fɪzɪkəli paʊɝfəl mæn u muvd wɪð sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə wɔɹɾɝz dɛdli ɡɹeɪs, bʌt ʃædoʊz sim tə fɑloʊ hɪm, əz ɪf hæf ðə læmps ɪn ðə ɹum hæd ɡɔn aʊt; nɑt ɹil ʃædoʊz, bʌɾ ən ɛɹ ʌv ɪmənən vaɪələns ðət sim pælpəbəl ɪnʌf tə soʊk ʌp laɪt.

Taim strode into the room as though he owned the Palace. She did not need him named. Blue-and-gold Dragons wove round the sleeves of his black coat from elbows to cuffs, in imitation of the Dragons on Rand's arms. Though she suspected he would not appreciate the observation. He was tall, nearly as tall as Rand, with a hooked nose and dark eyes like augers, a physically powerful man who moved with something of a Warder's deadly grace, but shadows seemed to follow him, as if half the lamps in the room had gone out; not real shadows, but an air of imminent violence that seemed palpable enough to soak up light.

tu mɔɹ blæk-koʊɾəd mɛn fɑloʊɾ əɾ ɪz hilz, ə bɔl fɛloʊ wɪð ə lɔŋ ɡɹɪzəl bɪɹɾ ən lɪɹɪŋ blu aɪz ən ə jʌŋɡɝ mæn, sneɪk-slɪm ən dɑɹk-hɛɹd, wɪð ðə snɪɹɪŋ ɛɹəɡəns jʌŋ mɛn ɔfən ədɑptəd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ lɝn bɛɾɝ. boʊθ wɔɹ ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ən ɹɛd-ɪnæməl dʒɹæɡən ɑn ðɛɹ tɔl kɑlɝz. nʌn ə ðə θɹi kæɹiɾ ə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp, ðoʊ; ðeɪ dɪd nɑt nid sɔɹdz. sʌɾənli ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum fɛl smɔlɝ, ən kɹaʊɾəd.

Two more black-coated men followed at his heels, a bald fellow with a long grizzled beard and leering blue eyes and a younger man, snake-slim and dark-haired, with the sneering arrogance young men often adopted before they learned better. Both wore the silver Sword and red-enameled Dragon on their tall collars. None of the three carried a sword on his hip, though; they did not need swords. Suddenly the sitting room felt smaller, and crowded.

ɪnstɪŋktɪvli, ɪleɪn ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ ən ɹitʃt aʊt tə lɪŋk. mɛɝɪlɪl slɪpt ɪndə ðə sɝkəl izəli; əstaʊndɪŋli, soʊ dɪd ɹɪneɪl. ə kwɪk ɡlæns ət ðə wɪndfɪndɝ lɛsən əɹ sɝpɹaɪz. hɝ feɪs ɡɹeɪ, ɹɪneɪl wɑz ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ θɹʌs bɪhaɪn əɹ sæʃ soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪleɪn kəd fil ðə peɪn ɪn əɹ nʌkəlz θɹu ðə lɪŋk. ʃi hæd bɪn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə bi əwɛɹ ʌv wʌɾ ən æʃəmən wɑz.

Instinctively, Elayne embraced saidar and reached out to link. Merilille slipped into the circle easily; astoundingly, so did Renaile. A quick glance at the Windfinder lessened her surprise. Her face gray, Renaile was gripping the dagger thrust behind her sash so hard that Elayne could feel the pain in her knuckles through the link. She had been in Caemlyn long enough to be aware of what an Asha'man was.

ðə mɛn nu sʌmwʌn hæɾ ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ, ʌv kɔɹs, ivən ɪf ðeɪ kəd nɑt si ðə ɡloʊ sɝaʊndɪŋ ðə θɹi wɪmən. ðə bɔl mæn stɪfənd; ðə slɪm jʌŋ mæn klɛntʃt ɪz fɪsts. ðeɪ stɛɹd wɪð æŋɡɹi aɪz. ʃʊɹli ðeɪ hæd siz seɪɾɪn. ɪleɪn bɪɡæn tə ɹəɡɹɛt ɡɪvɪŋ ɪn tə ɹiflɛks, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv ðə sɔɹs, nɑt naʊ. teɪm ɹeɪɾieɪtəd deɪnʒɝ ðə weɪ ə faɪɝ ɡeɪv hit. ʃi dʒɹu dipli θɹu ðə lɪŋk, tə ðə pɔɪnt wɛɹ ði oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ sɛns ə laɪf bɪkeɪm ʃɑɹp, wɔɹnɪŋ pɹɪkəlz. ivən ðoʊz fɛlt . . . dʒɔɪəs. wɪð ðət mʌtʃ ə ðə paʊɝ ɪn hɝ, ʃi kəd leɪ weɪs tə ðə pæləs, bʌt ʃi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf tə mætʃ teɪm ən ði ʌðɝ tu. ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɪʃt ʃi hæd wʌn ə ðə θɹi æŋɡɹil ðeɪ hæd faʊn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, naʊ seɪfli lɑkt əweɪ wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ðə θɪŋz fɹəm ðə kæʃ əntɪl ʃi hæd taɪm tə stʌɾi ðɛm əɡɛn.

The men knew someone had embraced saidar, of course, even if they could not see the glow surrounding the three women. The bald man stiffened; the slim young man clenched his fists. They stared with angry eyes. Surely they had seized saidin. Elayne began to regret giving in to reflex, but she was not going to let go of the Source, not now. Taim radiated danger the way a fire gave heat. She drew deeply through the link, to the point where the overwhelming sense of life became sharp, warning prickles. Even those felt . . . joyous. With that much of the Power in her, she could lay waste to the Palace, but she wondered whether it was enough to match Taim and the other two. She very much wished she had one of the three angreal they had found in Ebou Dar, now safely locked away with the rest of the things from the cache until she had time to study them again.

teɪm ʃʊk ɪz hɛd kəntɛmptʃwəsli, ə hæf-smaɪl flɪkɝɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪz lɪps. "juz jəɹ aɪz." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz kwaɪət, bʌt hɑɹɾ ən snɪɹɪŋ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ tu ɛɛs sədaɪ hɪɹ. ɑɹ jə əfɹeɪɾ ə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ? bɪsaɪdz, jə doʊnt wɑnə fɹaɪɾən ðə fjutʃɝ kwin ʌv ændɝ." hɪz kəmpænjənz ɹɪlæks vɪzəbli, ðən bɪɡæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɛmjəleɪt ði ənθɪŋkɪŋ dɑmənəns ə hɪz stæns.

Taim shook his head contemptuously, a half-smile flickering across his lips. "Use your eyes." His voice was quiet, but hard and sneering. "There are two Aes Sedai here. Are you afraid of two Aes Sedai? Besides, you don't want to frighten the future Queen of Andor." His companions relaxed visibly, then began trying to emulate the unthinking dominance of his stance.

ɹɪn nu nʌθɪŋ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ əɹ seɪɾɪn; ʃi hæd ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ðə mɛn, skaʊlɪŋ, əz sun əz ðeɪ ɛntɝd. æʃəmən əɹ noʊ æʃəmən, ʃi ɪkspɛktəd pipəl tə bɪheɪv əz ðeɪ ʃʊd. ʃi mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. nɑt kwaɪt fɑɹ ɪnʌf ʌndɝ, ðoʊ. ðə wɝdz "snikɪŋ ɹæts" wɝ dʒʌst ɑɾəbəl.

Reene knew nothing of saidar or saidin; she had rounded on the men, scowling, as soon as they entered. Asha'man or no Asha'man, she expected people to behave as they should. She muttered something almost under her breath. Not quite far enough under, though. The words "sneaking rats" were just audible.

ðə fɝs meɪd ɹɛɾənd wən ʃi ɹilaɪzd ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə ɹum hæd hɝd, ən ɪleɪn ɡɑɾ ə tʃæns tə si ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ flʌstɝd. wɪtʃ wɑz tə seɪ ðət ðə wʊmən dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp ən sɛd, wɪð ə ɡɹeɪs ən dɪɡnəɾi ɛni ɹulɝ maɪɾ ɛnvi, "fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ leɪɾi ɪleɪn, bʌɾ aɪv bɪn toʊl ðəɹ ɑɹ ɹæts ɪnfɛstɪŋ ðə stɔɹɹumz. moʊst ənjuʒəwəl ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ, ən soʊ mɛni ʌv ðɛm. ɪf jəl ɪkskjuz mi, aɪ mʌs meɪk ʃʊɹ maɪ ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ɹætkætʃɝz ən pɔɪzən beɪts ɑɹ biɪŋ kæɹiɾ aʊt."

The First Maid reddened when she realized everyone in the room had heard, and Elayne got a chance to see Reene Harfor flustered. Which was to say that the woman drew herself up and said, with a grace and dignity any ruler might envy, "Forgive me, my Lady Elayne, but I've been told there are rats infesting the storerooms. Most unusual this time of year, and so many of them. If you will excuse me, I must make sure my orders for ratcatchers and poison baits are being carried out."

"steɪ," ɪleɪn toʊld əɹ kuli. kɑmli. "vɝmɪn kən bi dɛlt wɪð ɪn du taɪm." tu ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ɹɪneɪl kəd tʃænəl, ən i hæɾ ɛmfəsaɪz tu. wəd dʒʌs θɹi wɪmən ɡɪv səm ædvæntɪdʒ? əɹ dɪɾ ɪt teɪk mɔɹ? pleɪnli ði æʃəmən nu ʌv səm ædvæntɪdʒ tə wɪmən ɪn nʌmbɝz lɛs ðən ə sɝkəl ə θɝtin. wɔk ɪn ɑn əɹ wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə baɪ-jɔɹ-liv, wəd ðeɪ? "ju kən ʃoʊ ðiz ɡʊdmən aʊt wən aɪm dʌn wɪð ðɛm." teɪmz kəmpænjənz skaʊld ət biɪŋ kɔld "ɡʊdmən," bʌt ðə mæn hɪmsɛlf mɪɹli flæʃt ənʌðɝ ə ðoʊz ɔlmoʊst-smaɪlz. hi wɑz kwɪk ɪnʌf tə noʊ ʃi hæd bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɪm wən ʃi spoʊk ə vɝmɪn. laɪt! meɪbi ɹænd hæd niɾəd ðɪs mæn wʌns, bʌt waɪ wəɾ i kip ɪm naʊ, ən ɪn ə pəzɪʃən ə sətʃ əθɔɹəɾi? wɛl, hɪz əθɔɹəɾi kaʊntəd fəɹ nʌθɪŋ hɪɹ.

"Stay," Elayne told her coolly. Calmly. "Vermin can be dealt with in due time." Two Aes Sedai. He did not realize Renaile could channel, and he had emphasized two. Would just three women give some advantage? Or did it take more? Plainly the Asha'man knew of some advantage to women in numbers less than a circle of thirteen. Walk in on her without so much as a by-your-leave, would they? "You can show these goodmen out when I'm done with them." Taim's companions scowled at being called "goodmen," but the man himself merely flashed another of those almost-smiles. He was quick enough to know she had been thinking of him when she spoke of vermin. Light! Maybe Rand had needed this man once, but why would he keep him now, and in a position of such authority? Well, his authority counted for nothing here.

ənhɝidli, ʃi tʊk əɹ tʃɛɹ əɡɛn, ən ɡeɪv ə moʊmən tə ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ skɝts. ðə mɛn wəɾ əv tə kʌm ɝaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ laɪk sʌpləkəns, əɹ ɛls tɔk tə ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ hɛd waɪl ʃi ɹəfjuz tə lʊk ət ðɛm. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt ʃi kənsɪɾɝd pæsɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə smɔl sɝkəl. ði æʃəmən wəd ʃʊɹli foʊkəs ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən ɑn hɝ. ɹɪneɪl wɑz stɪl ɡɹeɪ, ðoʊ, æŋɡɝ ən fɪɹ tʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪnsaɪd hɝ; ʃi maɪt stʃɹaɪk aʊɾ əz sun əz ðə lɪŋk wɑz hɝz. mɛɝɪlɪl hæd səm fɪɹ, dʒʌst ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl, mɪkst wɪð ə vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ə . . . ɡusi . . . filɪŋ ðət mætʃt əɹ waɪɾ aɪz ən pɑɹɾəd lɪps; ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌt ʃi maɪt də wɪð ðə lɪŋk.

Unhurriedly, she took her chair again, and gave a moment to adjusting her skirts. The men would have to come around in front of her like supplicants, or else talk to the side of her head while she refused to look at them. For an instant she considered passing control of the small circle. The Asha'man would surely focus their attention on her. Renaile was still gray, though, anger and fear tumbling over one another inside her; she might strike out as soon as the link was hers. Merilille had some fear, just under control, mixed with a very great deal of a . . . goosey . . . feeling that matched her wide eyes and parted lips; the Light alone knew what she might do with the link.

daɪɛlɪn ɡlaɪɾɪd tə ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɪleɪnz tʃɛɹ, əz ɪf tə ʃild əɹ fɹəm ði æʃəmən. wʌtɛvɝ leɪ ɪnsaɪd ðə haɪ siɾ ə tæɹɑvɪn, hɝ feɪs wɑz stɝn, ənfɹaɪɾənd. ði ʌðɝ wɪmən hæd weɪstəd noʊ taɪm ɪn pɹipɛɹɪŋ əz bɛs ðeɪ kʊd. zeɪɾə stʊd vɛɹi stɪl bɪsaɪd ðə kəlaɪɾəskoʊp, duɪŋ əɹ bɛs tə lʊk dɪmɪnjəɾɪv ən hɑɹmləs, bʌɾ əɹ hænz wɝ bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk ən ðə dæɡɝ wɑz mɪsɪŋ fɹəm bɪhaɪn əɹ sæʃ. bɝdʒɪt laʊnʒd bɪsaɪd ðə faɪɝpleɪs, lɛf hæn pɹɑpt ɑn ðə dʒæm, simɪŋli əɾ əɹ iz, bʌt ðə ʃiθ ə hɝ bɛl naɪf wɑz ɛmpti, ən fɹəm ðə weɪ hɝ ʌðɝ hæn ɹɛstəd baɪ hɝ saɪd, ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi fəɹ ən ʌndɝhæn θɹoʊ. ðə bɑn kæɹid . . . foʊkəs. æɹoʊ nɑkt, dʒɹɔn tə tʃik, ɹɛɾi tə lus.

Dyelin glided to the side of Elayne's chair, as if to shield her from the Asha'man. Whatever lay inside the High Seat of Taravin, her face was stern, unfrightened. The other women had wasted no time in preparing as best they could. Zaida stood very still beside the kaleidoscope, doing her best to look diminutive and harmless, but her hands were behind her back and the dagger was missing from behind her sash. Birgitte lounged beside the fireplace, left hand propped on the jamb, seemingly at her ease, but the sheath of her belt knife was empty, and from the way her other hand rested by her side, she was ready for an underhand throw. The bond carried . . . focus. Arrow nocked, drawn to cheek, ready to loose.

ɪleɪn meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə lʊk ɝaʊn daɪɛlɪn ət ðə θɹi mɛn. "fɝs jə ɑɹ tu sloʊ oʊbeɪɪŋ maɪ sʌmənz, mæstɝ teɪm, ən ðən tu sʌɾən." laɪt, wɑz i hoʊldɪŋ seɪɾɪn? ðəɹ wɝ mɛθədz ʌv ɪntɝfɪɹɪŋ wɪð ə mæn tʃænəlɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ə ʃildɪŋ hɪm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə dɪfəkəl skɪl, tʃænsi, ən ʃi nu lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ðə θɪɹi.

Elayne made no effort to look around Dyelin at the three men. "First you are too slow obeying my summons, Master Taim, and then too sudden." Light, was he holding saidin? There were methods of interfering with a man channeling short of shielding him, but it was a difficult skill, chancy, and she knew little more than the theory.

hi dɪd kʌm ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, sɛvɹəl peɪsɪz ɔf, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt lʊk ə sʌpləkənt. mæzɹim teɪm nu hu hi wɑz ən ɪz oʊn wɝθ, ðoʊ hi pleɪnli sɛɾ ɪt haɪɝ ðən ðə skaɪ. laɪtnɪŋ flæʃɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz sɛn stʃɹeɪnʒ laɪts əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs. mɛni wəd fil oʊvɝɔd baɪ hɪm, ivən wɪθaʊɾ ɪz fænsi koʊɾ əɹ ɪz ɪnfəməs neɪm. ʃi dɪd nɑt. ʃi wəd nɑt!

He did come in front of her, several paces off, but he did not look a supplicant. Mazrim Taim knew who he was and his own worth, though he plainly set it higher than the sky. Lightning flashing in the windows sent strange lights across his face. Many would feel overawed by him, even without his fancy coat or his infamous name. She did not. She would not!

teɪm ɹʌbd ɪz tʃɪn θɔtfəli. "aɪ ʌndɝstæn juv teɪkən daʊn ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝz ɔl oʊvɝ keɪɛmlɪn, mɪstʃɹəs ɪleɪn." ðəɹ wɑz əmjuzmən ɪn ɪz dip vɔɪs, ɪf nʌn ɪn ɪz aɪz! daɪɛlɪn hɪst ɪn fjʊɹi ət ðə slaɪt tə ɪleɪn, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹd hɝ. "ðə sɑldəiənz əv wɪθdʒɹɔn tə ðə lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz kæmp, aɪ hɪɹ, ən sun ðə læst ə ði il wɪl bi ɪn kæmps aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi, əz wɛl. wʌt wɪl i seɪ wən i lɝnz?" ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ u hi mɛnt. "æn æftɝ hiz sɛn jə ə ɡɪft, tu. fɹəm ðə saʊθ. əl əv ɪt dɪlɪvɝd leɪɾɝ."

Taim rubbed his chin thoughtfully. "I understand you've taken down the Dragon banners all over Caemlyn, Mistress Elayne." There was amusement in his deep voice, if none in his eyes! Dyelin hissed in fury at the slight to Elayne, but he ignored her. "The Saldaeans have withdrawn to the Legion of the Dragon's camp, I hear, and soon the last of the Aiel will be in camps outside the city, as well. What will he say when he learns?" There was no doubt who he meant. "And after he's sent you a gift, too. From the south. I'll have it delivered later."

"aɪ wɪl əlaɪ ændɝ wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn du kɔɹs," ʃi toʊld ɪm koʊldli, "bʌɾ ændɝ ɪz nɑɾ ə kɑŋkɝd pɹɑvəns, nɑt fəɹ ɪm əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls." ʃi meɪɾ əɹ hænz steɪ ɹɪlækst ɑn ði ɑɹmz ə ðə tʃɛɹ. laɪt, tɔkɪŋ ði il ən sɑldəiənz ɪndə livɪŋ hæd bɪn əɹ bɪɡəst ətʃivmən jɛt, ən ivən wɪð ðə flɛɹ-ʌp ɪn kɹaɪm, ɪt hæd bɪn nɛsəsɛɹi! "ɪn ɛni keɪs, mæstɝ teɪm, ɪts nɑt jəɹ pleɪs tə kɔl mi tə tæsk. ɪf ɹænd ɑbʒɛkts, əl dil wɪð hɪm!" teɪm ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, ən ðəɾ ɑd kwɝk ə hɪz maʊθ lɪŋɡɝd.

"I will ally Andor with the Dragon Reborn in due course," she told him coldly, "but Andor is not a conquered province, not for him or anyone else." She made her hands stay relaxed on the arms of the chair. Light, talking the Aiel and Saldaeans into leaving had been her biggest achievement yet, and even with the flare-up in crime, it had been necessary! "In any case, Master Taim, it is not your place to call me to task. If Rand objects, I will deal with him!" Taim raised an eyebrow, and that odd quirk of his mouth lingered.

bɝn mi, ʃi θɔɾ ɪndɪɡnənli, aɪ ʃʊdn əv juzd ɹændz neɪm! ðə mæn klɪɹli θɔɾ i nu ɪɡzækli haʊ ʃi wəd dil wɪð ði æŋɡɝ ə ðə blʌɾi dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn! ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt wɑz, ɪf ʃi kəd tʃɹɪp ɹænd ɪndə ə bɛd, ʃi wʊd. nɑt fəɹ ðɪs, nɑt tə dil wɪð hɪm, bʌt kəz ʃi wɑntəd tə. wʌt sɔɹɾ ʌv ɡɪf hæɾ i sɛn hɝ?

Burn me, she thought indignantly, I shouldn't have used Rand's name! The man clearly thought he knew exactly how she would deal with the anger of the bloody Dragon Reborn! The worst of it was, if she could trip Rand into a bed, she would. Not for this, not to deal with him, but because she wanted to. What sort of gift had he sent her?

æŋɡɝ hɑɹɾənd əɹ vɔɪs. æŋɡɝ ət teɪmz toʊn, ət ɹænd fəɹ steɪɪŋ əweɪ soʊ lɔŋ. ət hɝsɛlf, fəɹ blʌʃɪŋ ən θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɡɪfs. ɡɪfs! "juv wɔld ɪn fɔɹ maɪlz ʌv ændɝ." laɪt, ðət wɑz mɔɹ ðən hæf əz lɑɹdʒ əz ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi! haʊ mɛni ʌv ðiz fɛloʊz kəɾ ɪt hoʊld? ðə θɔt meɪɾ əɹ skɪn kɹɔl. "wɪð huz pɝmɪʃən, mæstɝ teɪm? doʊn tɛl mi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hiz noʊ ɹaɪt tə ɡɪv pɝmɪʃən fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ændɝ." daɪɛlɪn ʃɪftəd bɪsaɪd hɝ. noʊ ɹaɪt, bʌɾ ɪnʌf stʃɹɛŋkθ kəd meɪk ɹaɪt. ɪleɪn kɛpt əɹ ətɛnʃən ɑn teɪm. "juv ɹəfjuz ðə kwinz ɡɑɹɾ ɛntʃɹi tə jəɹ . . . kɑmpaʊnd." nɑt ðət ðeɪ hæd tʃɹaɪd bɪfɔɹ ʃi keɪm hoʊm. "ðə lɔ ɪn ændɝ ɹʌnz oʊvɝ ɔl ʌv ændɝ, mæstɝ teɪm. dʒʌstəs wɪl bi ðə seɪm fəɹ lɔɹɾ əɹ fɑɹmɝ - əɹ æʃəmən. aɪ woʊn kleɪm aɪ kən fɔɹs maɪ weɪ ɪn." hi bɪɡæn tə smaɪl əɡɛn, əɹ nɪɹli soʊ. "aɪ wʊdn dɪmin maɪsɛlf. bʌɾ ənlɛs ðə kwinz ɡɑɹɾ ɪz əlaʊɾ ɪn, aɪ pɹɑməs jə nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə pəteɪtoʊ wɪl ɡoʊ θɹu jəɹ ɡeɪts, iðɝ. aɪ noʊ jə kən tʃɹævəl. lɛt jəɹ æʃəmən spɛn ðɛɹ deɪz tʃɹævlɪŋ tə baɪ fud." ði ɔlmoʊst-smaɪl vænɪʃt ɪn ə feɪnt ɡɹɪmɑs; hɪz buts ʃɪftəd slaɪtli.

Anger hardened her voice. Anger at Taim's tone, at Rand for staying away so long. At herself, for blushing and thinking of gifts. Gifts! "You've walled in four miles of Andor." Light, that was more than half as large as the Inner City! How many of these fellows could it hold? The thought made her skin crawl. "With whose permission, Master Taim? Don't tell me the Dragon Reborn. He has no right to give permission for anything in Andor." Dyelin shifted beside her. No right, but enough strength could make right. Elayne kept her attention on Taim. "You've refused the Queen's Guard entry to your . . . compound." Not that they had tried before she came home. "The law in Andor runs over all of Andor, Master Taim. Justice will be the same for lord or farmer - or Asha'man. I won't claim I can force my way in." He began to smile again, or nearly so. "I wouldn't demean myself. But unless the Queen's Guard is allowed in, I promise you not so much as a potato will go through your gates, either. I know you can Travel. Let your Asha'man spend their days Traveling to buy food." The almost-smile vanished in a faint grimace; his boots shifted slightly.

ənɔɪəns læstəɾ oʊnli ən ɪnstənt, ðoʊ. "fuɾ ɪz ə smɔl pɹɑbləm," hi sɛd smuðli, spɹɛɾɪŋ ɪz hænz. "æz jə seɪ, maɪ mɛn kən tʃɹævəl. tə ɛniwɛɹ aɪ kəmænd. aɪ daʊt jə kəd stɑp mi baɪɪŋ wʌtɛvɝ aɪ wɑn ivən tɛn maɪlz fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn, bʌɾ ɪt wʊdn bɑðɝ mi ɪf jə kʊd. stɪl, aɪm wɪlɪŋ tə əlaʊ vɪzəts wɛnɛvɝ jə æsk. kəntʃɹoʊl vɪzəts, wɪð ɛskɔɹts əɾ ɔl taɪmz. ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪz hɑɹɾ ɪn ðə blæk taʊɝ. mɛn daɪ ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi deɪ. aɪ wəd nɑt wɑn ɛni æksəɾənts."

Annoyance lasted only an instant, though. "Food is a small problem," he said smoothly, spreading his hands. "As you say, my men can Travel. To anywhere I command. I doubt you could stop me buying whatever I want even ten miles from Caemlyn, but it wouldn't bother me if you could. Still, I am willing to allow visits whenever you ask. Controlled visits, with escorts at all times. The training is hard in the Black Tower. Men die almost every day. I would not want any accidents."

hi wɑz ɪɹɪteɪɾɪŋli ækjɝəɾ ɑn haʊ fɑɹ fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn əɹ ɹɪt ɹæn. bʌt noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɪɹəteɪɾɪŋ. wɝ ɪz ɹɪmɑɹks əbaʊt tʃɹævlɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ i kəmændəɾ ən "æksəɾənts" mɛn tə bi veɪl θɹɛts? ʃʊɹli nɑt. ə weɪv ə fjʊɹi ɹæn θɹu hɝ əz ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz sɝɾən i wəd nɑt θɹɛɾən əɹ kəz ə ɹænd. ʃi wəd nɑt haɪd bɪhaɪn ɹænd ælθɹ. kəntʃɹoʊl vɪzəts? wən ʃi æskt? ʃi ɔt tə bɝn ðə mæn tə ə sɪndɝ wɛɹ i stʊd!

He was irritatingly accurate on how far from Caemlyn her writ ran. But no more than irritating. Were his remarks about Traveling anywhere he commanded and "accidents" meant to be veiled threats? Surely not. A wave of fury ran through her as she realized that she was certain he would not threaten her because of Rand. She would not hide behind Rand al'Thor. Controlled visits? When she asked? She ought to burn the man to a cinder where he stood!

əbɹʌpli ʃi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ʌv wʌt wɑz kʌmɪŋ θɹu ðə bɑn fɹəm bɝdʒɪt, æŋɡɝ, ə ɹəflɛkʃən ə hɝz, dʒɔɪnɪŋ wɪð bɝdʒɪts, ɹəflɛktɪŋ fɹəm bɝdʒɪt tə hɝ, baʊnsɪŋ fɹəm əɹ tə bɝdʒɪt, fiɾɪŋ ɑn ɪtsɛlf, bɪldɪŋ. bɝdʒɪts naɪf hæn kwɪvɝd wɪð ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə θɹoʊ. ən hɝsɛlf? fjʊɹi fɪl hɝ! ə wɪskɝ mɔɹ, ən ʃi wəd luz seɪaɪdɑɹ. əɹ læʃ aʊt wɪð ɪt.

Abruptly she became aware of what was coming through the bond from Birgitte, anger, a reflection of hers, joining with Birgitte's, reflecting from Birgitte to her, bouncing from her to Birgitte, feeding on itself, building. Birgitte's knife hand quivered with the desire to throw. And herself? Fury filled her! A whisker more, and she would lose saidar. Or lash out with it.

wɪð ən ɛfɝt ʃi fɔɹst ɹeɪdʒ daʊn, ɪndə ə sɛmbləns ə kɑm. ə ɹʌf, siθɪŋ sɛmbləns. ʃi swɑloʊd, ən stʃɹʌɡəl tə kip əɹ vɔɪs lɛvəl. "ðə ɡɑɹdz wɪl vɪzəɾ ɛvɹi deɪ, mæstɝ teɪm." ən haʊ ʃi wɑz tə mænədʒ ðəɾ ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ, ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ. "pɝhæps əl kʌm maɪsɛlf, wɪð ə fju ʌðɝ sɪstɝz." ɪf ðə θɔɾ ə hævɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz blæk taʊɝ ʌpsɛt teɪm, hi dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ ɪt. laɪt, ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪstæblɪʃ ændɝz əθɔɹəɾi, nɑt ɡoʊd ðə mæn. hɝidli ʃi dɪɾ ə nɑvəs ɛksɝsaɪz - ðə ɹɪvɝ kənteɪn baɪ ðə bæŋk - sikɪŋ kɑm. ɪt wɝkt, ə lɪɾəl. naʊ ʃi mɪɹli wɑntəd tə θɹoʊ ɔl ðə waɪnkʌps ət hɪm. "aɪ wɪl æksid tə jəɹ ɹɪkwɛs fəɹ ɛskɔɹts, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɪz tə bi hɪɾən. aɪ woʊn əv kɹaɪmz kənsil baɪ jəɹ sikɹəts. də wi ʌndɝstænd wʌn ənʌðɝ?"

With an effort she forced rage down, into a semblance of calm. A rough, seething semblance. She swallowed, and struggled to keep her voice level. "The Guards will visit every day, Master Taim." And how she was to manage that in this weather, she did not know. "Perhaps I will come myself, with a few other sisters." If the thought of having Aes Sedai inside his Black Tower upset Taim, he did not show it. Light, she was trying to establish Andor's authority, not goad the man. Hurriedly she did a novice exercise - the river contained by the bank - seeking calm. It worked, a little. Now she merely wanted to throw all the winecups at him. "I will accede to your request for escorts, but nothing is to be hidden. I won't have crimes concealed by your secrets. Do we understand one another?"

teɪmz baʊ wɑz mɑkɪŋ - mɑkɪŋ! - bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə taɪtnəs ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "aɪ ʌndɝstæn jə pɝfəkli. ʌndɝstæn mi, ðoʊ. maɪ mɛn ɑɹ nɑt fɑɹmɝz nʌklɪŋ ðɛɹ fɔɹhɛdz wən jə pæs. pɹɛs ən æʃəmən tu hɑɹd, ən jə meɪ lɝn dʒʌs haʊ stʃɹɔŋ jəɹ lɔ ɪz."

Taim's bow was mocking - mocking! - but there was a tightness in his voice. "I understand you perfectly. Understand me, though. My men are not farmers knuckling their foreheads when you pass. Press an Asha'man too hard, and you may learn just how strong your law is."

ɪleɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə tɛl ɪm ɪɡzækli haʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðə lɔ wɑz ɪn ændɝ.

Elayne opened her mouth to tell him exactly how strong the law was in Andor.

"ɪɾ ɪz taɪm, ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd," ə wʊmənz vɔɪs sɛd fɹəm ðə dɔɹweɪ.

"It is time, Elayne Trakand," a woman's voice said from the doorway.

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz!" daɪɛlɪn mʌɾɝd. "ɪz ðə hoʊl wɝl dʒʌs gɑnə wɔk ɪn hɪɹ?"

"Blood and ashes!" Dyelin muttered. "Is the whole world just going to walk in here?"

ɪleɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə nu vɔɪs. ʃi hæd bɪn ɪkspɛktɪŋ ðɪs sʌmənz, wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ wən ɪt wəd kʌm. noʊɪŋ ðəɾ ɪt mʌs bi oʊbeɪd, ðoʊ, ɑn ði ɪnstənt. ʃi stʊd, wɪʃɪŋ ʃi kəɾ əv ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ tə meɪk mæɾɝz klɪɹ tə teɪm. hi fɹaʊn ət ðə wʊmən u hæd dʒʌst ɛntɝd, ən əɾ ɪleɪn, klɪɹli ənsɝɾən wʌt tə meɪk ə ðɪs. ɡʊd. lɛɾ ɪm stu əntɪl ʃi hæd taɪm tə sɛɾ ɪm stʃɹeɪɾ ɑn wʌt spɛʃəl ɹaɪts æʃəmən hæɾ ɪn ændɝ.

Elayne recognized the new voice. She had been expecting this summons, without knowing when it would come. Knowing that it must be obeyed, though, on the instant. She stood, wishing she could have a little longer to make matters clear to Taim. He frowned at the woman who had just entered, and at Elayne, clearly uncertain what to make of this. Good. Let him stew until she had time to set him straight on what special rights Asha'man had in Andor.

neɪdɪɹ stʊɾ əz tɔl əz iðɝ ə ðə tu mɛn baɪ ðə dɔɹ, ə waɪd wʊmən, əz kloʊs tə staʊɾ əz ɛni il ɪleɪn hæd sin. hɝ ɡɹin aɪz ɪɡzæmən ðə pɛɹ fəɹ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ dɪsmɪsɪŋ əm əz ənɪmpɔɹɾənt. æʃəmən dɪd nɑɾ ɪmpɹɛs waɪz wʌnz. vɛɹi lɪɾəl dɪd. ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ dɑɹk ʃɔl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ɪn ə klæɾɝ ə bɹeɪslɪts, ʃi wɔkt oʊvɝ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪleɪn, hɝ bæk tə teɪm. dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld, ʃi wɔɹ oʊnli ðət ʃɔl oʊvɝ əɹ θɪn waɪt blaʊs, ðoʊ ɑdli, ʃi kæɹiɾ ə hɛvi wʊl kloʊk dʒɹeɪpt əkɹɔs wʌn ɑɹm. "ju mʌs kʌm naʊ," ʃi toʊld ɪleɪn, "wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ." teɪmz aɪbɹaʊz sim tə bi klaɪmɪŋ ɪz fɔɹhɛd; noʊ daʊɾ i wɑz ʌnəkʌstəm tə biɪŋ soʊ θɝoʊli ɪɡnɔɹd.

Nadere stood as tall as either of the two men by the door, a wide woman, as close to stout as any Aiel Elayne had seen. Her green eyes examined the pair for a moment before dismissing them as unimportant. Asha'man did not impress Wise Ones. Very little did. Adjusting her dark shawl on her shoulders in a clatter of bracelets, she walked over in front of Elayne, her back to Taim. Despite the cold, she wore only that shawl over her thin white blouse, though oddly, she carried a heavy wool cloak draped across one arm. "You must come now," she told Elayne, "without delay." Taim's eyebrows seemed to be climbing his forehead; no doubt he was unaccustomed to being so thoroughly ignored.

"laɪɾ ə hɛvən!" daɪɛlɪn bɹiðd, məsɑʒɪŋ əɹ fɔɹhɛd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt ðɪs ɪz əbaʊt, neɪdɪɹ, bʌɾ ɪɾəl əv tə weɪɾ əntɪl - "

"Light of heaven!" Dyelin breathed, massaging her forehead. "I don't know what this is about, Nadere, but it will have to wait until - "

ɪleɪn leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm. "ju doʊnt noʊ, daɪɛlɪn, ən ɪt kænt weɪt. əl sɛn ɛvɹiwʌn əweɪ ən kʌm wɪð ju, neɪdɪɹ."

Elayne laid a hand on her arm. "You don't know, Dyelin, and it can't wait. I will send everyone away and come with you, Nadere."

ðə waɪz wʌn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd dɪsəpɹuvɪŋli. "ə tʃaɪld weɪɾɪŋ tə bi bɔɹn kænɑt teɪk taɪm tə sɛn pipəl əweɪ." ʃi ʃʊk aʊt ðə θɪk kloʊk. "aɪ bɹɔt ðɪs tə ʃil jəɹ skɪn fɹəm ðə koʊld. pɝhæps aɪ ʃəd liv ɪt, ən tɛl eɪvinhə jəɹ mɑɾəsti ɪz ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən jəɹ dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ ə sɪstɝ." daɪɛlɪn ɡæspt ɪn sʌɾən ɹiləzeɪʃən. ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn kwɪvɝd wɪð bɝdʒɪts aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ.

The Wise One shook her head disapprovingly. "A child waiting to be born cannot take time to send people away." She shook out the thick cloak. "I brought this to shield your skin from the cold. Perhaps I should leave it, and tell Aviendha your modesty is greater than your desire for a sister." Dyelin gasped in sudden realization. The Warder bond quivered with Birgitte's outrage.

ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn tʃɔɪs pɑsəbəl. noʊ tʃɔɪs, ɹɪli. lɛɾɪŋ ðə lɪŋk tə ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən dɪzɑlv, ʃi ɹilist seɪaɪdɑɹ hɝsɛlf. ðə ɡloʊ ɹɪmeɪn ɝaʊn ɹɪneɪl ən mɛɝɪlɪl, ðoʊ. "wɪl jə hɛlp mi wɪð maɪ bʌɾənz, daɪɛlɪn?" ɪleɪn wɑz pɹaʊɾ ə haʊ stɛɾi hɝ vɔɪs wɑz. ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðɪs. dʒʌs nɑt wɪð soʊ mɛni wɪtnəsəz! ʃi θɔt feɪnli. tɝnɪŋ əɹ bæk ɑn teɪm - ət list ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv tə si hɪm wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ! - ʃi bɪɡæn wɪð ðə taɪni bʌɾənz ɑn əɹ slivz. "daɪɛlɪn, ɪf jə pliz? daɪɛlɪn?" æftɝ ə moʊmən daɪɛlɪn muvd əz ɪf slipwɔkɪŋ ən bɪɡæn fʌmbəlɪŋ wɪð ðə bʌɾənz daʊn ɪleɪnz bæk, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf ɪn ʃɑk toʊnz. wʌn ə ði æʃəmən baɪ ðə dɔɹz snɪkɝd.

There was only one choice possible. No choice, really. Letting the link to the other two women dissolve, she released saidar herself. The glow remained around Renaile and Merilille, though. "Will you help me with my buttons, Dyelin?" Elayne was proud of how steady her voice was. She had expected this. Just not with so many witnesses! she thought faintly. Turning her back on Taim - at least she would not have to see him watching her! - she began with the tiny buttons on her sleeves. "Dyelin, if you please? Dyelin?" After a moment Dyelin moved as if sleepwalking and began fumbling with the buttons down Elayne's back, muttering to herself in shocked tones. One of the Asha'man by the doors snickered.

"əbaʊt tɝn!" teɪm snæpt, ən buts stæmp baɪ ðə dɔɹz.

"About turn!" Taim snapped, and boots stamped by the doors.

ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ i hæd tɝn əweɪ əz wɛl - ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ʃi kəd fil ɪz aɪz ɑn əɹ - bʌt sʌɾənli bɝdʒɪt wɑz ðɛɹ, ən mɛɝɪlɪl ən ɹɪn, ən zeɪɾə, ən ivən ɹɪneɪl, kɹaʊɾɪŋ ʃoʊldɝ-tə-ʃoʊldɝ, skaʊlɪŋ əz ðeɪ fɔɹmd ə wɔl bɪtwin əɹ ən ðə mɛn. nɑɾ ə vɛɹi æɾəkwət wɔl. nʌn wɝ əz tɔl əz ʃi, ən niðɝ zeɪɾə nɔɹ mɛɝɪlɪl stʊd haɪɝ ðən əɹ ʃoʊldɝ.

Elayne did not know whether he had turned away as well - she was certain she could feel his eyes on her - but suddenly Birgitte was there, and Merilille and Reene, and Zaida, and even Renaile, crowding shoulder-to-shoulder, scowling as they formed a wall between her and the men. Not a very adequate wall. None were as tall as she, and neither Zaida nor Merilille stood higher than her shoulder.

foʊkəs, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf. aɪm kəmpoʊzd. aɪm tʃɹæŋkwəl. aɪ æm. . . . aɪm stʃɹɪpɪŋ neɪkəɾ ɪn ə ɹum fʊl ə pipəl ɪz wʌɾ aɪ æm! ʃi ənʒɹəst əz hɝidli əz ʃi kʊd, lɛɾɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs ən ʃɪft fɔl tə ðə flɔɹ, tɔsɪŋ əɹ slɪpɝz ən stɑkɪŋz ɑn tɑp ə ðɛm. hɝ skɪn pɛbəld ɪn ðə kul ɛɹ; ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə tʃɪl dʒʌs mɛnt ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃɪvɝɪŋ. ən ʃi ɹæðɝ θɔt ðə hiɾ ɪn əɹ tʃiks maɪɾ əv sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðæt.

Focus, she told herself. I am composed. I am tranquil. I am. . . . I'm stripping naked in a room full of people is what I am! She undressed as hurriedly as she could, letting her dress and shift fall to the floor, tossing her slippers and stockings on top of them. Her skin pebbled in the cool air; ignoring the chill just meant she was not shivering. And she rather thought the heat in her cheeks might have something to do with that.

"mædnəs!" daɪɛlɪn mʌɾɝd ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs, snætʃɪŋ ʌp ðə kloʊðz. "ʌɾɝ mædnəs!"

"Madness!" Dyelin muttered in a low voice, snatching up the clothes. "Utter madness!"

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs əbaʊt?" bɝdʒɪt wɪspɝd. "ʃʊɾ aɪ kʌm wɪð ju?"

"What is this about?" Birgitte whispered. "Should I come with you?"

"aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ əloʊn," ɪleɪn wɪspɝd bæk. "doʊn ɑɹɡju!" nɑt ðət bɝdʒɪt ɡeɪv ɛni aʊtwɝd saɪn ʌv ɪt, bʌt ðə bɑn kæɹid vɑljumz. teɪkɪŋ ðə ɡoʊldən hups fɹəm əɹ ɪɹz, ʃi hændəɾ əm tə bɝdʒɪt, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ æɾɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ. ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd sɛd ʃi mʌs kʌm əz ə tʃaɪl keɪm tə bɝθ. ðeɪ hæd hæɾ ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz, fɝst əmʌŋ əm tə tɛl noʊ wʌn wʌt wɑz kʌmɪŋ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ʃi wɪʃt ʃi nu. ə tʃaɪl keɪm tə bɝθ wɪθaʊt fɹknoʊlɪdʒ ʌv wʌt wɑz tə hæpən. bɝdʒɪts mʌɾɝɪŋ bɪɡæn tə saʊn laɪk daɪɛlɪnz.

"I must go alone," Elayne whispered back. "Don't argue!" Not that Birgitte gave any outward sign of it, but the bond carried volumes. Taking the golden hoops from her ears, she handed them to Birgitte, then hesitated before adding her Great Serpent ring. The Wise Ones had said she must come as a child came to birth. They had had a great many instructions, first among them to tell no one what was coming. For that matter, she wished she knew. A child came to birth without foreknowledge of what was to happen. Birgitte's muttering began to sound like Dyelin's.

neɪdɪɹ keɪm fɔɹwɝd wɪð ðə kloʊk, bʌt sɪmpli hɛld ɪɾ aʊt; ɪleɪn hæd tə teɪk ɪɾ ən ɹæp ɪɾ ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf heɪstəli. ʃi wɑz stɪl ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd fil teɪmz ɡeɪz. hoʊldɪŋ ðə hɛvi wʊl kloʊs, hɝ ɪnstɪŋkt wɑz tə hɝi fɹəm ðə ɹum, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd ʃi dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp ən tɝn ɝaʊn sloʊli. ʃi wəd nɑt skɝi aʊt kloʊkt ɪn ʃeɪm.

Nadere came forward with the cloak, but simply held it out; Elayne had to take it and wrap it around herself hastily. She was still sure she could feel Taim's gaze. Holding the heavy wool close, her instinct was to hurry from the room, but instead she drew herself up and turned around slowly. She would not scurry out cloaked in shame.

ðə mɛn u hæd kʌm wɪð teɪm stʊd ɹɪdʒɪdli, feɪsɪŋ ðə dɔɹz, ən teɪm hɪmsɛlf wɑz piɹɪŋ ət ðə faɪɝpleɪs, ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst. ðə fil ə hɪz aɪz hæd bɪn ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, ðɛn. ɛksɛptɪŋ neɪdɪɹ, ði ʌðɝ wɪmən lʊkt əɾ əɹ ɪn vɛɹieɪʃənz ə kjʊɹiɑsəɾi, kɑnstɝneɪʃən ən ʃɑk. neɪdɪɹ mɪɹli simd ɪmpeɪʃənt.

The men who had come with Taim stood rigidly, facing the doors, and Taim himself was peering at the fireplace, arms folded across his chest. The feel of his eyes had been imagination, then. Excepting Nadere, the other women looked at her in variations of curiosity, consternation and shock. Nadere merely seemed impatient.

ɪleɪn tʃɹaɪd fəɹ əɹ moʊs kwinli vɔɪs. "mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ, jəl ɔfɝ mæstɝ teɪm ən ɪz mɛn waɪn, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɡoʊ." wɛl, ət list ɪt dɪd nɑt tʃɹɛmbəl. "daɪɛlɪn, pliz ɛntɝteɪn ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝ, ən si ɪf jə kən əleɪ ðɛɹ fɪɹz. bɝdʒɪt, aɪ ɪkspɛk tə hɪɹ jəɹ plæn fəɹ ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ tənaɪt." ðə wɪmən ʃi neɪm blɪŋkt ɪn stɑɹɾəlmənt, nɑɾəd wɝdləsli.

Elayne tried for her most queenly voice. "Mistress Harfor, you will offer Master Taim and his men wine, before they go." Well, at least it did not tremble. "Dyelin, please entertain the Wavemistress and the Windfinder, and see if you can allay their fears. Birgitte, I expect to hear your plan for recruiting tonight." The women she named blinked in startlement, nodded wordlessly.

ðən ʃi wɔk fɹəm ðə ɹum, fɑloʊd baɪ neɪdɪɹ, wɪʃɪŋ ʃi cʊɾə dʌn bɛɾɝ. ðə læs θɪŋ ʃi hɝd bɪfɔɹ ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn əɹ wɑz zeɪɾəz vɔɪs. "stʃɹeɪnʒ kʌstəmz, jə ʃɔɹbaʊn hæv."

Then she walked from the room, followed by Nadere, wishing she could have done better. The last thing she heard before the door closed behind her was Zaida's voice. "Strange customs, you shorebound have."

ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə muv ə lɪɾəl fæstɝ, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi waɪl kipɪŋ ðə kloʊk fɹəm ɡeɪpɪŋ. ðə ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt flɔɹ taɪlz wɝ mʌtʃ koʊldɝ ðən ðə kɑɹpəts ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. ə fju sɝvəns, wɔɹmli bʌndəld ɪn ɡʊd wʊlən lɪvɝi, stɛɹd wən ðeɪ sɔ hɝ, ðən hɝiɾ ɑn əbaʊt ðɛɹ tæsks. ðə fleɪmz ə ðə stænd-læmps flɪkɝd; ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz dʒɹæfs ɪn ðə hɔlweɪz. əkeɪʒənəli ði ɛɹ stɝɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə wɔl hæŋɪŋ ɹɪpəl læzəli.

In the corridor she tried to move a little faster, though it was not easy while keeping the cloak from gaping. The red-and-white floor tiles were much colder than the carpets in the sitting room. A few servants, warmly bundled in good woolen livery, stared when they saw her, then hurried on about their tasks. The flames of the stand-lamps flickered; there were always drafts in the hallways. Occasionally the air stirred enough to make a wall hanging ripple lazily.

"ðæt wɑz ɑn pɝpəs, wɑzn ɪt?" ʃi sɛd tə neɪdɪɹ, nɑt ɹɪli æskɪŋ ə kwɛstʃən. "wɛnɛvɝ jə kɔl mi, juɾ əv meɪd ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv pipəl tə wɑtʃ. tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ədɑptɪŋ eɪvinhə wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪnʌf tə mi." ɪt hæd tə bi mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ðeɪ hæd bɪn toʊld. "wʌt dɪd jə də tə hɝ?" eɪvinhə sim tə hæv vɛɹi lɪɾəl mɑɾəsti səmtaɪmz, ɔfən wɔkɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ əpɑɹtməns ənkloʊðd ən ʌnkənsɝnd, nɑɾ ivən noʊɾɪsɪŋ wən sɝvəns ɛntɝd. meɪkɪŋ əɹ əndʒɹɛs ɪn ə kɹaʊd wʊɾə pɹuv nʌθɪŋ.

"That was on purpose, wasn't it?" she said to Nadere, not really asking a question. "Whenever you called me, you'd have made sure there were plenty of people to watch. To make sure adopting Aviendha was important enough to me." It had to be more important than anything else, they had been told. "What did you do to her?" Aviendha seemed to have very little modesty sometimes, often walking around her apartments unclothed and unconcerned, not even noticing when servants entered. Making her undress in a crowd would have proved nothing.

"ðæɾ ɪz fəɹ əɹ tə tɛl jə ɪf ʃi wɪʃɪz," neɪdɪɹ sɛd kəmpleɪsənli. "ju ɑɹ ʃɑɹp tə si ɪt; mɛni də nɑt." hɝ lɑɹdʒ bʊzəm hivd ɪn ə ɡɹʌn ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn ə læf. "ðoʊz mɛn, tɝnɪŋ ðɛɹ bæks, ən ðoʊz wɪmən, ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ju. aɪ wʊɾə pʊɾ ə stɑp tə ɪɾ ɪf ðə mæn ɪn ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd koʊt hæd nɑt kɛp lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ tə ædmaɪɹ jəɹ hɪps. ən ɪf jəɹ blʌʃəz hæd nɑt sɛd jə nu."

"That is for her to tell you if she wishes," Nadere said complacently. "You are sharp to see it; many do not." Her large bosom heaved in a grunt that might have been a laugh. "Those men, turning their backs, and those women, guarding you. I would have put a stop to it if the man in the embroidered coat had not kept looking over his shoulder to admire your hips. And if your blushes had not said you knew."

ɪleɪn mɪst ə stɛp ən stʌmbəld. ðə kloʊk flɛɹd, luzɪŋ ðə lɪɾəl bɑɾi wɔɹmθ ɪt hæd tʃɹæp bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd snætʃ ɪt kloʊzd əɡɛn. "ðæt fɪlθi pɪɡ-kɪsɝ!" ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "aɪl . . . ! əl . . . !" bɝn hɝ, wʌt kəd ʃi du? tɛl ɹænd? lɛɾ ɪm dil wɪð teɪm? nɛvɝ ɪn laɪf!

Elayne missed a step and stumbled. The cloak flared, losing the little body warmth it had trapped before she could snatch it closed again. "That filthy pig-kisser!" she growled. "I'll . . . ! I'll . . . !" Burn her, what could she do? Tell Rand? Let him deal with Taim? Never in life!

neɪdɪɹ aɪɾ əɹ kwɪtsɪkli. "moʊs mɛn ɛndʒɔɪ lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə wʊmənz bɑɾəm. stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt mɛn, ən stɑɹt θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə wʊmən jə wɑn fəɹ ə sɪstɝ."

Nadere eyed her quizzically. "Most men enjoy looking at a woman's bottom. Stop thinking about men, and start thinking about the woman you want for a sister."

flʌʃɪŋ əɡɛn, ɪleɪn pʊɾ əɹ maɪn ɑn eɪvinhə. ɪt dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə sɛɾəl əɹ nɝvz. ðəɹ wɝ spəsɪfɪk θɪŋz ʃi hæd bɪn toʊl tə θɪŋk ɑn bɪfɔɹ ðə sɛɹəmoʊni, ən səm meɪɾ əɹ ənizi.

Flushing again, Elayne put her mind on Aviendha. It did nothing to settle her nerves. There were specific things she had been told to think on before the ceremony, and some made her uneasy.

neɪdɪɹ kɛpt əɹ peɪs tə ɪleɪnz, ən ɪleɪn tʊk ɡɹeɪt kɛɹ nɑt tə lɛɾ əɹ lɛɡz flæʃ θɹu ðə kloʊks oʊpənɪŋ - ðəɹ wɝ sɝvəns ɛvɹiwɛɹ - soʊ ɪt tʊk əm səm lɪɾəl taɪm tə ɹitʃ ðə ɹum wɛɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ ɡæðɝd, mɔɹ ðən ə dʌzən ə ðɛm ɪn ðɛɹ bʌlki skɝts ən waɪt blaʊsəz ən dɑɹk ʃɔlz, dɛkt wɪð nɛkləsɪz ən bɹeɪslɪts ʌv ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ, dʒɛmz ən aɪvɝi, ðɛɹ lɔŋ hɛɹ hɛl bæk wɪð foʊldəd skɑɹvz. ɔl ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz ən kɑɹpəts hæd bɪn klɪɹɾ aʊt, livɪŋ bɛɹ waɪt flɔɹ taɪlz, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ faɪɝ ɑn ðə hɑɹθ. hɪɹ, dip ɪn ðə pæləs, wɪð noʊ wɪndoʊz, ðə kɹæʃ ə θʌndɝ wɑz bɛɹli ɑɾəbəl.

Nadere kept her pace to Elayne's, and Elayne took great care not to let her legs flash through the cloak's opening - there were servants everywhere - so it took them some little time to reach the room where the Wise Ones were gathered, more than a dozen of them in their bulky skirts and white blouses and dark shawls, decked with necklaces and bracelets of gold and silver, gems and ivory, their long hair held back with folded scarves. All the furnishings and carpets had been cleared out, leaving bare white floor tiles, and there was no fire on the hearth. Here, deep in the Palace, with no windows, the crash of thunder was barely audible.

ɪleɪnz aɪz wɛn stʃɹeɪt tə eɪvinhə, stændɪŋ ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum. neɪkəd. ʃi smaɪld əɾ ɪleɪn nɝvəsli. nɝvəsli! eɪvinhə! hɝidli θɹoʊɪŋ ɔf ðə kloʊk, ɪleɪn smaɪl bæk. nɝvəsli, ʃi ɹilaɪzd. eɪvinhə ɡeɪv ə sɑf læf, ən æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ɪleɪn dɪd, tu. laɪt, ði ɛɹ wɑz koʊld! ən ðə flɔɹ wɑz koʊldɝ!

Elayne's eyes went straight to Aviendha, standing on the far side of the room. Naked. She smiled at Elayne nervously. Nervously! Aviendha! Hurriedly throwing off the cloak, Elayne smiled back. Nervously, she realized. Aviendha gave a soft laugh, and after a moment, Elayne did, too. Light, the air was cold! And the floor was colder!

ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ moʊst ə ðə waɪz wʌnz ɪn ðə ɹum, bʌt wʌn feɪs dʒʌmpt ət hɝ. æmɪz' pɹimətʃʊɹli waɪt hɛɹ kəmbaɪnd wɪð fitʃɝz ðəɾ əpɪɹd ʃɔɹɾ ə ðɛɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz tə ɡɪv əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə lʊk ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi mʌst əv tʃɹævəl fɹəm kɛɹhin. ɛɡwin hæd bɪn titʃɪŋ ðə dʒɹimwɔkɝz, tə ɹipeɪ ðɛɹ titʃɪŋ əbaʊt tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ən tə miɾ ə dɛt, ʃi kleɪmd, ðoʊ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ meɪd klɪɹ wʌt dɛt.

She did not know most of the Wise Ones in the room, but one face jumped at her. Amys' prematurely white hair combined with features that appeared short of their middle years to give her something of the look of an Aes Sedai. She must have Traveled from Cairhien. Egwene had been teaching the dreamwalkers, to repay their teaching about Tel'aran'rhiod. And to meet a debt, she claimed, though she had never made clear what debt.

"aɪ hoʊp məleɪn wəd bi hɪɹ," ɪleɪn sɛd. ʃi laɪk beɪlz waɪf, ə wɔɹm ən dʒɛnɝəs wʊmən. nɑt laɪk tu ʌðɝz ɪn ðə ɹum ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd, boʊni teɪmɛlə wɪð əɹ æŋɡjəlɝ feɪs ən vinʒɹ, ə bjuɾəfəl, blu-aɪɾ iɡəl. boʊθ wɝ stʃɹɔŋɝ ɪn ðə paʊɝ ðən ʃi, stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛni sɪstɝ ʃi hæd mɛt seɪv nɪneɪiv. ðət wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə mæɾɝ əmʌŋ il, bʌt ʃi kəd θɪŋk ə noʊ ʌðɝ ɹizən waɪ ðeɪ ɔlweɪz snɪɹɾ ən lʊk daʊn ðɛɹ noʊzɪz wən ðeɪ sɔ hɝ.

"I hoped Melaine would be here," Elayne said. She liked Bael's wife, a warm and generous woman. Not like two others in the room she recognized, bony Tamela with her angular face and Viendre, a beautiful, blue-eyed eagle. Both were stronger in the Power than she, stronger than any sister she had met save Nynaeve. That was not supposed to matter among Aiel, but she could think of no other reason why they always sneered and looked down their noses when they saw her.

ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ æmɪz tə teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ - æmɪz ɔlweɪz dɪd, ɪt simd - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə ʃɔɹt wʊmən neɪmd mɑneɪəl, hɝ hɛɹ jɛloʊ wɪð hɪns ə ɹɛd, hu stɛp fɔɹwɝd. nɑt tʃɹuli ʃɔɹt, jɛt stɪl ði oʊnli wʊmən ɪn ðə ɹum ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɪleɪn. ən ðə wikəst ɪn ðə paʊɝ, tu, bɛɹli stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf, hæd ʃi ɡɔn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, tə hæv ɝn ðə ʃɔl. pɝhæps ðət ɹɪli dɪd nɑt kaʊnt wɪð il.

She expected Amys to take charge - Amys always did, it seemed - but it was a short woman named Monaelle, her hair yellow with hints of red, who stepped forward. Not truly short, yet still the only woman in the room shorter than Elayne. And the weakest in the Power, too, barely strong enough, had she gone to Tar Valon, to have earned the shawl. Perhaps that really did not count with Aiel.

"wɝ məleɪn hɪɹ," mɑneɪəl sɛd, hɝ toʊn bɹɪsk bʌt nɑɾ ənfɹɛnli, "ðə beɪbz ʃi kæɹiz wəd bi pɑɹɾ ə ðə bɑn bɪtwin jə ən eɪvinhə, ɪf ðə wivz bɹʌʃt ðɛm. ɪf ðeɪ sɝvaɪvd, ðəɾ ɪz; ði ʌnbɔɹn ɑɹ nɑt stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ ðɪs. ðə kwɛstʃən ɪz, ɑɹ ðə tu ʌv ju?" ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd wɪð boʊθ hænz, pɔɪntɪŋ tə spɑts ɑn ðə flɔɹ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm hɝ. "kʌm hɪɹ tə ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ, boʊθ ə ju."

"Were Melaine here," Monaelle said, her tone brisk but not unfriendly, "the babes she carries would be part of the bond between you and Aviendha, if the weaves brushed them. If they survived, that is; the unborn are not strong enough for this. The question is, are the two of you?" She gestured with both hands, pointing to spots on the floor not far from her. "Come here to the middle of the chamber, both of you."

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ɪleɪn ɹilaɪz ðət seɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz tə bi pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs. ʃi hæd θɔɾ ɪt wəd bi dʒʌst ə sɛɹəmoʊni, plɛdʒɪz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd, pɝhæps oʊðz ɡɪvən. wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən? ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ, ɪksɛpt . . . hɝ stɛps dʒɹæɡd əz ʃi muv təwɔɹd mɑneɪəl. "maɪ wɔɹɾɝ. . . . əɹ bɑnd. . . . wɪl ʃi bi . . . əfɛktəd . . . baɪ ðɪs?" eɪvinhə, kʌmɪŋ tə feɪs hɝ, hæd fɹaʊnd wən ɪleɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bʌɾ ət ðə kwɛstʃən, ʃi swʌŋ stɑɹɾəld aɪz tə mɑneɪəl. klɪɹli, ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʃi hæd nɑt θɔɾ ʌv.

For the first time, Elayne realized that saidar was to be part of this. She had thought it would be just a ceremony, pledges exchanged, perhaps oaths given. What was going to happen? It did not matter, except . . . Her steps dragged as she moved toward Monaelle. "My Warder. . . . Our bond. . . . Will she be . . . affected . . . by this?" Aviendha, coming to face her, had frowned when Elayne hesitated, but at the question, she swung startled eyes to Monaelle. Clearly, it was something she had not thought of.

ðə ʃɔɹt waɪz wʌn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "noʊ wʌn aʊtsaɪd ðɪs tʃeɪmbɝ kən bi tʌtʃt baɪ ðə wivz. ʃi meɪ sɛns səm pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt jə ʃɛɹ wɪð itʃ ʌðɝ, kəz ə hɝ bɑnd wɪð ju, bʌɾ oʊnli ə vɛɹi lɪɾəl." eɪvinhə hivd ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif ðəɾ ɪleɪn ɛkoʊd.

The short Wise One shook her head. "No one outside this chamber can be touched by the weaves. She may sense some part of what you share with each other, because of her bond with you, but only a very little." Aviendha heaved a sigh of relief that Elayne echoed.

"naʊ," mɑneɪəl wɛn ɑn. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ fɔɹmz tə bi fɑloʊd. kʌm. wəɹ nɑt klæn tʃifs dɪskʌsɪŋ wɔɾɝ-plɛdʒɪz oʊvɝ uskaɪ." læfɪŋ, meɪkɪŋ wʌt sim tə bi dʒoʊks əbaʊt klæn tʃifs ən ðə stʃɹɔŋ il lɪkɝ, ði ʌðɝ wɪmən fɔɹmd ə sɝkəl ɝaʊn eɪvinhə ən ɪleɪn. mɑneɪəl sɛɾəld ɡɹeɪsfəli tə ðə flɔɹ, sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəd tu peɪsɪz tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə bɛɹ wɪmən. læftɝ sist əz əɹ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm fɔɹməl. "wi ɑɹ ɡæðɝd kəz tu wɪmən wɪʃ tə bi fɝst-sɪstɝz. wɪl si wɛðɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf, ən ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ, hɛlp ðɛm. ɑɹ ðɛɹ mʌðɝz pɹɛzənt?"

"Now," Monaelle went on. "There are forms to be followed. Come. We are not clan chiefs discussing water-pledges over oosquai." Laughing, making what seemed to be jokes about clan chiefs and the strong Aiel liquor, the other women formed a circle around Aviendha and Elayne. Monaelle settled gracefully to the floor, sitting cross-legged two paces to one side of the bare women. Laughter ceased as her voice became formal. "We are gathered because two women wish to be first-sisters. We will see whether they are strong enough, and if they are, help them. Are their mothers present?"

ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, bʌt ðə nɛks moʊmən vinʒɹ wɑz bɪhaɪn hɝ. "aɪ stæn fəɹ ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənz mʌðɝ, hu kænɑt bi hɪɹ." hænz ɑn ɪleɪnz ʃoʊldɝz, vinʒɹ pʊʃt əɹ fɔɹwɝɾ ən pɹɛs daʊn əntɪl ʃi wɑz nilɪŋ ɑn ðə koʊl taɪlz ɪn fɹʌn ʌv eɪvinhə, ðən nɛl bɪhaɪn hɝ. "aɪ ɔfɝ maɪ dɔɾɝ tə hɝ tɛstɪŋ."

Elayne gave a start, but the next moment Viendre was behind her. "I stand for Elayne Trakand's mother, who cannot be here." Hands on Elayne's shoulders, Viendre pushed her forward and pressed down until she was kneeling on the cold tiles in front of Aviendha, then knelt behind her. "I offer my daughter to her testing."

teɪmɛlə əpɪɹd bɪhaɪn eɪvinhə, pɹɛsɪŋ əɹ daʊn wɪð əɹ niz ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃɪŋ ɪleɪnz, nilɪŋ əɾ əɹ bæk. "aɪ stæn fəɹ eɪvinhəz mʌðɝ, hu kænɑt bi hɪɹ. aɪ ɔfɝ maɪ dɔɾɝ tə hɝ tɛstɪŋ."

Tamela appeared behind Aviendha, pressing her down with her knees almost touching Elayne's, kneeling at her back. "I stand for Aviendha's mother, who cannot be here. I offer my daughter to her testing."

ənʌðɝ taɪm, ɪleɪn maɪɾ əv ɡɪɡəld. niðɝ wʊmən lʊk mɔɹ ðən ə hæf-dʌzən jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən eɪvinhə əɹ hɝ. ənʌðɝ taɪm. nɑt naʊ. ðə stændɪŋ waɪz wʌnz wɔɹ sɑləm feɪsəz. ðeɪ wɝ stʌɾiɪŋ əɹ ən eɪvinhə əz ɪf weɪɪŋ ðɛm, ənʃʊɹ ðeɪ wəd mɛʒɝ ʌp.

Another time, Elayne might have giggled. Neither woman looked more than a half-dozen years older than Aviendha or her. Another time. Not now. The standing Wise Ones wore solemn faces. They were studying her and Aviendha as if weighing them, unsure they would measure up.

"hu wɪl sʌfɝ ðə pæŋz ə bɝθ fəɹ ðɛm?" mɑneɪəl æskt, ən æmɪz stɛp fɔɹwɝd.

"Who will suffer the pangs of birth for them?" Monaelle asked, and Amys stepped forward.

tu ʌðɝz keɪm wɪð hɝ, ə faɪɝi ɹɛdhɛd neɪmd ʃaɪændə, hum ɪleɪn hæd sin wɪð məleɪn, ən ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ. ðeɪ hɛlpt æmɪz stʃɹɪp tə hɝ skɪn. pɹaʊɾ ɪn əɹ neɪkədnəs, æmɪz feɪs mɑneɪəl ən slæpt əɹ tɔt bɛli. "aɪ hæv bɔɹn tʃɪlʒɹən. aɪ hæv ɡɪvən sʌk," ʃi sɛd, kʌpɪŋ bɹɛsts ðət lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ ə ðə kaɪnd. "aɪ ɔfɝ maɪsɛlf."

Two others came with her, a fiery redhead named Shyanda, whom Elayne had seen with Melaine, and a graying woman she did not know. They helped Amys strip to her skin. Proud in her nakedness, Amys faced Monaelle and slapped her taut belly. "I have borne children. I have given suck," she said, cupping breasts that looked as if she had done nothing of the kind. "I offer myself."

ət mɑneɪəlz dɪɡnəfaɪd nɑɾ ʌv æksɛptəns, æmɪz wɛn tə hɝ niz tu peɪsɪz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə ən sɛɾəld bæk ɑn əɹ hilz. ʃaɪændə ən ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ waɪz wʌn nɛl flæŋkɪŋ hɝ, ən sʌɾənli ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ sɝaʊndəɾ ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪn ðə ɹum ɪksɛpt ɪleɪn, eɪvinhə ən æmɪz.

At Monaelle's dignified nod of acceptance, Amys went to her knees two paces on the other side of Elayne and Aviendha and settled back on her heels. Shyanda and the graying Wise One knelt flanking her, and suddenly the glow of the Power surrounded every woman in the room except Elayne, Aviendha and Amys.

ɪleɪn tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ən sɔ eɪvinhə də ðə seɪm. əkeɪʒənəli ə bɹeɪslət klɪkt əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ əmʌŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz, ði oʊnli saʊn ɪn ðə ɹum bɪɑn bɹiðɪŋ, ən feɪnt, dɪstən θʌndɝ. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst ə ʃɑk wən mɑneɪəl spoʊk.

Elayne took a deep breath, and saw Aviendha do the same. Occasionally a bracelet clicked against another among the Wise Ones, the only sound in the room beyond breathing, and faint, distant thunder. It was almost a shock when Monaelle spoke.

"ju wɪl boʊθ də əz jə ɑɹ ɪnstʃɹʌktəd. ɪf jə weɪvɝ əɹ kwɛstʃən, jəɹ dɛɾəkeɪʃən ɪz nɑt stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf. əl sɛn jə əweɪ, ən ðət wɪl bi ði ɛn ʌv ɪt, fɝɛvɝ. əl æsk kwɛstʃənz, ən jəl ænsɝ tʃɹuθfəli. ɪf jə ɹəfjuz tə ænsɝ, jəl bi sɛn əweɪ. ɪf ɛni hɪɹ θɪŋk jə laɪ, jəl bi sɛn əweɪ. jə meɪ liv əɾ ɛni taɪm ɑn jəɹ oʊn, ʌv kɔɹs. wɪtʃ ɔlsoʊ wɪl ɛn ðɪs fəɹ ɔl taɪm. ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ sɛkən tʃænsəz hɪɹ. naʊ. wʌɾ ɪz ðə bɛs jə noʊ ʌv ðə wʊmən jə wɑn fəɹ ə fɝst-sɪstɝ?"

"You will both do as you are instructed. If you waver or question, your dedication is not strong enough. I will send you away, and that will be the end of it, forever. I will ask questions, and you will answer truthfully. If you refuse to answer, you will be sent away. If any here think you lie, you will be sent away. You may leave at any time on your own, of course. Which also will end this for all time. There are no second chances here. Now. What is the best you know of the woman you want for a first-sister?"

ɪleɪn hæf-ɪkspɛktəd ðə kwɛstʃən. ðɪs wɑz wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz ʃi hæd bɪn toʊl tə θɪŋk əbaʊt. tʃuzɪŋ wʌn vɝtʃu əmʌŋ mɛni hæd nɑt bɪn izi, jɛt ʃi hæɾ əɹ ænsɝ ɹɛɾi. wən ʃi spoʊk, floʊz ə seɪaɪdɑɹ sʌɾənli woʊv təɡɛðɝ bɪtwin əɹ ən eɪvinhə, ən noʊ saʊn keɪm fɹəm əɹ tʌŋ, əɹ eɪvinhəz. wɪθaʊt θɔt, ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝ maɪn tʌkt əweɪ ðə wivz; ivən naʊ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɝn wɑz əz mʌtʃ ə pɑɹɾ ə hɝ əz ðə kʌlɝ ə hɝ aɪz. ðə wivz vænɪʃt əz əɹ lɪps kloʊzd.

Elayne half-expected the question. This was one of the things she had been told to think about. Choosing one virtue among many had not been easy, yet she had her answer ready. When she spoke, flows of saidar suddenly wove together between her and Aviendha, and no sound came from her tongue, or Aviendha's. Without thought, a part of her mind tucked away the weaves; even now, trying to learn was as much a part of her as the color of her eyes. The weaves vanished as her lips closed.

"eɪvinhə ɪz soʊ kɑnfəɾənt, soʊ pɹaʊd. ʃi dʌzn kɛɹ wʌɾ ɛniwʌn θɪŋks ʃi ʃəd du, əɹ bi; ʃiz u ʃi wɑns tə bi," ɪleɪn hɝɾ əɹ oʊn vɔɪs seɪ, waɪl eɪvinhəz wɝdz sʌɾənli wɝ ɑɾəbəl ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "ivən wən ɪleɪn ɪz soʊ əfɹeɪd ðəɾ əɹ maʊθ dʒɹaɪz, hɝ spɪɹət wɪl nɑt bɛnd. ʃiz bɹeɪvɝ ðən ɛniwʌn aɪ hæv ɛvɝ noʊn."

"Aviendha is so confident, so proud. She doesn't care what anyone thinks she should do, or be; she is who she wants to be," Elayne heard her own voice say, while Aviendha's words suddenly were audible at the same time. "Even when Elayne is so afraid that her mouth dries, her spirit will not bend. She is braver than anyone I have ever known."

ɪleɪn stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ fɹɛnd. eɪvinhə θɔt ʃi wɑz bɹeɪv? laɪt, ʃi wɑz noʊ kaʊɝd, bʌt bɹeɪv? stʃɹeɪnʒli, eɪvinhə wɑz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɪn dɪsbɪlif.

Elayne stared at her friend. Aviendha thought she was brave? Light, she was no coward, but brave? Strangely, Aviendha was staring at her in disbelief.

"kɝədʒ ɪz ə wɛl," vinʒɹ sɛɾ əɾ ɪleɪnz ɪɹ, "dip ɪn sʌm, ʃæloʊ ɪn ʌðɝz. dip əɹ ʃæloʊ, wɛlz ɡoʊ dʒɹaɪ ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ivən ɪf ðeɪ fɪl əɡɛn leɪɾɝ. jəl feɪs wʌt jə kænɑt feɪs. jəɹ spaɪn wɪl tɝn tə dʒɛli, ən jəɹ vɔntɪd kɝədʒ wɪl liv jə wipɪŋ ɪn ðə dʌst. ðə deɪ wɪl kʌm." ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɑntəd tə bi ðəɹ tə si ɪt kʌm. ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ə kɝt nɑd. ʃi nu ɔl əbaʊɾ əɹ spaɪn tɝnɪŋ tə dʒɛli; ʃi fɔɾ ɪɾ ɛvɹi deɪ, ɪt simd.

"Courage is a well," Viendre said at Elayne's ear, "deep in some, shallow in others. Deep or shallow, wells go dry eventually, even if they fill again later. You will face what you cannot face. Your spine will turn to jelly, and your vaunted courage will leave you weeping in the dust. The day will come." She sounded as though she wanted to be there to see it come. Elayne gave a curt nod. She knew all about her spine turning to jelly; she fought it every day, it seemed.

teɪmɛlə wɑz spikɪŋ tə eɪvinhə, ɪn ə vɔɪs ɔlmoʊst əz sæɾəsfaɪd əz vinʒɹz. "dʒiɾoʊ baɪnz jə laɪk bænz ə stil. fəɹ dʒi, jə meɪk jɝsɛlf ɪɡzækli wʌɾ ɪz ɪkspɛktəɾ ə ju, tə ðə læs hɛɹ. fəɹ toʊ, ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi jəl əbeɪs jɝsɛlf ən kɹɔl ɑn jəɹ bɛli. kəz jə kɛɹ tə jəɹ boʊnz wʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn θɪŋks ə ju."

Tamela was speaking to Aviendha, in a voice almost as satisfied as Viendre's. "Ji'e'toh binds you like bands of steel. For ji, you make yourself exactly what is expected of you, to the last hair. For toh, if necessary you will abase yourself and crawl on your belly. Because you care to your bones what everyone thinks of you."

ɪleɪn nɪɹli ɡæspt. ðət wɑz hɑɹʃ, ən ənfɛɹ. ʃi nu sʌmθɪŋ ə dʒiɾoʊ, bʌɾ eɪvinhə wɑz nɑt laɪk ðæt. jɛɾ eɪvinhə wɑz nɑɾɪŋ, mʌtʃ əz ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd. ən ɪmpeɪʃən æksɛptəns ʌv wʌt ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi nu.

Elayne nearly gasped. That was harsh, and unfair. She knew something of ji'e'toh, but Aviendha was not like that. Yet Aviendha was nodding, much as she herself had. An impatient acceptance of what she already knew.

"faɪn tʃɹeɪts tə lʌv ɪn ə fɝst-sɪstɝ," mɑneɪəl sɛd, lɪftɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl daʊn tə hɝ ɛlboʊz, "bʌt wʌt dʒju faɪnd wɝst ɪn hɝ?"

"Fine traits to love in a first-sister," Monaelle said, lifting her shawl down to her elbows, "but what do you find worst in her?"

ɪleɪn ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ tʃɪlɪŋ niz, lɪkt əɹ lɪps bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. ʃi hæd dʒɹɛɾɪd ðɪs. ɪt wɑz nɑt dʒʌs mɑneɪəlz wɔɹnɪŋ. eɪvinhə hæd sɛd ðeɪ mʌst spik ðə tʃɹuθ. mʌst, əɹ wʌt wɑz sɪstɝhʊd wɝθ? əɡɛn ðə wivz hɛl ðɛɹ wɝdz kæptɪv əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ dʌn.

Elayne shifted on her chilling knees, licked her lips before speaking. She had dreaded this. It was not just Monaelle's warning. Aviendha had said they must speak the truth. Must, or what was sisterhood worth? Again the weaves held their words captive until they were done.

"eɪvinhə . . ." ɪleɪnz vɔɪs sɛd sʌɾənli, hɛzɪɾəntli. "ʃi . . . ʃi θɪŋks vaɪələns ɪz ɔlweɪz ði ænsɝ. ət taɪmz, ʃi woʊn θɪŋk bɪɑn əɹ bɛl naɪf. ət taɪmz, ʃiz laɪk ə bɔɪ hu woʊnt ɡɹoʊ ʌp!"

"Aviendha . . ." Elayne's voice said suddenly, hesitantly. "She . . . she thinks violence is always the answer. At times, she won't think beyond her belt knife. At times, she's like a boy who won't grow up!"

"ɪleɪn noʊz ðət . . ." eɪvinhəz vɔɪs bɪɡæn, ðən ɡʌlpt ən wɛn ɑn ɪn ə ɹʌʃ. "ʃi noʊz ʃiz bjuɾəfəl, noʊz ðə paʊɝ ɪt ɡɪvz əɹ oʊvɝ mɛn. ʃi ɪkspoʊzɪz hæf əɹ bʊzəm səmtaɪmz, ɪn ði oʊpən ɛɹ, ən ʃi smaɪlz tə meɪk mɛn də wʌt ʃi wɑns."

"Elayne knows that . . ." Aviendha's voice began, then gulped and went on in a rush. "She knows she is beautiful, knows the power it gives her over men. She exposes half her bosom sometimes, in the open air, and she smiles to make men do what she wants."

ɪleɪn ɡeɪpt. eɪvinhə θɔt ðəɾ ə hɝ? ɪt meɪɾ əɹ saʊn ə laɪt-skɝt! eɪvinhə fɹaʊn bæk ən hæf-oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt teɪmɛlə pɹɛst əɹ ʃoʊldɝz əɡɛn ən bɪɡæn tə spik.

Elayne gaped. Aviendha thought that of her? It made her sound a light-skirt! Aviendha frowned back and half-opened her mouth, but Tamela pressed her shoulders again and began to speak.

"ju θɪŋk mɛn də nɑt stɛɹ ət jəɹ feɪs ɪn əpɹuvəl?" ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛdʒ ɪn ðə waɪz wʌnz vɔɪs; stʃɹɔŋ wɑz ðə bɛst ɛniwʌn wəɾ ɛvɝ seɪ ʌv əɹ feɪs. "du ðeɪ nɑt lʊk ət jəɹ bɹɛsts ɪn ðə swɛt tɛnt? ædmaɪɹ jəɹ hɪps? jə ɑɹ bjuɾəfəl, ən jə noʊ ɪt. dɪnaɪ ɪt, ən dɪnaɪ jɝsɛlf! juv teɪkən plɛʒɝ ɪn mɛnz lʊks, ən smaɪld ət ðɛm. wɪl jə nɛvɝ smaɪl əɾ ə mæn tə ɡɪv jəɹ ɑɹɡjəməns mɔɹ weɪt, əɹ tʌtʃ ɪz ɑɹm tə dɪstʃɹækt ɪm fɹəm ðə wiknəs ə jəɹ ɑɹɡjəməns? jə wɪl, ən jəl bi noʊ lɛs fəɹ ɪt."

"You think men do not stare at your face in approval?" There was an edge in the Wise One's voice; strong was the best anyone would ever say of her face. "Do they not look at your breasts in the sweat tent? Admire your hips? You are beautiful, and you know it. Deny it, and deny yourself! You have taken pleasure in men's looks, and smiled at them. Will you never smile at a man to give your arguments more weight, or touch his arm to distract him from the weakness of your arguments? You will, and you will be no less for it."

ɹɛd flʌɾəd eɪvinhəz tʃiks, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wɑz hævɪŋ tə lɪsən tə vinʒɹ. ən faɪt blʌʃəz ə hɝ oʊn. "ðɛɹ ɪz vaɪələns ɪn ju. dɪnaɪ ɪt, ən dɪnaɪ jɝsɛlf. hæv jə nɛvɝ ɹeɪdʒd ən stʃɹʌk aʊt? hæv jə nɛvɝ dʒɹɔn blʌd? hæv jə nɛvɝ wɪʃt tə? wɪθaʊt kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ənʌðɝ weɪ? wɪθaʊɾ ɛni θɔɾ əɾ ɔl? waɪl jə bɹið, ðət wɪl bi pɑɹɾ ə ju." ɪleɪn θɔɾ ə teɪm, ən ʌðɝ taɪmz, ən əɹ feɪs fɛlt laɪk ə fɝnəs.

Red flooded Aviendha's cheeks, but Elayne was having to listen to Viendre. And fight blushes of her own. "There is violence in you. Deny it, and deny yourself. Have you never raged and struck out? Have you never drawn blood? Have you never wished to? Without considering another way? Without any thought at all? While you breathe, that will be part of you." Elayne thought of Taim, and other times, and her face felt like a furnace.

ðɪs taɪm, ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən wʌn ɹɪspɑns.

This time, there was more than one response.

"jɔɹ ɑɹmz wɪl ɡɹoʊ wik," teɪmɛlə wɑz tɛlɪŋ eɪvinhə. "jɔɹ lɛɡz wɪl luz ðɛɹ swɪfnəs. ə juθ wɪl bi eɪbəl tə teɪk ðə naɪf fɹəm jəɹ hænd. haʊ wɪl skɪl əɹ fɝɑsəɾi əveɪl jə ðɛn? hɑɹɾ ən maɪn ɑɹ ðə tʃɹu wɛpənz. bʌt dɪd jə lɝn tə juz ðə spɪɹ ɪn ə deɪ, wən jə wɝ ə meɪɾən? ɪf jə də nɑt hoʊn maɪn ən hɑɹt naʊ, jəl ɡɹoʊ oʊld ən tʃɪlʒɹən wɪl bɪfʌɾəl jəɹ wɪts. klæn tʃifs wɪl sɪt jə ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ tə pleɪ kæts kɹeɪɾəl, ən wən jə spik, ɔl wɪl hɪɹ oʊnli ðə wɪnd. teɪk hid waɪl jə kæn."

"Your arms will grow weak," Tamela was telling Aviendha. "Your legs will lose their swiftness. A youth will be able to take the knife from your hand. How will skill or ferocity avail you then? Heart and mind are the true weapons. But did you learn to use the spear in a day, when you were a Maiden? If you do not hone mind and heart now, you will grow old and children will befuddle your wits. Clan chiefs will sit you in a corner to play cat's cradle, and when you speak, all will hear only the wind. Take heed while you can."

"bjuɾi fliz," vinʒɹ wɛn ɑn, tə ɪleɪn. "jɪɹz wɪl meɪk jəɹ bɹɛsts sæɡ, jəɹ flɛʃ ɡɹoʊ slæk, jəɹ skɪn ɡɹoʊ lɛðɝi. mɛn u smaɪl tə si jəɹ feɪs wɪl spik tə jə əz ɪf jə wɝ dʒʌst ənʌðɝ mæn. jəɹ hʌzbən meɪ si jə ɔlweɪz əz ðə fɝs taɪm ɪz aɪz kɑt ju, bʌt noʊ ʌðɝ mæn wɪl dʒɹim ə ju. wɪl jə noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bi ju? jəɹ bɑɾi ɪz oʊnli kloʊðɪŋ. jəɹ flɛʃ wɪl wɪðɝ, bʌt jə ɑɹ jəɹ hɑɹɾ ən maɪnd, ən ðeɪ də nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ɪksɛp tə ɡɹoʊ stʃɹɔŋɝ."

"Beauty flees," Viendre went on, to Elayne. "Years will make your breasts sag, your flesh grow slack, your skin grow leathery. Men who smiled to see your face will speak to you as if you were just another man. Your husband may see you always as the first time his eyes caught you, but no other man will dream of you. Will you no longer be you? Your body is only clothing. Your flesh will wither, but you are your heart and mind, and they do not change except to grow stronger."

ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. nɑɾ ɪn dɪnaɪəl. nɑt ɹɪli. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ θɔɾ ɑn eɪdʒɪŋ, ðoʊ. ɪspɛʃli nɑt sɪns ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə taʊɝ. ðə jɪɹz leɪ laɪtli ivən ɑn vɛɹi oʊld ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt wʌɾ ɪf ʃi lɪvd əz lɔŋ əz ðə kɪnswɪmən? ðət wəd min ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt wʌɾ ɪf ʃi dɪd? ðə kɪn tʊk ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm tə ɡɹoʊ ɹɪŋkəlz, bʌt ɡɹoʊ ðɛm ðeɪ dɪd. wʌt wɑz eɪvinhə θɪŋkɪŋ? ʃi nɛl ðəɹ lʊkɪŋ . . . sʌlən.

Elayne shook her head. Not in denial. Not really. She had never thought on aging, though. Especially not since going to the Tower. The years lay lightly even on very old Aes Sedai. But what if she lived as long as the Kinswomen? That would mean giving up being Aes Sedai, of course, but what if she did? The Kin took a very long time to grow wrinkles, but grow them they did. What was Aviendha thinking? She knelt there looking . . . sullen.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðə moʊs tʃaɪldɪʃ θɪŋ jə noʊ ʌv ðə wʊmən jə wɑn fəɹ ə fɝst-sɪstɝ?" mɑneɪəl sɛd.

"What is the most childish thing you know of the woman you want for a first-sister?" Monaelle said.

ðɪs wɑz iziɝ, nɑt soʊ fɹɔt. ɪleɪn ivən smaɪld əz ʃi spoʊk. eɪvinhə ɡɹɪn bæk, sʌlənnəs ɡɔn. əɡɛn ðə wivz tʊk ðɛɹ wɝdz ən ɹilist əm təɡɛðɝ, vɔɪsəz wɪð læftɝ ɪn ðɛm.

This was easier, not so fraught. Elayne even smiled as she spoke. Aviendha grinned back, sullenness gone. Again the weaves took their words and released them together, voices with laughter in them.

"eɪvinhə woʊn lemi titʃ əɹ tə swɪm. aɪv tʃɹaɪd. ʃi ɪzən əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ, ɪksɛpt ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪndə mɔɹ wɔɾɝ ðən ə bæθtəb."

"Aviendha won't let me teach her to swim. I've tried. She isn't afraid of anything, except getting into more water than a bathtub."

"ɪleɪn ɡɑbəlz swits wɪð boʊθ hænz laɪk ə tʃaɪl huz ɪskeɪpt əɹ mʌðɝz aɪ. ɪf ʃi kips ɑn, ʃɪl bi fæɾ əz ə pɪɡ bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɡɹoʊz oʊld."

"Elayne gobbles sweets with both hands like a child who's escaped her mother's eye. If she keeps on, she will be fat as a pig before she grows old."

ɪleɪn dʒɝkt. ɡɑbəlz? ɡɑbəlz? ə teɪst, naʊ ən ðɛn, wɑz ɔl ʃi tʊk. dʒʌs naʊ ən ðɛn. fæt? waɪ wɑz eɪvinhə ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət hɝ? ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə stɛp ɪndə wɔɾɝ mɔɹ ðən ni-dip wɑz tʃaɪldɪʃ.

Elayne jerked. Gobbles? Gobbles? A taste, now and then, was all she took. Just now and then. Fat? Why was Aviendha glaring at her? Refusing to step into water more than knee-deep was childish.

mɑneɪəl kʌvɝɾ ə slaɪt kɑf wɪð wʌn hænd, bʌɾ ɪleɪn θɔt ʃi wɑz haɪɾɪŋ ə smaɪl. səm ə ðə stændɪŋ waɪz wʌnz læft aʊtʃɹaɪt. əɾ eɪvinhəz sɪlinəs? əɹ əɹ . . . ɡɑbəlɪŋ?

Monaelle covered a slight cough with one hand, but Elayne thought she was hiding a smile. Some of the standing Wise Ones laughed outright. At Aviendha's silliness? Or her . . . gobbling?

mɑneɪəl ɹɪzum dɪɡnəɾi, ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ skɝts spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ə tʌtʃ ə mɝθ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ ɡɹeɪɾəst dʒɛləsi ʌv ðə wʊmən jə wɑn fəɹ ə fɝst-sɪstɝ?"

Monaelle resumed dignity, adjusting her skirts spread out on the floor, but there was still a touch of mirth in her voice. "What is your greatest jealousy of the woman you want for a first-sister?"

pɝhæps ɪleɪn wʊɾə hɛdʒd əɹ ænsɝ dɪspaɪt ðə ɹɪkwaɪɹmən fəɹ tʃɹuθ. tʃɹuθ hæd dʒʌmpt ʌp əz sun əz ʃi wɑz toʊl tə θɪŋk ɑn ðɪs, bʌt ʃi hæd faʊn sʌmθɪŋ smɔlɝ, lɛs ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ fəɹ əm boʊθ, ðət wʊɾə pæs mʌstɝ. pɝhæps. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ðəɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ smaɪlɪŋ ət mɛn ən ɪkspoʊzɪŋ əɹ bʊzəm. meɪbi ʃi dɪd smaɪl, bʌɾ eɪvinhə wɔkt ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹɛd-feɪst sɝvɪŋmən wɪθaʊɾ ə stɪtʃ ɑn ən sim nɑɾ ivən tə si ðɛm! soʊ ʃi ɡɑbəl kændi, dɪd ʃi? ʃi wɑz gɑnə ɡɛt fæt? ʃi spoʊk ðə bɪɾɝ tʃɹuθ waɪl ðə wivz tʊk əɹ wɝdz ən eɪvinhəz maʊθ muvd ɪn ɡɹɪm saɪləns, əntɪl ət læst wʌt ðeɪ hæd sɛd wɑz lust.

Perhaps Elayne would have hedged her answer despite the requirement for truth. Truth had jumped up as soon as she was told to think on this, but she had found something smaller, less embarrassing for them both, that would have passed muster. Perhaps. But there was that about her smiling at men and exposing her bosom. Maybe she did smile, but Aviendha walked in front of red-faced servingmen without a stitch on and seemed not even to see them! So she gobbled candy, did she? She was going to get fat? She spoke the bitter truth while the weaves took her words and Aviendha's mouth moved in grim silence, until at last what they had said was loosed.

"eɪvinhə hæz leɪn ɪn ði ɑɹmz ə ðə mæn aɪ lʌv. aɪ nɛvɝ hæv; aɪ meɪ nɛvɝ, ən aɪ kəd wip oʊvɝ ɪt!"

"Aviendha has lain in the arms of the man I love. I never have; I may never, and I could weep over it!"

"ɪleɪn əz ðə lʌv ə ɹænd ælθ . . . ʌv ɹænd. maɪ hɑɹɾ ɪz dʌs fəɹ wɑntɪŋ ɪm tə lʌv mi, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt noʊ ɪf i ɛvɝ wɪl."

"Elayne has the love of Rand al'Th . . . of Rand. My heart is dust for wanting him to love me, but I do not know if he ever will."

ɪleɪn pɪɹɾ ɪndə eɪvinhəz ənɹiɾəbəl feɪs. ʃi wɑz dʒɛləs ə hɝ oʊvɝ ɹænd? wən ðə mæn əvɔɪɾəd ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən əz ɪf ʃi hæd skæbiz? ʃi hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ mɔɹ θɔt.

Elayne peered into Aviendha's unreadable face. She was jealous of her over Rand? When the man avoided Elayne Trakand as if she had scabies? She had no time for more thought.

"stʃɹaɪk əɹ əz hɑɹɾ əz jə kən wɪð jəɹ oʊpən hænd," teɪmɛlə toʊld eɪvinhə, ɹimuvɪŋ əɹ oʊn hænz fɹəm eɪvinhəz ʃoʊldɝz.

"Strike her as hard as you can with your open hand," Tamela told Aviendha, removing her own hands from Aviendha's shoulders.

vinʒɹ skwizd ɪleɪnz laɪtli. "du nɑt dɪfɛn jɝsɛlf." ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn toʊld ɛniθɪŋ ə ðɪs! ʃʊɹli, eɪvinhə wəd nɑt -  blɪŋkɪŋ, ɪleɪn pʊʃt hɝsɛlf ʌp fɹəm ði aɪsi flɔɹ taɪlz. dʒɪnʒɝli ʃi fɛlt əɹ tʃik, ən wɪnst. ʃi wɑz gɑnə wɛɹ ə pɑm pɹɪn ðə ɹɛst ə ðə deɪ. ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑɾ əv tə hɪɾ əɹ ðət hɑɹd.

Viendre squeezed Elayne's lightly. "Do not defend yourself." They had not been told anything of this! Surely, Aviendha would not -  Blinking, Elayne pushed herself up from the icy floor tiles. Gingerly she felt her cheek, and winced. She was going to wear a palm print the rest of the day. The woman did not have to hit her that hard.

ɛvɹiwʌn weɪɾəd əntɪl ʃi wɑz nilɪŋ əɡɛn, ən ðən vinʒɹ lin kloʊsɝ. "stʃɹaɪk əɹ əz hɑɹɾ əz jə kən wɪð jəɹ oʊpən hænd."

Everyone waited until she was kneeling again, and then Viendre leaned closer. "Strike her as hard as you can with your open hand."

wɛl, ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə nɑk eɪvinhə ɑn əɹ ɪɹ. ʃi wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə - hɝ fʊl-ɑɹm slæp sɛn eɪvinhə spɹɔlɪŋ, slaɪɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ tʃɛst əkɹɔs ðə taɪlz ɔlmoʊs tə mɑneɪəl. ɪleɪnz pɑm stʌŋ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz əɹ tʃik.

Well, she was not going to knock Aviendha on her ear. She was not going to - Her full-armed slap sent Aviendha sprawling, sliding on her chest across the tiles almost to Monaelle. Elayne's palm stung almost as much as her cheek.

eɪvinhə hæf pʊʃt hɝsɛlf ʌp, ɡeɪv əɹ hɛɾ ə ʃeɪk, ðən skɹæmbəl bæk tə hɝ pəzɪʃən. ən teɪmɛlə sɛd, "stʃɹaɪk əɹ wɪð ði ʌðɝ hænd."

Aviendha half pushed herself up, gave her head a shake, then scrambled back to her position. And Tamela said, "Strike her with the other hand."

ðɪs taɪm, ɪleɪn slɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə æmɪz' niz ɑn ðə fɹoʊzən taɪlz, hɝ hɛd ɹɪŋɪŋ, boʊθ tʃiks bɝnɪŋ. ən wən ʃi ɹiɡeɪn əɹ oʊn niz ɪn fɹʌn ʌv eɪvinhə, wən vinʒɹ toʊld əɹ tə stʃɹaɪk, ʃi pʊɾ əɹ hoʊl bɑɾi ɪndə ðə slæp, soʊ mʌtʃ ðət ʃi nɪɹli fɛl oʊvɝ ətɑp eɪvinhə əz ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɛn daʊn.

This time, Elayne slid all the way to Amys' knees on the frozen tiles, her head ringing, both cheeks burning. And when she regained her own knees in front of Aviendha, when Viendre told her to strike, she put her whole body into the slap, so much that she nearly fell over atop Aviendha as the other woman went down.

"ju meɪ ɡoʊ naʊ," mɑneɪəl sɛd.

"You may go now," Monaelle said.

ɪleɪnz aɪz dʒɝk təwɔɹd ðə waɪz wʌn. eɪvinhə, hæfweɪ bæk tə hɝ niz, wɛn stɪf əz stoʊn.

Elayne's eyes jerked toward the Wise One. Aviendha, halfway back to her knees, went stiff as stone.

"ɪf jə wɪʃ tə," mɑneɪəl kəntɪnjud. "mɛn juʒəwəli du, ət ðɪs pɔɪn ɪf nɑt sunɝ. mɛni wɪmən du, tu. bʌɾ ɪf jə stɪl lʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ ɑn, ðən ɛmbɹeɪs."

"If you wish to," Monaelle continued. "Men usually do, at this point if not sooner. Many women do, too. But if you still love one another enough to go on, then embrace."

ɪleɪn flʌŋ hɝsɛlf əɾ eɪvinhə, ən wɑz mɛt wɪð ə ɹʌʃ ðət nɪɹli nɑkt əɹ oʊvɝ bækwɝd. ðeɪ klʌŋ təɡɛðɝ. ɪleɪn fɛl tɪɹz tʃɹɪklɪŋ fɹəm əɹ aɪz, ən ɹilaɪzd eɪvinhə wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ əz wɛl. "aɪm sɑɹi," ɪleɪn wɪspɝd fɝvənli. "aɪm sɑɹi, eɪvinhə."

Elayne flung herself at Aviendha, and was met with a rush that nearly knocked her over backward. They clung together. Elayne felt tears trickling from her eyes, and realized Aviendha was crying as well. "I'm sorry," Elayne whispered fervently. "I'm sorry, Aviendha."

"fɝɡɪv mi," eɪvinhə wɪspɝd bæk. "fɝɡɪv mi.

"Forgive me," Aviendha whispered back. "Forgive me.

mɑneɪəl wɑz stændɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛm, naʊ. "ju wɪl noʊ æŋɡɝ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ əɡɛn, jəl spik hɑɹʃ wɝdz, bʌt jəl ɔlweɪz ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət juv ɔlɹɛɾi stʃɹʌk hɝ. ən fəɹ noʊ bɛɾɝ ɹizən ðən jə wɝ toʊl tə. lɛt ðoʊz bloʊz pæs fəɹ ɔl jə maɪt wɪʃ tə ɡɪv. juv toʊ təwɔɹd wʌn ənʌðɝ, toʊ jə kænɑt ɹipeɪ ən wɪl nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə, fəɹ ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪz ɔlweɪz ɪn əɹ fɝst-sɪstɝz dɛt. jəl bi bɔɹn əɡɛn."

Monaelle was standing over them, now. "You will know anger at one another again, you will speak harsh words, but you will always remember that you have already struck her. And for no better reason than you were told to. Let those blows pass for all you might wish to give. You have toh toward one another, toh you cannot repay and will not try to, for every woman is always in her first-sister's debt. You will be born again."

ðə fil ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪn ðə ɹum wɑz tʃeɪnʒɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn hæd noʊ tʃæns tə si haʊ ivən hæd ʃi θɔɾ ʌv ɪt. ðə laɪt dwɪndəld əz ɪf ðə læmps wɝ biɪŋ pʊɾ aʊt. ðə fil ʌv eɪvinhəz hʌɡ dwɪndəld. saʊn dwɪndəld. ðə læs θɪŋ ʃi hɝd wɑz mɑneɪəlz vɔɪs. "ju wɪl bi bɔɹn əɡɛn." ɛvɹiθɪŋ feɪɾəd. ʃi feɪɾəd. ʃi sis tə ɪɡzɪst.

The feel of saidar in the room was changing, but Elayne had no chance to see how even had she thought of it. The light dwindled as if the lamps were being put out. The feel of Aviendha's hug dwindled. Sound dwindled. The last thing she heard was Monaelle's voice. "You will be born again." Everything faded. She faded. She ceased to exist.

əwɛɹnəs, ʌv ə sɔɹt. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ə hɝsɛlf əz ʃi, ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk əɾ ɔl, bʌt ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ. ʌv saʊnd. ə lɪkwəd swɪʃɪŋ ɔl ɝaʊnd. mjuɾɪd ɡɝɡəlz ən ɹʌmbəlz. ən ə ɹɪðmɪk θəɾɪŋ. ðəɾ əbʌv ɔl. θu-θʌd. θu-θʌd. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ kəntɛnmənt, bʌt ʃi wɑz kɑntɛnt. θu-θʌd.

Awareness, of a sort. She did not think of herself as she, she did not think at all, but she was aware. Of sound. A liquid swishing all around. Muted gurgles and rumbles. And a rhythmic thudding. That above all. Thu-thud. Thu-thud. She did not know contentment, but she was content. Thu-thud.

taɪm. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ taɪm, jɛɾ eɪdʒəz pæst. ðəɹ wɑz ə saʊnd wɪðɪn hɝ, ə saʊn ðət wɑz hɝ. θu-θʌd. ðə seɪm saʊnd, ðə seɪm ɹɪðəm əz ði ʌðɝ. θu-θʌd. ən fɹəm ənʌðɝ pleɪs, nɪɹɝ. θu-θʌd. ənʌðɝ. θu-θʌd. ðə seɪm saʊnd, ðə seɪm bit, əz əɹ oʊn. nɑɾ ənʌðɝ. ðeɪ wɝ ðə seɪm; ðeɪ wɝ wʌn. θu-θʌd.

Time. She did not know time, yet Ages passed. There was a sound within her, a sound that was her. Thu-thud. The same sound, the same rhythm as the other. Thu-thud. And from another place, nearer. Thu-thud. Another. Thu-thud. The same sound, the same beat, as her own. Not another. They were the same; they were one. Thu-thud.

fɝɛvɝ wɛn baɪ tə ðət pʌls, ɔl ðə taɪm ðət hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn. ʃi tʌtʃt ði ʌðɝ ðət wɑz hɝsɛlf. ʃi kəd fil. θu-θʌd. ʃi muvd, ʃi ən ði ʌðɝ ðət wɑz hɝsɛlf, ɹaɪðɪŋ əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ, lɪmz ɪntæŋlɪŋ, ɹoʊlɪŋ əweɪ bʌɾ ɔlweɪz kʌmɪŋ bæk tə itʃ ʌðɝ. θu-θʌd. ðəɹ wɑz laɪt səmtaɪmz, ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs; dɪm bɪɑn siɪŋ, bʌt bɹaɪt tə wʌn u hæd nɛvɝ noʊn ɛniθɪŋ bʌt dɑɹknəs. θu-θʌd. ʃi oʊpən əɹ aɪz, stɛɹɾ ɪndə ði aɪz ə ði ʌðɝ ðət wɑz hɝsɛlf, ən kloʊz hɝz əɡɛn, kɑntɛnt. θu-θʌd.

Forever went by to that pulse, all the time that had ever been. She touched the other that was herself. She could feel. Thu-thud. She moved, she and the other that was herself, writhing against each other, limbs entangling, rolling away but always coming back to each other. Thu-thud. There was light sometimes, in the darkness; dim beyond seeing, but bright to one who had never known anything but darkness. Thu-thud. She opened her eyes, stared into the eyes of the other that was herself, and closed hers again, content. Thu-thud.

tʃeɪnʒ, sʌɾən, ʃɑkɪŋ tə wʌn u hæd nɛvɝ noʊn ɛni tʃeɪnʒ. pɹɛʃɝ. θu-θʌd-θu-θʌd. ðət kʌmfɝɾɪŋ bit wɑz fæstɝ. kənvʌlsɪv pɹɛʃɝ. əɡɛn. əɡɛn. ɡɛɾɪŋ stʃɹɔŋɝ. θu-θʌd-θu-θʌd! θu-θʌd-θu-θʌd!

Change, sudden, shocking to one who had never known any change. Pressure. Thu-thud-thu-thud. That comforting beat was faster. Convulsive pressure. Again. Again. Getting stronger. Thu-thud-thu-thud! Thu-thud-thu-thud!

sʌɾənli, ði ʌðɝ ðət wɑz hɝsɛlf - wɑz ɡɔn. ʃi wɑz əloʊn. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ fɪɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd, ən əloʊn. θu-θʌd-θu-θʌd! pɹɛʃɝ! ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ɛniθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ! skwizɪŋ hɝ, kɹʌʃɪŋ hɝ. ɪf ʃi hæd noʊn haʊ tə skɹim, ɪf ʃi hæd noʊn wʌɾ ə skɹim wɑz, ʃi wəɾ əv ʃɹikt.

Suddenly, the other that was herself - was gone. She was alone. She did not know fear, but she was afraid, and alone. Thu-thud-thu-thud! Pressure! Greater than anything before! Squeezing her, crushing her. If she had known how to scream, if she had known what a scream was, she would have shrieked.

ən ðən laɪt, blaɪndɪŋ, fʊl ə swɝlɪŋ pæɾɝnz. ʃi hæd weɪt; ʃi hæd nɛvɝ fɛlt weɪt bɪfɔɹ. ə kʌɾɪŋ peɪn əɾ əɹ mɪɾəl. sʌmθɪŋ tɪkəld əɹ fʊt. sʌmθɪŋ tɪkəld əɹ bæk. ət fɝst ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðət weɪlɪŋ saʊnd wɑz kʌmɪŋ fɹəm hɝ. ʃi kɪk fibli, weɪv lɪmz ðət dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə muv. ʃi wɑz lɪftəd, leɪɾ ɑn sʌmθɪŋ sɑf bʌt fɝmɝ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ʃi hæd fɛl bɪfɔɹ, ɪksɛp fəɹ ɹɛkəlɛkʃənz ə ði ʌðɝ ðət wɑz hɝsɛlf, ði ʌðɝ ðət wɑz ɡɔn. θu-θʌd. θu-θʌd. ðə saʊnd. ðə seɪm saʊnd, ðə seɪm bit. loʊnlinəs ɹeɪnd, ənɹɛkəɡnaɪzd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz kəntɛnmənt, tu.

And then light, blinding, full of swirling patterns. She had weight; she had never felt weight before. A cutting pain at her middle. Something tickled her foot. Something tickled her back. At first she did not realize that wailing sound was coming from her. She kicked feebly, waved limbs that did not know how to move. She was lifted, laid on something soft but firmer than anything she had felt before, except for recollections of the other that was herself, the other that was gone. Thu-thud. Thu-thud. The sound. The same sound, the same beat. Loneliness reigned, unrecognized, but there was contentment, too.

mɛmɹi bɪɡæn tə ɹɪtɝn, sloʊli. ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ hɛd fɹəm ə bɹɛst ən lʊkt ʌp ɪndə æmɪz' feɪs. jɛs, æmɪz. swɛt-slɪk ən wɪɹi-aɪd, bʌt smaɪlɪŋ. ən ʃi wɑz ɪleɪn; jɛs, ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ tə hɝ, naʊ. nɑt laɪk ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑnd, bʌt laɪk ɪɾ ɪn ə weɪ. feɪntɝ, bʌt mɔɹ mæɡnɪfəsənt. sloʊli, ɑn ə nɛk ðət wɑbəld ənsɝteɪnli, ʃi tɝn əɹ hɛd tə lʊk ət ði ʌðɝ ðət wɑz hɝsɛlf, laɪɪŋ ɑn æmɪz' ʌðɝ bɹɛst. tə lʊk əɾ eɪvinhə, hɝ hɛɹ mæɾɪd, hɝ feɪs ən bɑɾi ʃaɪnɪŋ wɪð swɛt. smaɪlɪŋ wɪð dʒɔɪ. læfɪŋ, wipɪŋ, ðeɪ klʌtʃt itʃ ʌðɝ ən hʌŋ ɑn əz ɪf ðeɪ nɛvɝ ɪntɛndəd tə lɛt ɡoʊ.

Memory began to return, slowly. She lifted her head from a breast and looked up into Amys' face. Yes, Amys. Sweat-slick and weary-eyed, but smiling. And she was Elayne; yes, Elayne Trakand. But there was something more to her, now. Not like the Warder bond, but like it in a way. Fainter, but more magnificent. Slowly, on a neck that wobbled uncertainly, she turned her head to look at the other that was herself, lying on Amys' other breast. To look at Aviendha, her hair matted, her face and body shining with sweat. Smiling with joy. Laughing, weeping, they clutched each other and hung on as if they never intended to let go.

"ðɪs ɪz maɪ dɔɾɝ eɪvinhə," æmɪz sɛd, "æn ðɪs ɪz maɪ dɔɾɝ ɪleɪn, bɔɹn ɑn ðə seɪm deɪ, wɪðɪn ðə seɪm aʊɝ. meɪ ðeɪ ɔlweɪz ɡɑɹd wʌn ənʌðɝ, səpɔɹt wʌn ənʌðɝ, lʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ." ʃi læf sɔfli, taɪɹədli, fɑnli. "ænd naʊ wɪl sʌmwʌn bɹɪŋ əs ɡɑɹməns bɪfɔɹ maɪ nu dɔɾɝz ən aɪ ɔl fɹiz tə dɛθ?"

"This is my daughter Aviendha," Amys said, "and this is my daughter Elayne, born on the same day, within the same hour. May they always guard one another, support one another, love one another." She laughed softly, tiredly, fondly. "And now will someone bring us garments before my new daughters and I all freeze to death?"

ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt kɛɹ ət ðət moʊmən ɪf ʃi dɪd fɹiz tə dɛθ. ʃi klʌŋ tə eɪvinhə ɪn læftɝ ən tɪɹz. ʃi hæd faʊn əɹ sɪstɝ. laɪt, ʃi hæd faʊn əɹ sɪstɝ!

Elayne did not care at that moment if she did freeze to death. She clung to Aviendha in laughter and tears. She had found her sister. Light, she had found her sister!

tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl woʊk tə ðə saʊnz ə kwaɪət bʌsəl, ʌðɝ wɪmən muvɪŋ əbaʊt, səm tɔkɪŋ sɔfli. laɪɪŋ ɑn əɹ hɑɹd nɛɹoʊ kɑt, ʃi saɪd wɪð ɹəɡɹɛt. hɝ hænz ɝaʊn ɪleɪɾəz θɹoʊt hæd bɪn dʒʌst ə plɛzən dʒɹim. ðɪs taɪni kænvəs-wɔld ɹum wɑz ɹiæləɾi. ʃi hæd slɛpt pʊɹli, ən ʃi fɛl θɪnd, dʒɹeɪnd. ʃi hæɾ oʊvɝslɛpt, tu; ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ taɪm fəɹ bɹɛkfəst. ɹɪlʌktənli ʃi tɔst ɔf əɹ blæŋkəts. ðə bɪldɪŋ hæd bɪn ə smɔl wɛɹhaʊs ə səm sɔɹt, wɪð θɪk wɔlz ən hɛvi ɹæftɝz loʊ oʊvɝhɛd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hit. hɝ bɹɛθ mɪstɪd, ən ðə kɹɪsp mɔɹnɪŋ ɛɹ pɹɪk θɹu hɝ ʃɪf bɪfɔɹ əɹ fit ɹitʃt ðə ɹʌf flɔɹbɔɹdz. ivən ɪf ʃi cʊɾə kənsɪɾɝd laɪɪŋ əbɛɾ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, ʃi hæɾ əɹ ɔɹɾɝz. lɑɡənz fɪlθi bɑn meɪd dɪsəbiɾiəns ɪmpɑsəbəl, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɔfən ʃi wɪʃt ɪt.

Toveine Gazal woke to the sounds of quiet bustle, other women moving about, some talking softly. Lying on her hard narrow cot, she sighed with regret. Her hands around Elaida's throat had been just a pleasant dream. This tiny canvas-walled room was reality. She had slept poorly, and she felt thinned, drained. She had overslept, too; there would be no time for breakfast. Reluctantly she tossed off her blankets. The building had been a small warehouse of some sort, with thick walls and heavy rafters low overhead, but there was no heat. Her breath misted, and the crisp morning air pricked through her shift before her feet reached the rough floorboards. Even if she could have considered lying abed in this place, she had her orders. Logain's filthy bond made disobedience impossible, no matter how often she wished it.

ʃi ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk ə hɪm əz sɪmpli əblɝ, əɹ ət wɝs mæstɝ əblɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz dʒʌs lɑɡən ðət keɪm ɪndə hɝ maɪnd. ðə neɪm i hæd meɪɾ ɪnfəməs. lɑɡən, ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən u hæd ʃæɾɝd ði ɑɹmiz ə hɪz neɪɾɪv ɡildən. lɑɡən, hu hæd kɑɹvd ə pæθ θɹu ðə fju ɔltɑɹənz ən mʊɹændiənz wɪð nɝv ɪnʌf tə tʃɹaɪ stɑpɪŋ ɪm əntɪl i θɹɛɾənd luɡɹɾ ɪtsɛlf. lɑɡən, hu hæd bɪn dʒɛntəld ən sʌmhaʊ kəd tʃænəl əɡɛn, hu hæd dɛɹd tə fɪks ɪz kɝst wiv ə seɪɾɪn ɑn tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl. ə pɪɾi fəɹ ɪm i hæd nɑt kəmændəɾ əɹ tə stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ! ʃi kəd fil ðə mæn, ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd. hi wɑz ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ.

She always tried to think of him as simply Ablar, or at worst Master Ablar, but it was always just Logain that came into her mind. The name he had made infamous. Logain, the false Dragon who had shattered the armies of his native Ghealdan. Logain, who had carved a path through the few Altarans and Murandians with nerve enough to try stopping him until he threatened Lugard itself. Logain, who had been gentled and somehow could channel again, who had dared to fix his cursed weave of saidin on Toveine Gazal. A pity for him he had not commanded her to stop thinking! She could feel the man, in the back of her head. He was always there.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃi skwizd əɹ aɪz ʃʌt. laɪt! mɪstʃɹəs daʊilz fɑɹm hæd sim ðə pɪɾ ə dum, jɪɹz ʌv ɛɡzaɪl ən pɛnəns wɪð noʊ weɪ aʊɾ ɪksɛp ði ənθɪŋkəbəl, tə bɪkʌm ə hʌntəd ɹɛnəɡeɪd. bɛɹli hæf ə wik sɪns əɹ kæptʃɝ, ʃi nu bɛɾɝ. ðɪs wɑz ðə pɪɾ ə dum. ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɪskeɪp. æŋɡɹəli, ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ən skɹʌbd ɡlɪsnɪŋ dæmpnəs fɹəm əɹ tʃiks wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. noʊ! ʃi wəɾ ɪskeɪp, sʌmhaʊ, ɪf oʊnli fəɹ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə pʊɾ əɹ ɹil hænz ɑn ɪleɪɾəz θɹoʊt. sʌmhaʊ.

For a moment, she squeezed her eyes shut. Light! Mistress Doweel's farm had seemed the Pit of Doom, years of exile and penance with no way out except the unthinkable, to become a hunted renegade. Barely half a week since her capture, she knew better. This was the Pit of Doom. And there was no escape. Angrily, she shook her head, and scrubbed glistening dampness from her cheeks with her fingers. No! She would escape, somehow, if only for long enough to put her real hands on Elaida's throat. Somehow.

əsaɪd fɹəm ðə kɑt, ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli θɹi pisəz ə fɝnɪtʃɝ, jɛt ðeɪ lɛf lɪɾəl speɪs fəɹ əɹ tə muv. ʃi kɹæk ði aɪs ɪn ðə jɛloʊ-stʃɹaɪpt pɪtʃɝ ɑn ðə wɑʃstænd wɪð əɹ bɛl naɪf, fɪl ðə tʃɪpt waɪt beɪsən, ən tʃænəl tə hit ðə wɔɾɝ tɪl tɛnʒɹəlz ə stim ɹoʊz. ɪt wɑz əlaʊd tə tʃænəl fəɹ ðæt. ðəɾ ən noʊ mɔɹ. baɪ ɹoʊt ʃi wɑʃt ən skɹʌbd əɹ tiθ wɪð sɔlt ən soʊɾə, ðən tʊk ə fɹɛʃ ʃɪft ən stɑkɪŋz fɹəm ðə smɔl wʊɾən tʃɛst ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə kɑt. hɝ ɹɪŋ ʃi lɛft ɪn ðə tʃɛst, tʌkt ʌndɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ə smɔl vɛlvət paʊtʃ. ənʌðɝ ɔɹɾɝ. ɔl ə hɝ θɪŋz wɝ hɪɹ, ɪksɛp fəɹ əɹ læpdɛsk. lʌkəli, ðət hæd bɪn lɔst wən ʃi wɑz teɪkən. hɝ dʒɹɛsəz hʌŋ ɑn ə kloʊkstænd, ðə læst ə ðə ɹumz fɝnɪʃɪŋz. tʃuzɪŋ wʌn wɪθaʊt ɹɪli lʊkɪŋ, ʃi pʊɾ ɪɾ ɑn məkænɪkli ən juz koʊm ən bɹʌʃ ɑn əɹ hɛɹ.

Aside from the cot, there were only three pieces of furniture, yet they left little space for her to move. She cracked the ice in the yellow-striped pitcher on the washstand with her belt knife, filled the chipped white basin, and channeled to heat the water till tendrils of steam rose. It was allowed to channel for that. That and no more. By rote she washed and scrubbed her teeth with salt and soda, then took a fresh shift and stockings from the small wooden chest at the foot of the cot. Her ring she left in the chest, tucked under everything else in a small velvet pouch. Another order. All of her things were here, except for her lapdesk. Luckily, that had been lost when she was taken. Her dresses hung on a cloakstand, the last of the room's furnishings. Choosing one without really looking, she put it on mechanically and used comb and brush on her hair.

ði aɪvɝi-bæk bɹʌʃ sloʊɾ əz ʃi ɹɪli sɔ hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə wɑʃstænz tʃip, bʌbəl mɪɹɝ. bɹiðɪŋ ɹæədli, ʃi sɛt ðə bɹʌʃ daʊn bɪsaɪd ðə mætʃɪŋ koʊm. ðə dʒɹɛs ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən wɑz θɪk, faɪnli woʊvən wʊl ʌv ən ʌnədɔɹn ɹɛd soʊ dɑɹk ɪt sim nɪɹli blæk. blæk, laɪk ən æʃəmənz koʊt. hɝ dɪstɔɹɾəd ɪmədʒ stɛɹd bæk ət hɝ, lɪps ɹaɪðɪŋ. tʃeɪnʒɪŋ wəd bi ə sɔɹɾ ə sɝɛndɝ. dətɝmənədli ʃi snætʃt əɹ mɑɹɾən-laɪnd ɡɹeɪ kloʊk fɹəm ðə stænd.

The ivory-backed brush slowed as she really saw herself in the washstand's cheap, bubbled mirror. Breathing raggedly, she set the brush down beside the matching comb. The dress she had chosen was thick, finely woven wool of an unadorned red so dark it seemed nearly black. Black, like an Asha'man's coat. Her distorted image stared back at her, lips writhing. Changing would be a sort of surrender. Determinedly she snatched her marten-lined gray cloak from the stand.

wən ʃi pʊʃt əsaɪd ðə kænvəs dɔɹflæp, twɛnti əɹ soʊ sɪstɝz ɔlɹɛɾi ɑkjəpaɪd ðə lɔŋ sɛntʃɹəl hɔlweɪ laɪnd wɪð kænvəs ɹumz. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə fju wɝ spikɪŋ ɪn mɝmɝz, bʌt ðə ɹɛst əvɔɪɾəd wʌn ənʌðɝz aɪz, ivən wən ðeɪ bɪlɔŋ tə ðə seɪm ədʒɑ. fɪɹ hæɾ ɪts pɹɛzəns, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ʃeɪm ðət koʊɾəd moʊs feɪsəz. əkʊɹ, ə staʊt ɡɹeɪ, wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə hænd wɛɹ ʃi nɔɹməli wɔɹ əɹ ɹɪŋ. deɪsɑndɝ, ə wɪləwi jɛloʊ, wɑz haɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɹaɪt hæn ɪn əɹ ɑɹmpɪt.

When she pushed aside the canvas doorflap, twenty or so sisters already occupied the long central hallway lined with canvas rooms. Here and there a few were speaking in murmurs, but the rest avoided one another's eyes, even when they belonged to the same Ajah. Fear had its presence, but it was shame that coated most faces. Akoure, a stout Gray, was staring at the hand where she normally wore her ring. Desandre, a willowy Yellow, was hiding her right hand in her armpit.

ðə sɑf kɑnvɝseɪʃənz tʃɹeɪld ɔf wən tʌvaɪn əpɪɹd. sɛvɹəl wɪmən ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ oʊpənli. ɪnkluɾɪŋ dʒɛnɛɹ ən ləməaɪ, fɹəm əɹ oʊn ədʒɑ! deɪsɑndɝ keɪm tə hɝsɛlf ɪnʌf tə tɝn əɹ bæk stɪfli. ɪn ðə speɪs ə tu deɪz, fɪfti-wʌn ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd fɔlən kæptɪv tə ðə blæk-koʊɾəd mɑnstɝz, ən fɪfti ʌv əm bleɪm tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl əz ðoʊ ɪleɪɾə ɹɔɪhən hæd noʊ hæn ɪn ðə dɪzæstɝ əɾ ɔl. ɪksɛp fəɹ lɑɡənz ɪntɝvɛntʃən, ðeɪ wʊɾə hæd ðɛɹ ɹivɛnʒ ðɛɹ fɝs naɪt hɪɹ. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʌv ɪm fəɹ pʊɾɪŋ ə stɑp tə ɪɾ ən meɪkɪŋ kɑɹnil hil ðə wɛls lɛf baɪ bɛls, ðə bɹuzəz lɛf baɪ fɪsts ən fit. ʃi wəd ɹæðɝ ðeɪ hæd biɾən əɹ tə dɛθ ðən ʃi oʊ hɪm.

The soft conversations trailed off when Toveine appeared. Several women glared at her openly. Including Jenare and Lemai, from her own Ajah! Desandre came to herself enough to turn her back stiffly. In the space of two days, fifty-one Aes Sedai had fallen captive to the black-coated monsters, and fifty of them blamed Toveine Gazal as though Elaida a'Roihan had no hand in the disaster at all. Except for Logain's intervention, they would have had their revenge their first night here. She did not love him for putting a stop to it and making Carniele Heal the welts left by belts, the bruises left by fists and feet. She would rather they had beaten her to death than she owe him.

pʊɾɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ʃi wɔk pɹaʊdli daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, aʊɾ ɪndə peɪl mɔɹnɪŋ sʌnʃaɪn ðət suɾəd əɹ wɑʃt-aʊt mud. bɪhaɪn hɝ, sʌmwʌn ʃaʊɾəd æsəd wɝdz bɪfɔɹ ðə kloʊzɪŋ dɔɹ kʌɾ əm ɔf. hɝ hænz tʃɹɛmbəld əz ʃi pʊld ʌp əɹ hʊd, nɛslɪŋ ðə dɑɹk fɝ ɝaʊn əɹ feɪs. noʊ wʌn ɡɑɾ əweɪ wɪð pʊʃɪŋ daʊn tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl. ivən mɪstʃɹəs daʊil, hu hæd kɹʌʃt əɹ ɪndə ə sɛmbləns ə səbmɪʃən oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz, lɝn ðət wən əɹ ɛɡzaɪl ɛndəd. ʃi wəd ʃoʊ ðɛm. ʃi wəd ʃoʊ ðɛm ɔl!

Putting her cloak on her shoulders, she walked proudly down the corridor, out into pale morning sunshine that suited her washed-out mood. Behind her, someone shouted acid words before the closing door cut them off. Her hands trembled as she pulled up her hood, nestling the dark fur around her face. No one got away with pushing down Toveine Gazal. Even Mistress Doweel, who had crushed her into a semblance of submission over the years, learned that when her exile ended. She would show them. She would show them all!

ðə dɔɹmətɔɹi ʃi ʃɛɹd wɪð ði ʌðɝz leɪ ɑn ðə vɛɹi ɛdʒ ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ vɪlədʒ, ɪf ə vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ wʌn. ə vɪlədʒ ʌv æʃəmən. ɛlswɛɹ, soʊ ʃi hæd bɪn toʊld, ɡɹaʊnd wɑz mɑɹkt ɔf fəɹ stʃɹʌktʃɝz ðeɪ kleɪmd wəd dwɔɹf ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt ðɪs wɑz wɛɹ moʊst ə ðɛm lɪv naʊ. faɪv lɑɹdʒ, blɑki stoʊn bæɹəks, speɪst əlɔŋ stʃɹits əz waɪɾ əz ɛniθɪŋ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, kəɾ itʃ hoʊld ə hʌnʒɹəd æʃəmən soʊlʒɝz. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt fʊl jɛt, ðə laɪt bi θæŋkt, bʌt snoʊ-kʌvɝd skæfəldɪŋ əweɪɾəd ði ɝaɪvəl ʌv wɝkmɪn ɝaʊn ðə θɪk wɔlz ə tu mɔɹ ðət wɝ ɔlmoʊst ɹɛɾi fəɹ ɹufɪŋ ɪn θætʃ. nɪɹli ə dʌzən smɔlɝ stoʊn stʃɹʌktʃɝz wɝ meɪd tə hoʊl tɛn dɛɾəkeɪtəd itʃ, ən ənʌðɝ ə ðoʊz wɑz ʌndɝ kənstʃɹʌkʃən, tu. skæɾɝd ɝaʊn əm stʊd nɪɹli tu hʌnʒɹəd haʊsəz ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn sin ɪn ɛni vɪlədʒ, wɛɹ səm ə ðə mɛɹid mɛn lɪvd, ən ðə fæmliz ʌv ʌðɝz nɑt fɑɹ ɪnʌf əlɔŋ ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ.

The dormitory she shared with the others lay on the very edge of a large village, if a very strange one. A village of Asha'man. Elsewhere, so she had been told, ground was marked off for structures they claimed would dwarf the White Tower, but this was where most of them lived now. Five large, blocky stone barracks, spaced along streets as wide as anything in Tar Valon, could each hold a hundred Asha'man Soldiers. They were not full yet, the Light be thanked, but snow-covered scaffolding awaited the arrival of workmen around the thick walls of two more that were almost ready for roofing in thatch. Nearly a dozen smaller stone structures were made to hold ten Dedicated each, and another of those was under construction, too. Scattered around them stood nearly two hundred houses that might have been seen in any village, where some of the married men lived, and the families of others not far enough along in training.

mɛn u kəd tʃænəl dɪd nɑt fɹaɪɾən hɝ. wʌns ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ɪn tə pænɪk fəɹ ə moʊmənt, tʃɹu, bʌt ðət wɑz bɪsaɪd ðə pɔɪnt. faɪv hʌnʒɹəd mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, haʊɛvɝ, wɝ ə skɹæp ə boʊn wɛdʒ bɪtwin tu ʌv əɹ tiθ wɛɹ ʃi kəd nɑt fɹi ɪt. faɪv hʌnʒɹəd! ən ðeɪ kəd tʃɹævəl, səm ə ðɛm. ə ʃɑɹp skɹæp ə boʊn. mɔɹ, ʃi hæd tʃɹæmp ðə maɪl əɹ mɔɹ θɹu ðə wʊdz tə ðə wɔl. ðət fɹaɪɾənd hɝ, wʌɾ ɪt sɪɡnəfaɪd.

Men who could channel did not frighten her. Once she had given in to panic for a moment, true, but that was beside the point. Five hundred men who could channel, however, were a scrap of bone wedged between two of her teeth where she could not free it. Five hundred! And they could Travel, some of them. A sharp scrap of bone. More, she had tramped the mile or more through the woods to the wall. That frightened her, what it signified.

noʊwɛɹ wɑz ðə wɔl fɪnɪʃt, noʊwɛɹ mɔɹ ðən twɛlv əɹ fɪftin fit haɪ, nʌn ə ðə taʊɝz əɹ bæstʃənz mɔɹ ðən bɪɡʌn. ɪn pleɪsəz, ʃi cʊɾə klæmbɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə paɪlz ə blæk stoʊn, ɪksɛp fəɹ əɹ ɔɹɾɝz nɑt tə ətɛmpt ɪskeɪp. ðə θɪŋ ɹæn fəɹ eɪt maɪlz, ðoʊ, ən ʃi bɪliv lɑɡən wən i sɛɾ ɪt wɑz bɪɡʌn lɛs ðən θɹi mʌnθs əɡoʊ. ðə mæn hɛld əɹ tu taɪtli tə bɑðɝ wɪð laɪɪŋ. hi kɔl ðə wɔl ə weɪst ə taɪm ən ɛfɝt, ən pɝhæps ɪt wɑz, bʌɾ ɪt meɪɾ əɹ tiθ tʃæɾɝ. dʒʌs θɹi mʌnθs. meɪd juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ. wən ʃi θɔɾ ə ðət blæk wɔl, ʃi sɔ ən ɪmplækəbəl fɔɹs ðət kəd nɑt bi stɑpt, ən ævəlæntʃ ə blæk stoʊn slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn tə bɛɹi ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɪmpɑsəbəl, ʌv kɔɹs. ɪmpɑsəbəl, bʌt wən ʃi dɪd nɑt dʒɹim ə stʃɹæŋɡəlɪŋ ɪleɪɾə, ʃi dʒɹimd ə ðæt.

Nowhere was the wall finished, nowhere more than twelve or fifteen feet high, none of the towers or bastions more than begun. In places, she could have clambered over the piles of black stone, except for her orders not to attempt escape. The thing ran for eight miles, though, and she believed Logain when he said it was begun less than three months ago. The man held her too tightly to bother with lying. He called the wall a waste of time and effort, and perhaps it was, but it made her teeth chatter. Just three months. Made using the Power. The male half of the Power. When she thought of that black wall, she saw an implacable force that could not be stopped, an avalanche of black stone sliding down to bury the White Tower. Impossible, of course. Impossible, but when she did not dream of strangling Elaida, she dreamed of that.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn snoʊfɔl ɪn ðə naɪt, ən ə hɛvi blæŋkəɾ ʌv waɪt kʌvɝɾ ɛvɹi ɹuf, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə pɪk əɹ weɪ əlɔŋ ðə bɹɔd stʃɹits. ðə hɑɹd-pæk dɝt hæd bɪn klɪɹd, ə tʃɔɹ ə mɛn ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn keɪm ʌp. ðeɪ juz ðə paʊɝ fəɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɹəm fɪlɪŋ wʊdbɑksɪz tə klinɪŋ ðɛɹ kloʊðz! blæk-klæd mɛn hɝid hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ɪn ðə stʃɹits, ən mɔɹ wɝ ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪn ɹoʊz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ bæɹəks wɪð ʌðɝz kɔlɪŋ ɹoʊl ɪn laʊd vɔɪsəz. wɪmən bʌndəld ʌp əɡɛns ðə koʊld wɔk pæs ðɛm, plɑtʃədli kæɹiɪŋ bæskəts tə ðə kɔɹɾɝmæstɝz stɔɹhaʊs əɹ wɔɾɝ bʌkəts tə ðə nɪɹəs faʊntən, ðoʊ haʊ ɛni wʊmən kəd ɹɪmeɪn, noʊɪŋ wʌɾ əɹ hʌzbənd wɑz, wɑz bɪɑn tʌvaɪnz kɑmpɹihɛnʃən. ivən mɔɹ bəzɑɹ, tʃɪlʒɹən ɹæn ʌp ən daʊn ðə stʃɹit, ɝaʊn ðə skwɛɹz ə mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, ʃaʊɾɪŋ ən læfɪŋ, ɹoʊlɪŋ hups, tɔsɪŋ peɪntəd bɔlz, pleɪɪŋ wɪð dɑlz əɹ dɑɡz. ə dʒɹɑp ə nɔɹmæləɾi ðət haɪɾənd ði ivəl stɛntʃ ə ðə ɹɛst.

There had been snowfall in the night, and a heavy blanket of white covered every roof, but she did not have to pick her way along the broad streets. The hard-packed dirt had been cleared, a chore of men in training before the sun came up. They used the Power for everything from filling woodboxes to cleaning their clothes! Black-clad men hurried here and there in the streets, and more were gathering in rows in front of their barracks with others calling roll in loud voices. Women bundled up against the cold walked past them, placidly carrying baskets to the quartermaster's storehouse or water buckets to the nearest fountain, though how any woman could remain, knowing what her husband was, was beyond Toveine's comprehension. Even more bizarre, children ran up and down the street, around the squares of men who could channel, shouting and laughing, rolling hoops, tossing painted balls, playing with dolls or dogs. A drop of normality that heightened the evil stench of the rest.

əhɛɾ ə hɝ, ə maʊntəd pɑɹɾi wɑz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ʌp ðə stʃɹiɾ əɾ ə wɔk. ɪn ðə ʃɔɹt taɪm ʃi hæd bɪn hɪɹ - ði ɛnləs taɪm - ʃi hæd nɑt sin ɛniwʌn ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ ɪksɛpt wɝkmɪn ɑn kɑɹts əɹ wæɡənz. nɔɹ ɛni vɪzəɾɝz, wɪtʃ səm ə ðiz pleɪnli mʌs bi. faɪv mɛn ɪn blæk wɝ ɛskɔɹɾɪŋ ə dʌzən ɪn ðə ɹɛd koʊts ən kloʊks ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz, wɪð tu jɛloʊ-hɛɹd wɪmən ət ðə fɹʌnt, wʌn ɪn ə ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt kloʊk laɪnd wɪð blæk fɝ ən ði ʌðɝ . . . tʌvaɪnz aɪbɹaʊz klaɪmd. ði ʌðɝ wɔɹ ɡɹin kændɔɹi tʃɹaʊzɝz ən ə koʊt meɪɾ ʌp əz ɪf ɪt bɪlɔŋ tə ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə ɡɑɹd. hɝ ɹɛd kloʊk ivən hæd ɡoʊldən nɑts ə ɹæŋk ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ! meɪbi ʃi wɑz mɪsteɪkən əbaʊt ðə mɛn. ðət wʌn wəd faɪnd ʃɔɹt ʃɪft wən ʃi ɪnkaʊntɝd ɹil ɡɑɹdzmɪn. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪt wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒli ɝli fəɹ vɪzəɾɝz.

Ahead of her, a mounted party was approaching up the street at a walk. In the short time she had been here - the endless time - she had not seen anyone ride in the village except workmen on carts or wagons. Nor any visitors, which some of these plainly must be. Five men in black were escorting a dozen in the red coats and cloaks of the Queen's Guards, with two yellow-haired women at the front, one in a red-and-white cloak lined with black fur and the other . . . Toveine's eyebrows climbed. The other wore green Kandori trousers and a coat made up as if it belonged to the Captain-General of the Guard. Her red cloak even had golden knots of rank on the shoulder! Maybe she was mistaken about the men. That one would find short shift when she encountered real Guardsmen. In any case, it was strangely early for visitors.

itʃ taɪm ði ɑd pɑɹɾi ɹitʃt wʌn ə ðə fɔɹmeɪʃənz, ðə mæn ɪn fɹʌnt ʃaʊɾəd, "æʃəmən, ətɛn fɹʌnt!" ən but hilz stæmpt ɑn ðə hɑɹɾənd ɝθ əz ði ʌðɝz stɪfən laɪk pɪlɝz ə stoʊn.

Each time the odd party reached one of the formations, the man in front shouted, "Asha'man, attend front!" and boot heels stamped on the hardened earth as the others stiffened like pillars of stone.

pʊlɪŋ əɹ hʊd fɔɹwɝd bɛɾɝ tə haɪɾ əɹ feɪs, tʌvaɪn muv tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə waɪd stʃɹit, kloʊs bɪsaɪd ðə kɔɹnɝ ʌv wʌn ə ðə smɔlɝ stoʊn bæɹəks. ə fɔɹk-bɪɹɾəd oʊl mæn kʌmɪŋ aʊt, ə sɪlvɝ sɔɹd pɪn ɑn ɪz haɪ kɑlɝ, ɡlænst əɾ əɹ kjʊɹiəsli wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ ɪz stʃɹaɪd.

Pulling her hood forward better to hide her face, Toveine moved to the side of the wide street, close beside the corner of one of the smaller stone barracks. A fork-bearded old man coming out, a silver sword pin on his high collar, glanced at her curiously without slowing his stride.

wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn stʃɹʌk əɹ laɪk ə bʌkəɾ ə koʊld wɔɾɝ, ən ʃi nɪɹli wɛpt. nʌn ə ðoʊz stʃɹeɪnʒɝz wəd spɑɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪs, naʊ, ɪf ðeɪ kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz wʌn. ɪf iðɝ ə ðoʊz wɪmən kəd tʃænəl, ənlaɪkli ðoʊ ðət wɑz, ʃi wəd nɑt pæs kloʊs ɪnʌf tə tɛl ðət tʌvaɪn kʊd, tu. ʃi fɹɛɾɪd ən fjumd oʊvɝ haʊ tə dɪsəbeɪ lɑɡən, ən ðən dɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ nɛsəsɛɹi tə kæɹi aʊɾ ɪz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz wɪθaʊɾ ivən θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt!

What she had done struck her like a bucket of cold water, and she nearly wept. None of those strangers would spot an Aes Sedai face, now, if they could recognize one. If either of those women could channel, unlikely though that was, she would not pass close enough to tell that Toveine could, too. She fretted and fumed over how to disobey Logain, and then did everything necessary to carry out his instructions without even thinking about it!

əz ən ækt ə dɪfaɪəns, ʃi stɑpt wɛɹ ʃi wɑz, tɝnɪŋ tə wɑtʃ ðə vɪzəɾɝz. ɔɾəmætɪkli, hɝ hænz tʃɛkt əɹ hʊd bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd snætʃ əm tə hɝ saɪdz. ɪt wɑz pɪɾəfəl, ən ɹɪdɪkjələs. ʃi nu ði æʃəmən ɡaɪɾɪŋ ðə pɑɹɾi, baɪ saɪɾ ət list, ə bʌlki mæn ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz wɪð ɔɪli blæk hɛɹ, ən ɔɪli smaɪl ən aɪz laɪk ɔɡɝz. nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz, ðoʊ. wʌt kəd ʃi hoʊp tə ɡeɪn baɪ ðɪs? haʊ kəd ʃi ɛntʃɹʌst ə mɛsədʒ tə ɛni ʌv ðɛm? ivən ɪf ði ɛskɔɹt vænɪʃt, haʊ kəd ʃi ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə pæs ə mɛsədʒ wən ʃi wɑz fɔɹbɪɾən tə lɛɾ ɛni aʊtsaɪɾɝ dɪskʌvɝ ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ?

As an act of defiance, she stopped where she was, turning to watch the visitors. Automatically, her hands checked her hood before she could snatch them to her sides. It was pitiful, and ridiculous. She knew the Asha'man guiding the party, by sight at least, a bulky man in his middle years with oily black hair, an oily smile and eyes like augurs. None of the others, though. What could she hope to gain by this? How could she entrust a message to any of them? Even if the escort vanished, how could she get close enough to pass a message when she was forbidden to let any outsider discover the presence of Aes Sedai?

ði ɔɡɝ-aɪd fɛloʊ lʊk bɔɹd wɪð ɪz duɾi ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, hɑɹdli bɑðɝɪŋ tə haɪɾ ɪz jɔnz bɪhaɪn ə ɡlʌv hænd. ". . . wən wi də fɪnɪʃ hɪɹ," hi wɑz seɪɪŋ əz i ɹoʊd pæs tʌvaɪn, "aɪ wɪl ʃoʊ jə ðə kɹæf taʊn. kwaɪɾ ə bɪt bɪɡɝ ðən ðɪs. wi də hæv ɛvɹi kaɪndə kɹæftsfoʊk, fɹəm meɪsənz ən kɑɹpəntɝz tə mɛɾəlsmɪθs ən teɪlɝz. wi kən meɪk ɛvɹiθɪŋ wi nid, leɪɾi ɪleɪn."

The augur-eyed fellow looked bored with his duty this morning, hardly bothering to hide his yawns behind a gloved hand. ". . . when we do finish here," he was saying as he rode past Toveine, "I will show you the Craft Town. Quite a bit bigger than this. We do have every kind of craftsfolk, from masons and carpenters to metalsmiths and tailors. We can make everything we need, Lady Elayne."

"ɪksɛp tɝnəps," wʌn ə ðə wɪmən sɛɾ ɪn ə haɪ vɔɪs, ən ði ʌðɝ læft.

"Except turnips," one of the women said in a high voice, and the other laughed.

tʌvaɪnz hɛd dʒɝkt. ʃi wɑtʃt ðə ɹaɪɾɝz muv ɑn daʊn ðə stʃɹiɾ əkʌmpənid baɪ ʃaʊɾəd ɔɹɾɝz ən stæmpɪŋ buts. leɪɾi ɪleɪn? ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd? ðə jʌŋɡɝ ə ðə pɛɹ maɪt mætʃ ðə dɪskɹɪpʃən ʃi hæd bɪn ɡɪvən. ɪleɪɾə dɪd nɑt ɹɪvil waɪ ʃi wɑz soʊ dɛspɹɪt tə leɪ hɝ hænz ɑn wʌn ɹʌnəweɪ æksɛptɪd, ivən wʌn u maɪt bɪkʌm ə kwin, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ lɛɾ ə sɪstɝ liv ðə taʊɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɔɹɾɝz ɑn wʌt tə də ɪf ʃi ɪnkaʊntɝd ðə ɡɝl. bi vɛɹi kɛɹfəl, ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, tʌvaɪn θɔt. aɪ wəd nɑt laɪk ɪleɪɾə tə hæv ðə sæɾəsfækʃən ə leɪɪŋ hænz ɑn ju.

Toveine's head jerked. She watched the riders move on down the street accompanied by shouted orders and stamping boots. Lady Elayne? Elayne Trakand? The younger of the pair might match the description she had been given. Elaida did not reveal why she was so desperate to lay her hands on one runaway Accepted, even one who might become a queen, but she never let a sister leave the Tower without orders on what to do if she encountered the girl. Be very careful, Elayne Trakand, Toveine thought. I would not like Elaida to have the satisfaction of laying hands on you.

ʃi wɑntəd tə θɪŋk ɑn ðɪs, ɑn wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɑz səm weɪ tə juz ðə ɡɝlz pɹɛzəns hɪɹ, bʌɾ əbɹʌpli ʃi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ðə sɛnseɪʃənz ət ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd. ə maɪl kəntɛnmənt ən ə ɡɹoʊɪŋ pɝpəs. lɑɡən hæd fɪnɪʃt ɪz bɹɛkfəst. hi wəd bi kʌmɪŋ aʊt, sun. hi hæd toʊld əɹ tə bi ðəɹ wən i dɪd.

She wanted to think on this, on whether there was some way to use the girl's presence here, but abruptly she became aware of the sensations at the back of her head. A mild contentment and a growing purpose. Logain had finished his breakfast. He would be coming out, soon. He had told her to be there when he did.

hɝ fit wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi θɔt. wɪð ðə ɹɪzʌl ðəɾ əɹ skɝts tæŋɡəld ɪn əɹ lɛɡz, ən ʃi fɛl hɑɹd, nɑkɪŋ əɹ bɹɛθ aʊt. æŋɡɝ wɛld ʌp, fjʊɹi, bʌt ʃi skɹæmbəl tə hɝ fiɾ ænd, wɪθaʊt pɔzɪŋ tə bɹʌʃ ɔf ðə dʌst, ɡæðɝɾ əɹ skɝts əbʌv əɹ niz ən bɪɡæn tə ɹʌn əɡɛn, kloʊk bɪloʊɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. mɛnz ɹɔkəs ʃaʊts fɑloʊɾ əɹ daʊn ðə stʃɹit, ən læfɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən pɔɪntəɾ əz ʃi ɹæn pæst.

Her feet were running before she thought. With the result that her skirts tangled in her legs, and she fell hard, knocking her breath out. Anger welled up, fury, but she scrambled to her feet and, without pausing to brush off the dust, gathered her skirts above her knees and began to run again, cloak billowing behind. Men's raucous shouts followed her down the street, and laughing children pointed as she ran past.

sʌɾənli ə pæk ə dɑɡz wɑz ɝaʊn hɝ, snɑɹlɪŋ, nɪpɪŋ əɾ əɹ hilz. ʃi lɛpt ən spʌn ən kɪkt, bʌt ðeɪ hɛɹid hɝ. ʃi wɑntəd tə ʃɹik wɪð fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ən fjʊɹi. dɑɡz wɝ ɔlweɪz ə bɑðɝ, ən ʃi kəd nɑt tʃænəl ə fɛðɝ tə dʒɹaɪv əm ɔf. ə ɡɹeɪ haʊn sizd ə maʊθfʊl ə dæŋɡəlɪŋ skɝt, pʊlɪŋ əɹ saɪdweɪz. pænɪk oʊvɝwɛlmd ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. ɪf ʃi fɛl əɡɛn, ðeɪ wəd tɛɹ əɹ tə ʃɹɛdz.

Suddenly a pack of dogs was around her, snarling, nipping at her heels. She leaped and spun and kicked, but they harried her. She wanted to shriek with frustration and fury. Dogs were always a bother, and she could not channel a feather to drive them off. A gray hound seized a mouthful of dangling skirt, pulling her sideways. Panic overwhelmed everything else. If she fell again, they would tear her to shreds.

ə ʃaʊɾɪŋ wʊmən ɪn bɹaʊn wʊl swʌŋ əɹ hɛvi bæskəɾ ət ðə dɔɡ tʌɡɪŋ tʌvaɪnz skɝt, meɪkɪŋ ɪt dɑdʒ əweɪ. ə ɹaʊnd wʊmənz bʌkət kɑɾ ə bɹɪndəl kɝ ɪn ðə ɹɪbz, ən ɪt ɹæn jɛlpɪŋ. tʌvaɪn ɡeɪpt ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt, ən fəɹ əɹ ɪnətɛntʃən hæd tə pʊl əɹ lɛf lɛɡ əweɪ fɹəm ənʌðɝ dɔɡ ət ðə kɑst ʌv ə pis ə hɝ stɑkɪŋ ən ə lɪɾəl skɪn. ðəɹ wɝ wɪmən ɔl ɝaʊn hɝ, fleɪlɪŋ əweɪ ət ði ænəməlz wɪð wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ hæd tə hænd.

A shouting woman in brown wool swung her heavy basket at the dog tugging Toveine's skirt, making it dodge away. A round woman's bucket caught a brindled cur in the ribs, and it ran yelping. Toveine gaped in astonishment, and for her inattention had to pull her left leg away from another dog at the cost of a piece of her stocking and a little skin. There were women all around her, flailing away at the animals with whatever they had to hand.

"ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ə skɪni, ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən toʊl hɝ, slaɪsɪŋ əɾ ə spɑɾəd dɔɡ wɪð ə swɪtʃ. "ðeɪ woʊn bɑðɝ jə mɔɹ. aɪd laɪk ə naɪs kæt, maɪsɛlf, bʌt kæts woʊn əbaɪd ðə hʌzbənd naʊ. ɡoʊ ɑn."

"Go on with you, Aes Sedai," a skinny, graying woman told her, slicing at a spotted dog with a switch. "They won't bother you more. I'd like a nice cat, myself, but cats won't abide the husband now. Go on."

tʌvaɪn dɪd nɑt weɪt tə θæŋk əɹ ɹɛskjuɝz. ʃi ɹæn, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ fjʊɹiəsli. ðə wɪmən nu. ɪf wʌn dɪd, ðeɪ ɔl dɪd. bʌt ðeɪ wəd kæɹi noʊ mɛsədʒəz, ɡɪv noʊ hɛlp tə ən ɪskeɪp, nɑt wən ðeɪ wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə ɹɪmeɪn ðɛmsɛlvz. nɑɾ ɪf ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd wʌt ðeɪ wɝ hɛlpɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz ðæt.

Toveine did not wait to thank her rescuers. She ran, considering furiously. The women knew. If one did, they all did. But they would carry no messages, give no help to an escape, not when they were willing to remain themselves. Not if they understood what they were helping. There was that.

dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə lɑɡənz haʊs, wʌn ə sɛvɹəl daʊn ə nɛɹoʊɝ saɪd stʃɹit, ʃi sloʊɾ ən heɪstəli lɛt daʊn əɹ skɝts. eɪɾ əɹ naɪn mɛn ɪn blæk koʊts wɝ weɪɾɪŋ aʊtsaɪd, bɔɪz ən oʊlstɝz ən ɪn bɪtwin, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ə lɑɡən jɛt. ʃi kəd stɪl sɛns hɪm, fʊl ə pɝpəs bʌt kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ. ɹɛɾɪŋ, pɝhæps. ʃi wɔk ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ əɾ ə dɪɡnəfaɪd peɪs. kəmpoʊzd ən ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, noʊ mæɾɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. ʃi ɔlmoʊs mænədʒ tə fɝɡɛɾ əɹ fɹæntɪk flaɪt fɹəm ðə dɑɡz.

Just short of Logain's house, one of several down a narrower side street, she slowed and hastily let down her skirts. Eight or nine men in black coats were waiting outside, boys and oldsters and in between, but there was no sign of Logain yet. She could still sense him, full of purpose but concentrating. Reading, perhaps. She walked the rest of the way at a dignified pace. Composed and every inch an Aes Sedai, no matter the circumstances. She almost managed to forget her frantic flight from the dogs.

ðə haʊs sɝpɹaɪzd əɹ ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi sɔ ɪt. ʌðɝz ɑn ðə stʃɹit wɝ əz lɑɹdʒ ən tu lɑɹdʒɝ. ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi wʊɾən haʊs ə tu stɔɹiz, ðoʊ ðə ɹɛd dɔɹ, ʃʌɾɝz ən wɪndoʊ fɹeɪmz lʊkt ɑd. pleɪn kɝɾənz hɪd ði ɪntɪɹiɝ, bʌt ðə ɡlæs ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz wɑz soʊ pʊɹ ʃi daʊɾɪd ʃi cʊɾə sin ɛniθɪŋ klɪɹli wɪð ðə kɝɾənz dʒɹɔn. ə haʊs suɾəbəl fəɹ ə nɑɾ oʊvɝli səksɛsfəl ʃɑpkipɝ; hɑɹdli ðə dwɛlɪŋ fəɹ wʌn ə ðə moʊs noʊtɔɹiəs mɛn əlaɪv.

The house surprised her every time she saw it. Others on the street were as large and two larger. An ordinary wooden house of two stories, though the red door, shutters and window frames looked odd. Plain curtains hid the interior, but the glass in the windows was so poor she doubted she could have seen anything clearly with the curtains drawn. A house suitable for a not overly successful shopkeeper; hardly the dwelling for one of the most notorious men alive.

bɹifli ʃi wʌndɝd wʌt wɑz kipɪŋ ɡɑbɹɛl. ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝ bɑndəd tə lɑɡən hæd ðə seɪm ɪnstʃɹʌkʃən ʃi dɪd, ən əntɪl naʊ, ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn hɪɹ fɝst. ɡɑbɹɛl wɑz iɡɝ, stʌɾiɪŋ ði æʃəmən əz ɪf ʃi ɪntɛndəd ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə bʊk ɑn ðə sʌbʒɪkt. pɝhæps ʃi dɪd; bɹaʊnz wəd ɹaɪɾ əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ. ʃi pʊt ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝ aʊɾ ə hɝ maɪnd. ɔlðoʊ, ɪf ɡɑbɹɛl dɪd tɝn ʌp leɪt, ʃi wəɾ əv tə faɪn aʊt haʊ ðə wʊmən hæd mænədʒd ɪt. fəɹ naʊ, ʃi hæɾ əɹ oʊn stʌɾiɪŋ.

Briefly she wondered what was keeping Gabrelle. The other sister bonded to Logain had the same instruction she did, and until now, she had always been here first. Gabrelle was eager, studying the Asha'man as if she intended writing a book on the subject. Perhaps she did; Browns would write about anything. She put the other sister out of her mind. Although, if Gabrelle did turn up late, she would have to find out how the woman had managed it. For now, she had her own studying.

ðə mɛn aʊtsaɪd ðə ɹɛd dɔɹ aɪd hɝ, bʌt sɛd nʌθɪŋ, ivən tə wʌn ənʌðɝ. stɪl ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ænəmɑsəɾi. ðeɪ wɝ sɪmpli weɪɾɪŋ. nʌn hæɾ ə kloʊk, ðoʊ ðɛɹ bɹɛθ meɪd peɪl fɛðɝz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ɔl wɝ dɛɾəkeɪtəd, wɪð ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹd pɪn ɑn ðɛɹ kɑlɝz.

The men outside the red door eyed her, but said nothing, even to one another. Still there was no animosity. They were simply waiting. None had a cloak, though their breath made pale feathers in front of their faces. All were Dedicated, with the silver sword pin on their collars.

ɪt hæd bɪn ðə seɪm ɛvɹi mɔɹnɪŋ ʃi hæd ɹipɔɹɾəd ðɪs weɪ, ðoʊ nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ðə seɪm mɛn. ʃi nu sʌm, nu ðɛɹ neɪmz ət list, ən səmtaɪmz ə fju ʌðɝ ɡlin tɪdbɪts. ɛvɪn vɪntʃhoʊvə, ðə pɹɪɾi læɾ u hæd bɪn ðəɹ wən lɑɡən kæptʃɝd hɝ, linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə haʊs ən tɔɪɪŋ wɪð ə bɪɾ ə stʃɹɪŋ. dɑnɑloʊ sændʌmɪɹ, ɪf ðət wɑz ɪz ɹil neɪm, wɪð ɪz kɹis fɑɹmɝz feɪs ən ʃɑɹpli tʃɹɪmd ɔɪl bɪɹd, ətɛmptɪŋ ðə læŋɡwəd stæns i θɔɾ ə noʊbəlmən wəɾ əsum. ðə tæɹɑbənɝ ænʒɹəl ɡɛnhəld, ə skwɛɹ fɛloʊ wɪð ɪz hɛvi aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹɔn ɪn θɔɾ ən ɪz hænz klæsp bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk; hi wɔɹ ə ɡoʊl sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ, bʌt ʃi θɔɾ ɪm ən əpɹɛntəs u hæd ʃeɪvd ɪz mʌstæʃɪz ən əbændən ɪz veɪl. mɛzɝ kɹɪn, ə dəmɑni wɪð ɡɹeɪ əɾ ɪz tɛmpəlz, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹnəɾ ɪn ɪz lɛft ɪɹ; hi vɛɹi wɛl maɪt bi ə maɪnɝ noʊbəl. ʃi wɑz kəlɛktɪŋ ə nit faɪl ə neɪmz ən feɪsəz ɪn əɹ hɛd. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ðeɪ wəd bi hʌntəd daʊn, ən ɛvɹi pis ʌv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ðət kəd hɛlp aɪdɛntəfaɪ ðɛm wəd bi jusfəl.

It had been the same every morning she had reported this way, though not always the same men. She knew some, knew their names at least, and sometimes a few other gleaned tidbits. Evin Vinchova, the pretty lad who had been there when Logain captured her, leaning against the corner of the house and toying with a bit of string. Donalo Sandomere, if that was his real name, with his creased farmer's face and sharply trimmed oiled beard, attempting the languid stance he thought a nobleman would assume. The Taraboner Androl Genhald, a square fellow with his heavy eyebrows drawn in thought and his hands clasped behind his back; he wore a gold signet ring, but she thought him an apprentice who had shaved his mustaches and abandoned his veil. Mezar Kurin, a Domani with gray at his temples, fingering the garnet in his left ear; he very well might be a minor noble. She was collecting a neat file of names and faces in her head. Sooner or later they would be hunted down, and every piece of information that could help identify them would be useful.

ðə ɹɛd dɔɹ oʊpənd, ən ðə mɛn stʃɹeɪɾənd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt lɑɡən u keɪm aʊt.

The red door opened, and the men straightened, but it was not Logain who came out.

tʌvaɪn blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ðən mɛt ɡɑbɹɛlz suɾi ɡɹin aɪz wɪð ə flæt stɛɹ, meɪkɪŋ noʊ ɛfɝt tə haɪɾ əɹ dɪsɡʌst. ðəɾ əkɝs lɪŋk wɪð lɑɡən hæd meɪd klɪɹ wʌɾ i wɑz ʌp tə ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ - ʃi hæd bɪn əfɹeɪd ʃi wəd nɛvɝ fɔl əslip! - bʌt nɑɾ ɪn əɹ dɑɹkəst ɪmædʒɪnɪŋz hæd ʃi səspɛktəd ɡɑbɹɛl! səm ə ðə mɛn simd əz stɑɹɾəld əz ʃi. səm ətɛmptəd tə haɪd smaɪlz. kɹɪn ɡɹɪn oʊpənli ən stʃɹoʊkt ɪz θɪn mʌstæʃ wɪð ə θʌm.

Toveine blinked in surprise, then met Gabrelle's sooty green eyes with a flat stare, making no effort to hide her disgust. That accursed link with Logain had made clear what he was up to the night before - she had been afraid she would never fall asleep! - but not in her darkest imaginings had she suspected Gabrelle! Some of the men seemed as startled as she. Some attempted to hide smiles. Kurin grinned openly and stroked his thin mustache with a thumb.

ðə dʌski wʊmən dɪd nɑɾ ivən əv ðə ɡɹeɪs tə blʌʃ. ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ ʌptɝnd noʊz ə tʃɹaɪfəl, ðən boʊldli ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ dɑɹk blu dʒɹɛs oʊvɝ əɹ hɪps əz ɪf tə ædvɝtaɪz ðət ʃi hæd dʒʌs dɑn ðə ɡɑɹmənt. swipɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ʃi taɪd ðə ɹɪbənz əz ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd təwɔɹd tʌvaɪn, əz sɝin əz ɪf ʃi wɝ bæk ɪn ðə taʊɝ.

The dusky woman did not even have the grace to blush. She lifted her upturned nose a trifle, then boldly adjusted her dark blue dress over her hips as if to advertise that she had just donned the garment. Sweeping her cloak around her shoulders, she tied the ribbons as she glided toward Toveine, as serene as if she were back in the Tower.

tʌvaɪn ɡɹæb ðə tɔlɝ wʊmənz ɑɹm, pʊlɪŋ əɹ ə lɪɾəl weɪ fɹəm ðə mɛn. "wi meɪ bi kæptɪvz, ɡɑbɹɛl," ʃi wɪspɝd hɑɹʃli, "bʌt ðəɾ ɪz noʊ ɹizən tə sɝɛndɝ. ɪspɛʃli tə əblɝz vaɪl lʌsts!" ði ʌðɝ wʊmən dɪd nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz lʊk əbæʃt! ə θɔt keɪm. ʌv kɔɹs. "dɪɾ i . . . ? dɪɾ i ɔɹɾɝ ju?"

Toveine grabbed the taller woman's arm, pulling her a little way from the men. "We may be captives, Gabrelle," she whispered harshly, "but that is no reason to surrender. Especially to Ablar's vile lusts!" The other woman did not so much as look abashed! A thought came. Of course. "Did he . . . ? Did he order you?"

wɪð sʌmθɪŋ kloʊs tə ə snɪɹ, ɡɑbɹɛl pʊl fɹi. "tʌvaɪn, ɪt tʊk mi tu deɪz tə dɪsaɪɾ aɪ ʃəd 'sɝɛndɝ' tə hɪz lʌsts, əz jə pʊɾ ɪt. aɪ fil lʌki ɪɾ oʊnli ɹikwaɪɝd fɔɹ tə kənvɪns ɪm tə lɛt mi. jə ɹɛdz maɪt nɑt bi əwɛɹ, bʌt mɛn lʌv tə tɔk ən ɡɑsəp. ɔl jə nid də ɪz lɪsən, əɹ ivən pɹitɛn tə, ən ə mæn wɪl tɛl jə hɪz hoʊl laɪf." ə θɔtfəl fɹaʊn kɹist əɹ fɔɹhɛd, ən ðə twɪs tə hɝ lɪps vænɪʃt. "aɪ wʌndɝ wɛðɝ ɪts laɪk ðət fəɹ ɔɹɾənɛɹi wɪmən."

With something close to a sneer, Gabrelle pulled free. "Toveine, it took me two days to decide I should 'surrender' to his lusts, as you put it. I feel lucky it only required four to convince him to let me. You Reds might not be aware, but men love to talk and gossip. All you need do is listen, or even pretend to, and a man will tell you his whole life." A thoughtful frown creased her forehead, and the twist to her lips vanished. "I wonder whether it's like that for ordinary women."

"wɛðɝ wʌɾ ɪz laɪk wʌt?" tʌvaɪn dɪmændəd. ɡɑbɹɛl wɑz spaɪɪŋ ɑn hɪm? əɹ dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt mɔɹ mətɪɹiəl fəɹ əɹ bʊk? bʌt ðɪs wɑz ʌnbəlivəbəl, ivən fəɹ ə bɹaʊn! "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?"

"Whether what is like what?" Toveine demanded. Gabrelle was spying on him? Or just trying to get more material for her book? But this was unbelievable, even for a Brown! "What are you talking about?"

ðət mjuzɪŋ ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ lɛf ði ʌðɝz feɪs. "aɪ fɛlt . . . hɛlpləs. oʊ, hi wɑz dʒɛntəl, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ ɹɪli θɔt bɪfɔɹ ɑn haʊ stʃɹɔŋ ə mænz ɑɹmz ɑɹ, ən mi əneɪbəl tə tʃænəl ə wɪskɝ. hi wɑz . . . ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, aɪ səpoʊz, ðoʊ ðəɾ ɪzən kwaɪt ɹaɪt. dʒʌst . . . stʃɹɔŋɝ, ən aɪ nu ɪt. ɪt fɛlt . . . stʃɹeɪnʒli ɪɡzɪlɝeɪɾɪŋ."

That musing expression never left the other's face. "I felt . . . helpless. Oh, he was gentle, but I never really thought before on how strong a man's arms are, and me unable to channel a whisker. He was . . . in charge, I suppose, though that isn't quite right. Just . . . stronger, and I knew it. It felt . . . strangely exhilarating."

tʌvaɪn ʃʌɾɝəd. ɡɑbɹɛl mʌs bi ɪnseɪn! ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə tɛl əɹ soʊ wən lɑɡən hɪmsɛlf əpɪɹd, kloʊzɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi wɑz tɔl, tɔlɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ mæn ðɛɹ, wɪð dɑɹk hɛɹ ðət bɹʌʃt waɪd ʃoʊldɝz ən fɹeɪmd ən ɛɹəɡən feɪs. hɪz haɪ kɑlɝ kæɹid boʊθ ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ən ðət ɹɪdɪkjələs sneɪk wɪð lɛɡz. hi flæʃt ə smaɪl ət ɡɑbɹɛl əz ði ʌðɝz ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn hɪm. ðə hʌsi smaɪl bæk, tu. tʌvaɪn ʃʌɾɝəd əɡɛn. ɪɡzɪlɝeɪɾɪŋ. ðə wʊmən wɑz ɪnseɪn!

Toveine shuddered. Gabrelle must be insane! She was about to tell her so when Logain himself appeared, closing the door behind him. He was tall, taller than any other man there, with dark hair that brushed wide shoulders and framed an arrogant face. His high collar carried both the silver sword and that ridiculous snake with legs. He flashed a smile at Gabrelle as the others gathered around him. The hussy smiled back, too. Toveine shuddered again. Exhilarating. The woman was insane!

əz ɑn pɹiviəs mɔɹnɪŋz, ðə mɛn bɪɡæn meɪkɪŋ ɹɪpɔɹts. moʊst ə ðə taɪm, tʌvaɪn hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk ʌp fɹəm daʊn wɪð ðɛm, bʌt ʃi lɪsənd.

As on previous mornings, the men began making reports. Most of the time, Toveine had not been able to make up from down with them, but she listened.

"aɪ faʊn tu mɔɹ u sim ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ðət nu kaɪndə hilɪŋ ðɪs nɪneɪiv juzd ɑn ju, lɑɡən," ɡɛnhəl sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ, "bʌt wʌn kən bɛɹli də ðə hilɪŋ wi ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ, ən ði ʌðɝ, hi wɑns tə noʊ mɔɹ ðən aɪ kəd tɛl hɪm."

"I found two more who seem interested in that new kind of Healing this Nynaeve used on you, Logain," Genhald said, frowning, "but one can barely do the Healing we already know, and the other, he wants to know more than I could tell him."

"wʌt jə kən tɛl ɪm ɪz ɔl aɪ noʊ," lɑɡən ɹɪplaɪd. "mɪstʃɹəs ɑlmɹə dɪdn tɛl mi mʌtʃ ʌv wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, ən aɪ kəɾ oʊnli lɝn bɪts ən pisəz lɪsnɪŋ tə ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz tɔk. dʒʌs kip plæntɪŋ ðə siɾ ən hoʊp sʌmθɪŋ ɡɹoʊz. ɪts ɔl jə kən du. sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ mɛn nɑɾəd əlɔŋ wɪð ɡɛnhəld.

"What you can tell him is all I know," Logain replied. "Mistress al'Meara didn't tell me much of what she was doing, and I could only learn bits and pieces listening to the other sisters talk. Just keep planting the seed and hope something grows. It's all you can do. Several other men nodded along with Genhald.

tʌvaɪn faɪld ɪɾ əweɪ. nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə. ʃi hæd hɝd ðət neɪm ɔfən æftɝ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə taʊɝ. ənʌðɝ ɹʌnəweɪ æksɛptɪd, ənʌðɝ wʌn ɪleɪɾə wɑntəd mɔɹ ðən ðə nɔɹməl dɪzaɪɝ tə kætʃ ɹʌnəweɪz sim tə əkaʊn fɔɹ. fɹəm ðə seɪm vɪlədʒ əz ælθɹ, tu. ən əsoʊsieɪɾəd sʌmhaʊ wɪð lɑɡən. ðət maɪt lɛd tə sʌmθɪŋ, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. bʌɾ ə nu kaɪndə hilɪŋ? juz baɪ ən æksɛptɪd? ðət wɑz ənlaɪkli bɔɹɾɝɪŋ kloʊs ɑn ɪmpɑsəbəl, bʌt ʃi hæd sin ði ɪmpɑsəbəl hæpən bɪfɔɹ, soʊ ʃi tʌkt ɪɾ əweɪ. ɡɑbɹɛl wɑz lɪsnɪŋ kloʊsli, tu, ʃi noʊɾəst. bʌt wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ əz wɛl, aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ.

Toveine filed it away. Nynaeve al'Meara. She had heard that name often after returning to the Tower. Another runaway Accepted, another one Elaida wanted more than the normal desire to catch runaways seemed to account for. From the same village as al'Thor, too. And associated somehow with Logain. That might lead to something, eventually. But a new kind of Healing? Used by an Accepted? That was unlikely bordering close on impossible, but she had seen the impossible happen before, so she tucked it away. Gabrelle was listening closely, too, she noticed. But watching her as well, out of the corner of her eye.

"ðɛɹz ə pɹɑbləm wɪð səm ə ðoʊz tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, lɑɡən," vɪntʃhoʊvə sɛd. ən æŋɡɹi flʌʃ ɹoʊz ɑn ɪz smuð feɪs. "mɛn, aɪ seɪ, bʌt ðiz tu ɑɹ bɔɪz, fɔɹtin ət moʊst! ðeɪ woʊn seɪ." hi maɪɾ əv bɪn ə jɪɹ əɹ tu oʊldɝ, wɪð ɪz bɪɹdləs tʃiks. "ɪt wɑz ə kɹaɪm, bɹɪŋɪŋ əm hɪɹ."

"There's a problem with some of those Two Rivers men, Logain," Vinchova said. An angry flush rose on his smooth face. "Men, I say, but these two are boys, fourteen at most! They won't say." He might have been a year or two older, with his beardless cheeks. "It was a crime, bringing them here."

lɑɡən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd; wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ɪn æŋɡɝ əɹ ɹəɡɹɛt wɑz hɑɹd tə seɪ. "aɪv hɝd ðə waɪt taʊɝ teɪks ɡɝlz əz jʌŋ əz twɛlv. lʊk æftɝ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɛɹ jə kæn. noʊ kɑɾəlɪŋ, əɹ ði ʌðɝz wɪl tɝn ɑn ðɛm, bʌt tʃɹaɪ tə si ðeɪ doʊn də ɛniθɪŋ stupəd. ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən maɪt nɑt laɪk ɪɾ ɪf wi kɪl tu mɛni fɹəm ɪz dɪstʃɹɪkt."

Logain shook his head; whether it was in anger or regret was hard to say. "I've heard the White Tower takes girls as young as twelve. Look after the Two Rivers men where you can. No coddling, or the others will turn on them, but try to see they don't do anything stupid. The Lord Dragon might not like it if we kill too many from his district."

"hi dʌzn sim tə bi kɛɹɪŋ mʌtʃ əɾ ɔl əz aɪ kən si," ə slik fɛloʊ mʌɾɝd. ðə saʊn ə mʊɹændi wɑz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ɪz maʊθ, ðoʊ hɪz fɪɹsli kɝl mʌstæʃɪz toʊld wɛɹ i wɑz fɹəm pleɪnli ɪnʌf. hi wɑz ɹoʊlɪŋ ə sɪlvɝ kɔɪn əkɹɔs ðə bæks ə hɪz fɪŋɡɝz ən simd əz ɪntɛn ɑn ðəɾ əz ɑn lɑɡən. "aɪ wɑz hɪɹɪŋ ɪt wɑz ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən hɪmsɛlf toʊl ðə l tə plʌk ʌp ɛniθɪŋ meɪl ɪn ðɪs tu ɹɪvɝz ðət kəd tʃænəl, daʊn tə ðə ɹustɝz. wɪð ðə nʌmbɝ i bɹɔt bæk, aɪm dʒʌst sɝpɹaɪzd i dɪdn bɹɪŋ ðə tʃɪks ən læmz, əz wɛl." tʃʌkəlz mɛɾ ɪz sæli, bʌt lɑɡənz lɛvəl toʊnz kʌɾ əm laɪk ə bleɪd.

"He doesn't seem to be caring much at all as I can see," a sleek fellow muttered. The sound of Murandy was strong in his mouth, though his fiercely curled mustaches told where he was from plainly enough. He was rolling a silver coin across the backs of his fingers and seemed as intent on that as on Logain. "I was hearing it was the Lord Dragon himself told the M'Hael to pluck up anything male in this Two Rivers that could channel, down to the roosters. With the number he brought back, I'm just surprised he didn't bring the chicks and lambs, as well." Chuckles met his sally, but Logain's level tones cut them like a blade.

"wʌtɛvɝ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɔɹɾɝd, aɪ tʃɹʌst aɪv meɪd maɪ ɔɹɾɝz klɪɹ." ɛvɹi hɛd nɑɾəd ðɪs taɪm, ən səm mɛn mɝmɝd "jɛs, lɑɡən" ən "æz jə seɪ, lɑɡən."

"Whatever the Lord Dragon ordered, I trust I've made my orders clear." Every head nodded this time, and some men murmured "Yes, Logain" and "As you say, Logain."

tʌvaɪn heɪstəli smuðd ðə snɪɹ fɹəm əɹ lɪps. ɪɡnɝən laʊts. ðə taʊɝ æksɛptɪd ɡɝlz ʌndɝ fɪftin oʊnli ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡʌn tʃænəlɪŋ. ði ʌðɝ wɑz ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, ðoʊ. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz əɡɛn. ɛvɹiwʌn sɛɾ ælθɹ hæd tɝn ɪz bæk ɑn ɪz hoʊm, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt soʊ sɝɾən. waɪ wɑz ɡɑbɹɛl wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ?

Toveine hastily smoothed the sneer from her lips. Ignorant louts. The Tower accepted girls under fifteen only if they had already begun channeling. The other was interesting, though. The Two Rivers again. Everyone said al'Thor had turned his back on his home, but she was not so certain. Why was Gabrelle watching her?

"læs naɪt," sændʌmɪɹ sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt, "aɪ lɝn ðət mɪʃɹeɪl ɪz hævɪŋ pɹaɪvət lɛsənz fɹəm ðə l." hi stʃɹoʊkt ɪz pɔɪntəd bɪɹd wɪð sæɾəsfækʃən, əz ɪf i hæd pɹədust ə dʒɛm ʌv ɡɹeɪt pɹaɪs.

"Last night," Sandomere said after a moment, "I learned that Mishraile is having private lessons from the M'Hael." He stroked his pointed beard with satisfaction, as if he had produced a gem of great price.

pɝhæps i hæd, bʌt tʌvaɪn kəd nɑt seɪ wʌt kaɪnd. lɑɡən nɑɾəd sloʊli. ði ʌðɝz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd saɪlən lʊks wɪð feɪsəz ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn kɑɹvd. ʃi tʃud fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən, wɑtʃɪŋ. tu ɔfən ɪt wɑz laɪk ðɪs, mæɾɝz ðeɪ sɔ noʊ ɹizən tə kɑmɛn ɑn - əɹ fɪɹd tə? - ən ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. ʃi ɔlweɪz fɛl ðəɹ wɝ dʒɛmz hɪɾən ðɛɹ, bɪɑn əɹ ɹitʃ.

Perhaps he had, but Toveine could not say what kind. Logain nodded slowly. The others exchanged silent looks with faces that might have been carved. She chewed frustration, watching. Too often it was like this, matters they saw no reason to comment on - or feared to? - and she did not understand. She always felt there were gems hidden there, beyond her reach.

ə waɪd kɛɹhinɪn fɛloʊ, bɛɹli əz tɔl əz lɑɡənz tʃɛst, oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, bʌt wɛðɝ i mɛn tə spik ə mɪʃɹeɪl, huɛvɝ i wɑz, ʃi nɛvɝ faʊn aʊt.

A wide Cairhienin fellow, barely as tall as Logain's chest, opened his mouth, but whether he meant to speak of Mishraile, whoever he was, she never found out.

"lɑɡən!" wɛlɪn kɑdʒimə paʊndɪd daʊn ðə stʃɹiɾ əɾ ə dɛd ɹʌn, ðə bɛlz ət ði ɛnz ə hɪz blæk bɹeɪdz dʒæŋɡəlɪŋ. ənʌðɝ dɛɾəkeɪtəd, ə mæn ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz u smaɪl tu mʌtʃ, hi hæd bɪn ðəɹ wən lɑɡən kæptʃɝd hɝ, tu. kɑdʒimə hæd bɑndəd dʒɛnɛɹ. hi wɑz ɔlmoʊst aʊɾ ə bɹɛθ wən i pʊʃt θɹu ði ʌðɝ mɛn, ən i wɑz nɑt smaɪlɪŋ naʊ.

"Logain!" Welyn Kajima pounded down the street at a dead run, the bells at the ends of his black braids jangling. Another Dedicated, a man in his middle years who smiled too much, he had been there when Logain captured her, too. Kajima had bonded Jenare. He was almost out of breath when he pushed through the other men, and he was not smiling now.

"lɑɡən," hi pæntɪd, "ðə lz bæk fɹəm kɛɹhin, ən hiz poʊstɪd nu dɛzɝɾɝz ɑn ðə bɔɹɾ ət ðə pæləs. jə woʊn bɪliv ðə neɪmz!" hi spɪld aʊɾ ɪz lɪst ɪn ə bɹɛθləs ɹʌʃ əmɪɾ ɛkskləmeɪʃənz fɹəm ði ʌðɝz ðət kɛp tʌvaɪn fɹəm hɪɹɪŋ mɔɹ ðən fɹæɡməns.

"Logain," he panted, "the M'Hael's back from Cairhien, and he's posted new deserters on the board at the palace. You won't believe the names!" He spilled out his list in a breathless rush amid exclamations from the others that kept Toveine from hearing more than fragments.

"dɛɾəkeɪtəd əv dɪzɝɾɪd bɪfɔɹ," ðə kɛɹhinɪn mʌɾɝd wən kɑdʒimə wɑz dʌn, "bʌt nɛvɝ ə fʊl æʃəmən. ən naʊ sɛvən ət wʌns?"

"Dedicated have deserted before," the Cairhienin muttered when Kajima was done, "but never a full Asha'man. And now seven at once?"

"ɪf jə doʊn bɪliv mi," kɑdʒimə bɪɡæn, dʒɹɔɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɪn ə fʌsi mænɝ. hi hæd bɪn ə klɝk, ɪn ɝæfəl.

"If you don't believe me," Kajima began, drawing himself up in a fussy manner. He had been a clerk, in Arafel.

"wi bɪliv ju," ɡɛnhəl sɛd suðɪŋli. "bʌt dʒɛdwɪn ən tɔɹvəl, ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə lz mɛn. ɹɑtʃeɪɾ ən kɪsmən, tu. waɪ wəd ðeɪ dɪzɝt? hi ɡeɪv əm ɛniθɪŋ ə kɪŋ kəd wɑnt."

"We believe you," Genhald said soothingly. "But Gedwyn and Torval, they are the M'Hael's men. Rochaid and Kisman, too. Why would they desert? He gave them anything a king could want."

kɑdʒimə ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli, meɪkɪŋ ɪz bɛlz tʃaɪm. "ju noʊ ðə lɪs nɛvɝ ɡɪvz ɹizənz. dʒʌs neɪmz."

Kajima shook his head irritably, making his bells chime. "You know the list never gives reasons. Just names."

"ɡʊd ɹɪɾəns," kɹɪn ɡɹaʊld. "æt list, ɪt wəd bi ɪf wi dɪdn əv tə hʌn əm daʊn, naʊ."

"Good riddance," Kurin growled. "At least, it would be if we didn't have to hunt them down, now."

"ɪts ði ʌðɝz aɪ kænɑɾ ʌndɝstænd," sændʌmɪɹ pʊɾ ɪn. "aɪ wɑz ət dəməaɪz wɛlz. aɪ sɔ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən tʃuz, æftɝ. dæʃivə hæɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ðə klaʊdz, laɪk ɔlweɪz. bʌt flɪn, hɑpwəl, nɛɹɪʃmə? jə nɛvɝ sɔ mɛn mɔɹ plizd. ðeɪ wɝ laɪk læmz lɛt lus ɪn ðə bɑɹli ʃɛd."

"It's the others I cannot understand," Sandomere put in. "I was at Dumai's Wells. I saw the Lord Dragon choose, after. Dashiva had his head in the clouds, like always. But Flinn, Hopwil, Narishma? You never saw men more pleased. They were like lambs let loose in the barley shed."

ə stɝɾi fɛloʊ wɪð ɡɹeɪ ɪn ɪz hɛɹ spæt. "wɛl, aɪ wɑzn ət ðə wɛlz, bʌɾ aɪ wɛn saʊθ əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn." hɪz æksɛns wɝ ændɔɝən. "meɪbi ðə læmz dɪdn laɪk ðə bʊtʃɝz jɑɹɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ dɪd ðə bɑɹli ʃɛd."

A sturdy fellow with gray in his hair spat. "Well, I wasn't at the Wells, but I went south against the Seanchan." His accents were Andoran. "Maybe the lambs didn't like the butcher's yard as much as they did the barley shed."

lɑɡən hæd bɪn lɪsnɪŋ wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ pɑɹt, ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst. hɪz feɪs wɑz ənɹiɾəbəl, ə mæsk. "du jə wɝi əbaʊt ðə bʊtʃɝz jɑɹd, kænlɝ?" hi sɛd naʊ.

Logain had been listening without taking part, arms folded across his chest. His face was unreadable, a mask. "Do you worry about the butcher's yard, Canler?" he said now.

ði ændɔɝən ɡɹɪməst, ðən ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪ ɹɛkən wɝ ɔl hɛɾəd ðɛɹ, sun əɹ leɪt, lɑɡən. doʊn si wɪv mʌtʃ tʃɔɪs, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn əv tə ɡɹɪn əbaʊɾ ɪt."

The Andoran grimaced, then shrugged. "I reckon we're all headed there, soon or late, Logain. Don't see we have much choice, but I don't have to grin about it."

"æz lɔŋ əz jəɹ ðəɹ ɑn ðə deɪ," lɑɡən sɛd kwaɪətli. hi ədʒɹɛs ðə mæn kɔl kænlɝ, bʌt sɛvɹəl ə ði ʌðɝz nɑɾəd.

"As long as you're there on the day," Logain said quietly. He addressed the man called Canler, but several of the others nodded.

lʊkɪŋ pæs ðə mɛn, lɑɡən kənsɪɾɝd tʌvaɪn ən ɡɑbɹɛl. tʌvaɪn tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ, ən ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ neɪmz fɪɹsli. "ɡoʊ ɪnsaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə koʊld," hi toʊl ðɛm. "hæv səm ti tə wɔɹm ju. əl bi bæk əz sun əz aɪ kæn. doʊn tʌtʃ maɪ peɪpɝz." ɡæðɝɪŋ ʌp ði ʌðɝ mɛn wɪð ə dʒɛstʃɝ, hi lɛɾ əm ɔf ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən kɑdʒimə hæd kʌm fɹʌm.

Looking past the men, Logain considered Toveine and Gabrelle. Toveine tried to look as if she had not been eavesdropping, and remembering names fiercely. "Go inside out of the cold," he told them. "Have some tea to warm you. I'll be back as soon as I can. Don't touch my papers." Gathering up the other men with a gesture, he led them off in the direction Kajima had come from.

tʌvaɪn ɡɹɪɾɪd əɹ tiθ ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. ət list ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv tə fɑloʊ hɪm tə ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɡɹaʊnz, pæs ðə soʊ-kɔl tʃɹeɪɾɝz tʃɹi, wɛɹ hɛdz hʌŋ laɪk dɪziz fɹut fɹəm ðə bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz, ən wɑtʃ mɛn stʌɾiɪŋ haʊ tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ wɪð ðə paʊɝ, bʌt ʃi hæd hoʊp fəɹ ənʌðɝ deɪ tə hɝsɛlf, fɹi tə wɑndɝ əbaʊɾ ən si wʌt ʃi kəd lɝn. ʃi hæd hɝd mɛn spik ə teɪmz "pæləs" bɪfɔɹ, ən tədeɪ ʃi hæd hoʊp tə faɪn ɪɾ ən pɝhæps kætʃ ə ɡlɪmps ə ðə mæn huz neɪm wɑz əz blæk əz lɑɡənz. ɪnstɛd, ʃi mikli fɑloʊd ði ʌðɝ wʊmən θɹu ðə ɹɛd dɔɹ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ jus ɪn faɪɾɪŋ ɪt.

Toveine gritted her teeth in frustration. At least she would not have to follow him to the training grounds, past the so-called Traitor's Tree, where heads hung like diseased fruit from the bare branches, and watch men studying how to destroy with the Power, but she had hoped for another day to herself, free to wander about and see what she could learn. She had heard men speak of Taim's "palace" before, and today she had hoped to find it and perhaps catch a glimpse of the man whose name was as black as Logain's. Instead, she meekly followed the other woman through the red door. There was no use in fighting it.

ɪnsaɪd, ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə fɹʌn ɹum waɪl ɡɑbɹɛl hʌŋ əɹ kloʊk ɑn ə pɛɡ. dɪspaɪt ði ɪkstɪɹiɝ, ʃi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd sʌmθɪŋ ɡɹændɝ fəɹ lɑɡən. ə loʊ faɪɝ bɝn ɪn ə ɹʌf stoʊn faɪɝpleɪs. ə lɔŋ nɛɹoʊ teɪbəl ən læɾɝ-bækt tʃɛɹz stʊɾ ɑn bɛɹ flɔɹbɔɹdz. ə dɛsk, oʊnli slaɪtli mɔɹ ɪlæbɹət ðən ði ʌðɝ fɝnɪʃɪŋz, kɑɾ əɹ aɪ. stæks ə lɪɾɪd lɛɾɝbɑksɪz lɪɾɝd ðə dɛsktɑp, ən lɛðɝ foʊldɝz fʊl ə lɔŋ ʃits ə peɪpɝ. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz ɪtʃt, bʌt ʃi nu ðəɾ ivən ɪf ʃi sæɾ ət ðə dɛsk, ʃi wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə leɪ ə fɪŋɡɝ ɑn ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ðə pɛn əɹ ɡlæs ɪŋk bɑɾəl.

Inside, she looked around the front room while Gabrelle hung her cloak on a peg. Despite the exterior, she had expected something grander for Logain. A low fire burned in a rough stone fireplace. A long narrow table and ladder-backed chairs stood on bare floorboards. A desk, only slightly more elaborate than the other furnishings, caught her eye. Stacks of lidded letterboxes littered the desktop, and leather folders full of long sheets of paper. Her fingers itched, but she knew that even if she sat at the desk, she would not be able to lay a finger on anything more than the pen or glass ink bottle.

wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi fɑloʊd ɡɑbɹɛl ɪndə ðə kɪtʃən, wɛɹ ən aɪɝn stoʊv ɡeɪv tu mʌtʃ hiɾ ən dɝɾi bɹɛkfəs dɪʃəz sæɾ ɑn ə loʊ kæbənət bɪniθ ðə wɪndoʊ. ɡɑbɹɛl fɪld ə tikɛɾəl ən pʊɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə stoʊv, ðən tʊk ə ɡɹin-ɡleɪz tipɑɾ ən ə wʊɾən kænəstɝ fɹəm ənʌðɝ kæbənət. tʌvaɪn dʒɹeɪpt əɹ kloʊk oʊvɝ ə tʃɛɹ ən sæt daʊn ət ðə skwɛɹ teɪbəl. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ti ənlɛs ɪt keɪm wɪð ðə bɹɛkfəst ʃi hæd mɪst, bʌt ʃi nu ʃi wɑz gɑnə dʒɹɪŋk ɪt.

With a sigh, she followed Gabrelle into the kitchen, where an iron stove gave too much heat and dirty breakfast dishes sat on a low cabinet beneath the window. Gabrelle filled a teakettle and put it on the stove, then took a green-glazed teapot and a wooden canister from another cabinet. Toveine draped her cloak over a chair and sat down at the square table. She did not want tea unless it came with the breakfast she had missed, but she knew she was going to drink it.

ðə sɪli bɹaʊn næɾɝd ɑn əz ʃi kæɹiɾ aʊɾ əɹ dəmɛstɪk tæsks laɪk ə kəntɛntəd fɑɹmwaɪf. "aɪv lɝn ə ɡʊd dil ɔlɹɛɾi. lɑɡən ɪz ði oʊnli fʊl æʃəmən tə lɪv hɪɹ ɪn ðɪs vɪlədʒ. ði ʌðɝz ɔl lɪv ɪn teɪmz 'pæləs.' ðeɪv sɝvəns, bʌt lɑɡən haɪɝd ðə waɪf ʌv ə mæn ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə kʊk ən klin fəɹ hɪm. ʃɪl bi hɪɹ sun, ən ʃi θɪŋks i pʊt ðə sʌn ɪn ðə skaɪ, soʊ wi bɛs bi dʌn tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt baɪ ðɛn. hi faʊn jəɹ læpdɛsk."

The silly Brown nattered on as she carried out her domestic tasks like a contented farmwife. "I've learned a good deal already. Logain is the only full Asha'man to live here in this village. The others all live in Taim's 'palace.' They have servants, but Logain hired the wife of a man in training to cook and clean for him. She'll be here soon, and she thinks he put the sun in the sky, so we best be done talking about anything important by then. He found your lapdesk."

tʌvaɪn fɛlt əz ðoʊ ən aɪsi hæn hæd sizd əɹ θɹoʊt. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ ɪt, bʌt ɡɑbɹɛl wɑz lʊkɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət hɝ.

Toveine felt as though an icy hand had seized her throat. She tried to hide it, but Gabrelle was looking straight at her.

"hi bɝn ɪt, tʌvaɪn. æftɝ ɹiɾɪŋ ðə kɑntɛns. hi sim tə θɪŋk i hæd dʌn əs ə feɪvɝ."

"He burned it, Toveine. After reading the contents. He seemed to think he had done us a favor."

ðə hæn izd, ən tʌvaɪn kəd bɹið əɡɛn. "ɪleɪɾəz ɔɹɾɝ wɑz əmʌŋ maɪ peɪpɝz." ʃi klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt tə ɹɪd hɝsɛlf ə hɔɹsnəs. ɪleɪɾəz ɔɹɾɝ tə dʒɛntəl ɛvɹi mæn faʊn hɪɹ ən ðən hæŋ əm ɑn ðə spɑt, wɪθaʊt ðə tʃɹaɪəl ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn ɹikwaɪɝd baɪ taʊɝ lɔ. "ʃi ɪmpoʊz hɑɹʃ kəndɪʃənz, ən ðiz mɛn wʊɾə ɹiæktəd hɑɹʃli, ɪf ðeɪ nu." ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə hit fɹəm ðə stoʊv, ʃi ʃɪvɝd. ðət sɪŋɡəl peɪpɝ cʊɾə ɡɑɾən əm ɔl stɪld ən hæŋd. "waɪ wəɾ i də əs feɪvɝz?"

The hand eased, and Toveine could breathe again. "Elaida's order was among my papers." She cleared her throat to rid herself of hoarseness. Elaida's order to gentle every man found here and then hang them on the spot, without the trial in Tar Valon required by Tower law. "She imposed harsh conditions, and these men would have reacted harshly, if they knew." In spite of the heat from the stove, she shivered. That single paper could have gotten them all stilled and hanged. "Why would he do us favors?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ, tʌvaɪn. hi ɪzən ə vɪlən, noʊ mɔɹ ðən moʊs mɛn. ɪt kəd bi əz sɪmpəl əz ðæt." ɡɑbɹɛl sɛɾ ə pleɪɾ ə kɹʌstɪd ɹoʊlz ən ənʌðɝ wɪð waɪt tʃiz ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "ɔɹ ɪt kəd bi ðət ðɪs bɑn ɪz laɪk ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn ɪn mɔɹ weɪz ðən wi noʊ. meɪbi hi dʒʌs dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɪkspɪɹiəns ðə tu ʌv əs biɪŋ ɛksəkjuɾəd." tʌvaɪnz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld, bʌt ʃi pɪkt ʌp ə ɹoʊl əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ə nɪbəl.

"I don't know why, Toveine. He isn't a villain, no more than most men. It could be as simple as that." Gabrelle set a plate of crusted rolls and another with white cheese on the table. "Or it could be that this bond is like the Warder bond in more ways than we know. Maybe he just did not want to experience the two of us being executed." Toveine's stomach rumbled, but she picked up a roll as if she did not care for more than a nibble.

"aɪ səspɛkt 'hɑɹʃ' wɑz ə maɪl tʃɔɪs ʌv wɝdz," ɡɑbɹɛl wɛn ɑn, spunɪŋ ti ɪndə ðə tipɑt. "aɪ sɔ jə flɪntʃ. ʌv kɔɹs, ðeɪ wɛn tə ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə tʃɹʌbəl tə bɹɪŋ əs hɪɹ. fɪfti-wʌn sɪstɝz ɪn ðɛɹ mɪdst, ən ivən wɪð ðə bɑnd, ðeɪ mʌs fɪɹ wɪl faɪn səm weɪ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ ɔɹɾɝz, səm luphoʊl ðeɪ mɪst. ði ɑbviəs ænsɝ ɪz, ɪf wi wɝ dɛd, ðə taʊɝ wəd bi ɹaʊz tə fjʊɹi. wɪð əs əlaɪv ən kæptɪv, ivən ɪleɪɾə wɪl muv kɔʃəsli." ʃi læft, kwaɪətli əmjuzd. "jɔɹ feɪs, tʌvaɪn. dɪd jə θɪŋk aɪv spɛn ɔl maɪ taɪm θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt tæŋəlɪŋ maɪ fɪŋɡɝz ɪn lɑɡənz hɛɹ?"

"I suspect 'harsh' was a mild choice of words," Gabrelle went on, spooning tea into the teapot. "I saw you flinch. Of course, they went to a great deal of trouble to bring us here. Fifty-one sisters in their midst, and even with the bond, they must fear we'll find some way around their orders, some loophole they missed. The obvious answer is, if we were dead, the Tower would be roused to fury. With us alive and captive, even Elaida will move cautiously." She laughed, quietly amused. "Your face, Toveine. Did you think I've spent all my time thinking about tangling my fingers in Logain's hair?"

tʌvaɪn kloʊzd əɹ maʊθ ən pʊt daʊn ði əntʌtʃt ɹoʊl. ɪt wɑz koʊld, ɛniweɪ, ən fɛl hɑɹd. ɔlweɪz ə mɪsteɪk tə əsum bɹaʊnz wɝ ənwɝldli, əbzɔɹbd ɪn ðɛɹ bʊks ən stʌɾiz tə ði ɪkskluʒən ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. "wʌɾ ɛls əv jə sin?"

Toveine closed her mouth and put down the untouched roll. It was cold, anyway, and felt hard. Always a mistake to assume Browns were unworldly, absorbed in their books and studies to the exclusion of everything else. "What else have you seen?"

stɪl ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə spun, ɡɑbɹɛl sæɾ əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl fɹəm əɹ ən lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntɛnli. "ðɛɹ wɔl meɪ bi stʃɹɔŋ wən ɪts dʌn, bʌt ðɪs pleɪs ɪz fʊl ə fɹæktʃɝz. ðəɹ ɪz mæzɹim teɪmz fækʃən, ən lɑɡənz fækʃən, ðoʊ aɪm ənsɝɾən iðɝ θɪŋks ə ðɛm soʊ. pɝhæps ʌðɝ fækʃənz, tu, ən sɝɾənli mɛn u doʊnt noʊ ðəɹ ɑɹ fækʃənz. fɪfti-wʌn sɪstɝz ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə meɪk sʌmθɪŋ ə ðæt, ivən wɪð ðə bɑnd. ðə sɛkən kwɛstʃən ɪz, wʌt də wi meɪk ʌv ɪt?"

Still gripping the spoon, Gabrelle sat across the table from her and leaned forward intently. "Their wall may be strong when it's done, but this place is full of fractures. There is Mazrim Taim's faction, and Logain's faction, though I am uncertain either thinks of them so. Perhaps other factions, too, and certainly men who don't know there are factions. Fifty-one sisters should be able to make something of that, even with the bond. The second question is, what do we make of it?"

"ðə sɛkən kwɛstʃən?" tʌvaɪn dɪmændəd, bʌt ði ʌðɝ wʊmən mɪɹli weɪɾəd. "ɪf wi mænədʒ tə bɹeɪk ðoʊz fɪʃɝz oʊpən," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli, "wi skæɾɝ tɛn əɹ fɪfti əɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd bænz əkɹɔs ðə wɝld, itʃ mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən ɛni ɑɹmi ɛvɝ sin. kætʃɪŋ əm ɔl maɪt teɪk ə laɪftaɪm ən ɹɪp ðə wɝld əpɑɹt laɪk ə nu bɹeɪkɪŋ, ən ðət wɪð tɑɹmən ɡdən ɑn ɪts weɪ. ðəɾ ɪz, ɪf ðɪs fɛloʊ ælθɹ ɹɪli ɪz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn." ɡɑbɹɛl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt tʌvaɪn weɪvd əweɪ wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ. ðəɾ i wɑz, vɛɹi laɪkli. ɪt hɑɹdli mæɾɝd, hɪɹ ən naʊ. "bʌɾ ɪf wi doʊnt . . . pʊt daʊn ðə ɹɪbɛljən ən ɡæðɝ ðoʊz sɪstɝz bæk tə ðə taʊɝ, kɔl bæk ɛvɹi ɹɪtaɪɹd sɪstɝ, ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ ɔl ʌv əs təɡɛðɝ kəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðɪs pleɪs. aɪ səspɛk hæf ðə taʊɝ wəd daɪ ɪn ði ətɛmpt, iðɝ weɪ. wʌɾ ɪz ðə fɝs kwɛstʃən?"

"The second question?" Toveine demanded, but the other woman merely waited. "If we manage to break those fissures open," she said finally, "we scatter ten or fifty or a hundred bands across the world, each more dangerous than any army ever seen. Catching them all might take a lifetime and rip the world apart like a new Breaking, and that with Tarmon Gai'don on its way. That is, if this fellow al'Thor really is the Dragon Reborn." Gabrelle opened her mouth, but Toveine waved away whatever she was going to say. That he was, very likely. It hardly mattered, here and now. "But if we don't . . . Put down the rebellion and gather those sisters back to the Tower, call back every retired sister, and I don't know whether all of us together could destroy this place. I suspect half the Tower would die in the attempt, either way. What is the first question?"

ɡɑbɹɛl lin bæk ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ, hɝ feɪs sʌɾənli wɪɹi. "jɛs, nɑɾ ən izi dɪsɪʒən. ən ðeɪ bɹɪŋ ɪn mɔɹ mɛn ɛvɹi deɪ. fɪftin əɹ twɛnti sɪns wiv bɪn hɪɹ, aɪ bɪliv."

Gabrelle leaned back in her chair, her face suddenly weary. "Yes, not an easy decision. And they bring in more men every day. Fifteen or twenty since we've been here, I believe."

"aɪ woʊn bi tʃɹaɪfəld wɪð, ɡɑbɹɛl! wʌɾ ɪz ðə fɝs kwɛstʃən?" ðə bɹaʊnz ɡeɪz ʃɑɹpənd, stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt.

"I won't be trifled with, Gabrelle! What is the first question?" The Brown's gaze sharpened, stared at her for a long moment.

"sun, ðə ʃɑk wɪl wɛɹ ɔf," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "wʌt kʌmz ðɛn? ði əθɔɹəɾi ɪleɪɾə ɡeɪv jə ɪz fɪnɪʃt; ði ɛkspədɪʃən ɪz fɪnɪʃt. ðə fɝs kwɛstʃən ɪz, ɑɹ wi fɪfti-wʌn sɪstɝz junaɪɾəd, əɹ də wi ɹɪvɝt tə biɪŋ bɹaʊnz ən ɹɛdz, jɛloʊz ən ɡɹinz ən ɡɹeɪz? ən pʊɹ aɪɑkoʊ, hu mʌs bi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðət ðə waɪts ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn hævɪŋ ə sɪstɝ ɪnkluɾəd. ləməaɪ ən deɪsɑndɝ stæn haɪəst əmʌŋ ʌs." ɡɑbɹɛl weɪv ðə spun ɪn ædmɑnɪʃmənt. "ði oʊnli tʃæns wɪv ə hoʊldɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ɪz ɪf jə ən aɪ pʌblɪkli səbmɪt tə deɪsɑndɝz əθɔɹəɾi. wi mʌst! ðət wɪl stɑɹɾ ɪt, əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt. aɪ hoʊp. ɪf wi kən oʊnli bɹɪŋ ə fju ʌðɝz, tə bɪɡɪn wɪð, ɪɾəl bi ə stɑɹt."

"Soon, the shock will wear off," she said finally. "What comes then? The authority Elaida gave you is finished; the expedition is finished. The first question is, are we fifty-one sisters united, or do we revert to being Browns and Reds, Yellows and Greens and Grays? And poor Ayako, who must be regretting that the Whites insisted on having a sister included. Lemai and Desandre stand highest among us." Gabrelle waved the spoon in admonishment. "The only chance we have of holding together is if you and I publicly submit to Desandre's authority. We must! That will start it, at any rate. I hope. If we can only bring a few others, to begin with, it will be a start."

tʌvaɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən pɹitɛndəd tə stɛɹ ət nʌθɪŋ, əz ɪf kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. səbmɪɾɪŋ tə ə sɪstɝ u stʊd haɪɝ ðən ʃi wɑz noʊ hɑɹdʃɪp, ɪn ɪtsɛlf. ði ədʒəz hæɾ ɔlweɪz kɛp sikɹəts, ən səmtaɪmz skimd ə lɪɾəl əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ, bʌt ði oʊpən dɪsɛnʃən ɪn ðə taʊɝ naʊ əpɔl hɝ. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi hæd lɝn haʊ tə bi hʌmbəl bɪfɔɹ mɪstʃɹəs daʊil. ʃi wʌndɝd haʊ ðə wʊmən ɛndʒɔɪd pɑvɝɾi, ən wɝkɪŋ ɑn ə fɑɹm fəɹ ə tæskməstʃɹəs ivən hɑɹʃɝ ðən hɝsɛlf.

Toveine drew a deep breath and pretended to stare at nothing, as if considering. Submitting to a sister who stood higher than she was no hardship, in itself. The Ajahs had always kept secrets, and sometimes schemed a little against one another, but the open dissension in the Tower now appalled her. Besides, she had learned how to be humble before Mistress Doweel. She wondered how the woman enjoyed poverty, and working on a farm for a taskmistress even harsher than herself.

"aɪ kən bɹɪŋ maɪsɛlf tə ɪt," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "wi ʃəɾ əv ə plæn ʌv ækʃən tə pɹizɛn tə deɪsɑndɝ ən ləməaɪ, ɪf wi min tə kənvɪns ðɛm." ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi hæd wʌn pɑɹtli fɔɹmd, ɪf nɑt fəɹ pɹɛzənteɪʃən tə ɛniwʌn. "oʊ, ðə wɔɾɝ ɪz bɔɪlɪŋ, ɡɑbɹɛl."

"I can bring myself to it," she said finally. "We should have a plan of action to present to Desandre and Lemai, if we mean to convince them." She already had one partly formed, if not for presentation to anyone. "Oh, the water is boiling, Gabrelle."

sʌɾənli smaɪlɪŋ, ðə fulɪʃ wʊmən ɹoʊz ən hɝid tə ðə stoʊv. bɹaʊnz ɔlweɪz wɝ bɛɾɝ ɹɛɾɪŋ bʊks ðən pipəl, kʌm tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt. bɪfɔɹ lɑɡən ən teɪm ən ðə ɹɛst wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪd, ðeɪ wəd hɛlp tʌvaɪn ɡæzəl bɹɪŋ daʊn ɪleɪɾə.

Suddenly smiling, the foolish woman rose and hurried to the stove. Browns always were better reading books than people, come to think of it. Before Logain and Taim and the rest were destroyed, they would help Toveine Gazal bring down Elaida.

ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi ʌv kɛɹhin wɑz ə hʌlkɪŋ mæs ɪnsaɪd mæsɪv wɔlz, kɹaʊɾɪŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ ɑlɡnjə. ðə skaɪ wɑz klɪɹ ən klaʊdləs, bʌɾ ə koʊld wɪn blu ən ðə sʌn ʃoʊn ɑn ɹufs kʌvɝd wɪð snoʊ, ɡlɪntɪɾ ɑn aɪsɪkəlz ðət ʃoʊd noʊ saɪn ə mɛltɪŋ. ði ɑlɡnjə wɑz nɑt fɹoʊzən, bʌt smɔl, dʒæɡd aɪs floʊz fɹəm fɑɹðɝ ʌpɹɪvɝ spʌn ɪn ðə kɝəns, naʊ ən ðən bæŋɪŋ əɡɛns ðə hʌlz ə ʃɪps weɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ tɝnz ət ðə dɑks. tʃɹeɪd sloʊd fəɹ wɪntɝ ən wɔɹz, ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌɾ ɪt nɛvɝ ɹɪli stɑpt, nɑɾ əntɪl neɪʃənz daɪd. dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld, wæɡənz ən kɑɹts ən pipəl floʊɾ əlɔŋ stʃɹits ðət ɹeɪzɝd ðə tɛɹəs hɪlz ə ðə sɪɾi. ðə sɪɾi, ɪt wɑz kɔl hɪɹ.

The great city of Cairhien was a hulking mass inside massive walls, crowding the River Alguenya. The sky was clear and cloudless, but a cold wind blew and the sun shone on roofs covered with snow, glinted on icicles that showed no sign of melting. The Alguenya was not frozen, but small, jagged ice floes from farther upriver spun in the currents, now and then banging against the hulls of ships waiting their turns at the docks. Trade slowed for winter and wars, and the Dragon Reborn, but it never really stopped, not until nations died. Despite the cold, wagons and carts and people flowed along streets that razored the terraced hills of the city. The City, it was called here.

ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə skwɛɹ-taʊɝd sʌn pæləs, ə kɹaʊd dʒæm təɡɛðɝ ɝaʊn ðə lɔŋ ɛntʃɹi ɹæmp ən stɛɹɾ ʌp, mɝtʃəns ɹæpt ɪn faɪn wʊlənz ən noʊbəlz ɪn vɛlvəts ɹʌbɪŋ ʃoʊldɝz wɪð ɡɹaɪmi-feɪs leɪbɝɝz ən dɝɾiɝ ɹɛfjudʒiz. noʊ wʌn kɛɹɾ u stʊd nɛks tə hɪm, ən ivən ðə kʌtpɝsɪz fɝɡɑt tə fɑloʊ ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪd. mɛn ən wɪmən dɪpɑɹɾəd, ɔfən ʃeɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz, bʌɾ ʌðɝz tʊk ðɛɹ pleɪsəz, səmtaɪmz hɔɪstɪŋ ə tʃaɪl tə ɡɛɾ ə bɛɾɝ vju ʌv ðə pæləsəz ɹuənd wɪŋ, wɛɹ wɝkmɪn wɝ klɪɹɪŋ əweɪ ðə ɹʌbəl ə ðə θɝd stɔɹi. θɹuaʊt ðə ɹɛst ə kɛɹhin, kɹæfsmənz hæmɝz ən kɹikɪŋ æksəlz fɪl ði ɛɹ, təɡɛðɝ wɪð ðə kɹaɪz ə ʃɑpkipɝz, ðə kəmpleɪns ə baɪɝz, ðə mɝmɝz ə mɝtʃəns. ðə kɹaʊd bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn pæləs wɑz saɪlənt.

In front of the square-towered Sun Palace, a crowd jammed together around the long entry ramp and stared up, merchants wrapped in fine woolens and nobles in velvets rubbing shoulders with grimy-faced laborers and dirtier refugees. No one cared who stood next to him, and even the cutpurses forgot to follow their trade. Men and women departed, often shaking their heads, but others took their places, sometimes hoisting a child to get a better view of the Palace's ruined wing, where workmen were clearing away the rubble of the third story. Throughout the rest of Cairhien, craftsmen's hammers and creaking axles filled the air, together with the cries of shopkeepers, the complaints of buyers, the murmurs of merchants. The crowd before the Sun Palace was silent.

ə maɪl fɹəm ðə pæləs, ɹænd stʊɾ əɾ ə wɪndoʊ ɪn ðə ɡɹænli neɪmd əkæɾəmi ʌv kɛɹhin, piɹɪŋ θɹu ðə fɹɔstəd peɪnz ət ðə stoʊn-peɪv steɪbliɑɹd bɪloʊ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn skulz kɔld əkæɾəmiz ɪn ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz taɪm ən bɪfɔɹ, sɛntɝz ə lɝnɪŋ fɪld wɪð skɑlɝz fɹəm ɛvɹi kɔɹnɝ ə ðə noʊn wɝld. ðə kənsit meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns; ðeɪ cʊɾə kɔld ɪt ðə bɑɹn, soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt dɪd wʌɾ i wɑntəd. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt kənsɝnz fɪld ɪz θɔts. hæɾ i meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə kɛɹhin soʊ sun? bʌɾ i hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə fli tu kwɪkli, soʊ ɪt wəd bi noʊn ɪn ðə ɹaɪt kɔɹɾɝz ðəɾ i æktʃəli  hæd flɛd. tu kwɪkli tə pɹipɛɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ðəɹ wɝ kwɛstʃənz i niɾəd tə æsk, ən tæsks ðət kəd nɑt bi pʊɾ ɔf. ən mɪn wɑntəd mɔɹ ə mæstɝ fɛlz bʊks. hi kəd hɪɹ əɹ mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf əz ʃi ɹʌmɪɡd θɹu ðə ʃɛlvz wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn stɔɹɾ æftɝ fɛlz dɛθ. wɪð ðə baʊnti fəɹ bʊks ən mænjəskɹɪps ɪt dɪd nɑt jɛt pəzɛs, ði əkæɾəmiz laɪbɹɛɹi wɑz fæst aʊtɡɹoʊɪŋ ðə ɹumz ðət kəd bi spɛɹɾ ɪn lɔɹd bɑɹθeɪnz' fɔɹmɝ pæləs. ɑlɑnə sæɾ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd, sʌlkɪŋ ɪt simd; ʃi wəd noʊ hi wɑz ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ðɪs nɪɹ, ʃi wəd bi eɪbəl tə wɔk stʃɹeɪt tə hɪm, bʌɾ i wəd noʊ ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪd. blɛsədli, luz θɝɪn wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. ʌv leɪt, ðə mæn simd mæɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ.

A mile from the Palace, Rand stood at a window in the grandly named Academy of Cairhien, peering through the frosted panes at the stone-paved stableyard below. There had been schools called Academies in Artur Hawkwing's time and before, centers of learning filled with scholars from every corner of the known world. The conceit made no difference; they could have called it the Barn, so long as it did what he wanted. More important concerns filled his thoughts. Had he made a mistake, returning to Cairhien so soon? But he had been forced to flee too quickly, so it would be known in the right quarters that he actually had fled. Too quickly to prepare everything. There were questions he needed to ask, and tasks that could not be put off. And Min wanted more of Master Fel's books. He could hear her muttering to herself as she rummaged through the shelves where they had been stored after Fel's death. With the bounty for books and manuscripts it did not yet possess, the Academy's library was fast outgrowing the rooms that could be spared in Lord Barthanes' former palace. Alanna sat in the back of his head, sulking it seemed; she would know he was in the City. This near, she would be able to walk straight to him, but he would know if she tried. Blessedly, Lews Therin was silent for the moment. Of late, the man seemed madder than ever.

hi ɹʌbd ə spɑt klɪɹ ɑn ə wɪndoʊpeɪn wɪð ɪz koʊtsliv. staʊt dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ wʊl, ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə mæn wɪð ə lɪɾəl mʌni ən fju ɛɹz, ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə ɡɑɹmən ɛniwʌn wəɾ ɪkspɛk tə si ɑn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðə ɡoʊldən-meɪn dʒɹæɡənz hɛɾ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz hænd ɡlɪɾɝd mɛɾəlɪkli; ɪt pɹizɛntəd noʊ deɪnʒɝ hɪɹ. hɪz but tʌtʃt ðə lɛðɝ skɹɪp sɪɾɪŋ bɪloʊ ðə wɪndoʊ əz i lin fɔɹwɝd tə lʊk aʊt.

He rubbed a spot clear on a windowpane with his coatsleeve. Stout dark gray wool, good enough for a man with a little money and few airs, it was not a garment anyone would expect to see on the Dragon Reborn. The golden-maned Dragon's head on the back of his hand glittered metallically; it presented no danger here. His boot touched the leather scrip sitting below the window as he leaned forward to look out.

ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹd, ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz hæd bɪn swɛp klɪɹ ə snoʊ, ən ə lɑɹdʒ wæɡən stʊd sɝaʊndəd baɪ bʌkəts laɪk mʌʃɹumz ɪn ə klɪɹɪŋ. hæf ə dʌzən mɛn ɪn hɛvi koʊts ən skɑɹvz ən kæps sim tə bi wɝkɪŋ ɑn ðə wæɡənz ɑd kɑɹɡoʊ, məkænɪkəl dɪvaɪsəz kɹaʊɾəd ɝaʊn ə fæt mɛɾəl sɪləndɝ ðət tʊk ʌp mɔɹ ðən hæf ðə wæɡən bɛd. ivən stʃɹeɪnʒɝ, ðə wæɡən-ʃæfs wɝ mɪsɪŋ. wʌn ə ðə mɛn wɑz muvɪŋ splɪt faɪɝwʊd fɹəm ə lɑɹdʒ wilbɛɹoʊ ɪndə ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə mɛɾəl bɑks fæsən bɪloʊ wʌn ɛn ə ðə bɪɡ sɪləndɝ. ði oʊpən dɔɹ ɪn ðə bɑks ɡloʊd wɪð ðə ɹɛɾ ə faɪɝ ɪnsaɪd, ən smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm ə tɔl, nɛɹoʊ tʃɪmni. ənʌðɝ fɛloʊ dænst ɝaʊn ðə wæɡən, bɪɹɾəd, keɪpləs ən bɔld-hɛɾəd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ ən əpɛɹənli ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz ðət dɪd nɑt sim tə meɪk ði ʌðɝz muv ɛni fæstɝ. ðɛɹ bɹɛθ meɪd feɪnt waɪt plumz. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst wɔɹm ɪnsaɪd; ði əkæɾəmi hæd lɑɹdʒ fɝnəsəz ɪn ðə sɛlɝz ən ən ɪkstɛnsɪv sɪstəm ə vɛns. ðə hæf-hild, nɛvɝ hilɪŋ wunz ɪn ɪz saɪd wɝ hɑt.

In the stableyard, the paving stones had been swept clear of snow, and a large wagon stood surrounded by buckets like mushrooms in a clearing. Half a dozen men in heavy coats and scarves and caps seemed to be working on the wagon's odd cargo, mechanical devices crowded around a fat metal cylinder that took up more than half the wagon bed. Even stranger, the wagon-shafts were missing. One of the men was moving split firewood from a large wheelbarrow into the side of a metal box fastened below one end of the big cylinder. The open door in the box glowed with the red of fire inside, and smoke rose from a tall, narrow chimney. Another fellow danced around the wagon, bearded, capless and bald-headed, gesturing and apparently shouting orders that did not seem to make the others move any faster. Their breath made faint white plumes. It was almost warm inside; the Academy had large furnaces in the cellars and an extensive system of vents. The half-healed, never healing wounds in his side were hot.

hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt mɪnz kɝsɪz - hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ kɝsɪz - bʌɾ əɹ toʊn wɑz ɪnʌf tə seɪ ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi livɪŋ jɛɾ ənlɛs i dʒɹæɡd əɹ əweɪ. ðəɹ wɝ wʌn əɹ tu aɪɾəmz i maɪɾ æsk əbaʊt stɪl. "wʌɾ ɑɹ pipəl seɪɪŋ? əbaʊt ðə pæləs?"

He could not make out Min's curses - he was sure they were curses - but her tone was enough to say they would not be leaving yet unless he dragged her away. There were one or two items he might ask about still. "What are people saying? About the Palace?"

"wʌt jə maɪɾ ɪkspɛkt," lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn ænsɝd bɪhaɪn ɪm wɪð lɛvəl peɪʃəns, əz i hæɾ ænsɝɾ ɔl ði ʌðɝ kwɛstʃənz. ivən wən i ədmɪɾəd ə læk ə nɑlədʒ, hɪz toʊn hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd. "sʌm seɪ ðə fɔɹseɪkən ətæk ju, əɹ ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd. ðoʊz u θɪŋk jə swɔɹ fiəlti tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit feɪvɝ ðə fɔɹseɪkən. iðɝ weɪ, ðəɹ ɪz kənsɪɾɝəbəl dəbeɪɾ ɑn wɛðɝ jə ɑɹ dɛɾ əɹ kɪdnæpt əɹ flɛd. moʊs bɪliv jə laɪv, wɛɹɛvɝ jə ɑɹ, əɹ seɪ ðeɪ du. sʌm, ə ɡʊd mɛni aɪ fɪɹ, θɪŋk . . ." hɪz vɔɪs feɪɾəd tə saɪləns.

"What you might expect," Lord Dobraine answered behind him with level patience, as he had answered all the other questions. Even when he admitted a lack of knowledge, his tone had not changed. "Some say the Forsaken attacked you, or that Aes Sedai did. Those who think you swore fealty to the Amyrlin Seat favor the Forsaken. Either way, there is considerable debate on whether you are dead or kidnapped or fled. Most believe you live, wherever you are, or say they do. Some, a good many I fear, think . . ." His voice faded to silence.

"ðæɾ aɪv ɡɔn mæd," ɹænd fɪnɪʃt fəɹ ɪm ɪn ðə seɪm lɛvəl toʊn. nɑɾ ə mæɾɝ fəɹ kənsɝn, əɹ æŋɡɝ. "ðæɾ aɪ dɪstʃɹɔɪd pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæləs maɪsɛlf?" hi wəd nɑt spik ə ðə dɛd. fjuɝ ðən ʌðɝ taɪmz, ʌðɝ pleɪsəz, bʌɾ ɪnʌf, ən səm ə ðɛɹ neɪmz əpɪɹd wɛnɛvɝ i kloʊzd ɪz aɪz. wʌn ə ðə mɛn bɪloʊ klaɪm daʊn fɹəm ðə wæɡən, bʌt ðə bɔl fɛloʊ kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹm ən dʒɹæɡd ɪm bæk ʌp, meɪkɪŋ ɪm ʃoʊ wʌɾ i hæd dʌn. ə mæn ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd dʒʌmp tə ðə peɪvmən kɛɹləsli, skɪɾɪŋ, ən ðə keɪpləs mæn əbændən ðə fɝs tə tʃeɪs ɝaʊn ðə wæɡən ən meɪk ðət wʌn klaɪm bæk ʌp wɪð hɪm. wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt kəd ðeɪ bi duɪŋ? ɹænd ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ðeɪɹ nɑt fɑɹ ɹɔŋ."

"That I've gone mad," Rand finished for him in the same level tone. Not a matter for concern, or anger. "That I destroyed part of the Palace myself?" He would not speak of the dead. Fewer than other times, other places, but enough, and some of their names appeared whenever he closed his eyes. One of the men below climbed down from the wagon, but the bald fellow caught his arm and dragged him back up, making him show what he had done. A man on the other side jumped to the pavement carelessly, skidding, and the capless man abandoned the first to chase around the wagon and make that one climb back up with him. What in the Light could they be doing? Rand glanced over his shoulder. "They're not far wrong."

dɑbɹeɪn tæbɔɹwɪn, ə ʃɔɹt mæn wɪð ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz hɛd ʃeɪvd ən fɔɹməli paʊɾɝd ən ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz hɛɹ nɪɹli ɔl ɡɹeɪ, lʊk bæk wɪð dɑɹk ɪmpæsɪv aɪz. nɑɾ ə hænsəm mæn, bʌt stɛɾi. blu-ænd-waɪt stʃɹaɪps mɑɹtʃt daʊn ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz dɑɹk vɛlvət koʊt fɹəm ɪz nɛk ɔlmoʊs tə hɪz niz. hɪz sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ wɑz ə kɑɹvd ɹubi, ən i wɔɹ ənʌðɝ əɾ ɪz kɑlɝ, nɑt mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ jɛt flæmbɔɪən fəɹ ə kɛɹhinɪn. hi wɑz haɪ siɾ ə hɪz haʊs, wɪð mɔɹ bæɾəlz bɪhaɪn ɪm ðən moʊst, ən nɑt mʌtʃ fɹaɪɾənd hɪm. hi hæd pɹuv ðəɾ ət dəməaɪz wɛlz.

Dobraine Taborwin, a short man with the front of his head shaved and formally powdered and the rest of his hair nearly all gray, looked back with dark impassive eyes. Not a handsome man, but steady. Blue-and-white stripes marched down the front of his dark velvet coat from his neck almost to his knees. His signet ring was a carved ruby, and he wore another at his collar, not much larger yet flamboyant for a Cairhienin. He was High Seat of his House, with more battles behind him than most, and not much frightened him. He had proved that at Dumai's Wells.

bʌt ðɛn, ðə stɑki, ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən peɪʃənli weɪɾɪŋ əɹ tɝn əɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əpɪɹd dʒʌst əz ʌnəfɹeɪd. ɪn ʃɑɹp kɑntʃɹæs tə dɑbɹeɪnz noʊbəl ɛləɡəns, ɪdʒɹin tɑɹsənz sɛnsəbəl bɹaʊn wʊlənz wɝ pleɪn ɪnʌf fəɹ ə ʃɑpkipɝ, jɛt ʃi hæɾ əɹ oʊn wɛl ʌv əθɔɹəɾi ən dɪɡnəɾi. ɪdʒɹin wɑz hɛdmɪstʃɹəs ə ði əkæɾəmi, ðə taɪɾəl ʃi hæd ɡɪvən hɝsɛlf sɪns moʊst ə ðə skɑlɝz ən məkænɪks kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz mæstɝ ə ðɪs əɹ mɪstʃɹəs ə ðæt. ʃi ɹæn ðə skul wɪð ə stʃɹɔŋ hæn ən bɪlivd ɪn pɹæktəkəl θɪŋz, nu mɛθədz ə sɝfəsɪŋ ɹoʊdz əɹ meɪkɪŋ daɪz, ɪmpɹuvməns tə faʊnʒɹiz ən mɪlz. ʃi ɔlsoʊ bɪlivd ɪn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðət wɑz pɹæktəkəl, ɪt wɑz pɹæɡmæɾɪk, ən i wəd sɛɾəl fəɹ ðæt.

But then, the stocky, graying woman patiently waiting her turn at his shoulder appeared just as unafraid. In sharp contrast to Dobraine's noble elegance, Idrien Tarsin's sensible brown woolens were plain enough for a shopkeeper, yet she had her own well of authority and dignity. Idrien was Headmistress of the Academy, the title she had given herself since most of the scholars and mechanics called themselves master of this or mistress of that. She ran the school with a strong hand and believed in practical things, new methods of surfacing roads or making dyes, improvements to foundries and mills. She also believed in the Dragon Reborn. Whether or not that was practical, it was pragmatic, and he would settle for that.

hi tɝn bæk tə ðə wɪndoʊ ən klɪɹɾ ɪz pætʃ ɑn ðə ɡlæs əɡɛn. meɪbi ɪt wɑz fəɹ hiɾɪŋ wɔɾɝ - səm ə ðoʊz bʌkəts sim tə hæv wɔɾɝ ɪn əm stɪl; ɪn ʃaɪnɝ, ðeɪ juz bɪɡ bɔɪlɝz tə hit wɔɾɝ fəɹ ðə bæθs - bʌt waɪ ɑn ə wæɡən? "hæz ɛniwʌn lɛf sʌɾənli sɪns aɪ wɛnt? əɹ kʌm ʌnɪkspɛktɪdli?"

He turned back to the window and cleared his patch on the glass again. Maybe it was for heating water - some of those buckets seemed to have water in them still; in Shienar, they used big boilers to heat water for the baths - but why on a wagon? "Has anyone left suddenly since I went? Or come unexpectedly?"

hi dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk ðəɾ ɛniwʌn hæd, ɛniwʌn ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾəns tə hɪm. bɪtwin mɝtʃəns' pɪdʒənz ən waɪt taʊɝ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz - ən mæzɹim teɪm; hi mʌs nɑt fɝɡɛt teɪm; luz θɝɪn snɑɹəld wɝdləsli ət ðə neɪm - wɪð ɔl ðoʊz pɪdʒənz ən spaɪz ən bæbəlɪŋ tʌŋz, ɪn ə fju mɔɹ deɪz ðə hoʊl wɝld wəd bi əwɛɹ ðəɾ i hæd vænɪʃt fɹəm kɛɹhin. ɔl ðə wɝl ðət mæɾɝd, hɪɹ ən naʊ. kɛɹhin wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɛɹ ðə bæɾəl wəd bi fɔt. dɑbɹeɪnz ænsɝ sɝpɹaɪz hɪm.

He did not expect that anyone had, anyone of importance to him. Between merchants' pigeons and White Tower eyes-and-ears - and Mazrim Taim; he must not forget Taim; Lews Therin snarled wordlessly at the name - with all those pigeons and spies and babbling tongues, in a few more days the whole world would be aware that he had vanished from Cairhien. All the world that mattered, here and now. Cairhien was no longer the ground where the battle would be fought. Dobraine's answer surprised him.

"noʊ wʌn, ɪksɛpt . . . eɪlɪl ɹieɪɾən ən səm haɪ si foʊk əfɪʃəl ɑɹ boʊθ mɪsɪŋ sɪns ði . . . ətæk." ə bɛɹ pɔz, bʌɾ ə pɔz. pɝhæps i wɑz nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ wʌt hæd hæpənd, iðɝ. jɛɾ i wəd kip ɪz wɝd. hi hæd pɹuv ðəɾ ət dəməaɪz wɛlz, tu. "noʊ bɑɾiz wɝ faʊnd, bʌt ðeɪ meɪ hæv bɪn kɪld. ðə si foʊk weɪvməstʃɹəs ɹəfjuzəz tə kaʊntənəns ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi, ðoʊ. ʃiz ɹeɪzɪŋ ə stɔɹm wɪð dɪmænz ðəɾ əɹ wʊmən bi pɹədust. ɪn tʃɹuθ, eɪlɪl meɪ hæv flɛd tə ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. əɹ ɡɔn tə dʒɔɪn əɹ bɹʌðɝ, dɪspaɪɾ əɹ plɛdʒɪz tə ju. jəɹ θɹi æʃəmən ɑɹ stɪl ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs. flɪn, nɛɹɪʃmə ən hɑpwəl. ðeɪ meɪk pipəl nɝvəs. mɔɹ soʊ naʊ ðən bɪfɔɹ." ðə hɛdmɪstʃɹəs meɪɾ ə saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, ən əɹ ʃuz ʃɪftəɾ ɑɾəbli ɑn ðə flɔɹbɔɹdz. ðeɪ sɝɾənli meɪɾ əɹ nɝvəs.

"No one, except . . . Ailil Riatin and some high Sea Folk official are both missing since the . . . attack." A bare pause, but a pause. Perhaps he was not so sure what had happened, either. Yet he would keep his word. He had proved that at Dumai's Wells, too. "No bodies were found, but they may have been killed. The Sea Folk Wavemistress refuses to countenance the possibility, though. She is raising a storm with demands that her woman be produced. In truth, Ailil may have fled to the countryside. Or gone to join her brother, despite her pledges to you. Your three Asha'man are still in the Sun Palace. Flinn, Narishma and Hopwil. They make people nervous. More so now than before." The Headmistress made a sound in her throat, and her shoes shifted audibly on the floorboards. They certainly made her nervous.

ɹænd dɪsmɪs ði æʃəmən. ənlɛs mʌtʃ kloʊsɝ ðən ðə pæləs, nʌn wɑz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə hæv fɛlt ɪm oʊpən ə ɡeɪtweɪ hɪɹ. ðoʊz θɹi hæd nɑt bɪn pɑɹɾ ə ði ətæk ɑn hɪm, bʌɾ ə waɪz plænɝ maɪɾ əv kənsɪɾɝd ðə tʃæns ə feɪljɝ. plæn haʊ tə kip sʌmwʌn kloʊs tə hɪm ɪf i sɝvaɪvd. jə woʊn sɝvaɪv, luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd. nʌn ʌv əs wɪl sɝvaɪv.

Rand dismissed the Asha'man. Unless much closer than the Palace, none was strong enough to have felt him open a gateway here. Those three had not been part of the attack on him, but a wise planner might have considered the chance of failure. Planned how to keep someone close to him if he survived. You won't survive, Lews Therin whispered. None of us will survive.

ɡoʊ bæk tə slip, ɹænd θɔɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. hi nu hi wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə sɝvaɪv. bʌɾ i wɑntəd tə. ə dɝɪsɪv læf ænsɝɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd, bʌt ðə saʊn θɪn ən wɑz ɡɔn. ðə bɔl mæn wɑz lɛɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝz klaɪm daʊn, naʊ, ən ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ ɪn ə pliz fæʃən. ʌv ɔl θɪŋz, ðə fɛloʊ sim tə bi ɡɪvɪŋ ə spitʃ!

Go back to sleep, Rand thought irritably. He knew he was not going to survive. But he wanted to. A derisive laugh answered in his head, but the sound thinned and was gone. The bald man was letting the others climb down, now, and rubbing his hands together in a pleased fashion. Of all things, the fellow seemed to be giving a speech!

"eɪlɪl ən ʃələn ɑɹ əlaɪv, ən ðeɪ dɪdn fli," ɹænd sɛɾ əlaʊd. hi hæd lɛft əm baʊn ən ɡæɡd, stʌft ʌndɝ ə bɛd, wɛɹ ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn faʊn baɪ sɝvəns ɪn ə fju aʊɝz, ðoʊ ðə ʃild i hæd woʊvən ɑn ðə si foʊk wɪndfɪndɝ wʊɾə dɪsəpeɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ ðæt. ðə tu wɪmən ʃʊɾə bɪn eɪbəl tə fɹi ðɛmsɛlvz ðɛn. "lʊk tə kædzueɪn. ʃɪl əv əm ɪn leɪɾi ɑɹɪlɪnz pæləs."

"Ailil and Shalon are alive, and they didn't flee," Rand said aloud. He had left them bound and gagged, stuffed under a bed, where they would have been found by servants in a few hours, though the shield he had woven on the Sea Folk Windfinder would have dissipated before that. The two women should have been able to free themselves then. "Look to Cadsuane. She'll have them in Lady Arilyn's palace."

"kædzueɪn sədaɪ ɪz ɪn ən aʊɾ ə ðə sʌn pæləs əz ɪf ɪt wɝ əɹ oʊn," dɑbɹeɪn sɛd dʒudɪʃɪsli, "bʌt haʊ kəd ʃi hæv teɪkən əm aʊɾ ənsin? ən waɪ? eɪlɪl ɪz tɔɹæmz sɪstɝ, jɛɾ ɪz kleɪm tə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn ɪz dʌs naʊ, ɪf ɪt wɑz ɛvɝ mɔɹ. ʃiz ənɪmpɔɹɾənt ivən əz ə kaʊntɝ, naʊ. əz fəɹ hoʊldɪŋ ən æθɑn maɪɹ ə haɪ ɹæŋk . . . tə wʌt pɝpəs?"

"Cadsuane Sedai is in and out of the Sun Palace as if it were her own," Dobraine said judiciously, "but how could she have taken them out unseen? And why? Ailil is Toram's sister, yet his claim to the Sun Throne is dust now, if it was ever more. She is unimportant even as a counter, now. As for holding an Atha'an Miere of high rank . . . To what purpose?"

ɹænd meɪɾ ɪz vɔɪs laɪt, ənkɛɹɪŋ. "waɪ ɪz ʃi kipɪŋ leɪɾi kæɹɑlin ən haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn əz 'ɡɛsts,' dɑbɹeɪn? waɪ də ɛɛs sədaɪ də ɛniθɪŋ? jəl faɪn əm wɛɹ aɪ sɛd. ɪf ʃi lɛts jə ɪn tə lʊk." waɪ wɑz nɑɾ ə fulɪʃ kwɛstʃən. hi dʒʌs dɪd nɑɾ əv ði ænsɝ. ʌv kɔɹs, kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹɾ ən eɪlɪl ɹieɪɾən dɪd ɹɛpɹəzɛn ðə læs tu haʊsəz tə hoʊl ðə sʌn θɹoʊn. ən dɑɹlɪn sɪsnɛɹə lɛd ðə noʊbəlz ɪn tiɹ u wɑntəɾ ɪm θɹoʊn aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ pɹɛʃəs stoʊn, aʊɾ ə tiɹ.

Rand made his voice light, uncaring. "Why is she keeping Lady Caraline and High Lord Darlin as 'guests,' Dobraine? Why do Aes Sedai do anything? You'll find them where I said. If she lets you in to look." Why was not a foolish question. He just did not have the answer. Of course, Caraline Damodred and Ailil Riatin did represent the last two Houses to hold the Sun Throne. And Darlin Sisnera led the nobles in Tear who wanted him thrown out of their precious Stone, out of Tear.

ɹænd fɹaʊnd. hi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ kædzueɪn wɑz foʊkəst ɑn ɪm dɪspaɪɾ əɹ pɹitɛns ʌðɝwaɪz, bʌt wʌɾ ɪf ɪt wɑz nɑt pɹitɛns? ə ɹɪlif, ɪf soʊ. ʌv kɔɹs ɪt wɑz. ðə læs θɪŋ i niɾəd wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu θɔt ʃi kəd mɛɾəl ɪn ɪz əfɛɹz. ðə vɛɹi læst. pɝhæps kædzueɪn wɑz dɝɛktɪŋ əɹ mɛɾəlɪŋ ɛlswɛɹ. mɪn hæd sin sɪsnɛɹə wɛɹɪŋ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ kɹaʊn; ɹænd hæd θɔɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ɑn ðət vjuɪŋ ə hɝz. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk ʌv ʌðɝ θɪŋz ʃi hæd sin, kənsɝnɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ən ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ. kəɾ ɪt bi əz sɪmpəl əz kædzueɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ʃi kəd dɪsaɪɾ u wəd ɹul boʊθ tiɹ ən kɛɹhin?

Rand frowned. He had been sure Cadsuane was focused on him despite her pretense otherwise, but what if it was not pretense? A relief, if so. Of course it was. The last thing he needed was an Aes Sedai who thought she could meddle in his affairs. The very last. Perhaps Cadsuane was directing her meddling elsewhere. Min had seen Sisnera wearing a strange crown; Rand had thought a great deal on that viewing of hers. He did not want to think of other things she had seen, concerning himself and the Green sister. Could it be as simple as Cadsuane thinking she could decide who would rule both Tear and Cairhien?

sɪmpəl? hi ɔlmoʊs læft. bʌt ðət wɑz haʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪheɪvd. ən ʃələn, ðə wɪndfɪndɝ? pəzɛsɪŋ əɹ maɪt ɡɪv kædzueɪn lɛvɝɪdʒ wɪð hɑɹɪn, ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs, bʌɾ i səspɛktəd ʃi hæd dʒʌs bɪn skupt ʌp wɪð eɪlɪl, tə tʃɹaɪ haɪɾɪŋ u tʊk ðə noʊbəlwʊmən. kædzueɪn wəɾ əv tə bi dɪsɑbjuzd. hu wəd ɹul ɪn tiɹ ən kɛɹhin hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd. hi wəd pɔɪn ðəɾ aʊt tə hɝ. leɪɾɝ. ɪt stʊd fɑɹ daʊn ɪz lɪst ə pɹaɪɔɹəɾiz.

Simple? He almost laughed. But that was how Aes Sedai behaved. And Shalon, the Windfinder? Possessing her might give Cadsuane leverage with Harine, the Wavemistress, but he suspected she had just been scooped up with Ailil, to try hiding who took the noblewoman. Cadsuane would have to be disabused. Who would rule in Tear and Cairhien had already been decided. He would point that out to her. Later. It stood far down his list of priorities.

"bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɡoʊ, dɑbɹeɪn, aɪ nid tə ɡɪv jə - " wɝdz fɹoʊz ɑn ɪz tʌŋ.

"Before I go, Dobraine, I need to give you - " Words froze on his tongue.

ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹd, ðə keɪpləs mæn hæd pʊld ə lɛvəl ɑn ðə wæɡən, ən wʌn ɛn ʌv ə lɔŋ hɔɹəzɑntəl bim sʌɾənli ɹoʊz, ðən sæŋk, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ə ʃɔɹɾɝ bim daʊn θɹu ə hoʊl kʌɾ ɪn ðə wæɡən bɛd. ænd, vaɪbɹeɪɾɪŋ tɪl ɪt simd ɹɛɾi tə ʃeɪk əpɑɹt, tʃɹeɪlɪŋ smoʊk fɹəm ðə tʃɪmni, ðə wæɡən lɝtʃt əhɛd, ðə bim ɹaɪzɪŋ ən fɔlɪŋ, sloʊli ət fɝst, ðən fæstɝ. ɪt muvd, wɪθaʊt hɔɹsəz!

In the stableyard, the capless man had pulled a level on the wagon, and one end of a long horizontal beam suddenly rose, then sank, driving a shorter beam down through a hole cut in the wagon bed. And, vibrating till it seemed ready to shake apart, trailing smoke from the chimney, the wagon lurched ahead, the beam rising and falling, slowly at first, then faster. It moved, without horses!

hi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz i hæd spoʊkən əlaʊɾ əntɪl ðə hɛdmɪstʃɹəs ænsɝd hɪm.

He did not realize he had spoken aloud until the Headmistress answered him.

"oʊ, ðæt! ðæts mɝvɪn poʊəlz stimwæɡən, əz i kɔlz ɪt, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən." dɪsəpɹuvəl fɹeɪɾɪd əɹ haɪ, stɑɹtlɪŋli juθfəl vɔɪs. "kleɪmz i kən pʊl ə hʌnʒɹəd wæɡənz wɪð ðə kəntʃɹæpʃən. nɑɾ ənlɛs i kən meɪk ɪt ɡoʊ fɝðɝ ðən fɪfti peɪsɪz wɪθaʊt bɪts bɹeɪkɪŋ əɹ fɹizɪŋ ʌp. ɪts oʊnli dʌn ðət fɑɹ wʌns, ðəɾ aɪ noʊ."

"Oh, that! That's Mervin Poel's steamwagon, as he calls it, my Lord Dragon." Disapproval freighted her high, startlingly youthful voice. "Claims he can pull a hundred wagons with the contraption. Not unless he can make it go further than fifty paces without bits breaking or freezing up. It has only done that far once, that I know."

ɪndid, ðə - stimwæɡən? - ʃʌɾɝəd tə ə hɔl nɑt twɛnti peɪsɪz fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt fɝst stʊd. ʃʌɾɝəd ɪndid; ɪt sim tə bi ʃeɪkɪŋ hɑɹɾɝ baɪ ðə hɑɹtbit. moʊst ə ðə mɛn swɔɹmd oʊvɝ ɪɾ əɡɛn, wʌn ə ðɛm fɹæntəkəli twɪstɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ə klɔθ ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪz hænd. əbɹʌpli stim ʃɑɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ fɹəm ə paɪp, ən ðə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ sloʊd, stɑpt.

Indeed, the - steamwagon? - shuddered to a halt not twenty paces from where it first stood. Shuddered indeed; it seemed to be shaking harder by the heartbeat. Most of the men swarmed over it again, one of them frantically twisting at something with a cloth wrapped around his hand. Abruptly steam shot into the air from a pipe, and the shuddering slowed, stopped.

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd siɪŋ ðɪs fɛloʊ mɝvɪn, wɪð ə dɪvaɪs ðət kwɪvɝɾ ɑn ə teɪbəltɑp ən dɪd nʌθɪŋ. ən ðɪs mɑɹvəl hæd kʌm fɹəm ðæt? hi hæd θɔɾ ɪt wɑz mɛn tə meɪk mjuzɪk. ðət mʌs bi mɝvɪn lipɪŋ əbaʊɾ ən ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz fɪsts ət ði ʌðɝz. wʌɾ ʌðɝ ɑd θɪŋz, wʌt mɑɹvəlz, wɝ pipəl bɪldɪŋ hɪɹ ət ði əkæɾəmi?

Rand shook his head. He remembered seeing this fellow Mervin, with a device that quivered on a tabletop and did nothing. And this marvel had come from that? He had thought it was meant to make music. That must be Mervin leaping about and shaking his fists at the others. What other odd things, what marvels, were people building here at the Academy?

wən i æskt, stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ ðə mɛn ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹd wɝk ɑn ðə wæɡən, ɪdʒɹin snɪf laʊdli. ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hɛld oʊnli ə θɪn ɛdʒ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs əz ʃi bɪɡæn, ən kwɪkli lɔst ɡɹaʊn tə dɪsɡʌst. "bæɾ ɪnʌf aɪ mʌst ɡɪv speɪs tə fəlɑsəfɝz ən hɪstɔɹiənz ən æɹɪðmtɪsts ən ðə laɪk, bʌt jə sɛd teɪk ɪn ɛniwʌn u wɑntəd tə meɪk ɛniθɪŋ nu ən lɛɾ əm steɪ ɪf ðeɪ ʃoʊd pɹɑɡɹɛs. aɪ səpoʊz jə hoʊp fəɹ wɛpənz, bʌt naʊ aɪ hæv dʌzənz ə dʒɹimɝz ən weɪstʃɹəlz ɑn maɪ hænz, ɛvɹi wʌn wɪð ən oʊl bʊk əɹ mænjəskɹɪpt əɹ sɪks, ɔl ʌv wɪtʃ deɪt bæk tə ðə kɑmpækt ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz, maɪnd, ɪf nɑt ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ɪtsɛlf, əɹ soʊ ðeɪ seɪ, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk sɛns ə dʒɹɔɪŋz ən skɛtʃəz ən dɪskɹɪpʃənz ə θɪŋz ðeɪv nɛvɝ sin ən meɪbi noʊbɑdi ɛvɝ dɪd si. aɪ hæv sin oʊl mænjəskɹɪps ðət tɔk əbaʊt pipəl wɪð ðɛɹ aɪz ɪn ðɛɹ bɛliz, ən ænəməlz tɛn fit tɔl wɪð tʌsks lɔŋɡɝ ðən ə mæn, ən sɪɾiz wɛɹ - "

When he asked, still watching the men in the courtyard work on the wagon, Idrien sniffed loudly. Respect for the Dragon Reborn held only a thin edge in her voice as she began, and quickly lost ground to disgust. "Bad enough I must give space to philosophers and historians and arithmetists and the like, but you said take in anyone who wanted to make anything new and let them stay if they showed progress. I suppose you hoped for weapons, but now I have dozens of dreamers and wastrels on my hands, every one with an old book or manuscript or six, all of which date back to the Compact of the Ten Nations, mind, if not the Age of Legends itself, or so they say, and they are all trying to make sense of drawings and sketches and descriptions of things they've never seen and maybe nobody ever did see. I have seen old manuscripts that talk about people with their eyes in their bellies, and animals ten feet tall with tusks longer than a man, and cities where - "

"bʌt wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ meɪkɪŋ, hɛdmɪstʃɹəs tɑɹsən?" ɹænd dɪmændəd. ðə mɛn wɝkɪŋ ɑn ðə θɪŋ bɪloʊ muvd wɪð ən ɛɹ ə pɝpəs, nɑɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ sɔ feɪljɝ. ən ɪt hæd muvd.

"But what are they making, Headmistress Tarsin?" Rand demanded. The men working on the thing below moved with an air of purpose, not as if they saw failure. And it had moved.

ʃi snɪf laʊɾɝ ðɪs taɪm. "fulɪʃnəs, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, ðəɾ ɪz wʌt ðeɪ meɪk. kɪn tʌvɪɹ kənstʃɹʌktəɾ ɪz bɪɡ lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs. jə kən si ðə mun θɹu ɪt pleɪn əz jəɹ hænd, ən wʌɾ i kleɪmz ɑɹ ʌðɝ wɝlz, bʌt wʌɾ ɪz ðə ɡʊɾ ə ðæt? hi wɑns tə bɪld ə bɪɡɝ, naʊ. mæɹəl hɑɹk meɪks hjudʒ kaɪts ʃi kɔlz ɡlaɪɾɝz, ən kʌm spɹɪŋ, ʃɪl bi θɹoʊɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɔf hɪlz əɡɛn. pʊts jəɹ hɑɹɾ ɪn jəɹ maʊθ tə si hɝ seɪlɪŋ daʊnhɪl ɑn ðə θɪŋz; ʃɪl bɹeɪk mɔɹ ðən əɹ ɑɹm nɛks taɪm wʌn foʊlz ʌp ɑn hɝ, aɪ wɔɹənt. dʒændɝ pɛɹɛntɑkɪs bɪlivz i kən muv ɹɪvɝboʊts wɪð wɔtɝwilz ɔf ə mɪl, əɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf, bʌt wən i pʊɾ ɪnʌf mɛn ɪndə ðə boʊt tə tɝn ðə kɹæŋks, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹum fəɹ kɑɹɡoʊ, ən ɛni kɹæft wɪð seɪlz kəɾ aʊtʃɹʌn ɪt. ɹɪn ænhɑɹə tʃɹæps laɪtnɪŋ ɪn bɪɡ dʒɑɹz - aɪ daʊɾ ivən i noʊz waɪ - ən nikoʊ təkɑmə ɪz dʒʌst əz sɪli wɪð əɹ - "

She sniffed louder this time. "Foolishness, my Lord Dragon, that is what they make. Kin Tovere constructed his big looking glass. You can see the moon through it plain as your hand, and what he claims are other worlds, but what is the good of that? He wants to build a bigger, now. Maryl Harke makes huge kites she calls gliders, and come spring, she will be throwing herself off hills again. Puts your heart in your mouth to see her sailing downhill on the things; she will break more than her arm next time one folds up on her, I warrant. Jander Parentakis believes he can move riverboats with waterwheels off a mill, or near enough, but when he put enough men into the boat to turn the cranks, there was no room for cargo, and any craft with sails could outrun it. Ryn Anhara traps lightning in big jars - I doubt even he knows why - and Niko Tokama is just as silly with her - "

ɹænd spʌn ɝaʊn soʊ fæs ðət ʃi stɛp bæk, ən ivən dɑbɹeɪn ʃɪftəɾ ɑn ɪz fit, ə sɔɝdzmənz muv. noʊ, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ʃʊɹ ə hɪm əɾ ɔl. "hi tʃɹæps laɪtnɪŋ?" hi æskt kwaɪətli.

Rand spun around so fast that she stepped back, and even Dobraine shifted on his feet, a swordsman's move. No, they were not sure of him at all. "He traps lightning?" he asked quietly.

kɑmpɹihɛnʃən flʌɾəd əɹ blʌn feɪs, ən ʃi weɪvd əɹ hænz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. "noʊ, noʊ! nɑt laɪk . . . laɪk ðæt!" nɑt laɪk ju, ʃi hæɾ ɔlmoʊst sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz ə θɪŋ ʌv waɪɝz ən wilz ən bɪɡ kleɪ dʒɑɹz ən ðə laɪt noʊz wʌt. hi kɔlz ɪt laɪtnɪŋ, ən aɪ sɔ ə ɹæt dʒʌmp daʊn ɑn wʌn ə ðə dʒɑɹz wʌns, ɑn ðə mɛɾəl ɹɑdz stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə tɑp. ɪt sɝɾənli lʊk stʃɹʌk baɪ laɪtnɪŋ." ə hoʊpfəl toʊn ɛntɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs. "aɪ kən meɪk ɪm stɑp, ɪf jə wɪʃ."

Comprehension flooded her blunt face, and she waved her hands in front of her. "No, no! Not like . . . like that!" Not like you, she had almost said. "It is a thing of wires and wheels and big clay jars and the Light knows what. He calls it lightning, and I saw a rat jump down on one of the jars once, on the metal rods sticking out of the top. It certainly looked struck by lightning." A hopeful tone entered her voice. "I can make him stop, if you wish."

hi tʃɹaɪd tə pɪktʃɝ sʌmwʌn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə kaɪt, bʌt ði ɪmədʒ wɑz luɾəkɹəs. kætʃɪŋ laɪtnɪŋ ɪn dʒɑɹz wɑz bɪɑn ɪz əbɪləɾi tə ɪmædʒən. ən jɛt . . . "lɛɾ əm ɡoʊ ɑn əz bɪfɔɹ, hɛdmɪstʃɹəs. hu noʊz? meɪbi wʌn ə ðiz ɪnvɛnʃənz wɪl tɝn aʊt tə bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ɪf ɛni wɝk əz kleɪmd, ɡɪv ði ɪnvɛntɝ ə ɹɪwɔɹd."

He tried to picture someone riding on a kite, but the image was ludicrous. Catching lightning in jars was beyond his ability to imagine. And yet . . . "Let them go on as before, Headmistress. Who knows? Maybe one of these inventions will turn out to be important. If any work as claimed, give the inventor a reward."

dɑbɹeɪnz lɛðɝi, sʌn-dɑɹkən feɪs lʊk dubiəs, ðoʊ hi ɔlmoʊs mænədʒ tə kənsil ɪt. ɪdʒɹin baʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn sʌlən əsɛnt, ən ivən kɝtsid, bʌt pleɪnli ʃi θɔɾ i wɑz æskɪŋ tə lɛt pɪɡz flaɪ ɪf ðeɪ kʊd.

Dobraine's leathery, sun-darkened face looked dubious, though he almost managed to conceal it. Idrien bowed her head in sullen assent, and even curtsied, but plainly she thought he was asking to let pigs fly if they could.

ɹænd wɑz nɑt sɝɾən i dɪsəɡɹid. ðən əɡɛn, meɪbi wʌn ə ðə pɪɡz wəd ɡɹoʊ wɪŋz. ðə wæɡən hæd muvd. hi wɑntəd vɛɹi bædli tə liv sʌmθɪŋ bɪhaɪnd, sʌmθɪŋ tə hɛlp ðə wɝl sɝvaɪv ðə nu bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə pɹɑfəsiz sɛɾ i wəd bɹɪŋ. ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɑz, hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌt ðət maɪt bi, seɪv fəɹ ðə skulz ðɛmsɛlvz. hu nu wʌɾ ə mɑɹvəl kəd du? laɪt, hi wɑntəd tə bɪl sʌmθɪŋ ðət kəd læst.

Rand was not certain he disagreed. Then again, maybe one of the pigs would grow wings. The wagon had moved. He wanted very badly to leave something behind, something to help the world survive the new Breaking the Prophecies said he would bring. The trouble was, he had no idea what that might be, save for the schools themselves. Who knew what a marvel could do? Light, he wanted to build something that could last.

aɪ θɔɾ aɪ kəd bɪld, luz θɝɪn mɝmɝɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd. aɪ wɑz ɹɔŋ. wəɹ nɑt bɪldɝz, nɑt ju, əɹ aɪ, əɹ ði ʌðɝ wʌn. wəɹ dɪstʃɹɔɪɝz. dɪstʃɹɔɪɝz.

I thought I could build, Lews Therin murmured in his head. I was wrong. We are not builders, not you, or I, or the other one. We are destroyers. Destroyers.

ɹænd ʃɪvɝd, ən skɹʌbd ɪz hænz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. ði ʌðɝ wʌn? ət taɪmz, ðə vɔɪs saʊndəd seɪnəst wən ɪt wɑz ðə moʊs mæd. ðeɪ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, dɑbɹeɪn vɛɹi nɪɹli haɪɾɪŋ ənsɝɾənti, ɪdʒɹin meɪkɪŋ noʊ ɛfɝt tə. stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ, hi dʒɹu tu slɪm pækɪts fɹəm ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz koʊt. boʊθ kæɹid ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪn ə lɔŋ lʌmp ə ɹɛd wæks ɑn ði aʊtsaɪd. ðə bɛl bʌkəl i wɑz nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ət ðə moʊmən sɝv fəɹ ən ɪmpɹɛsɪv sɪɡnɪt.

Rand shivered, and scrubbed his hands through his hair. The other one? At times, the voice sounded sanest when it was the most mad. They were watching him, Dobraine very nearly hiding uncertainty, Idrien making no effort to. Straightening as if nothing was wrong, he drew two slim packets from inside his coat. Both carried the Dragon in a long lump of red wax on the outside. The belt buckle he was not wearing at the moment served for an impressive signet.

"ðə tɑp wʌn neɪmz jə maɪ stuɝɾ ɪn kɛɹhin," hi sɛd, hændɪŋ ðə pækɪts tə dɑbɹeɪn. ə θɝd stɪl nɛsəl nɛks tə hɪz tʃɛst, fəɹ ɡɹɛɡɹɪn dɛn lʌʃɪnoʊz, meɪkɪŋ ɪm stuɝɾ ɪn ɪljən. "soʊ ðɛɹəl bi noʊ tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ɛniwʌn kwɛstʃənɪŋ jəɹ əθɔɹəɾi waɪl aɪm ɡɔn." dɑbɹeɪn kəd hændəl ðət sɔɹɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ɪz ɑɹmmɪn, bʌt bɛs tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn kəd kleɪm ɪɡnɝəns əɹ daʊt. meɪbi ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ tʃɹʌbəl tə hændəl ɪf ɛvɹiwʌn bɪliv ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wəd dɪsɛn ɑn tʃɹænzɡɹɛsɝz. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɔɹɾɝz əbaʊt θɪŋz aɪ wɑn dʌn, bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðoʊz, jus jəɹ oʊn dʒʌdʒmənt. wən ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn leɪz kleɪm tə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn, θɹoʊ jəɹ fʊl səpɔɹt bɪhaɪn hɝ." ɪleɪn. oʊ, laɪt, ɪleɪn, ən eɪvinhə. ət lis ðeɪ wɝ seɪf. mɪnz vɔɪs saʊndəd hæpiɝ, naʊ; ʃi mʌst əv faʊn mæstɝ fɛlz bʊks. hi wɑz gɑnə lɛɾ əɹ fɑloʊ hɪm tə hɝ dɛθ kəz i wɑz nɑt stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə stɑp hɝ. aɪlaɪɛnə, luz θɝɪn moʊnd. fɝɡɪv mi, aɪlaɪɛnə! ɹændz vɔɪs keɪm aʊɾ əz koʊld əz wɪntɝz hɑɹt. "jul noʊ wən tə dɪlɪvɝ ði ʌðɝ. wɛðɝ tə dɪlɪvɝ ɪt. pɹaɪ hɪm aʊɾ ɪf nid bi, ən dɪsaɪd baɪ wʌɾ i sɛz. ɪf jə dɪsaɪd noʊ, əɹ i ɹəfjuzəz, əl pɪk sʌmwʌn ɛls. nɑt ju."

"The top one names you my steward in Cairhien," he said, handing the packets to Dobraine. A third still nestled next to his chest, for Gregorin den Lushenos, making him steward in Illian. "So there'll be no trouble with anyone questioning your authority while I'm gone." Dobraine could handle that sort of trouble with his armsmen, but best to make sure no one could claim ignorance or doubt. Maybe there would be no trouble to handle if everyone believed the Dragon Reborn would descend on transgressors. "There are orders about things I want done, but aside from those, use your own judgment. When the Lady Elayne lays claim to the Sun Throne, throw your full support behind her." Elayne. Oh, Light, Elayne, and Aviendha. At least they were safe. Min's voice sounded happier, now; she must have found Master Fel's books. He was going to let her follow him to her death because he was not strong enough to stop her. Ilyena, Lews Therin moaned. Forgive me, Ilyena! Rand's voice came out as cold as winter's heart. "You'll know when to deliver the other. Whether to deliver it. Pry him out if need be, and decide by what he says. If you decide no, or he refuses, I'll pick someone else. Not you."

pɝhæps ðət wɑz bɹʌsk, bʌt dɑbɹeɪnz ɪkspɹɛʃən hɑɹdli tʃeɪnʒd. hɪz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz slaɪtli ət ðə neɪm ɹɪɾən ɑn ðə sɛkən pækət; ðət wɑz ɔl. hi meɪɾ ə smuð baʊ. kɛɹhinɪn juʒəwəli wɝ smuð. "ɪt ʃæl bi əz jə seɪ. fɝɡɪv mi, bʌt jə saʊn əz ðoʊ jə min tə bi ɡɔn ə lɔŋ waɪl."

Perhaps that was brusque, but Dobraine's expression hardly changed. His eyebrows rose slightly at the name written on the second packet; that was all. He made a smooth bow. Cairhienin usually were smooth. "It shall be as you say. Forgive me, but you sound as though you mean to be gone a long while."

ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd. hi tʃɹʌstɪd ðə haɪ lɔɹɾ əz fɑɹ əz i tʃɹʌstɪɾ ɛniwʌn. ɔlmoʊst əz fɑɹ. "hu kən seɪ? ðə taɪmz ɑɹ ənsɝɾən. meɪk ʃʊɹ hɛdmɪstʃɹəs tɑɹsən əz wʌtɛvɝ kɔɪn ʃi nidz, ən ðə mɛn stɑɹɾɪŋ ðə skul ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ðə skul ɪn tiɹ, əz wɛl, əntɪl mæɾɝz tʃeɪnʒ ðɛɹ."

Rand shrugged. He trusted the High Lord as far as he trusted anyone. Almost as far. "Who can say? The times are uncertain. Make sure Headmistress Tarsin has whatever coin she needs, and the men starting the school in Caemlyn. The school in Tear, as well, until matters change there."

"æz jə seɪ," dɑbɹeɪn ɹɪpiɾɪd, tʌkɪŋ ðə pækɪts ɪndə hɪz koʊt. hɪz feɪs bɪtʃɹeɪd noʊ ɪmoʊʃən, naʊ. ən ɪkspɪɹiəns pleɪɝ ɪn ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz, wɑz dɑbɹeɪn.

"As you say," Dobraine repeated, tucking the packets into his coat. His face betrayed no emotion, now. An experienced player in the Game of Houses, was Dobraine.

fəɹ əɹ pɑɹt, ðə hɛdmɪstʃɹəs mænədʒ tə lʊk plizd ən dɪsɡɹʌntəld ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ən bɪzid hɝsɛlf smuðɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs ənnɛsəsɛɹəli ðə weɪ wɪmən dɪd wən hɑɹd-pɹɛs nɑt tə spik ðɛɹ maɪnz. kəmpleɪn haʊ ʃi wəɾ əbaʊt dʒɹimɝz ən fəlɑsəfɝz, ʃi wɑz dʒɛləs ə ði əkæɾəmiz wɛl-biɪŋ. ʃi wəd ʃɛd noʊ tɪɹz ɪf ðoʊz ʌðɝ skulz vænɪʃt ən ðɛɹ skɑlɝz wɝ fɔɹs tə kʌm tə ði əkæɾəmi. ivən ðə fəlɑsəfɝz. wʌt wəd ʃi θɪŋk ʌv wʌn pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɔɹɾɝ ɪn dɑbɹeɪnz pækət?

For her part, the Headmistress managed to look pleased and disgruntled at the same time, and busied herself smoothing her dress unnecessarily the way women did when hard-pressed not to speak their minds. Complain how she would about dreamers and philosophers, she was jealous of the Academy's well-being. She would shed no tears if those other schools vanished and their scholars were forced to come to the Academy. Even the philosophers. What would she think of one particular order in Dobraine's packet?

"aɪv faʊn ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ nid," mɪn sɛd, kʌmɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ðə ʃɛlvz stæɡɝɪŋ slaɪtli ʌndɝ ðə weɪɾ ə ðə θɹi bʌlʒɪŋ klɔθ skɹəps ðət hʌŋ fɹəm hɝ. hɝ pleɪn bɹaʊn koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz wɝ vɛɹi laɪk wʌt ʃi hæd wɔɹn wən i fɝst sɔ hɝ ɪn bɛɹlən. fəɹ səm ɹizən, ʃi hæd ɡɹʌmbəld oʊvɝ əm əntɪl ɛniwʌn u nu hɝ wʊɾə θɔɾ i wɑz æskɪŋ əɹ tə pʊɾ ɑn ə dʒɹɛs. ʃi smaɪl naʊ, ðoʊ, wɪð dɪlaɪɾ ən ə hɪn ə mɪstʃəf. "aɪ hoʊp ðoʊz pækhɔɹsɪz ɑɹ wɛɹ wi lɛf ðɛm, əɹ maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən wɪl əv tə bi fɪɾəd fəɹ ə pæksæɾəl."

"I've found everything I need," Min said, coming out from the shelves staggering slightly under the weight of the three bulging cloth scrips that hung from her. Her plain brown coat and breeches were very like what she had worn when he first saw her in Baerlon. For some reason, she had grumbled over them until anyone who knew her would have thought he was asking her to put on a dress. She smiled now, though, with delight and a hint of mischief. "I hope those packhorses are where we left them, or my Lord Dragon will have to be fitted for a packsaddle."

ɪdʒɹin ɡæspt, skændəlaɪz tə hɪɹ ɪm ədʒɹɛst soʊ, bʌt dɑbɹeɪn mɪɹli smaɪld ə lɪɾəl. hi hæd sin mɪn ɝaʊn ɹænd bɪfɔɹ.

Idrien gasped, scandalized to hear him addressed so, but Dobraine merely smiled a little. He had seen Min around Rand before.

ɹænd ɡɑt ɹɪɾ ə ðɛm əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl ðɛn, sɪns ðeɪ hæd hɝɾ ən sin əz mʌtʃ əz i wɑntəɾ əm tə - sɛn əm ɔf wɪð ə faɪnəl ædmənɪʃən ðəɾ i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ðəɹ əɾ ɔl. dɑbɹeɪn nɑɾəd əz ɪf i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd noʊ lɛs. ɪdʒɹin lʊk θɔtfəl əz ʃi lɛft. ɪf ʃi lɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ slɪp wɛɹ ə sɝvən kəd hɪɹ, əɹ ə skɑlɝ, ɪt wəd bi ɔl oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi ɪn tu deɪz. ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ taɪm ɪn ɛni keɪs. pɝhæps noʊ wʌn u kəd tɛl hæd bɪn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə fil ɪm oʊpən ə ɡeɪtweɪ hɪɹ, bʌɾ ɛniwʌn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ðə saɪnz wəd bi ʃʊɹ baɪ naʊ ðəɹ wɑz ə tɑvɝən ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪz plæn tə bi faʊn jɛt.

Rand got rid of them as quickly as possible then, since they had heard and seen as much as he wanted them to - sent them off with a final admonition that he had never been there at all. Dobraine nodded as if he had expected no less. Idrien looked thoughtful as she left. If she let anything slip where a servant could hear, or a scholar, it would be all over the City in two days. There was not much time in any case. Perhaps no one who could tell had been close enough to feel him open a gateway here, but anyone looking for the signs would be sure by now there was a ta'veren in the city. It was not his plan to be found yet.

wən ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, hi stʌɾid mɪn fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən tʊk wʌn ə ðə skɹəps ən slʌŋ ɪt fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

When the door closed behind them, he studied Min for a moment, then took one of the scrips and slung it from his shoulder.

"oʊnli wʌn?" ʃi sɛd. sɛɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝz ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ʃi plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ən skaʊld. "səmtaɪmz jə ɹɪli ɑɹ ə ʃifɝɾɝ. ðiz bæɡz mʌs bi ə hʌnʒɹədweɪt itʃ." bʌt ʃi saʊndəd mɔɹ əmjuz ðən əpsɛt.

"Only one?" she said. Setting the others on the floor, she planted her fists on her hips and scowled. "Sometimes you really are a sheepherder. These bags must be a hundredweight each." But she sounded more amused than upset.

"ju ʃʊɾə pɪk smɔlɝ bʊks," hi toʊl hɝ, pʊlɪŋ ɑn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz tə haɪd ðə dʒɹæɡənz. "ɔɹəɡən laɪɾɝ." hi tɝn təwɔɹd ðə wɪndoʊ, tə fɛtʃ ðə lɛðɝ skɹɪp, ən ə weɪv ə dɪzinəs hɪt hɪm. niz tɝnɪŋ tə wɔɾɝ, hi stʌmbəld. ə ʃɪmɝɪŋ feɪs i kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt flæʃt θɹu hɪz hɛd. wɪð ən ɛfɝt, hi kɑt hɪmsɛlf, fɔɹst ɪz lɛɡz stʃɹeɪt. ən ðə wɝlɪŋ sɛnseɪʃən vænɪʃt. luz θɝɪn pæntɪd hɔɹsli ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz. kəd ðə feɪs bi hɪz?

"You should have picked smaller books," he told her, pulling on riding gloves to hide the Dragons. "Or lighter." He turned toward the window, to fetch the leather scrip, and a wave of dizziness hit him. Knees turning to water, he stumbled. A shimmering face he could not make out flashed through his head. With an effort, he caught himself, forced his legs straight. And the whirling sensation vanished. Lews Therin panted hoarsely in the shadows. Could the face be his?

"ɪf jə θɪŋk jəl meɪk mi kæɹi ðɛm ɔl ðət weɪ, θɪŋk əɡɛn," mɪn ɡɹʌmbəld. "aɪv sin bɛɾɝ pɹitɛndɪŋ fɹəm steɪbəlɪhənz. jə kəd tʃɹaɪ fɔlɪŋ daʊn."

"If you think you'll make me carry them all that way, think again," Min grumbled. "I've seen better pretending from stablehands. You could try falling down."

"nɑt ðɪs taɪm." hi wɑz ɹɛɾi fəɹ wʌt hæpənd wən i tʃænəld; hi kəd kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt tə səm ɪkstɛnt. juʒəwəli. moʊst ə ðə taɪm. ðɪs dɪzinəs wɪθaʊt seɪɾɪn wɑz nu. meɪbi hi hæd dʒʌs tɝn tu fæst. ən meɪbi pɪɡz dɪd flaɪ. hi sɛɾəld ðə lɛðɝ skɹɪps stʃɹæp oʊvɝ ɪz fɹi ʃoʊldɝ. ðə mɛn ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹd wɝ stɪl bɪzi. bɪldɪŋ. "mɪn - "

"Not this time." He was ready for what happened when he channeled; he could control it to some extent. Usually. Most of the time. This dizziness without saidin was new. Maybe he had just turned too fast. And maybe pigs did fly. He settled the leather scrip's strap over his free shoulder. The men in the stableyard were still busy. Building. "Min - "

hɝ bɹaʊz loʊɝɾ ɪmiɾiətli. ʃi pɔz fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɪn dʒɹɔɪŋ ɑn əɹ ɹɛd ɡlʌvz ən bɪɡæn tæpɪŋ əɹ fʊt. ə deɪnʒɝəs saɪn wɪð ɛni wʊmən, ɪspɛʃli wʌn u kæɹid naɪvz. "wi hæd ðɪs aʊt, ɹænd blʌɾi dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ælθɹ! jə ɑɹ nɑt livɪŋ mi bɪhaɪnd!"

Her brows lowered immediately. She paused for an instant in drawing on her red gloves and began tapping her foot. A dangerous sign with any woman, especially one who carried knives. "We had this out, Rand bloody Dragon Reborn al'Thor! You are not leaving me behind!"

"ðə θɔt nɛvɝ kɹɔs maɪ maɪnd," hi laɪd. hi wɑz tu wik; hi kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf seɪ ðə wɝdz, tə meɪk əɹ steɪ. tu wik, hi θɔt bɪɾɝli, ən ʃi maɪt wɛl daɪ fəɹ ɪt, ðə laɪt bɝn mi fɝɛvɝ!

"The thought never crossed my mind," he lied. He was too weak; he could not make himself say the words, to make her stay. Too weak, he thought bitterly, and she might well die for it, the Light burn me forever!

ɪt wɪl, luz θɝɪn pɹɑməst sɔfli.

It will, Lews Therin promised softly.

"aɪ dʒʌs θɔt jə ʃəd noʊ wʌt wiv bɪn duɪŋ, ən wʌt wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə du," ɹænd wɛn ɑn. "aɪ hævən bɪn vɛɹi fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ, aɪ səpoʊz." ɡæðɝɪŋ hɪmsɛlf, hi siz seɪɾɪn. ðə ɹum sim tə wɝl, ən i ɹoʊd ði ævəlæntʃ ə faɪɝ ən aɪs ən fɪlθ wɪð nɔziə siθɪŋ ɪn ɪz bɛli. hi wɑz eɪbəl tə stæn ɪɹɛkt wɪθaʊt sweɪɪŋ, ðoʊ. bɛɹli. ən dʒʌst eɪbəl tə wiv ðə floʊz ʌv ə ɡeɪtweɪ ðəɾ oʊpən ɪndə ə snoʊi klɪɹɪŋ wɛɹ tu sæɾəld hɔɹsəz wɝ tɛðɝd tə ə loʊ bɹæntʃ ʌv ən oʊk.

"I just thought you should know what we've been doing, and what we are going to do," Rand went on. "I haven't been very forthcoming, I suppose." Gathering himself, he seized saidin. The room seemed to whirl, and he rode the avalanche of fire and ice and filth with nausea seething in his belly. He was able to stand erect without swaying, though. Barely. And just able to weave the flows of a gateway that opened into a snowy clearing where two saddled horses were tethered to a low branch of an oak.

hi wɑz ɡlæd tə si ði ænəməlz stɪl ðɛɹ. ðə klɪɹɪŋ wɑz wɛl əweɪ fɹəm ðə nɪɹəst ɹoʊd, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ stɪl wɑndɝɝz u hæd tɝn ðɛɹ bæks ɑn fæmliz ən fɑɹmz, tʃɹeɪdz ən kɹæfs, kəz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd bɹoʊkən ɔl bɑnz. ðə pɹɑfəsiz sɛd soʊ. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ə ɡʊd mɛni ʌv ðoʊz mɛn ən wɪmən, fʊtsɔɹ ən hæf-fɹoʊzən naʊ ɑn tɑp ʌv ɪt, wɝ taɪɝɾ ə sɝtʃɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni noʊʃən wʌt ðeɪ wɝ sɝtʃɪŋ fɔɹ. ivən ðiz nɑndɪskɹɪp maʊns ʃʊɹli wʊɾə vænɪʃt wɪð ðə fɝs mæn tə faɪn əm ənətɛndɪd. hi hæd ɡoʊld ɪnʌf tə baɪ ʌðɝz, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk mɪn wʊɾə ɛndʒɔɪd ði aʊɝz wɔk tə ðə vɪlədʒ wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd lɛf ðə pækhɔɹsɪz.

He was glad to see the animals still there. The clearing was well away from the nearest road, but there were still wanderers who had turned their backs on families and farms, trades and crafts, because the Dragon Reborn had broken all bonds. The Prophecies said so. On the other hand, a good many of those men and women, footsore and half-frozen now on top of it, were tired of searching without any notion what they were searching for. Even these nondescript mounts surely would have vanished with the first man to find them unattended. He had gold enough to buy others, but he did not think Min would have enjoyed the hour's walk to the village where they had left the packhorses.

hɝiɪŋ θɹu ɪndə ðə klɪɹɪŋ, pɹitɛndɪŋ ðə tʃeɪnʒ fɹəm flɔɹ tə ni-dip snoʊ kɑzd ɪz stʌmbəl, hi oʊnli weɪɾəd əntɪl ʃi hæd snætʃt ʌp əɹ bæɡz ə bʊks ən stæɡɝd θɹu æftɝ ɪm bɪfɔɹ ɹilisɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. ðeɪ wɝ faɪv hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz fɹəm kɛɹhin, ən nɪɹɝ tɑɹ vəlɑn ðən ɛniwɛɹ ɛls ə noʊt. ɑlɑnə hæd feɪɾəd ɪn ɪz hɛd wən ðə ɡeɪtweɪ kloʊzd.

Hurrying through into the clearing, pretending the change from floor to knee-deep snow caused his stumble, he only waited until she had snatched up her bags of books and staggered through after him before releasing the Power. They were five hundred miles from Cairhien, and nearer Tar Valon than anywhere else of note. Alanna had faded in his head when the gateway closed.

"fɔɹθkʌmɪŋ?" mɪn sɛd, saʊndɪŋ səspɪʃəs. ʌv ɪz moʊɾɪvz, hi hoʊpt, əɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt ðə tʃɹuθ. ðə dɪzinəs ən nɔziə feɪɾəd sloʊli. "ju hæv bɪn əz oʊpən əz ə mʌsəl, ɹænd, bʌɾ aɪm nɑt blaɪnd. fɝst wi tʃɹævəl tə ɹɪɾiən, wɛɹ jə æsk soʊ mɛni kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt ðɪs ʃɑɹə pleɪs ðəɾ ɛnibəɾi wəd θɪŋk jə mɛn tə ɡoʊ ðɛɹ." fɹaʊnɪŋ feɪnli, ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ əz ʃi fæsənd wʌn ə hɝ bɝɾənz tə ðə sæɾəl ə hɝ bɹaʊn ɡɛldɪŋ. ʃi ɡɹʌntɪd wɪð ði ɛfɝt, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə sɛt ði ʌðɝ bæɡ ʌv bʊks daʊn ɪn ðə snoʊ. "aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt ði il weɪst wɑz laɪk ðæt. ðət sɪɾi ɪz bɪɡɝ ðən tɑɹ vəlɑn, ivən ɪf ɪts hæf ɹuənd. ən ɔl ðoʊz faʊntənz, ən ðə leɪk. aɪ kʊdn ivən si ðə fɑɹ saɪd. aɪ θɔt ðəɹ wɑzn ɛni wɔɾɝ ɪn ðə weɪst. ən ɪt wɑz əz koʊld əz hɪɹ; aɪ θɔt ðə weɪst wɑz hɑt!"

"Forthcoming?" Min said, sounding suspicious. Of his motives, he hoped, or anything but the truth. The dizziness and nausea faded slowly. "You have been as open as a mussel, Rand, but I am not blind. First we Traveled to Rhuidean, where you asked so many questions about this Shara place that anybody would think you meant to go there." Frowning faintly, she shook her head as she fastened one of her burdens to the saddle of her brown gelding. She grunted with the effort, but she was not about to set the other bag of books down in the snow. "I never thought the Aiel Waste was like that. That city is bigger than Tar Valon, even if it is half ruined. And all those fountains, and the lake. I couldn't even see the far side. I thought there wasn't any water in the Waste. And it was as cold as here; I thought the Waste was hot!"

"ɪn sʌmɝ, jə fɹaɪ dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪ, bʌt jə stɪl fɹiz ət naɪt." hi fɛlt ɹəkʌvɝɾ ɪnʌf tə bɪɡɪn ʃɪftɪŋ ɪz oʊn bɝɾənz tə ðə ɡɹeɪz sæɾəl. ɔlmoʊst ɪnʌf. hi dɪɾ ɪɾ ɛniweɪ. "ɪf jə ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, wʌt wɑz aɪ duɪŋ bɪsaɪdz æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz?"

"In summer, you fry during the day, but you still freeze at night." He felt recovered enough to begin shifting his own burdens to the gray's saddle. Almost enough. He did it anyway. "If you already know everything, what was I doing besides asking questions?"

"ðə seɪm əz ɪn tɛɹ læs naɪt. meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ ɛvɹi kæɾ ən blækbɝd nu jə wɝ ðɛɹ. ɪn tɛɹ, ɪt wɑz tʃeɪkɪn jə æskt əbaʊt. ɪts ɑbviəs. jə ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənfjuz ɛniwʌn u tʃɹaɪz tə faɪn aʊt wɛɹ jə ɑɹ ən wɛɹ jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ nɛkst." ðə sɛkən bæɡ ʌv bʊks bælənsɪŋ ðə fɝs bɪhaɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ʃi əntaɪɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz ən klaɪmd ɪndə ðə sæɾəl. "soʊ, æm aɪ blaɪnd?"

"The same as in Tear last night. Making sure every cat and blackbird knew you were there. In Tear, it was Chachin you asked about. It's obvious. You are trying to confuse anyone who tries to find out where you are and where you're going next." The second bag of books balancing the first behind her saddle, she untied her reins and climbed into the saddle. "So, am I blind?"

"jɔɹ aɪz bɪlɔŋ ɑn ən iɡəl." hi hoʊpt ɪz pɝsuɝz sɔ əz klɪɹli. əɹ ðət huɛvɝ dɝɛktəɾ əm dɪd. ɪt wəd nɑt də tə hæv əm hɛɹɪŋ ɔf ðə laɪt nu wɛɹ. "aɪ nid tə leɪ səm mɔɹ fɔls tʃɹeɪlz, aɪ θɪŋk."

"Your eyes belong on an eagle." He hoped his pursuers saw as clearly. Or that whoever directed them did. It would not do to have them haring off the Light knew where. "I need to lay some more false trails, I think."

"waɪ teɪk ðə taɪm? aɪ noʊ juv ə plæn, aɪ noʊ ɪt kənsɝnz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðət lɛðɝ skɹɪp - ə sɑŋɡɹil? - ən aɪ noʊ ɪts ɪmpɔɹɾənt. doʊn lʊk soʊ sɝpɹaɪzd. jə bɛɹli lɛt ðət bæɡ aʊɾ ə jəɹ saɪt. waɪ nɑt ɡoʊ əhɛɾ ən də wʌtɛvɝ ɪts jə plæn, ðən leɪ jəɹ fɔls tʃɹeɪlz? ən ðə ɹil wʌn, ʌv kɔɹs. jəɹ gɑnə tɝn ɑn əm wən ðeɪ list ɪkspɛkt, jə sɛd. jə kən hɑɹdli də ðəɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ fɑloʊ wɛɹ jə wɑnt."

"Why take the time? I know you have a plan, I know it concerns something in that leather scrip - a sa'angreal? - and I know it's important. Don't look so surprised. You barely let that bag out of your sight. Why not go ahead and do whatever it is you plan, then lay your false trails? And the real one, of course. You're going to turn on them when they least expect, you said. You can hardly do that unless they follow where you want."

"aɪ wɪʃ jud nɛvɝ stɑɹɾəd ɹiɾɪŋ hɹɪd fɛlz bʊks," hi mʌɾɝd saʊɝli, pʊlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪz sæɾəl. hɪz hɛd spʌn oʊnli ə lɪɾəl. "ju pʌzəl aʊt tu mʌtʃ. kən aɪ kip ɛni sikɹəts əɾ ɔl fɹəm ju, naʊ?"

"I wish you'd never started reading Herid Fel's books," he muttered sourly, pulling himself into the gray's saddle. His head spun only a little. "You puzzle out too much. Can I keep any secrets at all from you, now?"

"ju nɛvɝ kʊd, wʊlhɛd," ʃi læft, ən ðɛn, kɑntʃɹədɪktɪŋ hɝsɛlf, "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə plænɪŋ? əsaɪd fɹəm kɪlɪŋ dæʃivə ən ðə ɹɛst, aɪ min. aɪ hæv ə ɹaɪt tə noʊ ɪf aɪm tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð ju." əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð hɪm.

"You never could, woolhead," she laughed, and then, contradicting herself, "What are you planning? Aside from killing Dashiva and the rest, I mean. I have a right to know if I'm traveling with you." As if she had not insisted on traveling with him.

"aɪm gɑnə klɛnz ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə sɔɹs," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs. ə moʊmɛntəs ənaʊnsmənt. ə ɡɹæn skim, mɔɹ ðən ɡɹænd. ɡɹændioʊs, moʊst wəd seɪ. hi maɪɾ əv sɛɾ i ɪntɛndəd tə teɪk ən æftɝnun stʃɹoʊl, fəɹ ɔl ə mɪnz ɹiækʃən. ʃi sɪmpli lʊkt ət hɪm, hænz foʊldəɾ ɑn ðə pɑməl ə hɝ sæɾəl, əntɪl i wɛn ɑn.

"I'm going to cleanse the male half of the Source," he said in a flat voice. A momentous announcement. A grand scheme, more than grand. Grandiose, most would say. He might have said he intended to take an afternoon stroll, for all of Min's reaction. She simply looked at him, hands folded on the pommel of her saddle, until he went on.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ lɔŋ ɪɾəl teɪk, ən wʌns aɪ stɑɹt, aɪ θɪŋk ɛvɹiwʌn wɪðɪn ə θaʊzən maɪlz ə mi hu kən tʃænəl wɪl noʊ sʌmθɪŋ ɪz hæpənɪŋ. aɪ daʊɾ əl bi eɪbəl tə dʒʌst stɑp ɪf dæʃivə ən ðə ɹɛst, əɹ ðə fɔɹseɪkən, sʌɾənli əpɪɹ tə si wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz. ðə fɔɹseɪkən, aɪ kæn də ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt, bʌt wɪð lʌk, aɪ kən fɪnɪʃ ði ʌðɝz." meɪbi biɪŋ tɑvɝən wəd ɡɪv ɪm ði ɛdʒ i niɾəd soʊ dɛspɝətli.

"I don't know how long it will take, and once I start, I think everyone within a thousand miles of me who can channel will know something is happening. I doubt I'll be able to just stop if Dashiva and the rest, or the Forsaken, suddenly appear to see what it is. The Forsaken, I can't do anything about, but with luck, I can finish the others." Maybe being ta'veren would give him the edge he needed so desperately.

"dɪpɛn ɑn lʌk, ən kɔɹlən dæʃivə əɹ ðə fɔɹseɪkən, iðɝ wʌn, wɪl əv jə fəɹ bɹɛkfəst," ʃi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs aʊɾ ə ðə klɪɹɪŋ. "meɪbi aɪ kən θɪŋk ʌv ə bɛɾɝ weɪ. kʌm ɑn. ðɛɹz ə wɔɹm faɪɝ ət ðəɾ ɪn. aɪ hoʊp jəɹ gɑnə lɛɾ əs əv ə hɑt mil bɪfɔɹ wi liv."

"Depend on luck, and Corlan Dashiva or the Forsaken, either one, will have you for breakfast," she said, turning her horse out of the clearing. "Maybe I can think of a better way. Come on. There's a warm fire at that inn. I hope you're going to let us have a hot meal before we leave."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ æftɝ əɹ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. jə wʊɾə θɔt faɪv ɹɛnəɡeɪɾ æʃəmən, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə fɔɹseɪkən, wɝ lɛs bɑðɝ ðən ə sɔɹ tuθ. buɾɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪ əhɛɾ ɪn ə spɹeɪ ʌv snoʊ, hi kɑɾ ʌp tə hɝ ən ɹoʊɾ ɪn saɪləns. hi stɪl hæɾ ə fju sikɹəts fɹəm hɝ, ðɪs sɪknəs ðət hæd bɪɡʌn əfɛktɪŋ ɪm wən i tʃænəld, fəɹ wʌn. ðət wɑz ðə ɹil ɹizən i hæd tə dil wɪð dæʃivə ən ði ʌðɝz fɝst. ɪt ɡeɪv ɪm taɪm tə ɡɛɾ oʊvɝ ðə sɪknəs. ɪf ðət wɑz pɑsəbəl. ɪf nɑt, hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðə tu tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz sæɾəl wɝ gɑnə bi ɛni jus əɾ ɔl.

Rand stared after her incredulously. You would have thought five renegade Asha'man, not to mention the Forsaken, were less bother than a sore tooth. Booting the gray ahead in a spray of snow, he caught up to her and rode in silence. He still had a few secrets from her, this sickness that had begun affecting him when he channeled, for one. That was the real reason he had to deal with Dashiva and the others first. It gave him time to get over the sickness. If that was possible. If not, he was not sure the two ter'angreal riding behind his saddle were going to be any use at all.


tʃæptɝ wʌn


CHAPTER 1

livɪŋ ðə pɹɑfət


Leaving the Prophet

ðə wil ə taɪm tɝnz, ən eɪdʒəz kʌm ən pæs, livɪŋ mɛmɹiz ðət bɪkʌm lɛdʒənd. lɛdʒən feɪdz tə mɪθ, ən ivən mɪθ ɪz lɔŋ fɝɡɑɾən wən ði eɪdʒ ðət ɡeɪv ɪt bɝθ kʌmz əɡɛn. ɪn wʌn eɪdʒ, kɔl ðə θɝɾ eɪdʒ baɪ sʌm, ən eɪdʒ jɛt tə kʌm, ən eɪdʒ lɔŋ pæst, ə wɪn ɹoʊz əbʌv ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. ðə wɪnd wɑz nɑt ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ niðɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋz nɔɹ ɛndɪŋz tə ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil ə taɪm. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

The Wheel of Time turns, and Ages come and pass, leaving memories that become legend. Legend fades to myth, and even myth is long forgotten when the Age that gave it birth comes again. In one Age, called the Third Age by some, an Age yet to come, an Age long past, a wind rose above the Aryth Ocean. The wind was not the beginning. There are neither beginnings nor endings to the turning of the Wheel of Time. But it was a beginning.

is ðə wɪn blu əbʌv ðə koʊld ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin oʊʃən swɛlz, təwɔɹd tæɹɑbən, wɛɹ ʃɪps ɔlɹɛɾi ənloʊɾəd əɹ weɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ tɝnz tə ɛntɝ ðə hɑɹbɝ ə tæntʃəkoʊ tɔst əɾ æŋkɝ fəɹ maɪlz əlɔŋ ðə loʊ koʊstlaɪn. mɔɹ ʃɪps, ɡɹeɪɾ ən smɔl, fɪl ðə hjudʒ hɑɹbɝ, ən bɑɹdʒəz fɛɹiɪŋ pipəl ən kɑɹɡoʊ əʃɔɹ, fəɹ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mʊɹɪŋ ɛmpti əɾ ɛni ʌv ðə sɪɾiz dɑks. ði ɪnhæbəɾənts ə tæntʃəkoʊ hæd bɪn fɪɹfəl wən ðə sɪɾi fɛl tə ɪts nu mæstɝz, wɪð ðɛɹ pəkjuljɝ kʌstəmz ən stʃɹeɪnʒ kɹitʃɝz ən wɪmən hɛld ɑn liʃɪz u kəd tʃænəl, ən fɪɹfəl əɡɛn wən ðɪs fliɾ ɝaɪvd, maɪnd-nʌmɪŋ ɪn ɪts saɪz, ən bɪɡæn dɪsɡɔɹdʒɪŋ nɑɾ oʊnli soʊlʒɝz bʌt ʃɑɹp-aɪd mɝtʃəns, ən kɹæftsfoʊk wɪð ðə tulz ə ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪdz, ən ivən fæmliz wɪð wæɡənz fʊl ə fɑɹm ɪmpləməns ən ənnoʊn plæns. ðəɹ wɑz ə nu kɪŋ ən ə nu pɑnɑɹtʃ tə ɔɹɾɝ ðə lɔz, ðoʊ, ən ɪf kɪŋ ən pɑnɑɹtʃ oʊd fiəlti tə səm fɑɹ dɪstən ɛmpɹɛs, ɪf sintʃæn noʊbəlz ɑkjəpaɪd mɛni ʌv ðə pæləsəz ən dɪmændəd dipɝ oʊbaɪsəns ðən ɛni tæɹɑbənɝ lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi, laɪf wɑz lɪɾəl tʃeɪnʒd fəɹ moʊs pipəl, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə bɛɾɝ. ðə sintʃæn blʌd hæd smɔl kɑntækt wɪð ɔɹɾənɛɹi foʊk, ən ɑd kʌstəmz kəd bi lɪvd wɪð. ði ænɝki ðət hæd ɹɪp ðə kʌntʃɹi əpɑɹt wɑz dʒʌst ə mɛmɹi, naʊ, ən hʌŋɡɝ wɪð ɪt. ðə ɹɛbəlz ən bændəts ən dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn u hæd pleɪɡd ðə lænd wɝ dɛɾ əɹ kæptʃɝɾ əɹ dʒɹɪvən nɔɹθ ɑntu ɑlməθ pleɪn, ðoʊz u hæd nɑt jildəd, ən tʃɹeɪd muvd wʌns mɔɹ. ðə hɔɹdz ə stɑɹvɪŋ ɹɛfjudʒiz ðət hæd klɔɡd ðə sɪɾi stʃɹits wɝ bæk ɪn ðɛɹ vɪlədʒəz, bæk ɑn ðɛɹ fɑɹmz. ən noʊ mɔɹ ə ðə nuəst ɝaɪvəlz ɹɪmeɪn ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ ðən ðə sɪɾi kəd səpɔɹɾ izəli. dɪspaɪt ðə snoʊz, soʊlʒɝz ən mɝtʃəns, kɹæftsfoʊk ən fɑɹmɝz fæn aʊɾ ɪnlæn ɪn ðɛɹ θaʊzənz ən tɛnz ə θaʊzənz, bʌt ði aɪsi wɪn læʃt ə tæntʃəkoʊ ət pis ænd, æftɝ ɪts hɑɹʃ tʃɹʌbəlz, fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt kɑntɛnt wɪð ɪts lɑt.

East the wind blew above the cold gray-green ocean swells, toward Tarabon, where ships already unloaded or waiting their turns to enter the harbor of Tanchico tossed at anchor for miles along the low coastline. More ships, great and small, filled the huge harbor, and barges ferrying people and cargo ashore, for there was no mooring empty at any of the city's docks. The inhabitants of Tanchico had been fearful when the city fell to its new masters, with their peculiar customs and strange creatures and women held on leashes who could channel, and fearful again when this fleet arrived, mind-numbing in its size, and began disgorging not only soldiers but sharp-eyed merchants, and craftsfolk with the tools of their trades, and even families with wagons full of farm implements and unknown plants. There was a new King and a new Panarch to order the laws, though, and if King and Panarch owed fealty to some far distant Empress, if Seanchan nobles occupied many of the palaces and demanded deeper obeisance than any Taraboner lord or lady, life was little changed for most people, except for the better. The Seanchan Blood had small contact with ordinary folk, and odd customs could be lived with. The anarchy that had ripped the country apart was just a memory, now, and hunger with it. The rebels and bandits and Dragonsworn who had plagued the land were dead or captured or driven north onto Almoth Plain, those who had not yielded, and trade moved once more. The hordes of starving refugees that had clogged the city streets were back in their villages, back on their farms. And no more of the newest arrivals remained in Tanchico than the city could support easily. Despite the snows, soldiers and merchants, craftsfolk and farmers fanned out inland in their thousands and tens of thousands, but the icy wind lashed a Tanchico at peace and, after its harsh troubles, for the most part content with its lot.

is ðə wɪn blu fəɹ liɡz, ɡʌstɪŋ ən feɪɾɪŋ, dɪvaɪɾɪŋ bʌt nɛvɝ daɪɪŋ, ist ən vɪɹɪŋ tə ðə saʊθ, əkɹɔs fɔɹəsts ən pleɪnz ɹæpt ɪn wɪntɝ, bɛɹ-bɹæntʃt ən bɹaʊn-ɡɹæst, ət læs kɹɔsɪŋ wʌt hæd wʌns bɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝ bɪtwin tæɹɑbən ən ɑmɑdɪʃiə. ə bɔɹɾɝ stɪl, bʌɾ oʊnli ɪn neɪm, ðə kʌstəmz poʊsts dɪsmæntəld, ðə ɡɑɹdz ɡɔn. ist ən saʊθ, ɝaʊn ðə sʌðɝn ɹitʃəz ə ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, swɝlɪŋ əkɹɔs haɪ-wɔld æmədɔɹ. kɑŋkɝɾ æmədɔɹ. ðə bænɝ ətɑp ðə mæsɪv fɔɹtʃɹəs ə ðə laɪt snæpt ɪn ðə wɪnd, ðə ɡoʊldən hɔk ɪt bɔɹ tʃɹuli simɪŋ tə flaɪ wɪð laɪtnɪŋ boʊls klʌtʃt ɪn ɪts təlɑnz. fju neɪɾɪvz lɛf ðɛɹ hoʊmz ɪksɛpt ət nid, ən ðoʊz fju hɝiɾ əlɔŋ ðə fɹoʊzən stʃɹits, kloʊks klʌtʃt ɝaʊn əm ən aɪz daʊn. aɪz daʊn nɑt dʒʌs tə maɪn fʊɾɪŋ ɑn slɪk peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz bʌt tə əvɔɪd lʊkɪŋ ət ði əkeɪʒənəl sintʃæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ baɪ ɑn ə bis laɪk ə bɹɑnz-skeɪl kæt ðə saɪz ʌv ə hɔɹs, əɹ stil-veɪl tæɹɑbənɝz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɡɹups ʌv wʌntaɪm tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, naʊ tʃeɪn ən leɪbɝɪŋ laɪk ænəməlz tə hɔl ɹɛfjus wæɡənz aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi. ə bɛɹ mʌnθ ən ə hæf ɪn ðə sintʃæn foʊld, ðə pipəl ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃiəz kæpəɾəl sɪɾi fɛl ðə bɪɾɝ wɪn laɪk ə skɝdʒ, ən ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt kɝs ðɛɹ feɪt mɛɾəteɪtɪd ɑn wʌt sɪnz hæd bɹɔɾ əm tə ðɪs.

East the wind blew for leagues, gusting and fading, dividing but never dying, east and veering to the south, across forests and plains wrapped in winter, bare-branched and brown-grassed, at last crossing what had once been the border between Tarabon and Amadicia. A border still, but only in name, the customs posts dismantled, the guards gone. East and south, around the southern reaches of the Mountains of Mist, swirling across high-walled Amador. Conquered Amador. The banner atop the massive Fortress of the Light snapped in the wind, the golden hawk it bore truly seeming to fly with lightning bolts clutched in its talons. Few natives left their homes except at need, and those few hurried along the frozen streets, cloaks clutched around them and eyes down. Eyes down not just to mind footing on slick paving stones but to avoid looking at the occasional Seanchan riding by on a beast like a bronze-scaled cat the size of a horse, or steel-veiled Taraboners guarding groups of onetime Children of the Light, now chained and laboring like animals to haul refuse wagons out of the city. A bare month and a half in the Seanchan fold, the people of Amadicia's capital city felt the bitter wind like a scourge, and those who did not curse their fate meditated on what sins had brought them to this.

is ðə wɪn haʊld oʊvɝ ə dɛsəleɪɾɪd lænd wɛɹ əz mɛni vɪlədʒəz leɪ bɝn ən fɑɹmz ɹuən əz hɛl pipəl. snoʊ blæŋkəɾɪd tʃɑɹd tɪmbɝz ən əbændən bɑɹnz əlaɪk, sɔfənɪŋ ðə vju ivən əz ɪɾ æɾəd fɹizɪŋ tə stɑɹveɪʃən əz ə weɪ ʌv daɪɪŋ. sɔɹɾ ən æks ən spɪɹ hæd bɪn ðəɹ ɔlɹɛɾi, ən ɹɪmeɪn tə kɪl əɡɛn. ist, əntɪl ðə wɪn moʊn ə dɝdʒ oʊvɝ ənwɔld ɑbilə. noʊ bænɝz flu əbʌv ðə taʊnz wɑtʃtaʊɝz, fəɹ ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən wɑz ðɛɹ, ən ðə pɹɑfət niɾəd noʊ bænɝ seɪv ɪz neɪm. ɪn ɑbilə, pipəl ʃɪvɝd hɑɹɾɝ ət ðə neɪm ə ðə pɹɑfət ðən ðeɪ dɪd fəɹ ðə wɪnd. pipəl ɛlswɛɹ ʃɪvɝɾ ət ðət neɪm, tu.

East the wind howled over a desolated land where as many villages lay burned and farms ruined as held people. Snow blanketed charred timbers and abandoned barns alike, softening the view even as it added freezing to starvation as a way of dying. Sword and axe and spear had been there already, and remained to kill again. East, until the wind moaned a dirge over unwalled Abila. No banners flew above the town's watchtowers, for the Prophet of the Lord Dragon was there, and the Prophet needed no banner save his name. In Abila, people shivered harder at the name of the Prophet than they did for the wind. People elsewhere shivered at that name, too.

stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə tɔl mɝtʃəns haʊs wɛɹ mæsimə lɪvd, pɛɹɪn lɛt ðə wɪnd wɪp ɪz fɝ-laɪn kloʊk əz i pʊld ɑn ɪz ɡlʌvz. ðə mɪddeɪ sʌn ɡeɪv noʊ wɔɹmθ, ən ði ɛɹ bɪt dip. hi kɛpt ɪz feɪs smuð, bʌɾ i wɑz tu æŋɡɹi tə fil ðə koʊld. kipɪŋ ɪz hænz fɹəm ði æks əɾ ɪz bɛlt wɑz ən ɛfɝt. mæsimə - hi wəd nɑt kɔl ðə mæn pɹɑfət, nɑɾ ɪn ɪz oʊn hɛɾ i wəd nɑt! - mæsimə wɑz vɛɹi laɪkli ə ful, ən vɛɹi sɝɾənli ɪnseɪn. ə paʊɝfəl ful, mɔɹ paʊɝfəl ðən moʊs kɪŋz, ən mæd wɪð ɪt.

Striding out of the tall merchant's house where Masema lived, Perrin let the wind whip his fur-lined cloak as he pulled on his gloves. The midday sun gave no warmth, and the air bit deep. He kept his face smooth, but he was too angry to feel the cold. Keeping his hands from the axe at his belt was an effort. Masema - he would not call the man Prophet, not in his own head he would not! - Masema was very likely a fool, and very certainly insane. A powerful fool, more powerful than most kings, and mad with it.

mæsiməz ɡɑɹdz fɪl ðə stʃɹit fɹəm saɪd tə saɪɾ ən stʃɹɛtʃt ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝz ə ðə nɛkst stʃɹits, boʊni fɛloʊz ɪn stoʊlən sɪlks, bɪɹdləs əpɹɛntəsɪz ɪn tɔɹn koʊts, wʌns-plʌmp mɝtʃəns ɪn ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ə faɪn wʊlənz. ðɛɹ bɹɛθ wɑz waɪt mɪst, ən səm ʃɪvɝd wɪθaʊɾ ə kloʊk, bʌɾ ɛvɹi mæn klʌtʃt ə spɪɹ, əɹ ə kɹɔsboʊ wɪð ðə boʊlt ɪn pleɪs. stɪl, nʌn lʊkt aʊtwɝdli hɑstəl. ðeɪ nu hi kleɪmd əkweɪntəns wɪð ðə pɹɑfət, ən ðeɪ ɡeɪpt əz ɪf ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɪm tə lip ɪndə ði ɛɹ ən flaɪ. əɹ ət lis tɝn sʌmɝsɔls. hi fɪltɝɾ aʊt ðə smɛl ʌv wʊdzmoʊk fɹəm ðə taʊnz tʃɪmniz. ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm stæŋk ʌv oʊl swɛɾ ən ənwɑʃt bɑɾiz, ʌv iɡɝnəs ən fɪɹ. ən ʌv ə stʃɹeɪnʒ fivɝ i hæd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz bɪfɔɹ, ə ɹəflɛkʃən ə ðə mædnəs ɪn mæsimə. hɑstəl əɹ nɑt, ðeɪ wəd kɪl hɪm, əɹ ɛniwʌn, ət mæsiməz wɝd. ðeɪ wəd bʊtʃɝ neɪʃənz ət mæsiməz wɝd. smɛlɪŋ ðɛm, hi fɛlt ə koʊlnəs dipɝ ðən ɛni wɪntɝ wɪnd. hi wɑz ɡlæɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ ðəɾ i hæd ɹəfjuz tə lɛt feɪl kʌm wɪð hɪm.

Masema's guards filled the street from side to side and stretched around the corners of the next streets, bony fellows in stolen silks, beardless apprentices in torn coats, once-plump merchants in the remains of fine woolens. Their breath was white mist, and some shivered without a cloak, but every man clutched a spear, or a crossbow with the bolt in place. Still, none looked outwardly hostile. They knew he claimed acquaintance with the Prophet, and they gaped as if expecting him to leap into the air and fly. Or at least turn somersaults. He filtered out the smell of woodsmoke from the town's chimneys. The lot of them stank of old sweat and unwashed bodies, of eagerness and fear. And of a strange fever he had not recognized before, a reflection of the madness in Masema. Hostile or not, they would kill him, or anyone, at Masema's word. They would butcher nations at Masema's word. Smelling them, he felt a coldness deeper than any winter wind. He was gladder than ever that he had refused to let Faile come with him.

ðə mɛn i hæd lɛft wɪð ðə maʊns wɝ pleɪɪŋ ət daɪs əlɔŋsaɪd ði ænəməlz, əɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ðoʊ ðə moʊʃənz ʌv ɪt, ɑn ə speɪs ə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz skɹeɪp moʊsli klɪɹ ə snoʊi slʌʃ. hi dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌs mæsimə əz fɑɹ əz i kəd θɹoʊ hɪz beɪ, ən nɔɹ dɪd ðeɪ. ðeɪ wɝ peɪɪŋ mɔɹ maɪn tə ðə haʊs, ən ðə ɡɑɹdz, ðən tə ðɛɹ ɡeɪm. ðə θɹi wɔɹɾɝz spɹæŋ tə ðɛɹ fiɾ əz sun əz i əpɪɹd, ðɛɹ aɪz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hɪz kəmpænjənz kʌmɪŋ aʊt bɪhaɪn hɪm. ðeɪ nu wʌt ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd fɛlt ɪnsaɪd ðɛɹ. nild wɑz sloʊɝ, pɔzɪŋ tə skup ʌp ðə daɪs ən kɔɪnz. ði æʃəmən wɑz ə poʊpənʒ, ɔlweɪz stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz kɝl mʌstæʃɪz, stʃɹʌɾɪŋ ən smɝkɪŋ ət wɪmən, bʌɾ i stʊɾ ɑn ðə bɔlz ə hɪz fit naʊ, wɛɹi əz ə kæt.

The men he had left with the mounts were playing at dice alongside the animals, or going though the motions of it, on a space of paving stones scraped mostly clear of snowy slush. He did not trust Masema as far as he could throw his bay, and nor did they. They were paying more mind to the house, and the guards, than to their game. The three Warders sprang to their feet as soon as he appeared, their eyes going to his companions coming out behind him. They knew what their Aes Sedai had felt inside there. Neald was slower, pausing to scoop up the dice and coins. The Asha'man was a popinjay, always stroking his curled mustaches, strutting and smirking at women, but he stood on the balls of his feet now, wary as a cat.

"aɪ θɔt wiɾ əv tə faɪɾ əɹ weɪ aʊɾ ə ðəɹ fəɹ ə taɪm," ɛlaɪəs mɝmɝɾ ət pɛɹɪnz ʃoʊldɝ. hɪz ɡoʊldən aɪz wɝ kɑm, ðoʊ. ə læŋki oʊl mæn ɪn ə bɹɔd-bɹɪm hæt, wɪð ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ ðət hʌŋ daʊn ɪz bæk tə hɪz weɪst ən ə lɔŋ bɪɹd fænɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst. ə lɔŋ naɪf əɾ ɪz bɛlt, nɑɾ ə sɔɹd. bʌɾ i hæd bɪn ə wɔɹɾɝ. hi stɪl wɑz, ɪn ə weɪ.

"I thought we'd have to fight our way out of there for a time," Elyas murmured at Perrin's shoulder. His golden eyes were calm, though. A lanky old man in a broad-brimmed hat, with graying hair that hung down his back to his waist and a long beard fanning across his chest. A long knife at his belt, not a sword. But he had been a Warder. He still was, in a way.

"ðæts ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət wɛn ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn toʊl hɪm, teɪkɪŋ steɪɝz ɹeɪnz fɹəm nild. ði æʃəmən kwɝkt ən aɪbɹaʊ kwɛstʃənɪŋli, bʌt pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ wʌt ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz, ən nild, wɪð ə twɪs tə hɪz maʊθ, hændəɾ ɛlaɪəs ðə ɹeɪnz ə hɪz maʊs-kʌlɝd ɡɛldɪŋ bɪfɔɹ klaɪmɪŋ ɑntu hɪz oʊn dæpəl.

"That's the only thing that went right," Perrin told him, taking Stayer's reins from Neald. The Asha'man quirked an eyebrow questioningly, but Perrin shook his head, not caring what the question was, and Neald, with a twist to his mouth, handed Elyas the reins of his mouse-colored gelding before climbing onto his own dapple.

pɛɹɪn hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ ðə mʊɹændiənz sʌlks. ɹænd hæd sɛn ɪm tə bɹɪŋ bæk mæsimə, ən mæsimə wɑz kʌmɪŋ. əz ɔlweɪz ə leɪt wən i θɔɾ ə ɹænd, kʌlɝz swɝld ɪn ɪz hɛd, ən əz ɔlweɪz, hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm. mæsimə wɑz tu ɡɹeɪɾ ə pɹɑbləm fəɹ pɛɹɪn tə weɪs θɔt fɹɛɾɪŋ oʊvɝ kʌlɝz. ðə blʌɾi mæn θɔɾ ɪt blæsfəmi fəɹ ɛniwʌn bʌt ɹænd tə tʌtʃ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɹænd, ɪt simd, wɑz nɑt ɹɪli mɔɹɾəl; hi wɑz ðə laɪt meɪd flɛʃ! soʊ ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ tʃɹævlɪŋ, noʊ kwɪk lip tə kɛɹhin θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ meɪd baɪ wʌn ə ði æʃəmən, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ pɛɹɪn hæd tʃɹaɪd tə bɹɪŋ mæsimə ɝaʊnd. ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə ɹaɪd ðə hoʊl fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd liɡz əɹ mɔɹ, θɹu ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌt. ən kip ɪt sikɹəɾ u ðeɪ wɝ, ən mæsimə əz wɛl. ðoʊz hæd bɪn ɹændz ɔɹɾɝz.

Perrin had no time for the Murandian's sulks. Rand had sent him to bring back Masema, and Masema was coming. As always of late when he thought of Rand, colors swirled in his head, and as always, he ignored them. Masema was too great a problem for Perrin to waste thought fretting over colors. The bloody man thought it blasphemy for anyone but Rand to touch the One Power. Rand, it seemed, was not really mortal; he was the Light made flesh! So there would be no Traveling, no quick leap to Cairhien through a gateway made by one of the Asha'man, no matter how Perrin had tried to bring Masema around. They would have to ride the whole four hundred leagues or more, through the Light alone knew what. And keep it secret who they were, and Masema as well. Those had been Rand's orders.

"ðɛɹz oʊnli wʌn weɪ aɪ kən si tə də ɪt, bɔɪ," ɛlaɪəs sɛɾ əz ɪf i hæd spoʊkən əlaʊd. "ə slɪm tʃæns. wi maɪɾ əv hæd bɛɾɝ ɑdz nɑkɪŋ ðə fɛloʊ ɑn ðə hɛɾ ən faɪɾɪŋ klɪɹ ɛniweɪ."

"There's only one way I can see to do it, boy," Elyas said as if he had spoken aloud. "A slim chance. We might have had better odds knocking the fellow on the head and fighting clear anyway."

"aɪ noʊ," pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld. hi hæd θɔɾ ʌv ɪt mɔɹ ðən wʌns dʊɹɪŋ ði aʊɝz ʌv ɑɹɡjəmənt. wɪð æʃəmən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ən waɪz wʌnz ɔl tʃænəlɪŋ, ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn pɑsəbəl. bʌɾ i hæd sin ə bæɾəl fɔt wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, mɛn ɹɪp tə blʌd-soʊkt ʃɹɛdz ɪn ðə blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ, ði ɝθ ɪtsɛlf blumɪŋ ɪn faɪɝ. ɑbilə wʊɾə bɪn ə bʊtʃɝz jɑɹd bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ dʌn. hi wəd nɛvɝ lʊk ɑn ðə laɪk əɡɛn, ɪf i hæɾ ɪz weɪ.

"I know," Perrin growled. He had thought of it more than once during the hours of argument. With Asha'man and Aes Sedai and Wise Ones all channeling, it might have been possible. But he had seen a battle fought with the One Power, men ripped to blood-soaked shreds in the blink of an eye, the earth itself blooming in fire. Abila would have been a butcher's yard before they were done. He would never look on the like again, if he had his way.

"wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ðɪs pɹɑfət wɪl meɪk ʌv ɪt?" ɛlaɪəs æskt.

"What do you think this Prophet will make of it?" Elyas asked.

pɛɹɪn hæd tə klɪɹ ɪz maɪn ə dəməaɪz wɛlz, ən ɑbilə lʊkɪŋ laɪk ðə fild ət dəməaɪz wɛlz, bɪfɔɹ i kəd θɪŋk ʌv wʌɾ ɛlaɪəs wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt. oʊ. haʊ hi wɑz gɑnə də ði ɪmpɑsəbəl. "aɪ doʊn kɛɹ wʌɾ i meɪks ʌv ɪt." ðə mæn wəd meɪk tʃɹʌbəl, ðət wɑz fəɹ sɝɾən ʃʊɹ.

Perrin had to clear his mind of Dumai's Wells, and Abila looking like the field at Dumai's Wells, before he could think of what Elyas was talking about. Oh. How he was going to do the impossible. "I don't care what he makes of it." The man would make trouble, that was for certain sure.

ɪɹɪɾəbli, hi ɹʌbd əɾ ɪz bɪɹd. hi niɾəd tə tʃɹɪm ɪt. tə hæv ɪt tʃɹɪmd, ɹæðɝ. ɪf i pɪkt ʌp ðə sɪzɝz, feɪl wəd teɪk əm əweɪ ən ɡɪv əm tə læmɡwɪn. ɪt stɪl simd ɪmpɑsəbəl ðət ðət hʌlkɪŋ ʃoʊldɝθʌmpɝ wɪð ɪz skɑɹd feɪs ən sʌŋkən nʌkəlz ʃəd noʊ ðə skɪlz ʌv ə bɑdaɪsɝvənt. laɪt! ə bɑdaɪsɝvənt. hi wɑz faɪndɪŋ ɪz fʊɾɪŋ wɪð feɪl ən əɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ sɑldəiən weɪz, bʌt ðə bɛɾɝ ɪz fʊɾɪŋ, ðə mɔɹ ʃi mænədʒ tə ɹʌn θɪŋz tə sut hɝsɛlf. wɪmən ɔlweɪz dɪd ðəɾ ɛniweɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt səmtaɪmz i θɔɾ i hæɾ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wʌn sɔɹɾ ʌv wɝlwɪn fəɹ ənʌðɝ. meɪbi hi kəd tʃɹaɪ səm ə ðɪs mæstɝfəl ʃaʊɾɪŋ ʃi sim tə laɪk soʊ mʌtʃ. ə mæn ɔt tə bi eɪbəl tə pʊt sɪzɝz tə hɪz oʊn bɪɹɾ ɪf i wɑntəd. hi daʊɾɪd i wʊd, ðoʊ. ʃaʊɾɪŋ əɾ əɹ wɑz hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf wən ʃi bɪɡæn ʃaʊɾɪŋ fɝst. ful θɪŋ tə bi θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt naʊ, ɛniweɪ.

Irritably, he rubbed at his beard. He needed to trim it. To have it trimmed, rather. If he picked up the scissors, Faile would take them away and give them to Lamgwin. It still seemed impossible that that hulking shoulderthumper with his scarred face and sunken knuckles should know the skills of a bodyservant. Light! A bodyservant. He was finding his footing with Faile and her strange Saldaean ways, but the better his footing, the more she managed to run things to suit herself. Women always did that anyway, of course, but sometimes he thought he had exchanged one sort of whirlwind for another. Maybe he could try some of this masterful shouting she seemed to like so much. A man ought to be able to put scissors to his own beard if he wanted. He doubted he would, though. Shouting at her was hard enough when she began shouting first. Fool thing to be thinking about now, anyway.

hi stʌɾid ði ʌðɝz meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ tə ðə hɔɹsəz əz i wʊɾə stʌɾid tulz i niɾəd fəɹ ə hɑɹd dʒɑb ʌv wɝk. hi wɑz əfɹeɪd mæsimə wəd meɪk ðɪs dʒɝni əz bæɾ ə dʒɑb əz i hæɾ ɛvɝ teɪkən ɑn, ən ɪz tulz wɝ fʊl ə kɹæks.

He studied the others making their way to the horses as he would have studied tools he needed for a hard job of work. He was afraid Masema would make this journey as bad a job as he had ever taken on, and his tools were full of cracks.

siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi pɔz bɪsaɪd hɪm, ðə hʊdz ə ðɛɹ kloʊks pʊld wɛl fɔɹwɝd, pʊɾɪŋ ðɛɹ feɪsəz ɪn ʃædoʊ. ə ɹeɪzɝ-ʃɑɹp kwɪvɝɪŋ leɪs ðə feɪn sɛn ə ðɛɹ pɝfjumz, fɪɹ ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl. mæsimə wʊɾə kɪld əm ɑn ðə spɑɾ ɪf i hæd hæɾ ɪz weɪ. ðə ɡɑɹdz stɪl maɪt, ɪf ɛni ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ən ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪs. əmʌŋ ðɪs mɛni, ðəɹ hæd tə bi səm u kʊd. mɑsʊɝi wɑz ðə tɔlɝ baɪ ɔlmoʊst ə hænd, bʌt pɛɹɪn stɪl lʊk daʊn ɑn ðə tɑps ə ðɛɹ hɛdz. ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɛlaɪəs, ðə sɪstɝz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz ʃɛltɝd wɪðɪn ðɛɹ kaʊlz; ðən siɑnɪd spoʊk kwaɪətli.

Seonid and Masuri paused beside him, the hoods of their cloaks pulled well forward, putting their faces in shadow. A razor-sharp quivering laced the faint scent of their perfumes, fear under control. Masema would have killed them on the spot if he had had his way. The guards still might, if any recognized an Aes Sedai face. Among this many, there had to be some who could. Masuri was the taller by almost a hand, but Perrin still looked down on the tops of their heads. Ignoring Elyas, the sisters exchanged glances sheltered within their cowls; then Seonid spoke quietly.

"du jə si naʊ waɪ hi mʌs bi kɪld? ðə mæn ɪz . . . ɹæbɪd." wɛl, ðə ɡɹin wɑz sɛldəm wʌn tə mɪns wɝdz. lʌkəli, nʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹdz wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ.

"Do you see now why he must be killed? The man is . . . rabid." Well, the Green was seldom one to mince words. Luckily, none of the guards was close enough to overhear.

"ju kəd tʃuz ə bɛɾɝ pleɪs tə seɪ ðæt," hi sɛd. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə hɪɹ ði ɑɹɡjəməns əɡɛn, naʊ əɹ leɪɾɝ, bʌɾ ɪspɛʃli nɑt naʊ. ən ɪt simd i dɪd nɑɾ əv tə.

"You could choose a better place to say that," he said. He did not want to hear the arguments again, now or later, but especially not now. And it seemed he did not have to.

ɛdʒɹə ən kɛɹɛl lum bɪhaɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, dɑɹk ʃɔlz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz. ðə bɪts ðət hʌŋ daʊn əkɹɔs tʃɛst ən bæk hɑɹdli simd ɛni pɹətɛkʃən fɹəm ðə koʊld, bʌt ðɛn, snoʊ bɑðɝd ðə waɪz wʌnz mɔɹ, dʒʌs ði ɛɡzɪstəns ə sətʃ ə θɪŋ. ðɛɹ sʌn-dɑɹk feɪsəz maɪɾ əv bɪn kɑɹv fəɹ ɔl ðeɪ ɹɪvild, jɛt ðə sɛn ə ðɛm wɑz ə stil spaɪk, ɛdʒɹəz blu aɪz, juʒəwəli soʊ kəmpoʊz ðət ðeɪ simd ɑd sɛɾ ɪn əɹ juθfəl fitʃɝz, wɝ əz hɑɹɾ əz ðət spaɪk. ʌv kɔɹs, hɝ kəmpoʊʒɝ mæsk stil. ʃɑɹp stil.

Edarra and Carelle loomed behind the Aes Sedai, dark shawls already wrapped around their heads. The bits that hung down across chest and back hardly seemed any protection from the cold, but then, snow bothered the Wise Ones more, just the existence of such a thing. Their sun-dark faces might have been carved for all they revealed, yet the scent of them was a steel spike, Edarra's blue eyes, usually so composed that they seemed odd set in her youthful features, were as hard as that spike. Of course, her composure masked steel. Sharp steel.

"ðɪs ɪz noʊ pleɪs fəɹ tɔkɪŋ," kɛɹɛl toʊl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪldli, tʌkɪŋ ə stʃɹæn ə faɪɝi ɹɛd hɛɹ bɪniθ əɹ ʃɔl. əz tɔl əz mɛni mɛn, ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz maɪld. fəɹ ə waɪz wʌn. wɪtʃ oʊnli mɛnt ʃi dɪd nɑt baɪt jəɹ noʊz ɔf wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ wɔɹnɪŋ fɝst. "ɡɛt tə jəɹ hɔɹsəz."

"This is no place for talking," Carelle told the Aes Sedai mildly, tucking a strand of fiery red hair beneath her shawl. As tall as many men, she was always mild. For a Wise One. Which only meant she did not bite your nose off without giving warning first. "Get to your horses."

ən ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ wɪmən kɝtsid tə hɝ bɹifli ən hɝid tə ðɛɹ sæɾəlz əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ əɾ ɔl. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt, tə ðə waɪz wʌnz. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i wəd nɛvɝ ɡɹoʊ əkʌstəm tə ðæt. ivən ɪf mɑsʊɝi ən siɑnɪd sim tə hæv dʌn soʊ.

And the shorter women curtsied to her briefly and hurried to their saddles as if they were not Aes Sedai at all. They were not, to the Wise Ones. Perrin thought he would never grow accustomed to that. Even if Masuri and Seonid seemed to have done so.

wɪð ə saɪ, hi swʌŋ ʌp ɑntu steɪɝ əz ðə waɪz wʌnz fɑloʊd ðɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɹɛntəsɪz. ðə stæljən fɹɪskt ə fju stɛps æftɝ ɪz ɹɛst, bʌt pɛɹɪn bɹɔɾ ɪm ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl wɪð ðə pɹɛʃɝ ə hɪz niz ən stɛɾi hænz ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz. ði il wɪmən maʊntəɾ ɔkwɝdli ivən æftɝ ɔl ðə pɹæktəs ðeɪ hæd hæd ðiz pæst wiks, ðɛɹ hɛvi skɝts pʊʃt ʌp tə bɛɹ wʊl-stɑkɪnɡd lɛɡz əbʌv ðə ni. ðeɪ əɡɹid wɪð ðə tu sɪstɝz əbaʊt mæsimə, ən soʊ dɪd ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz bæk əɾ ɪz kæmp. ə faɪn bɔɪlɪŋ stu fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə kæɹi tə kɛɹhin wɪθaʊt biɪŋ skɔldɪd.

With a sigh, he swung up onto Stayer as the Wise Ones followed their Aes Sedai apprentices. The stallion frisked a few steps after his rest, but Perrin brought him under control with the pressure of his knees and steady hands on the reins. The Aiel women mounted awkwardly even after all the practice they had had these past weeks, their heavy skirts pushed up to bare wool-stockinged legs above the knee. They agreed with the two sisters about Masema, and so did the other Wise Ones back at his camp. A fine boiling stew for anyone to carry to Cairhien without being scalded.

ɡɹeɪɾi ən ɛɹæm wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi maʊntəd, ən i kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt ðɛɹ sɛns əmʌŋ ɔl ði ʌðɝz. ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl nid. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz θɔt ɡɹeɪɾi lʊkt ə fɑɹmɝ dɪspaɪɾ ɪz blæk koʊɾ ən ðə sɪlvɝ sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz kɑlɝ, bʌt nɑt naʊ. stætʃu-stɪl ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, ðə stɑki æʃəmən sɝveɪd ðə ɡɑɹdz wɪð ðə ɡɹɪm aɪz ʌv ə mæn dəsaɪɾɪŋ wɛɹ tə meɪk ðə fɝs kʌt. ən ðə sɛkənd, ən θɝd, ən haʊɛvɝ mɛni wɝ niɾəd. ɛɹæm, bɪliəs ɡɹin tɪŋkɝz kloʊk fleɪlɪŋ ðə wɪn əz i hændəld ɪz ɹeɪnz, ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd ɹaɪzɪŋ əbʌv ɪz ʃoʊldɝ - ɛɹæmz feɪs wɑz ə mæp ʌv ɪksaɪtmən ðət meɪd pɛɹɪnz hɑɹt sɪŋk. ɪn mæsimə, ɛɹæm hæd mɛɾ ə mæn u hæd ɡɪvən ɪz laɪf ən hɑɹɾ ən soʊl tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ɪn ɛɹæmz vju, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɹæŋkt kloʊs bɪhaɪn pɛɹɪn ən feɪl.

Grady and Aram were already mounted, and he could not make out their scents among all the others. There was little need. He had always thought Grady looked a farmer despite his black coat and the silver sword on his collar, but not now. Statue-still in his saddle, the stocky Asha'man surveyed the guards with the grim eyes of a man deciding where to make the first cut. And the second, and third, and however many were needed. Aram, bilious green Tinker's cloak flailing the wind as he handled his reins, the hilt of his sword rising above his shoulder - Aram's face was a map of excitement that made Perrin's heart sink. In Masema, Aram had met a man who had given his life and heart and soul to the Dragon Reborn. In Aram's view, the Dragon Reborn ranked close behind Perrin and Faile.

jə dɪd ðə bɔɪ noʊ feɪvɝ, ɛlaɪəs hæd toʊl pɛɹɪn. jə hɛlpt ɪm lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv wʌɾ i bɪlivd, ən naʊ ɔl hiz tə bɪliv ɪn ɪz jə ən ðət sɔɹd. ɪts nɑɾ ɪnʌf, nɑt fəɹ ɛni mæn. ɛlaɪəs hæd noʊn ɛɹæm wən ɛɹæm wɑz stɪl ə tɪŋkɝ, bɪfɔɹ i pɪkt ʌp ðə sɔɹd.

You did the boy no favor, Elyas had told Perrin. You helped him let go of what he believed, and now all he has to believe in is you and that sword. It's not enough, not for any man. Elyas had known Aram when Aram was still a Tinker, before he picked up the sword.

ə stu ðət maɪɾ əv pɔɪzən ɪn ɪt, fəɹ sʌm.

A stew that might have poison in it, for some.

ðə ɡɑɹdz maɪt ɡeɪz ət pɛɹɪn ɪn wʌndɝ, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt muv tə klɪɹ ə pæsədʒ əntɪl sʌmwʌn ʃaʊɾəd fɹəm ə wɪndoʊ ʌv ðə haʊs. ðən ðeɪ ɛdʒd əsaɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə ɹaɪɾɝz tə liv sɪŋɡəl faɪl. ɹitʃɪŋ ðə pɹɑfət wɑz nɑɾ izi, wɪθaʊɾ ɪz pɝmɪʃən. wɪθaʊɾ ɪz pɝmɪʃən, livɪŋ ɪm wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl.

The guards might gaze at Perrin in wonder, but they did not move to clear a passage until someone shouted from a window of the house. Then they edged aside enough for the riders to leave single file. Reaching the Prophet was not easy, without his permission. Without his permission, leaving him was impossible.

wʌns əweɪ fɹəm mæsimə ən ɪz ɡɑɹdz, pɛɹɪn sɛɾ əz fɛɹ ə peɪs əz i kəd θɹu ðə kɹaʊɾəd stʃɹits. ɑbilə hæd bɪn ə lɑɹdʒ, pɹɑspɝəs taʊn nɑt soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ, wɪð ɪts stoʊn mɑɹkətpleɪsɪz, ən sleɪt-ɹuf bɪldɪŋz əz tɔl əz fɔɹ stɔɹiz. ɪt wɑz stɪl lɑɹdʒ, bʌt maʊnz ə ɹʌbəl mɑɹkt wɛɹ haʊsəz ən ɪnz hæd bɪn tɔɹn daʊn. nɑɾ ən ɪn ɹɪmeɪn stændɪŋ ɪn ɑbilə, əɹ ə haʊs wɛɹ sʌmwʌn hæd bɪn sloʊ tə pɹoʊkleɪm ðə ɡlɔɹi ʌv ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. mæsiməz dɪsəpɹuvəl wɑz nɛvɝ sʌɾəl.

Once away from Masema and his guards, Perrin set as fair a pace as he could through the crowded streets. Abila had been a large, prosperous town not so long ago, with its stone marketplaces, and slate-roofed buildings as tall as four stories. It was still large, but mounds of rubble marked where houses and inns had been torn down. Not an inn remained standing in Abila, or a house where someone had been slow to proclaim the glory of the Lord Dragon Reborn. Masema's disapproval was never subtle.

ðə θɹɔŋ hɛl fju hu lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ lɪvd ɪn ðə taʊn, dʒɹæb foʊk ɪn dʒɹæb kloʊðz fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt skʌɾəlɪŋ fɪɹfəli əlɔŋ ðə saɪdz ə ðə stʃɹit, ən noʊ tʃɪlʒɹən. noʊ dɑɡz, iðɝ; hʌŋɡɝ wɑz ə laɪkli pɹɑbləm ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, naʊ. ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɡɹups ʌv ɑɹmd mɛn stʃɹæɡəl θɹu ði æŋkəl-dip mʌk ðət hæd bɪn snoʊ læs naɪt, twɛnti hɪɹ, fɪfti ðɛɹ, nɑkɪŋ daʊn pipəl tu sloʊ tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ pæθ, ivən meɪkɪŋ ði ɑks-kɑɹts wɛn ɝaʊn ðɛm. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz hʌnʒɹədz ɪn saɪt. ðəɹ hæd tə bi θaʊzənz ɪn ðə taʊn. mæsiməz ɑɹmi wɑz ə ɹæbəl, bʌt ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz hæd meɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ʌðɝ læks soʊ fɑɹ. θæŋk ðə laɪt ðə mæn hæɾ əɡɹid tə bɹɪŋ əlɔŋ oʊnli ə hʌnʒɹəd. ɪt hæd teɪkən ən aʊɝz ɑɹɡjəmənt, bʌɾ i hæɾ əɡɹid. ɪn ði ɛnd, mæsiməz dɪzaɪɝ tə ɹitʃ ɹænd kwɪkli, ivən ɪf i wəd nɑt tʃɹævəl, hæd wʌn ðə pɔɪnt. fju ʌv ɪz fɑloʊɝz hæd hɔɹsəz, ən ðə mɔɹ ðət keɪm əfʊt, ðə sloʊɝ ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ. ət list i wəɾ ɝaɪv ət pɛɹɪnz kæmp baɪ naɪtfɔl.

The throng held few who looked as if they lived in the town, drab folk in drab clothes for the most part scuttling fearfully along the sides of the street, and no children. No dogs, either; hunger was a likely problem in this place, now. Everywhere groups of armed men straggled through the ankle-deep muck that had been snow last night, twenty here, fifty there, knocking down people too slow to get out of their path, even making the ox-carts wend around them. There were always hundreds in sight. There had to be thousands in the town. Masema's army was a rabble, but their numbers had made up for other lacks so far. Thank the Light the man had agreed to bring along only a hundred. It had taken an hour's argument, but he had agreed. In the end, Masema's desire to reach Rand quickly, even if he would not Travel, had won the point. Few of his followers had horses, and the more that came afoot, the slower they would go. At least he would arrive at Perrin's camp by nightfall.

pɛɹɪn sɔ noʊ wʌn maʊntəɾ ɪksɛpt ɪz oʊn pɑɹɾi, ən ðeɪ dʒɹu stɛɹz fɹəm ði ɑɹmd mɛn, stoʊni stɛɹz, fivɝd stɛɹz. faɪnli dʒɹɛs foʊk keɪm tə ðə pɹɑfəɾ ɔfən ɪnʌf, noʊbəlz ən mɝtʃəns hoʊpɪŋ ə səbmɪʃən ɪn pɝsən wəd ɡeɪn mɔɹ blɛsɪŋz ən fjuɝ pɛnəltiz, bʌt ðeɪ juʒəwəli dɪpɑɹɾəd əfʊt. ðɛɹ weɪ wɑz ʌnɪmpiɾɪd, haʊɛvɝ, əsaɪd fɹəm ðə nəsɛsəɾi ʌv ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə klʌmps ə mæsiməz fɑloʊɝz. ɪf ðeɪ lɛf maʊntəd, ɪt mʌs bi baɪ mæsiməz wɪl. ivən soʊ, pɛɹɪn hæd noʊ nid tə tɛl ɛniwʌn tə steɪ kloʊs. ðəɹ wɑz ə fil ʌv weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɑbilə, ən noʊ wʌn wɪð hæf ə bɹeɪn wəd wɑnə bi nɪɹ wən ðə weɪɾɪŋ ɛndəd.

Perrin saw no one mounted except his own party, and they drew stares from the armed men, stony stares, fevered stares. Finely dressed folk came to the Prophet often enough, nobles and merchants hoping a submission in person would gain more blessings and fewer penalties, but they usually departed afoot. Their way was unimpeded, however, aside from the necessity of riding around the clumps of Masema's followers. If they left mounted, it must be by Masema's will. Even so, Perrin had no need to tell anyone to stay close. There was a feel of waiting in Abila, and no one with half a brain would want to be near when the waiting ended.

ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlif wən beɪlwɝ niɾ ɪz hæmɝ-noʊzd ɡɛldɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə saɪd stʃɹit dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə loʊ wʊɾən bɹɪdʒ ðət lɛɾ aʊɾ ə taʊn, ɔlmoʊst əz ɡɹeɪɾ əz ðə ɹɪlif i fɛlt wən ðeɪ hæd kɹɔs ðə bɹɪdʒ ən pæs ðə læst ɡɑɹdz. ðə pɪntʃ-feɪs lɪɾəl mæn, ɔl nɑbi dʒɔɪns ən wɪð ɪz pleɪn bɹaʊn koʊt mɔɹ hæŋɪŋ ɑn ɪm ðən wɔɹn, kəd lʊk æftɝ hɪmsɛlf ɪn spaɪɾ ʌv əpɪɹənsəz, bʌt feɪl wɑz sɛɾɪŋ ʌp ə pɹɑpɝ haʊshoʊl fəɹ ə noʊbəlwʊmən, ən ʃi wəd bi mɔɹ ðən dɪsplizd ɪf pɛɹɪn lɛɾ ɛni hɑɹm kʌm tə hɝ sɛkɹətɛɹi. hɝz, ən pɛɹɪnz. pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ hi fɛlt əbaʊt hævɪŋ ə sɛkɹətɛɹi, jɛt ðə fɛloʊ pəzɛst skɪlz bɪɑn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə faɪn hænd. wɪtʃ i dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾəd əz sun əz ðeɪ wɝ klɪɹ ə ðə taʊn, wɪð loʊ, fɔɹəstəd hɪlz ɔl ɝaʊnd. moʊst ə ðə bɹæntʃəz wɝ stɑɹk ən bɛɹ, ən ðoʊz ðət ɹɪteɪn lif əɹ niɾəl splæʃt ə vɪvəd ɡɹin əɡɛns ðə waɪt. ðeɪ hæd ðə ɹoʊd tə ðɛmsɛlvz, bʌt snoʊ fɹoʊzən ɪn ɹʌts kɛp ðɛɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ sloʊ.

It was a relief when Balwer kneed his hammer-nosed gelding out of a side street just short of the low wooden bridge that led out of town, almost as great as the relief he felt when they had crossed the bridge and passed the last guards. The pinch-faced little man, all knobby joints and with his plain brown coat more hanging on him than worn, could look after himself in spite of appearances, but Faile was setting up a proper household for a noblewoman, and she would be more than displeased if Perrin let any harm come to her secretary. Hers, and Perrin's. Perrin was not sure how he felt about having a secretary, yet the fellow possessed skills beyond writing a fine hand. Which he demonstrated as soon as they were clear of the town, with low, forested hills all around. Most of the branches were stark and bare, and those that retained leaf or needle splashed a vivid green against the white. They had the road to themselves, but snow frozen in ruts kept their riding slow.

"fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," beɪlwɝ mɝmɝd, linɪŋ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl tə pɪɹ pæst ɛlaɪəs, "bʌɾ aɪ hæpən tə oʊvɝhɪɹ sʌmθɪŋ bæk ðəɹ jə maɪt faɪn ʌv ɪntʃɹəst." hi kɔf dɪskɹitli ɪndə hɪz ɡlʌv, ðən hɝidli ɹikæptʃɝɾ ɪz kloʊk ən pʊld ɪt kloʊs.

"Forgive me, my Lord Perrin," Balwer murmured, leaning in his saddle to peer past Elyas, "but I happened to overhear something back there you might find of interest." He coughed discreetly into his glove, then hurriedly recaptured his cloak and pulled it close.

ɛlaɪəs ən ɛɹæm hɑɹdli niɾəd pɛɹɪnz dʒɛstʃɝ tə fɔl bæk wɪð ði ʌðɝz. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz əkʌstəm tə ðə dʒɹaɪ lɪɾəl mænz dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ pɹaɪvəsi. waɪ hi wɑntəd tə pɹitɛn ðət noʊ wʌn ɛls nu hi fɛɹəɾəd aʊɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən əɾ ɛvɹi taʊn əɹ vɪlədʒ ðeɪ pæst, pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɡɛs. hi hæd tə noʊ ðət pɛɹɪn dɪskʌst wʌɾ i lɝnd wɪð feɪl, ən ɛlaɪəs. ɪn ɛni keɪs, hi wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət fɛɹəɾɪŋ.

Elyas and Aram hardly needed Perrin's gesture to fall back with the others. Everyone was accustomed to the dry little man's desire for privacy. Why he wanted to pretend that no one else knew he ferreted out information at every town or village they passed, Perrin could not begin to guess. He had to know that Perrin discussed what he learned with Faile, and Elyas. In any case, he was very good at ferreting.

beɪlwɝ tɪltəɾ ɪz hɛd tə wʌn saɪd tə wɑtʃ pɛɹɪn əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd saɪd baɪ saɪd. "aɪ hæv tu pisəz ə nuz, maɪ lɔɹd, wʌn aɪ bɪliv ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ən wʌn ɝdʒənt." ɝdʒən əɹ nɑt, ivən ðə fɛloʊz vɔɪs saʊndəd dʒɹaɪ, laɪk dɛd livz ɹʌslɪŋ.

Balwer tilted his head to one side to watch Perrin as they rode side by side. "I have two pieces of news, my Lord, one I believe important, and one urgent." Urgent or not, even the fellow's voice sounded dry, like dead leaves rustling.

"haʊ ɝdʒənt?" pɛɹɪn meɪɾ ə weɪdʒɝ wɪð hɪmsɛlf oʊvɝ u ðə fɝs pis ə nuz wəd bi əbaʊt.

"How urgent?" Perrin made a wager with himself over who the first piece of news would be about.

"vɛɹi, pɝhæps, maɪ lɔɹd. kɪŋ eɪlɹən əz bɹɔt ðə sintʃæn tə bæɾəl nɪɹ ðə taʊn ə dʒɹəməl, əpɹɑksəmətli wʌn hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz wɛst ə hɪɹ. ðɪs wɑz əbaʊt tɛn deɪz əɡoʊ." beɪlwɝz maʊθ pɝs moʊməntɛɹəli ɪn ɪɹɪteɪʃən. hi dɪslaɪkt ɪmpɹsɪʒən; hi dɪslaɪk nɑt noʊɪŋ. "ɹɪlaɪəbəl ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ɪz skɛɹs, bʌt wɪθaʊt daʊt, ði ɑmɑdɪʃən ɑɹmi ɪz dɛd, kæptɪv əɹ skæɾɝd. aɪ wəd bi vɛɹi sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd ɹɪmeɪn təɡɛðɝ ɛniwɛɹ, ən ðoʊz wɪl teɪk tə bændətʃɹi sun ɪnʌf. eɪlɹən hɪmsɛlf wɑz teɪkən, əlɔŋ wɪð ɪz ɪntaɪɝ kɔɹt. ɑmɑdɪʃiə noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əz ɛni noʊbɪləɾi, nɑt tə əmaʊn tə ɛniθɪŋ."

"Very, perhaps, my Lord. King Ailron has brought the Seanchan to battle near the town of Jeramel, approximately one hundred miles west of here. This was about ten days ago." Balwer's mouth pursed momentarily in irritation. He disliked imprecision; he disliked not knowing. "Reliable information is scarce, but without doubt, the Amadician army is dead, captive or scattered. I would be very surprised if more than a hundred remain together anywhere, and those will take to banditry soon enough. Ailron himself was taken, along with his entire court. Amadicia no longer has any nobility, not to amount to anything."

mɛntəli, pɛɹɪn mɑɹk ðə weɪdʒɝ lɔst. juʒəwəli, beɪlwɝ bɪɡæn wɪð nuz ə ðə waɪtkloʊks. "ə pɪɾi fəɹ ɑmɑdɪʃiə, aɪ səpoʊz. fəɹ ðə pipəl kæptʃɝd, ɛniweɪ." əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə beɪlwɝ, ðə sintʃæn hæɾ ə hɑɹʃ weɪ wɪð ðoʊz kæptʃɝɾ ʌndɝ ɑɹmz əpoʊzɪŋ ðɛm. soʊ ɑmɑdɪʃiə hæd noʊ ɑɹmi lɛft, ən noʊ noʊbəlz tə ɹeɪz əɹ lɛɾ ənʌðɝ. nʌθɪŋ tə stɑp ðə sintʃæn spɹɛɾɪŋ əz fæst əz ðeɪ wɪʃt, ðoʊ ðeɪ sim tə spɹɛd vɛɹi kwɪkli ivən wən ðəɹ wɑz ɑpəzɪʃən. bɛst ɪf i ɹoʊɾ ist əz sun əz mæsimə ɹitʃt ðə kæmp, ən ðən muvd əz fæst əz i kəd fəɹ əz lɔŋ əz ðə mɛn ən hɔɹsəz kəd səsteɪn ɪt.

Mentally, Perrin marked the wager lost. Usually, Balwer began with news of the Whitecloaks. "A pity for Amadicia, I suppose. For the people captured, anyway." According to Balwer, the Seanchan had a harsh way with those captured under arms opposing them. So Amadicia had no army left, and no nobles to raise or lead another. Nothing to stop the Seanchan spreading as fast as they wished, though they seemed to spread very quickly even when there was opposition. Best if he rode east as soon as Masema reached the camp, and then moved as fast as he could for as long as the men and horses could sustain it.

hi sɛɾ əz mʌtʃ, ən beɪlwɝ nɑɾəd, wɪð ə θɪn smaɪl ʌv əpɹuvəl. ðə mæn əpɹiʃieɪɾɪd ɪt wən pɛɹɪn sɔ ðə vælju ʌv wʌɾ i ɹipɔɹɾəd.

He said as much, and Balwer nodded, with a thin smile of approval. The man appreciated it when Perrin saw the value of what he reported.

"wʌn ʌðɝ pɔɪnt, maɪ lɔɹd," hi wɛn ɑn. "ðə waɪtkloʊks tʊk pɑɹɾ ɪn ðə bæɾəl, bʌɾ əpɛɹənli vɑldə mænədʒ tə ɡɛt moʊst ə ðɛm ɔf ðə fild ət ði ɛnd. hiz ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn lʌk. noʊ wʌn simz tə noʊ wɛɹ ðeɪv ɡɔn. əɹ ɹæðɝ, ɛvɹi tʌŋ ɡɪvz ə dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃən. ɪf aɪ meɪ seɪ soʊ, aɪ feɪvɝ ist. əweɪ fɹəm ðə sintʃæn." ən təwɔɹɾ ɑbilə, ʌv kɔɹs.

"One other point, my Lord," he went on. "The Whitecloaks took part in the battle, but apparently Valda managed to get most of them off the field at the end. He has the Dark One's own luck. No one seems to know where they have gone. Or rather, every tongue gives a different direction. If I may say so, I favor east. Away from the Seanchan." And toward Abila, of course.

ðə weɪdʒɝ wɑz nɑɾ ə lɔs, ðɛn. ðoʊ ðə mæn hæd nɑt bɪɡʌn wɪð ɪt. ə dʒɹɔ, meɪbi. fɑɹ əhɛd, ə hɔk sɔɹd haɪ ɪn ðə klaʊdləs skaɪ, hɛɾɪŋ nɔɹθ. ɪt wəd ɹitʃ ðə kæmp lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ i wʊd. pɛɹɪn kəd ɹikɔl ə taɪm wən i hæd hæɾ əz fju kənsɝnz əz ðət hɔk. kəmpɛɹd tə naʊ, ət list. ɪt hæd bɪn ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ.

The wager was not a loss, then. Though the man had not begun with it. A draw, maybe. Far ahead, a hawk soared high in the cloudless sky, heading north. It would reach the camp long before he would. Perrin could recall a time when he had had as few concerns as that hawk. Compared to now, at least. It had been a very long time ago.

"aɪ səspɛk ðə waɪtkloʊks ɑɹ mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə sintʃæn ðən ɪn bɑðɝɪŋ ʌs, beɪlwɝ. ɛniweɪ, aɪ kæn muv ɛni fæstɝ fəɹ əm ðən fəɹ ðə sintʃæn. wɝ ðeɪ ðə sɛkən pis ə nuz?"

"I suspect the Whitecloaks are more interested in avoiding the Seanchan than in bothering us, Balwer. Anyway, I can't move any faster for them than for the Seanchan. Were they the second piece of news?"

"noʊ, maɪ lɔɹd. sɪmpli ə pɔɪn ʌv ɪntʃɹəst." beɪlwɝ sim tə heɪt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, moʊst ɪspɛʃli vɑldə - ə mæɾɝ ə ɹʌf tʃɹitmən sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ɪz pæst, pɛɹɪn səspɛktəd - bʌt laɪk ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls əbaʊt ðə mæn, ɪt wɑz ə dʒɹaɪ, koʊl heɪt. pæʃənləs. "ðə sɛkənd nuz ɪz ðət ðə sintʃæn əv fɔɾ ənʌðɝ bæɾəl, ðɪs ɪn sʌðɝn ɔltɑɹə. əɡɛnst ɛɛs sədaɪ, pɑsəbli, ðoʊ səm mɛnʃən mɛn tʃænəlɪŋ." hæf tɝnɪŋ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, beɪlwɝ lʊk bæk ət ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild ɪn ðɛɹ blæk koʊts. ɡɹeɪɾi wɑz ɪn kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð ɛlaɪəs, ən nild wɪð ɛɹæm, bʌt boʊθ æʃəmən əpɪɹd tə bi kipɪŋ əz kloʊz ən aɪ ɑn ðə fɔɹəsts əz dɪd ðə wɔɹɾɝz bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ tɔkɪŋ ɪn loʊ vɔɪsəz, tu. "huɛvɝ ðeɪ fɔt, maɪ lɔɹd, ɪts klɪɹ ðət ðə sintʃæn lɔst ən wɝ sɛn ɹilɪŋ bæk ɪndə ɛbu dɑɹ."

"No, my Lord. Simply a point of interest." Balwer seemed to hate the Children of the Light, most especially Valda - a matter of rough treatment somewhere in his past, Perrin suspected - but like everything else about the man, it was a dry, cold hate. Passionless. "The second news is that the Seanchan have fought another battle, this in southern Altara. Against Aes Sedai, possibly, though some mentioned men channeling." Half turning in his saddle, Balwer looked back at Grady and Neald in their black coats. Grady was in conversation with Elyas, and Neald with Aram, but both Asha'man appeared to be keeping as close an eye on the forests as did the Warders bringing up the rear. The Aes Sedai and the Wise Ones were talking in low voices, too. "Whoever they fought, my Lord, it is clear that the Seanchan lost and were sent reeling back into Ebou Dar."

"ɡʊd nuz," pɛɹɪn sɛd flætli. dəməaɪz wɛlz flæʃt ɪndə hɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn, stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hi wɑz bæk-tə-bæk wɪð lɔɪəl əɡɛn, faɪɾɪŋ dɛspɝətli, ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɛvɹi bɹɛθ wəd bi hɪz læst. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ðət deɪ, hi ʃɪvɝd. ət list ɹænd nu əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn. ət list i dɪd nɑɾ əv tə wɝi əbaʊt ðæt.

"Good news," Perrin said flatly. Dumai's Wells flashed into his head again, stronger than before. For a moment, he was back-to-back with Loial again, fighting desperately, sure that every breath would be his last. For the first time that day, he shivered. At least Rand knew about the Seanchan. At least he did not have to worry about that.

hi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə beɪlwɝ aɪɪŋ hɪm. kənsɪɾɝɪŋ hɪm, laɪk ə bɝd kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪnsɛkt. hi hæd sin ɪm ʃɪvɝ. ðə lɪɾəl mæn laɪk tə noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ səm sikɹəts noʊ wʌn wəɾ ɛvɝ noʊ.

He became aware of Balwer eyeing him. Considering him, like a bird considering a strange insect. He had seen him shiver. The little man liked to know everything, but there were some secrets no one would ever know.

pɛɹɪnz aɪz ɹɪtɝn tə ðə hɔk, bɛɹli vɪzəbəl naʊ ivən tə hɪm. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə feɪl, hɪz fɪɹs fælkən ʌv ə waɪf. hɪz bjuɾəfəl fælkən ʌv ə waɪf. hi pʊt sintʃæn ən waɪtkloʊks ən bæɾəl ən ivən mæsimə aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd. fəɹ ðə taɪm, ət list.

Perrin's eyes returned to the hawk, barely visible now even to him. It made him think of Faile, his fierce falcon of a wife. His beautiful falcon of a wife. He put Seanchan and Whitecloaks and battle and even Masema out of his mind. For the time, at least.

"lɛts pɪk ʌp ðə peɪs ə lɪɾəl," hi kɔl bæk tə ði ʌðɝz. ðə hɔk maɪt si feɪl bɪfɔɹ i dɪd, bʌɾ ənlaɪk ðə bɝd, hi wəd bi siɪŋ ðə lʌv ə hɪz hɑɹt. ən tədeɪ, hi wəd nɑt ʃaʊɾ əɾ əɹ noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ʃi dɪd.

"Let's pick up the pace a little," he called back to the others. The hawk might see Faile before he did, but unlike the bird, he would be seeing the love of his heart. And today, he would not shout at her no matter what she did.


tʃæptɝ tu


CHAPTER 2

teɪkən


Taken

ðə hɔk sun pæst aʊɾ ə saɪt, ən ðə ɹoʊd ɹɪmeɪn ɛmpti ʌv ʌðɝ tʃɹævəlɝz, bʌt pɹɛs əz pɛɹɪn wʊd, fɹoʊzən ɹʌts ɹɛɾi tə bɹeɪk ə hɔɹsəz lɛɡ ən ə ɹaɪɾɝz nɛk əlaʊd noʊ ɡɹeɪt spid. ðə wɪn kæɹiɾ aɪs, ən ə pɹɑməs ə snoʊ əɡɛn təmɑɹoʊ. ɪt wɑz mɪdæftɝnun baɪ ðə taɪm i tɝn ɔf θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ɪndə waɪt dʒɹɪfs ðət wɝ ni-dip ɑn ðə hɔɹsəz ɪn pleɪsəz, ən kʌvɝd ðə læs maɪl tə ðə fɔɹəs kæmp wɛɹ i hæd lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ən ði il, ðə minɝz ən ɡildænɪn. ən feɪl. nʌθɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz əz i ɪkspɛktəd.

The hawk soon passed out of sight, and the road remained empty of other travelers, but press as Perrin would, frozen ruts ready to break a horse's leg and a rider's neck allowed no great speed. The wind carried ice, and a promise of snow again tomorrow. It was midafternoon by the time he turned off through the trees into white drifts that were knee-deep on the horses in places, and covered the last mile to the forest camp where he had left the Two Rivers men and the Aiel, the Mayeners and Ghealdanin. And Faile. Nothing there was as he expected.

əz ɔlweɪz, ðəɹ wɝ fɔɹ kæmps speɪst aʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, ɪn tʃɹuθ, bʌt ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz' smoʊkɪŋ kæmpfaɪɝz stʊɾ əbændən ɝaʊn bɹəleɪnz stʃɹaɪp tɛns, əmɪɾ oʊvɝtɝn kɛɾəlz ən bɪts ʌv ɡɪɹ dʒɹɑpt ɑn ðə snoʊ, ən ðə seɪm saɪnz ə heɪs dɑɾəd ðə tʃɹæmpəld ɡɹaʊnd wɛɹ æliændɝz soʊlʒɝz hæd bɪn sɛɾ ʌp wən i lɛf ðət mɔɹnɪŋ. ði oʊnli ɛvəɾəns ə laɪf ɪn iðɝ pleɪs wɑz ðə hɔɹs hænlɝz ən fɛɹiɝz ən kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝz, bʌndəld ɪn wʊlənz ən hʌɾəld ɪn klʌmps ɝaʊn ðə hɔɹslaɪnz ən haɪ-wil səplaɪ kɑɹts. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl stɛɹɪŋ təwɔɹd wʌt kɑɾ ɪz aɪ ən hɛld ɪt.

As always, there were four camps spaced out among the trees, in truth, but the Winged Guards' smoking campfires stood abandoned around Berelain's striped tents, amid overturned kettles and bits of gear dropped on the snow, and the same signs of haste dotted the trampled ground where Alliandre's soldiers had been set up when he left that morning. The only evidence of life in either place was the horse handlers and farriers and cart drivers, bundled in woolens and huddled in clumps around the horselines and high-wheeled supply carts. They were all staring toward what caught his eye and held it.

faɪv hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə ɹɑki, flæt-tɑp hɪl wɛɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd pleɪs ðɛɹ loʊ tɛns, ðə ɡɹeɪ-koʊɾəd minɝz wɝ dʒɹɔn ʌp, ɔl naɪn hʌnʒɹəd əɹ soʊ ʌv ðɛm, hɔɹsəz stæmpɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənli, ɹɛd kloʊks ən ðə lɔŋ ɹɛd stʃɹimɝz ɑn ðɛɹ lænsɪz ɹɪpəlɪŋ ɪn ðə koʊl bɹiz. nɪɹɝ ðə hɪl ən ɔf tə wʌn saɪd, dʒʌst ət ðə nɪɹ bæŋk ʌv ə fɹoʊzən stʃɹim, ðə ɡildænɪn meɪɾ ə blɑk ə lænsɪz dʒʌst əz lɑɹdʒ, ðiz wɪð ɡɹin stʃɹimɝz. ðə maʊntəd soʊlʒɝz' ɡɹin koʊts ən ɑɹmɝ əpɪɹd dʒɹæb kəmpɛɹd wɪð ðə minɝz' ɹɛd hɛlməts ən bɹɛstpleɪts, bʌt ðɛɹ ɔfəsɝz spɑɹkəld ɪn sɪlvɝɾ ɑɹmɝ ən skɑɹlət koʊts ən kloʊks, wɪð ɹeɪnz ən sæɾələkloʊθs fɹɪn ɪn kɹɪmzən. ə bɹeɪv ʃoʊ, fəɹ mɛn ɑn pɝeɪd, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɑt pɝeɪɾɪŋ. ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz feɪs təwɔɹd ðə ɡildænɪn, ðə ɡildænɪn təwɔɹd ðə hɪl. ən ðə kɹɛst ə ðə hɪl wɑz ɹɪŋ baɪ tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn, lɔŋboʊz ɪn hænd. noʊ wʌn hæd dʒɹɔn, jɛt, bʌɾ ɛvɹi mæn hæɾ ə ʃæf nɑkt ən ɹɛɾi. ɪt wɑz mædnəs.

Five hundred paces from the rocky, flat-topped hill where the Wise Ones had placed their low tents, the gray-coated Mayeners were drawn up, all nine hundred or so of them, horses stamping impatiently, red cloaks and the long red streamers on their lances rippling in the cold breeze. Nearer the hill and off to one side, just at the near bank of a frozen stream, the Ghealdanin made a block of lances just as large, these with green streamers. The mounted soldiers' green coats and armor appeared drab compared with the Mayeners' red helmets and breastplates, but their officers sparkled in silvered armor and scarlet coats and cloaks, with reins and saddlecloths fringed in crimson. A brave show, for men on parade, but they were not parading. The Winged Guards faced toward the Ghealdanin, the Ghealdanin toward the hill. And the crest of the hill was ringed by Two Rivers men, longbows in hand. No one had drawn, yet, but every man had a shaft nocked and ready. It was madness.

buɾɪŋ steɪɝ tə əz nɪɹ ə ɡæləp əz ðə beɪ kəd mænədʒ, pɛɹɪn plaʊd θɹu ðə snoʊ, fɑloʊd baɪ ði ʌðɝz, əntɪl i ɹitʃt ðə hɛɾ ə ðə ɡildænɪn fɔɹmeɪʃən. bɹəleɪn wɑz ðɛɹ, ɪn ə fɝ-tʃɹɪmd ɹɛd kloʊk, ən ɡælɛn, ðə wʌn-aɪd kæptən ə hɝ wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz, ən ənʊɹə, hɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ædvaɪzɝ, ɔl əpɛɹənli ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð æliændɝz fɝs kæptən, ə ʃɔɹt, hɑɹd-bɪɾən fɛloʊ neɪm dʒɝɑɹɾ ɑɹɡændə, hu wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd soʊ hɑɹd ðə fæt waɪt plumz kwɪvɝɾ ɑn ɪz ɡlimɪŋ hɛlmət. ðə fɝst ə min lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə baɪɾ aɪɝn, vɛkseɪʃən ʃoʊd θɹu ənʊɹəz ɛɛs sədaɪ kɑm, ən ɡælɛn wɑz fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə ɹɛd-plum hɛlmət hæŋɪŋ əɾ ɪz sæɾəl əz ðoʊ dəsaɪɾɪŋ wɛðɝ tə dɑn ɪt. ət ðə saɪɾ ə pɛɹɪn, ðeɪ bɹoʊk ɔf ən tɝn ðɛɹ maʊns təwɔɹd hɪm. bɹəleɪn sæɾ əɹ sæɾəl ɪɹɛkt, bʌɾ əɹ blæk hɛɹ wɑz wɪnbloʊn, ən əɹ faɪn-æŋkəld waɪt mɛɹ wɑz ʃɪvɝɪŋ, ðə læðɝ ʌv ə hɑɹd ɹʌn fɹizɪŋ ɑn əɹ flæŋks.

Booting Stayer to as near a gallop as the bay could manage, Perrin plowed through the snow, followed by the others, until he reached the head of the Ghealdanin formation. Berelain was there, in a fur-trimmed red cloak, and Gallenne, the one-eyed Captain of her Winged Guards, and Annoura, her Aes Sedai advisor, all apparently arguing with Alliandre's First Captain, a short, hard-bitten fellow named Gerard Arganda, who was shaking his head so hard the fat white plumes quivered on his gleaming helmet. The First of Mayene looked ready to bite iron, vexation showed through Annoura's Aes Sedai calm, and Gallenne was fingering the red-plumed helmet hanging at his saddle as though deciding whether to don it. At the sight of Perrin, they broke off and turned their mounts toward him. Berelain sat her saddle erect, but her black hair was windblown, and her fine-ankled white mare was shivering, the lather of a hard run freezing on her flanks.

wɪð soʊ mɛni pipəl əbaʊt, ɪt wɑz ɔl bʌɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl tə meɪk aʊɾ ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl sɛns, bʌt pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt niɾ ɪz noʊz tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz tʃɹʌbəl hæŋɪŋ baɪ ə hɛɹ. bɪfɔɹ i kəd dɪmæn tə noʊ wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt ðeɪ θɔt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ, bɹəleɪn spoʊk wɪð ə pɔɹsələn-feɪs fɔɹmæləɾi ðət meɪɾ ɪm blɪŋk ət fɝst.

With so many people about, it was all but impossible to make out individual scents, but Perrin did not need his nose to recognize trouble hanging by a hair. Before he could demand to know what in the Light they thought they were doing, Berelain spoke with a porcelain-faced formality that made him blink at first.

"lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, jəɹ leɪɾi waɪf ən aɪ wɝ hʌntɪŋ wɪð kwin æliændɝ wən wi wɝ ətæk baɪ il. aɪ mænədʒ tə ɪskeɪp. noʊ wʌn ɛls ɪn ðə pɑɹɾi hæz ɹɪtɝnd, jɛt, ðoʊ ɪt meɪ bi ði il tʊk pɹɪznɝz. aɪ hæv sɛn ə skwɑɾ ə lænsɝz tə skaʊt. wi wɝ əbaʊt tɛn maɪlz tə ðə saʊθist, soʊ ðeɪ ʃəd ɹɪtɝn wɪð nuz baɪ naɪtfɔl."

"Lord Perrin, your Lady wife and I were hunting with Queen Alliandre when we were attacked by Aiel. I managed to escape. No one else in the party has returned, yet, though it may be the Aiel took prisoners. I have sent a squad of lancers to scout. We were about ten miles to the southeast, so they should return with news by nightfall."

"feɪl wɑz kæptʃɝd?" pɛɹɪn sɛd θɪkli. ivən bɪfɔɹ kɹɔsɪŋ ɪndə ɑmɑdɪʃiə fɹəm ɡildən ðeɪ hæd hɝɾ ʌv il bɝnɪŋ ən luɾɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn sʌmwɛɹ ɛls, ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ oʊvɝ əɹ ðə wʌn bɪɑn ðæt, ɪf nɑt fɑɹðɝ. nɛvɝ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə wɝi əbaʊt, əɹ tə bi ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ mɔɹ ðən ɹumɝ. nɑt wən i hæd ɹænd blʌɾi ælθɹz ɔɹɾɝz tə kæɹi aʊt! ən lʊk wʌɾ ɪt hæd kɑst.

"Faile was captured?" Perrin said thickly. Even before crossing into Amadicia from Ghealdan they had heard of Aiel burning and looting, but it had always been somewhere else, the next village over or the one beyond that, if not farther. Never close enough to worry about, or to be sure they were more than rumor. Not when he had Rand bloody al'Thor's orders to carry out! And look what it had cost.

"waɪ ɑɹ jə ɔl stɪl hɪɹ?" hi dɪmændəɾ əlaʊd. "waɪ ɑɹən jə ɔl sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ hɝ?" hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ. hi wɑntəd tə haʊl, tə sævədʒ ðɛm. "bɝn jə ɔl, wʌɾ ɑɹ jə weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ?" ðə lɛvlnəs ə hɝ ɹɪplaɪ, əz ɪf ɹipɔɹɾɪŋ haʊ mʌtʃ fɑɾɝ wɑz lɛft fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz, pʊʃt niɾəlz ə ɹeɪdʒ ɪndə hɪz hɛd. ðə mɔɹ soʊ kəz ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt.

"Why are you all still here?" he demanded aloud. "Why aren't you all searching for her?" He realized he was shouting. He wanted to howl, to savage them. "Burn you all, what are you waiting for?" The levelness of her reply, as if reporting how much fodder was left for the horses, pushed needles of rage into his head. The more so because she was right.

"wi wɝ æmbʊʃt baɪ tu əɹ θɹi hʌnʒɹəd, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, bʌt jə noʊ əz wɛl əz aɪ, fɹəm wʌt wɪv hɝd ðəɹ izəli kəd bi ə dʌzən əɹ mɔɹ sətʃ bænz ɹoʊmɪŋ ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. ɪf wi pɝsu ɪn fɔɹs, wi meɪ faɪn ə bæɾəl ðət wɪl kɑst əs hɛvəli, əɡɛnst il, wɪθaʊɾ ivən noʊɪŋ wɛðɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə wʌnz u hoʊl jəɹ leɪɾi waɪf. əɹ ivən ɪf ʃi stɪl laɪvz. wi mʌs noʊ ðət fɝst, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn, əɹ ðə ɹɛst ɪz wɝs ðən jusləs."

"We were ambushed by two or three hundred, Lord Perrin, but you know as well as I, from what we have heard there easily could be a dozen or more such bands roaming the countryside. If we pursue in force, we may find a battle that will cost us heavily, against Aiel, without even knowing whether they are the ones who hold your Lady wife. Or even if she still lives. We must know that first, Lord Perrin, or the rest is worse than useless."

ɪf ʃi stɪl lɪvd. hi ʃɪvɝd; ðə koʊld wɑz ɪnsaɪd hɪm, sʌɾənli. ɪn ɪz boʊnz. hɪz hɑɹt. ʃi hæd tə bi əlaɪv. ʃi hæd tə bi. oʊ, laɪt, hi ʃʊɾə lɛɾ əɹ kʌm tə ɑbilə wɪð hɪm. ənʊɹəz waɪd-maʊð feɪs wɑz ə mæsk ə sɪmpəθi fɹeɪm baɪ θɪn tæɹɑbənɝ bɹeɪdz. sʌɾənli hi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə peɪn ɪn ɪz hænz, kɹæmpɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz. hi fɔɹst əm tə lusən ðɛɹ ɡɹɪp, flɛkst ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz ɡɔnləts.

If she still lived. He shivered; the cold was inside him, suddenly. In his bones. His heart. She had to be alive. She had to be. Oh, Light, he should have let her come to Abila with him. Annoura's wide-mouthed face was a mask of sympathy framed by thin Taraboner braids. Suddenly he became aware of pain in his hands, cramping on the reins. He forced them to loosen their grip, flexed his fingers inside his gauntlets.

"ʃiz ɹaɪt," ɛlaɪəs sɛd kwaɪətli, muvɪŋ ɪz ɡɛldɪŋ kloʊsɝ. "hoʊld ɑn tə jɝsɛlf. blʌndɝ ɝaʊnd wɪð il, ən jəɹ æskɪŋ tə daɪ. meɪbi teɪk ə lɑɾ ə mɛn wɪð jə tə ə bæɾ ɛnd. daɪɪŋ dʌz noʊ ɡʊɾ ɪf ɪt livz jəɹ waɪf ə pɹɪznɝ." hi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs laɪɾɝ, bʌt pɛɹɪn kəd smɛl ðə stʃɹeɪn. "ɛniweɪ, wɪl faɪn hɝ, bɔɪ. ʃi kəd wɛl əv ɪskeɪp ðɛm, ə wʊmən laɪk ðæt. bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk əɹ weɪ bæk hɪɹ əfʊt. teɪk taɪm, ðət wʊd, ɪn ə dʒɹɛs. ðə fɝsts skaʊts wɪl loʊkeɪt tʃɹeɪsəz." ɹeɪkɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɪz lɔŋ bɪɹd, ɛlaɪəs ɡeɪv ə sɛlf-dɛpɹəkeɪɾɪŋ tʃʌkəl. "ɪf aɪ kæn faɪn mɔɹ ðən ðə minɝz, əl it bɑɹk. wɪl ɡɛɾ əɹ bæk fəɹ ju."

"She's right," Elyas said quietly, moving his gelding closer. "Hold on to yourself. Blunder around with Aiel, and you're asking to die. Maybe take a lot of men with you to a bad end. Dying does no good if it leaves your wife a prisoner." He tried to make his voice lighter, but Perrin could smell the strain. "Anyway, we'll find her, boy. She could well have escaped them, a woman like that. Be trying to make her way back here afoot. Take time, that would, in a dress. The First's scouts will locate traces." Raking fingers through his long beard, Elyas gave a self-deprecating chuckle. "If I can't find more than the Mayeners, I'll eat bark. We'll get her back for you."

pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt fuld. "jɛs," hi sɛd hɑɹʃli. noʊbɑdi kəɾ ɪskeɪp il əfʊt. "ɡoʊ naʊ. hɝi." nɑt fuld əɾ ɔl. ðə mæn ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn feɪlz bɑɾi. ʃi hæd tə bi əlaɪv, ən ðət mɛn kæptɪv, bʌt bɛɾɝ ə pɹɪznɝ ðən . . .

Perrin was not fooled. "Yes," he said harshly. Nobody could escape Aiel afoot. "Go now. Hurry." Not fooled at all. The man expected to find Faile's body. She had to be alive, and that meant captive, but better a prisoner than . . .

ðeɪ kəd nɑt tɔk bɪtwin ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðeɪ dɪd wɪð wʊlvz, bʌɾ ɛlaɪəs hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əz ɪf i ʌndɝstʊd pɛɹɪnz θɔts. hi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə dɪnaɪ ðɛm, ðoʊ. hɪz ɡɛldɪŋ sɛɾ ɔf saʊθist əɾ ə wɔk, əz kwɪk əz ðə snoʊ wəɾ əlaʊ, ən æftɝ ə kwɪk ɡlæns ət pɛɹɪn, ɛɹæm fɑloʊd, hɪz feɪs dɑɹk. ðə wʌn-taɪm tɪŋkɝ dɪd nɑt laɪk ɛlaɪəs, bʌɾ i nɪɹ ɪnʌf wɝʃəp feɪl, ɪf oʊnli kəz ʃi wɑz pɛɹɪnz waɪf.

They could not talk between themselves as they did with wolves, but Elyas hesitated as if he understood Perrin's thoughts. He did not try to deny them, though. His gelding set off southeast at a walk, as quick as the snow would allow, and after a quick glance at Perrin, Aram followed, his face dark. The one-time Tinker did not like Elyas, but he near enough worshipped Faile, if only because she was Perrin's wife.

ɪt wəd də noʊ ɡʊd tə faʊndɝ ði ænəməlz, pɛɹɪn toʊl hɪmsɛlf, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðɛɹ ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ bæks. hi wɑntəɾ əm tə ɹʌn. hi wɑntəd tə ɹʌn wɪð ðɛm. faɪn kɹæks sim tə bi spaɪɾɝɪŋ θɹu hɪm. ɪf ðeɪ ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ðə ɹɔŋ nuz, hi wəd ʃæɾɝ. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ðə θɹi wɔɹɾɝz tʃɹɑɾəd ðɛɹ maʊns θɹu ðə tʃɹiz æftɝ ɛlaɪəs ən ɛɹæm ɪn splæʃəz ə snoʊ, pleɪn wʊlən kloʊks stʃɹimɪŋ bɪhaɪnd, ðən mætʃt spid wən ðeɪ kɑɾ ʌp.

It would do no good to founder the animals, Perrin told himself, frowning at their retreating backs. He wanted them to run. He wanted to run with them. Fine cracks seemed to be spidering through him. If they returned with the wrong news, he would shatter. To his surprise, the three Warders trotted their mounts through the trees after Elyas and Aram in splashes of snow, plain woolen cloaks streaming behind, then matched speed when they caught up.

hi mænədʒ tə ɡɪv mɑsʊɝi ən siɑnɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪtfəl nɑd, ən ɪnkluɾəd ɛdʒɹə ən kɛɹɛl. huɛvɝ hæd meɪd ðə sədʒɛstʃən, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ u hæd ɡɹæntəd pɝmɪʃən. ɪt wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ə ðə kəntʃɹoʊl ðə waɪz wʌnz hæɾ ɪstæblɪʃt ðət niðɝ sɪstɝ wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ. ðeɪ vɛɹi laɪkli wɑntəd tə, bʌt ðɛɹ ɡlʌv hænz ɹɪmeɪn foʊldəɾ ɑn ðə pɑməlz ə ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, ən niðɝ bɪtʃɹeɪɾ ɪmpeɪʃəns baɪ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ðə flɪkɝ ʌv ən aɪləd.

He managed to give Masuri and Seonid a grateful nod, and included Edarra and Carelle. Whoever had made the suggestion, there was no doubt who had granted permission. It was a measure of the control the Wise Ones had established that neither sister was trying to take charge. They very likely wanted to, but their gloved hands remained folded on the pommels of their saddles, and neither betrayed impatience by so much as the flicker of an eyelid.

nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ðə dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ mɛn. ənʊɹə ɔltɝneɪɾəd bɪtwin bimɪŋ sɪmpəθi əɾ ɪm ən stʌɾiɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. ənlaɪk ði ʌðɝ tu sɪstɝz, ʃi hæd meɪd noʊ pɹɑməsəz, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz sɝkəmspɛkt wɪð ði ilwɪmən əz ðeɪ. ɡælɛnz wʌn aɪ wɑz ɑn bɹəleɪn, əweɪɾɪŋ ə saɪn i ʃəd dʒɹɔ ðə sɔɹɾ i wɑz ɡɹɪpɪŋ, waɪl ʃi wɑz ɪntɛn ɑn pɛɹɪn, hɝ feɪs stɪl smuð ən ənɹiɾəbəl. ɡɹeɪɾi ən nil hæd ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ, kæstɪŋ kwɪk, ɡɹɪm ɡlænsɪz ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən. beɪlwɝ sæt vɛɹi stɪl, laɪk ə spɛɹoʊ pɝtʃt ɑn ðə sæɾəl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bi ɪnvɪzəbəl, lɪsnɪŋ ɪntɛnli.

Not everyone was watching the departing men. Annoura alternated between beaming sympathy at him and studying the Wise Ones out of the corner of her eye. Unlike the other two sisters, she had made no promises, but she was almost as circumspect with the Aielwomen as they. Gallenne's one eye was on Berelain, awaiting a sign he should draw the sword he was gripping, while she was intent on Perrin, her face still smooth and unreadable. Grady and Neald had their heads together, casting quick, grim glances in his direction. Balwer sat very still, like a sparrow perched on the saddle, trying to be invisible, listening intently.

ɑɹɡændə pʊʃt ɪz tɔl ɹoʊn ɡɛldɪŋ pæst ɡælɛnz hɛvi-tʃɛstəd blæk, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə minɝz wʌn-aɪd ɡlɛɹ ʌv aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ. ðə fɝs kæptənz maʊθ wɝkt æŋɡɹəli bɪhaɪn ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ feɪs-bɑɹz ə hɪz hɛlmət, bʌt pɛɹɪn hɝd nʌθɪŋ. feɪl fɪld ɪz hɛd. oʊ, laɪt, feɪl! hɪz tʃɛs fɛl baʊnd wɪð aɪɝn stʃɹæps. hi wɑz nɪɹ tə pænɪk, hoʊldɪŋ tə ðə pɹɛsəpəs wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz.

Arganda pushed his tall roan gelding past Gallenne's heavy-chested black, ignoring the Mayener's one-eyed glare of outrage. The First Captain's mouth worked angrily behind the shining face-bars of his helmet, but Perrin heard nothing. Faile filled his head. Oh, Light, Faile! His chest felt bound with iron straps. He was near to panic, holding to the precipice with his fingernails.

dɛspɝətli hi ɹitʃt aʊt wɪð ɪz maɪnd, fɹæntəkəli sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ wʊlvz. ɛlaɪəs mʌst əv tʃɹaɪd ðɪs ɔlɹɛɾi - ɛlaɪəs wəd nɑɾ əv ɡɪvən weɪ tə pænɪk ət ðə nuz - bʌɾ i hæd tə tʃɹaɪ hɪmsɛlf.

Desperately he reached out with his mind, frantically searching for wolves. Elyas must have tried this already - Elyas would not have given way to panic at the news - but he had to try himself.

sɝtʃɪŋ, hi faʊn ðɛm, θɹi toʊz' pæk ən koʊld wɔɾɝz, twaɪlaɪts ən spɹɪŋhɔɹnz ən ʌðɝz. peɪn floʊɾ aʊt wɪð ɪz pli fəɹ hɛlp, bʌt ɡɹu ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪm ɹæðɝ ðən lɛs. ðeɪ hæd hɝɾ ə jʌŋ bʊl, ən ðeɪ kəməzɝeɪɾɪd oʊvɝ ðə lɔs ə hɪz ʃi, bʌt ðeɪ kɛp klɪɹ ə ðə tu-lɛɡz, hu fɹaɪɾənd əweɪ ɔl ðə ɡeɪm ən wɝ dɛθ fəɹ ɛni wʊlf kɑɾ əloʊn. ðəɹ wɝ soʊ mɛni pæks ə tu-lɛɡz əbaʊt, əfʊɾ ən ɹaɪɾɪŋ ðə hɑɹd-fʊɾɪd fɔɹ-lɛɡz, ðət ðeɪ kəd nɑt seɪ wɛðɝ ɛni ðeɪ nu ʌv wɝ ðə wʌn i sɔt. tu-lɛɡz wɝ tu-lɛɡz, tə ðɛm, ɪndɪstɪŋɡwɪʃəbəl ɪksɛp fəɹ ðoʊz u kəd tʃænəl, ən ðə fju hu kəd spik wɪð ðɛm. mɔɹn, ðeɪ toʊl hɪm, ən muv ɑn, ən miɾ əɹ əɡɛn ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim.

Searching, he found them, Three Toes' pack and Cold Water's, Twilight's and Springhorn's and others. Pain flowed out with his plea for help, but grew greater inside him rather than less. They had heard of Young Bull, and they commiserated over the loss of his she, but they kept clear of the two-legs, who frightened away all the game and were death for any wolf caught alone. There were so many packs of two-legs about, afoot and riding the hard-footed four-legs, that they could not say whether any they knew of were the one he sought. Two-legs were two-legs, to them, indistinguishable except for those who could channel, and the few who could speak with them. Mourn, they told him, and move on, and meet her again in the wolf dream.

wʌn baɪ wʌn, ði ɪmədʒəz ðəɾ ɪz maɪn tɝn tə wɝdz feɪɾəd əweɪ, əntɪl oʊnli wʌn lɪŋɡɝd. mɔɹn, ən miɾ əɹ əɡɛn ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim. ðən ðəɾ ɔlsoʊ wɑz ɡɔn.

One by one, the images that his mind turned to words faded away, until only one lingered. Mourn, and meet her again in the wolf dream. Then that also was gone.

"ɑɹ jə lɪsnɪŋ?" ɑɹɡændə dɪmændəd ɹʌfli. hi wɑz nɑɾ ə smuð-feɪs noʊbəl, ən dɪspaɪɾ ɪz sɪlks ən ðə ɡoʊld-wɝk ətɑp ðə sɪlvɝ ə hɪz bɹɛstpleɪɾ i lʊk laɪk wʌɾ i wɑz, ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ soʊlʒɝ u hæd fɝs hɛftəɾ ə læns əz ə bɔɪ ən pɹɑbli kæɹid tu dʌzən skɑɹz. hɪz dɑɹk aɪz wɝ ɔlmoʊst əz fivɝɾ əz ðoʊz ə mæsiməz mɛn. hi smɛld ə ɹeɪdʒ, ən fɪɹ. "ðoʊz sævədʒəz tʊk kwin æliændɝ, əz wɛl!"

"Are you listening?" Arganda demanded roughly. He was not a smooth-faced noble, and despite his silks and the gold-work atop the silver of his breastplate he looked like what he was, a graying soldier who had first hefted a lance as a boy and probably carried two dozen scars. His dark eyes were almost as fevered as those of Masema's men. He smelled of rage, and fear. "Those savages took Queen Alliandre, as well!"

"wi wɪl faɪn jəɹ kwin wən wi faɪn maɪ waɪf," pɛɹɪn sɛd, hɪz vɔɪs əz koʊld ən hɑɹɾ əz ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz æks. ʃi hæd tə bi əlaɪv. "səpoʊz jə tɛl mi wʌɾ ɔl ðɪs ɪz əbaʊt, jə dʒɹɔn ʌp ɹɛɾi tə tʃɑɹdʒ, ɪt lʊks laɪk. ən feɪsɪŋ maɪ pipəl, ət ðæt." hi hæɾ ʌðɝ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾiz, tu. æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ ðət wɑz bɪɾɝ əz ɡɔl. nʌθɪŋ ɛls kaʊntəɾ əlɔŋsaɪd feɪl. nʌθɪŋ! bʌt ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɝ ɪz pipəl.

"We will find your Queen when we find my wife," Perrin said, his voice as cold and hard as the edge of his axe. She had to be alive. "Suppose you tell me what all this is about, you drawn up ready to charge, it looks like. And facing my people, at that." He had other responsibilities, too. Acknowledging that was bitter as gall. Nothing else counted alongside Faile. Nothing! But the Two Rivers men were his people.

ɑɹɡændə dæʃt ɪz maʊn kloʊs ən siz pɛɹɪnz sliv ɪn ə ɡɔntələɾəd fɪst. "ju lɪsən tə mi! ðə fɝs leɪɾi bɹəleɪn sɛz ɪt wɑz il tʊk kwin æliændɝ, ən ðəɹ ɑɹ il ʃɛltɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðoʊz ɑɹtʃɝz ə jʊɹz. aɪ hæv mɛn u wɪl bi hæpi ɪnʌf tə pʊɾ əm tə ðə kwɛstʃən." hɪz hiɾəd ɡeɪz swʌŋ bæk tə ɛdʒɹə ən kɛɹɛl fəɹ ə moʊmənt. pɝhæps i wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ðət ðeɪ wɝ il wɪð noʊ ɑɹtʃɝz bɑɹɪŋ ɪz pæθ.

Arganda dashed his mount close and seized Perrin's sleeve in a gauntleted fist. "You listen to me! The First Lady Berelain says it was Aiel took Queen Alliandre, and there are Aiel sheltering behind those archers of yours. I have men who will be happy enough to put them to the question." His heated gaze swung back to Edarra and Carelle for a moment. Perhaps he was thinking that they were Aiel with no archers barring his path.

"ðə fɝs kæptən ɪz . . . oʊvɝɹɔt," bɹəleɪn mɝmɝd, leɪɪŋ ə hæn ɑn pɛɹɪnz ʌðɝ ɑɹm. "aɪ hæv ɪkspleɪn tə hɪm ðət nʌn ə ði il hɪɹ wɝ ɪnvɑlvd. aɪm ʃʊɹ ðəɾ aɪ kən kənvɪns ɪm - "

"The First Captain is . . . overwrought," Berelain murmured, laying a hand on Perrin's other arm. "I have explained to him that none of the Aiel here were involved. I'm sure that I can convince him - "

hi ʃʊk əɹ ɔf, ɹɪpt ɪz ɑɹm əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɡildænɪn. "æliændɝ swɔɹ fiəlti tə mi, ɑɹɡændə. jə swɔɹ fiəlti tə hɝ, ən ðət meɪks mi jəɹ lɔɹd. aɪ sɛɾ əl faɪn æliændɝ wən aɪ faɪn feɪl." ði ɛdʒ ʌv ən æks. ʃi wɑz əlaɪv. "ju kwɛstʃən noʊ wʌn, tʌtʃ noʊ wʌn, ənlɛs aɪ seɪ. wʌt jəl də ɪz teɪk jəɹ mɛn bæk tə jəɹ kæmp, naʊ, ən bi ɹɛɾi tə ɹaɪd wən aɪ ɡɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ. ɪf jəɹ nɑt ɹɛɾi wən aɪ kɔl, jəl bi lɛf bɪhaɪnd."

He shook her off, ripped his arm away from the Ghealdanin. "Alliandre swore fealty to me, Arganda. You swore fealty to her, and that makes me your lord. I said I'll find Alliandre when I find Faile." The edge of an axe. She was alive. "You question no one, touch no one, unless I say. What you will do is take your men back to your camp, now, and be ready to ride when I give the order. If you're not ready when I call, you will be left behind."

ɑɹɡændə stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd. hɪz aɪz stʃɹeɪɾ əɡɛn, ðɪs taɪm təwɔɹd ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild, ðən dʒɝk bæk tə pɛɹɪnz feɪs. "æz jə kəmænd, maɪ lɔɹd," hi sɛd stɪfli. wilɪŋ ɪz ɹoʊn, hi ʃaʊɾəd ɔɹɾɝz tə hɪz ɔfəsɝz ən wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɡæləpɪŋ əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ bɪɡæn ɪʃuɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn. ðə ɡildænɪn bɪɡæn tə pil əweɪ baɪ kɑləmz, ɹaɪɾɪŋ æftɝ ðɛɹ fɝs kæptən. təwɔɹd ðɛɹ kæmp, ðoʊ wɛðɝ ɑɹɡændə ɪntɛndəd tə ɹɪmeɪn ðəɹ wɑz ɛniwʌnz ɡɛs. ən wɛðɝ ɪt maɪt nɑt bi fəɹ ðə wɝs ɪf i dɪd.

Arganda stared at him, breathing hard. His eyes strayed again, this time toward Grady and Neald, then jerked back to Perrin's face. "As you command, my Lord," he said stiffly. Wheeling his roan, he shouted orders to his officers and was already galloping away before they began issuing their own. The Ghealdanin began to peel away by columns, riding after their First Captain. Toward their camp, though whether Arganda intended to remain there was anyone's guess. And whether it might not be for the worse if he did.

"ju hændəl ðət vɛɹi wɛl, pɛɹɪn," bɹəleɪn sɛd. "ə dɪfəkəl sɪtʃueɪʃən, ən ə peɪnfəl taɪm fəɹ ju." nɑt fɔɹməl əɾ ɔl, naʊ. dʒʌst ə wʊmən fʊl ə pɪɾi, hɝ smaɪl kəmpæʃənət. oʊ, ʃi hæɾ ə θaʊzənd ɡaɪzəz, bɹəleɪn dɪd.

"You handled that very well, Perrin," Berelain said. "A difficult situation, and a painful time for you." Not formal at all, now. Just a woman full of pity, her smile compassionate. Oh, she had a thousand guises, Berelain did.

ʃi stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ə ɹɛd-ɡlʌv hænd, ən i bæk steɪɝ əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd tʌtʃ hɪm. "ɡɪv ɪɾ oʊvɝ, bɝn ju!" hi snɑɹəld. "maɪ waɪf əz bɪn teɪkən! aɪv noʊ peɪʃəns fəɹ jəɹ tʃaɪldɪʃ ɡeɪmz!"

She stretched out a red-gloved hand, and he backed Stayer away before she could touch him. "Give it over, burn you!" he snarled. "My wife has been taken! I've no patience for your childish games!"

ʃi dʒɝkt əz ɪf i hæd stʃɹʌk hɝ. kʌlɝ blumd ɪn əɹ tʃiks, ən ʃi tʃeɪnʒd əɡɛn, bɪkʌmɪŋ sʌpəl ən wɪləwi ɪn əɹ sæɾəl. "nɑt tʃaɪldɪʃ, pɛɹɪn," ʃi mɝmɝd, hɝ vɔɪs ɹɪtʃ ən əmjuzd. "tu wɪmən kəntɛstɪŋ oʊvɝ ju, ən jə ðə pɹaɪz? aɪ wəd θɪŋk jud bi flæɾɝd. ətɛn mi, lɔɹd kæptən ɡælɛn. aɪ səpoʊz wi, tu, ʃəd bi ɹɛɾi tə ɹaɪɾ ət kəmænd."

She jerked as if he had struck her. Color bloomed in her cheeks, and she changed again, becoming supple and willowy in her saddle. "Not childish, Perrin," she murmured, her voice rich and amused. "Two women contesting over you, and you the prize? I would think you'd be flattered. Attend me, Lord Captain Gallenne. I suppose we, too, should be ready to ride at command."

ðə wʌn-aɪd mæn ɹoʊd bæk təwɔɹd ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz əɾ əɹ saɪd, əz kloʊs tə ə kæntɝ əz ðə snoʊ meɪd pɑsəbəl. hi wɑz linɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əɹ əz ɪf hɪɹɪŋ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. ənʊɹə pɔzd wɛɹ ʃi wɑz, ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz ə hɝ bɹaʊn mɛɹ. hɝ maʊθ wɑz ə ɹeɪzɝd laɪn bɪniθ əɹ bik ʌv ə noʊz. "səmtaɪmz jə ɑɹ ə vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ ful, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. kwaɪɾ ɔfən, ɪn fækt."

The one-eyed man rode back toward the Winged Guards at her side, as close to a canter as the snow made possible. He was leaning toward her as if hearing instructions. Annoura paused where she was, gathering the reins of her brown mare. Her mouth was a razored line beneath her beak of a nose. "Sometimes you are a very large fool, Perrin Aybara. Quite often, in fact."

hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt ʃi wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, ən dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. ət taɪmz ʃi simd ɹɪzaɪn tə bɹəleɪn tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ ə mɛɹid mæn, ən ʌðɝ taɪmz əmjuz baɪ ɪt, ivən hɛlpɪŋ aʊt baɪ ɝeɪnʒɪŋ fəɹ bɹəleɪn tə bi əloʊn wɪð hɪm. ɹaɪt ðɛn, fɝst ən ɛɛs sədaɪ boʊθ dɪsɡʌstəd hɪm. hilɪŋ steɪɝ ɪn ðə flæŋks, hi tʃɹɑɾəd əweɪ fɹəm əɹ wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd.

He did not know what she was talking about, and did not care. At times she seemed resigned to Berelain chasing after a married man, and other times amused by it, even helping out by arranging for Berelain to be alone with him. Right then, First and Aes Sedai both disgusted him. Heeling Stayer in the flanks, he trotted away from her without a word.

ðə mɛn ɑn ðə hɪltɑp oʊpən ɪnʌf tə lɛɾ ɪm θɹu, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ ən wɑtʃɪŋ ðə lænsɝz bɪloʊ ɹaɪd təwɔɹd ðɛɹ ɹɪspɛktɪv kæmps, pɑɹɾəd əɡɛn tə lɛt ðə waɪz wʌnz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ən æʃəmən pæs. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt bɹeɪk ʌp ən kɹaʊɾ ɝaʊn hɪm, əz i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd, fəɹ wɪtʃ i wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl. ðə hoʊl hɪltɑp smɛld ʌv wɛɹinɪs. moʊst ʌv ɪt dɪd.

The men on the hilltop opened enough to let him through, muttering to one another and watching the lancers below ride toward their respective camps, parted again to let the Wise Ones and Aes Sedai and Asha'man pass. They did not break up and crowd around him, as he had expected, for which he was grateful. The whole hilltop smelled of wariness. Most of it did.

ðə snoʊ ətɑp ðə hɪl hæd bɪn tʃɹæmpəld əntɪl səm pætʃəz wɝ klɪɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ fɹoʊzən klʌmps ən ʌðɝz wɝ ʃits ʌv aɪs. ðə fɔɹ waɪz wʌnz u hæd ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪnd wən i ɹoʊd tə ɑbilə wɝ stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wʌn ə ðə loʊ il tɛns, tɔl ənɹʌfəld wɪmən wɪð dɑɹk wʊlən ʃɔlz ɝaʊn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tu sɪstɝz dɪsmaʊnt wɪð kɛɹɛl ən ɛdʒɹə, ən simɪŋli peɪɪŋ noʊ maɪn tə wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɝaʊn ðɛm. ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn u sɝvd əm ɪn pleɪs ə sɝvəns wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ nɔɹməl tæsks kwaɪətli, mikli, feɪsəz hɪɾən ɪn ðə dip kaʊlz ə ðɛɹ waɪt ɹoʊbz. wʌn fɛloʊ wɑz ivən biɾɪŋ ə kɑɹpət hʌŋ oʊvɝ ə ɹoʊp taɪd bɪtwin tu tʃɹiz! ði oʊnli saɪn əmʌŋ ði il ðət ðeɪ maɪɾ əv bɪn ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ʌv ə faɪt wɑz ɡɔl ən ðə meɪɾənz. ðeɪ hæd bɪn skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ hilz, ʃoʊufə ɝaʊn ðɛɹ hɛdz ən blæk veɪlz haɪɾɪŋ ɔl bʌt ðɛɹ aɪz, ʃɔɹt spɪɹz ən bʊl-haɪd bʌklɝz ɪn hænd. əz pɛɹɪn dʒʌmp daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, ðeɪ ɹoʊz.

The snow atop the hill had been trampled until some patches were clear except for frozen clumps and others were sheets of ice. The four Wise Ones who had remained behind when he rode to Abila were standing in front of one of the low Aiel tents, tall unruffled women with dark woolen shawls around their shoulders, watching the two sisters dismount with Carelle and Edarra, and seemingly paying no mind to what was going on around them. The gai'shain who served them in place of servants were going about their normal tasks quietly, meekly, faces hidden in the deep cowls of their white robes. One fellow was even beating a carpet hung over a rope tied between two trees! The only sign among the Aiel that they might have been on the brink of a fight was Gaul and the Maidens. They had been squatting on their heels, shoufa around their heads and black veils hiding all but their eyes, short spears and bull-hide bucklers in hand. As Perrin jumped down from his saddle, they rose.

dænɪl luɪn tʃɹɑɾəd ʌp, tʃuɪŋ wɝidli ət ðə θɪk mʌstæʃ ðət meɪɾ ɪz noʊz lʊk ivən bɪɡɝ ðən ɪt wɑz. hi hæɾ ɪz baʊ ɪn wʌn hæn ən wɑz slaɪɾɪŋ ən æɹoʊ bæk ɪndə ðə kwɪvɝ əɾ ɪz bɛlt. "aɪ dɪdnt noʊ wʌɾ ɛls tə du, pɛɹɪn," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə dʒɝki vɔɪs. dænɪl hæd bɪn ət dəməaɪz wɛlz, ən feɪs tʃɹɑləks bæk hoʊm, bʌt ðɪs wɑz aʊtsaɪɾ ɪz vju ʌv ðə wɝld. "baɪ ðə taɪm wi faʊn aʊt wʌt hæpənd, ðoʊz ɡildænɪn fɛloʊz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi stɑɹɾɪŋ ðɪs weɪ, soʊ aɪ sɛn ɔf dʒɑndɪn bæɹən ən ə kʌpəl ʌv ʌðɝz, hu mɑɹwɪn ən ɡɛɾ eɪliə, toʊl ðə kɛɹhinɪn ən jəɹ sɝvəns tə meɪk ə sɝkəl wɪð ðə kɑɹts ən steɪ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪt - hæd tə dʒʌst əbaʊt taɪ ʌp ðoʊz foʊks hɔɹ ɔlweɪz fɑloʊɪŋ ðə leɪɾi feɪl ɝaʊnd; ðeɪ wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ ɔf æftɝ hɝ, ən nɑɾ ə wʌn ə ðɛm noʊz ə fʊtpɹɪn fɹəm ən oʊk tʃɹi - ðən aɪ bɹɔɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi ɛls hɪɹ. aɪ θɔt ðoʊz ɡildænɪn maɪt tʃɑɹdʒ ʌs, əntɪl ðə fɝst ɡɑt ðəɹ wɪð əɹ mɛn. ðeɪ mʌs bi kɹeɪzi, θɪŋkɪŋ ɛni ʌv əɹ il wəd hɝt ðə leɪɾi feɪl." ivən wən ðeɪ pɝɹən hɪm, feɪl nɪɹli ɔlweɪz ɹəsiv ði ɑnɝɪfɪk fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn.

Dannil Lewin trotted up, chewing worriedly at the thick mustache that made his nose look even bigger than it was. He had his bow in one hand and was sliding an arrow back into the quiver at his belt. "I didn't know what else to do, Perrin," he said in a jerky voice. Dannil had been at Dumai's Wells, and faced Trollocs back home, but this was outside his view of the world. "By the time we found out what happened, those Ghealdanin fellows were already starting this way, so I sent off Jondyn Barran and a couple of others, Hu Marwin and Get Ayliah, told the Cairhienin and your servants to make a circle with the carts and stay inside it - had to just about tie up those folks who're always following the Lady Faile around; they wanted to go off after her, and not a one of them knows a footprint from an oak tree - then I brought everybody else here. I thought those Ghealdanin might charge us, until the First got there with her men. They must be crazy, thinking any of our Aiel would hurt the Lady Faile." Even when they Perrined him, Faile nearly always received the honorific from the Two Rivers men.

"ju dɪd ɹaɪt, dænɪl," pɛɹɪn sɛd, tɔsɪŋ ɪm steɪɝz ɹeɪnz. hu ən ɡɛt wɝ ɡʊd wʊdzmɪn, ən dʒɑndɪn bæɹən kəd fɑloʊ jɛstɝdeɪz wɪnd. ɡɔl ən ðə meɪɾənz wɝ stɑɹɾɪŋ tə liv, ɪn sɪŋɡəl faɪl. ðeɪ wɝ stɪl veɪld. "tɛl ɔf wʌn mæn ɪn θɹi tə steɪ hɪɹ," pɛɹɪn toʊl dænɪl hɝidli; dʒʌs kəz i hæd feɪst ɑɹɡændə daʊn wɑz noʊ ɹizən tə bɪliv ðə mæn hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪz maɪnd, "æn sɛn ðə ɹɛs bæk tə pæk ʌp. aɪ wɑnə ɹaɪɾ əz sun əz ðɛɹz wɝd."

"You did right, Dannil," Perrin said, tossing him Stayer's reins. Hu and Get were good woodsmen, and Jondyn Barran could follow yesterday's wind. Gaul and the Maidens were starting to leave, in single file. They were still veiled. "Tell off one man in three to stay here," Perrin told Dannil hurriedly; just because he had faced Arganda down was no reason to believe the man had changed his mind, "and send the rest back to pack up. I want to ride as soon as there's word."

wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə ɹɪplaɪ, hi hɝid tə pʊt hɪmsɛlf ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɡɔl ən stɑp ðə tɔlɝ mæn wɪð ə hæn tə hɪz tʃɛst. fəɹ səm ɹizən, ɡɔlz ɡɹin aɪz taɪɾənd əbʌv ɪz veɪl. səlɪn ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə meɪɾənz stʃɹʌŋ aʊt bɪhaɪn ɪm wɛn ʌp ɑn ðə bɔlz ə ðɛɹ fit.

Without waiting on a reply, he hurried to put himself in front of Gaul and stopped the taller man with a hand to his chest. For some reason, Gaul's green eyes tightened above his veil. Sulin and the rest of the Maidens strung out behind him went up on the balls of their feet.

"faɪn əɹ fəɹ mi, ɡɔl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɔl ə ju, pliz faɪn u tʊk hɝ. ɪf ɛniwʌn kən tʃɹæk il, ɪts ju."

"Find her for me, Gaul," Perrin said. "All of you, please find who took her. If anyone can track Aiel, it's you."

ðə taɪtnəs ɪn ɡɔlz aɪz vænɪʃt əz sʌɾənli əz ɪt hæd kʌm, ən ðə meɪɾənz ɹɪlækst, tu. əz mʌtʃ əz il ɛvɝ kəd bi sɛd tə ɹɪlæks. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ. ðeɪ kəd nɑt θɪŋk i bleɪmd əm ɪn ɛni weɪ.

The tightness in Gaul's eyes vanished as suddenly as it had come, and the Maidens relaxed, too. As much as Aiel ever could be said to relax. It was very strange. They could not think he blamed them in any way.

"wi ɔl weɪk fɹəm ðə dʒɹim wʌn deɪ," ɡɔl sɛd dʒɛnli, "bʌɾ ɪf ʃi stɪl dʒɹimz, wɪl faɪn hɝ. bʌɾ ɪf il tʊk hɝ, wi mʌst ɡoʊ. ðəl muv kwɪkli. ivən ɪn . . . ðɪs." hi pʊt kənsɪɾɝəbəl dɪsɡʌst ɪn ðə wɝd, kɪkɪŋ əɾ ə klɑɾ ə snoʊ.

"We all wake from the dream one day," Gaul said gently, "but if she still dreams, we will find her. But if Aiel took her, we must go. They will move quickly. Even in . . . this." He put considerable disgust in the word, kicking at a clod of snow.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd ən heɪstəli stɛpt əsaɪd, lɛɾɪŋ ði il sɛɾ aʊɾ əɾ ə tʃɹɑt. hi daʊɾɪd ðeɪ kəd meɪnteɪn ðət fəɹ vɛɹi lɔŋ, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wəd kip ðə peɪs lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls kəd hæv. əz ðə meɪɾənz pæs hɪm, itʃ kwɪkli pɹɛs fɪŋɡɝz tə ðə veɪl oʊvɝ əɹ lɪps, ðən tʌtʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. səlɪn, ɹaɪt bɪhaɪnd ɡɔl, ɡeɪv ɪm ə nɑd, bʌt nʌn sɛɾ ə wɝd. feɪl wʊɾə noʊn wʌt ðeɪ mɛnt wɪð ðɛɹ fɪŋɡɝ kɪsɪŋ.

Perrin nodded and hastily stepped aside, letting the Aiel set out at a trot. He doubted they could maintain that for very long, but he was sure they would keep the pace longer than anyone else could have. As the Maidens passed him, each quickly pressed fingers to the veil over her lips, then touched his shoulder. Sulin, right behind Gaul, gave him a nod, but none said a word. Faile would have known what they meant with their finger kissing.

ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ɑɾ əbaʊt ðɛɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ, hi ɹilaɪzd əz ðə læs meɪɾən wɛn baɪ. ðeɪ wɝ lɛɾɪŋ ɡɔl lɛd. nɔɹməli, ɛni ʌv əm wʊɾə stʌk ə spɪɹ ɪn ɪm bɪfɔɹ əlaʊɪŋ ðæt. waɪ . . . ? meɪbi . . . kiæɾ ən beɪn wʊɾə bɪn wɪð feɪl. ɡɔl dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wʌn weɪ əɹ ði ʌðɝ əbaʊt beɪn, bʌt kiæd wɑz ə dɪfɹən mæɾɝ. ðə meɪɾənz sɝɾənli hæd nɑt bɪn ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ ɡɔlz hoʊp ðət kiæd wəd ɡɪv ʌp ðə spɪɹ tə mɛɹi hɪm - ɛniθɪŋ bʌt! - jɛt meɪbi ðət wɑz ɪt.

There was something else odd about their departure, he realized as the last Maiden went by. They were letting Gaul lead. Normally, any of them would have stuck a spear in him before allowing that. Why . . . ? Maybe . . . Chiad and Bain would have been with Faile. Gaul did not care one way or the other about Bain, but Chiad was a different matter. The Maidens certainly had not been encouraging Gaul's hope that Chiad would give up the spear to marry him - anything but! - yet maybe that was it.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪn dɪsɡʌst ət hɪmsɛlf. kiæɾ ən beɪn, ən u ɛls? ivən blaɪnd wɪð fɪɹ fəɹ feɪl, hi ʃʊɾə æsk ðət mʌtʃ. ɪf i wɑz gɑnə ɡɛɾ əɹ bæk, hi niɾəd tə stʃɹæŋɡəl fɪɹ ən si. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz laɪk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stʃɹæŋɡəl ə tʃɹi.

Perrin grunted in disgust at himself. Chiad and Bain, and who else? Even blind with fear for Faile, he should have asked that much. If he was going to get her back, he needed to strangle fear and see. But it was like trying to strangle a tree.

ðə flæt hɪltɑp swɔɹm naʊ. sʌmwʌn hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi lɛd steɪɝ əweɪ, ən tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɝ livɪŋ ðə ɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə kɹɛst, hɝiɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛɹ kæmp ɪn ə skæɾɝd stʃɹim, ʃaʊɾɪŋ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ əbaʊt wʌt ðeɪ wʊɾə dʌn hæd ðə lænsɝz tʃɑɹdʒd. əkeɪʒənəli ə mæn ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs æskɪŋ əbaʊt feɪl, dɪɾ ɛniwʌn noʊ ɪf ðə leɪɾi wɑz seɪf, wɝ ðeɪ gɑnə lʊk fəɹ hɝ, bʌɾ ʌðɝz ɔlweɪz ʃʌʃt ɪm hɝidli wɪð wɝid ɡlænsɪz ət pɛɹɪn. ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn wɛn əbaʊt ðɛɹ tæsks plɑtʃədli ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɔl ðə ɹʌʃ. ənlɛs kəmændəd tə stɑp, ðeɪ wʊɾə dʌn ðə seɪm ɪf ə bæɾəl hæd swɝld ɝaʊn ðɛm, nɑt ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn tə hɛlp əɹ hɪndɝ. ðə waɪz wʌnz hæɾ ɔl ɡɔn ɪndə wʌn ə ðə tɛns wɪð siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi, ən ðə flæps wɝ nɑɾ oʊnli daʊn, bʌt taɪd. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi dɪstɝbd. ðeɪ wəd bi dɪskʌsɪŋ mæsimə, noʊ daʊt. pɑsəbli dɪskʌsɪŋ haʊ tə kɪl ðə mæn wɪθaʊɾ ɪm əɹ ɹænd lɝnɪŋ ðeɪ hæd dʌn ɪt.

The flat hilltop swarmed now. Someone had already led Stayer away, and Two Rivers men were leaving the ring around the crest, hurrying toward their camp in a scattered stream, shouting to one another about what they would have done had the lancers charged. Occasionally a man raised his voice asking about Faile, did anyone know if the Lady was safe, were they going to look for her, but others always shushed him hurriedly with worried glances at Perrin. The gai'shain went about their tasks placidly in the middle of all the rush. Unless commanded to stop, they would have done the same if a battle had swirled around them, not raising a hand to help or hinder. The Wise Ones had all gone into one of the tents with Seonid and Masuri, and the flaps were not only down, but tied. They did not want to be disturbed. They would be discussing Masema, no doubt. Possibly discussing how to kill the man without him or Rand learning they had done it.

hi smækt ə fɪst ɪndə hɪz pɑm ɪn ɪɹɪteɪʃən. hi hæɾ æktʃəli  fɝɡɑɾən mæsimə əntɪl naʊ. ðə mæn wɑz səpoʊz tə bi fɑloʊɪŋ bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl, wɪð ðəɾ ɑnɝ ɡɑɹɾ ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn. wɪð lʌk, ðə minɝ skaʊts wəd bi bæk baɪ ðɛn, ən ɛlaɪəs ən ði ʌðɝz sun æftɝ.

He smacked a fist into his palm in irritation. He had actually forgotten Masema until now. The man was supposed to be following before nightfall, with that honor guard of a hundred men. With luck, the Mayener scouts would be back by then, and Elyas and the others soon after.

"maɪ lɔɹd pɛɹɪn?" ɡɹeɪɾi sɛd bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən i tɝnd. ðə tu æʃəmən stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, fɪdlɪŋ ənsɝteɪnli wɪð ðɛɹ ɹeɪnz. ɡɹeɪɾi dʒɹu bɹɛθ ən wɛn ɑn wɪð nil nɑɾɪŋ əɡɹimənt. "ðə pɛɹ ʌv əs kəd kʌvɝ ə lɑɾ ʌv ɡɹaʊnd, tʃɹævlɪŋ. ən ɪf wi faɪn ðə lɑɾ u kɪdnæp hɝ, wɛl, aɪ daʊɾ ivən ə fju hʌnʒɹəd il kəd stɑp tu æʃəmən fɹəm teɪkɪŋ əɹ bæk."

"My Lord Perrin?" Grady said behind him, and he turned. The two Asha'man stood in front of their horses, fiddling uncertainly with their reins. Grady drew breath and went on with Neald nodding agreement. "The pair of us could cover a lot of ground, Traveling. And if we find the lot who kidnapped her, well, I doubt even a few hundred Aiel could stop two Asha'man from taking her back."

pɛɹɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə tɛl əm tə stɑɹɾ ɪmiɾiətli, ðən kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn. ɡɹeɪɾi hæd bɪn ə fɑɹmɝ, tʃɹu, bʌt nɛvɝ ə hʌntɝ əɹ wʊdzmən. nil θɔɾ ɛni pleɪs wɪθaʊɾ ə stoʊn wɔl wɑz ə vɪlədʒ. ðeɪ maɪt noʊ ə fʊtpɹɪn fɹəm ən oʊk tʃɹi, jɛɾ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd faɪn tʃɹæks, vɛɹi laɪkli niðɝ wəd bi eɪbəl tə seɪ wɪtʃ dɝɛkʃən ðeɪ wɝ hɛɾəd. ʌv kɔɹs, hi kəd ɡoʊ wɪð ðɛm. hi wɑz nɑɾ əz ɡʊɾ əz dʒɑndɪn, bʌt . . . hi kəd ɡoʊ, ən liv dænɪl tə dil wɪð ɑɹɡændə. ən wɪð mæsimə. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə waɪz wʌnz' skimz.

Perrin opened his mouth to tell them to start immediately, then closed it again. Grady had been a farmer, true, but never a hunter or woodsman. Neald thought any place without a stone wall was a village. They might know a footprint from an oak tree, yet if they did find tracks, very likely neither would be able to say which direction they were headed. Of course, he could go with them. He was not as good as Jondyn, but . . . He could go, and leave Dannil to deal with Arganda. And with Masema. Not to mention the Wise Ones' schemes.

"ɡoʊ ɡɛt jʊɹsɛlvz pækt," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. wɛɹ wɑz beɪlwɝ? noʊwɛɹ ɪn saɪt. nɑt vɛɹi laɪkli ðəɾ i hæd ɡɔn hɛɹɪŋ ɔf tə faɪn feɪl. "ju meɪ bi niɾəd hɪɹ."

"Go get yourselves packed," he said quietly. Where was Balwer? Nowhere in sight. Not very likely that he had gone haring off to find Faile. "You may be needed here."

ɡɹeɪɾi blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən nilz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən.

Grady blinked in surprise, and Neald's mouth dropped open.

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv əm noʊ tʃæns tə ɑɹɡju. hi stʃɹoʊɾ oʊvɝ tə ðə loʊ tɛnt wɪð ðə taɪd flæps. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə əndu ðə taɪz fɹəm ði aʊtsaɪd. wən waɪz wʌnz wɑntəd tə ɹɪmeɪn ʌndɪstɝbd, ðeɪ wɑntəd tə ɹɪmeɪn ʌndɪstɝbd, baɪ klæn tʃifs əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls. ɪnkluɾɪŋ ə wɛtləndɝ lʌmbɝd wɪð ðə taɪɾəl ə lɔɹɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. hi dʒɹu hɪz bɛl naɪf, ən bɛn tə slaɪs ðə taɪz, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəd slaɪd ðə bleɪd θɹu ðə taɪt kɹæk bɪtwin ði ɛntʃɹi flæps, ðeɪ dʒɝkt əz ɪf sʌmwʌn wɑz ənfæsənɪŋ əm fɹəm ɪnsaɪd. hi stʃɹeɪɾənd ən weɪɾəd.

Perrin gave them no chance to argue. He strode over to the low tent with the tied flaps. There was no way to undo the ties from the outside. When Wise Ones wanted to remain undisturbed, they wanted to remain undisturbed, by clan chiefs or anyone else. Including a wetlander lumbered with the title of Lord of the Two Rivers. He drew his belt knife, and bent to slice the ties, but before he could slide the blade through the tight crack between the entry flaps, they jerked as if someone was unfastening them from inside. He straightened and waited.

ðə tɛntflæps oʊpənd, ən nəvɛɝɪn slɪpt aʊt. hɝ ʃɔl wɑz taɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ weɪst, bʌɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə mɪst ə hɝ bɹɛθ, ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ ɛvəɾəns ə ði aɪsi ɛɹ. hɝ ɡɹin aɪz tʊk ɪn ðə naɪf ɪn ɪz hænd, ən ʃi plæntəɾ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ɪn ə ɹæɾəl ə bɹeɪslɪts. ʃi wɑz nɪɹ ɪnʌf boʊn-θɪn, wɪð lɔŋ sændi jɛloʊ hɛɹ hɛl bæk baɪ ə dɑɹk foʊldəd kɝtʃəf, ən mɔɹ ðən ə hæn tɔlɝ ðən nɪneɪiv, bʌt ðət wɑz u ʃi ɔlweɪz meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ʌv. ʃi stʊd blɑkɪŋ ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə tɛnt.

The tentflaps opened, and Nevarin slipped out. Her shawl was tied around her waist, but except for the mist of her breath, she gave no evidence of the icy air. Her green eyes took in the knife in his hand, and she planted her fists on her hips in a rattle of bracelets. She was near enough bone-thin, with long sandy yellow hair held back by a dark folded kerchief, and more than a hand taller than Nynaeve, but that was who she always made him think of. She stood blocking the entrance to the tent.

"ju ɑɹ ɪmpɛtʃwəs, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə." hɝ laɪt vɔɪs wɑz lɛvəl, bʌɾ i hæd ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ðət ʃi wɑz kənsɪɾɝɪŋ bɑksɪŋ ɪz ɪɹz. vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk nɪneɪiv. "ðoʊ ðət maɪt bi ʌndɝstændəbəl, ɪn ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. wʌt dʒju wɑnt?"

"You are impetuous, Perrin Aybara." Her light voice was level, but he had the impression that she was considering boxing his ears. Very much like Nynaeve. "Though that might be understandable, in the circumstances. What do you want?"

"haʊ . . . ?" hi hæd tə stɑp tə swɑloʊ. "haʊ wɪl ðeɪ tʃɹit hɝ?"

"How . . . ?" He had to stop to swallow. "How will they treat her?"

"aɪ kænɑt seɪ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ sɪmpəθi ɑn əɹ feɪs, noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən əɾ ɔl. il kəd ɡɪv ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛsənz ɪn ðæt. "teɪkɪŋ wɛtləndɝz kæptɪv ɪz əɡɛns kʌstəm, ɪksɛp fəɹ tʃɹikɪlɝz, ðoʊ ðəɾ əz tʃeɪnʒd. soʊ ɪz kɪlɪŋ wɪθaʊt nid. bʌt mɛni hæv ɹəfjuz tə æksɛp ðə tʃɹuθs ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn ɹɪvild. səm wɝ teɪkən baɪ ðə bliknəs ən θɹu daʊn ðɛɹ spɪɹz, jɛt ðeɪ meɪ hæv teɪkən əm ʌp əɡɛn. ʌðɝz sɪmpli lɛft, tə lɪv əz ðeɪ bɪliv wəɹ mɛn tə. aɪ kænɑt seɪ wʌt kʌstəmz maɪt bi kɛpt əɹ əbændən baɪ ðoʊz u hæv əbændən klæn ən sɛpt." ði oʊnli ɪmoʊʃən ʃi dɪspleɪd wɑz ə hɪn ə dɪsɡʌst ət ði ɛnd, fəɹ ðoʊz u əbændən klæn ən sɛpt.

"I cannot say, Perrin Aybara." There was no sympathy on her face, no expression at all. Aiel could give Aes Sedai lessons in that. "Taking wetlanders captive is against custom, except for Treekillers, though that has changed. So is killing without need. But many have refused to accept the truths the Car'a'carn revealed. Some were taken by the Bleakness and threw down their spears, yet they may have taken them up again. Others simply left, to live as they believe we are meant to. I cannot say what customs might be kept or abandoned by those who have abandoned clan and sept." The only emotion she displayed was a hint of disgust at the end, for those who abandoned clan and sept.

"laɪt, wʊmən, jə mʌst əv səm aɪdiə! ʃʊɹli jə kən meɪk ə ɡɛs - "

"Light, woman, you must have some idea! Surely you can make a guess - "

"du nɑt bɪkʌm ɪɹæʃənəl," ʃi bɹoʊk ɪn ʃɑɹpli. "mɛn ɔfən də ɪn sətʃ sɪtʃueɪʃənz, bʌt wɪv niɾ ə ju. aɪ θɪŋk ɪɾəl də jəɹ stændɪŋ wɪð ði ʌðɝ wɛtləndɝz noʊ ɡʊɾ ɪf wi mʌs baɪn jə əntɪl jə kɑm daʊn. ɡoʊ tə jəɹ tɛnt. ɪf jə kænɑt kəntʃɹoʊl jəɹ θɔts, dʒɹɪŋk əntɪl jə kænɑt θɪŋk. ən də nɑt bɑðɝ əs wən wəɹ ɪn kaʊnsəl." ʃi dʌk bæk ɪndə ðə tɛnt, ən ðə flæps dʒɝkt kloʊzd ən bɪɡæn tə twɪtʃ əz ðeɪ wɝ taɪɾ əɡɛn.

"Do not become irrational," she broke in sharply. "Men often do in such situations, but we have need of you. I think it will do your standing with the other wetlanders no good if we must bind you until you calm down. Go to your tent. If you cannot control your thoughts, drink until you cannot think. And do not bother us when we are in council." She ducked back into the tent, and the flaps jerked closed and began to twitch as they were tied again.

pɛɹɪn kənsɪɾɝd ðə kloʊz flæps, ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz θʌm oʊvɝ ðə bleɪɾ ə hɪz naɪf, ðən ʃʌvd ɪɾ ɪndə ðə ʃiθ. ðeɪ dʒʌs maɪt də əz nəvɛɝɪn hæd θɹɛɾənd ɪf i bɑɹdʒd ɪn. ən ðeɪ kəd nɑt tɛl ɪm ɛniθɪŋ i wɑntəd tə noʊ. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wəd kip sikɹəts əɾ ə taɪm laɪk ðɪs. nɑɾ əbaʊt feɪl, ɛniweɪ.

Perrin considered the closed flaps, running his thumb over the blade of his knife, then shoved it into the sheath. They just might do as Nevarin had threatened if he barged in. And they could not tell him anything he wanted to know. He did not think she would keep secrets at a time like this. Not about Faile, anyway.

ðə hɪltɑp hæd ɡɹoʊn kwaɪəɾɝ, wɪð moʊst ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn ɡɔn. ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ, stɪl wɑtʃfəl ə ðə ɡildænɪn kæmp bɪloʊ, stæmp ðɛɹ fiɾ əɡɛns ðə koʊld, bʌt noʊ wʌn tɔkt. ðə skɝiɪŋ ɡeɪʃeɪn hɑɹdli meɪɾ ə saʊnd. tʃɹiz əbskjʊɹd pɑɹts ə ðə ɡildænɪn ən minɝ kæmps, bʌt pɛɹɪn kəd si kɑɹts biɪŋ loʊɾəd ɪn boʊθ. hi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə liv mɛn ɑn ɡɑɹɾ ɛniweɪ. ɑɹɡændə kəd bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʌl hɪm. ə mæn u smɛld laɪk ðət kəd bi . . . ɪɹæʃənəl, hi fɪnɪʃt ðə θɔt dʒɹaɪli.

The hilltop had grown quieter, with most of the Two Rivers men gone. The remainder, still watchful of the Ghealdanin camp below, stamped their feet against the cold, but no one talked. The scurrying gai'shain hardly made a sound. Trees obscured parts of the Ghealdanin and Mayener camps, but Perrin could see carts being loaded in both. He decided to leave men on guard anyway. Arganda could be trying to lull him. A man who smelled like that could be . . . Irrational, he finished the thought dryly.

ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ lɛft fəɹ ɪm tə də ɑn ðə hɪl, soʊ hi sɛɾ aʊt tə wɔk ðə hæf maɪl tə hɪz tɛnt. ðə tɛn i ʃɛɹd wɪð feɪl. hi stʌmbəld əz mʌtʃ əz wɔkt, leɪbɝɪŋ wən ðə snoʊ ɹoʊz ɝaʊn ɪz lɛɡz. əz mʌtʃ tə stɑp ɪt snæpɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪn əz fəɹ wɔɹmθ, hi hɛld ɪz kloʊk taɪɾ ɝaʊn hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɔɹmθ.

There was nothing left for him to do on the hill, so he set out to walk the half mile to his tent. The tent he shared with Faile. He stumbled as much as walked, laboring when the snow rose around his legs. As much to stop it snapping in the wind as for warmth, he held his cloak tight around him. There was no warmth.

ðə tu ɹɪvɝz kæmp wɑz æzwɝm wɪð æktɪvəɾi wən i ɝaɪvd. ðə kɑɹts stɪl meɪɾ ə bɪɡ sɝkəl, wɪð mɛn ən wɪmən fɹəm dɑbɹeɪnz ɪsteɪts bæk ɪn kɛɹhin loʊɾɪŋ ðɛm, ən ʌðɝz ɹɛɾiɪŋ hɔɹsəz fəɹ sæɾəlɪŋ. ɪn ðɪs dɛpθ ə snoʊ, kɑɹtwilz maɪɾ əz wɛl əv tʃɹaɪd tə ɹoʊl θɹu mʌd, soʊ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl læʃt tə ðə saɪdz ə ðə kɑɹts, naʊ, ɹipleɪs baɪ pɛɹz ə bɹɔd wʊɾən slɛdz. bʌndəld əɡɛns ðə wɛðɝ tɪl moʊst sim twaɪs əz waɪɾ əz ðeɪ ɹɪli wɝ, ðə kɛɹhinɪn hɑɹdli pɔz tə ɡlæns ət hɪm, bʌɾ ɛvɹi tu ɹɪvɝz mæn u sɔ hɪm stɑp tə stɛɹ əntɪl sʌmwʌn ɛls pɹɑɾɪd ðə fɛloʊ tə ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð wʌtɛvɝ i wɑz əbaʊt. pɛɹɪn wɑz ɡlæd nʌn ɡeɪv wɝdz tə ðə sɪmpəθi ɪn ðoʊz stɛɹz. hi θɔɾ i maɪt bɹeɪk daʊn ən kɹaɪ ɪf ɛniwʌn dɪd.

The Two Rivers camp was aswarm with activity when he arrived. The carts still made a big circle, with men and women from Dobraine's estates back in Cairhien loading them, and others readying horses for saddling. In this depth of snow, cartwheels might as well have tried to roll through mud, so they were all lashed to the sides of the carts, now, replaced by pairs of broad wooden sleds. Bundled against the weather till most seemed twice as wide as they really were, the Cairhienin hardly paused to glance at him, but every Two Rivers man who saw him stopped to stare until someone else prodded the fellow to get on with whatever he was about. Perrin was glad none gave words to the sympathy in those stares. He thought he might break down and cry if anyone did.

ðəɹ sim tə bi nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə də hɪɹ, iðɝ. hɪz bɪɡ tɛnt - hɪz ən feɪlz - wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi daʊn ən ɑn ə kɑɹt, əlɔŋ wɪð ɪts kɑntɛns. bɑzəl ɡɪl wɑz wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə kɑɹts wɪð ə lɔŋ lɪst ɪn ɪz hænz. ðə staʊt mæn hæd teɪkən tə ðə dʒɑb ə ʃæmbaɪən, ɹʌnɪŋ feɪlz haʊshoʊld, pɛɹɪnz, laɪk ə skwɝəl tə ə kɔɹn kɹɪb. mɔɹ juz tə sɪɾiz ðən tʃɹævlɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðɛɹ wɔlz, ðoʊ, hi sʌfɝd fɹəm ðə koʊld, ən wɔɹ nɑɾ oʊnli ə kloʊk bʌɾ ə θɪk skɑɹf ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, ə flɑpi-bɹɪm fɛl hæɾ ən hɛvi wʊlən ɡlʌvz. fəɹ səm ɹizən, ɡɪl flɪntʃt ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm, ən mʌmbəl sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt siɪŋ tə ðə kɑɹts bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ ɔf əz fæst əz i kʊd. ɑd.

There seemed to be nothing for him to do here, either. His big tent - his and Faile's - was already down and on a cart, along with its contents. Basel Gill was walking along the carts with a long list in his hands. The stout man had taken to the job of shambayan, running Faile's household, Perrin's, like a squirrel to a corn crib. More used to cities than traveling outside their walls, though, he suffered from the cold, and wore not only a cloak but a thick scarf around his neck, a floppy-brimmed felt hat and heavy woolen gloves. For some reason, Gill flinched at the sight of him, and mumbled something about seeing to the carts before hurrying off as fast as he could. Odd.

pɛɹɪn dɪd θɪŋk ʌv wʌn θɪŋ ðɛn, ən faɪndɪŋ dænɪl, hi ɡeɪv ɔɹɾɝz tə ɹɪliv ðə mɛn ɑn ðə hɪl ɛvɹi aʊɝ ən meɪk ʃʊɹ ɛvɹiwʌn hæɾ ə hɑt mil.

Perrin did think of one thing then, and finding Dannil, he gave orders to relieve the men on the hill every hour and make sure everyone had a hot meal.

"teɪk kɛɹ ə ðə mɛn ən hɔɹsəz fɝst," ə θɪn bʌt stʃɹɔŋ vɔɪs sɛd. "bʌt ðən jə mʌs teɪk kɛɹ ə jɝsɛlf. ðɛɹz hɑt sup ɪn ðə kɛɾəl, ən bɹɛɾ ʌv ə sɔɹt, ən aɪv pʊt baɪ səm smoʊk hæm. ə fʊl bɛli wɪl meɪk jə lʊk lɛs laɪk mɝɾɝ wɔkɪŋ."

"Take care of the men and horses first," a thin but strong voice said. "But then you must take care of yourself. There's hot soup in the kettle, and bread of a sort, and I've put by some smoked ham. A full belly will make you look less like murder walking."

"θæŋk ju, lini," hi sɛd. mɝɾɝ wɔkɪŋ? laɪt, hi fɛlt laɪk wʌn ə ðə dɛd, nɑɾ ə mɝɾɝɝ. "aɪl iɾ ɪn ə lɪɾəl waɪl."

"Thank you, Lini," he said. Murder walking? Light, he felt like one of the dead, not a murderer. "I'll eat in a little while."

feɪlz tʃif meɪd wɑz ə fɹeɪl-əpɪɹɪŋ wʊmən, wɪð skɪn laɪk pɑɹtʃmən ən waɪt hɛɹ ɪn ə bʌn ɑn tɑp ə hɝ hɛd, bʌɾ əɹ bæk wɑz stʃɹeɪɾ ən əɹ dɑɹk aɪz wɝ klɪɹ ən ʃɑɹp. wɝi kɹist əɹ fɔɹhɛd naʊ, ðoʊ, ən əɹ hænz ɡɹɪpt əɹ kloʊk tu taɪtli, stʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ʃi wəd bi wɝiɾ əbaʊt feɪl, sɝɾənli, bʌt . . .

Faile's chief maid was a frail-appearing woman, with skin like parchment and white hair in a bun on top of her head, but her back was straight and her dark eyes were clear and sharp. Worry creased her forehead now, though, and her hands gripped her cloak too tightly, straining. She would be worried about Faile, certainly, but . . .

"meɪaɪɡdɪn wɑz wɪð hɝ," hi sɛd, ən dɪd nɑt niɾ əɹ nɑd. meɪaɪɡdɪn wɑz ɔlweɪz wɪð feɪl, ɪt simd. ə tʃɹɛʒɝ, feɪl kɔl hɝ. ən lini sim tə kənsɪɾɝ ðə wʊmən əɹ dɔɾɝ, ðoʊ səmtaɪmz meɪaɪɡdɪn dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə ɛndʒɔɪ ðəɾ əz mʌtʃ əz lini dɪd. "aɪl ɡɛɾ əm bæk," hi pɹɑməst. "ɔl ə ðɛm." hɪz vɔɪs ɔlmoʊs bɹoʊk ɑn ðæt. "ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð jəɹ wɝk," hi wɛn ɑn ɹʌfli, hɝidli. "aɪl iɾ ɪn ə bɪt. aɪ hæv tə si tə . . . tə . . ." hi stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ wɪθaʊt fɪnɪʃɪŋ.

"Maighdin was with her," he said, and did not need her nod. Maighdin was always with Faile, it seemed. A treasure, Faile called her. And Lini seemed to consider the woman her daughter, though sometimes Maighdin did not appear to enjoy that as much as Lini did. "I'll get them back," he promised. "All of them." His voice almost broke on that. "Get on with your work," he went on roughly, hurriedly. "I'll eat in a bit. I have to see to . . . to . . ." He strode away without finishing.

ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ i hæd tə si tə. nʌθɪŋ i kəd θɪŋk ʌv, ɪksɛp feɪl. hi hɑɹdli nu wɛɹ i wɑz hɛɾɪŋ əntɪl ɪz stɛps tʊk ɪm aʊtsaɪd ðə sɝkəl ə kɑɹts.

There was nothing he had to see to. Nothing he could think of, except Faile. He hardly knew where he was heading until his steps took him outside the circle of carts.

ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz bɪɑn ðə hɔɹslaɪnz, ə loʊ, stoʊni ɹɪdʒ θɹʌst ə blæk pik θɹu ðə snoʊ. fɹəm ðɛɹ, hi wəd bi eɪbəl tə si ðə tʃɹæks lɛf baɪ ɛlaɪəs ən ði ʌðɝz. fɹəm ðɛɹ, hi wəd si ðɛm ɹɪtɝnɪŋ.

A hundred paces beyond the horselines, a low, stony ridge thrust a black peak through the snow. From there, he would be able to see the tracks left by Elyas and the others. From there, he would see them returning.

hɪz noʊz toʊld ɪm i wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn wɛl bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ðə nɛɹoʊ kɹɛst ə ðə ɹɪdʒ, toʊld ɪm u wɑz ʌp ðɛɹ. ði ʌðɝ mæn wɑz nɑt lɪsnɪŋ, kəz pɛɹɪn kɹʌntʃt ɪz weɪ tə ðə tɑp bɪfɔɹ i spɹæŋ ʌp fɹəm wɛɹ i hæd bɪn kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɑn ɪz hilz. tɑlænvɝz ɡɔntələɾəd hænz niɾɪd ɪz lɔŋ sɔɹd hɪlt, ən i pɪɹɾ ət pɛɹɪn ənsɝteɪnli. ə tɔl mæn u hæd teɪkən hɑɹd nɑks ɪn ɪz laɪf, hi juʒəwəli wɑz vɛɹi ʃʊɹ ə hɪmsɛlf. pɝhæps i ɪkspɛktəɾ ə taɪɹeɪd fəɹ nɑt hævɪŋ bɪn ðəɹ wən feɪl wɑz teɪkən, ðoʊ ʃi hæd ɹɪdʒɛktɪd ði ɑɹmsmən əz ə bɑɾiɡɑɹd, ɹɪdʒɛktɪɾ ɛni bɑɾiɡɑɹd. bɪɑn beɪn ən kiæd, ət list, hu əpɛɹənli dɪd nɑt kaʊnt. əɹ meɪbi hi dʒʌs θɔɾ i wəd bi sɛn əweɪ, bæk tə ðə kɑɹts, soʊ pɛɹɪn kəd bi əloʊn. pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz feɪs lʊk lɛs laɪk - wʌt hæd lini kɔld ɪt? - mɝɾɝ wɔkɪŋ? tɑlænvɝ wɑz ɪn lʌv wɪð meɪaɪɡdɪn, ən wəd bi wɛd tə hɝ sun ɪf feɪlz səspɪʃənz wɝ kɝɛkt. ðə mæn hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə kip wɑtʃ.

His nose told him he was not alone well before he reached the narrow crest of the ridge, told him who was up there. The other man was not listening, because Perrin crunched his way to the top before he sprang up from where he had been crouching on his heels. Tallanvor's gauntleted hands kneaded his long sword hilt, and he peered at Perrin uncertainly. A tall man who had taken hard knocks in his life, he usually was very sure of himself. Perhaps he expected a tirade for not having been there when Faile was taken, though she had rejected the armsman as a bodyguard, rejected any bodyguard. Beyond Bain and Chiad, at least, who apparently did not count. Or maybe he just thought he would be sent away, back to the carts, so Perrin could be alone. Perrin tried to make his face look less like - what had Lini called it? - murder walking? Tallanvor was in love with Maighdin, and would be wed to her soon if Faile's suspicions were correct. The man had a right to keep watch.

ðeɪ stʊd ðəɹ ɑn ðə ɹɪdʒ waɪl twaɪlaɪt fɛl, ən nʌθɪŋ muvd ɪn ðə snoʊi fɔɹəs ðeɪ wɑtʃt. dɑɹknəs keɪm wɪθaʊt muvmənt, ən wɪθaʊt mæsimə, bʌt pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ ivən θɪŋk ə mæsimə. ðə ɡɪbəs mun ʃoʊn waɪɾ ɑn ðə snoʊ, ɡɪvɪŋ nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ laɪɾ əz ə fʊl mun, ɪt simd. əntɪl skəɪŋ klaʊdz bɪɡæn tə haɪɾ ɪt, ən munʃæɾoʊz ɹeɪst əkɹɔs ðə snoʊ, θɪkɝ ən θɪkɝ. snoʊ bɪɡæn tə fɔl wɪð ə dʒɹaɪ ɹʌslɪŋ. snoʊ ðət wəd bɛɹi tʃɹeɪsəz ən tʃɹæks. saɪlən ɪn ðə koʊld, ðə tu mɛn stʊd ðɛɹ, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə snoʊfɔl, weɪɾɪŋ, hoʊpɪŋ.

They stood there on the ridge while twilight fell, and nothing moved in the snowy forest they watched. Darkness came without movement, and without Masema, but Perrin did not even think of Masema. The gibbous moon shone white on the snow, giving nearly as much light as a full moon, it seemed. Until scudding clouds began to hide it, and moonshadows raced across the snow, thicker and thicker. Snow began to fall with a dry rustling. Snow that would bury traces and tracks. Silent in the cold, the two men stood there, watching into the snowfall, waiting, hoping.


tʃæptɝ θɹi


CHAPTER 3

kʌstəmz


Customs

fɹəm ðə fɝst aʊɝ æftɝ biɪŋ kæptʃɝd, leɪbɝɪŋ θɹu ðə snoʊi wʊdz, feɪl wɝiɾ əbaʊt fɹizɪŋ. bɹizɪz stɝɾ ən daɪd, stɝɾ ən daɪd. fju ʌv ðə skæɾɝd tʃɹiz stɪl kæɹid livz, ən moʊst ə ðoʊz hʌŋ dɛɾ ən bɹaʊn. ðə bɹizɪz swɝl θɹu ðə fɔɹəst ənhɪndɝd, ən smɔl əz ðə ɡʌsts wɝ, ðeɪ kæɹiɾ aɪs. pɛɹɪn hɑɹdli ɛntɝɾ əɹ θɔts, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə hoʊp ðəɾ i sʌmhaʊ lɝn ə mæsiməz sikɹət dilɪŋz. ən ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, ʌv kɔɹs. ivən ɪf ðət tʃɹʌl bɹəleɪn wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn u kəd tɛl hɪm, naʊ. ʃi hoʊp bɹəleɪn hæɾ ɪskeɪp ði æmbʊʃ ən toʊl pɛɹɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ən ðən fɔlən ɪndə ə hoʊl ən bɹoʊkən əɹ nɛk. bʌt ʃi hæd fɑɹ mɔɹ pɹɛsɪŋ kənsɝnz ðən əɹ hʌzbənd.

From the first hour after being captured, laboring through the snowy woods, Faile worried about freezing. Breezes stirred and died, stirred and died. Few of the scattered trees still carried leaves, and most of those hung dead and brown. The breezes swirled through the forest unhindered, and small as the gusts were, they carried ice. Perrin hardly entered her thoughts, except for a hope that he somehow learned of Masema's secret dealings. And of the Shaido, of course. Even if that trull Berelain was the only one who could tell him, now. She hoped Berelain had escaped the ambush and told Perrin everything. And then fallen into a hole and broken her neck. But she had far more pressing concerns than her husband.

ʃi hæd kɔl ðɪs wɛðɝ ɔtʌmnəl, jɛt pipəl fɹoʊz tə dɛθ ɪn ə sɑldəiən ɔɾəm, ən ə hɝ kloʊðz ʃi ɹɪteɪn oʊnli hɝ dɑɹk wʊlən stɑkɪŋz. wʌn læʃt əɹ ɛlboʊz taɪt bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk, waɪl ðə sɛkən hæd bɪn taɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk fəɹ ə liʃ. bɹeɪv wɝdz meɪd skæn kʌvɝɪŋ fəɹ bɛɹ skɪn. ʃi wɑz tu koʊl fəɹ swɛt, jɛɾ əɹ lɛɡz sun ætʃt wɪð ðə stʃɹʌɡəl tə kip ʌp wɪð əɹ kæptɝz. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kɑləm, veɪl mɛn ən meɪɾənz, sloʊd wən ðə snoʊ ɹoʊz təwɔɹd ðɛɹ niz bʌɾ ɪmiɾiətli ɹɪzumd ə stɛɾi tʃɹɑt wən ɪt sæŋk təwɔɹd ðɛɹ æŋkəlz, ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə taɪɝ. hɔɹsəz kəd nɑɾ əv muv fæstɝ oʊvɝ ðə dɪstəns. ʃɪvɝɪŋ, ʃi leɪbɝɾ ɑn ət ði ɛn ə hɝ liʃ, duɪŋ əɹ bɛs tə ɡʌlp ɛɹ θɹu tiθ ɡɹɪɾɪd tə stɑp ðɛɹ tʃæɾɝɪŋ.

She had called this weather autumnal, yet people froze to death in a Saldaean autumn, and of her clothes she retained only her dark woolen stockings. One lashed her elbows tight behind her back, while the second had been tied around her neck for a leash. Brave words made scant covering for bare skin. She was too cold for sweat, yet her legs soon ached with the struggle to keep up with her captors. The Shaido column, veiled men and Maidens, slowed when the snow rose toward their knees but immediately resumed a steady trot when it sank toward their ankles, and they did not seem to tire. Horses could not have moved faster over the distance. Shivering, she labored on at the end of her leash, doing her best to gulp air through teeth gritted to stop their chattering.

ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ fjuɝ ðən ʃi hæɾ ɛstəmeɪɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ði ətæk, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti ʃi θɔt, ən nɪɹli ɔl kæɹid spɪɹz əɹ baʊz ət ðə ɹɛɾi. smɔl tʃæns ɛniwʌn kəd sɝpɹaɪz ðɛm. ɔlweɪz əlɝt, ðeɪ ɡɑstɪɾ əlɔŋ ɪn saɪləns ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə feɪn kɹʌntʃ ə ðə snoʊ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ sɑft, ni-haɪ buts. ðə ɡɹinz ən ɡɹeɪz ən bɹaʊnz ə ðɛɹ kloʊðɪŋ stʊɾ aʊɾ əɡɛns ðə waɪt lændskeɪp, ðoʊ. ɡɹin hæd bɪn æɾəd tə ðə keɪɾɪnsɝ sɪns kɹɔsɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, soʊ beɪn ən kiæd hæd toʊl hɝ, tə eɪd kənsilmən ɪn ə ɡɹin lænd. waɪ hæd ðiz pipəl nɑɾ æɾəd waɪt, fəɹ ðə wɪntɝ? əz ɪt wɑz, ðeɪ kəd bi sin ət səm dɪstəns. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə noʊɾəs ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪt pɹuv jusfəl leɪɾɝ, wən ɪt keɪm taɪm tə ɪskeɪp. ʃi hoʊpt əɹ fɛloʊ pɹɪznɝz wɝ duɪŋ əz mʌtʃ. pɛɹɪn wəd bi hʌntɪŋ fəɹ hɝ, sɝɾənli, bʌt ðə θɔɾ ə ɹɛskju nɛvɝ ɛntɝɾ əɹ kælkjəleɪʃənz. weɪt fəɹ ɹɛskju, ən jə maɪt weɪt fɝɛvɝ. bɪsaɪdz, ðeɪ niɾəd tə ɪskeɪp əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl, bɪfɔɹ ðɛɹ kæptɝz dʒɔɪnd wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ. ʃi kəd nɑt si haʊ, jɛt, bʌt ðəɹ mʌs bi ə weɪ. ðə wʌn bɪɾ ə lʌk wɑz ðət ðə meɪn bɑɾi ʌv ʃeɪɾoʊ mʌs bi deɪz dɪstənt. ðɪs pɑɹɾ ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃiə wɑz keɪɑs, bʌt θaʊzənz ə ʃeɪɾoʊ kəd nɑt bi tu nɪɹ wɪθaʊɾ əɹ hævɪŋ hɝɾ ə ðɛm.

The Shaido were fewer than she had estimated during the attack, no more than a hundred and fifty she thought, and nearly all carried spears or bows at the ready. Small chance anyone could surprise them. Always alert, they ghosted along in silence except for the faint crunch of the snow under their soft, knee-high boots. The greens and grays and browns of their clothing stood out against the white landscape, though. Green had been added to the cadin'sor since crossing the Dragonwall, so Bain and Chiad had told her, to aid concealment in a green land. Why had these people not added white, for the winter? As it was, they could be seen at some distance. She tried to notice everything, remember anything that might prove useful later, when it came time to escape. She hoped her fellow prisoners were doing as much. Perrin would be hunting for her, certainly, but the thought of rescue never entered her calculations. Wait for rescue, and you might wait forever. Besides, they needed to escape as quickly as possible, before their captors joined with the rest of the Shaido. She could not see how, yet, but there must be a way. The one bit of luck was that the main body of Shaido must be days distant. This part of Amadicia was chaos, but thousands of Shaido could not be too near without her having heard of them.

wʌns, ɝli ɑn, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk bæk ət ðə wɪmən u hæd bɪn kæptʃɝd wɪð hɝ, bʌt ði oʊnli ɹɪzʌlt wɑz ə stʌmbəlɪŋ fɔl ɪndə ə snoʊbæŋk. hæf-bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə waɪt paʊɾɝ, ʃi ɡæsp fɹəm ði aɪsi ʃɑk, ən ɡæspt əɡɛn wən ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌlkɪŋ ʃeɪɾoʊ hu hɛld əɹ liʃ sɛɾ əɹ bæk ɑn əɹ fit. əz waɪɾ əz pɛɹɪn ən ə fʊl hɛd tɔlɝ, ɹoʊlən sɪmpli hɔld əɹ əpɹaɪt baɪ ə fɪsfəl ə hɝ hɛɹ, sɛɾ əɹ muvɪŋ əɡɛn wɪð ə bɹɪsk slæp ɑn əɹ bɛɹ bɑɾəm, ən wʌns mɔɹ tʊk ʌp ðə lɔŋ stʃɹaɪdz ðət fɔɹst əɹ tə stɛp kwɪkli. ðə slæp maɪɾ əv bɪn ɡɪvən tə meɪk ə poʊni muv. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ neɪkədnəs, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ʌv ə mæn lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə wʊmən ɪn ɹoʊlənz blu aɪz. pɑɹɾ ə hɝ wɑz vɛɹi ɡɹeɪtfəl. pɑɹɾ əɹ wɑz veɪɡli . . . teɪkən əbæk. ʃi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt wɑn ɪm ɡeɪzɪŋ əɾ əɹ wɪð lʌst əɹ ivən ɪntʃɹəst, bʌt ðoʊz blænd ɡlænsɪz wɝ ɔlmoʊst ɪnsʌltɪŋ! æftɝ ðət ʃi meɪd ʃʊɹ nɑt tə fɔl, ðoʊ əz ði aʊɝz pæst wɪθaʊɾ ə pɔz ɪn ðə mɑɹtʃ, sɪmpli steɪɪŋ əpɹaɪt bɪkeɪm mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ʌv ən ɛfɝt.

Once, early on, she tried to look back at the women who had been captured with her, but the only result was a stumbling fall into a snowbank. Half-buried in the white powder, she gasped from the icy shock, and gasped again when the great hulking Shaido who held her leash set her back on her feet. As wide as Perrin and a full head taller, Rolan simply hauled her upright by a fistful of her hair, set her moving again with a brisk slap on her bare bottom, and once more took up the long strides that forced her to step quickly. The slap might have been given to make a pony move. Despite her nakedness, there was nothing of a man looking at a woman in Rolan's blue eyes. Part of her was very grateful. Part her was vaguely . . . taken aback. She certainly did not want him gazing at her with lust or even interest, but those bland glances were almost insulting! After that she made sure not to fall, though as the hours passed without a pause in the march, simply staying upright became more and more of an effort.

ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʃi wɝiɾ oʊvɝ wɪtʃ bɪts ə hɝ wəd fɹiz fɝst, bʌt baɪ ðə taɪm mɔɹnɪŋ hæd ɹoʊld ɪndə æftɝnun wɪθaʊɾ ə pɔz ɪn ðə mɑɹtʃ, ʃi wɑz foʊkəst ɑn əɹ fit. ɹoʊlən ən ðoʊz əhɛɾ ə hɪm tʃɹæmpəld ə sɔɹɾ ə pæθ fəɹ hɝ, jɛɾ ɪnʌf snoʊkɹʌst ɹɪmeɪn fəɹ ʃɑɹp ɛdʒəz, ən ʃi bɪɡæn tə liv ɹɛd steɪnz fɹizɪŋ ɪn əɹ fʊtpɹɪns. wɝs wɑz ðə koʊld ɪtsɛlf. ʃi hæd sin fɹɔstbaɪt. haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ əɹ toʊz bɪɡæn tə tɝn blæk? stæɡɝɪŋ, ʃi flɛkst itʃ fʊɾ əz ʃi swʌŋ ɪt fɔɹwɝd, ən wɝkt əɹ hænz kɑnstənli. fɪŋɡɝz ən toʊz wɝ ɪn ðə wɝs deɪnʒɝ, bʌɾ ɛni ɪkspoʊz skɪn wɑz ət ɹɪsk. əbaʊɾ əɹ feɪs ən ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ ʃi kəɾ oʊnli hoʊp. ðə flɛksɪŋ hɝt, meɪkɪŋ ðə kʌts ɑn əɹ fit bɝn, bʌɾ ɛni filɪŋ wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən nʌn. wən sɛnseɪʃən wɛnt, ʃi wəɾ əv vɛɹi lɪɾəl taɪm lɛft. flɛks ən stʃɹaɪd, flɛks ən stʃɹaɪd. ðət fɪld əɹ θɔts. ʃi kɛp muvɪŋ ɑn kwɪvɝɪŋ lɛɡz, ən kɛpt əɹ hænz ən fit fɹəm fɹizɪŋ. ʃi kɛp muvɪŋ.

In the beginning she worried over which bits of her would freeze first, but by the time morning had rolled into afternoon without a pause in the march, she was focused on her feet. Rolan and those ahead of him trampled a sort of path for her, yet enough snowcrust remained for sharp edges, and she began to leave red stains freezing in her footprints. Worse was the cold itself. She had seen frostbite. How long before her toes began to turn black? Staggering, she flexed each foot as she swung it forward, and worked her hands constantly. Fingers and toes were in the worst danger, but any exposed skin was at risk. About her face and the rest of her she could only hope. The flexing hurt, making the cuts on her feet burn, but any feeling was better than none. When sensation went, she would have very little time left. Flex and stride, flex and stride. That filled her thoughts. She kept moving on quivering legs, and kept her hands and feet from freezing. She kept moving.

əbɹʌpli, ʃi stʌmbəld ɪndə ɹoʊlən ən ɹɪbaʊndɪd fɹəm ɪz waɪd tʃɛst, pæntɪŋ. hæf deɪzd, əɹ meɪbi mɔɹ ðən hæf, ʃi hæd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i hæd stɑpt. soʊ hæd ði ʌðɝz əhɛd, ə fju lʊkɪŋ bæk, ðə ɹɛs feɪsɪŋ aʊtwɝɾ ən wɛɹəli ɑn ɡɑɹd, wɛpənz ʌp əz ðoʊ ɪkspɛktɪŋ ətæk. ðət wɑz ɔl ʃi hæd taɪm tə si bɪfɔɹ ɹoʊlən sizd ə hændfʊl ə hɝ hɛɹ əɡɛn ən bɛn tə lɪft wʌn ə hɝ fit. laɪt, ðə mæn ɹɪli wɑz tʃɹiɾɪŋ əɹ laɪk ə poʊni!

Abruptly, she stumbled into Rolan and rebounded from his wide chest, panting. Half dazed, or maybe more than half, she had not realized that he had stopped. So had the others ahead, a few looking back, the rest facing outward and warily on guard, weapons up as though expecting attack. That was all she had time to see before Rolan seized a handful of her hair again and bent to lift one of her feet. Light, the man really was treating her like a pony!

ɹilisɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ ən əɹ fʊt, hi sneɪkt ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn əɹ lɛɡz, ən ðə nɛks moʊmən əɹ vɪʒən wɝld əz ʃi wɑz hivd ʌp ɑntu hɪz ʃoʊldɝ, hɛd-daʊn bɪsaɪd ðə hɔɹn baʊ keɪst ɑn ɪz bæk. ɪndɪɡneɪʃən wɛld ʌp əz i kæʒəwəli ʃɪftəɾ əɹ əbaʊt tə faɪn ði iziəs pəzɪʃən fəɹ kæɹiɪŋ, bʌt ʃi tæmpt ɪt daʊn əz fæst əz ɪt ɹoʊz. ðɪs wɑz noʊ pleɪs əɹ taɪm. hɝ fit wɝ aʊɾ ə ðə snoʊ; ðət wɑz wʌt mæɾɝd. ən ʃi kəd kætʃ əɹ bɹɛθ, laɪk ðɪs. hi cʊɾə wɔɹn hɝ, ðoʊ.

Releasing her hair and her foot, he snaked an arm around her legs, and the next moment her vision whirled as she was heaved up onto his shoulder, head-down beside the horn bow cased on his back. Indignation welled up as he casually shifted her about to find the easiest position for carrying, but she tamped it down as fast as it rose. This was no place or time. Her feet were out of the snow; that was what mattered. And she could catch her breath, like this. He could have warned her, though.

wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ʃi ɑɹtʃt əɹ nɛk soʊ ʃi kəd si hɝ kəmpænjənz, ən fɛlt ɹɪlif tə faɪn əm ɔl stɪl ðɛɹ. neɪkəd pɹɪznɝz, tʃɹu, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ oʊnli ə kɔɹps wʊɾə bɪn lɛf bɪhaɪnd. ði ʌðɝz u wɔkt wɝ liʃt wɪð stɑkɪŋz əɹ stʃɹɪps ə klɔθ kʌt fɹəm ðɛɹ lɔst ɡɑɹməns, ən moʊst ɔlsoʊ hæd ðɛɹ ɑɹmz taɪd bɪhaɪnd. æliændɝ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɛn dʌbəl ɪn ən ətɛmp tə ʃil hɝsɛlf. ʌðɝ kənsɝnz hæd ɹipleɪs mɑɾəsti fəɹ ðə kwin ʌv ɡildən. pæntɪŋ ən tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, ʃi maɪɾ əv fɔlən ɪf ðə skwɑt ʃeɪɾoʊ ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ əɹ fit hæd nɑt səpɔɹɾəd əɹ baɪ hɝ baʊn ɛlboʊz. skwɑt fəɹ ən il mɛn i cʊɾə pæst ənɹɪmɑɹk moʊs pleɪsəz, ɪksɛp fəɹ ʃoʊldɝz nɪɹli əz waɪɾ əz ɹoʊlənz. ðə dɑɹk hɛɹ spɪlɪŋ daʊn æliændɝz bæk wɑz wɪnbloʊn, hɝ feɪs hæɡɝd. bɪhaɪn hɝ, meɪaɪɡdɪn əpɪɹɾ ɪn ɔlmoʊst əz bæɾ ə steɪt, ɡʌlpɪŋ ɛɹ, ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ ɪn dɪsɝeɪ ən blu aɪz stɛɹɪŋ, jɛt ʃi mænədʒ tə steɪ ɪɹɛkt ɑn əɹ oʊn wɪð ə boʊn-lin meɪɾən lɪftɪŋ əɹ fʊt. sʌmhaʊ, feɪlz meɪd lʊk mɔɹ ə kwin ðən æliændɝ dɪd, ɪf ə vɛɹi dɪʃɛvəl kwin.

With an effort, she arched her neck so she could see her companions, and felt relief to find them all still there. Naked prisoners, true, but she was sure only a corpse would have been left behind. The others who walked were leashed with stockings or strips of cloth cut from their lost garments, and most also had their arms tied behind. Alliandre was no longer trying to bend double in an attempt to shield herself. Other concerns had replaced modesty for the Queen of Ghealdan. Panting and trembling, she might have fallen if the squat Shaido examining her feet had not supported her by her bound elbows. Squat for an Aiel meant he could have passed unremarked most places, except for shoulders nearly as wide as Rolan's. The dark hair spilling down Alliandre's back was windblown, her face haggard. Behind her, Maighdin appeared in almost as bad a state, gulping air, red-gold hair in disarray and blue eyes staring, yet she managed to stay erect on her own with a bone-lean Maiden lifting her foot. Somehow, Faile's maid looked more a queen than Alliandre did, if a very disheveled queen.

ɪn kəmpɛɹəsən, beɪn ən kiæd simd ɪn noʊ wɝs steɪt ðən dɪd ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, ðoʊ kiædz tʃik wɑz jɛloʊɪŋ ən swoʊlən fɹəm ə bloʊ wən ðeɪ wɝ fɝs teɪkən, ən ðə blæk blʌd mæɾɪŋ beɪnz ʃɔɹt faɪɝi hɛɹ ən spɹɛɾ əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs sim tə hæv fɹoʊzən. ðət wɑz bæd; ðət kəd skɑɹ. ðə tu meɪɾənz wɝ nɑt bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd, ðoʊ, ən ivən ɹeɪz ðɛɹ oʊn fit fəɹ ɪɡzæməneɪʃən. əloʊn ə ðə pɹɪznɝz ðeɪ wɝ ənbaʊnd - ɪksɛp baɪ kʌstəm stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən tʃeɪnz. ðeɪ hæd kɑmli æksɛptɪd ðɛɹ feɪt, tə sɝv ə jɪɹ ən ə deɪ əz ɡeɪʃeɪn. beɪn ən kiæd maɪt bi ʌv səm hɛlp ɪn ɪskeɪpɪŋ - feɪl wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ fɑɹ kʌstəm kənstʃɹeɪn əm - bʌt ðeɪ ðɛmsɛlvz wəd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ.

In comparison, Bain and Chiad seemed in no worse state than did the Shaido, though Chiad's cheek was yellowing and swollen from a blow when they were first taken, and the black blood matting Bain's short fiery hair and spread across her face seemed to have frozen. That was bad; that could scar. The two Maidens were not breathing hard, though, and even raised their own feet for examination. Alone of the prisoners they were unbound - except by custom stronger than chains. They had calmly accepted their fate, to serve a year and a day as gai'shain. Bain and Chiad might be of some help in escaping - Faile was not sure how far custom constrained them - but they themselves would not try to get away.

ðə læs pɹɪznɝz, lətʃəl ən ɹɛlə, ətɛmptəd tə pæɾɝn ðɛmsɛlvz æftɝ ðə meɪɾənz, ʌv kɔɹs, wɪð ɪndɪfɹən səksɛs. ə tɔl ilmən hæd sɪmpli tʌk taɪni lətʃəl ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm tə lʊk əɾ əɹ fit, ən kɹɪmzən mɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən steɪn əɹ peɪl tʃiks. ɹɛlə wɑz tɔl, bʌt ðə pɛɹ ə meɪɾənz u hæd tʃɑɹdʒ ə hɝ wɝ tɔlɝ ðən feɪl hɝsɛlf, ən ðeɪ hændəl ðə tɛɹən wʊmən wɪð ɪmpɝsənəl iz. ə skaʊl kəntɔɹɾəd əɹ dɑɹk feɪs ət ðɛɹ pɹɑɾɪŋ, ən meɪbi ət ðə ɹæpəd hæntɔk ðeɪ wɝ ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ. feɪl hoʊpt ʃi wəd nɑt meɪk tʃɹʌbəl, nɑt naʊ. ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn tʃɑ feɪl tʃɹaɪd tə bi laɪk ði il, tə lɪv əz ðeɪ θɔt ði il dɪd, bʌt ɹɛlə wɑntəd tə bi ə meɪɾən, ən ʃi ɹizɛntəd ðə fæk ðət səlɪn ən ði ʌðɝz wəd nɑt titʃ əɹ hæntɔk. ʃi wʊɾə bɪn wɝs ɪf ʃi nu beɪn ən kiæd hæd tɔt feɪl ə lɪɾəl. nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk aʊt mɔɹ ðən ɛvɹi ʌðɝ wɝd ðə meɪɾənz wɝ seɪɪŋ naʊ, bʌt sʌm. əz wɛl ɹɛlə kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. ðeɪ θɔt ðə wɛtləndɝ hæd sɑft fit, ðət ʃi wɑz ɔltəɡɛðɝ tu pæmpɝɾ ən sɑft, ən ðət ʃʊɹli wʊɾə sɛt ðə wʊmən ɔf.

The last prisoners, Lacile and Arrela, attempted to pattern themselves after the Maidens, of course, with indifferent success. A tall Aielman had simply tucked tiny Lacile under his arm to look at her feet, and crimson mortification stained her pale cheeks. Arrela was tall, but the pair of Maidens who had charge of her were taller than Faile herself, and they handled the Tairen woman with impersonal ease. A scowl contorted her dark face at their prodding, and maybe at the rapid handtalk they were exchanging. Faile hoped she would not make trouble, not now. Everyone in Cha Faile tried to be like the Aiel, to live as they thought the Aiel did, but Arrela wanted to be a Maiden, and she resented the fact that Sulin and the others would not teach her handtalk. She would have been worse if she knew Bain and Chiad had taught Faile a little. Not enough to make out more than every other word the Maidens were saying now, but some. As well Arrela could not understand. They thought the wetlander had soft feet, that she was altogether too pampered and soft, and that surely would have set the woman off.

əz ɪt tɝn aʊt, feɪl nid nɑɾ əv wɝiɾ əbaʊt ɹɛlə. ðə tɛɹən stɪfənd wən wʌn ə ðə meɪɾənz hɛftəɾ əɹ ɑntu ə ʃoʊldɝ - pɹitɛndɪŋ tə stæɡɝ, ðə bɝɾənd wʊmən juzd əɹ fɹi hæn tə flɪkɝ ə mɛsədʒ ðət meɪd ði ʌðɝ meɪɾən bɑɹk ə læf bɪhaɪn əɹ veɪl - bʌɾ æftɝ ə ɡlæns ət beɪn ən kiæd, ɔlɹɛɾi mikli bɛli daʊn ɑn ilmɛnz ʃoʊldɝz, ɹɛlə sʌlənli lɛt hɝsɛlf hæŋ lɪmp. lətʃəl skwild wən ðə bɪɡ mæn hoʊldɪŋ əɹ əbɹʌpli spʌn əɹ əbaʊt tə læn ɪn ðə seɪm pəzɪʃən, bʌt ʃi kwaɪəɾəd æftɝ ðæt, ðoʊ hɝ feɪs wɑz stɪl bɹaɪt skɑɹlət. ðəɹ wɝ dɛfənəɾ ædvæntɪdʒɪz tə ðɛɹ ɛmjəleɪʃən ʌv il.

As it turned out, Faile need not have worried about Arrela. The Tairen stiffened when one of the Maidens hefted her onto a shoulder - pretending to stagger, the burdened woman used her free hand to flicker a message that made the other Maiden bark a laugh behind her veil - but after a glance at Bain and Chiad, already meekly belly down on Aielmen's shoulders, Arrela sullenly let herself hang limp. Lacile squealed when the big man holding her abruptly spun her about to land in the same position, but she quieted after that, though her face was still bright scarlet. There were definite advantages to their emulation of Aiel.

æliændɝ ən meɪaɪɡdɪn, haʊɛvɝ, ðə læst wɪmən feɪl wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəd tə kɑz pɹɑbləmz, wɝ ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ ɪntaɪɝli. wən ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ, ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm fɔt waɪldli. ɪt wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ ʌv ə faɪt, tu neɪkəɾ ən ɪɡzɔstəd wɪmən wɪð ðɛɹ ɛlboʊz baʊn taɪt bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ bæks, bʌt ðeɪ twɪstəɾ ən ʃaʊɾəd ən kɪkt əɾ ɛniwʌn u keɪm wɪðɪn ɹitʃ, ən meɪaɪɡdɪn ivən sæŋk əɹ tiθ ɪndə ðə hæn ʌv ə kɛɹləs ilmən, hæŋɪŋ ɑn laɪk ə bɔɹhaʊnd.

Alliandre and Maighdin, however, the last women Faile would have expected to cause problems, were another matter entirely. When they realized what was happening, the pair of them fought wildly. It was not much of a fight, two naked and exhausted women with their elbows bound tight behind their backs, but they twisted and shouted and kicked at anyone who came within reach, and Maighdin even sank her teeth into the hand of a careless Aielman, hanging on like a boarhound.

"stɑp ɪt, jə fulz!" feɪl kɔl tə ðɛm. "æliændɝ! meɪaɪɡdɪn! lɛɾ əm kæɹi ju! oʊbeɪ mi!" niðɝ əɹ meɪd nɔɹ əɹ væsəl peɪd ðə slaɪɾəst hid. meɪaɪɡdɪn ɡɹaʊld laɪk ə laɪən ɝaʊn əɹ maʊθfʊl ʌv il. æliændɝ wɑz ɹɛsəl daʊn, stɪl ʃaʊɾɪŋ ən fleɪlɪŋ wɪð əɹ fit. feɪl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ fəɹ ənʌðɝ kəmænd.

"Stop it, you fools!" Faile called to them. "Alliandre! Maighdin! Let them carry you! Obey me!" Neither her maid nor her vassal paid the slightest heed. Maighdin growled like a lion around her mouthful of Aiel. Alliandre was wrestled down, still shouting and flailing with her feet. Faile opened her mouth for another command.

"ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn wɪl bi kwaɪət," ɹoʊlən ɡɹʌntɪd, spæŋkɪŋ əɹ hɑɹd.

"The gai'shain will be quiet," Rolan grunted, spanking her hard.

ʃi ɡɹaʊn əɹ tiθ ən mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. wɪtʃ ɝn ənʌðɝ slæp! ðə mæn hæɾ əɹ naɪvz tʌk bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt. ɪf ʃi kəd leɪ hænz ɑn dʒʌst wʌn . . . ! noʊ. wʌt mʌs bi ɛndʒjʊɹd, kəd bi ɛndʒjʊɹd. ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə ɪskeɪp, nɑt meɪk jusləs dʒɛstʃɝz.

She ground her teeth and muttered under her breath. Which earned another slap! The man had her knives tucked behind his belt. If she could lay hands on just one . . . ! No. What must be endured, could be endured. She intended to escape, not make useless gestures.

meɪaɪɡdɪnz faɪt læstəɾ ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ ðən æliændɝz, əntɪl ə pɛɹ ə bɝli mɛn kəd pɹaɪ hɝ dʒɔz fɹəm ðə ʃeɪɾoʊz hænd. ɪt ɹikwaɪɝɾ ə pɛɹ. tə feɪlz sɝpɹaɪz, ɪnstɛɾ ə kʌffɪŋ meɪaɪɡdɪn, ðə bɪɾən fɛloʊ ʃʊk blʌɾ ɔf ɪz hæn ən læft! ðət dɪd nɑt seɪv hɝ, ðoʊ. ɪn ə tʃɹaɪs, feɪlz meɪd wɑz feɪsdaʊn ɪn ðə snoʊ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə kwin. ðeɪ wɝ ɡɪvən oʊnli ə fju moʊməns tə ɡæsp ən ɹɪð ɪn ði æɾəd koʊld. tu ʃeɪɾoʊ, wʌn ə meɪɾən, əpɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ tʃɹiz, ʃeɪvɪŋ ðə stʌbz fɹəm lɔŋ swɪtʃəz wɪð ðɛɹ hɛvi bɛl naɪvz. ə fʊt plæntəd bɪtwin itʃ wʊmənz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz, ə fɪst ɑn baʊn ɛlboʊz tə ɹeɪz flʌɾɝɪŋ hænz aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ, ən ɹɛd wɛls bɪɡæn tə blum ɑn waɪt hɪps.

Maighdin's fight lasted a little longer than Alliandre's, until a pair of burly men could pry her jaws from the Shaido's hand. It required a pair. To Faile's surprise, instead of cuffing Maighdin, the bitten fellow shook blood off his hand and laughed! That did not save her, though. In a trice, Faile's maid was facedown in the snow alongside the Queen. They were given only a few moments to gasp and writhe in the added cold. Two Shaido, one a Maiden, appeared out of the surrounding trees, shaving the stubs from long switches with their heavy belt knives. A foot planted between each woman's shoulder blades, a fist on bound elbows to raise fluttering hands out of the way, and red welts began to bloom on white hips.

ət fɝs boʊθ wɪmən kəntɪnjud tə faɪt, twɪstɪŋ əbaʊt dɪspaɪt ðə weɪ ðeɪ wɝ hɛld. ðɛɹ stʃɹʌɡəl wɑz ivən mɔɹ jusləs ðən wən ðeɪ wɝ əpɹaɪt. lɪɾəl muvd əbʌv ðɛɹ weɪsts bɪɑn tɔsɪŋ hɛdz ən waɪldli weɪvɪŋ hænz. æliændɝ kɛpt ʃɹɪlɪŋ ðət ðeɪ kəd nɑt də ðɪs tə hɝ, ʌndɝstændəbəl kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ə kwin, ɪf fulɪʃ ɪn ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. pleɪnli ðeɪ kʊd, ən ðeɪ wɝ. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, meɪaɪɡdɪn ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs ɪn ðə seɪm pɪɹsɪŋ dɪnaɪəlz. ɛniwʌn wʊɾə θɔɾ əɹ ɹɔɪəlti ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə leɪɾiz meɪd. feɪl nu fəɹ ə fæk ðət lini hæd teɪkən ə swɪtʃ tə meɪaɪɡdɪn wɪθaʊɾ ɔl ðiz hɪstʃɹiɑnɪks. ɪn ɛni keɪs, dɪnaɪəlz dɪd noʊ ɡʊd fəɹ iðɝ wʊmən. ðə məθɑɾəkəl θɹæʃɪŋz kəntɪnjuɾ əntɪl ðeɪ boʊθ wɝ kɪkɪŋ ən haʊlɪŋ wɝdləsli, ən ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ fəɹ ɡʊd mɛʒɝ. wən ðeɪ wɝ faɪnəli hɔɪstəd laɪk ði ʌðɝ pɹɪznɝz, ðeɪ hʌŋ wipɪŋ, ɔl faɪt ɡɔn aʊɾ ə ðɛm.

At first both women continued to fight, twisting about despite the way they were held. Their struggle was even more useless than when they were upright. Little moved above their waists beyond tossing heads and wildly waving hands. Alliandre kept shrilling that they could not do this to her, understandable coming from a queen, if foolish in the circumstances. Plainly they could, and they were. Surprisingly, Maighdin raised her voice in the same piercing denials. Anyone would have thought her royalty instead of a lady's maid. Faile knew for a fact that Lini had taken a switch to Maighdin without all these histrionics. In any case, denials did no good for either woman. The methodical thrashings continued until they both were kicking and howling wordlessly, and a little longer for good measure. When they were finally hoisted like the other prisoners, they hung weeping, all fight gone out of them.

feɪl fɛl noʊ sɪmpəθi. ðə fulz hæɾ ɝn ɛvɹi stʃɹaɪp, ɪn əɹ əpɪnjən. fɹɔstbaɪɾ ən kʌt fiɾ əsaɪd, ðə lɔŋɡɝ ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn aʊtsaɪd wɪθaʊt kloʊðz, ðə mɔɹ tʃæns ðət səm ə ðɛm maɪt nɑt sɝvaɪv tə ɪskeɪp. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæd tə bi teɪkɪŋ əm tə səm sɔɹɾ ə ʃɛltɝ, ən æliændɝ ən meɪaɪɡdɪn hæd dɪleɪd ɹitʃɪŋ ɪt. meɪbi ɪt wɑz lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə kɔɹɾɝ aʊɝz dɪleɪ, bʌt mɪnəts kəd bi ðə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ðə lɪvɪŋ ən ðə dɛd. ɑn tɑp ʌv wɪtʃ, ivən il wəd ʃʊɹli lɛt daʊn ðɛɹ ɡɑɹɾ ə lɪɾəl wʌns ðeɪ faʊnd ʃɛltɝ ən meɪd faɪɝz. ən ðeɪ kəd ɹɛst, biɪŋ kæɹid. ðeɪ kəd bi ɹɛɾi tə teɪk ðɛɹ tʃæns wən ɪt keɪm.

Faile felt no sympathy. The fools had earned every stripe, in her opinion. Frostbite and cut feet aside, the longer they remained outside without clothes, the more chance that some of them might not survive to escape. The Shaido had to be taking them to some sort of shelter, and Alliandre and Maighdin had delayed reaching it. Maybe it was little more than a quarter hour's delay, but minutes could be the difference between the living and the dead. On top of which, even Aiel would surely let down their guard a little once they found shelter and made fires. And they could rest, being carried. They could be ready to take their chance when it came.

kæɹiɪŋ ðɛɹ pɹɪznɝz, ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ sɛɾ aʊɾ əɡɛn ət ðət ɡɹaʊnd-kʌvɝɪŋ peɪs. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ðeɪ sim tə muv θɹu ðə fɔɹəs mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən bɪfɔɹ. ðə hɑɹd lɛðɝ baʊ keɪs bʌmp feɪlz saɪɾ əz ʃi sweɪd, ən ʃi bɪɡæn tə fil dɪzi. ɹoʊlənz ɛvɹi lɔŋ stʃɹaɪd sɛn ə dʒoʊl θɹu hɝ mɪɾəl. sɝəptɪʃəsli, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə faɪn səm pəzɪʃən wɛɹ ʃi wəd nɑt bi poʊkt ən θʌddɪd kwaɪt soʊ vɪɡɝəsli.

Carrying their prisoners, the Shaido set out again at that ground-covering pace. If anything, they seemed to move through the forest more quickly than before. The hard leather bow case bumped Faile's side as she swayed, and she began to feel dizzy. Rolan's every long stride sent a jolt through her middle. Surreptitiously, she tried to find some position where she would not be poked and thudded quite so vigorously.

"bi stɪl, əɹ jəl fɔl," ɹoʊlən mʌɾɝd, pæɾɪŋ əɹ hɪp əz i maɪɾ əv pæɾəd ə hɔɹs tə suð ɪt.

"Be still, or you will fall," Rolan muttered, patting her hip as he might have patted a horse to soothe it.

ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ hɛd, feɪl pɪɹd bæk əɾ æliændɝ, skaʊlɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ tə bi sin ə ðə kwin ʌv ɡildən, ən ðət kɹɪskɹɔs baɪ skɑɹlət wɛls fɹəm ðə tɑps ə hɝ hɪps ɔlmoʊs tə ðə bæks ə hɝ niz. kʌm tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, ə ʃɔɹt dɪleɪ ən ə fju stʃɹaɪps maɪt bi ə smɔl pɹaɪs tə peɪ fəɹ baɪɾɪŋ ə tʃʌŋk aʊɾ ə ðɪs ɑf toʊɾɪŋ əɹ laɪk ə sæk ʌv ɡɹeɪn. nɑɾ ɪz hænd, ðoʊ. hɪz θɹoʊt wəd bi əbaʊt ɹaɪt.

Raising her head, Faile peered back at Alliandre, scowling. There was not much to be seen of the Queen of Ghealdan, and that crisscrossed by scarlet welts from the tops of her hips almost to the backs of her knees. Come to think of it, a short delay and a few stripes might be a small price to pay for biting a chunk out of this oaf toting her like a sack of grain. Not his hand, though. His throat would be about right.

boʊl θɔts, ən wɝs ðən jusləs. fulɪʃ. ivən biɪŋ kæɹid, ʃi nu ʃi mʌs faɪt ðə koʊld. ɪn səm weɪz, ʃi bɪɡæn tə ɹilaɪz, biɪŋ kæɹid wɑz wɝs. wɔkɪŋ, ət list ʃi hæd hæd ðə stʃɹʌɡəl tə steɪ ɪɹɛkt ən ɑn əɹ fit tə kip əɹ əweɪk, bʌɾ əz ivnɪŋ keɪm ɑn ən dipən tə dɑɹknəs, ðə sweɪɪŋ moʊʃən ɑn ɹoʊlənz ʃoʊldɝ sim tə hæv ə lʌlɪŋ ɪfɛkt. noʊ. ɪt wɑz ðə koʊl ðət wɑz nʌmɪŋ əɹ maɪnd. meɪkɪŋ əɹ blʌd slʌɡɪʃ. ʃi hæd tə faɪɾ ɪt, əɹ ʃi wəd daɪ.

Bold thoughts, and worse than useless. Foolish. Even being carried, she knew she must fight the cold. In some ways, she began to realize, being carried was worse. Walking, at least she had had the struggle to stay erect and on her feet to keep her awake, but as evening came on and deepened to darkness, the swaying motion on Rolan's shoulder seemed to have a lulling effect. No. It was the cold that was numbing her mind. Making her blood sluggish. She had to fight it, or she would die.

ɹɪðmɪkli ʃi wɝkt əɹ hænz ən baʊn ɑɹmz, tɛnst əɹ lɛɡz ən ɹɪlæks ðɛm, tɛnst ən ɹɪlækst, fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ mʌsəlz tə wɝk əɹ blʌd. ʃi θɔɾ ə pɛɹɪn, sɑləd plænɪŋ θɔts ʌv wʌɾ i ʃəd də əbaʊt mæsimə, ən haʊ ʃi kəd kənvɪns ɪm ɪf i bɔkt. ʃi wɛn oʊvɝ ði ɑɹɡjəmən ðeɪ wəɾ əv wən i lɝnd ʃi bɪn juzɪŋ tʃɑ feɪl əz spaɪz, plæn haʊ ʃi wəd miɾ ɪz æŋɡɝ ən tɝn ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz ən ɑɹt tə ɡaɪɾɪŋ ə hʌzbənz æŋɡɝ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən jə wɑntəd, ən ʃi hæd lɝn fɹəm ən ɛkspɝt, hɝ mʌðɝ. ɪt wəd bi ə splɛndəɾ ɑɹɡjəmənt. ən ə splɛndəd meɪkɪŋ-ʌp, æftɝ.

Rhythmically she worked her hands and bound arms, tensed her legs and relaxed them, tensed and relaxed, forcing her muscles to work her blood. She thought of Perrin, solid planning thoughts of what he should do about Masema, and how she could convince him if he balked. She went over the argument they would have when he learned she been using Cha Faile as spies, planned how she would meet his anger and turn it. There was an art to guiding a husband's anger in the direction you wanted, and she had learned from an expert, her mother. It would be a splendid argument. And a splendid making-up, after.

θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt meɪkɪŋ ʌp wɪð ɪm meɪɾ əɹ fɝɡɛt tə wɝk əɹ mʌsəlz, soʊ ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ði ɑɹɡjəmənt, ɑn ðə plænɪŋ. koʊl dʌld əɹ θɔts, ðoʊ. ʃi bɪɡæn luzɪŋ ðə θɹɛd, hævɪŋ tə ʃeɪk əɹ hɛɾ ən stɑɹɾ oʊvɝ. ɹoʊlənz ɡɹaʊlz əɾ əɹ tə bi stɪl hɛlpt, ə vɔɪs tə foʊkəs ɑn, tə kip əɹ əweɪk. ivən ði əkʌmpəniɪŋ slæps ɑn əɹ ʌptɝn bɑɾəm hɛlpt, əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi heɪɾəd tə ədmɪt ðə fækt, itʃ wʌn ə ʃɑk ðət dʒoʊltɪɾ əɹ tə weɪkfəlnəs. æftɝ ə waɪl, ʃi bɪɡæn ʃɪftɪŋ mɔɹ, ðən stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ ɔlmoʊs tə ðə pɔɪn ə fɔlɪŋ, kɔɹɾɪŋ ðə ɹud smæks. ɛniθɪŋ tə steɪ əweɪk. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd haʊ mʌtʃ taɪm pæst, bʌɾ əɹ twɪsts ən ɹɪəlz bɪɡæn tə wikən, əntɪl ɹoʊlən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɡɹaʊld, mʌtʃ lɛs ɡeɪv əɹ ə slæp. laɪt, ʃi wɑntəd ðə mæn tə pleɪ hɝ laɪk ə dʒɹʌm!

Thinking about making up with him made her forget to work her muscles, so she tried to concentrate on the argument, on the planning. Cold dulled her thoughts, though. She began losing the thread, having to shake her head and start over. Rolan's growls at her to be still helped, a voice to focus on, to keep her awake. Even the accompanying slaps on her upturned bottom helped, as much as she hated to admit the fact, each one a shock that jolted her to wakefulness. After a while, she began shifting more, then struggling almost to the point of falling, courting the rude smacks. Anything to stay awake. She could not have said how much time passed, but her twists and wriggles began to weaken, until Rolan no longer growled, much less gave her a slap. Light, she wanted the man to play her like a drum!

waɪ ɪn ðə laɪt wəɾ aɪ wɑn ə θɪŋ laɪk ðæt? ʃi θɔt dʌli, ən ə dɪm kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ maɪn ɹilaɪz ðə bæɾəl wɑz lɔst. ðə naɪt sim dɑɹkɝ ðən ɪt ʃəd bi. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ivən meɪk aʊt ðə ɡloʊ ʌv munlaɪɾ ɑn ðə snoʊ. ʃi kəd fil hɝsɛlf slaɪɾɪŋ, ðoʊ, slaɪɾɪŋ fæstɝ ən fæstɝ təwɔɹɾ ə dipɝ dɑɹk. weɪlɪŋ saɪlənli, ʃi sæŋk ɪndə ə stupɝ.

Why in the Light would I want a thing like that? she thought dully, and a dim corner of her mind realized the battle was lost. The night seemed darker than it should be. She could not even make out the glow of moonlight on the snow. She could feel herself sliding, though, sliding faster and faster toward a deeper dark. Wailing silently, she sank into a stupor.

dʒɹimz keɪm. ʃi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn pɛɹɪnz læp wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz soʊ taɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ʃi kəd bɛɹli muv, bɪfɔɹ ə ɡɹeɪt faɪɝ ɹɔɹɪŋ ɪn ə bɹɔd stoʊn faɪɝpleɪs. hɪz kɝli bɪɹd skɹætʃt əɹ tʃiks əz i nɪpt əɹ ɪɹz ɔlmoʊs peɪnfəli. sʌɾənli ə hjudʒ wɪn haʊl θɹu ðə ɹum, snʌfɪŋ ðə faɪɝ laɪk ə kændəl. ən pɛɹɪn tɝn tə smoʊk ðət vænɪʃt ɪn ðə ɡeɪl. əloʊn ɪn bɪɾɝ dɑɹknəs, ʃi fɔt ðə wɪnd, bʌɾ ɪt tʌmbəld əɹ ɛn oʊvɝ ɛn əntɪl ʃi wɑz soʊ dɪzi ʃi kəd nɑt tɛl ʌp fɹəm daʊn. əloʊn ən ɛnləsli tʌmbəlɪŋ ɪndə aɪsi dɑɹk, noʊɪŋ ʃi wəd nɛvɝ faɪn ɪm əɡɛn.

Dreams came. She was sitting on Perrin's lap with his arms so tight around her she could barely move, before a great fire roaring in a broad stone fireplace. His curly beard scratched her cheeks as he nipped her ears almost painfully. Suddenly a huge wind howled through the room, snuffing the fire like a candle. And Perrin turned to smoke that vanished in the gale. Alone in bitter darkness, she fought the wind, but it tumbled her end over end until she was so dizzy she could not tell up from down. Alone and endlessly tumbling into icy dark, knowing she would never find him again.

ʃi ɹæn əkɹɔs ə fɹoʊzən lænd, flaʊndɝɪŋ fɹəm snoʊdʒɹɪf tə snoʊdʒɹɪft, fɔlɪŋ, skɹæmbəlɪŋ ʌp tə ɹʌn ɑn ɪn pænɪk, ɡʌlpɪŋ ɛɹ soʊ koʊld ɪt slaɪst əɹ θɹoʊt laɪk ʃɑɹdz ʌv ɡlæs. aɪsɪkəlz spɑɹkəld ɑn stɑɹk bɹæntʃəz ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ə fɹɪdʒəd wɪn kin θɹu ðə lifləs fɔɹəst. pɛɹɪn wɑz vɛɹi æŋɡɹi, ən ʃi hæd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ. sʌmhaʊ, ʃi kəd nɑt ɹikɔl ðə spɪsɪfɪks ə ði ɑɹɡjəmənt, dʒʌs ðət sʌmhaʊ ʃi hæd pʊʃt əɹ bjuɾəfəl wʊlf tə ɹil æŋɡɝ, tə ðə pɔɪn ə θɹoʊɪŋ θɪŋz. oʊnli, pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt θɹoʊ θɪŋz. hi wɑz gɑnə tɝn əɹ oʊvɝ ɪz ni, əz i hæd dʌn wʌns, lɔŋ əɡoʊ. waɪ wɑz ʃi ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ðæt, ðoʊ? ðəɹ wəd stɪl bi ðə meɪkɪŋ-ʌp. ən ʃi wəd meɪk ɪm peɪ fəɹ ðə hjumɪlieɪʃən, ʌv kɔɹs. ɛniweɪ, ʃi hæd dʒɹɔn ə lɪɾəl blʌd fɹəm ɪm ə taɪm əɹ tu wɪð ə wɛl-eɪm boʊl əɹ pɪtʃɝ, nɑt ɹɪli minɪŋ tə, ən ʃi nu hi wəd nɛvɝ ɹɪli hɝt hɝ. bʌt ʃi ɔlsoʊ nu ðət ʃi hæd tə ɹʌn, tə kip muvɪŋ, əɹ ʃi wəd daɪ.

She ran across a frozen land, floundering from snowdrift to snowdrift, falling, scrambling up to run on in panic, gulping air so cold it sliced her throat like shards of glass. Icicles sparkled on stark branches around her, and a frigid wind keened through the leafless forest. Perrin was very angry, and she had to get away. Somehow, she could not recall the specifics of the argument, just that somehow she had pushed her beautiful wolf to real anger, to the point of throwing things. Only, Perrin did not throw things. He was going to turn her over his knee, as he had done once, long ago. Why was she running from that, though? There would still be the making-up. And she would make him pay for the humiliation, of course. Anyway, she had drawn a little blood from him a time or two with a well-aimed bowl or pitcher, not really meaning to, and she knew he would never really hurt her. But she also knew that she had to run, to keep moving, or she would die.

ɪf i kætʃəz mi, ʃi θɔt dʒɹaɪli, ət lis pɑɹɾ ə mi wɪl bi wɔɹm. ən ʃi bɪɡæn tə læf ət ðæt, əntɪl ðə dɛd waɪt læn spʌn ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ʃi nu ðət sun ʃi wəd bi dɛd, tu.

If he catches me, she thought dryly, at least part of me will be warm. And she began to laugh at that, until the dead white land spun around her, and she knew that soon she would be dead, too.

ðə mɑnstʃɹəs bɑnfaɪɝ lumd oʊvɝ hɝ, ə taʊɝɪŋ paɪl ə θɪk lɔɡz ɹɔɹɪŋ wɪð fleɪm. ʃi wɑz neɪkəd. ən koʊld, soʊ koʊld. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ nɪɹ ðə faɪɝ ʃi ɛdʒd, hɝ boʊnz fɛl fɹoʊzən, hɝ flɛʃ ɹɛɾi tə ʃæɾɝ əɾ ə bloʊ. ʃi muv kloʊsɝ, kloʊsɝ. ðə hiɾ ə ðə bleɪz ɡɹu tɪl ʃi flɪntʃt əɾ ɪt, bʌt ðə bɪɾɝ koʊld ɹɪmeɪn tʃɹæpt ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ skɪn. kloʊsɝ. oʊ, laɪt, ɪt wɑz hɑt, tu hɑt! ən stɪl koʊld wɪðɪn. kloʊsɝ. ʃi bɪɡæn tə skɹim ət ðə bɝnɪŋ, ðə sɪɹɪŋ peɪn, bʌt ʃi wɑz stɪl aɪs ɪnsaɪd. kloʊsɝ. kloʊsɝ. ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ. ʃi ʃɹikt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli saɪləns, ən ðə koʊld.

The monstrous bonfire loomed over her, a towering pile of thick logs roaring with flame. She was naked. And cold, so cold. No matter how near the fire she edged, her bones felt frozen, her flesh ready to shatter at a blow. She moved closer, closer. The heat of the blaze grew till she flinched at it, but the bitter cold remained trapped inside her skin. Closer. Oh, Light, it was hot, too hot! And still cold within. Closer. She began to scream at the burning, the searing pain, but she was still ice inside. Closer. Closer. She was going to die. She shrieked, but there was only silence, and the cold.

ɪt wɑz deɪlaɪt, bʌt lɛɾən klaʊdz fɪl ðə skaɪ. snoʊ fɛl ɪn ə stɛɾi ʃaʊɝ, fɛðɝi fleɪks swɝlɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪn θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. nɑɾ ə fɪɹs wɪnd, bʌɾ ɪt lɪkt wɪð tʌŋz ʌv aɪs. ɹɪdʒəz ʌv waɪt bɪlt ɑn bɹæntʃəz əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ tɔl ɪnʌf tə kəlæps fɹəm ðɛɹ oʊn weɪɾ ən ðə wɪnd, sɛndɪŋ hɛviɝ ʃaʊɝz tə ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪloʊ. hʌŋɡɝ nɔɾ əɹ bɛli wɪð dʌl tiθ. ə vɛɹi tɔl, boʊni mæn wɪð ə waɪt wʊlən kaʊl ʃɛltɝɪŋ ɪz feɪs fɔɹst sʌmθɪŋ ɪndə hɝ maʊð, ðə ɹɪm ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ kleɪ mʌɡ. hɪz aɪz wɝ ə stɑɹtlɪŋ ɡɹin, laɪk ɛmɹəlz, ən sɝaʊndəd baɪ pʌkɝd skɑɹz. hi wɑz nilɪŋ ɑn ə lɑɹdʒ bɹaʊn wʊlən blæŋkət wɪð hɝ, ən ənʌðɝ blæŋkət, stʃɹaɪpt ɪn ɡɹeɪ, wɑz dʒɹeɪpt ɝaʊn əɹ neɪkədnəs. ðə teɪst ə hɑt ti θɪk wɪð hʌni ɪksploʊɾəd ɑn əɹ tʌŋ, ən ʃi siz ðə mænz sɪnjui ɹɪst wikli wɪð boʊθ hænz ɪn keɪs i tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk ðə mʌɡ əweɪ. hɝ tiθ tʃæɾɝd əɡɛns ðə mʌɡ, bʌt ʃi ɡʌlp ðə stimɪŋ sɪɹəpi lɪkwəd ɡɹiɾəli.

It was daylight, but leaden clouds filled the sky. Snow fell in a steady shower, feathery flakes swirling in the wind through the trees. Not a fierce wind, but it licked with tongues of ice. Ridges of white built on branches until they were tall enough to collapse from their own weight and the wind, sending heavier showers to the ground below. Hunger gnawed her belly with dull teeth. A very tall, bony man with a white woolen cowl sheltering his face forced something into her mouth, the rim of a large clay mug. His eyes were a startling green, like emeralds, and surrounded by puckered scars. He was kneeling on a large brown woolen blanket with her, and another blanket, striped in gray, was draped around her nakedness. The taste of hot tea thick with honey exploded on her tongue, and she seized the man's sinewy wrist weakly with both hands in case he tried to take the mug away. Her teeth chattered against the mug, but she gulped the steaming syrupy liquid greedily.

"nɑt tu fæst; jə mʌs nɑt spɪl ɛni," ðə ɡɹin-aɪd mæn sɛd mikli. miknəs saʊndəɾ ɑd fɹəm ðət fɪɹs feɪs, ən ɪn ə ɡɹævəli vɔɪs. "ðeɪ əfɛndəd jəɹ ɑnɝ. bʌt jə ɑɹ ə wɛtləndɝ, soʊ meɪbi ɪt dʌz nɑt kaʊnt wɪð ju."

"Not too fast; you must not spill any," the green-eyed man said meekly. Meekness sounded odd from that fierce face, and in a gravelly voice. "They offended your honor. But you are a wetlander, so maybe it does not count with you."

sloʊli ɪt dɔn ɑn əɹ ðət ðɪs wɑz noʊ dʒɹim. θɔt keɪm ɪn ə tʃɹɪkəl ə ʃædoʊz ðət mɛltəɾ ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə hoʊld əm tu hɑɹd. ðə waɪt-ɹoʊbd bɹut wɑz ɡeɪʃeɪn. hɝ liʃ ən bɑnz wɝ ɡɔn. hi pʊld ɪz ɹɪst əweɪ fɹəm əɹ fibəl ɡɹɪp, bʌɾ oʊnli tə pɔɹ ə dɑɹk stʃɹim fɹəm ə lɛðɝ wɔɾɝ bæɡ hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. stim ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə mʌɡ, ən ði ɝoʊmə ʌv ti.

Slowly it dawned on her that this was no dream. Thought came in a trickle of shadows that melted if she tried to hold them too hard. The white-robed brute was gai'shain. Her leash and bonds were gone. He pulled his wrist away from her feeble grip, but only to pour a dark stream from a leather water bag hanging from his shoulder. Steam rose from the mug, and the aroma of tea.

ʃɪvɝɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd ʃi ɔlmoʊs fɛl oʊvɝ, ʃi klʌtʃt ðə θɪk stʃɹaɪp blæŋkəɾ ɝaʊn hɝ. faɪɝi peɪn wɑz blɑsəmɪŋ ɪn əɹ fit. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv stʊd hæd ʃi tʃɹaɪd. nɑt ðət ʃi wɑntəd tə. ðə blæŋkət mænədʒ tə kʌvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌɾ əɹ fit soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ə kɹaʊtʃ; stændɪŋ wʊɾə bɛɹɾ əɹ lɛɡz ən meɪbi mɔɹ. ɪt wɑz wɔɹmθ ʃi θɔɾ ʌv, nɑt disənsi, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl ʌv iðɝ tə bi hæd. hʌŋɡɝz tiθ ɡɹu ʃɑɹp, ən ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp ʃeɪkɪŋ. ʃi wɑz fɹoʊzən ɪnsaɪd, ðə tiz hiɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dʒʌst ə mɛmɹi. hɝ mʌsəlz wɝ wik-oʊl kəndʒil pʊɾɪŋ. ʃi wɑntəd tə stɛɹ ət ðə fɪlɪŋ mʌɡ, kʌvəɾɪŋ ðə kɑntɛns, bʌt ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf lʊk fəɹ əɹ kəmpænjənz.

Shivering so hard she almost fell over, she clutched the thick striped blanket around her. Fiery pain was blossoming in her feet. She could not have stood had she tried. Not that she wanted to. The blanket managed to cover everything but her feet so long as she remained in a crouch; standing would have bared her legs and maybe more. It was warmth she thought of, not decency, though there was little of either to be had. Hunger's teeth grew sharp, and she could not stop shaking. She was frozen inside, the tea's heat already just a memory. Her muscles were week-old congealed pudding. She wanted to stare at the filling mug, coveting the contents, but she made herself look for her companions.

ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ðəɹ ɪn ə laɪn wɪð hɝ, meɪaɪɡdɪn ən æliændɝ ən ɛvɹiwʌn, slʌmpt ɑn ðɛɹ niz ətɑp blæŋkəts, ʃɪvɝɪŋ ɪnsaɪd blæŋkəts spɛkəld wɪð snoʊ. ɪn fɹʌn ʌv itʃ ə ɡeɪʃeɪn nɛlt wɪð ə bʌlʒɪŋ wɔɾɝ bæɡ ən ə mʌɡ əɹ kʌp, ən ivən beɪn ən kiæd dʒɹæŋk laɪk wɪmən hæf-dɛɾ ə θɝst. sʌmwʌn hæd klin ðə blʌd fɹəm beɪnz feɪs, bʌɾ ənlaɪk ðə læs taɪm feɪl hæd sin ðɛm, ðə tu meɪɾənz wɝ əz dʒɹɔn ən ənstɛɾi əz ɛniwʌn ɛls. fɹəm æliændɝ tə lətʃəl, hɝ kəmpænjənz lʊkt - wʌt wɑz pɛɹɪnz fɹeɪz? - əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn dʒɹæɡd θɹu ə nɑthoʊl bækwɝd. bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz stɪl əlaɪv; ðət wɑz ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ. oʊnli ðə lɪvɪŋ kəɾ ɪskeɪp.

They were all there in a line with her, Maighdin and Alliandre and everyone, slumped on their knees atop blankets, shivering inside blankets speckled with snow. In front of each a gai'shain knelt with a bulging water bag and a mug or cup, and even Bain and Chiad drank like women half-dead of thirst. Someone had cleaned the blood from Bain's face, but unlike the last time Faile had seen them, the two Maidens were as drawn and unsteady as anyone else. From Alliandre to Lacile, her companions looked - what was Perrin's phrase? - as if they had been dragged through a knothole backward. But everyone was still alive; that was the important thing. Only the living could escape.

ɹoʊlən ən ði ʌðɝ ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ hu hæd hæd tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðɛm meɪɾ ə klʌstɝ ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə nilɪŋ laɪn. faɪv mɛn ən θɹi wɪmən, ðə snoʊ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd nɪɹli ni-dip ɑn ðə meɪɾənz. blæk veɪlz hæŋɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts, ðeɪ wɑtʃt ðɛɹ pɹɪznɝz ən ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn ɪmpæsɪvli. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðɛm, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɹæsp ə slɪpɝi θɔt. jɛs; ʌv kɔɹs. wɛɹ wɝ ði ʌðɝz? ɪskeɪp wəd bi iziɝ ɪf ðə ɹɛs hæd ɡɔn fəɹ səm ɹizən. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ, ənʌðɝ mɪsti kwɛstʃən ʃi kəd nɑt kwaɪt kætʃ.

Rolan and the other algai'd'siswai who had had charge of them made a cluster at the far end of the kneeling line. Five men and three women, the snow on the ground nearly knee-deep on the Maidens. Black veils hanging down their chests, they watched their prisoners and the gai'shain impassively. For a moment, she frowned at them, trying to grasp a slippery thought. Yes; of course. Where were the others? Escape would be easier if the rest had gone for some reason. There was something more, another misty question she could not quite catch.

sʌɾənli wʌt leɪ bɪɑn ði eɪɾ il lɛpt aʊɾ ət hɝ, ən kwɛstʃən ən ænsɝ keɪm ət ðə seɪm taɪm. wɛɹ hæd ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn kʌm fɹʌm? ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əɹ soʊ dɪstənt, veɪl baɪ ðə skæɾɝd tʃɹiz ən fɔlɪŋ snoʊ, ə stɛɾi stʃɹim ə pipəl ən pæk ænəməlz, wæɡənz ən kɑɹts, wɑz floʊɪŋ baɪ. nɑɾ ə stʃɹim. ə flʌɾ ʌv il ɑn ðə muv. ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti ʃeɪɾoʊ, ʃi hæd ðə hoʊl klæn tə kəntɛnd wɪð. ɪt simd ɪmpɑsəbəl ðət soʊ mɛni pipəl kəd pæs wɪðɪn ə deɪ əɹ tu ʌv ɑbilə wɪθaʊt ɹeɪzɪŋ səm əlɑɹm, ivən wɪð ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪɾ ɪn ænɝki, bʌt ðə pɹuf wɑz ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ aɪz. ɪnsaɪd, ʃi fɛlt lɛɾən. meɪbi ɪskeɪp wəd bi noʊ hɑɹɾɝ, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt.

Suddenly what lay beyond the eight Aiel leaped out at her, and question and answer came at the same time. Where had the gai'shain come from? A hundred paces or so distant, veiled by the scattered trees and falling snow, a steady stream of people and pack animals, wagons and carts, was flowing by. Not a stream. A flood of Aiel on the move. Instead of a hundred and fifty Shaido, she had the whole clan to contend with. It seemed impossible that so many people could pass within a day or two of Abila without raising some alarm, even with the countryside in anarchy, but the proof was right in front of her eyes. Inside, she felt leaden. Maybe escape would be no harder, but she did not believe it.

"haʊ dɪd ðeɪ əfɛn mi?" ʃi æsk dʒɝkəli, ðən klæmpt əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt tə stɑp tʃæɾɝɪŋ. ən oʊpən ɪɾ əɡɛn əz ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn ɹeɪz ðə mʌɡ tə hɝ wʌns mɔɹ. ʃi ɡʌlp ðə pɹɛʃəs hit, tʃoʊkɪŋ, ən fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə swɑloʊ mɔɹ sloʊli. ðə hʌni, soʊ θɪk ɪt wʊɾə bɪn klɔɪɪŋ ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm, dʌld əɹ hʌŋɡɝ ə lɪɾəl.

"How did they offend me?" she asked jerkily, then clamped her mouth shut to stop chattering. And opened it again as the gai'shain raised the mug to her once more. She gulped the precious heat, choking, and forced herself to swallow more slowly. The honey, so thick it would have been cloying any other time, dulled her hunger a little.

"ju wɛtləndɝz noʊ nʌθɪŋ," ðə skɑɹd mæn sɛd dɪsmɪsɪvli. "ɡeɪʃeɪn ɑɹ nɑt kloʊðd ɪn ɛni weɪ əntɪl ðeɪ kən bi ɡɪvən pɹɑpɝ ɹoʊbz. bʌt ðeɪ fɪɹd jə wəd fɹiz tə dɛθ, ən ɔl ðeɪ hæd tə ɹæp jə wɑz ðɛɹ koʊts. jə wɝ ʃeɪmd, neɪmd əz wik, ɪf wɛtləndɝz əv ʃeɪm. ɹoʊlən ən mɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz ɑɹ mɛɝeɪɾɪn, jɛɾ ɛfɑlɪn ən ðə ɹɛst ʃəd noʊ bɛɾɝ. ɛfɑlɪn ʃəd nɑɾ əv əlaʊɾ ɪt."

"You wetlanders know nothing," the scarred man said dismissively. "Gai'shain are not clothed in any way until they can be given proper robes. But they feared you would freeze to death, and all they had to wrap you was their coats. You were shamed, named as weak, if wetlanders have shame. Rolan and many of the others are Mera'din, yet Efalin and the rest should know better. Efalin should not have allowed it."

ʃeɪmd? ɪnfjʊɹieɪɾəd wɑz mɔɹ laɪk ɪt. ənwɪlɪŋ tə tɝn əɹ hɛd fɹəm ðə blɛsɪd mʌɡ, ʃi ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz təwɔɹd ðə hʌlkɪŋ dʒaɪən u hæd kæɹiɾ əɹ laɪk ə sæk ʌv ɡɹeɪn ən smækt əɹ ənmɝsɪfəli. veɪɡli ʃi sim tə ɹikɔl wɛlkəmɪŋ ðoʊz spæŋks, bʌt ðət wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl. ʌv kɔɹs ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl! ɹoʊlən dɪd nɑt lʊk laɪk ə mæn u hæd hæf-tʃɹɑɾəd θɹu moʊst ʌv ə deɪ ən ə naɪt bɪsaɪdz, kæɹiɪŋ sʌmwʌn. hɪz waɪt-mɪstɪd bɹɛθ keɪm izəli. mɛɝeɪɾɪn? ʃi θɔt ðət wəd min bɹʌðɝləs ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, wɪtʃ toʊld əɹ nʌθɪŋ, bʌt ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə noʊɾ ə skɔɹn ɪn ðə ɡeɪʃeɪnz vɔɪs. ʃi wəɾ əv tə æsk beɪn ən kiæd, ən hoʊp ɪt wɑz nɑt wʌn ə ðoʊz θɪŋz il wəd nɑt tɔk əbaʊt tə wɛtləndɝz, nɑɾ ivən wɛtləndɝz u wɝ kloʊs fɹɛnz. ɛni pis ə nɑlədʒ maɪɾ eɪɾ ɪskeɪp.

Shamed? Infuriated was more like it. Unwilling to turn her head from the blessed mug, she rolled her eyes toward the hulking giant who had carried her like a sack of grain and smacked her unmercifully. Vaguely she seemed to recall welcoming those spanks, but that was impossible. Of course it was impossible! Rolan did not look like a man who had half-trotted through most of a day and a night besides, carrying someone. His white-misted breath came easily. Mera'din? She thought that would mean Brotherless in the Old Tongue, which told her nothing, but there had been a note of scorn in the gai'shain's voice. She would have to ask Bain and Chiad, and hope it was not one of those things Aiel would not talk about to wetlanders, not even wetlanders who were close friends. Any piece of knowledge might aid escape.

soʊ ðeɪ hæd ɹæp ðɛɹ pɹɪznɝz ʌp əɡɛns ðə koʊld, hæd ðeɪ? wɛl, noʊ wʌn wʊɾə bɪn ɪn ɛni deɪnʒɝ ə fɹizɪŋ ɪksɛp fəɹ ɹoʊlən ən ði ʌðɝz. stɪl, ʃi maɪɾ oʊ hɪm ə smɔl feɪvɝ. vɛɹi smɔl, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. pɝhæps ʃi wəɾ oʊnli slaɪs ɔf ɪz ɪɹz. ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ ɡɑt ðə tʃæns, sɝaʊndəd baɪ θaʊzənz ə ʃeɪɾoʊ. θaʊzənz? ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ nʌmbɝɾ ɪn ðə hʌnʒɹədz ə θaʊzənz, ən tɛnz ə θaʊzənz ə ðoʊz wɝ ælɡeɪdsɪswaɪ. fjʊɹiəs wɪð hɝsɛlf, ʃi fɔt dɪspɛɹ. ʃi wəɾ ɪskeɪp; ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl ɪskeɪp, ən ʃi wəd teɪk ðə mænz ɪɹz wɪð hɝ!

So they had wrapped their prisoners up against the cold, had they? Well, no one would have been in any danger of freezing except for Rolan and the others. Still, she might owe him a small favor. Very small, considering everything. Perhaps she would only slice off his ears. If she ever got the chance, surrounded by thousands of Shaido. Thousands? The Shaido numbered in the hundreds of thousands, and tens of thousands of those were algai'd'siswai. Furious with herself, she fought despair. She would escape; they would all escape, and she would take the man's ears with her!

"aɪ wɪl si ɹoʊlənz ɹipeɪɾ əz i dɪzɝvz," ʃi mʌɾɝd wən ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn tʊk ðə mʌɡ əweɪ fəɹ ɹifɪlɪŋ əɡɛn. hi ɡeɪv əɹ ə nɛɹoʊ-aɪd səspɪʃəs stɛɹ, ən ʃi hɝid. "æz jə seɪ, aɪm ə wɛtləndɝ. moʊst ʌv əs ɑɹ. wi doʊn fɑloʊ dʒiɾoʊ. baɪ jəɹ kʌstəmz, wi ʃʊdn bi meɪd ɡeɪʃeɪn əɾ ɔl, ɪz ðət nɑt ɹaɪt?" ðə mænz skɑɹd feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, nɑt baɪ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ðə twɪtʃ ʌv ən aɪləd. ə dɪm θɔt sɛɾ ɪt wɑz tu sun, ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ðə ɡɹaʊn jɛt, bʌt θɔts ɡɛləd wɪð koʊl kəd nɑt kætʃ əɹ tʌŋ. "wʌɾ ɪf ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ dɪsaɪd tə bɹeɪk ʌðɝ kʌstəmz? ðeɪ maɪt dɪsaɪd nɑt tə lɛt jə ɡoʊ wən jəɹ taɪm ɪz dʌn."

"I will see Rolan's repaid as he deserves," she muttered when the gai'shain took the mug away for refilling again. He gave her a narrow-eyed suspicious stare, and she hurried. "As you say, I am a wetlander. Most of us are. We don't follow ji'e'toh. By your customs, we shouldn't be made gai'shain at all, is that not right?" The man's scarred face did not change, not by so much as the twitch of an eyelid. A dim thought said it was too soon, she did not know the ground yet, but thoughts gelid with cold could not catch her tongue. "What if the Shaido decide to break other customs? They might decide not to let you go when your time is done."

"ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ bɹeɪk mɛni kʌstəmz," hi toʊld əɹ plɑtʃədli, "bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt. aɪ hæv oʊvɝ hæf ə jɪɹ jɛt tə wɛɹ waɪt. əntɪl ðɛn, əl sɝv əz kʌstəm dɪmænz. ɪf jə kən tɔk soʊ mʌtʃ, meɪbi juv hæɾ ɪnʌf ti?"

"The Shaido break many customs," he told her placidly, "but I do not. I have over half a year yet to wear white. Until then, I will serve as custom demands. If you can talk so much, maybe you have had enough tea?"

feɪl klʌmsəli snætʃt ðə mʌɡ fɹəm hɪm. hɪz aɪbɹaʊz lɪftəd, ən ʃi ɹiɝeɪnʒd əɹ dʒɹeɪpɝiz wʌn-hændəɾ əz kwɪkli əz ʃi kəd mænədʒ, hɝ tʃiks hiɾɪŋ. hi sɝɾənli nu hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə wʊmən. laɪt, ʃi wɑz blʌndɝɪŋ əbaʊt laɪk ə blaɪn ɑks! ʃi hæd tə θɪŋk, tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪt. hɝ bɹeɪn wɑz ði oʊnli wɛpən ʃi hæd. ən ət ðə moʊmənt, ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn fɹoʊzən tʃiz. dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ dip ə ðə hɑt swit ti, ʃi sɛt hɝsɛlf tə θɪŋkɪŋ ə səm weɪ ðət biɪŋ sɝaʊndəd baɪ θaʊzənz ə ʃeɪɾoʊ kəd bi tɝn tə ædvæntɪdʒ. nʌθɪŋ keɪm tə hɝ, ðoʊ. nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl.

Faile clumsily snatched the mug from him. His eyebrows lifted, and she rearranged her draperies one-handed as quickly as she could manage, her cheeks heating. He certainly knew he was looking at a woman. Light, she was blundering about like a blind ox! She had to think, to concentrate. Her brain was the only weapon she had. And at the moment, it might as well have been frozen cheese. Drinking deep of the hot sweet tea, she set herself to thinking of some way that being surrounded by thousands of Shaido could be turned to advantage. Nothing came to her, though. Nothing at all.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹ


CHAPTER 4

ɔfɝz


Offers

"wʌɾ əv wi hɪɹ?" ə wʊmənz hɑɹd vɔɪs sɛd. feɪl lʊkt ʌp, ən stɛɹd, hɑt ti ɡɔn fɹəm əɹ θɔts fəɹ ðə moʊmənt.

"What have we here?" a woman's hard voice said. Faile looked up, and stared, hot tea gone from her thoughts for the moment.

tu il wɪmən wɪð ə mʌtʃ ʃɔɹɾɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn wʊmən bɪtwin əm keɪm aʊɾ ə ðə swɝlɪŋ snoʊ, sɪŋkɪŋ hæfweɪ ʌp ðɛɹ kævz ɪn ðə waɪt kɑɹpət ðət kʌvɝd ðə ɡɹaʊn bʌt stɪl mænɪdʒɪŋ paʊɝfəl stʃɹaɪdz. ðə tɔlɝ wɪmən dɪd, ɛniweɪ; ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn stʌmbəld ən flaʊndɝd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ʌp, ən wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz hæɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi dɪd. ɔl θɹi wɝ wɝθ ə stɛɹ. ðə wʊmən ɪn waɪt kɛpt əɹ hɛd mikli daʊn əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi kəɾ ən əɹ hænz foʊldəɾ ɪn əɹ waɪd slivz əz ə ɡeɪʃeɪn wɑz səpoʊz tə, bʌɾ əɹ ɹoʊbz hæd ðə ʃin ə hɛvi sɪlk, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz. ɡeɪʃeɪn wɝ fɔɹbɪɾən dʒuəlɹi, jɛɾ ə waɪd, ɪlæbɹət bɛlt ʌv ɡoʊld ən faɪɝdʒɹɑps sɪntʃt əɹ weɪst ən ə mætʃɪŋ kɑlɝ wɑz dʒʌs vɪzəbəl ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ kaʊl, nɪɹli kʌvɝɪŋ əɹ nɛk. vɛɹi fju bɪsaɪdz ɹɔɪəlti kəɾ əfɔɹd ðə laɪk. stʃɹeɪnʒ əz ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn wɑz, haʊɛvɝ, ɪt wɑz ði ʌðɝz feɪl stʌɾid. sʌmθɪŋ toʊld əɹ ðeɪ wɝ waɪz wʌnz. ðəɹ wɑz tu mʌtʃ əθɔɹəɾi əbaʊɾ əm fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls; ðiz wɝ wɪmən juz tə ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz ən biɪŋ oʊbeɪd. bɪɑn ðæt, ðoʊ, ðɛɹ sɪmpəl pɹɛzəns kɑt ði aɪ. ðə wʊmən pʊʃɪŋ ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn əlɔŋ, ə stɝn blu-aɪɾ iɡəl wɪð ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ ʃɔl ɹæpt ɝaʊn əɹ hɛd, stʊɾ ə ɡʊd spæn ɪn haɪt, əz mʌtʃ əz moʊst ilmɛn, waɪl ði ʌðɝ wɑz ət lis hæf ə hæn tɔlɝ ðən pɛɹɪn! ʃi wɑz nɑt bʌlki, ðoʊ, ɪksɛpt ɪn wʌn pɝtɪkjəlɝ. sændi jɛloʊ hɛɹ floʊd tə hɝ weɪst, hɛl bæk fɹəm əɹ feɪs baɪ ə waɪd dɑɹk kɝtʃəf, ən əɹ bɹaʊn ʃɔl leɪ əkɹɔs əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, oʊpən ɪnʌf tə ʃoʊ ən ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl əmaʊn ə bʊzəm θɹʌstɪŋ hæf aʊɾ ə hɝ peɪl blaʊs. haʊ dɪd ʃi əvɔɪd fɹizɪŋ, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ skɪn ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ? ɔl ðoʊz hɛvi nɛkləsɪz ʌv aɪvɝi ən ɡoʊl mʌs fil laɪk bænz ʌv aɪs!

Two Aiel women with a much shorter gai'shain woman between them came out of the swirling snow, sinking halfway up their calves in the white carpet that covered the ground but still managing powerful strides. The taller women did, anyway; the gai'shain stumbled and floundered trying to keep up, and one of the others had a hand on her shoulder to make sure she did. All three were worth a stare. The woman in white kept her head meekly down as much as she could and her hands folded in her wide sleeves as a gai'shain was supposed to, but her robes had the sheen of heavy silk, of all things. Gai'shain were forbidden jewelry, yet a wide, elaborate belt of gold and firedrops cinched her waist and a matching collar was just visible inside her cowl, nearly covering her neck. Very few besides royalty could afford the like. Strange as the gai'shain was, however, it was the others Faile studied. Something told her they were Wise Ones. There was too much authority about them for anything else; these were women used to giving orders and being obeyed. Beyond that, though, their simple presence caught the eye. The woman pushing the gai'shain along, a stern blue-eyed eagle with a dark gray shawl wrapped around her head, stood a good span in height, as much as most Aielmen, while the other was at least half a hand taller than Perrin! She was not bulky, though, except in one particular. Sandy yellow hair flowed to her waist, held back from her face by a wide dark kerchief, and her brown shawl lay across her shoulders, open enough to show an incredible amount of bosom thrusting half out of her pale blouse. How did she avoid freezing, exposing so much skin in this weather? All those heavy necklaces of ivory and gold must feel like bands of ice!

əz ðeɪ stɑpt ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə nilɪŋ pɹɪznɝz, ði iɡəl-feɪst wʊmən fɹaʊn dɪsəpɹuvɪŋli ət ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hu hæd kæptʃɝd ðɛm, ən meɪɾ ə kɝt dʒɛstʃɝ ə dɪsmɪsəl wɪð əɹ fɹi hænd. fəɹ səm ɹizən, ʃi kəntɪnjud tə hoʊld ɑn tə ðə ɡeɪʃeɪnz ʃoʊldɝ taɪtli. ðə θɹi meɪɾənz tɝn ɪmiɾiətli, hɝiɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə pæsɪŋ θɹɔŋ ə ʃeɪɾoʊ. wʌn ə ðə mɛn dɪd, əz wɛl, bʌt ɹoʊlən ən ðə ɹɛst ɪkstʃeɪnʒd flæt-aɪd lʊks bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ fɑloʊd. pɝhæps ɪt mɛn sʌmθɪŋ, pɝhæps nʌθɪŋ. feɪl sʌɾənli nu haʊ sʌmwʌn ɪn ə wɝlpul fɛlt, ɡɹæbɪŋ dɛspɝətli ət stʃɹɔz.

As they stopped in front of the kneeling prisoners, the eagle-faced woman frowned disapprovingly at the Shaido who had captured them, and made a curt gesture of dismissal with her free hand. For some reason, she continued to hold on to the gai'shain's shoulder tightly. The three Maidens turned immediately, hurrying toward the passing throng of Shaido. One of the men did, as well, but Rolan and the rest exchanged flat-eyed looks before they followed. Perhaps it meant something, perhaps nothing. Faile suddenly knew how someone in a whirlpool felt, grabbing desperately at straws.

"wʌt wɪv ɪz mɔɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn fəɹ sɪvænə," ði ɪnkɹɛɾəbli tɔl wʊmən sɛɾ ɪn əmjuz toʊnz. ʃi hæɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ feɪs ðət səm maɪt kɔl pɹɪɾi, bʌɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌn, ʃi sim sɑft. "sɪvænə wɪl nɑt bi sæɾəsfaɪd əntɪl ði ɪntaɪɝ wɝld ɪz ɡeɪʃeɪn, θɛɝɑvə. nɑt ðəɾ aɪ wəɾ əbdʒɛk tə ðət maɪsɛlf," ʃi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ə læf.

"What we have is more gai'shain for Sevanna," the incredibly tall woman said in amused tones. She had a strong face that some might call pretty, but alongside the other Wise One, she seemed soft. "Sevanna will not be satisfied until the entire world is gai'shain, Therava. Not that I would object to that myself," she finished with a laugh.

ði iɡəl-aɪd waɪz wʌn dɪd nɑt læf. hɝ feɪs wɑz stoʊn. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz stoʊn. "sɪvænə hæz tu mɛni ɡeɪʃeɪn ɔlɹɛɾi, sʌmɛɝɪn. wɪv tu mɛni ɡeɪʃeɪn. ðeɪ sloʊ əs tə ə kɹɔl wən wi ʃəd ɹeɪs." hɝ aɪɝn stɛɹ ɹæn əlɔŋ ðə nilɪŋ laɪn.

The eagle-eyed Wise One did not laugh. Her face was stone. Her voice was stone. "Sevanna has too many gai'shain already, Someryn. We have too many gai'shain. They slow us to a crawl when we should race." Her iron stare ran along the kneeling line.

feɪl flɪntʃt wən ðət ɡeɪz tʌtʃt hɝ, ən hɝidli bɛɹiɾ əɹ feɪs ɪn ðə mʌɡ. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ sin θɛɝɑvə bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ ɪn ðət ɡlæns ʃi nu ðə wʊmənz sɔɹt, iɡɝ tə kɹʌʃ ɛni tʃælənʒ ʌɾɝli ən keɪpəbəl ə siɪŋ tʃælənʒ ɪn ə kæʒəwəl ɡlæns. bæɾ ɪnʌf wən ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə ful noʊbəl ət kɔɹt, əɹ sʌmwʌn ɪnkaʊntɝɾ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd, bʌɾ ɪskeɪp kəd bɪkʌm mɔɹ ðən dɪfəkəlt ɪf ðɪs iɡəl tʊk ə pɝsənəl ɪntʃɹəst. dʒʌs ðə seɪm, ʃi wɑtʃt ðə wʊmən fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. ɪt fɛlt laɪk wɑtʃɪŋ ə bændɪɾ æɾɝ, skeɪlz ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn, kɔɪld ə fʊt fɹəm əɹ feɪs.

Faile flinched when that gaze touched her, and hurriedly buried her face in the mug. She had never seen Therava before, but in that glance she knew the woman's sort, eager to crush any challenge utterly and capable of seeing challenge in a casual glance. Bad enough when it was only a fool noble at court, or someone encountered on the road, but escape could become more than difficult if this eagle took a personal interest. Just the same, she watched the woman from the corner of her eye. It felt like watching a banded adder, scales glittering in the sun, coiled a foot from her face.

mik, ʃi θɔt. aɪm nilɪŋ hɪɹ mikli, wɪð noʊ θɔɾ ɪn maɪ hɛd bʌt dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ maɪ ti. noʊ nid tə lʊk ət mi twaɪs, jə koʊld-aɪd wɪtʃ. ʃi hoʊp ði ʌðɝz sɔ wʌt ʃi dɪd.

Meek, she thought. I am kneeling here meekly, with no thought in my head but drinking my tea. No need to look at me twice, you cold-eyed witch. She hoped the others saw what she did.

æliændɝ dɪd nɑt. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹaɪz tə hɝ swoʊlən fit, tɑɾɝd, ðən sæŋk bæk tə hɝ niz wɪð ə wɪns. ivən soʊ, ʃi nɛlt əpɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ, hɛd haɪ, ə ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp blæŋkət hɛld ɝaʊn əɹ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə faɪn sɪlk ʃɔl oʊvɝ ə splɛndəd ɡaʊn. bɛɹd lɛɡz ən wɪnbloʊn hɛɹ spɔɪl ði ɪfɛk sʌmwʌt, jɛt ʃi wɑz stɪl ɛɹəɡəns ɑn ə pɛɾəstəl.

Alliandre did not. She tried to rise to her swollen feet, tottered, then sank back to her knees with a wince. Even so, she knelt upright in the falling snow, head high, a red-striped blanket held around her as if it were a fine silk shawl over a splendid gown. Bared legs and windblown hair spoiled the effect somewhat, yet she was still arrogance on a pedestal.

"aɪ æm æliændɝ mɛɹɪðə kɪɡɑɝɪn, kwin ʌv ɡildən," ʃi ənaʊns laʊdli, vɛɹi mʌtʃ kwin ədʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹʌfaɪən væɡəbɑnz. "ju wəd bi waɪz tə tʃɹit mi ən maɪ kəmpænjənz wɛl, ən pʌnɪʃ ðoʊz u hæv hændəld əs soʊ kɹudli. jə kən ɡeɪn ə lɑɹdʒ ɹænsəm fəɹ ʌs, lɑɹdʒɝ ðən jə kən ɪmædʒən, ən pɑɹɾən fəɹ jəɹ kɹaɪmz. maɪ lidʒ leɪɾi ən əl ɹikwaɪɝ suɾəbəl əkɑmədeɪʃən fəɹ aʊɝsɛlvz əntɪl ɝeɪnʒmənts kən bi meɪd, ən fəɹ əɹ meɪd. lɛsɝ wɪl də fəɹ ði ʌðɝz, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt hɑɹmd. əl peɪ noʊ ɹænsəm ɪf jə ɪl-tʃɹit ðə list ə maɪ lidʒ leɪɾiz sɝvəns."

"I am Alliandre Maritha Kigarin, Queen of Ghealdan," she announced loudly, very much queen addressing ruffian vagabonds. "You would be wise to treat me and my companions well, and punish those who have handled us so crudely. You can gain a large ransom for us, larger than you can imagine, and pardon for your crimes. My liege lady and I will require suitable accommodation for ourselves until arrangements can be made, and for her maid. Lesser will do for the others, so long as they are not harmed. I will pay no ransom if you ill-treat the least of my liege lady's servants."

feɪl cʊɾə ɡɹoʊnd - dɪd ði ɪɾiət wʊmən θɪŋk ðiz pipəl wɝ sɪmpəl bændəts? - oʊnli ʃi hæd noʊ taɪm tə.

Faile could have groaned - did the idiot woman think these people were simple bandits? - only she had no time to.

"ɪz ðət tʃɹu, ɡəlinə? ɪz ʃi ə wɛtləndɝ kwin?" ənʌðɝ wʊmən ɹoʊɾ aʊt fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə pɹɪznɝz, hɝ tɔl blæk ɡɛldɪŋ wɔkɪŋ sɔfli ɪn ðə snoʊ. feɪl θɔt ʃi mʌs bi il, bʌt ʃi wɑz ənʃʊɹ. ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə seɪ fəɹ sɝɾən wɪð ði ʌðɝ wʊmən ɑn hɔɹsbæk, bʌt ʃi simd ət list əz tɔl əz feɪl hɝsɛlf, ən fju wɪmən wɝ ɪksɛpt əmʌŋ ði il, sɝɾənli nɑt wɪð ðoʊz ɡɹin aɪz ɪn ə sʌn-dɑɹk feɪs. ən jɛt . . . ðət waɪd, dɑɹk skɝt lʊk laɪk ði il wɪmənz əɾ ə ɡlæns, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ən əpɪɹd tə bi sɪlk, əz wɑz əɹ kɹimi blaʊs, ən ðə hɛm ɹɪvild ɹɛd buts ɪn əɹ stɝəps. ðə waɪd foʊldəd kɝtʃəf ðət hɛl bæk əɹ lɔŋ ɡoʊldən hɛɹ wɑz bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd ɹɛd sɪlk, ən ə θʌm-θɪk sɝkləɾ ʌv ɡoʊld ən faɪɝdʒɹɑps nɛsəld oʊvɝ ɪt. ɪn kɑntʃɹæs tə ðə waɪz wʌnz' wɝkt ɡoʊld ən kɑɹvd aɪvɝi, hɝ ɹoʊps ə fæt pɝlz ən nɛkləsɪz ʌv ɛmɹəlz ən sæfaɪɝz ən ɹubiz hæf hɪd nɪɹli əz mʌtʃ bʊzəm əz sʌmɛɝɪn hæɾ ɑn dɪspleɪ. ðə bɹeɪslɪts klaɪmɪŋ ɔlmoʊs tə hɝ ɛlboʊz dɪfɝd fɹəm ðoʊz wɔɹn baɪ ðə tu waɪz wʌnz ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ, ən il dɪd nɑt wɛɹ ɹɪŋz, bʌt dʒɛmz spɑɹkəld ɑn ɛvɹi fɪŋɡɝ. ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə dɑɹk ʃɔl, ə bɹaɪt kɹɪmzən kloʊk, bɔɹɾɝd wɪð ɡoʊldən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ən laɪnd wɪð waɪt fɝ, flɛɹɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ɪn ðə stɪf bɹiz. ʃi dɪd sɪɾ əɹ sæɾəl wɪð ði ɔkwɝdnəs ʌv il ɑn hɔɹsbæk, ðoʊ. "æn ə kwinz," hɝ tʌŋ tʃɹɪpt ənfəmɪljɹli, "lidʒ leɪɾi? ðət minz ðə kwin swɔɹ oʊθ tə hɝ? ə tʃɹuli paʊɝfəl wʊmən, ðɛn. ænsɝ mi, ɡəlinə!"

"Is that true, Galina? Is she a wetlander queen?" Another woman rode out from behind the prisoners, her tall black gelding walking softly in the snow. Faile thought she must be Aiel, but she was unsure. It was difficult to say for certain with the other woman on horseback, but she seemed at least as tall as Faile herself, and few women were except among the Aiel, certainly not with those green eyes in a sun-dark face. And yet . . . That wide, dark skirt looked like the Aiel women's at a glance, but it was divided for riding and appeared to be silk, as was her creamy blouse, and the hem revealed red boots in her stirrups. The wide folded kerchief that held back her long golden hair was brocaded red silk, and a thumb-thick circlet of gold and firedrops nestled over it. In contrast to the Wise Ones' worked gold and carved ivory, her ropes of fat pearls and necklaces of emeralds and sapphires and rubies half hid nearly as much bosom as Someryn had on display. The bracelets climbing almost to her elbows differed from those worn by the two Wise Ones in the same way, and Aiel did not wear rings, but gems sparkled on every finger. Instead of a dark shawl, a bright crimson cloak, bordered with golden embroidery and lined with white fur, flared around her in the stiff breeze. She did sit her saddle with the awkwardness of Aiel on horseback, though. "And a queen's," her tongue tripped unfamiliarly, "liege lady? That means the Queen swore oath to her? A truly powerful woman, then. Answer me, Galina!"

ðə sɪlk-klæd ɡeɪʃeɪn hʌntʃt əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən feɪvɝd ðə maʊntəd wʊmən wɪð ə ɡɹɔvəlɪŋ smaɪl. "ə tʃɹuli paʊɝfəl wʊmən, tə hæv ə kwin swɛɹ fiəlti, sɪvænə," ʃi sɛɾ iɡɝli. "aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə ðə laɪk. jɛɾ aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz u ʃi kleɪmz. aɪ sɔ æliændɝ wʌns, jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ən ðə ɡɝl aɪ ɹikɔl kəd wɛl əv ɡɹoʊn ɪndə ðɪs wʊmən. ən ʃi wɑz kɹaʊn kwin ʌv ɡildən. wʌt ʃiz duɪŋ ɪn ɑmɑdɪʃiə, aɪ doʊnt noʊ. ðə waɪtkloʊks əɹ eɪlɹən iðɝ wʌn wəd snæp əɹ ʌp ɪn ən ɪnstən ɪf ðeɪ - "

The silk-clad gai'shain hunched her shoulders and favored the mounted woman with a groveling smile. "A truly powerful woman, to have a queen swear fealty, Sevanna," she said eagerly. "I've never heard of the like. Yet I think she is who she claims. I saw Alliandre once, years ago, and the girl I recall could well have grown into this woman. And she was crowned Queen of Ghealdan. What she is doing in Amadicia, I don't know. The Whitecloaks or Ailron either one would snap her up in an instant if they - "

"ɪnʌf, linə," θɛɝɑvə sɛd fɝmli. ðə hæn ɑn ɡəlinəz ʃoʊldɝ taɪɾənd vɪzəbli. "ju noʊ aɪ heɪɾ ɪt wən jə næɾɝ."

"Enough, Lina," Therava said firmly. The hand on Galina's shoulder tightened visibly. "You know I hate it when you natter."

ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn flɪntʃt əz ɪf stʃɹʌk, ən əɹ maʊθ snæpt ʃʌt. pɹæktəkli ɹaɪðɪŋ, ʃi smaɪld ʌp ət θɛɝɑvə, fɔnɪŋ ivən mɔɹ ɹɛtʃɪdli ðən ʃi hæd fəɹ sɪvænə. ɡoʊl flæʃt ɑn wʌn ə hɝ fɪŋɡɝz əz ʃi ɹʌŋ əɹ hænz. fɪɹ flæʃt ɪn əɹ aɪz, tu. dɑɹk aɪz. dɛfənətli nɑɾ il. θɛɝɑvə simd əblɪviəs tə ðə wʊmənz tʃɹʌklɪŋ; ə dɔɡ hæd bɪn kɔl tə hil ən hæɾ oʊbeɪd. hɝ ətɛnʃən wɑz ɔl ɑn sɪvænə. sʌmɛɝɪn aɪd ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn saɪdweɪz, hɝ lɪps twɪstɪŋ wɪð kəntɛmpt, bʌt ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ʃɔl əkɹɔs əɹ bʊzəm ən lʊk tə sɪvænə əz wɛl. il dɪd nɑt ɡɪv əweɪ mʌtʃ ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz, jɛt pleɪnli ʃi dɪslaɪk sɪvænə, ən wɑz wɛɹi ʌv əɹ ət ðə seɪm taɪm.

The gai'shain flinched as if struck, and her mouth snapped shut. Practically writhing, she smiled up at Therava, fawning even more wretchedly than she had for Sevanna. Gold flashed on one of her fingers as she wrung her hands. Fear flashed in her eyes, too. Dark eyes. Definitely not Aiel. Therava seemed oblivious to the woman's truckling; a dog had been called to heel and had obeyed. Her attention was all on Sevanna. Someryn eyed the gai'shain sideways, her lips twisting with contempt, but she folded her shawl across her bosom and looked to Sevanna as well. Aiel did not give away much on their faces, yet plainly she disliked Sevanna, and was wary of her at the same time.

feɪlz aɪz fɑloʊd ðə maʊntəd wʊmən, tu, oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ mʌɡ. ɪn ə weɪ, ɪt wɑz laɪk siɪŋ lɑɡən, əɹ mæzɹim teɪm. sɪvænə ɔlsoʊ hæd peɪntəɾ əɹ neɪm əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ ɪn blʌɾ ən faɪɝ. kɛɹhin wəd nid jɪɹz tə ɹɪkʌvɝ fɹəm wʌt ʃi hæd ɹɔt ðɛɹ, ən ðə ɹɪpəlz hæd spɹɛd tə ændɝ ən tiɹ ən bɪɑnd. pɛɹɪn leɪd ðə bleɪm tə ə mæn kɔl kaʊulɑɾɪn, bʌt feɪl hæd hɝɾ ɪnʌf ə ðɪs wʊmən tə hæv ə ʃɹuɾ aɪdiə huz hæn hæd bɪn bɪhaɪn ɪɾ ɔl. ən noʊ wʌn dɪspjuɾəd ðət ðə slɔɾɝ ət dəməaɪz wɛlz wɑz sɪvænəz fɔlt. pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɔlmoʊs daɪd ðɛɹ. ʃi hæɾ ə pɝsənəl kleɪm ɑn sɪvænə fəɹ ðæt. ʃi maɪt bi wɪlɪŋ tə lɛt ɹoʊlən kip ɪz ɪɹz ɪf ʃi kəd sɛɾəl ðət kleɪm.

Faile's eyes followed the mounted woman, too, over the edge of her mug. In a way, it was like seeing Logain, or Mazrim Taim. Sevanna also had painted her name across the sky in blood and fire. Cairhien would need years to recover from what she had wrought there, and the ripples had spread to Andor and Tear and beyond. Perrin laid the blame to a man called Couladin, but Faile had heard enough of this woman to have a shrewd idea whose hand had been behind it all. And no one disputed that the slaughter at Dumai's Wells was Sevanna's fault. Perrin had almost died there. She had a personal claim on Sevanna for that. She might be willing to let Rolan keep his ears if she could settle that claim.

ðə flæmbɔɪənli ɡɑɹbd wʊmən wɔkt əɹ maʊn sloʊli əlɔŋ ðə laɪn ə nilɪŋ wɪmən, hɝ stɛɾi ɡɹin aɪz ɔlmoʊst əz koʊld əz θɛɝɑvəz. ðə saʊn ə snoʊ kɹʌntʃɪŋ bɪniθ ðə blæks hʊvz sʌɾənli sim laʊd. "wɪtʃ ə jə ɪz ðə meɪd?" ən ɑd kwɛstʃən. meɪaɪɡdɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, taɪt-dʒɔd, bɪfɔɹ ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hæn fɹəm bɪniθ əɹ blæŋkət. sɪvænə nɑɾəd θɔtfəli. "æn ðə . . . lidʒ leɪɾi?"

The flamboyantly garbed woman walked her mount slowly along the line of kneeling women, her steady green eyes almost as cold as Therava's. The sound of snow crunching beneath the black's hooves suddenly seemed loud. "Which of you is the maid?" An odd question. Maighdin hesitated, tight-jawed, before raising a hand from beneath her blanket. Sevanna nodded thoughtfully. "And the . . . liege lady?"

feɪl kənsɪɾɝd hoʊldɪŋ bæk, bʌt wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, sɪvænə wəd lɝn wʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ. ɹɪlʌktənli, ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ hænd. ən ʃɪvɝd fɹəm mɔɹ ðən ðə koʊld. θɛɝɑvə wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ wɪð ðoʊz kɹuəl aɪz, peɪɪŋ kloʊs ətɛnʃən. tə sɪvænə, ən tə ðoʊz ʃi mɑɹkt aʊt.

Faile considered holding back, but one way or another, Sevanna would learn what she wanted to know. Reluctantly, she lifted her hand. And shivered from more than the cold. Therava was watching with those cruel eyes, paying close attention. To Sevanna, and to those she marked out.

haʊ ɛniwʌn kəd bi ʌnəwɛɹ ə ðəɾ ɔdʒɝɪŋ ɡeɪz, feɪl dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, jɛt sɪvænə sim soʊ əz ʃi tɝn əɹ ɡɛldɪŋ daʊn ðə bæk ə ðə laɪn. "ðeɪ kænɑt wɔk ɑn ðoʊz fit," ʃi sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "aɪ də nɑt si waɪ ðeɪ ʃəd ɹaɪd wɪð ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. hil ðɛm, ɡəlinə."

How anyone could be unaware of that augering gaze, Faile did not understand, yet Sevanna seemed so as she turned her gelding down the back of the line. "They cannot walk on those feet," she said after a moment. "I do not see why they should ride with the children. Heal them, Galina."

feɪl ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑp ðə kleɪ mʌɡ. ʃi pʊʃt ɪt təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk aʊt ðət ðət wɑz wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn duɪŋ ɔl əlɔŋ. ɪt wɑz ɛmpti ɛniweɪ. ðə skɑɹd fɛloʊ kɑmli bɪɡæn fɪlɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp əɡɛn fɹəm ɪz wɔɾɝ bæɡ ʌv ti. hil? ʃʊɹli ʃi kəd nɑt min . . .

Faile gave a start and almost dropped the clay mug. She pushed it toward the gai'shain, trying to make out that that was what she had been doing all along. It was empty anyway. The scarred fellow calmly began filling it up again from his water bag of tea. Heal? Surely she could not mean . . .

"vɛɹi wɛl," θɛɝɑvə sɛd, ɡɪvɪŋ ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn wʊmən ə ʃʌv ðət stæɡɝd hɝ. "du ɪt kwɪkli, lɪɾəl linə. aɪ noʊ jə də nɑt wɑnə dɪsəpɔɪn mi."

"Very well," Therava said, giving the gai'shain woman a shove that staggered her. "Do it quickly, little Lina. I know you do not want to disappoint me."

ɡəlinə kɑt hɝsɛlf fɹəm fɔlɪŋ, bʌɾ oʊnli tə stʃɹʌɡəl ɑn təwɔɹd ðə pɹɪznɝz. ʃi sæŋk əbʌv əɹ niz ɪn pleɪsəz, hɝ ɹoʊbz dʒɹæɡɪŋ ɪn ðə snoʊ, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɪntɛn ɑn ɹitʃɪŋ əɹ ɡoʊl. waɪd-aɪd fɪɹ ən ɹɪvʌlʃən mɪŋɡəld ɑn əɹ ɹaʊn feɪs wɪð . . . kəɾ ɪt bi, iɡɝnəs? ɔl ɪn ɔl, ɪt wɑz ə sɪkənɪŋ kɑmbəneɪʃən.

Galina caught herself from falling, but only to struggle on toward the prisoners. She sank above her knees in places, her robes dragging in the snow, but she was intent on reaching her goal. Wide-eyed fear and revulsion mingled on her round face with . . . could it be, eagerness? All in all, it was a sickening combination.

sɪvænə kəmpliɾəd əɹ sɝkət, kʌmɪŋ bæk tə wɛɹ feɪl kəd si hɝ klɪɹli, ən ɹeɪn ɪn feɪsɪŋ ðə waɪz wʌnz. ðə wʊmənz fʊl maʊθ wɑz taɪt. ði aɪsi bɹiz ɹɪpəld əɹ kloʊk, bʌt ʃi simd ʌnəwɛɹ ʌv ɪt, əɹ ə ðə snoʊ fɔlɪŋ ɑn əɹ hɛd. "aɪ hæv dʒʌst ɹəsivd wɝd, θɛɝɑvə." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kɑm, ðoʊ laɪtnɪŋ boʊls ʃʊɾə bɪn flæʃɪŋ fɹəm əɹ aɪz. "tənaɪt wi kæmp wɪð ðə dʒoʊnaɪn."

Sevanna completed her circuit, coming back to where Faile could see her clearly, and reined in facing the Wise Ones. The woman's full mouth was tight. The icy breeze rippled her cloak, but she seemed unaware of it, or of the snow falling on her head. "I have just received word, Therava." Her voice was calm, though lightning bolts should have been flashing from her eyes. "Tonight we camp with the Jonine."

"ə fɪfθ sɛpt," θɛɝɑvə ɹɪplaɪd flætli. fəɹ hɝ, ɔlsoʊ, wɪn ən snoʊ maɪɾ əz wɛl nɑɾ əv ɪɡzɪstəd. "faɪv, waɪl sɛvənti-eɪt ɹɪmeɪn skæɾɝd ɑn ðə wɪnd. wɛl ðət jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ jəɹ plɛdʒ tə ɹiunaɪt ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, sɪvænə. wɪl nɑt weɪt fɝɛvɝ."

"A fifth sept," Therava replied flatly. For her, also, wind and snow might as well not have existed. "Five, while seventy-eight remain scattered on the wind. Well that you remember your pledge to reunite the Shaido, Sevanna. We will not wait forever."

nɑt laɪtnɪŋ boʊls, naʊ. sɪvænəz aɪz wɝ ɡɹin vɑlkeɪnoʊz ɪɹʌptɪŋ. "aɪ ɔlweɪz də wʌɾ aɪ seɪ, θɛɝɑvə. wɛl ðət jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət jə ædvaɪz mi. aɪ spik fəɹ ðə klæn tʃif."

Not lightning bolts, now. Sevanna's eyes were green volcanoes erupting. "I always do what I say, Therava. Well that you remember that. And remember that you advise me. I speak for the clan chief."

wilɪŋ əɹ ɡɛldɪŋ, ʃi dʒɹʌmd əɹ hilz ɑn ði ænəməlz ɹɪbz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ɪm ɡæləp bæk təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪvɝ ə pipəl ən wæɡənz, ðoʊ noʊ hɔɹs kəd də soʊ ɪn ðət dɛpθ ə snoʊ. ðə blæk mænədʒ sʌmθɪŋ fæstɝ ðən ə wɔk, bʌt nɑt mʌtʃ. ðɛɹ feɪsəz ɪkspɹɛʃənləs əz mæsks, θɛɝɑvə ən sʌmɛɝɪn wɑtʃt hɔɹs ən ɹaɪɾɝ feɪɾ ɪndə ðə fɔlɪŋ waɪt veɪl.

Wheeling her gelding, she drummed her heels on the animal's ribs, trying to make him gallop back toward the river of people and wagons, though no horse could do so in that depth of snow. The black managed something faster than a walk, but not much. Their faces expressionless as masks, Therava and Someryn watched horse and rider fade into the falling white veil.

ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪkstʃeɪnʒ, ət lis tə feɪl. ʃi nu tɛnʃən taɪɾ əz ə hɑɹpstʃɹɪŋ wən ʃi sɔ ɪt, ən mjutʃəwəl heɪtʃɹəd. ə wiknəs ðət maɪt bi ɛksplɔɪɾəd, ɪf ʃi kəd pʌzəl aʊt haʊ. ən ɪt sim ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ nɑɾ ɔl hɪɹ æftɝ ɔl. ðoʊ mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf sim tə bi, dʒʌdʒɪŋ baɪ ði ənɛndɪŋ ɹɪvɝ ə ðɛm pæsɪŋ baɪ. ɡəlinə ɹitʃt əɹ ðɛn, ən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls flɛd fɹəm əɹ maɪnd.

An important exchange, at least to Faile. She knew tension tight as a harpstring when she saw it, and mutual hatred. A weakness that might be exploited, if she could puzzle out how. And it seemed the Shaido were not all here after all. Though more than enough seemed to be, judging by the unending river of them passing by. Galina reached her then, and anything else fled from her mind.

smuðɪŋ əɹ feɪs tə ə ɹæɡəd sɛmbləns ə kəmpoʊʒɝ, ɡəlinə klʌtʃt feɪlz hɛɾ ɪn boʊθ hænz wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ ə wɝd. feɪl maɪɾ əv ɡæspt; ʃi kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ. ðə wɝl sim tə flaɪ baɪ əz ʃi dʒɝk hæfweɪ tə hɝ fit. aʊɝz stʃɹik baɪ, əɹ hɑɹtbits kɹɔld. ðə waɪt-klæd wʊmən stɛp bæk, ən feɪl kəlæpst ɑn əɹ feɪs ətɑp ðə bɹaʊn blæŋkət tə laɪ pæntɪŋ əɡɛns ðə ɹʌf wʊl. hɝ fit noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hɝt, bʌt hilɪŋ ɔlweɪz bɹɔɾ ɪts oʊn hʌŋɡɝ, ən ʃi hæɾ iɾən nʌθɪŋ sɪns jɛstɝdeɪz bɹɛkfəst. ʃi cʊɾə wʊlf daʊn pleɪts ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ðəɾ ivən lʊk laɪk fud. ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɛl taɪɝd, bʌɾ əɹ mʌsəlz wɝ wɔɾɝ ɪnstɛɾ ə pʊɾɪŋ. pʊʃɪŋ hɝsɛlf ʌp wɪð ɑɹmz ðət wɑntəd tə foʊld ʌndɝ əɹ weɪt, ʃi ənstɛɾəli ɡæðɝd ðə ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹaɪp blæŋkəɾ əɡɛn. ʃi fɛl stʌn əz mʌtʃ baɪ wʌt ʃi hæd sin ɑn ɡəlinəz hæn dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ɡəlinə sizd əɹ əz ʃi dɪd baɪ ðə hilɪŋ. ɡɹeɪtfəli ʃi lɛt ðə skɑɹd mæn hoʊl ðə stimɪŋ mʌɡ tə hɝ maʊθ. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz cʊɾə hɛld ɑn tə ɪt.

Smoothing her face to a ragged semblance of composure, Galina clutched Faile's head in both hands without speaking a word. Faile might have gasped; she could not be sure. The world seemed to fly by as she jerked halfway to her feet. Hours streaked by, or heartbeats crawled. The white-clad woman stepped back, and Faile collapsed on her face atop the brown blanket to lie panting against the rough wool. Her feet no longer hurt, but Healing always brought its own hunger, and she had eaten nothing since yesterday's breakfast. She could have wolfed down plates of anything that even looked like food. She no longer felt tired, but her muscles were water instead of pudding. Pushing herself up with arms that wanted to fold under her weight, she unsteadily gathered the gray-striped blanket again. She felt stunned as much by what she had seen on Galina's hand just before Galina seized her as she did by the Healing. Gratefully she let the scarred man hold the steaming mug to her mouth. She was not sure her fingers could have held on to it.

ɡəlinə wɑz weɪstɪŋ noʊ taɪm. ə deɪzd æliændɝ wɑz dʒʌst ətɛmptɪŋ tə ɹaɪz fɹəm flæɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs, hɝ stʃɹaɪp kʌvɝɪŋ blæŋkət slaɪɾɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ənnoʊɾɪst. hɝ wɛls wɝ ɡɔn, ʌv kɔɹs. meɪaɪɡdɪn stɪl leɪ spɹɔl bɪtwin əɹ tu blæŋkəts, lus lɪmz poʊkɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ən twɪtʃɪŋ əz ʃi fibli tʃɹaɪd tə kəlɛk hɝsɛlf. kiæd, wɪð ɡəlinəz hænz ɑn əɹ hɛd, lɝtʃt ɔl ðə weɪ tə hɝ fit, ɑɹmz flʌŋ waɪd, bɹɛθ livɪŋ əɹ ɪn ə laʊd ɹʌʃ. ðə jɛloʊd swɛlɪŋ ɑn əɹ feɪs feɪɾəd əweɪ ivən əz feɪl wɑtʃt. ðə meɪɾən dʒɹɑpt əz ɪf pɑliækst wən ɡəlinə muvd ɑn tə beɪn, ðoʊ ʃi bɪɡæn stɝɪŋ ɔlmoʊst ət wʌns.

Galina was wasting no time. A dazed Alliandre was just attempting to rise from flat on her face, her striped covering blanket sliding to the ground unnoticed. Her welts were gone, of course. Maighdin still lay sprawled between her two blankets, loose limbs poking out in every direction and twitching as she feebly tried to collect herself. Chiad, with Galina's hands on her head, lurched all the way to her feet, arms flung wide, breath leaving her in a loud rush. The yellowed swelling on her face faded away even as Faile watched. The Maiden dropped as if poleaxed when Galina moved on to Bain, though she began stirring almost at once.

feɪl ətɛndəd tə hɝ ti, ən fjʊɹiəs θɔt. ðə ɡoʊld ɑn ɡəlinəz fɪŋɡɝ wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ. ʃi maɪɾ əv θɔɾ ɪɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pɹɛzən fɹəm huɛvɝ ɡeɪv ðə wʊmən əɹ ʌðɝ dʒuəlz ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə hilɪŋ. ɡəlinə wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi mʌs bi. bʌt wʌt wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ duɪŋ hɪɹ, ɪn ɡeɪʃeɪn ɹoʊbz? nɑt tə mɛnʃən əpɛɹənli ɹɛɾi tə lɪk sɪvænəz ɹɪst ən kɪs θɛɝɑvəz fit! ən ɛɛs sədaɪ!

Faile attended to her tea, and furious thought. The gold on Galina's finger was a Great Serpent ring. She might have thought it a strange present from whoever gave the woman her other jewels if not for the Healing. Galina was Aes Sedai. She must be. But what was an Aes Sedai doing here, in gai'shain robes? Not to mention apparently ready to lick Sevanna's wrist and kiss Therava's feet! An Aes Sedai!

stændɪŋ oʊvɝ ə lɪmp ɹɛlə, ðə læst ɪn ðə laɪn, ɡəlinə pæntɪd slaɪtli fɹəm ði ɛfɝɾ ə hilɪŋ soʊ mɛni soʊ kwɪkli, ən ɡeɪzd ət θɛɝɑvə əz ðoʊ hoʊpfəl fəɹ ə wɝɾ ə pɹeɪz. wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə lʊk ət hɝ, ðə tu waɪz wʌnz stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪvɝ ə ʃeɪɾoʊ, ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ, tɔkɪŋ. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ skaʊld ən lɪftəɾ əɹ ɹoʊbz, hɝiɪŋ æftɝ əm əz kwɪkli əz ʃi kʊd. ʃi ɡlæns bæk mɔɹ ðən wʌns, ðoʊ. feɪl hæd ðə filɪŋ ðət ʃi dɪd soʊ ivən æftɝ ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ pʊɾ ə kɝɾən bɪtwin ðɛm.

Standing over a limp Arrela, the last in the line, Galina panted slightly from the effort of Healing so many so quickly, and gazed at Therava as though hopeful for a word of praise. Without so much as a look at her, the two Wise Ones started toward the river of Shaido, their heads together, talking. After a moment, the Aes Sedai scowled and lifted her robes, hurrying after them as quickly as she could. She glanced back more than once, though. Faile had the feeling that she did so even after the falling snow put a curtain between them.

mɔɹ ɡeɪʃeɪn keɪm ði ʌðɝ weɪ, ə dʌzən mɛn ən wɪmən, ən oʊnli wʌn wɑz il, ə læŋki ɹɛdhɛd wɪð ə θɪn waɪt skɑɹ fɹəm hɛɹlaɪn tə dʒɔ. feɪl ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ʃɔɹt, pæləd kɛɹhinɪn, ən ʌðɝz ʃi θɔt maɪt bi ɑmɑdɪʃən əɹ ɔltɑɹən, tɔlɝ ən dɑɹkɝ, ən ivən ə bɹɑnz-skɪn dəmɑni. ðə dəmɑni ən wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ wɪmən wɔɹ waɪd bɛls ə ʃaɪni ɡoʊldən tʃeɪn taɪɾ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ weɪsts, ən kɑlɝz ə ðə flæt lɪŋks ɝaʊn ðɛɹ nɛks. soʊ dɪd wʌn ə ðə mɛn! ɪn ɛni keɪs, dʒuəlɹi ɑn ɡeɪʃeɪn simd ənɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪksɛpt əz ən ɑɾəti, ɪspɛʃli əlɔŋsaɪd ðə fuɾ ən kloʊðɪŋ ðeɪ bɹɔt.

More gai'shain came the other way, a dozen men and women, and only one was Aiel, a lanky redhead with a thin white scar from hairline to jaw. Faile recognized short, pallid Cairhienin, and others she thought might be Amadician or Altaran, taller and darker, and even a bronze-skinned Domani. The Domani and one of the other women wore wide belts of shiny golden chain tight around their waists, and collars of the flat links around their necks. So did one of the men! In any case, jewelry on gai'shain seemed unimportant except as an oddity, especially alongside the food and clothing they brought.

səm ə ðə nukʌmɝz kæɹid bæskəts wɪð loʊvz ə bɹɛɾ ən jɛloʊ tʃiz ən dʒɹaɪd bif, ən ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn ɔlɹɛɾi ðəɹ wɪð ðɛɹ wɔɾɝ bæɡz ə ti pɹəvaɪɾəd dʒɹɪŋk tə wɑʃ ɪt daʊn. feɪl wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn ɪn stʌfɪŋ əɹ maʊθ wɪð ənsimli heɪst ivən waɪl ʃi dʒɹɛst, klʌmsəli ən wɪð mɔɹ maɪn tə spid ðən mɑɾəsti. ðə hʊɾɪd waɪt ɹoʊb ən tu θɪk ʌndɝ-ɹoʊbz simd wɑnʒɹəsli wɔɹm, dʒʌs tə kip ði ɛɹ ɔf, ən soʊ wɝ hɛvi wʊlən stɑkɪŋz ən sɑft il buts ðət leɪs tə hɝ niz - ivən ðə buts hæd bɪn blitʃt waɪt! - bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt fɪl ʌp ðə hoʊl ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl. ðə mit wɑz tʌf əz but lɛðɝ, ðə tʃiz nɪɹli ɹɑk hɑɹɾ ən ðə bɹɛd nɑt mʌtʃ sɑftɝ, jɛt ðeɪ teɪstəd laɪk ə fist! hɝ maʊθ wɔɾɝd fəɹ ɛvɹi baɪt.

Some of the newcomers carried baskets with loaves of bread and yellow cheese and dried beef, and the gai'shain already there with their water bags of tea provided drink to wash it down. Faile was not alone in stuffing her mouth with unseemly haste even while she dressed, clumsily and with more mind to speed than modesty. The hooded white robe and two thick under-robes seemed wondrously warm, just to keep the air off, and so were heavy woolen stockings and soft Aiel boots that laced to her knees - even the boots had been bleached white! - but they did not fill up the hole in her middle. The meat was tough as boot leather, the cheese nearly rock hard and the bread not much softer, yet they tasted like a feast! Her mouth watered for every bite.

tʃuɪŋ ə maʊθfʊl ə tʃiz, ʃi nɑɾɪd ðə læs butleɪs ən stʊd, smuðɪŋ daʊn əɹ ɹoʊbz. əz ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ səm mɔɹ bɹɛd, wʌn ə ðə wɪmən wɛɹɪŋ ɡoʊld, plʌmp ən pleɪn ən wɪɹi-aɪd, tʊk ənʌðɝ bɛlt ʌv ɡoʊldən tʃeɪn aʊɾ ʌv ə klɔθ sæk hæŋɪŋ fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. heɪstəli swɑloʊɪŋ, feɪl stɛp bæk. "aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ nɑɾ əv ðæt, θæŋk ju." ʃi hæɾ ə sɪŋkɪŋ filɪŋ ʃi hæd bɪn ɹɔŋ tə dɪsmɪs ði ədɔɹnməns əz ənɪmpɔɹɾənt.

Chewing a mouthful of cheese, she knotted the last bootlace and stood, smoothing down her robes. As she reached for some more bread, one of the women wearing gold, plump and plain and weary-eyed, took another belt of golden chain out of a cloth sack hanging from her shoulder. Hastily swallowing, Faile stepped back. "I would rather not have that, thank you." She had a sinking feeling she had been wrong to dismiss the adornments as unimportant.

"wʌt jə wɑn dʌz nɑt mæɾɝ," ðə plʌmp wʊmən ɹɪplaɪd taɪɹədli. hɝ æksɛnt wɑz ɑmɑdɪʃən, ən kʌltʃɝd. "ju sɝv ðə leɪɾi sɪvænə, naʊ. jəl wɛɹ wʌt jə ɑɹ ɡɪvən ən də əz jə ɑɹ toʊld, əɹ jəl bi pʌnɪʃt əntɪl jə si ði ɛɹɝ ə jəɹ weɪz."

"What you want does not matter," the plump woman replied tiredly. Her accent was Amadician, and cultured. "You serve the Lady Sevanna, now. You will wear what you are given and do as you are told, or you will be punished until you see the error of your ways."

ə fju peɪsɪz əweɪ, meɪaɪɡdɪn wɑz fɛndɪŋ ɔf ðə dəmɑni, ɹɪzɪstɪŋ biɪŋ fɪɾəd wɪð ə kɑlɝ. æliændɝ wɑz bækɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə mæn u wɔɹ ɡoʊldən tʃeɪnz, hɝ hænz ɹeɪzd ən ə sɪkli ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs. hi hɛld aʊt wʌn ə ðə bɛls təwɔɹd hɝ. θæŋkfəli, ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ lʊkɪŋ tə feɪl, ðoʊ. pɝhæps ðət swɪtʃɪŋ ɪn ðə fɔɹəs hæd dʌn səm ɡʊd.

A few paces away, Maighdin was fending off the Domani, resisting being fitted with a collar. Alliandre was backing away from the man who wore golden chains, her hands raised and a sickly expression on her face. He held out one of the belts toward her. Thankfully, they were both looking to Faile, though. Perhaps that switching in the forest had done some good.

ɪkshəlɪŋ hɛvəli, feɪl nɑɾəd tə ðɛm, ðən əlaʊd ðə plʌmp ɡeɪʃeɪn tə fæsən ðə waɪd bɛlt ɝaʊn hɝ. wɪð əɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, ði ʌðɝ tu lɛt ðɛɹ hænz fɔl. ɪt simd wʌn bloʊ tu mɛni fəɹ æliændɝ, hu stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ əz ʃi wɑz bɛltəɾ ən kɑlɝd. meɪaɪɡdɪn dɪɾ əɹ bɛs tə ɡlɛɹ ə hoʊl θɹu ðə slɪm dəmɑni. feɪl tʃɹaɪd smaɪlɪŋ ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt, bʌt smaɪlɪŋ wɑz dɪfəkəlt. tə hɝ, ðə kɑlɝz kætʃ snæpɪŋ ʃʌt saʊndəd laɪk ə pɹɪzən dɔɹ biɪŋ lɑkt. bɛlt ən kɑlɝ kəd bi ɹimuvd əz izəli əz ðeɪ hæd bɪn pʊɾ ɑn, bʌt ɡeɪʃeɪn sɝvɪŋ "ðə leɪɾi sɪvænə" ʃʊɹli wəd bi wɑtʃt vɛɹi kloʊsli. dɪzæstɝ wɑz paɪlɪŋ ɑn dɪzæstɝ. θɪŋz hæd tə ɡɛt bɛɾɝ fɹəm hɪɹ ɑn. ðeɪ hæd tə.

Exhaling heavily, Faile nodded to them, then allowed the plump gai'shain to fasten the wide belt around her. With her example, the other two let their hands fall. It seemed one blow too many for Alliandre, who stood staring at nothing as she was belted and collared. Maighdin did her best to glare a hole through the slim Domani. Faile tried smiling encouragement, but smiling was difficult. To her, the collar's catch snapping shut sounded like a prison door being locked. Belt and collar could be removed as easily as they had been put on, but gai'shain serving "the Lady Sevanna" surely would be watched very closely. Disaster was piling on disaster. Things had to get better from here on. They had to.

sun, feɪl faʊn hɝsɛlf tʃɹæmpɪŋ ðoʊ ðə snoʊ ɑn wɑbəli lɛɡz wɪð ə stʌmbəlɪŋ, dʌl-aɪɾ æliændɝ ən ə skaʊlɪŋ meɪaɪɡdɪn, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɡeɪʃeɪn liɾɪŋ pæk ænəməlz, kæɹiɪŋ lɑɹdʒ kʌvɝd bæskəts ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, dʒɹæɡɪŋ loʊɾəd bæɹoʊz wɪð ðə wilz læʃt tə wʊɾən slɛdz. ðə kɑɹts ən wæɡənz hæd slɛdz əɹ bɹɔd ɹʌnɝz, tu, wɪð ðə wilz taɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə ðə snoʊ-ʃɹaʊɾɪd kɑɹɡoʊ. snoʊ maɪt bi ʌnfəmɪljɝ tə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, bʌt ðeɪ hæd lɝn sʌmθɪŋ ə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɪn ɪt. niðɝ feɪl nɔɹ ði ʌðɝ tu bɔɹ ɛni bɝɾənz, ðoʊ ðə plʌmp ɑmɑdɪʃən wʊmən meɪd klɪɹ ðət ðeɪ wəd bi ɪkspɛktəd tə kæɹi əɹ hɔl təmɑɹoʊ ən fɹəm ðən ɑn. haʊɛvɝ mɛni ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ ɪn ðə kɑləm, ɪt simd ə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi ɑn ðə muv, ɪf nɑɾ ə neɪʃən. tʃɪlʒɹən ʌp tə twɛlv əɹ θɝtin ɹoʊɾ ɑn ðə kɑɹts ən wæɡənz, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɔkt. ɔl ə ðə mɛn wɔɹ ðə keɪɾɪnsɝ, bʌt moʊst wɪmən wɔɹ skɝts ən blaʊsəz ən ʃɔlz laɪk ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən moʊst ə ðə mɛn kæɹiɾ oʊnli ə sɪŋɡəl spɪɹ əɹ noʊ wɛpən əɾ ɔl ən lʊk sɑftɝ ðən ði ʌðɝz. sɑf minɪŋ ðət ðəɹ wɝ stoʊnz sɑftɝ ðən ɡɹænət.

Soon, Faile found herself tramping though the snow on wobbly legs with a stumbling, dull-eyed Alliandre and a scowling Maighdin, surrounded by gai'shain leading pack animals, carrying large covered baskets on their backs, dragging loaded barrows with the wheels lashed to wooden sleds. The carts and wagons had sleds or broad runners, too, with the wheels tied on top of the snow-shrouded cargo. Snow might be unfamiliar to the Shaido, but they had learned something of traveling in it. Neither Faile nor the other two bore any burdens, though the plump Amadician woman made clear that they would be expected to carry or haul tomorrow and from then on. However many Shaido were in the column, it seemed a great city on the move, if not a nation. Children up to twelve or thirteen rode on the carts and wagons, but everyone else walked. All of the men wore the cadin'sor, but most women wore skirts and blouses and shawls like the Wise Ones, and most of the men carried only a single spear or no weapon at all and looked softer than the others. Soft meaning that there were stones softer than granite.

baɪ ðə taɪm ði ɑmɑdɪʃən lɛft, wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ neɪm əɹ seɪɪŋ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən oʊbeɪ əɹ bi pʌnɪʃt, feɪl ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi hæd lɔst saɪɾ ə beɪn ən ðə ɹɛst sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ. noʊ wʌn tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk əɹ kip ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ pleɪs, soʊ ʃi tʃɹæmpt wɛɹəli bæk ən fɔɹθ əkɹɔs ðə kɑləm, əkʌmpənid baɪ æliændɝ ən meɪaɪɡdɪn. kipɪŋ əɹ hænz foʊldəd təɡɛðɝ ɪn əɹ slivz meɪd wɔkɪŋ dɪfəkəlt, ɪspɛʃli weɪɾɪŋ θɹu snoʊ, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd kip əm wɔɹm. wɔɹmɝ ðən ði ɔltɝnəɾɪv, ət list. ðə wɪn meɪd ʃʊɹ ðeɪ kɛp ðɛɹ hʊdz wɛl ʌp. dɪspaɪt ði aɪdɛntəfaɪɪŋ ɡoʊldən bɛls, niðɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn nɔɹ ʃeɪɾoʊ lʊkt əɾ əm twaɪs. dɪspaɪt kɹɔsɪŋ ðə kɑləm ə dʌzən taɪmz əɹ mɔɹ, haʊɛvɝ, ðə sɝtʃ pɹuv fɹutləs. ðəɹ wɝ pipəl ɪn waɪt ɹoʊbz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, mɔɹ ðən wɪθaʊt, ən ɛni ʌv ðoʊz dip kaʊlz cʊɾə hɪɾən əɹ ʌðɝ kəmpænjənz.

By the time the Amadician left, without giving her name or saying much more than obey or be punished, Faile realized that she had lost sight of Bain and the rest somewhere in the falling snow. No one tried to make her keep a particular place, so she tramped wearily back and forth across the column, accompanied by Alliandre and Maighdin. Keeping her hands folded together in her sleeves made walking difficult, especially wading through snow, but it did keep them warm. Warmer than the alternative, at least. The wind made sure they kept their hoods well up. Despite the identifying golden belts, neither gai'shain nor Shaido looked at them twice. Despite crossing the column a dozen times or more, however, the search proved fruitless. There were people in white robes everywhere, more than without, and any of those deep cowls could have hidden her other companions.

"wi wɪl əv tə faɪn əm tənaɪt," meɪaɪɡdɪn sɛd faɪnəli. ʃi æktʃəli  mænədʒ tə stɔk θɹu ðə dip snoʊ, ɪf ɪn ən ənɡeɪnli fæʃən. hɝ blu aɪz wɝ fɪɹs ɪnsaɪd ðə kævɝn ə hɝ hʊd, ən ʃi ɡɹɪp ðə bɹɔd ɡoʊldən tʃeɪn ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk wɪð wʌn hæn əz ɪf wɑntɪŋ tə ɹɪp ɪɾ ɔf. "æz ɪɾ ɪz, wɝ teɪkɪŋ tɛn stɛps tə wʌn fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. twɛnti fəɹ ɪɾəl wɪl də əs lɪɾəl ɡʊd tə ɝaɪv ət tənaɪts kæmp tu ɪɡzɔstəd tə muv."

"We will have to find them tonight," Maighdin said finally. She actually managed to stalk through the deep snow, if in an ungainly fashion. Her blue eyes were fierce inside the cavern of her hood, and she gripped the broad golden chain around her neck with one hand as if wanting to rip it off. "As it is, we're taking ten steps to one for everyone else. Twenty for one. It will do us little good to arrive at tonight's camp too exhausted to move."

ɑn feɪlz ʌðɝ saɪd, æliændɝ ɹaʊz fɹəm əɹ nʌmnəs ɪnʌf tə ɹeɪz ən aɪbɹaʊ ət ðə dɪsaɪsɪvnəs ɪn meɪaɪɡdɪnz vɔɪs. feɪl mɪɹli lʊkt əɾ əɹ meɪd, bʌt ðət wɑz ɪnʌf tə sɛt meɪaɪɡdɪn blʌʃɪŋ ən stæmɝɪŋ. wʌt hæd ɡɑɾən ɪndə ðə wʊmən? stɪl, ɪt maɪt nɑt bi wʌt ʃi ɪkspɛktəd fɹəm ə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt fɔl meɪaɪɡdɪnz spɪɹəɾ ɪn ə kəmpænjən fəɹ ɪskeɪp. ə pɪɾi ðə wʊmən kəd nɑt tʃænəl mɔɹ. feɪl hæd hæd ɡɹeɪt hoʊps ə ðət wʌns, əntɪl ʃi lɝn ðət meɪaɪɡdɪn pəzɛst soʊ lɪɾəl əbɪləɾi ɪt wɑz jusləs.

On Faile's other side, Alliandre roused from her numbness enough to raise an eyebrow at the decisiveness in Maighdin's voice. Faile merely looked at her maid, but that was enough to set Maighdin blushing and stammering. What had gotten into the woman? Still, it might not be what she expected from a serving woman, but she could not fault Maighdin's spirit in a companion for escape. A pity the woman could not channel more. Faile had had great hopes of that once, until she learned that Maighdin possessed so little ability it was useless.

"tənaɪɾ ɪt mʌs bi, meɪaɪɡdɪn," ʃi əɡɹid. əɹ haʊɛvɝ mɛni naɪts ɪt tʊk. ʃi dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðæt. hɝidli ʃi sɝveɪd ðə pipəl nɪɹəst əm tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn wɑz kloʊs ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, wɛðɝ ɪn keɪɾɪnsɝ əɹ nɑt, muv θɹu ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ pɝpəsfəli, pɹɛsɪŋ fɔɹwɝd təwɔɹɾ ən ənsin ɡoʊl. ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn - ði ʌðɝ ɡeɪʃeɪn - muvd wɪð ə dɪfɹən pɝpəs. oʊbeɪ əɹ bi pʌnɪʃt. "ðə weɪ ðeɪ ɪɡnɔɹ ʌs," ʃi wɛn ɑn, "ɪt ʃəd bi pɑsəbəl tə dʒʌs fɔl baɪ ðə weɪsaɪd, soʊ lɔŋ əz jə doʊn tʃɹaɪ ʌndɝ ə ʃeɪɾoʊz noʊz. ɪf iðɝ ə jə faɪnz ə tʃæns, teɪk ɪt. ðiz ɹoʊbz wɪl hɛlp jə haɪɾ ɪn ðə snoʊ, ən wʌns jə faɪn ə vɪlədʒ, ðə ɡoʊl ðeɪv soʊ ɡɹeɪʃəsli ɡɪvən əs wɪl si jə bæk tə maɪ hʌzbənd. hɪl bi fɑloʊɪŋ." nɑt tu kwɪkli, ʃi hoʊpt. nɑt tu kloʊsli, ət list. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ hæɾ ən ɑɹmi hɪɹ. ə smɔl ɑɹmi, pɝhæps, kəmpɛɹd tə sʌm, bʌt lɑɹdʒɝ ðən pɛɹɪnz.

"Tonight it must be, Maighdin," she agreed. Or however many nights it took. She did not mention that. Hurriedly she surveyed the people nearest them to make sure no one was close enough to overhear. The Shaido, whether in cadin'sor or not, moved through the falling snow purposefully, pressing forward toward an unseen goal. The gai'shain - the other gai'shain - moved with a different purpose. Obey or be punished. "The way they ignore us," she went on, "it should be possible to just fall by the wayside, so long as you don't try under a Shaido's nose. If either of you finds a chance, take it. These robes will help you hide in the snow, and once you find a village, the gold they've so graciously given us will see you back to my husband. He will be following." Not too quickly, she hoped. Not too closely, at least. The Shaido had an army here. A small army, perhaps, compared to some, but larger than Perrin's.

æliændɝz feɪs hɑɹɾənd ɪn dɪtɝməneɪʃən. "aɪ wɪl nɑt liv wɪθaʊt ju," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. sɔfli, jɛɾ ɪn fɝm toʊnz. "aɪ wɪl nɑt teɪk maɪ oʊθ ə fiəlti laɪtli, maɪ leɪɾi. əl ɪskeɪp wɪð ju, əɹ nɑɾ əɾ ɔl!"

Alliandre's face hardened in determination. "I will not leave without you," she said softly. Softly, yet in firm tones. "I will not take my oath of fealty lightly, my Lady. I will escape with you, or not at all!"

"ʃi spiks fəɹ boʊθ ʌv ʌs," meɪaɪɡdɪn sɛd. "aɪ meɪ bi oʊnli ə sɪmpəl meɪd," ʃi ɹʌŋ ðə wɝd wɪð skɔɹn, "bʌɾ aɪ woʊn liv ɛniwʌn bɪhaɪn tə ðiz . . . ðiz bændəts!" hɝ vɔɪs wɑz nɑt sɪmpli fɝm; ɪt bɹʊk noʊ ɑpəzɪʃən. ɹɪli, æftɝ ðɪs, lini wəɾ əv tə hæv ə vɛɹi lɔŋ tɔk wɪð əɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz fɪt tə hoʊld əɹ pəzɪʃən!

"She speaks for both of us," Maighdin said. "I may be only a simple maid," she wrung the word with scorn, "but I won't leave anyone behind to these . . . these bandits!" Her voice was not simply firm; it brooked no opposition. Really, after this, Lini would have to have a very long talk with her before she was fit to hold her position!

feɪl oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə ɑɹɡju - noʊ, tə kəmænd; æliændɝ wɑz əɹ swɔɹn wʊmən, ən meɪaɪɡdɪn əɹ meɪd, haʊɛvɝ faɪɝ-bɹeɪn kæptɪvəɾi hæd meɪd hɝ! ðeɪ wəd fɑloʊ hɝ ɔɹɾɝz! - bʌt ʃi lɛt ðə wɝdz daɪ ɑn əɹ tʌŋ.

Faile opened her mouth to argue - no, to command; Alliandre was her sworn woman, and Maighdin her maid, however fire-brained captivity had made her! They would follow her orders! - but she let the words die on her tongue.

dɑɹk ʃeɪps əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə taɪɾ ə ʃeɪɾoʊ ən ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ ɹizɑlvd ɪndə ə klʌstɝ ʌv il-wɪmən wɪð ðɛɹ ʃɔlz fɹeɪmɪŋ ðɛɹ feɪsəz. θɛɝɑvə lɛd ðɛm. ə mɝmɝd wɝd fɹəm hɝ, ən ði ʌðɝz sloʊd tə kip peɪs bɪhaɪnd waɪl θɛɝɑvə dʒɔɪn feɪl ən əɹ kəmpænjənz. ðət wɑz tə seɪ, ʃi wɔkt əlɔŋsaɪd ðɛm. hɝ fɪɹs aɪz sim tə tʃɪl ivən meɪaɪɡdɪnz ɪnθuziæzəm, nɑt ðət ʃi ɡeɪv əm mɔɹ ðən ə ɡlæns. tə hɝ, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt wɝθ lʊkɪŋ æt.

Dark shapes approaching through the tide of Shaido and the falling snow resolved into a cluster of Aiel-women with their shawls framing their faces. Therava led them. A murmured word from her, and the others slowed to keep pace behind while Therava joined Faile and her companions. That was to say, she walked alongside them. Her fierce eyes seemed to chill even Maighdin's enthusiasm, not that she gave them more than a glance. To her, they were not worth looking at.

"ju ɑɹ θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪskeɪp," ʃi bɪɡæn. noʊ wʌn ɛls oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt ðə waɪz wʌn æɾəd, "du nɑt tʃɹaɪ dɪnaɪɪŋ ɪt!" ɪn ə skɔɹnfəl vɔɪs.

"You are thinking of escape," she began. No one else opened her mouth, but the Wise One added, "Do not try denying it!" in a scornful voice.

"wi wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə sɝv əz wi ʃʊd, waɪz wʌn," feɪl sɛd kɛɹfəli. ʃi kɛpt əɹ hɛd daʊn ɪn əɹ kaʊl ən meɪd ʃʊɹ nɑt tə mit ðə tɔlɝ wʊmənz aɪz.

"We will try to serve as we should, Wise One," Faile said carefully. She kept her head down in her cowl and made sure not to meet the taller woman's eyes.

"ju noʊ sʌmθɪŋ ʌv əɹ weɪz." θɛɝɑvə saʊndəd sɝpɹaɪzd, bʌɾ ɪt vænɪʃt kwɪkli. "ɡʊd. bʌt jə teɪk mi fəɹ ə ful ɪf jə θɪŋk aɪ bɪliv jəl sɝv mikli. aɪ si spɪɹəɾ ɪn ðə θɹi ʌv ju, fəɹ wɛtləndɝz. səm nɛvɝ tʃɹaɪ tə ɪskeɪp, bʌɾ oʊnli ðə dɛd səksid. ðə lɪvɪŋ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz bɹɔt bæk. ɔlweɪz."

"You know something of our ways." Therava sounded surprised, but it vanished quickly. "Good. But you take me for a fool if you think I believe you will serve meekly. I see spirit in the three of you, for wetlanders. Some never try to escape, but only the dead succeed. The living are always brought back. Always."

"aɪ wɪl hid jəɹ wɝdz, waɪz wʌn," feɪl sɛd hʌmbli. ɔlweɪz? wɛl, ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə fɝs taɪm. "wi ɔl wɪl."

"I will heed your words, Wise One," Faile said humbly. Always? Well, there had to be a first time. "We all will."

"oʊ, vɛɹi ɡʊd," θɛɝɑvə mɝmɝd. "ju maɪɾ ivən kənvɪns sʌmwʌn əz blaɪn əz sɪvænə. noʊ ðɪs, haʊɛvɝ, ɡeɪʃeɪn. wɛtləndɝz ɑɹ nɑɾ əz ʌðɝz u wɛɹ waɪt. ɹæðɝ ðən biɪŋ ɹilist ət ði ɛn ʌv ə jɪɹ ən ə deɪ, jəl sɝv əntɪl jə ɑɹ tu bɛn ən wɪðɝd tə wɝk. aɪm jəɹ oʊnli hoʊp ʌv əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðət feɪt."

"Oh, very good," Therava murmured. "You might even convince someone as blind as Sevanna. Know this, however, gai'shain. Wetlanders are not as others who wear white. Rather than being released at the end of a year and a day, you will serve until you are too bent and withered to work. I am your only hope of avoiding that fate."

feɪl stʌmbəld ɪn ðə snoʊ, ən ɪf æliændɝ ən meɪaɪɡdɪn hæd nɑt kɑɾ əɹ wɪndmɪlɪŋ ɑɹmz, ʃi wəɾ əv fɔlən. θɛɝɑvə dʒɛstʃɝɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli fəɹ əm tə kip muvɪŋ. feɪl fɛl sɪk. θɛɝɑvə wəd hɛlp əm ɪskeɪp? kiæɾ ən beɪn kleɪm ði il nu nʌθɪŋ ə ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz ən skɔɹnd wɛtləndɝz fəɹ pleɪɪŋ ɪt, bʌt feɪl ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə kɝəns swɝlɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ naʊ. kɝəns ðət wəd pʊl ɔl ə ðɛm ʌndɝ ɪf ʃi mɪsstɛpt.

Faile stumbled in the snow, and if Alliandre and Maighdin had not caught her windmilling arms, she would have fallen. Therava gestured impatiently for them to keep moving. Faile felt sick. Therava would help them escape? Chiad and Bain claimed the Aiel knew nothing of the Game of Houses and scorned wetlanders for playing it, but Faile recognized the currents swirling around her now. Currents that would pull all of them under if she misstepped.

"aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, waɪz wʌn." ʃi wɪʃt əɹ vɔɪs dɪd nɑt saʊn soʊ hɔɹs, sʌɾənli.

"I do not understand, Wise One." She wished her voice did not sound so hoarse, suddenly.

pɝhæps ðət vɛɹi hɔɹsnəs kənvɪns θɛɝɑvə, ðoʊ. pipəl laɪk əɹ bɪlivd ɪn fɪɹ əz ə moʊɾəveɪʃən bɪfɔɹ ɛni ʌðɝ. əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt, ʃi smaɪld. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə wɔɹm smaɪl, dʒʌst ə kɝvɪŋ ə θɪn lɪps, ən ði oʊnli ɪmoʊʃən ɪt kənveɪd wɑz sæɾəsfækʃən. "ɔl θɹi ʌv jəl wɑtʃ ən lɪsən waɪl jə sɝv sɪvænə. itʃ deɪ ə waɪz wʌn wɪl kwɛstʃən ju, ən jəl ɹɪpiɾ ɛvɹi wɝd sɪvænə sɛd, ən u ʃi spoʊk tə. ɪf ʃi tɔks ɪn əɹ slip, jəl ɹɪpit wʌt ʃi mʌmbəlz. pliz mi, ən əl si ðət jə ɑɹ lɛf bɪhaɪnd."

Perhaps that very hoarseness convinced Therava, though. People like her believed in fear as a motivation before any other. At any rate, she smiled. It was not a warm smile, just a curving of thin lips, and the only emotion it conveyed was satisfaction. "All three of you will watch and listen while you serve Sevanna. Each day a Wise One will question you, and you will repeat every word Sevanna said, and who she spoke to. If she talks in her sleep, you will repeat what she mumbles. Please me, and I will see that you are left behind."

feɪl wɑntəd noʊ pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs, bʌt ɹəfjuzəl wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən. ɪf ʃi ɹəfjuzd, nʌn ə ðɛm wəd sɝvaɪv ðə naɪt. ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ə ðæt. θɛɝɑvə wəd teɪk noʊ tʃænsəz. ðeɪ maɪt nɑɾ ivən sɝvaɪv əntɪl naɪtfɔl; ðɪs snoʊ wəd haɪd θɹi waɪt-klæd kɔɹpsəz kwɪkli, ən ʃi vɛɹi mʌtʃ daʊɾɪd ðəɾ ɛniwʌn wɪðɪn saɪt wəd soʊ mʌtʃ əz pɹoʊɾɛst ɪf θɛɝɑvə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə slɪɾ ə fju θɹoʊts ðən ən ðɛɹ. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz foʊkəst ɑn muvɪŋ fɔɹwɝd θɹu ðə snoʊ ɪn ɛni keɪs. ðeɪ maɪt nɑɾ ivən si.

Faile wanted no part of this, but refusal was out of the question. If she refused, none of them would survive the night. She was certain of that. Therava would take no chances. They might not even survive until nightfall; this snow would hide three white-clad corpses quickly, and she very much doubted that anyone within sight would so much as protest if Therava decided to slit a few throats then and there. Everyone was focused on moving forward through the snow in any case. They might not even see.

"ɪf ʃi lɝnz ʌv ɪt. . . ." feɪl swɑloʊd. ðə wʊmən wɑz æskɪŋ əm tə wɔk aʊɾ ɑn ə kɹʌmbəlɪŋ klɪf. noʊ, ʃi wɑz ɔɹɾɝɪŋ əm tə. dɪd ði il kɪl spaɪz? ʃi hæd nɛvɝ θɔt tə æsk kiæɾ əɹ beɪn ðæt. "wɪl jə pɹətɛkt ʌs, waɪz wʌn?"

"If she learns of it. . . ." Faile swallowed. The woman was asking them to walk out on a crumbling cliff. No, she was ordering them to. Did the Aiel kill spies? She had never thought to ask Chiad or Bain that. "Will you protect us, Wise One?"

ðə hɑɹd-feɪst wʊmən kɑt feɪlz tʃɪn wɪð stili fɪŋɡɝz, pʊlɪŋ əɹ tə ə hɔlt, pʊlɪŋ əɹ ʌp ɑn əɹ toʊz. θɛɝɑvəz aɪz kɑt hɝz dʒʌst əz taɪtli. feɪlz maʊθ wɛn dʒɹaɪ. ðət stɛɹ pɹɑməs peɪn. "ɪf ʃi lɝnz ʌv ɪt, ɡeɪʃeɪn, əl tʃɹaɪs jə ʌp fəɹ kʊkɪŋ maɪsɛlf. soʊ meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi dʌz nɑt. tənaɪt jəl sɝv ɪn əɹ tɛns. jə ən ə hʌnʒɹəd ʌðɝz, soʊ jəl nɑɾ əv mɛni leɪbɝz tə dɪstʃɹæk jə fɹəm wʌɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt."

The hard-faced woman caught Faile's chin with steely fingers, pulling her to a halt, pulling her up on her toes. Therava's eyes caught hers just as tightly. Faile's mouth went dry. That stare promised pain. "If she learns of it, gai'shain, I will trice you up for cooking myself. So make sure she does not. Tonight you will serve in her tents. You and a hundred others, so you will not have many labors to distract you from what is important."

ə moʊməns kɛɹfəl stʌɾi ʌv ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm, ən θɛɝɑvə ɡeɪv ə sæɾəsfaɪd nɑd. ʃi sɔ θɹi sɑft wɛtləndɝz, tu wik tə də ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ oʊbeɪ. wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝd ʃi ɹilis feɪl ən tɝn əweɪ, ən ɪn moʊməns ʃi ən ði ʌðɝ waɪz wʌnz wɝ swɑloʊd baɪ ðə snoʊ.

A moment's careful study of the three of them, and Therava gave a satisfied nod. She saw three soft wetlanders, too weak to do anything but obey. Without another word she released Faile and turned away, and in moments she and the other Wise Ones were swallowed by the snow.

fəɹ ə taɪm, ðə θɹi wɪmən stʃɹʌɡəld ɑn ɪn saɪləns. feɪl dɪd nɑt bɹɪŋ ʌp ɛniwʌn ɪskeɪpɪŋ əloʊn, mʌtʃ lɛs ɡɪv ɔɹɾɝz. ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ðəɾ ɪf ʃi dɪd, ði ʌðɝz wəd bɔk əɡɛn. əsaɪd fɹəm ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, kəmplaɪɪŋ naʊ wəd meɪk ɪt sim θɛɝɑvə hæd tʃeɪnʒd ðɛɹ maɪnz, ðət fɪɹ ə hɝ hæd. feɪl nu ɪnʌf ə ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən tə bi ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wəd daɪ bɪfɔɹ ædmɪɾɪŋ ðət ðə wʊmən fɹaɪɾənd ðɛm. θɛɝɑvə sɝɾənli fɹaɪɾənd hɝ. ən aɪd swɑloʊ maɪ tʌŋ bɪfɔɹ ædmɪɾɪŋ ɪɾ əlaʊd, ʃi θɔt ɹaɪli.

For a time, the three women struggled on in silence. Faile did not bring up anyone escaping alone, much less give orders. She was certain that if she did, the others would balk again. Aside from anything else, complying now would make it seem Therava had changed their minds, that fear of her had. Faile knew enough of the other two women to be sure they would die before admitting that the woman frightened them. Therava certainly frightened her. And I'd swallow my tongue before admitting it aloud, she thought wryly.

"aɪ wʌndɝ wʌt ʃi mɛn baɪ . . . kʊkɪŋ," æliændɝ sɛd faɪnəli. "waɪtkloʊk kwɛstʃənɝz səmtaɪmz tɝn pɹɪznɝz oʊvɝ ə faɪɝ ɑn ə spɪt, aɪv hɝd." meɪaɪɡdɪn ɹæpt əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf, ʃʌɾɝɪŋ, ən æliændɝ fɹiɾ ə hæn fɹəm əɹ slivz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə pæt ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz ʃoʊldɝ. "du nɑt wɝi. ɪf sɪvænə hæz ə hʌnʒɹəd sɝvəns, wi meɪ nɛvɝ ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ ɛniθɪŋ. ən wi kən tʃuz wʌt wi ɹipɔɹt, soʊ ɪt kænɑt bi tʃɹeɪs bæk tə ʌs."

"I wonder what she meant by . . . cooking," Alliandre said finally. "Whitecloak Questioners sometimes turn prisoners over a fire on a spit, I've heard." Maighdin wrapped her arms around herself, shuddering, and Alliandre freed a hand from her sleeves long enough to pat the other woman's shoulder. "Do not worry. If Sevanna has a hundred servants, we may never get close enough to hear anything. And we can choose what we report, so it cannot be traced back to us."

meɪaɪɡdɪn læf bɪɾɝli ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ waɪt hʊd. "ju θɪŋk wi stɪl əv smɔl tʃɔɪsəz. wɪv nʌn. jə nid tə lɝn əbaʊt hævɪŋ noʊ tʃɔɪsəz. ðət wʊmən dɪdn pɪk əs aʊt kəz wɪv spɪɹət." ʃi ɔlmoʊst spæt ðə wɝd. "aɪl weɪdʒɝ ɛvɹi wʌn ə sɪvænəz ʌðɝ sɝvəns əz hæd ðət lɛktʃɝ fɹəm θɛɝɑvə, tu. ɪf wi mɪs ə wɝd wi ʃəɾ əv hɝd, jə kən bi ʃʊɹ ʃɪl noʊ ʌv ɪt."

Maighdin laughed bitterly inside her white hood. "You think we still have small choices. We have none. You need to learn about having no choices. That woman didn't pick us out because we have spirit." She almost spat the word. "I'll wager every one of Sevanna's other servants has had that lecture from Therava, too. If we miss a word we should have heard, you can be sure she'll know of it."

"ju meɪ bi ɹaɪt," æliændɝ əlaʊɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "bʌt jəl nɑt spik tə mi əɡɛn ɪn ðət fæʃən, meɪaɪɡdɪn. əɹ sɝkəmstænsəz ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ, tə seɪ ðə list, bʌt jəl ɹɪmɛmbɝ u aɪ æm."

"You may be right," Alliandre allowed after a moment. "But you will not speak to me again in that fashion, Maighdin. Our circumstances are trying, to say the least, but you will remember who I am."

"əntɪl wi ɪskeɪp," meɪaɪɡdɪn ɹɪplaɪd, "ju ɑɹ sɪvænəz sɝvənt. ɪf jə doʊn θɪŋk ə jɝsɛlf əz ə sɝvən ɛvɹi mɪnət, ðən jə maɪɾ əz wɛl klaɪm ɑntu ðət spɪt. ən liv ɹum fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs, kəz jəl pʊɾ əs ɑn ɪt, əz wɛl."

"Until we escape," Maighdin replied, "you are Sevanna's servant. If you don't think of yourself as a servant every minute, then you might as well climb onto that spit. And leave room for the rest of us, because you will put us on it, as well."

æliændɝz kaʊl hɪɾ əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ əɹ bæk ɡɹu stɪfɝ wɪð ɛvɹi wɝd. ʃi wɑz ɪntɛlədʒənt, ən nu haʊ tə də wʌt ʃi mʌst, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ə kwinz tɛmpɝ wən ʃi dɪd nɑt kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt.

Alliandre's cowl hid her face, but her back grew stiffer with every word. She was intelligent, and knew how to do what she must, but she had a queen's temper when she did not control it.

feɪl spoʊk bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ ɪɹʌpt. "əntɪl wi mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ, wəɹ ɔl sɝvəns," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. laɪt, ðə læs θɪŋ ʃi niɾəd wɑz ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm skwɑbəlɪŋ. "bʌt jəl əpɑlədʒaɪz, meɪaɪɡdɪn. naʊ!" hɛɾ əvɝɾəd, hɝ sɝvɪŋ wʊmən mʌmbəl sʌmθɪŋ ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn ən əpɑlədʒi. ʃi lɛɾ ɪt pæs fəɹ wʌn, ɪn ɛni keɪs. "æz fəɹ ju, æliændɝ, aɪ ɪkspɛk jə tə bi ə ɡʊd sɝvənt." æliændɝ meɪɾ ə nɔɪz, ə hæf-pɹoʊɾɛst, ðət feɪl ɪɡnɔɹd. "ɪf wəɹ tə hæv ɛni tʃæns ʌv ɪskeɪp, wi mʌs də əz wəɹ toʊld, wɝk hɑɹd, ən ətʃɹækt əz lɪɾəl ətɛnʃən əz pɑsəbəl." əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ətʃɹæktəd wʌt simd ɔl ði ətɛnʃən ɪn ðə wɝld. "ænd wɪl tɛl θɛɝɑvə ɛvɹi taɪm sɪvænə snizɪz. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt sɪvænə wɪl də ɪf ʃi faɪnz aʊt, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk wi ɔl əv ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə ʌv wʌt θɛɝɑvə wɪl də ɪf wi dɪspliz hɝ."

Faile spoke before she could erupt. "Until we manage to get away, we are all servants," she said firmly. Light, the last thing she needed was the pair of them squabbling. "But you will apologize, Maighdin. Now!" Head averted, her serving woman mumbled something that might have been an apology. She let it pass for one, in any case. "As for you, Alliandre, I expect you to be a good servant." Alliandre made a noise, a half-protest, that Faile ignored. "If we are to have any chance of escape, we must do as we are told, work hard, and attract as little attention as possible." As if they had not already attracted what seemed all the attention in the world. "And we will tell Therava every time Sevanna sneezes. I don't know what Sevanna will do if she finds out, but I think we all have a good idea of what Therava will do if we displease her."

ðət wɑz ɪnʌf tə sɛɾəl əm ɔl bæk ɪndə mjutnəs. ðeɪ dɪɾ ɔl əv ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə ʌv wʌt θɛɝɑvə wəd du, ən kɪlɪŋ maɪt nɑt bi ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt.

That was enough to settle them all back into muteness. They did all have a good idea of what Therava would do, and killing might not be the worst of it.

ðə snoʊ feɪɾəd əweɪ tə ə fju skæɾɝd fleɪks baɪ mɪddeɪ. dɑɹk ɹɔɪlɪŋ klaʊdz stɪl hɪd ðə sʌn, bʌt feɪl dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt mʌs bi nɪɹ ɪnʌf mɪddeɪ, kəz ðeɪ wɝ fɛd. noʊ wʌn stɑp muvɪŋ, bʌt hʌnʒɹədz ʌv ɡeɪʃeɪn meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə kɑləm wɪð bæskəts ən skɹəps fʊl ə bɹɛɾ ən dʒɹaɪd bif, ən wɔɾɝ bæɡz ðət kənteɪnd wɔɾɝ ðɪs taɪm, koʊld ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ tiθ eɪk. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ʃi fɛl noʊ mɔɹ hʌŋɡɹi ðən aʊɝz ʌv wɔkɪŋ θɹu snoʊ wəɾ əkaʊn fɔɹ. pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn hild wʌns, ʃi nu, ən i hæd bɪn ɹævənəs fəɹ tu deɪz. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz kəz əɹ ɪnʒɝiz hæd bɪn soʊ mʌtʃ lɛs ðən hɪz. ʃi noʊɾəst ðəɾ æliændɝ ən meɪaɪɡdɪn eɪt noʊ mɔɹ ðən ʃi.

The snow faded away to a few scattered flakes by midday. Dark roiling clouds still hid the sun, but Faile decided it must be near enough midday, because they were fed. No one stopped moving, but hundreds of gai'shain made their way through the column with baskets and scrips full of bread and dried beef, and water bags that contained water this time, cold enough to make her teeth ache. Strangely, she felt no more hungry than hours of walking through snow would account for. Perrin had been Healed once, she knew, and he had been ravenous for two days. Perhaps it was because her injuries had been so much less than his. She noticed that Alliandre and Maighdin ate no more than she.

hilɪŋ meɪɾ əɹ θɪŋk ʌv ɡəlinə, ɔl ðə seɪm kwɛstʃənz ðət bɔɪl daʊn tə ən ɪnkɹɛdʒələs waɪ? waɪ wəɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ - ʃi mʌs bi ɛɛs sədaɪ - waɪ wəd ʃi toʊɾi fəɹ sɪvænə ən θɛɝɑvə? fəɹ ɛniwʌn? ən ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪt hɛlp əm ɪskeɪp. əɹ ʃi maɪt nɑt. ʃi maɪt bɪtʃɹeɪ ðɛm, ɪf ɪt suɾəd əɹ pɝpəsəz. ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd wʌt ðeɪ dɪd, ən jə hæd noʊ ɔltɝnəɾɪv bʌt tə æksɛp ðəɾ ənlɛs jə wɝ ɹænd ælθɹ. bʌɾ i wɑz tɑvɝən, ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɑn tɑp ʌv ɪt; ʃi wɑz ə wʊmən wɪð vɛɹi fju ɹisɔɹsɪz ət ðə moʊmənt, ən ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl deɪnʒɝ hæŋɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə hɛdz ə ðoʊz ʃi wɑz ɹispɑnsəbəl fɔɹ. ɛni hɛlp wəd bi wɛlkəm, fɹəm ɛniwʌn. ðə bɹɪsk bɹiz feɪld waɪl ʃi pɹɑɾɪd ət ɡəlinə fɹəm ɛvɹi æŋɡəl ʃi kəd θɪŋk ʌv, ən ðə snoʊ keɪm əɡɛn, ɡɹoʊɪŋ hɛviɝ, əntɪl ʃi kəd nɑt si tɛn peɪsɪz. ʃi kəd nɑt dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ tə tʃɹʌs ðə wʊmən.

Healing made her think of Galina, all the same questions that boiled down to an incredulous why? Why would an Aes Sedai - she must be Aes Sedai - why would she toady for Sevanna and Therava? For anyone? An Aes Sedai might help them escape. Or she might not. She might betray them, if it suited her purposes. Aes Sedai did what they did, and you had no alternative but to accept that unless you were Rand al'Thor. But he was ta'veren, and the Dragon Reborn on top of it; she was a woman with very few resources at the moment, and a considerable danger hanging over her head. Not to mention the heads of those she was responsible for. Any help would be welcome, from anyone. The brisk breeze failed while she prodded at Galina from every angle she could think of, and the snow came again, growing heavier, until she could not see ten paces. She could not decide whether to trust the woman.

əbɹʌpli ʃi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ʌv ənʌðɝ waɪt-ɹoʊbd wʊmən wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ, ɔlmoʊs hɪɾən baɪ ðə snoʊ. nɑɾ ɪnʌf snoʊ tə mæsk ðət waɪd, dʒuəl bɛlt, ðoʊ. feɪl tʌtʃt əɹ kəmpænjənz ɑn ði ɑɹm ən nɑɾəd təwɔɹd ɡəlinə.

Abruptly she became aware of another white-robed woman watching her, almost hidden by the snow. Not enough snow to mask that wide, jeweled belt, though. Faile touched her companions on the arm and nodded toward Galina.

wən ɡəlinə sɔ ʃi hæd bɪn sin, ʃi keɪm tə tʃɹʌdʒ əlɔŋ bɪtwin feɪl ən æliændɝ. ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑt muv wɪð ɛni ɡɹeɪs ɪn ðə snoʊ, bʌt ʃi simd mɔɹ juz tə wɔkɪŋ ɪn ɪt ðən ðeɪ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ə fɔnɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ, naʊ. hɝ ɹaʊn feɪs wɑz hɑɹd wɪðɪn əɹ hʊd, hɝ aɪz ʃɑɹp. bʌt ʃi dɪd kip tɝnɪŋ əɹ hɛd, dɑɹɾɪŋ wɛɹi ɡlænsɪz tə si hu ɛls wɑz nɪɹbaɪ. ʃi lʊk laɪk ə haʊsəkæt pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ə lɛpɝd. "ju noʊ hu aɪ æm?" ʃi dɪmændəd, bʌɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs ðət wʊɾə bɪn ɪnɔɾəbəl tɛn fiɾ ɔf. "wʌɾ aɪ æm?"

When Galina saw she had been seen, she came to trudge along between Faile and Alliandre. She still did not move with any grace in the snow, but she seemed more used to walking in it than they. There was nothing of fawning about her, now. Her round face was hard within her hood, her eyes sharp. But she did keep turning her head, darting wary glances to see who else was nearby. She looked like a housecat pretending to be a leopard. "You know who I am?" she demanded, but in a voice that would have been inaudible ten feet off. "What I am?"

"ju sim tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ," feɪl sɛd kɛɹfəli. "ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, juv ə vɛɹi pəkjuljɝ pleɪs hɪɹ fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ." niðɝ æliændɝ nɔɹ meɪaɪɡdɪn ɡeɪv ðə slaɪɾəst stɑɹɾ ə sɝpɹaɪz. pleɪnli ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sin ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ðət ɡəlinə wɑz θʌmɪŋ nɝvəsli.

"You seem to be Aes Sedai," Faile said carefully. "On the other hand, you have a very peculiar place here for an Aes Sedai." Neither Alliandre nor Maighdin gave the slightest start of surprise. Plainly they had already seen the Great Serpent ring that Galina was thumbing nervously.

kʌlɝ blumd ɪn ɡəlinəz tʃiks, ən ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪɾ aʊɾ əz æŋɡɝ. "wʌɾ aɪ də hɪɹ ɪz ʌv ɡɹeɪɾ ɪmpɔɹɾəns tə ðə taʊɝ, tʃaɪld," ʃi sɛd koʊldli. hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən sɛd ʃi hæd ɹizənz ðeɪ kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə kɑmpɹihɛnd. hɝ aɪz dɑɹɾɪd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɪɹs ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ. "aɪ mʌs nɑt feɪl. ðəɾ ɪz ɔl jə nid tə noʊ."

Color bloomed in Galina's cheeks, and she tried to make it out as anger. "What I do here is of great importance to the Tower, child," she said coldly. Her expression said she had reasons they could not begin to comprehend. Her eyes darted, trying to pierce the falling snow. "I must not fail. That is all you need to know."

"wi nid tə noʊ wɛðɝ wi kən tʃɹʌs ju," æliændɝ sɛd kɑmli. "ju mʌst əv tʃɹeɪn ɪn ðə taʊɝ əɹ jə wəd nɑt noʊ hilɪŋ, bʌt wɪmən ɝn ðə ɹɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ɝnɪŋ ðə ʃɔl, ən aɪ kænɑt bɪliv jə ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ." ɪt sim feɪl hæd nɑt bɪn ði oʊnli wʌn pʌzəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə wʊmən.

"We need to know whether we can trust you," Alliandre said calmly. "You must have trained in the Tower or you would not know Healing, but women earn the ring without earning the shawl, and I cannot believe you are Aes Sedai." It seemed Faile had not been the only one puzzling over the woman.

ɡəlinəz plʌmp maʊθ hɑɹɾənd, ən ʃi klɛntʃt ə fɪst əɾ æliændɝ, tə θɹɛɾən əɹ ʃoʊ hɝ ɹɪŋ, əɹ boʊθ. "ju θɪŋk ðəl tʃɹit jə dɪfɹənli kəz jə wɛɹ ə kɹaʊn? kəz jə juz tə wɛɹ wʌn?" ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ ə hɝ æŋɡɝ, naʊ. ʃi fɝɡɑt tə kip lʊkaʊt fəɹ lɪsənɝz, ən əɹ vɔɪs wɑz æsəd. spɪɾəl flu wɪð ðə fɔɹs ə hɝ taɪɹeɪd. "ju wɪl bɹɪŋ sɪvænə waɪn ən wɑʃ əɹ bæk dʒʌs laɪk ðə ɹɛst. hɝ sɝvəns ɑɹ ɔl noʊbəlz, əɹ ɹɪtʃ mɝtʃəns, əɹ mɛn ən wɪmən u noʊ haʊ tə sɝv noʊbəlz. ɛvɹi deɪ ʃiz faɪv ə ðɛm stʃɹæpt, tə ɛnkɝɪdʒ ðə ɹɛst, soʊ ðeɪ ɔl kæɹi teɪlz tə hɝ hoʊpɪŋ tə kʌɹi feɪvɝ. ðə fɝs taɪm jə tʃɹaɪ tə ɪskeɪp, ðəl swɪtʃ ðə soʊlz ə jəɹ fiɾ əntɪl jə kænɑt wɔk, ən taɪ jə twɪstəɾ ʌp laɪk ə blæksmɪθs pʌzəl tə kæɹi ɑn ə kɑɹɾ əntɪl jə kæn. ðə sɛkən taɪm wɪl bi wɝs, ən ðə θɝd wɝs əɡɛn. ðəɹ ɪz ə fɛloʊ hɪɹ u juz tə bi ə waɪtkloʊk. hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɪskeɪp naɪn taɪmz. ə hɑɹd mæn, bʌt ðə læs taɪm ðeɪ bɹɔɾ ɪm bæk, hi wɑz bɛɡɪŋ ən kɹaɪɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ivən bɪɡæn stʃɹɪpɪŋ ɪm fəɹ pʌnɪʃmənt."

Galina's plump mouth hardened, and she clenched a fist at Alliandre, to threaten or show her ring, or both. "You think they will treat you differently because you wear a crown? Because you used to wear one?" There was no doubt of her anger, now. She forgot to keep lookout for listeners, and her voice was acid. Spittle flew with the force of her tirade. "You will bring Sevanna wine and wash her back just like the rest. Her servants are all nobles, or rich merchants, or men and women who know how to serve nobles. Every day she has five of them strapped, to encourage the rest, so they all carry tales to her hoping to curry favor. The first time you try to escape, they will switch the soles of your feet until you cannot walk, and tie you twisted up like a blacksmith's puzzle to carry on a cart until you can. The second time will be worse, and the third worse again. There is a fellow here who used to be a Whitecloak. He tried to escape nine times. A hard man, but the last time they brought him back, he was begging and crying before they even began stripping him for punishment."

æliændɝ dɪd nɑt teɪk ðə hɝæŋ wɛl. ʃi pʌft ʌp ɪndɪɡnənli, ən meɪaɪɡdɪn ɡɹaʊld, "wɑz ðət wʌt hæpən tə ju? wɛðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ æksɛptɪd, jə ɑɹ ə dɪsɡɹeɪs tə ðə taʊɝ!"

Alliandre did not take the harangue well. She puffed up indignantly, and Maighdin growled, "Was that what happened to you? Whether Aes Sedai or Accepted, you are a disgrace to the Tower!"

"bi saɪlənt wən jəɹ bɛɾɝz spik, waɪldɝ!" ɡəlinə snæpt.

"Be silent when your betters speak, wilder!" Galina snapped.

laɪt, ɪf ðɪs wɛn ɛni fɝðɝ, ðeɪ wəd bi skɹimɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ nɛkst. "ɪf jə min tə hɛlp əs ɪskeɪp, ðən seɪ soʊ," feɪl toʊl ðə sɪlk-klæɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli daʊt ðəɾ əbaʊt ðə wʊmən. dʒʌst ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. "ɪf nɑt, wʌt dʒju wɑnt wɪð ʌs?"

Light, if this went any further, they would be screaming at one another next. "If you mean to help us escape, then say so," Faile told the silk-clad Aes Sedai. She did not really doubt that about the woman. Just everything else. "If not, what do you want with us?"

əhɛɾ ə ðɛm ə wæɡən lumd aʊɾ ə ðə snoʊ, linɪŋ wɛɹ wʌn ə ðə slɛdz hæd kʌm lus. dɝɛktəd baɪ ə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɪð ði ɑɹmz ən ʃoʊldɝz ʌv ə blæksmɪθ, ɡeɪʃeɪn wɝ ɹɪɡɪŋ ə lɛvɝ tə hɔɪs ðə wæɡən ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə slɛd tə bi læʃt bæk ɪn pleɪs. feɪl ən ði ʌðɝz kɛp saɪlən əz ðeɪ pæst.

Ahead of them a wagon loomed out of the snow, leaning where one of the sleds had come loose. Directed by a Shaido with the arms and shoulders of a blacksmith, gai'shain were rigging a lever to hoist the wagon enough for the sled to be lashed back in place. Faile and the others kept silent as they passed.

"ɪz ðɪs ɹɪli jəɹ lidʒ leɪɾi, æliændɝ?" ɡəlinə dɪmændəd wʌns ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ʌv ɪɹʃɑɾ ə ðə mɛn ɝaʊn ðə wæɡən. hɝ feɪs wɑz stɪl flʌʃt wɪð æŋɡɝ, hɝ toʊn slaɪsɪŋ. "hu ɪz ʃi ðət jə wəd swɛɹ tə hɝ?"

"Is this really your liege lady, Alliandre?" Galina demanded once they were out of earshot of the men around the wagon. Her face was still flushed with anger, her tone slicing. "Who is she that you would swear to her?"

"ju kən æsk mi," feɪl sɛd koʊldli. bɝn ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðɛɹ blʌɾi sikɹəsi! səmtaɪmz ʃi θɔɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd nɑt tɛl jə ðə skaɪ wɑz blu ənlɛs ʃi sɔ ædvæntɪdʒ ɪn ɪt. "aɪ æm ðə leɪɾi feɪl teɪbɑɹə, ən ðæts əz mʌtʃ əz jə nid tə noʊ. dʒju min tə hɛlp ʌs?"

"You can ask me," Faile said coldly. Burn Aes Sedai and their bloody secrecy! Sometimes she thought an Aes Sedai would not tell you the sky was blue unless she saw advantage in it. "I am the Lady Faile t'Aybara, and that's as much as you need to know. Do you mean to help us?"

ɡəlinə stʌmbəl tə wʌn ni, piɹɪŋ ət feɪl soʊ hɑɹd ðət ʃi bɪɡæn tə wʌndɝ wɛðɝ ʃi hæd meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk. ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ, ʃi nu ʃi hæd.

Galina stumbled to one knee, peering at Faile so hard that she began to wonder whether she had made a mistake. A moment later, she knew she had.

ɹɪɡeɪnɪŋ əɹ fit, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ smaɪld ənplɛzənli. ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ simd æŋɡɹi. ɪn fækt, ʃi lʊkt əz plizd əz θɛɝɑvə hæd, ən wɝs, ɪn mʌtʃ ðə seɪm weɪ. "teɪbɑɹə," ʃi mjuzd. "ju ɑɹ sɑldəiən. ðəɹ ɪz ə jʌŋ mæn, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. jəɹ hʌzbənd? jɛs, aɪ si aɪv hɪt ðə tɑɹɡət. ðət wəɾ ɪkspleɪn æliændɝz oʊθ, sɝɾənli. sɪvænə hæz ɡɹændioʊs plænz fəɹ ə mæn huz neɪm ɪz lɪŋk tə jəɹ hʌzbənd. ɹænd ælθɹ. ɪf ʃi nu ʃi hæd jə ɪn əɹ hænz . . . oʊ, nɛvɝ fɪɹ ʃɪl lɝn fɹəm mi." hɝ ɡeɪz hɑɹɾənd, ən sʌɾənli ʃi simd ə lɛpɝɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ. ə stɑɹvɪŋ lɛpɝd. "nɑɾ ɪf jə ɔl də əz aɪ tɛl ju. əl ivən hɛlp jə ɡɛɾ əweɪ."

Regaining her feet, the Aes Sedai smiled unpleasantly. She no longer seemed angry. In fact, she looked as pleased as Therava had, and worse, in much the same way. "t'Aybara," she mused. "You are Saldaean. There is a young man, Perrin Aybara. Your husband? Yes, I see I've hit the target. That would explain Alliandre's oath, certainly. Sevanna has grandiose plans for a man whose name is linked to your husband. Rand al'Thor. If she knew she had you in her hands . . . Oh, never fear she will learn from me." Her gaze hardened, and suddenly she seemed a leopard in truth. A starving leopard. "Not if you all do as I tell you. I will even help you get away."

"wʌt dʒju wɑn ʌv ʌs?" feɪl sɛd, mɔɹ ɪnsɪstənli ðən ʃi fɛlt. laɪt, ʃi hæd bɪn æŋɡɹi əɾ æliændɝ fəɹ dʒɹɔɪŋ ətɛnʃən tə ðɛm baɪ neɪmɪŋ hɝsɛlf, ən naʊ ʃi hæd dʌn ðə seɪm. əɹ wɝs. ən aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz kənsilɪŋ maɪsɛlf baɪ haɪɾɪŋ maɪ fɑðɝz neɪm, ʃi θɔt bɪɾɝli.

"What do you want of us?" Faile said, more insistently than she felt. Light, she had been angry at Alliandre for drawing attention to them by naming herself, and now she had done the same. Or worse. And I thought I was concealing myself by hiding my father's name, she thought bitterly.

"nʌθɪŋ tu tʃɹaɪɪŋ," ɡəlinə ɹɪplaɪd. "ju mɑɹk θɛɝɑvə, ʌv kɔɹs? ʌv kɔɹs, jə dɪd. ɛvɹiwʌn noʊɾəsəz θɛɝɑvə. ʃi kips sʌmθɪŋ ɪn əɹ tɛnt, ə smuð waɪt ɹɑɾ əbaʊɾ ə fʊt lɔŋ. ɪts ɪn ə ɹɛd tʃɛst wɪð bɹæs bændɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz nɛvɝ lɑkt. bɹɪŋ ɪt tə mi, ən əl teɪk jə wɪð mi wən aɪ ɡoʊ."

"Nothing too trying," Galina replied. "You marked Therava, of course? Of course, you did. Everyone notices Therava. She keeps something in her tent, a smooth white rod about a foot long. It is in a red chest with brass banding that is never locked. Bring it to me, and I will take you with me when I go."

"ə smɔl θɪŋ tə du, ɪt simz," æliændɝ sɛd daʊtfəli. "bʌɾ ɪf soʊ, waɪ dʒju nɑt teɪk ɪt jɝsɛlf?"

"A small thing to do, it seems," Alliandre said doubtfully. "But if so, why do you not take it yourself?"

"bɪkɔz aɪ hæv jə tə fɛtʃ ɪt fəɹ mi!" ɹilaɪzɪŋ ʃi hæd ʃaʊɾəd, ɡəlinə hʌɾəld ɪn ɑn hɝsɛlf, ən əɹ kaʊl swʌŋ əz ʃi sɝtʃt fəɹ ivzdʒɹɑpɝz əmʌŋ ðə snoʊ-veɪl θɹɔŋ. noʊ wʌn sim tə bi soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænsɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs dʒɹɑp tə ə fɛɹəl hɪs. "ɪf jə də nɑt, əl liv jə hɪɹ əntɪl jə ɑɹ ɡɹeɪ ən ɹɪŋkəld. ən sɪvænə wɪl hɪɹ ə pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə."

"Because I have you to fetch it for me!" Realizing she had shouted, Galina huddled in on herself, and her cowl swung as she searched for eavesdroppers among the snow-veiled throng. No one seemed to be so much as glancing their way, but her voice dropped to a feral hiss. "If you do not, I will leave you here until you are gray and wrinkled. And Sevanna will hear of Perrin Aybara."

"ɪt meɪ teɪk taɪm," feɪl sɛd dɛspɝətli. "wi woʊn bi fɹi tə dʒʌst snik ɪndə θɛɝɑvəz tɛnt wɛnɛvɝ wi wɑnt." laɪt, ðə læs θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld ʃi wɑntəd wɑz tə ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ θɛɝɑvəz tɛnt. bʌt ɡəlinə hæd sɛd ʃi wəd hɛlp ðɛm. vaɪl ʃi maɪt bi, bʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt laɪ.

"It may take time," Faile said desperately. "We won't be free to just sneak into Therava's tent whenever we want." Light, the last thing in the world she wanted was to go anywhere near Therava's tent. But Galina had said she would help them. Vile she might be, but Aes Sedai could not lie.

"ju hæv ɔl ðə taɪm jə nid," ɡəlinə ɹɪplaɪd. "ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ laɪf, leɪɾi feɪl teɪbɑɹə, ɪf jə ɑɹ nɑt kɛɹfəl. də nɑt feɪl mi." ʃi ɡeɪv feɪl ə læs hɑɹd stɛɹ, ðən tɝn tə leɪbɝ əweɪ ɪndə ðə snoʊ, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪɾ əɹ dʒuəl bɛl bɪhaɪn əɹ waɪd slivz.

"You have all the time you need," Galina replied. "The rest of your life, Lady Faile t'Aybara, if you are not careful. Do not fail me." She gave Faile a last hard stare, then turned to labor away into the snow, holding her arms as if trying to hide her jeweled belt behind her wide sleeves.

feɪl stʃɹʌɡəld ɔnwɝɾ ɪn saɪləns. niðɝ ə hɝ kəmpænjənz hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə seɪ, iðɝ. ðəɹ dɪd nɑt sim tə bi ɛniθɪŋ tə seɪ. æliændɝ əpɪɹd sʌŋk ɪn θɔt, hænz ɪn əɹ slivz, piɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ əz ɪf siɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ bɪɑn ðə blɪzɝd. meɪaɪɡdɪn hæd ɡɔn bæk tə ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ ɡoʊldən kɑlɝ ɪn ə taɪt fɪst. ðeɪ wɝ kɑɾ ɪn θɹi snɛɹz, nɑt wʌn, ən ɛni ʌv ðə θɹi maɪt kɪl. ɹɛskju sʌɾənli sim vɛɹi ətʃɹæktɪv. sʌmhaʊ, ðoʊ, feɪl ɪntɛndəd tə faɪn əɹ weɪ aʊɾ ə ðɪs tʃɹæp. pʊlɪŋ əɹ hæn əweɪ fɹəm əɹ oʊn kɑlɝ, ʃi fɔt θɹu ðə snoʊstɔɹm, plænɪŋ.

Faile struggled onward in silence. Neither of her companions had anything to say, either. There did not seem to be anything to say. Alliandre appeared sunk in thought, hands in her sleeves, peering straight ahead as if seeing something beyond the blizzard. Maighdin had gone back to gripping her golden collar in a tight fist. They were caught in three snares, not one, and any of the three might kill. Rescue suddenly seemed very attractive. Somehow, though, Faile intended to find her way out of this trap. Pulling her hand away from her own collar, she fought through the snowstorm, planning.


tʃæptɝ faɪv


CHAPTER 5

flæɡz


Flags

hi ɹæn əkɹɔs ðə snoʊ-kʌvɝd pleɪn, noʊz ɪndə ðə wɪnd, hʌntɪŋ fəɹ ə sɛnt, fəɹ ðət wʌn pɹɛʃəs sɛnt. ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ mɛltəɾ ɑn ɪz tʃɪl fɝ, bʌt koʊl kəd nɑt dɪtɝ hɪm. ðə pædz ə hɪz pɔz wɝ nʌm, jɛɾ ɪz bɝnɪŋ lɛɡz wɝk fjʊɹiəsli, kæɹiɪŋ ɪm ɑn, fæstɝ ən fæstɝ, tɪl ðə læn blɝɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz. hi hæd tə faɪn hɝ.

He ran across the snow-covered plain, nose into the wind, hunting for a scent, for that one precious scent. The falling snow no longer melted on his chilled fur, but cold could not deter him. The pads of his paws were numb, yet his burning legs worked furiously, carrying him on, faster and faster, till the land blurred in his eyes. He had to find her.

sʌɾənli ə ɡɹeɪt ɡɹɪzəld ɡɹeɪ wʊlf, ɹæɡəd-ɪɹɾ ən skɑɹd fɹəm mɛni faɪts, sɛɾəld daʊn aʊɾ ə ðə skaɪ tə ɹeɪs ðə sʌn bɪsaɪd hɪm. ənʌðɝ ɡɹeɪt ɡɹeɪ wʊlf, bʌt nɑt soʊ lɑɹdʒ əz hɪmsɛlf. hɪz tiθ wəd tɛɹ ðə θɹoʊts ə ðoʊz u hæd teɪkən hɝ. hɪz dʒɔz wəd kɹʌʃ ðɛɹ boʊnz!

Suddenly a great grizzled gray wolf, ragged-eared and scarred from many fights, settled down out of the sky to race the sun beside him. Another great gray wolf, but not so large as himself. His teeth would tear the throats of those who had taken her. His jaws would crush their bones!

jəɹ ʃiz nɑt hɪɹ, hɑpɝ sɛn tə hɪm, bʌt jə ɑɹ hɪɹ tu stʃɹɔŋli, ən tu lɔŋ fɹəm jəɹ bɑɾi. jə mʌst ɡoʊ bæk, jʌŋ bʊl, əɹ jəl daɪ.

Your she is not here, Hopper sent to him, but you are here too strongly, and too long from your body. You must go back, Young Bull, or you will die.

aɪ mʌs faɪn hɝ. ivən ɪz θɔts sim tə pænt. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ə hɪmsɛlf əz pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. hi wɑz jʌŋ bʊl. wʌns, hi hæd faʊn ðə fælkən hɪɹ, ən i kəɾ əɡɛn. hi hæd tə faɪn hɝ. bɪsaɪd ðət nid, dɛθ wɑz nʌθɪŋ.

I must find her. Even his thoughts seemed to pant. He did not think of himself as Perrin Aybara. He was Young Bull. Once, he had found the falcon here, and he could again. He had to find her. Beside that need, death was nothing.

ɪn ə flæʃ ʌv ɡɹeɪ ði ʌðɝ wʊlf lʌnʒd əɡɛnst ɪz saɪd, ən ðoʊ jʌŋ bʊl wɑz ðə lɑɹdʒɝ, hi wɑz taɪɝd, ən i fɛl hɛvəli. skɹæmbəlɪŋ tə hɪz fiɾ ɪn ðə snoʊ, hi snɑɹəld ən lɔntʃt hɪmsɛlf ət hɑpɝz θɹoʊt. nʌθɪŋ mæɾɝd mɔɹ ðən ðə fælkən.

In a flash of gray the other wolf lunged against his side, and though Young Bull was the larger, he was tired, and he fell heavily. Scrambling to his feet in the snow, he snarled and launched himself at Hopper's throat. Nothing mattered more than the falcon.

ðə skɑɹd wʊlf flu ɪndə ði ɛɹ laɪk ə bɝd, ən jʌŋ bʊl wɛn spɹɔlɪŋ. hɑpɝ laɪɾəd ɑn ðə snoʊ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

The scarred wolf flew into the air like a bird, and Young Bull went sprawling. Hopper lighted on the snow behind him.

hɪɹ mi, kʌb! hɑpɝ θɔɾ əɾ ɪm fɪɹsli. jəɹ maɪn ɪz twɪstəd wɪð fɪɹ! ʃiz nɑt hɪɹ, ən jəl daɪ ɪf jə ɹɪmeɪn lɔŋɡɝ. faɪn əɹ ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld. jə kən oʊnli faɪn əɹ ðɛɹ. ɡoʊ bæk, ən faɪn hɝ!

Hear me, cub! Hopper thought at him fiercely. Your mind is twisted with fear! She is not here, and you will die if you remain longer. Find her in the waking world. You can only find her there. Go back, and find her!

pɛɹɪnz aɪz snæpt oʊpən. hi wɑz boʊn taɪɝɾ ən ɪz mɪɾəl fɛl hɑloʊ, bʌt hʌŋɡɝ wɑz ə ʃædoʊ bɪsaɪd ðə hɑloʊnəs ɪn ɪz tʃɛst. hi wɑz ɔl hɑloʊ, ən dɪstənst ivən fɹəm hɪmsɛlf, əz ɪf i wɝ ənʌðɝ pɝsən wɑtʃɪŋ pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə sʌfɝ. əbʌv hɪm, ə blu-ænd-ɡoʊld-stʃɹaɪp tɛn ɹuf ɹɪpəld ɪn ðə wɪnd. ði ɪntɪɹiɝ ə ðə tɛnt wɑz dɪm ən ʃæɾoʊd, bʌt sʌnlaɪt meɪd ðə bɹaɪt kænvəs ɡloʊ sɔfli. ən jɛstɝdeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn ə naɪtmɛɹ ɛni mɔɹ ðən hɑpɝ wɑz. laɪt, hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɑpɝ. ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, dɛθ wɑz . . . faɪnəl. ði ɛɹ wɑz wɔɹm, bʌɾ i ʃɪvɝd. hi wɑz laɪɪŋ ɑn ə fɛðɝ mætʃɹəs, ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ bɛd wɪð hɛvi kɔɹnɝpoʊsts θɪkli kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd. θɹu ðə sɛn ə tʃɑɹkoʊl bɝnɪŋ ɪn ðə bɹeɪʒɝz i smɛl mʌski pɝfjum, ən ðə wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ɪt. noʊ wʌn ɛls wɑz pɹɛzənt.

Perrin's eyes snapped open. He was bone tired and his middle felt hollow, but hunger was a shadow beside the hollowness in his chest. He was all hollow, and distanced even from himself, as if he were another person watching Perrin Aybara suffer. Above him, a blue-and-gold-striped tent roof rippled in the wind. The interior of the tent was dim and shadowed, but sunlight made the bright canvas glow softly. And yesterday had not been a nightmare any more than Hopper was. Light, he had tried to kill Hopper. In the wolf dream, death was . . . final. The air was warm, but he shivered. He was lying on a feather mattress, in a large bed with heavy cornerposts thickly carved and gilded. Through the scent of charcoal burning in the braziers he smelled musky perfume, and the woman wearing it. No one else was present.

wɪθaʊt ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz hɛd fɹəm ðə pɪloʊ, hi sɛd, "hæv ðeɪ faʊn əɹ jɛt, bɹəleɪn?" hɪz hɛd fɛl tu hɛvi tə lɪft.

Without raising his head from the pillow, he said, "Have they found her yet, Berelain?" His head felt too heavy to lift.

wʌn ə hɝ kæmp tʃɛɹz skwik feɪnli əz ʃi ʃɪftəd. hi hæd bɪn hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ ɔfən, wɪð feɪl, tə dɪskʌs plænz. ðə tɛnt wɑz bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə haʊs ə fæmli, ən bɹəleɪnz ɪlæbɹət fɝnɪʃɪŋz wəd nɑɾ əv lʊkt aʊɾ ə pleɪs ɪn ə pæləs, ɔl ɪntʃɹəkət kɑɹvɪŋ ən ɡɪlt, ðoʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, teɪbəlz ən tʃɛɹz ən ðə bɛɾ ɪtsɛlf, wɑz hɛl təɡɛðɝ wɪð pɛɡz. ðeɪ kəd bi dɪsəsɛmbəl fəɹ stɔɹədʒ ɑn ə kɑɹt, bʌt ðə pɛɡz dɪd nɑt meɪk fəɹ tʃɹu stɝɾinəs.

One of her camp chairs squeaked faintly as she shifted. He had been here before often, with Faile, to discuss plans. The tent was big enough to house a family, and Berelain's elaborate furnishings would not have looked out of place in a palace, all intricate carving and gilt, though everything, tables and chairs and the bed itself, was held together with pegs. They could be disassembled for storage on a cart, but the pegs did not make for true sturdiness.

ʌndɝ ðə pɝfjum, bɹəleɪn smɛld ə sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ i nu ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ, jɛɾ əɹ vɔɪs wɑz kəmpoʊzd. "noʊ. jəɹ skaʊts hævən ɹɪtɝn jɛt, ən maɪn . . . wən ðeɪ dɪdn ɹɪtɝn baɪ naɪtfɔl, aɪ sɛn ə fʊl kʌmpəni. ðeɪ faʊn maɪ mɛn dɛɾ ɪn ən æmbʊʃ, kɪl bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn mɔɹ ðən faɪv əɹ sɪks maɪlz. aɪ ɔɹɾɝd lɔɹd ɡælɛn tə kip ə taɪt wɑtʃ ɝaʊn ðə kæmps. ɑɹɡændə hæz ə stʃɹɔŋ ɡɑɹd maʊntəd, tu, bʌɾ i sɛn pətʃɹoʊlz aʊt. əɡɛns maɪ ædvaɪs. ðə mænz ə ful. hi θɪŋks noʊ wʌn kən faɪn æliændɝ bʌt hɪm. aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ i bɪlivz ɛniwʌn ɛls ɪz ɹɪli tʃɹaɪɪŋ. sɝɾənli nɑt ði il."

Under the perfume, Berelain smelled of surprise that he knew she was there, yet her voice was composed. "No. Your scouts haven't returned yet, and mine . . . When they didn't return by nightfall, I sent a full company. They found my men dead in an ambush, killed before they had gone more than five or six miles. I ordered Lord Gallenne to keep a tight watch around the camps. Arganda has a strong guard mounted, too, but he sent patrols out. Against my advice. The man's a fool. He thinks no one can find Alliandre but him. I am not sure he believes anyone else is really trying. Certainly not the Aiel."

pɛɹɪnz hænz taɪɾənd ɑn ðə sɑft wʊl blæŋkəts kʌvɝɪŋ hɪm. ɡɔl wəd nɑt bi kɑt baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, əɹ dʒɑndɪn, nɑɾ ivən baɪ il. ðeɪ wɝ stɪl hʌntɪŋ, ən ðət mɛn feɪl wɑz əlaɪv. ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn bæk lɔŋ sɪns ɪf ðeɪ hæd faʊn əɹ bɑɾi. hi hæd tə bɪliv ðæt. hi lɪftəd wʌn ə ðə blu blæŋkəts ə tʃɹaɪfəl. bɪniθ ðɛm, hi wɑz bɛɹ. "ɪz ðəɹ ən ɛkspləneɪʃən fəɹ ðɪs?"

Perrin's hands tightened on the soft wool blankets covering him. Gaul would not be caught by surprise, or Jondyn, not even by Aiel. They were still hunting, and that meant Faile was alive. They would have been back long since if they had found her body. He had to believe that. He lifted one of the blue blankets a trifle. Beneath them, he was bare. "Is there an explanation for this?"

hɝ vɔɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt kɑʃən ʃɪmɝɾ ɪn əɹ sɛnt. "ju ən jəɹ ɑɹmsmən maɪɾ əv fɹoʊzən tə dɛθ ɪf aɪ hædnt ɡɔn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ jə wən nɹɛl ɹɪtɝnd wɪð nuz ə maɪ skaʊts. noʊ wʌn ɛls hæd ðə nɝv tə dɪstɝb ju; əpɛɹənli jə snɑɹəld laɪk ə wʊlf əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn u dɪd. wən aɪ faʊn ju, jə wɝ soʊ nʌm jə kʊdn hɪɹ ɛniwʌn spik tə ju, ən ði ʌðɝ mæn wɑz ɹɛɾi tə fɔl ɑn ɪz feɪs. jəɹ wʊmən lini kɛpt ɪm - ɔl i niɾəd wɑz hɑt sup ən blæŋkəts - bʌɾ aɪ hæd jə kæɹid hɪɹ. jə maɪɾ əv lɔst səm toʊz ət bɛst wɪθaʊɾ ənʊɹə. ʃi . . . ʃi simd əfɹeɪd jə maɪt daɪ ivən æftɝ ʃi hil ju. jə slɛp laɪk ə mæn ɔlɹɛɾi dɛd. ʃi sɛd jə ɔlmoʊs fɛlt laɪk sʌmwʌn u hæd lɔst ɪz soʊl, koʊl noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni blæŋkəts wɝ paɪld ɑn ju. aɪ fɛlt ɪt, əz wɛl, wən aɪ tʌtʃt ju."

Her voice did not change, but caution shimmered in her scent. "You and your armsman might have frozen to death if I hadn't gone looking for you when Nurelle returned with news of my scouts. No one else had the nerve to disturb you; apparently you snarled like a wolf at everyone who did. When I found you, you were so numb you couldn't hear anyone speak to you, and the other man was ready to fall on his face. Your woman Lini kept him - all he needed was hot soup and blankets - but I had you carried here. You might have lost some toes at best without Annoura. She . . . She seemed afraid you might die even after she Healed you. You slept like a man already dead. She said you almost felt like someone who had lost his soul, cold no matter how many blankets were piled on you. I felt it, as well, when I touched you."

tu mʌtʃ ɛkspləneɪʃən, ən nɑɾ ɪnʌf. æŋɡɝ flɛɹd, ə dɪstən æŋɡɝ, bʌɾ i hæmɝɾ ɪt daʊn. feɪl wɑz ɔlweɪz dʒɛləs wən i ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs tə bɹəleɪn. ðə wʊmən wəd ɡɛt noʊ ʃaʊts fɹəm hɪm. "ɡɹeɪɾi əɹ nild cʊɾə dʌn wʌtɛvɝ wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs. "ivən siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi wɝ kloʊsɝ."

Too much explanation, and not enough. Anger flared, a distant anger, but he hammered it down. Faile was always jealous when he raised his voice to Berelain. The woman would get no shouts from him. "Grady or Neald could have done whatever was necessary," he said in a flat voice. "Even Seonid and Masuri were closer."

"maɪ oʊn ædvaɪzɝ keɪm tə maɪn fɝst. aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ ə ði ʌðɝz tɪl aɪ wɑz ɔlmoʊs bæk hɪɹ. ɛniweɪ, dʌz ɪt mæɾɝ u dɪd ðə hilɪŋ?"

"My own advisor came to mind first. I never thought of the others till I was almost back here. Anyway, does it matter who did the Healing?"

soʊ plɔzəbəl. ən ɪf i æskt waɪ ðə fɝst ə min hɝsɛlf wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪm ɪn ə hæf-dɑɹk tɛn ɪnstɛɾ ə hɝ sɝvɪŋ wɪmən, əɹ səm ə hɝ soʊlʒɝz, əɹ ivən ənʊɹə, ʃi wəɾ əv ənʌðɝ plɔzəbəl ænsɝ. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə hɪɹ ɪt.

So plausible. And if he asked why the First of Mayene herself was watching over him in a half-dark tent instead of her serving women, or some of her soldiers, or even Annoura, she would have another plausible answer. He did not want to hear it.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ maɪ kloʊðz?" hi æskt, pɹɑpɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɑn ɪz ɛlboʊz. hɪz vɔɪs stɪl hæd noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən.

"Where are my clothes?" he asked, propping himself up on his elbows. His voice still had no expression.

ə sɪŋɡəl kændəl ɑn ə smɔl teɪbəl bɪsaɪd bɹəleɪnz tʃɛɹ ɡeɪv ði oʊnli ɹil laɪɾ ɪn ðə tɛnt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪz aɪz, ivən ɡɹeɪni wɪð taɪɹədnəs əz ðeɪ wɝ. ʃi wɑz ɡɑɹb dɪmjʊɹli ɪnʌf, ɪn ə dɑɹk ɡɹin ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs wɪð ə haɪ nɛk ðət nɛsəld əɹ tʃɪn ɪn ə θɪk ɹʌf ə leɪs. pʊɾɪŋ dɪmjʊɹ ɑn bɹəleɪn wɑz laɪk pʊɾɪŋ ə ʃipskɪn ɑn ə ɹɪdʒɛkæt. hɝ feɪs wɑz feɪnli ʃæɾoʊd, bjuɾəfəl ən əntʃɹʌstwɝði. ʃi wəd də wʌt ʃi pɹɑməst, bʌt laɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, fəɹ əɹ oʊn ɹizənz, ən ðə θɪŋz ʃi hæd meɪd noʊ pɹɑməsəz əbaʊt kəd stæb jə ɪn ðə bæk.

A single candle on a small table beside Berelain's chair gave the only real light in the tent, but it was more than enough for his eyes, even grainy with tiredness as they were. She was garbed demurely enough, in a dark green riding dress with a high neck that nestled her chin in a thick ruff of lace. Putting demure on Berelain was like putting a sheepskin on a ridgecat. Her face was faintly shadowed, beautiful and untrustworthy. She would do what she promised, but like an Aes Sedai, for her own reasons, and the things she had made no promises about could stab you in the back.

"ɑn ðə tʃɛst oʊvɝ ðɛɹ," ʃi sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ wɪð ə ɡɹeɪsfəl hænd nɪɹli hɪɾən ɪn peɪl leɪs. "aɪ hæd ɹɑsin ən nænə klin ðɛm, bʌt jə nid ɹɛst ən fud mɔɹ ðən kloʊðɪŋ. ən bɪfɔɹ wi ɡɛt tə fud, ən bɪznəs, aɪ wɑn jə tə noʊ ðət noʊ wʌn hoʊps feɪl ɪz əlaɪv mɔɹ ðən aɪ." hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz soʊ oʊpən ən ɑnəst, hi cʊɾə bɪlivd əɹ hæd ʃi bɪn ɛniwʌn ɛls. ʃi ivən mænədʒ tə smɛl ɑnəst!

"On the chest over there," she said, gesturing with a graceful hand nearly hidden in pale lace. "I had Rosene and Nana clean them, but you need rest and food more than clothing. And before we get to food, and business, I want you to know that no one hopes Faile is alive more than I." Her expression was so open and honest, he could have believed her had she been anyone else. She even managed to smell honest!

"aɪ nid maɪ kloʊðz naʊ." hi twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn tə sɪɾ ʌp ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə bɛd wɪð ðə blæŋkəts pʊld əkɹɔs ɪz lɛɡz. ðə kloʊðz i hæd bɪn wɛɹɪŋ leɪ nitli foʊldəɾ ɑn ə bændɪd tʃɹævəl tʃɛs ðət wɑz kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd wɪðɪn ən ɪntʃ ʌv ɪts laɪf. hɪz fɝ-laɪn kloʊk wɑz dʒɹeɪpt əkɹɔs wʌn ɛn ə ðə tʃɛst, ən ɪz æks lind nɛks tə hɪz buts ɑn ðə bɹaɪtli flaʊɝd kɑɹpəts leɪɝd fəɹ ə flɔɹ. laɪt, hi wɑz taɪɝd. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ lɔŋ i hæd bɪn ɪn ðə wʊlf dʒɹim, bʌɾ əweɪk ðəɹ wɑz əweɪk, əz fɑɹ əz jəɹ bɑɾi wɑz kənsɝnd. hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld laʊdli. "æn fud."

"I need my clothes now." He twisted around to sit up on the side of the bed with the blankets pulled across his legs. The clothes he had been wearing lay neatly folded on a banded travel chest that was carved and gilded within an inch of its life. His fur-lined cloak was draped across one end of the chest, and his axe leaned next to his boots on the brightly flowered carpets layered for a floor. Light, he was tired. He did not know how long he had been in the wolf dream, but awake there was awake, as far as your body was concerned. His stomach rumbled loudly. "And food."

bɹəleɪn meɪɾ ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊɾ ən ɹoʊz, smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts, hɝ tʃɪn lɪftəd haɪ wɪð dɪsəpɹuvəl. "ənʊɹə wɪl nɑt bi plizd wɪð jə wən ʃi kʌmz bæk fɹəm tɔkɪŋ wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. "ju kæn dʒʌst ɪɡnɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. jə ɑɹ nɑt ɹænd ælθɹ, əz ðəl pɹuv tə jə sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ."

Berelain made an exasperated sound in her throat and rose, smoothing her skirts, her chin lifted high with disapproval. "Annoura will not be pleased with you when she comes back from talking with the Wise Ones," she said firmly. "You can't just ignore Aes Sedai. You are not Rand al'Thor, as they will prove to you sooner or later."

bʌt ʃi lɛf ðə tɛnt, lɛɾɪŋ ɪn ə swɝl ə koʊld ɛɹ. ɪn əɹ dɪsplɛʒɝ, ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən bɑðɝ tə teɪk ə kloʊk. θɹu ðə moʊməntɛɹi ɡæp ɪn ði ɛntʃɹi flæps, hi sɔ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl snoʊɪŋ. nɑɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz læs naɪt, bʌt waɪt fleɪks dʒɹɪzəl daʊn stɛɾəli. ivən dʒɑndɪn wəɾ əv dɪfəkəlti faɪndɪŋ saɪn æftɝ læs naɪt. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðæt.

But she left the tent, letting in a swirl of cold air. In her displeasure, she did not even bother to take a cloak. Through the momentary gap in the entry flaps, he saw that it was still snowing. Not as hard as last night, but white flakes drizzled down steadily. Even Jondyn would have difficulty finding sign after last night. He tried not to think about that.

fɔɹ bɹeɪʒɝz wɔɹm ði ɛɹ ɪn ðə tɛnt, bʌɾ aɪs sipt ɪndə hɪz fiɾ əz sun əz ðeɪ hɪt ðə kɑɹpəts, ən i hɝid tə hɪz kloʊðz. tɑɾɝd tə ðɛm, ɹɪli, ðoʊ nɑt dæliɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt. hi wɑz soʊ taɪɝɾ i cʊɾə leɪn daʊn ɑn ðə kɑɹpəts ən ɡɔn tə slip əɡɛn. ɑn tɑp ə ðæt, hi fɛlt wik əz ə nubɔɹn læm. pɝhæps ðə wʊlf dʒɹim hæd sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðæt, tu - ɡoʊɪŋ ðəɹ əz stʃɹɔŋli əz i hæd, əbændənɪŋ ɪz bɑɾi - bʌt hilɪŋ laɪkli hæɾ ɪɡzæsɝbeɪɾəd mæɾɝz. wɪð nʌθɪŋ tə it sɪns jɛstɝdeɪz bɹɛkfəst ən ə naɪt spɛn stændɪŋ ɪn ðə snoʊ, hi hæd hæd noʊ ɹɪzɝv tə dʒɹɔ ɑn. naʊ hɪz hænz fʌmbəld wɪð ðə sɪmpəl tæsk ə pʊɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz smɔlkloʊðz. dʒɑndɪn wəd faɪn hɝ. əɹ ɡɔl wʊd. faɪn əɹ əlaɪv. nʌθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ðə wɝl mæɾɝd. hi fɛl nʌm.

Four braziers warmed the air in the tent, but ice seeped into his feet as soon as they hit the carpets, and he hurried to his clothes. Tottered to them, really, though not dallying about it. He was so tired he could have lain down on the carpets and gone to sleep again. On top of that, he felt weak as a newborn lamb. Perhaps the wolf dream had something to do with that, too - going there as strongly as he had, abandoning his body - but Healing likely had exacerbated matters. With nothing to eat since yesterday's breakfast and a night spent standing in the snow, he had had no reserve to draw on. Now his hands fumbled with the simple task of putting on his smallclothes. Jondyn would find her. Or Gaul would. Find her alive. Nothing else in the world mattered. He felt numb.

hi hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd bɹəleɪn tə ɹɪtɝn hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ ə ɡʌst ə koʊld ɛntɝd kæɹiɪŋ əɹ pɝfjum waɪl i wɑz stɪl dʒɹɔɪŋ ɑn ɪz bɹitʃɪz. hɝ ɡeɪz ɑn ɪz bæk wɑz laɪk stʃɹoʊkɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz, bʌɾ i meɪd hɪmsɛlf ɡoʊ ɑn əz ɪf əloʊn. ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv ðə sæɾəsfækʃən ə siɪŋ ɪm hɝi kəz ʃi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət hɝ.

He had not expected Berelain to return herself, but a gust of cold entered carrying her perfume while he was still drawing on his breeches. Her gaze on his back was like stroking fingers, but he made himself go on as if alone. She would not have the satisfaction of seeing him hurry because she was watching. He did not look at her.

"ɹɑsin ɪz bɹɪŋɪŋ hɑt fud," ʃi sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz oʊnli mʌɾən stu, aɪm əfɹeɪd, bʌɾ aɪ toʊld əɹ ɪnʌf fəɹ θɹi mɛn." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ən i hɝɾ əɹ slɪpɝz ʃɪft ɑn ðə kɑɹpəts. ʃi saɪd sɔfli. "pɛɹɪn, aɪ noʊ jə ɑɹ hɝɾɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ θɪŋz jə maɪt wɑnə seɪ ðət jə kæn tə ənʌðɝ mæn. aɪ kæn si jə kɹaɪɪŋ ɑn liniz ʃoʊldɝ, soʊ aɪ ɔfɝ maɪn. wi kən kɔl ə tʃɹus əntɪl feɪl ɪz faʊnd."

"Rosene is bringing hot food," she said. "There is only mutton stew, I'm afraid, but I told her enough for three men." She hesitated, and he heard her slippers shift on the carpets. She sighed softly. "Perrin, I know you are hurting. There are things you might want to say that you can't to another man. I can't see you crying on Lini's shoulder, so I offer mine. We can call a truce until Faile is found."

"ə tʃɹus?" hi sɛd, kɛɹfəli bɛndɪŋ tə tʌɡ ɑn ə but. kɛɹfəli soʊ hi dɪd nɑt fɔl oʊvɝ. staʊt wʊl stɑkɪŋz ən θɪk lɛðɝ soʊlz wəɾ əv ɪz fit wɔɹm sun ɪnʌf. "waɪ də wi niɾ ə tʃɹus?" ʃi wɑz saɪlənt waɪl i dɑn ði ʌðɝ buɾ ən foʊldəd ðə tɝndaʊnz bɪloʊ hɪz niz, nɑt spikɪŋ əntɪl i hæd dʌn ʌp ðə leɪsəz ə hɪz ʃɝɾ ən wɑz stʌfɪŋ ɪɾ ɪndə hɪz bɹitʃɪz.

"A truce?" he said, carefully bending to tug on a boot. Carefully so he did not fall over. Stout wool stockings and thick leather soles would have his feet warm soon enough. "Why do we need a truce?" She was silent while he donned the other boot and folded the turndowns below his knees, not speaking until he had done up the laces of his shirt and was stuffing it into his breeches.

"vɛɹi wɛl, pɛɹɪn. ɪf ðəɾ ɪz haʊ jə wɑn ɪt." wʌtɛvɝ ðət wɑz səpoʊz tə min, ʃi saʊndəd vɛɹi dɪtɝmənd. sʌɾənli hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ɪz noʊz hæd feɪl hɪm. hɝ sɛnt wɑz əfɹʌntɪd, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz! wən i lʊkt ət hɝ, ðoʊ, ʃi wɔɹ ə feɪn smaɪl. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ðoʊz bɪɡ aɪz hɛld ə ɡlɪn ʌv æŋɡɝ. "ðə pɹɑfəts mɛn bɪɡæn ɝaɪvɪŋ bɪfɔɹ deɪlaɪt," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə bɹɪsk vɔɪs, "bʌɾ əz aɪ fɑɹ əz aɪ noʊ, hi hæzən kʌm hɪmsɛlf, jɛt. bɪfɔɹ jə si hɪm əɡɛn - "

"Very well, Perrin. If that is how you want it." Whatever that was supposed to mean, she sounded very determined. Suddenly he wondered whether his nose had failed him. Her scent was affronted, of all things! When he looked at her, though, she wore a faint smile. On the other hand, those big eyes held a glint of anger. "The Prophet's men began arriving before daylight," she said in a brisk voice, "but as I far as I know, he hasn't come himself, yet. Before you see him again - "

"bɪɡæn ɝaɪvɪŋ?" hi bɹoʊk ɪn. "mæsimə əɡɹid tə bɹɪŋ oʊnli ən ɑnɝ ɡɑɹd, ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn."

"Began arriving?" he broke in. "Masema agreed to bring only an honor guard, a hundred men."

"wʌtɛvɝ i əɡɹid, ðəɹ wɝ θɹi əɹ fɔɹ θaʊzən ðə læst aɪ lʊkt - ən ɑɹmi ʌv ɹʌfaɪənz, ɛvɹi mæn wɪðɪn maɪlz u kəd kæɹi ə spɪɹ, ɪt simd - ən mɔɹ kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən."

"Whatever he agreed, there were three or four thousand the last I looked - an army of ruffians, every man within miles who could carry a spear, it seemed - and more coming from every direction."

hɝidli, hi ʃɹʌɡd ɪndə hɪz koʊɾ ən bʌkəld ɪz bɛlt oʊvɝ ɪt, sɛɾəlɪŋ ðə weɪɾ ə ði æks əɾ ɪz hɪp. ɪɾ ɔlweɪz fɛl hɛviɝ ðən ɪt ʃʊd. "wi wɪl si əbaʊt ðæt! bɝn mi, aɪ woʊn bi lʌmbɝd wɪð ɪz mɝɾɝəs vɝmɪn!"

Hurriedly, he shrugged into his coat and buckled his belt over it, settling the weight of the axe at his hip. It always felt heavier than it should. "We will see about that! Burn me, I won't be lumbered with his murderous vermin!"

"hɪz vɝmɪn ɑɹ ən ənɔɪəns kəmpɛɹd tə ðə mæn hɪmsɛlf. ðə deɪnʒɝ laɪz wɪð mæsimə." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kul, bʌt taɪtli liʃt fɪɹ kwɪvɝɾ ɪn əɹ sɛnt. ɪɾ ɔlweɪz dɪd wən ʃi spoʊk ə mæsimə. "ðə sɪstɝz ən ðə waɪz wʌnz ɑɹ ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ðæt. ɪf jə nid mɔɹ pɹuf ʌv ɪt ðən jəɹ oʊn aɪz, hiz bɪn miɾɪŋ wɪð ðə sintʃæn."

"His vermin are an annoyance compared to the man himself. The danger lies with Masema." Her voice was cool, but tightly leashed fear quivered in her scent. It always did when she spoke of Masema. "The sisters and the Wise Ones are right about that. If you need more proof of it than your own eyes, he has been meeting with the Seanchan."

ðət hɪɾ ɪm laɪk ə hæmɝ, ɪspɛʃli æftɝ beɪlwɝz nuz ə ðə faɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɔltɑɹə. "haʊ dʒju noʊ?" hi dɪmændəd. "jɔɹ θif-kætʃɝz?" ʃi hæɾ ə pɛɹ, bɹɔt fɹəm min, ən ʃi sɛn əm ɔf tə lɝn wʌt ðeɪ kəɾ əɾ ɛvɹi taʊn əɹ vɪlədʒ. bɪtwin əm ðeɪ nɛvɝ dɪskʌvɝd hæf ʌv wʌt beɪlwɝ dɪd. nɑt ðət ʃi toʊl hɪm, ɛniweɪ.

That hit him like a hammer, especially after Balwer's news of the fighting in Altara. "How do you know?" he demanded. "Your thief-catchers?" She had a pair, brought from Mayene, and she sent them off to learn what they could at every town or village. Between them they never discovered half of what Balwer did. Not that she told him, anyway.

bɹəleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd slaɪtli, ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli. "feɪlz . . . ɹɪteɪnɝz. θɹi ʌv əm faʊn əs dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ði il ətækt. ðeɪ hæd tɔkt wɪð mɛn u sɔ ə hjudʒ flaɪɪŋ kɹitʃɝ lænd." ʃi ʃɪvɝɾ ə lɪɾəl tu ɑstənteɪʃəsli, bʌt baɪ hɝ smɛl, ɪt wɑz ə tʃɹu ɹiækʃən. noʊ sɝpɹaɪz; hi hæd sin səm ə ðə bists wʌns, ən ə tʃɹɑlɑk dɪd nɑt lʊk mɔɹ laɪk ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. "ə kɹitʃɝ kæɹiɪŋ ə pæsənʒɝ. ðeɪ tʃɹeɪst əɹ tə ɑbilə, tə mæsimə. aɪ doʊn bɪliv ɪt wɑz ə fɝs miɾɪŋ. ɪt hæd ðə saʊn ə pɹæktəs, tə mi."

Berelain shook her head slightly, regretfully. "Faile's . . . retainers. Three of them found us just before the Aiel attacked. They had talked with men who saw a huge flying creature land." She shivered a little too ostentatiously, but by her smell, it was a true reaction. No surprise; he had seen some of the beasts once, and a Trolloc did not look more like Shadowspawn. "A creature carrying a passenger. They traced her to Abila, to Masema. I don't believe it was a first meeting. It had the sound of practice, to me."

sʌɾənli hɝ lɪps kɝvd ɪn ə smaɪl, slaɪtli mɑkɪŋ, flɝteɪʃəs. ðɪs taɪm, hɝ sɛn mætʃt əɹ feɪs. "ɪt wɑz nɑt vɛɹi naɪs ə jə tə meɪk mi θɪŋk ðət dʒɹaɪd-ʌp lɪɾəl sɛkɹətɛɹi ʌv jʊɹz wɑz faɪndɪŋ aʊt mɔɹ ðən maɪ θif-kætʃɝz wən juv tu dʌzən aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz mæskɝeɪɾɪŋ əz feɪlz ɹɪteɪnɝz. aɪ mʌst ədmɪt, jə hæd mi fuld. ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz nu sɝpɹaɪzəz tə faɪn ɪn ju. waɪ dʒju lʊk soʊ stɑɹɾəld? dɪd jə ɹɪli θɪŋk jə kəd tʃɹʌs mæsimə æftɝ ɔl wiv sin ən hɝd?"

Suddenly her lips curved in a smile, slightly mocking, flirtatious. This time, her scent matched her face. "It was not very nice of you to make me think that dried-up little secretary of yours was finding out more than my thief-catchers when you have two dozen eyes-and-ears masquerading as Faile's retainers. I must admit, you had me fooled. There are always new surprises to find in you. Why do you look so startled? Did you really think you could trust Masema after all we've seen and heard?"

pɛɹɪnz stɛɹ hæd lɪɾəl tə də wɪð mæsimə. ðət nuz kəd min ə ɡɹeɪt dil əɹ nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. pɝhæps ðə mæn θɔɾ i kəd bɹɪŋ ðə sintʃæn tə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən, tu. hi wɑz mæɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪt. bʌt . . . feɪl hæd ðoʊz fulz spaɪɪŋ? snikɪŋ ɪndə ɑbilə? ən ðə laɪt nu wɛɹ ɛls. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi ɔlweɪz sɛd spaɪɪŋ wɑz ə waɪfs wɝk, bʌt lɪsnɪŋ tə ɡɑsəp ɝaʊn ə pæləs wɑz wʌn θɪŋ; ðɪs wɑz ɔltəɡɛðɝ dɪfɹənt. ʃi cʊɾə toʊl hɪm, ət list. əɹ hæd ʃi kɛp kwaɪət kəz əɹ ɹɪteɪnɝz wɝ nɑt ði oʊnli wʌnz poʊkɪŋ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz wɛɹ ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt? ɪt wəd bi dʒʌs laɪk hɝ. feɪl tʃɹuli dɪd pəzɛs ə fælkənz spɪɹət. ʃi maɪt θɪŋk ɪt fʌn tə spaɪ hɝsɛlf. noʊ, hi wɑz nɑt gɑnə ɡɛɾ æŋɡɹi wɪð hɝ, sɝɾənli nɑt naʊ. laɪt, ʃi wəd θɪŋk ɪt wɑz fʌn.

Perrin's stare had little to do with Masema. That news could mean a great deal or nothing at all. Perhaps the man thought he could bring the Seanchan to the Lord Dragon, too. He was mad enough for it. But . . . Faile had those fools spying? Sneaking into Abila? And the Light knew where else. Of course, she always said spying was a wife's work, but listening to gossip around a palace was one thing; this was altogether different. She could have told him, at least. Or had she kept quiet because her retainers were not the only ones poking their noses where they should not? It would be just like her. Faile truly did possess a falcon's spirit. She might think it fun to spy herself. No, he was not going to get angry with her, certainly not now. Light, she would think it was fun.

"aɪ æm ɡlæd tə noʊ jə kən bi dɪskɹit," bɹəleɪn mɝmɝd. "aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv θɔɾ ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ neɪtʃɝ, bʌt dɪskɹɛʃən kən bi ə faɪn θɪŋ. ɪspɛʃli naʊ. maɪ mɛn wɝ nɑt kɪl baɪ il, ənlɛs il əv teɪkən tə juzɪŋ kɹɔsboʊz ən æksiz."

"I am glad to know you can be discreet," Berelain murmured. "I would not have thought it in your nature, but discretion can be a fine thing. Especially now. My men were not killed by Aiel, unless Aiel have taken to using crossbows and axes."

hɪz hɛd dʒɝkt ʌp, ən dɪspaɪɾ ɪz bɛst ɪntɛntʃənz, hi ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɝ. "ju dʒʌst slɪp ðəɾ ɪn? ɪz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls juv fɝɡɑɾən tə tɛl mi, ɛniθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪskeɪp jəɹ maɪnd?"

His head jerked up, and despite his best intentions, he glared at her. "You just slip that in? Is there anything else you've forgotten to tell me, anything that escaped your mind?"

"haʊ kən jə æsk?" ʃi ɔlmoʊs læft. "aɪ wəɾ əv tə stʃɹɪp maɪsɛlf neɪkəd tə ɹɪvil mɔɹ ðən aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi hæv." spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz waɪd, ʃi twɪstəd slaɪtli laɪk ə sneɪk əz ɪf tə dɛmənstʃɹeɪt.

"How can you ask?" she almost laughed. "I would have to strip myself naked to reveal more than I already have." Spreading her arms wide, she twisted slightly like a snake as if to demonstrate.

pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld ɪn dɪsɡʌst. feɪl wɑz mɪsɪŋ, ðə laɪɾ oʊnli nu wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz əlaɪv - laɪt, lɛɾ əɹ bi əlaɪv! - ən bɹəleɪn tʃoʊz naʊ tə flɔn hɝsɛlf wɝs ðən ʃi ɛvɝ hæd bɪfɔɹ? bʌt ʃi wɑz u ʃi wɑz. hi ʃəd bi ɡɹeɪtfəl ʃi hæd klʌŋ tə disənsi lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə dʒɹɛs.

Perrin growled in disgust. Faile was missing, the Light only knew whether she was alive - Light, let her be alive! - and Berelain chose now to flaunt herself worse than she ever had before? But she was who she was. He should be grateful she had clung to decency long enough for him to dress.

aɪɪŋ ɪm θɔtfəli, ʃi ɹæn ə fɪŋɡɝɾɪp əlɔŋ əɹ loʊɝ lɪp. "dɪspaɪt wʌt jə meɪ hæv hɝd, jəl bi oʊnli ðə θɝd mæn tə ʃɛɹ maɪ bɛd." hɝ aɪz wɝ . . . smoʊki . . . jɛt ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn seɪɪŋ i wɑz ðə θɝd mæn ʃi hæd spoʊkən tə ðət deɪ. hɝ sɛnt . . . ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət keɪm tə maɪnd wɑz ə wʊlf aɪɪŋ ə dɪɹ kɑɾ ɪn bɹæmbəlz. "ði ʌðɝ tu wɝ pɑlətɪks. jəl bi plɛʒɝ. ɪn mɔɹ weɪz ðən wʌn," ʃi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ tʌtʃ ə baɪt.

Eyeing him thoughtfully, she ran a fingertip along her lower lip. "Despite what you may have heard, you will be only the third man to share my bed." Her eyes were . . . smoky . . . yet she might have been saying he was the third man she had spoken to that day. Her scent . . . The only thing that came to mind was a wolf eyeing a deer caught in brambles. "The other two were politics. You will be pleasure. In more ways than one," she finished with a surprising touch of bite.

dʒʌs ðən ɹɑsin bʌsəld ɪndə ðə tɛn ɪn ə bɪloʊ ʌv aɪsi ɛɹ, hɝ blu kloʊk θɹoʊn bæk ən kæɹiɪŋ ən oʊvəl sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ kʌvɝd wɪð ə waɪt lɪnən klɔθ. pɛɹɪn snæpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt, pɹeɪɪŋ ʃi hæd nɑɾ oʊvɝhɝd. smaɪlɪŋ, bɹəleɪn sim nɑt tə kɛɹ. sɛɾɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪ ɑn ðə lɑɹdʒəs teɪbəl, ðə staʊt sɝvɪŋ wʊmən spɹɛɾ əɹ blu-ænd-ɡoʊld-stʃɹaɪp skɝts ɪn ə dip kɝtsi fəɹ bɹəleɪn ən ənʌðɝ, ʃɔɹɾɝ, fəɹ hɪm. hɝ dɑɹk aɪz lɪŋɡɝɾ ɑn ɪm ə moʊmənt, ən ʃi smaɪld, əz plizd əz əɹ mɪstʃɹəs, bɪfɔɹ ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ kloʊk təɡɛðɝ ən hɝiɪŋ aʊɾ əɡɛn əɾ ə kwɪk dʒɛstʃɝ fɹəm bɹəleɪn. ʃi hæɾ oʊvɝhɝd, ɔl ɹaɪt. ðə tʃɹeɪ ɡeɪv ɔf ðə smɛlz ə mʌɾən stu ən spaɪst waɪn ðət meɪd pɛɹɪnz bɛli ɹʌmbəl əɡɛn, bʌɾ i wəd nɑɾ əv steɪd tə iɾ ɪf ɪz lɛɡz hæd bɪn bɹoʊkən.

Just then Rosene bustled into the tent in a billow of icy air, her blue cloak thrown back and carrying an oval silver tray covered with a white linen cloth. Perrin snapped his mouth shut, praying she had not overheard. Smiling, Berelain seemed not to care. Setting the tray on the largest table, the stout serving woman spread her blue-and-gold-striped skirts in a deep curtsy for Berelain and another, shorter, for him. Her dark eyes lingered on him a moment, and she smiled, as pleased as her mistress, before gathering her cloak together and hurrying out again at a quick gesture from Berelain. She had overheard, all right. The tray gave off the smells of mutton stew and spiced wine that made Perrin's belly rumble again, but he would not have stayed to eat if his legs had been broken.

flɪŋɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, hi stɔkt aʊɾ ɪndə ðə sɑf snoʊfɔl, tʌɡɪŋ ɑn ɪz ɡɔnləts. hɛvi klaʊdz ʃɹaʊɾɪd ðə sʌn, bʌt dɔn wɑz ə fju aʊɝz pæst, baɪ ðə laɪt. pæðz hæd bɪn biɾən θɹu ðə snoʊ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, jɛt ðə waɪt dʒɹɪftɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə skaɪ wɑz paɪlɪŋ ʌp ɑn bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz ən ɡɪvɪŋ ði ɛvɝɡɹinz nu koʊts. ðɪs stɔɹm wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm fɪnɪʃt. laɪt, haʊ kəd ðə wʊmən tɔk tə hɪm ðət weɪ? waɪ wəd ʃi tɔk ðət weɪ, ən naʊ?

Flinging his cloak around his shoulders, he stalked out into the soft snowfall, tugging on his gauntlets. Heavy clouds shrouded the sun, but dawn was a few hours past, by the light. Paths had been beaten through the snow on the ground, yet the white drifting out of the sky was piling up on bare branches and giving the evergreens new coats. This storm was far from finished. Light, how could the woman talk to him that way? Why would she talk that way, and now?

"ɹɪmɛmbɝ," bɹəleɪn kɔld æftɝ hɪm, meɪkɪŋ noʊ ɛfɝt tə mjuɾ əɹ vɔɪs. "dɪskɹɛʃən." wɪð ə wɪns, hi kwɪkən ɪz stɛp.

"Remember," Berelain called after him, making no effort to mute her voice. "Discretion." With a wince, he quickened his step.

ə dʌzən peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt stʃɹaɪp tɛn i ɹilaɪzd i hæd fɝɡɑɾən tə æsk ðə loʊkeɪʃən ə mæsiməz mɛn. ɔl ɝaʊn ɪm ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz wɝ wɔɹmɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ət kæmpfaɪɝz, ɑɹmɝɾ ən kloʊkt ən nɪɹ tə ðɛɹ sæɾəld maʊns ɑn ðə hɔɹslaɪnz. ðɛɹ lænsɪz stʊd kloʊs ət hæn ɪn stil-tɪp koʊnz ðət tʃɹeɪld ɹɛd stʃɹimɝz ɪn ðə wɪnd. dɪspaɪt ðə tʃɹiz, ə stʃɹeɪt laɪn cʊɾə bɪn dʒɹɔn θɹu ɛni ɹoʊ ʌv ðoʊz faɪɝz, ən ðeɪ wɝ ivən əz nɪɹ ðə seɪm saɪz əz hjumənli pɑsəbəl. ðə səplaɪ kɑɹts ðeɪ hæɾ əkwaɪɝd kʌmɪŋ saʊθ wɝ ɔl loʊɾəd, ðə hɔɹsəz hɑɹnəst, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɝeɪɾ ɪn ɹɪdʒəd laɪnz, tu.

A dozen paces from the great striped tent he realized he had forgotten to ask the location of Masema's men. All around him the Winged Guards were warming themselves at campfires, armored and cloaked and near to their saddled mounts on the horselines. Their lances stood close at hand in steel-tipped cones that trailed red streamers in the wind. Despite the trees, a straight line could have been drawn through any row of those fires, and they were even as near the same size as humanly possible. The supply carts they had acquired coming south were all loaded, the horses harnessed, and they were arrayed in rigid lines, too.

ðə tʃɹiz dɪd nɑt haɪd ðə kɹɛst ə ðə hɪl kəmplitli. tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn stɪl stʊd ɡɑɹɾ ʌp ðɛɹ, bʌt ðə tɛns wɝ daʊn, ən i kəd meɪk aʊt loʊɾəd pækhɔɹsɪz. hi θɔɾ i sɔ ə blæk koʊt, tu; wʌn ə ði æʃəmən, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt si wɪtʃ. əmʌŋ ðə ɡildænɪn, nɑts ə mɛn stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ðə hɪl, jɛɾ ɔl ɪn ɔl, ðeɪ əpɪɹɾ əz ɹɛɾi əz ðə minɝz. ðə tu kæmps wɝ ivən leɪɾ aʊɾ əlaɪk. bʌt noʊwɛɹ wɑz ðəɹ ɛni saɪn ðət θaʊzənz ə mɛn wɝ ɡæðɝɪŋ, noʊ bɹɔd tʃɹæmpəl pæðz ɪn ðə snoʊ tə fɑloʊ. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ðəɹ wɝ noʊ fʊtpɹɪns bɪtwin ðə θɹi kæmps əɾ ɔl. ɪf ənʊɹə wɑz wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz, ʃi hæd bɪn ɑn ðə hɪl fəɹ səm taɪm. wʌt wɝ ðeɪ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt? pɹɑbli haʊ tə kɪl mæsimə wɪθaʊɾ ɪm faɪndɪŋ aʊt ðeɪ wɝ ɹispɑnsəbəl. hi ɡlænst ət bɹəleɪnz tɛnt, bʌt ðə θɔɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ bæk ɪn ðəɹ wɪð əɹ meɪɾ ɪz hækəlz ɹaɪz.

The trees did not hide the crest of the hill completely. Two Rivers men still stood guard up there, but the tents were down, and he could make out loaded packhorses. He thought he saw a black coat, too; one of the Asha'man, though he could not see which. Among the Ghealdanin, knots of men stood staring up the hill, yet all in all, they appeared as ready as the Mayeners. The two camps were even laid out alike. But nowhere was there any sign that thousands of men were gathering, no broad trampled paths in the snow to follow. For that matter, there were no footprints between the three camps at all. If Annoura was with the Wise Ones, she had been on the hill for some time. What were they talking about? Probably how to kill Masema without him finding out they were responsible. He glanced at Berelain's tent, but the thought of going back in there with her made his hackles rise.

wʌn ʌðɝ tɛn ɹɪmeɪn ʌp, nɑt fɑɹ əweɪ, ðə smɔlɝ stʃɹaɪp tɛn bɪlɔŋɪŋ tə bɹəleɪnz tu sɝvɪŋ wɪmən. dɪspaɪt ðə dʒɹɪzəlɪŋ snoʊ, ɹɑsin ən nænə sæɾ ɑn kæmp stulz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə smɔlɝ tɛnt, kloʊkt ən hʊɾɪd ən wɔɹmɪŋ ðɛɹ hænz oʊvɝ ə smɔl faɪɝ. əlaɪk əz tu piz ɪn ðə pɑd, niðɝ wɑz pɹɪɾi, bʌt ðeɪ hæd kʌmpəni, laɪkli ðə ɹizən ðeɪ wɝ nɑt hʌɾəld ɝaʊn ə bɹeɪziɝ ɪnsaɪd. daʊtləs bɹəleɪn ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn mɔɹ pɹəpɹaɪəɾi ɪn əɹ sɝvɪŋ wɪmən ðən ʃi mænədʒ fəɹ hɝsɛlf. nɔɹməli bɹəleɪnz θif-kætʃɝz sɛldəm sim tə spik mɔɹ ðən θɹi wɝdz təɡɛðɝ, ət list ɪn pɛɹɪnz hɪɹɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ænəmeɪɾəd ən læfɪŋ wɪð ɹɑsin ən nænə. pleɪnli dʒɹɛst, ðə pɛɹ wɑz soʊ nɑndɪskɹɪp jə wəd nɑt noʊɾəs wʌn bʌmpɪŋ ɪndə hɪm ɑn ðə stʃɹit. pɛɹɪn wɑz stɪl nɑt ʃʊɹ wɪtʃ wɑz sɑns ən wɪtʃ dʒɛnʒɹ. ə smɔl kɛɾəl sɛɾ ɔf tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə faɪɝ smɛld ə mʌɾən stu; hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪz stʌmək ɡɹaʊld ɛniweɪ.

One other tent remained up, not far away, the smaller striped tent belonging to Berelain's two serving women. Despite the drizzling snow, Rosene and Nana sat on camp stools in front of the smaller tent, cloaked and hooded and warming their hands over a small fire. Alike as two peas in the pod, neither was pretty, but they had company, likely the reason they were not huddled around a brazier inside. Doubtless Berelain insisted on more propriety in her serving women than she managed for herself. Normally Berelain's thief-catchers seldom seemed to speak more than three words together, at least in Perrin's hearing, but they were animated and laughing with Rosene and Nana. Plainly dressed, the pair was so nondescript you would not notice one bumping into him on the street. Perrin was still not sure which was Santes and which Gendar. A small kettle set off to one side of the fire smelled of mutton stew; he tried to ignore it, but his stomach growled anyway.

tɔk stɑpt əz i əpɹoʊtʃt, ən bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ðə faɪɝ, sɑns ən dʒɛnʒɹ ɡlæns fɹəm ɪm tə bɹəleɪnz tɛnt, feɪsəz æbsəlutli blæŋk, ðən pʊl ðɛɹ kloʊks ɝaʊn əm ən hɝiɾ əweɪ, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɪz aɪz. ɹɑsin ən nænə lʊk fɹəm pɛɹɪn tə ðə tɛnt, ən tɪɾɝd bɪhaɪn kʌp hænz. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə blʌʃ əɹ haʊl.

Talk stopped as he approached, and before he reached the fire, Santes and Gendar glanced from him to Berelain's tent, faces absolutely blank, then pulled their cloaks around them and hurried away, avoiding his eyes. Rosene and Nana looked from Perrin to the tent, and tittered behind cupped hands. Perrin did not know whether to blush or howl.

"wʊd jə baɪ ɛni tʃæns noʊ wɛɹ ðə pɹɑfəts mɛn ɑɹ ɡæðɝɪŋ?" hi æskt. kipɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs lɛvəl wɑz hɑɹd wɪð ɔl ðɛɹ ɑɹtʃt aɪbɹaʊz ən smɝks. "jɔɹ mɪstʃɹəs fɝɡɑt tə tɛl mi ɪɡzækli." ðə pɛɹ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks hɪɾən baɪ ðɛɹ hʊdz ən ɡɪɡəl bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ hænz əɡɛn. hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ bɹeɪnləs, bʌɾ i daʊɾɪd bɹəleɪn wəd tɑlɝeɪt flʌf-bɹeɪnz ɝaʊn əɹ fəɹ lɔŋ.

"Would you by any chance know where the Prophet's men are gathering?" he asked. Keeping his voice level was hard with all their arched eyebrows and smirks. "Your mistress forgot to tell me exactly." The pair exchanged looks hidden by their hoods and giggled behind their hands again. He wondered whether they were brainless, but he doubted Berelain would tolerate fluff-brains around her for long.

æftɝ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə tɪɾɝɪŋ ɪntɝspɝst wɪð kwɪk ɡlænsɪz ət hɪm, əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ, ət bɹəleɪnz tɛnt, nænə əlaʊɾ əz haʊ ʃi wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ʃʊɹ bʌt θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ðət weɪ, weɪvɪŋ ə hæn veɪɡli təwɔɹd ðə saʊθwɛst. ɹɑsin wɑz sɝɾən ʃi hæd hɝɾ əɹ mɪstʃɹəs seɪ ɪt wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən tu maɪlz. əɹ meɪbi θɹi. ðeɪ wɝ stɪl ɡɪɡəlɪŋ wən i stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ. meɪbi ðeɪ ɹɪli wɝ ɡus-bɹeɪnd.

After a great deal of tittering interspersed with quick glances at him, at each other, at Berelain's tent, Nana allowed as how she was not really sure but thought it was that way, waving a hand vaguely toward the southwest. Rosene was certain she had heard her mistress say it was no more than two miles. Or maybe three. They were still giggling when he strode away. Maybe they really were goose-brained.

wɛɹəli hi tʃɹæmpt ɝaʊn ðə hɪl θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt wʌɾ i hæd tə du. ðə dɛpθ ə snoʊ hi hæd tə weɪd θɹu wʌns i lɛf ðə minɝ kæmp meɪɾ ɪz faʊl mud noʊ bɛɾɝ. nɔɹ dɪd ðə dɪsɪʒənz i ɹitʃt. ɪɾ oʊnli ɡɑt faʊlɝ æftɝ i ɝaɪvd wɛɹ ɪz oʊn pipəl wɝ kæmpt.

Wearily he tramped around the hill thinking about what he had to do. The depth of snow he had to wade through once he left the Mayener camp made his foul mood no better. Nor did the decisions he reached. It only got fouler after he arrived where his own people were camped.

ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz əz i hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd. kloʊkt kɛɹhinɪn sæɾ ɑn loʊɾəd kɑɹts wɪð ðə ɹeɪnz lupt ɝaʊn ə ɹɪst əɹ tʌkt ʌndɝ ə hɔntʃ, ən ʌðɝ ʃɔɹt fɪɡjɝz muvd əlɔŋ ðə lɛd laɪnz ə ɹimaʊns, suðɪŋ ðə hɔltɝd hɔɹsəz. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn nɑɾ ɑn ðə hɪltɑp skwɑɾɪd ɝaʊn dʌzənz ə smɔl faɪɝz skæɾɝd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, dʒɹɛs tə ɹaɪɾ ən hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz' ɹeɪnz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɔɹɾɝ tə ðɛm, nɑt laɪk ðə soʊlʒɝz ɪn ði ʌðɝ kæmps, bʌt ðeɪ hæd feɪs tʃɹɑləks, ən il. ɛvɹi mæn hæɾ ɪz baʊ slʌŋ əkɹɔs ɪz bæk ən ə fʊl kwɪvɝ ɑn ɪz hɪp, səmtaɪmz bæləns baɪ ə sɔɹɾ əɹ ʃɔɹt-sɔɹɾ əz wɛl. fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, ɡɹeɪɾi wɑz ət wʌn ə ðə faɪɝz. ðə tu æʃəmən juʒəwəli kɛpt ə lɪɾəl əpɑɹt fɹəm ði ʌðɝ mɛn, ən ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɝaʊn əz wɛl. noʊ wʌn wɑz tɔkɪŋ, dʒʌs kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn steɪɪŋ wɔɹm. ðə ɡlʌm feɪsəz toʊl pɛɹɪn ðət dʒɑndɪn hæd nɑt ɹɪtɝn jɛt, nɔɹ ɡɔl, nɔɹ ɛlaɪəs əɹ ɛnibəɾi ɛls. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ə tʃæns ðeɪ wəd bɹɪŋ əɹ bæk. əɹ ət lis faɪnd wɛɹ ʃi wɑz hɛld. fəɹ ə taɪm, ɪt sim ðoʊz wɝ ðə læst ɡʊd θɔts i wəɾ əv fəɹ ðə deɪ. ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl ə meɪnɛðɝən ən ɪz oʊn wʊlfzhɛd bænɝ hʌŋ lɪmp ɪn ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ, ɑn tu stæfs linɪŋ əɡɛnst ə kɑɹt.

Everything was as he had ordered. Cloaked Cairhienin sat on loaded carts with the reins looped around a wrist or tucked under a haunch, and other short figures moved along the lead lines of remounts, soothing the haltered horses. The Two Rivers men not on the hilltop squatted around dozens of small fires scattered through the trees, dressed to ride and holding their horses' reins. There was no order to them, not like the soldiers in the other camps, but they had faced Trollocs, and Aiel. Every man had his bow slung across his back and a full quiver on his hip, sometimes balanced by a sword or short-sword as well. For a wonder, Grady was at one of the fires. The two Asha'man usually kept a little apart from the other men, and the other way around as well. No one was talking, just concentrating on staying warm. The glum faces told Perrin that Jondyn had not returned yet, nor Gaul, nor Elyas or anybody else. There was still a chance they would bring her back. Or at least find where she was held. For a time, it seemed those were the last good thoughts he would have for the day. The Red Eagle of Manetheren and his own Wolfshead banner hung limp in the falling snow, on two staffs leaning against a cart.

hi hæd plæn tə juz ðoʊz flæɡz wɪð mæsimə ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ hi hæd tə kʌm saʊθ, haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ði oʊpən. ɪf ə mæn wɑz mæɾ ɪnʌf tə tʃɹaɪ ɹikleɪmɪŋ meɪnɛðɝənz eɪntʃənt ɡlɔɹiz, noʊ wʌn lʊk fɝðɝ, tə ɛni ʌðɝ ɹizən fəɹ ɪm mɑɹtʃɪŋ wɪð ə smɔl ɑɹmi, ən soʊ lɔŋ əz i dɪd nɑt lɪŋɡɝ, ðeɪ wɝ fɑɹ tu pliz tə si ðə mædmæn ɹaɪɾ ɑn tə tʃɹaɪ stɑpɪŋ hɪm. ðəɹ wɝ ɪnʌf tʃɹʌbəlz ɪn ðə lænd wɪθaʊt kɔlɪŋ mɔɹ daʊn ɑn jəɹ hɛd. lɛt sʌmwʌn ɛls faɪɾ ən bliɾ ən luz mɛn u wəd bi niɾəd kʌm spɹɪŋ plæntɪŋ. meɪnɛðɝənz bɔɹɾɝz hæd ɹʌn ɔlmoʊs tə wɛɹ mʊɹændi naʊ stʊd, ən wɪð lʌk, hi cʊɾə bɪn ɪndə ændɝ, wɛɹ ɹænd hæɾ ə fɝm ɡɹɪp, bɪfɔɹ hævɪŋ tə ɡɪv ʌp ðə dɪsɛpʃən. ðət wɑz tʃeɪnʒd, naʊ, ən i nu ðə pɹaɪs ə tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. ə vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ pɹaɪs. hi wɑz pɹipɛɹd tə peɪ, oʊnli ɪt wəd nɑt bi hi hu peɪd. hi wəɾ əv naɪtmɛɹz əbaʊɾ ɪt, ðoʊ.

He had planned to use those flags with Masema in the same way he had to come south, hiding in the open. If a man was mad enough to try reclaiming Manetheren's ancient glories, no one looked further, to any other reason for him marching with a small army, and so long as he did not linger, they were far too pleased to see the madman ride on to try stopping him. There were enough troubles in the land without calling more down on your head. Let someone else fight and bleed and lose men who would be needed come spring planting. Manetheren's borders had run almost to where Murandy now stood, and with luck, he could have been into Andor, where Rand had a firm grip, before having to give up the deception. That was changed, now, and he knew the price of changing. A very large price. He was prepared to pay, only it would not be he who paid. He would have nightmares about it, though.


tʃæptɝ sɪks


CHAPTER 6

ðə sɛn ə mædnəs


The Scent of Madness

sikɪŋ θɹu ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ fəɹ dænɪl, pɛɹɪn faʊn ɪm ət wʌn ə ðə faɪɝz ən pʊʃt bɪtwin ðə hɔɹsəz. ði ʌðɝ mɛn stʃɹeɪɾənd ən bækt əweɪ ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ɪm ɹum. nɑt noʊɪŋ wɛðɝ tə ɔfɝ sɪmpəθi, ðeɪ bɛɹli lʊkt ət hɪm, ən dʒɝk ðɛɹ aɪz əweɪ wən ðeɪ dɪd, haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ feɪsəz ɪn ðɛɹ kaʊlz. "du jə noʊ wɛɹ mæsiməz pipəl ɑɹ?" hi æskt, ðən hæd tə kənsil ə jɔn bɪhaɪn ɪz hænd. hɪz bɑɾi wɑntəd slip, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm.

Seeking through the falling snow for Dannil, Perrin found him at one of the fires and pushed between the horses. The other men straightened and backed away enough to give him room. Not knowing whether to offer sympathy, they barely looked at him, and jerked their eyes away when they did, hiding their faces in their cowls. "Do you know where Masema's people are?" he asked, then had to conceal a yawn behind his hand. His body wanted sleep, but there was no time.

"əbaʊt θɹi maɪlz saʊθ ən wɛst," dænɪl ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə saʊɝ vɔɪs, ən tʌɡd ɪɹɪɾəbli əɾ ɪz mʌstæʃ. soʊ ðə ɡus-bɹeɪnz hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾ æftɝ ɔl. "flɑkɪŋ ɪn laɪk dʌks ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝwʊd ɪn ɔɾəm, ən ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm lʊk laɪk ðeɪd skɪn ðɛɹ oʊn mʌðɝz." hɔɹs-feɪs lɛm ɑldaɪ spæɾ ɪn dɪsɡʌs θɹu ðə ɡæp ɪn ɪz tiθ i hæd ɡɑɾən tʌslɪŋ wɪð ə wʊl mɝtʃəns ɡɑɹd lɔŋ əɡoʊ. lɛm laɪk tə faɪt wɪð ɪz fɪsts; hi lʊkt iɡɝ tə pɪk ə skɹæp wɪð səm ə mæsiməz fɑloʊɝz.

"About three miles south and west," Dannil replied in a sour voice, and tugged irritably at his mustache. So the goose-brains had been right after all. "Flocking in like ducks into the Waterwood in autumn, and the lot of them look like they'd skin their own mothers." Horse-faced Lem al'Dai spat in disgust through the gap in his teeth he had gotten tussling with a wool merchant's guard long ago. Lem liked to fight with his fists; he looked eager to pick a scrap with some of Masema's followers.

"ðeɪ wʊd, ɪf mæsimə sɛd tə," pɛɹɪn sɛd kwaɪətli. "bɛs jə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi ɹɪmɛmbɝz ðæt. juv hɝd haʊ bɹəleɪnz mɛn daɪd?" dænɪl ɡeɪv ə ʃɑɹp nɑd, ən səm ə ði ʌðɝz ʃɪftəd ðɛɹ buts ən mʌɾɝd æŋɡɹəli ʌndɝ ðɛɹ bɹɛθ. "dʒʌst soʊ jə noʊ. ðɛɹz noʊ pɹuf ʌv ɛniθɪŋ, jɛt." lɛm snɔɹɾɪd, ən ðə ɹɛs lʊkt əbaʊɾ əz blik əz dænɪl. ðeɪ hæd sin ðə kɔɹpsəz mæsiməz fɑloʊɝz lɛf bɪhaɪnd.

"They would, if Masema said to," Perrin said quietly. "Best you make sure everybody remembers that. You've heard how Berelain's men died?" Dannil gave a sharp nod, and some of the others shifted their boots and muttered angrily under their breath. "Just so you know. There's no proof of anything, yet." Lem snorted, and the rest looked about as bleak as Dannil. They had seen the corpses Masema's followers left behind.

ðə snoʊ wɑz pɪkɪŋ ʌp, fæt fleɪks ðət dɑɾəd ðə mɛnz kloʊks. ðə hɔɹsəz kɛp ðɛɹ teɪlz tʌkt ɪn əɡɛns ðə koʊld. ɪt wəd bi ə fʊl blɪzɝɾ əɡɛn ɪn ə fju aʊɝz, ɪf nɑt sunɝ. noʊ wɛðɝ tə bi livɪŋ ðə faɪɝz' wɔɹmθ. noʊ wɛðɝ tə bi ɑn ðə muv.

The snow was picking up, fat flakes that dotted the men's cloaks. The horses kept their tails tucked in against the cold. It would be a full blizzard again in a few hours, if not sooner. No weather to be leaving the fires' warmth. No weather to be on the move.

"bɹɪŋ ɛvɹibɑɾi ɔf ðə hɪl ən stɑɹt təwɔɹd wɛɹ ði æmbʊʃ wɑz," hi ɔɹɾɝd. ðət wɑz wʌn ə ðə dɪsɪʒənz i hæd meɪd, wɔkɪŋ bæk. hi hæd dɪleɪd tu lɔŋ ɔlɹɛɾi, noʊ mæɾɝ u əɹ wʌt wɑz aʊt ðɛɹ. ðə ɹɛnəɡeɪɾ il hæd tu mʌtʃ lɛɾ əz ɪt wɑz, ən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ hɛɾəd ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən bʌt saʊθ əɹ ist, sʌmwʌn wʊɾə bɹɔt wɝd baɪ ðɪs taɪm. baɪ ðɪs taɪm, ðeɪ wəɾ ɪkspɛkt ɪm tə bi fɑloʊɪŋ. "wil ɹaɪɾ əntɪl aɪ hæv ə bɛɾɝ aɪdiə wɛɹ wɝ hɛɾɪŋ, ðən ɡɹeɪɾi əɹ nild wɪl teɪk əs ðəɹ θɹu ə ɡeɪtweɪ. sɛn mɛn tə bɹəleɪn ən ɑɹɡændə. aɪ wɑn ðə minɝz ən ɡildænɪn muvɪŋ, tu. pʊt skaʊts aʊt, ən flæŋkɝz, ən tɛl əm nɑt tə lʊk fəɹ il soʊ hɑɹd ðeɪ fɝɡɛt ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝz u maɪt wɑnə kɪl ʌs. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə stʌmbəl ɪndə ɛniθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ aɪ noʊ ɪts ðɛɹ. ən æsk ðə waɪz wʌnz tə steɪ kloʊs tə ʌs." hi wəd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæst ɑɹɡændə tə tʃɹaɪ pʊɾɪŋ əm tə ðə kwɛstʃən ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪz ɔɹɾɝz. ɪf ðə waɪz wʌnz kɪl səm ə ðə ɡildænɪn dɪfɛndɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, ðə fɛloʊ maɪt stʃɹaɪk aʊɾ ɪntaɪɝli ɑn ɪz oʊn, fiəlti əɹ noʊ. hi hæd ðə filɪŋ i wɑz gɑnə niɾ ɛvɹi faɪɾɪŋ mæn i kəd faɪnd. "bi əz fɝm əz jə dɛɹ."

"Bring everybody off the hill and start toward where the ambush was," he ordered. That was one of the decisions he had made, walking back. He had delayed too long already, no matter who or what was out there. The renegade Aiel had too much lead as it was, and if they were headed in any direction but south or east, someone would have brought word by this time. By this time, they would expect him to be following. "We'll ride until I have a better idea where we're heading, then Grady or Neald will take us there through a gateway. Send men to Berelain and Arganda. I want the Mayeners and Ghealdanin moving, too. Put scouts out, and flankers, and tell them not to look for Aiel so hard they forget there are others who might want to kill us. I don't want to stumble into anything before I know it's there. And ask the Wise Ones to stay close to us." He would not put it past Arganda to try putting them to the question in spite of his orders. If the Wise Ones killed some of the Ghealdanin defending themselves, the fellow might strike out entirely on his own, fealty or no. He had the feeling he was going to need every fighting man he could find. "Be as firm as you dare."

dænɪl tʊk ɪn ðə flʌɾ ʌv ɔɹɾɝz kɑmli, bʌɾ ət ðə læst ɪz maʊθ twɪstəɾ ɪn ə sɪkli ɡɹɪmɑs. laɪkli, hi wəɾ əz sun tʃɹaɪ tə bi fɝm wɪð ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl bæk hoʊm. "æz jə seɪ, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," hi sɛd stɪfli, tʌtʃɪŋ ə nʌkəl tə hɪz fɔɹhɛd bɪfɔɹ i swʌŋ ɪndə hɪz haɪ-kæntəl sæɾəl ən bɪɡæn kɔlɪŋ aʊɾ ɔɹɾɝz.

Dannil took in the flood of orders calmly, but at the last his mouth twisted in a sickly grimace. Likely, he would as soon try to be firm with the Women's Circle back home. "As you say, Lord Perrin," he said stiffly, touching a knuckle to his forehead before he swung into his high-cantled saddle and began calling out orders.

sɝaʊndəd baɪ mɛn skɹæmbəlɪŋ tə maʊnt, pɛɹɪn kɑt kɛnli mɹɪnz sliv waɪl ðə jʌŋ mæn stɪl hæd wʌn fʊɾ ɪn ɪz stɝəp ən æskt ɪm tə hæv stɛpɝ sæɾəld ən bɹɔt. wɪð ə waɪd ɡɹɪn, kɛnli nʌkəld ɪz fɔɹhɛd. "æz jə seɪ, lɔɹd pɛɹɪn. ɹaɪɾ əweɪ."

Surrounded by men scrambling to mount, Perrin caught Kenly Maerin's sleeve while the young man still had one foot in his stirrup and asked him to have Stepper saddled and brought. With a wide grin, Kenly knuckled his forehead. "As you say, Lord Perrin. Right away."

pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛɾ əz kɛnli tʃɹæmp təwɔɹd ðə hɔɹslaɪnz pʊlɪŋ ɪz bɹaʊn ɡɛldɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. ðə jʌŋ wɛlp ʃəd nɑt ɡɹoʊ ə bɪɹɾ ɪf i wɑz gɑnə skɹætʃ əɾ ɪɾ ɔl ðə taɪm. ðə θɪŋ wɑz stʃɹæɡɡli, ɛniweɪ.

Perrin growled inside his head as Kenly tramped toward the horselines pulling his brown gelding behind. The young whelp should not grow a beard if he was going to scratch at it all the time. The thing was straggly, anyway.

weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪz hɔɹs, hi muv kloʊs tə ðə bleɪz. feɪl sɛɾ i hæd tə lɪv wɪð ɔl ðə lɔɹd pɝɹaɪnɪŋ ən boʊɪŋ ən skɹeɪpɪŋ, ən moʊst ə ðə taɪm i mænədʒ tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt, bʌt tədeɪ ɪt wɑz ənʌðɝ dʒɹɑp ə baɪl. hi kəd fil ə kæzəm ɡɹoʊɪŋ waɪɾɝ bɪtwin ɪm ən ði ʌðɝ mɛn fɹəm hoʊm, ən i sim tə bi ði oʊnli wʌn u wɑntəd tə bɹɪdʒ ɪt. ɡɪl faʊn ɪm mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf əz i hɛld ɪz hænz aʊt tə ðə fleɪmz.

Waiting for his horse, he moved close to the blaze. Faile said he had to live with all the Lord Perrining and bowing and scraping, and most of the time he managed to ignore it, but today it was another drop of bile. He could feel a chasm growing wider between him and the other men from home, and he seemed to be the only one who wanted to bridge it. Gill found him muttering to himself as he held his hands out to the flames.

"fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ bɑðɝɪŋ ju, maɪ lɔɹd," ɡɪl sɛd, boʊɪŋ ən bɹifli snætʃɪŋ ɔf ɪz flɑpi hæt tə ɹɪvil ə θɪnli θætʃt skælp. ðə hæt wɛn ɹaɪt bæk ɑn ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn tə kip ɔf ðə snoʊ. sɪɾi bɹɛd, hi fɛl ðə koʊl bædli. ðə staʊt mæn wɑz nɑɾ əbsikwiəs - fju keɪɛmlɪn ɪnkipɝz wɝ - bʌɾ i sim tə ɛndʒɔɪ ə sɝɾən əmaʊn ə fɔɹmæləɾi. hi hæd sɝɾənli fɪɾəd ɪndə hɪz nu dʒɑb wɛl ɪnʌf tə pliz feɪl. "ɪts jʌŋ tɑlænvɝ. ət fɝs laɪt, hi sæɾəld ɪz hɔɹs ən wɛn ɔf. hi sɛd jə ɡeɪv ɪm pɝmɪʃən, ɪf . . . ɪf ðə sɝtʃ pɑɹɾiz hædnt ɡɑɾən bæk baɪ ðɛn, bʌɾ aɪ wʌndɝd, sɪns jə wʊdn lɛɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls ɡoʊ."

"Forgive me for bothering you, my Lord," Gill said, bowing and briefly snatching off his floppy hat to reveal a thinly thatched scalp. The hat went right back on his head again to keep off the snow. City bred, he felt the cold badly. The stout man was not obsequious - few Caemlyn innkeepers were - but he seemed to enjoy a certain amount of formality. He had certainly fitted into his new job well enough to please Faile. "It's young Tallanvor. At first light, he saddled his horse and went off. He said you gave him permission, if . . . if the search parties hadn't gotten back by then, but I wondered, since you wouldn't let anyone else go."

ðə ful. ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt tɑlænvɝ mɑɹkt ɪm ən ɪkspɪɹiənst soʊlʒɝ, ðoʊ hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn vɛɹi klɪɹ əbaʊɾ ɪz bækɡɹaʊnd, bʌɾ əloʊn əɡɛnst il, hi wɑz ə hɛɹ tʃeɪsɪŋ wizəlz. laɪt, aɪ wɑnə bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð hɪm! aɪ ʃʊdn əv lɪsən tə bɹəleɪn əbaʊɾ æmbʊʃɪz. bʌt ðəɹ hæd bɪn ənʌðɝ æmbʊʃ. ɑɹɡændəz skaʊts maɪɾ ɛn ðə seɪm weɪ. bʌɾ i hæd tə muv. hi hæd tə.

The fool. Everything about Tallanvor marked him an experienced soldier, though he had never been very clear about his background, but alone against Aiel, he was a hare chasing weasels. Light, I want to be riding with him! I shouldn't have listened to Berelain about ambushes. But there had been another ambush. Arganda's scouts might end the same way. But he had to move. He had to.

"jɛs," hi sɛɾ əlaʊd. "aɪ toʊld ɪm i kʊd." ɪf i sɛɾ ʌðɝwaɪz, hi maɪɾ əv tə teɪk noʊɾəs leɪɾɝ. lɔɹdz hæd tə də ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ. ɪf i ɛvɝ sɔ ðə mæn əlaɪv əɡɛn. "ju saʊn əz ðoʊ jə wɑnə ɡoʊ hʌntɪŋ jɝsɛlf."

"Yes," he said aloud. "I told him he could." If he said otherwise, he might have to take notice later. Lords had to do that sort of thing. If he ever saw the man alive again. "You sound as though you want to go hunting yourself."

"aɪ æm . . . vɛɹi fɑn ə meɪaɪɡdɪn, maɪ lɔɹd," ɡɪl ɹɪplaɪd. kwaɪət dɪɡnəɾi mɑɹkt ɪz vɔɪs, ən ə dɪɡɹi ʌv stɪfnəs, əz ðoʊ pɛɹɪn hæd sɛɾ i wɑz tu oʊld ən fæt fəɹ ðə tæsk. hi sɝɾənli smɛld ə vɛkseɪʃən, ɔl pɹɪkli ən dʒɪnʒɝ, ðoʊ hɪz koʊld-ɹɛɾənd feɪs wɑz smuð. "nɑt laɪk tɑlænvɝ - nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðæt, ʌv kɔɹs - bʌt vɛɹi fɑn ɔl ðə seɪm. ən ə ðə leɪɾi feɪl, ʌv kɔɹs," hi æɾəd heɪstəli. "ɪts dʒʌs ðəɾ ɪt simz aɪv noʊn meɪaɪɡdɪn maɪ hoʊl laɪf. ʃi dɪzɝvz bɛɾɝ."

"I am . . . very fond of Maighdin, my Lord," Gill replied. Quiet dignity marked his voice, and a degree of stiffness, as though Perrin had said he was too old and fat for the task. He certainly smelled of vexation, all prickly and ginger, though his cold-reddened face was smooth. "Not like Tallanvor - nothing like that, of course - but very fond all the same. And of the Lady Faile, of course," he added hastily. "It's just that it seems I've known Maighdin my whole life. She deserves better."

pɛɹɪnz saɪ mɪstɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz maʊθ. "aɪ ʌndɝstænd, mæstɝ ɡɪl." hi dɪd. hi hɪmsɛlf wɑntəd tə ɹɛskju ɛvɹiwʌn, bʌɾ i nu ɪf i hæd tə tʃuz, hi wəd teɪk feɪl ən lɛt ði ʌðɝz ɡoʊ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ kəd ɡoʊ, tə seɪv hɝ. hɔɹs-sɛnt wɑz hɛvi ɪn ði ɛɹ, bʌɾ i smɛl sʌmwʌn ɛls u wɑz ɪɹəteɪɾəd, ən lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

Perrin's sigh misted in front of his mouth. "I understand, Master Gill." He did. He himself wanted to rescue everyone, but he knew if he had to choose, he would take Faile and let the others go. Everything could go, to save her. Horse-scent was heavy in the air, but he smelled someone else who was irritated, and looked over his shoulder.

lini wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm fɹəm ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə tɝmɔɪl, ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ ɡɹaʊn dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə kip fɹəm biɪŋ ɹɪɾən daʊn æksədɛntəli baɪ mɛn dʒɑsəlɪŋ tə fɔɹm ɹæɡəd faɪlz. wʌn boʊni hænd ɡɹɪp ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ kloʊk, ən ði ʌðɝ hɛld ə bɹæs-stʌɾɪd kʌdʒəl, nɪɹli əz lɔŋ əz əɹ ɑɹm. ɪt wɑz ə wʌndɝ ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɔn wɪð tɑlænvɝ.

Lini was glaring at him from the middle of the turmoil, shifting her ground just enough to keep from being ridden down accidentally by men jostling to form ragged files. One bony hand gripped the edge of her cloak, and the other held a brass-studded cudgel, nearly as long as her arm. It was a wonder she had not gone with Tallanvor.

"jul hɪɹ əz sun əz aɪ du," hi pɹɑməs hɝ. ə ɹʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm sʌɾənli ən fɔɹsfəli ʌv ðət stu hi hæd skɔɹnd. hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs teɪs ðə mʌɾən ən lɛntəlz. ənʌðɝ jɔn kɹækt ɪz dʒɔz. "fɝɡɪv mi, lini," hi sɛd wən i kəd tɔk. "aɪ dɪdnt ɡɛt mʌtʃ slip læs naɪt. əɹ ə baɪt tə it. ɪz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ? səm bɹɛd, ən wʌtɛvɝz tə hænd?"

"You'll hear as soon as I do," he promised her. A rumbling in his middle reminded him suddenly and forcefully of that stew he had scorned. He could almost taste the mutton and lentils. Another yawn cracked his jaws. "Forgive me, Lini," he said when he could talk. "I didn't get much sleep last night. Or a bite to eat. Is there anything? Some bread, and whatever's to hand?"

"ɛvɹiwʌnz iɾən lɔŋ sɪns," ʃi snæpt. "ðə skɹæps ɑɹ ɡɔn, ən ðə kɛɾəlz klin ən stɔɹɾ əweɪ. sʌp fɹəm tu mɛni dɪʃəz, ən jə dɪzɝv ə bɛlieɪk ðæɾəl splɪt jə oʊpən. ɪspɛʃli wən ðəɹ nɑt jəɹ dɪʃəz." tʃɹeɪlɪŋ ɔf ɪndə dɪsæɾəsfaɪd mʌɾɝz, ʃi skaʊld əɾ ɪm ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ bɪfɔɹ stɔkɪŋ əweɪ, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wɝld.

"Everyone's eaten long since," she snapped. "The scraps are gone, and the kettles cleaned and stored away. Sup from too many dishes, and you deserve a bellyache that'll split you open. Especially when they're not your dishes." Trailing off into dissatisfied mutters, she scowled at him a moment longer before stalking away, glaring at the world.

"tu mɛni dɪʃəz?" pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd. "aɪ hævən hæɾ ə wʌn; ðæts maɪ tʃɹʌbəl, nɑɾ ə bɛlieɪk." lini wɑz meɪkɪŋ əɹ weɪ əkɹɔs ðə kæmpɡɹaʊnd, θɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ weɪ bɪtwin hɔɹsəz ən kɑɹts. θɹi əɹ fɔɹ mɛn spoʊk tə hɝ ɪn pæsɪŋ, ən ʃi bɑɹkt əɾ ɛvɹi wʌn, ivən ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ kʌdʒəl ɪf ðeɪ feɪl tə teɪk ðə hɪnt. ðə wʊmən mʌs bi aʊɾ ə hɝ maɪn oʊvɝ meɪaɪɡdɪn. "ɔɹəɡən wɑz ðət wʌn ə hɝ seɪɪŋz? ðeɪ juʒəwəli meɪk mɔɹ sɛns ðən ðæt."

"Too many dishes?" Perrin muttered. "I haven't had a one; that's my trouble, not a bellyache." Lini was making her way across the campground, threading her way between horses and carts. Three or four men spoke to her in passing, and she barked at every one, even shaking her cudgel if they failed to take the hint. The woman must be out of her mind over Maighdin. "Or was that one of her sayings? They usually make more sense than that."

"ɑ . . . wɛl, əz tə ðæt, naʊ. . . ." ɡɪl snætʃt ɪz hæɾ ɔf əɡɛn ən pɪɹɾ ɪnsaɪd, ðən stʌft ɪt bæk ɑn. "aɪ . . . ɑ . . . aɪ hæv tə si tə ðə kɑɹts, maɪ lɔɹd. nid tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɔlz ɹɛɾi."

"Ah . . . well, as to that, now. . . ." Gill snatched his hat off again and peered inside, then stuffed it back on. "I . . . ah . . . I have to see to the carts, my Lord. Need to make sure all's ready."

"ə blaɪn mæn kəd si ðə kɑɹts ɑɹ ɹɛɾi," pɛɹɪn toʊl hɪm. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?"

"A blind man could see the carts are ready," Perrin told him. "What is it?"

ɡɪlz hɛd swʌŋ waɪldli ɪn sɝtʃ ʌv ənʌðɝ ɪkskjus. faɪndɪŋ nʌn, hi wɪltɪd. "aɪ . . . aɪ səpoʊz jəl hɪɹ sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ," hi mʌmbəld. "ju si, maɪ lɔɹd, lini . . ." hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "ʃi wɔkt oʊvɝ tə ðə minɝ kæmp ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, bɪfɔɹ sʌnɹaɪz, tə si haʊ jə wɝ ən . . . ɑ . . . waɪ jə hædn kʌm bæk. ðə fɝsts tɛnt wɑz dɑɹk, bʌt wʌn ə hɝ meɪdz wɑz əweɪk, ən ʃi toʊld lini . . . ʃi ɪmplaɪd . . . aɪ min tə seɪ . . . doʊn lʊk ət mi ðət weɪ, maɪ lɔɹd."

Gill's head swung wildly in search of another excuse. Finding none, he wilted. "I . . . I suppose you'll hear sooner or later," he mumbled. "You see, my Lord, Lini . . ." He drew a deep breath. "She walked over to the Mayener camp this morning, before sunrise, to see how you were and . . . ah . . . why you hadn't come back. The First's tent was dark, but one of her maids was awake, and she told Lini . . . She implied . . . I mean to say . . . Don't look at me that way, my Lord."

pɛɹɪn smuðd ðə snɑɹl fɹəm ɪz feɪs. tʃɹaɪd tə, əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt. ɪt steɪɾ ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "bɝn mi, aɪ slɛpt ɪn ðət tɛnt, mæn. ðəɾ ɪz ɔl aɪ dɪd! jə tɛl əɹ ðæt!"

Perrin smoothed the snarl from his face. Tried to, at any rate. It stayed in his voice. "Burn me, I slept in that tent, man. That is all I did! You tell her that!"

ə vaɪələn kɑfɪŋ fɪt ɹæk ðə staʊt mæn. "mi?" ɡɪl wizd wʌns i kəd tɔk. "ju wɑn mi tə tɛl hɝ? ʃɪl kɹæk maɪ peɪɾ ɪf aɪ mɛnʃən ə θɪŋ laɪk ðæt! aɪ θɪŋk ðə wʊmən wɑz bɔɹn ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ ɪn ə θʌndɝstɔɹm. ʃi pɹɑbli toʊl ðə θʌndɝ tə bi kwaɪət. ɪt pɹɑbli dɪd."

A violent coughing fit wracked the stout man. "Me?" Gill wheezed once he could talk. "You want me to tell her? She'll crack my pate if I mention a thing like that! I think the woman was born in Far Madding in a thunderstorm. She probably told the thunder to be quiet. It probably did."

"jɔɹ ʃæmbaɪən," pɛɹɪn toʊl hɪm. "ɪt kæn ɔl bi loʊɾɪŋ kɑɹts ɪn ðə snoʊ." hi wɑntəd tə baɪt sʌmwʌn!

"You're shambayan," Perrin told him. "It can't all be loading carts in the snow." He wanted to bite someone!

ɡɪl sim tə sɛns ɪt. mʌmbəlɪŋ ɪz kɝɾəsiz, hi meɪɾ ə dʒɝki baʊ ən skɝiɾ əweɪ klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz kloʊk kloʊs. nɑt tə faɪn lini, pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ. ɡɪl ɔɹɾɝd ðə haʊshoʊld, sətʃ əz ɪt wɑz, bʌt nɛvɝ hɝ. noʊ wʌn ɔɹɾɝd lini ɪksɛp feɪl.

Gill seemed to sense it. Mumbling his courtesies, he made a jerky bow and scurried away clutching his cloak close. Not to find Lini, Perrin was sure. Gill ordered the household, such as it was, but never her. No one ordered Lini except Faile.

ɡlʌmli pɛɹɪn wɑtʃt ðə skaʊts ɹaɪɾ aʊt θɹu ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ, tɛn mɛn ɔlɹɛɾi wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹiz ɝaʊn əm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ bɪɑn saɪɾ ə ðə kɑɹts. laɪt, wɪmən wəd bɪliv ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ə mæn soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt wɑz bæd. ən ðə wɝs ɪt wɑz, ðə mɔɹ ðeɪ hæd tə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt. hi hæd θɔt ɹɑsin ən nænə wɝ ɔl i hæd tə wɝi əbaʊt. laɪkli lini hæd toʊl bɹin, feɪlz ʌðɝ meɪd, fɝs θɪŋ ɑn ɡɛɾɪŋ bæk, ən baɪ ðɪs taɪm, bɹin ʃʊɹli hæd toʊld ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪn ðə kæmp. ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti əmʌŋ ðə hɔɹs hænlɝz ən kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝz, ən kɛɹhinɪn biɪŋ kɛɹhinɪn, ðeɪ pɹɑbli hæd bɪn iɡɝ tə pæs ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn tə ðə mɛn, tu. ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ wɑz nɑt sin wɪð tʃɛɹɪɾi ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. wʌns jə ɡeɪn ðə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən, luzɪŋ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi. sʌɾənli ðə mɛn bækɪŋ əweɪ tə ɡɪv ɪm ɹum tʊk ɑn ə nu laɪt, ən ði ənsɝɾən weɪ ðeɪ hæd lʊkt ət hɪm, ən ivən lɛm spɪɾɪŋ. ɪn mɛmɹi, kɛnliz ɡɹɪn bɪkeɪm ə smɝk. ðə wʌn bɹaɪt spɑt wɑz ðət feɪl wəd nɑt bɪliv ɪt. ʌv kɔɹs ʃi wəd nɑt. sɝɾənli nɑt.

Glumly Perrin watched the scouts ride out through the falling snow, ten men already watching the trees around them before they were beyond sight of the carts. Light, women would believe anything about a man so long as it was bad. And the worse it was, the more they had to talk about it. He had thought Rosene and Nana were all he had to worry about. Likely Lini had told Breane, Faile's other maid, first thing on getting back, and by this time, Breane surely had told every woman in the camp. There were plenty among the horse handlers and cart drivers, and Cairhienin being Cairhienin, they probably had been eager to pass everything on to the men, too. That sort of thing was not seen with charity in the Two Rivers. Once you gained the reputation, losing it was not easy. Suddenly the men backing away to give him room took on a new light, and the uncertain way they had looked at him, and even Lem spitting. In memory, Kenly's grin became a smirk. The one bright spot was that Faile would not believe it. Of course she would not. Certainly not.

kɛnli ɹɪtɝn əɾ ə stʌmbəlɪŋ tʃɹɑt θɹu ðə snoʊ, dʒɹɔɪŋ stɛpɝ ən ɪz oʊn ɹeɪnʒi ɡɛldɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. boʊθ hɔɹsəz wɝ mɪzɝəbəl wɪð ðə koʊld, ðɛɹ ɪɹz foʊldəd bæk ən teɪlz taɪt, ən ðə dʌn stæljən meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə baɪɾ ət kɛnliz maʊnt, əz i juʒəwəli wəd hæv.

Kenly returned at a stumbling trot through the snow, drawing Stepper and his own rangy gelding behind. Both horses were miserable with the cold, their ears folded back and tails tight, and the dun stallion made no effort to bite at Kenly's mount, as he usually would have.

"doʊnt ʃoʊ jəɹ tiθ ɔl ðə taɪm," pɛɹɪn snæpt, snætʃɪŋ stɛpɝz ɹeɪnz. ðə bɔɪ aɪɾ ɪm daʊtfəli, ðən slʌŋk əweɪ ɡlænsɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

"Don't show your teeth all the time," Perrin snapped, snatching Stepper's reins. The boy eyed him doubtfully, then slunk away glancing back over his shoulder.

ɡɹoʊlɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, pɛɹɪn tʃɛk ðə stæljənz sæɾəl ɡɝθ. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə faɪn mæsimə, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt maʊnt. hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf ɪt wɑz kəz i wɑz taɪɝɾ ən hʌŋɡɹi, ðəɾ i wɑntəd dʒʌst ə bɪɾ ə ɹɛst ən sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ɪz bɛli, ɪf i kəd faɪn ɛniθɪŋ. hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf ðæt, bʌɾ i kɛp siɪŋ bɝn fɑɹmz ən bɑɾiz hæŋɪŋ baɪ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd, mɛn ən wɪmən ən ivən tʃɪlʒɹən. ivən ɪf ɹænd wɑz stɪl ɪn ɔltɑɹə, ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ weɪ. ə lɔŋ weɪ, ən i hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs. nʌn i kəd meɪk hɪmsɛlf teɪk.

Growling under his breath, Perrin checked the stallion's saddle girth. It was time to find Masema, but he did not mount. He told himself it was because he was tired and hungry, that he wanted just a bit of rest and something in his belly, if he could find anything. He told himself that, but he kept seeing burned farms and bodies hanging by the side of the road, men and women and even children. Even if Rand was still in Altara, it was a long way. A long way, and he had no choice. None he could make himself take.

hi wɑz stændɪŋ wɪð ɪz fɔɹhɛd sʌŋk əɡɛnst stɛpɝz sæɾəl wən ə dɛləɡeɪʃən ə ðə jʌŋ fulz u hæɾ ətætʃt ðɛmsɛlvz tə feɪl sɔɾ ɪm aʊt, nɪɹ ə dʌzən ə ðɛm. hi stʃɹeɪɾənd wɛɹəli, wɪʃɪŋ ðə snoʊ wəd bɛɹi ðɛm ɔl.

He was standing with his forehead sunk against Stepper's saddle when a delegation of the young fools who had attached themselves to Faile sought him out, near a dozen of them. He straightened wearily, wishing the snow would bury them all.

sɛlən plæntəd hɝsɛlf əlɔŋsaɪd stɛpɝz haɪndkɔɹɾɝz, ə ʃɔɹt slɛndɝ wʊmən wɪð ɡɹin-ɡlʌv fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps ən ən æŋɡɹi skaʊl kɹisɪŋ əɹ fɔɹhɛd. ʃi mænədʒ tə swæɡɝ stændɪŋ stɪl. dɪspaɪt ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ, wʌn saɪɾ ə hɝ kloʊk wɑz θɹoʊn bæk tə ɡɪv izi æksɛs tə hɝ sɔɹd, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ sɪks bɹaɪt slæʃɪz əkɹɔs ðə fɹʌn ə hɝ dɑɹk blu koʊt. ɔl ðə wɪmən wɔɹ mɛnz kloʊðɪŋ ən sɔɹdz, ən juʒəwəli ðeɪ wɝ twaɪs əz ɹɛɾi tə juz əm əz ðə mɛn, wɪtʃ wɑz seɪɪŋ kwaɪɾ ə bɪt. mɛn ən wɪmən əlaɪk, ðeɪ wɝ tʌtʃi wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn, ən wʊɾə bɪn faɪɾɪŋ duəlz ɛvɹi deɪ hæd nɑt feɪl pʊɾ ə stɑp tə ɪt. mɛn ən wɪmən əlaɪk, ðə lɑt wɪð sɛlən smɛld æŋɡɹi, sʌlən, sʌlki ən pɛtʃələnt, ɔl dʒʌmbəl təɡɛðɝ, ə sɛn ðət twɪtʃt ənkʌmftəbli ɪn ɪz noʊz.

Selande planted herself alongside Stepper's hindquarters, a short slender woman with green-gloved fists on her hips and an angry scowl creasing her forehead. She managed to swagger standing still. Despite the falling snow, one side of her cloak was thrown back to give easy access to her sword, exposing six bright slashes across the front of her dark blue coat. All the women wore men's clothing and swords, and usually they were twice as ready to use them as the men, which was saying quite a bit. Men and women alike, they were touchy with everyone, and would have been fighting duels every day had not Faile put a stop to it. Men and women alike, the lot with Selande smelled angry, sullen, sulky and petulant, all jumbled together, a scent that twitched uncomfortably in his nose.

"aɪ si ju, maɪ lɔɹd pɛɹɪn," sɛlən sɛd fɔɹməli ɪn ðə kɹɪsp æksɛns ə kɛɹhin. "pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz ɑɹ biɪŋ meɪd tə muv aʊt, bʌt stɪl wəɹ ɹəfjuzd əɹ hɔɹsəz. wɪl juv ðɪs meɪd ɹaɪt?" ʃi meɪɾ ɪt saʊn ə dɪmænd.

"I see you, my Lord Perrin," Selande said formally in the crisp accents of Cairhien. "Preparations are being made to move out, but still we are refused our horses. Will you have this made right?" She made it sound a demand.

ʃi sɔ hɪm, dɪd ʃi? hi wɪʃt i dɪd nɑt si hɝ. "il wɔk," hi ɡɹaʊld, ən staɪfəld ə jɔn, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ ə wɪt fəɹ ðə fjʊɹiəs ɡlɛɹz ðəɾ ɝn hɪm. hi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊt slip aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd. "ɪf jə woʊnt wɔk, ɹaɪɾ ɑn ðə kɑɹts."

She saw him, did she? He wished he did not see her. "Aiel walk," he growled, and stifled a yawn, not caring a whit for the furious glares that earned him. He tried to put sleep out of his mind. "If you won't walk, ride on the carts."

"ju kænɑt də ðæt!" wʌn ə ðə tɛɹən wɪmən ənaʊns hɔɾəli, wʌn hæn taɪɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ kloʊk, ði ʌðɝ ɑn əɹ sɔɹd hɪlt. mɛdɔɹ wɑz tɔl, wɪð bɹaɪt blu aɪz ɪn ə dɑɹk feɪs, ən ɪf ʃi mɪs bjuɾəfəl, ɪt wɑz nɑt baɪ mʌtʃ. ðə fæt, ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp slivz ə hɝ koʊt lʊk dɪsaɪɾədli ɑd wɪð əɹ fʊl bʊzəm. "ɹɛdwɪŋ ɪz maɪ feɪvɹɪt maʊnt! aɪ woʊn bi dɪnaɪd hɝ!"

"You cannot do that!" one of the Tairen women announced haughtily, one hand tight on the edge of her cloak, the other on her sword hilt. Medore was tall, with bright blue eyes in a dark face, and if she missed beautiful, it was not by much. The fat, red-striped sleeves of her coat looked decidedly odd with her full bosom. "Redwing is my favorite mount! I won't be denied her!"

"θɝd taɪm," sɛlən sɛd kɹɪptɪkli. "wɛn wi stɑp tənaɪt, wɪl dɪskʌs jəɹ toʊ, mɛdɔɹ dɑmɑɹə."

"Third time," Selande said cryptically. "When we stop tonight, we will discuss your toh, Medore Damara."

səpoʊzədli, mɛdɔɹz fɑðɝ wɑz ən eɪdʒɪŋ mæn u hæd ɹɪtaɪɹd tə hɪz kʌntʃɹi ɪsteɪts jɪɹz əɡoʊ, bʌɾ əstɔɹəl wɑz stɪl ə haɪ lɔɹd fəɹ ɔl ðæt. əz ðoʊz θɪŋz wɝ ɹɛkənd, ðət pʊɾ ɪz dɔɾɝ wɛl əbʌv sɛlənd, oʊnli ə maɪnɝ noʊbəl ɪn kɛɹhin. jɛt mɛdɔɹ swɑloʊd hɑɹd, ən əɹ aɪz waɪɾənd tɪl ʃi lʊkt əz ðoʊ ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə bi skɪn əlaɪv.

Supposedly, Medore's father was an aging man who had retired to his country estates years ago, but Astoril was still a High Lord for all that. As those things were reckoned, that put his daughter well above Selande, only a minor noble in Cairhien. Yet Medore swallowed hard, and her eyes widened till she looked as though she expected to be skinned alive.

əbɹʌpli pɛɹɪn hæd hæɾ ɔl i kəd teɪk ə ðiz ɪɾiəts ən ðɛɹ dɔɡz dɪnɝ ʌv il bɪts ən pisəz ən pjʊɹ haɪbɹn dʒækfulɝi. "wɛn dɪd jə stɑɹt spaɪɪŋ fəɹ maɪ waɪf?" hi dɪmændəd. ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv ɡɔn stɪfɝ hæd ðɛɹ bækboʊnz fɹoʊzən.

Abruptly Perrin had had all he could take of these idiots and their dog's dinner of Aiel bits and pieces and pure highborn jacfoolery. "When did you start spying for my wife?" he demanded. They could not have gone stiffer had their backbones frozen.

"wi kæɹi aʊt sətʃ smɔl tæsks ən ɛɹənz əz ðə leɪɾi feɪl maɪt ɹikwaɪɝ ʌv əs fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm," sɛlən sɛɾ æftɝ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt, ɪn vɛɹi kɛɹfəl toʊnz. wɛɹinɪs wɑz θɪk ɪn əɹ sɛnt. ðə hoʊl ɡæɡəl ə ðɛm smɛld laɪk fɑksəz wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ə bædʒɝ hæd teɪkən oʊvɝ ðɛɹ dɛn.

"We carry out such small tasks and errands as the Lady Faile might require of us from time to time," Selande said after a long moment, in very careful tones. Wariness was thick in her scent. The whole gaggle of them smelled like foxes wondering whether a badger had taken over their den.

"dɪd maɪ waɪf ɹɪli ɡoʊ hʌntɪŋ, sɛlənd?" hi ɡɹaʊl hiɾɪdli. "ʃiz nɛvɝ wɑntəd tə bɪfɔɹ." æŋɡɝ ɹɔɹɾ ɪn hɪm, fleɪmz fæn baɪ ɔl ði ɪvɛns ə ðə deɪ. hi pʊʃt stɛpɝ əweɪ wɪð wʌn hæn ən stɛp kloʊsɝ tə ðə wʊmən, lumɪŋ oʊvɝ hɝ. ðə stæljən tɔst ɪz hɛd, sɛnsɪŋ pɛɹɪnz hjumɝ. hɪz fɪst ætʃt ɪn ɪz ɡɔnlət fɹəm ɪts ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz. "ɔɹ dɪd ʃi ɹaɪɾ aʊt tə mit səm ə ju, fɹɛʃ fɹəm ɑbilə? wɑz ʃi kɪdnæp kəz ə jəɹ blʌɾi spaɪɪŋ?"

"Did my wife really go hunting, Selande?" he growled heatedly. "She's never wanted to before." Anger roared in him, flames fanned by all the events of the day. He pushed Stepper away with one hand and stepped closer to the woman, looming over her. The stallion tossed his head, sensing Perrin's humor. His fist ached in his gauntlet from its grip on the reins. "Or did she ride out to meet some of you, fresh from Abila? Was she kidnapped because of your bloody spying?"

ðət meɪd noʊ sɛns, ən i nu ɪɾ əz ðə wɝdz lɛft ɪz maʊθ. feɪl cʊɾə tɔkt wɪð əm ɛniwɛɹ. ən ʃi wəd nɛvɝ əv ɝeɪnʒd tə miɾ əɹ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz - laɪt, hɝ spaɪz! - ɪn kʌmpəni wɪð bɹəleɪn. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz ə mɪsteɪk tə spik wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ. hi nu əbaʊt mæsimə ən ðə sintʃæn kəz ə ðɛɹ spaɪɪŋ. bʌɾ i wɑntəd tə læʃ aʊt, hi niɾəd tə læʃ aʊt, ən ðə mɛn i wɑntəd tə hæmɝ ɪndə nʌθɪŋnəs wɝ maɪlz əweɪ. wɪð feɪl.

That made no sense, and he knew it as the words left his mouth. Faile could have talked with them anywhere. And she would never have arranged to meet her eyes-and-ears - Light, her spies! - in company with Berelain. It was always a mistake to speak without thinking. He knew about Masema and the Seanchan because of their spying. But he wanted to lash out, he needed to lash out, and the men he wanted to hammer into nothingness were miles away. With Faile.

sɛlən dɪd nɑt bæk əweɪ fɹəm ɪz æŋɡɝ. hɝ aɪz nɛɹoʊd tə slɪts. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz oʊpən ən kloʊzd ɑn ðə hɪlt ə hɝ sɔɹd, ən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. "wi wəd daɪ fəɹ ðə leɪɾi feɪl!" ʃi spæt. "nʌθɪŋ wɪv dʌn əz pʊɾ əɹ ɪn deɪnʒɝ! wəɹ swɔɹn tə hɝ baɪ wɔɾɝ oʊθ!" tə feɪl ən nɑt tə hɪm, hɝ toʊn æɾəd.

Selande did not back away from his anger. Her eyes narrowed to slits. Her fingers opened and closed on the hilt of her sword, and she was not alone. "We would die for the Lady Faile!" she spat. "Nothing we have done has put her in danger! We are sworn to her by water oath!" To Faile and not to him, her tone added.

hi ʃəɾ əpɑlədʒaɪz. hi nu hi ʃʊd. ɪnstɛd, hi sɛd, "ju kən əv jəɹ hɔɹsəz ɪf jə ɡɪmi jəɹ wɝd jəl də əz aɪ seɪ ən nɑt tʃɹaɪ ɛniθɪŋ ɹæʃ." "ɹæʃ" wɑz nɑt ðə wɝd fəɹ ðɪs lɑt. ðeɪ wɝ keɪpəbəl ə ɹʌʃɪŋ ɔf əloʊn əz sun əz ðeɪ lɝnd wɛɹ feɪl wɑz. ðeɪ wɝ keɪpəbəl ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ feɪl kɪld. "wɛn wi faɪn hɝ, əl dɪsaɪd haʊ tə ɹɛskju hɝ. ɪf jəɹ wɔɾɝ oʊθ sɛz dɪfɹənt, taɪ ə nɑɾ ɪn ɪt, əɹ əl taɪ jə ɪn nɑts."

He should apologize. He knew he should. Instead, he said, "You can have your horses if you give me your word you'll do as I say and not try anything rash." "Rash" was not the word for this lot. They were capable of rushing off alone as soon as they learned where Faile was. They were capable of getting Faile killed. "When we find her, I will decide how to rescue her. If your water oath says different, tie a knot in it, or I'll tie you in knots."

hɝ dʒɔ taɪɾənd ən əɹ skaʊl dipənd, bʌt faɪnəli ʃi sɛd "aɪ əɡɹi!" əz ðoʊ ðə wɝdz wɝ biɪŋ pɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ. wʌn ə ðə tɛɹənz, ə lɔŋ-noʊz fɛloʊ neɪm kɑɹlən, ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst, bʌt sɛlən ɹeɪzd wʌn fɪŋɡɝ, ən i ʃʌɾ ɪz maʊθ. wɪð ðət nɛɹoʊ tʃɪn, hi pɹɑbli ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ʃeɪvɪŋ ɔf ɪz bɪɹd. ðə lɪɾəl wʊmən hæd ðə ɹɛst ə ðiz fulz ɪn ðə pɑm ə hɝ hænd, wɪtʃ dɪd nɑt meɪk əɹ ɛni lɛs ə ful hɝsɛlf. wɔɾɝ oʊθ, ɪndid! ʃi dɪd nɑt teɪk əɹ aɪz fɹəm pɛɹɪnz. "wi wɪl oʊbeɪ jə əntɪl ðə leɪɾi feɪl ɪz ɹɪtɝnd. ðɛn, wəɹ hɝz əɡɛn. ən ʃi kən dɪsaɪɾ əɹ toʊ." ðət læst simd mɔɹ fəɹ ði ʌðɝz ðən hɪm.

Her jaw tightened and her scowl deepened, but finally she said "I agree!" as though the words were being pried out of her. One of the Tairens, a long-nosed fellow named Carlon, grunted in protest, but Selande raised one finger, and he shut his mouth. With that narrow chin, he probably regretted shaving off his beard. The little woman had the rest of these fools in the palm of her hand, which did not make her any less a fool herself. Water oath, indeed! She did not take her eyes from Perrin's. "We will obey you until the Lady Faile is returned. Then, we are hers again. And she can decide our toh." That last seemed more for the others than him.

"ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf," hi toʊl hɝ. hi ətɛmptəd tə mɑɾɝeɪt ɪz toʊn, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs wɑz stɪl ɹʌf. "aɪ noʊ jə ɑɹ lɔɪəl tə hɝ, ɔl ə ju. aɪ ɹɪspɛk ðæt." ðət wɑz əbaʊɾ ɔl i dɪd ɹɪspɛkt ɪn ðɛm. əz ən əpɑlədʒi ɪt wɑz nɑt vɛɹi mʌtʃ, ən ðət wɑz dʒʌs haʊ ðeɪ tʊk ɪt. ə ɡɹʌn fɹəm sɛlənd wɑz ði oʊnli ɹɪplaɪ hi ɡɑt, ðəɾ ən ɡlaʊɝz fɹəm ðə ɹɛst əz ðeɪ stɔkt ɔf. soʊ bi ɪt. əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ kɛp ðɛɹ wɝd. ðə hoʊl bʌntʃ hæd nɛvɝ dʌn ən ɑnəs deɪz wɝk bɪtwin ðɛm.

"Good enough," he told her. He attempted to moderate his tone, but his voice was still rough. "I know you are loyal to her, all of you. I respect that." That was about all he did respect in them. As an apology it was not very much, and that was just how they took it. A grunt from Selande was the only reply he got, that and glowers from the rest as they stalked off. So be it. As long as they kept their word. The whole bunch had never done an honest day's work between them.

ðə kæmp wɑz ɛmptiɪŋ aʊt. ðə kɑɹts hæd bɪɡʌn muvɪŋ saʊθ, slaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ slɛdz bɪhaɪn ðə kɑɹθɔɹsɪz. ðə hɔɹsəz lɛf dip tʃɹæks, bʌt ðə slɛdz meɪɾ oʊnli ʃæloʊ ɹʌts ðət ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ bɪɡæn tə bɛɹi ɪmiɾiətli. ðə læst ə ðə mɛn fɹəm ðə hɪl wɝ skɹæmbəlɪŋ ɪndə ðɛɹ sæɾəlz ən dʒɔɪnɪŋ ði ʌðɝz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə kɑɹts. dʒʌst ɔf tə wʌn saɪd, ðə waɪz wʌnz' pɑɹɾi bɪɡæn tə pæs, ivən ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn liɾɪŋ ðə pæk ænəməlz ðɛmsɛlvz maʊntəd. haʊɛvɝ fɝm dænɪl hæd dɛɹd tə bi, əɹ nɑɾ əz wɑz mɔɹ laɪkli, əpɛɹənli ɪt hæd bɪn ɪnʌf. ðə waɪz wʌnz lʊk pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɑkwɝɾ ɑn hɔɹsbæk kəmpɛɹd tə ðə ɡɹeɪs ə siɑnɪɾ ən mɑsʊɝi, ðoʊ nɑt soʊ bæɾ əz ðə ɡeɪʃeɪn. ðə waɪt-ɹoʊb mɛn ən wɪmən hæɾ ɔl bɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ sɪns ðə θɝd deɪ ɪn snoʊ, jɛt ðeɪ kɹaʊtʃt loʊ oʊvɝ ðə tɔl pɑməlz ə ðɛɹ sæɾəlz ən klʌŋ tə nɛk əɹ meɪn əz ɪf ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə fɔl ɔf ət ðə nɛkst stɛp. ɡɛɾɪŋ əm maʊntəɾ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs hæd ɹikwaɪɝd dɝɛkt kəmænz fɹəm ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən səm wəd stɪl slaɪd daʊn ən wɔk ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt wɑtʃt.

The camp was emptying out. The carts had begun moving south, sliding on their sleds behind the carthorses. The horses left deep tracks, but the sleds made only shallow ruts that the falling snow began to bury immediately. The last of the men from the hill were scrambling into their saddles and joining the others already riding with the carts. Just off to one side, the Wise Ones' party began to pass, even the gai'shain leading the pack animals themselves mounted. However firm Dannil had dared to be, or not as was more likely, apparently it had been enough. The Wise Ones looked particularly awkward on horseback compared to the grace of Seonid and Masuri, though not so bad as the gai'shain. The white-robed men and women had all been riding since the third day in snow, yet they crouched low over the tall pommels of their saddles and clung to neck or mane as if expecting to fall off at the next step. Getting them mounted in the first place had required direct commands from the Wise Ones, and some would still slide down and walk if they were not watched.

pɛɹɪn pʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɑntu stɛpɝ. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i maɪt nɑt fɔl ɔf hɪmsɛlf. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə meɪk ðɪs ɹaɪɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə meɪk, ðoʊ. hi wʊɾə kɪl fəɹ ə pis ə bɹɛd. əɹ səm tʃiz. əɹ ə naɪs ɹæbət.

Perrin pulled himself up onto Stepper. He was not sure he might not fall off himself. It was time to make this ride he did not want to make, though. He would have killed for a piece of bread. Or some cheese. Or a nice rabbit.

"il kʌmɪŋ!" sʌmwʌn ʃaʊɾəd fɹəm ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kɑləm, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ keɪm tə ə hɔlt. mɔɹ ʃaʊts ɹæŋ aʊt, pæsɪŋ ðə wɝɾ əz ɪf ɛvɹiwʌn hæd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hɝd, ən mɛn ənlɪmbɝd baʊz fɹəm ðɛɹ bæks. kɑɹt dʒɹaɪvɝz stʊɾ ʌp ɑn ðɛɹ sits, piɹɪŋ əhɛd, əɹ lɛp daʊn tə kɹaʊtʃ bɪsaɪd ðə kɑɹt. ɡɹoʊlɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, pɛɹɪn hil stɛpɝ ɪn ðə flæŋks.

"Aiel coming!" someone shouted from the head of the column, and everything came to a halt. More shouts rang out, passing the word as if everyone had not already heard, and men unlimbered bows from their backs. Cart drivers stood up on their seats, peering ahead, or leaped down to crouch beside the cart. Growling under his breath, Perrin heeled Stepper in the flanks.

ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə kɑləm, dænɪl wɑz stɪl ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, ən ðə tu mɛn kæɹiɪŋ ðoʊz blʌɾi bænɝz, bʌɾ ə ɡʊd θɝɾi wɝ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, kʌvɝɪŋz stʃɹɪp fɹəm ðɛɹ bɑstʃɹɪŋz ən æɹoʊz nɑkt. ðə mɛn hoʊldɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz fəɹ ðə dɪsmaʊntɪd mɛn dʒɑsəld əbaʊt, pɔɪntɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ə klɪɹ vju. ɡɹeɪɾi ən nild wɝ ðɛɹ, əz wɛl, piɹɪŋ əhɛd wɪð ɪntɛn feɪsəz bʌt sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz kɑmli. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɹikt ʌv ædʒəteɪʃən. ði æʃəmən oʊnli smɛld . . . ɹɛɾi.

At the front of the column, Dannil was still in his saddle, and the two men carrying those bloody banners, but a good thirty were on the ground, coverings stripped from their bowstrings and arrows nocked. The men holding the horses for the dismounted men jostled about, pointing and trying to get a clear view. Grady and Neald were there, as well, peering ahead with intent faces but sitting on their horses calmly. Everyone else reeked of agitation. The Asha'man only smelled . . . ready.

pɛɹɪn kəd meɪk aʊt wʌt ðeɪ wɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ə ɡʊd dil mɔɹ klɪɹli ðən ðeɪ. tɛn veɪld il tʃɹɑɾɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əm θɹu ðə fɔlɪŋ snoʊ, wʌn liɾɪŋ ə tɔl waɪt hɔɹs. ə lɪɾəl bɪhaɪn əm ɹoʊd θɹi mɛn, kloʊkt ən hʊɾɪd. ðəɹ sim tə bi sʌmθɪŋ ɑɾ ɪn ðə weɪ ði il muvd. ən ðəɹ wɑz ə bʌndəl taɪd tə ðə waɪts sæɾəl. ə fɪst ɡɹɪpt pɛɹɪnz hɑɹɾ əntɪl i ɹilaɪzd ɪt wɑz nɑt nɪɹli lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə bi ə bɑɾi.

Perrin could make out what they were staring at through the trees a good deal more clearly than they. Ten veiled Aiel trotting toward them through the falling snow, one leading a tall white horse. A little behind them rode three men, cloaked and hooded. There seemed to be something odd in the way the Aiel moved. And there was a bundle tied to the white's saddle. A fist gripped Perrin's heart until he realized it was not nearly large enough to be a body.

"pʊɾ ʌp jəɹ baʊz," hi sɛd. "ðæts æliændɝz ɡɛldɪŋ. ɪt mʌs bi əɹ pipəl. kæn jə si ði il ɑɹ ɔl meɪɾənz?" nɑɾ ə wʌn wɑz tɔl ɪnʌf tə bi ən ilmən.

"Put up your bows," he said. "That's Alliandre's gelding. It must be our people. Can't you see the Aiel are all Maidens?" Not a one was tall enough to be an Aielman.

"aɪ kən bɛɹli meɪk aʊt ðəɹ il," dænɪl mʌɾɝd, ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. ðeɪ ɔl tʊk ɪt fəɹ ɡɹæntəd ðəɾ ɪz aɪz wɝ ɡʊd, ivən tʊk pɹaɪɾ ɪn ɪt - əɹ juz tə - bʌɾ i tʃɹaɪd tə kip əm fɹəm noʊɪŋ haʊ ɡʊd. ɹaɪt ðɛn, hi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ, ðoʊ.

"I can barely make out they're Aiel," Dannil muttered, giving him a sidelong look. They all took it for granted that his eyes were good, even took pride in it - or used to - but he tried to keep them from knowing how good. Right then, he did not care, though.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ aʊɝz," hi toʊl dænɪl. "ɛvɹibɑɾi steɪ hɪɹ."

"They are ours," he told Dannil. "Everybody stay here."

sloʊli hi ɹoʊɾ aʊt tə mit ðə ɹɪtɝnɪŋ pɑɹɾi. ðə meɪɾənz bɪɡæn ənveɪlɪŋ əz i əpɹoʊtʃt. ɪn wʌn ə ðə dip kaʊlz ɑn ðə maʊntəd mɛn, hi meɪɾ aʊt fʊɹən ælhæɹəz blæk feɪs. ðə θɹi wɔɹɾɝz, ðɛn; ðeɪ wʊɾə kʌm bæk tɑɡðɝ. ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz lʊkt əz taɪɝɾ əz i fɛlt, nɪɹ ɪɡzɔstʃən. hi wɑntəd tə fɔɹs stɛpɝ tə ɹʌn, tə hɪɹ wʌt ðeɪ hæd tə ɹipɔɹt. hi dʒɹɛɾɪd hɪɹɪŋ. ɹeɪvənz wʊɾə bɪn ət ðə bɑɾiz, ən fɑksəz, bædʒɝz meɪbi, ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌt bɪsaɪdz. meɪbi ðeɪ θɔt ðeɪ wɝ spɛɹɪŋ ɪm baɪ nɑt bɹɪŋɪŋ bæk wʌt ðeɪ hæd faʊnd. noʊ! feɪl hæd tə bi əlaɪv. hi tʃɹaɪd tə fɪks ðət θɔɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ ɪt hɝt laɪk ɡɹɪpɪŋ ə ʃɑɹp bleɪd bæɹhændɪd.

Slowly he rode out to meet the returning party. The Maidens began unveiling as he approached. In one of the deep cowls on the mounted men, he made out Furen Alharra's black face. The three Warders, then; they would have come back togther. Their horses looked as tired as he felt, near exhaustion. He wanted to force Stepper to run, to hear what they had to report. He dreaded hearing. Ravens would have been at the bodies, and foxes, badgers maybe, and the Light alone knew what besides. Maybe they thought they were sparing him by not bringing back what they had found. No! Faile had to be alive. He tried to fix that thought in his head, but it hurt like gripping a sharp blade barehanded.

dɪsmaʊntɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm, hi stʌmbəld ən hæd tə hoʊld ɑn tə ðə sæɾəl tə kip fɹəm fɔlɪŋ. hi fɛl nʌm ɝaʊn ðə bɹaɪt peɪn ə hoʊldɪŋ ɑn tə ðət wʌn θɔt. ʃi hæd tə bi əlaɪv. lɪɾəl dɪteɪlz lum lɑɹdʒ, fəɹ səm ɹizən. nɑt wʌn bʌndəl fæsən tə ði ɪlæbɹətli tul sæɾəl, bʌɾ ə nʌmbɝ ə smɔl bʌndəlz ðət lʊk laɪk ɡæðɝd ɹæɡz. ðə meɪɾənz wɔɹ snoʊʃuz, ɹʌf-meɪɾ ə vaɪnz ən sʌpəl paɪn bɹæntʃəz wɪð ðə niɾəlz stɪl ɑn. ðət wɑz waɪ ðeɪ sim tə bi muvɪŋ ɑdli. dʒɑndɪn mʌst əv ʃoʊn əm haʊ tə meɪk ðɛm. hi tʃɹaɪd tə foʊkəs. hi θɔɾ ɪz hɑɹt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə paʊn θɹu hɪz ɹɪbz.

Dismounting in front of them, he stumbled and had to hold on to the saddle to keep from falling. He felt numb around the bright pain of holding on to that one thought. She had to be alive. Little details loomed large, for some reason. Not one bundle fastened to the elaborately tooled saddle, but a number of small bundles that looked like gathered rags. The Maidens wore snowshoes, rough-made of vines and supple pine branches with the needles still on. That was why they seemed to be moving oddly. Jondyn must have shown them how to make them. He tried to focus. He thought his heart was going to pound through his ribs.

ɡɹɪpɪŋ spɪɹz ən bʌkəlɝ ɪn əɹ lɛf hænd, səlɪn tʊk wʌn ə ðə smɔl bʌndəlz ə klɔθ fɹəm ðə sæɾəl bɪfɔɹ ʃi keɪm tə hɪm. ðə pɪŋk skɑɹ ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn əɹ lɛðɝi tʃik twɪstəɾ əz ʃi smaɪld. "ɡʊd nuz, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ʃi sɛd sɔfli, hændɪŋ ɪm ðə dɑɹk blu klɔθ. "jɔɹ waɪf laɪvz." ælhæɹə ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð siɑnɪdz ʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝ, tɛɹəl wɪntɝ, hu fɹaʊnd. mɑsʊɝiz mæn, ɹoʊvɛɹ kɝklɪn, stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd stɑnəli. ɪt wɑz əz pleɪn əz wɪntɝz kɝl mʌstæʃɪz ðət ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ɡʊd nuz. "ði ʌðɝz pɹɛs ɑn tə si wʌt mɔɹ ðeɪ kən faɪnd," ʃi wɛn ɑn. "ðoʊ wi ɔlɹɛɾi hæv faʊn ɑɾətiz ɪnʌf."

Gripping spears and buckler in her left hand, Sulin took one of the small bundles of cloth from the saddle before she came to him. The pink scar running down her leathery cheek twisted as she smiled. "Good news, Perrin Aybara," she said softly, handing him the dark blue cloth. "Your wife lives." Alharra exchanged glances with Seonid's other Warder, Teryl Wynter, who frowned. Masuri's man, Rovair Kirklin, stared straight ahead stonily. It was as plain as Wynter's curled mustaches that they were not sure it was good news. "The others press on to see what more they can find," she went on. "Though we already have found oddities enough."

pɛɹɪn lɛt ðə bʌndəl fɔl oʊpən ɪn ɪz hænz. ɪt wɑz feɪlz dʒɹɛs, slaɪs daʊn ðə fɹʌn ən əlɔŋ ði ɑɹmz. hi ɪnheɪl dipli, pʊlɪŋ feɪlz sɛn ɪndə hɪm, ə feɪn tʃɹeɪs ə hɝ flaʊɝi soʊp, ə tʌtʃ ə hɝ swit pɝfjum, bʌt moʊst ʌv ɔl, ðə smɛl ðət wɑz hɝ. ən noʊ hɪn ə blʌd. ðə ɹɛst ə ðə meɪɾənz ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn hɪm, moʊsli oʊldɝ wɪmən wɪð hɑɹd feɪsəz, ðoʊ nɑɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz səlɪnz. ðə wɔɹɾɝz klaɪm daʊn, ʃoʊɪŋ noʊ saɪn ðət ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɔl naɪɾ ɪn ðə sæɾəl, bʌt ðeɪ hɛl bæk bɪhaɪn ðə meɪɾənz.

Perrin let the bundle fall open in his hands. It was Faile's dress, sliced down the front and along the arms. He inhaled deeply, pulling Faile's scent into him, a faint trace of her flowery soap, a touch of her sweet perfume, but most of all, the smell that was her. And no hint of blood. The rest of the Maidens gathered around him, mostly older women with hard faces, though not as hard as Sulin's. The Warders climbed down, showing no sign that they had been all night in the saddle, but they held back behind the Maidens.

"ɔl ə ðə mɛn wɝ kɪld," ðə wɪɹi wʊmən sɛd, "bʌt baɪ ðə ɡɑɹməns wi faʊnd, æliændɝ kɪɡɑɝɪn, meɪaɪɡdɪn dɔɹleɪn, lətʃəl ɑldɔɹwɪn, ɹɛlə ʃiɡoʊ, ən tu mɔɹ ɔlsoʊ wɝ meɪd ɡeɪʃeɪn." ði ʌðɝ tu mʌst əv bɪn beɪn ən kiæd; mɛnʃənɪŋ əm baɪ neɪm, ðət ðeɪ hæd bɪn teɪkən, wʊɾə ʃeɪm ðɛm. hi hæd lɝn ə lɪɾəl əbaʊɾ il. "ðɪs ɡoʊz əɡɛns kʌstəm, bʌɾ ɪt pɹətɛks ðɛm." wɪntɝ fɹaʊn ɪn daʊt, ðən tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ ɪt baɪ ədʒʌstɪŋ ɪz hʊd.

"All of the men were killed," the wiry woman said, "but by the garments we found, Alliandre Kigarin, Maighdin Dorlain, Lacile Aldorwin, Arrela Shiego, and two more also were made gai'shain." The other two must have been Bain and Chiad; mentioning them by name, that they had been taken, would have shamed them. He had learned a little about Aiel. "This goes against custom, but it protects them." Wynter frowned in doubt, then tried to hide it by adjusting his hood.

ðə nit kʌts wɝ laɪk ðoʊz meɪd skɪnɪŋ ən ænəməl. ɪt hɪt pɛɹɪn sʌɾənli. sʌmwʌn hæd kʌt feɪlz kloʊðz ɔf! hɪz vɔɪs ʃʊk. "ðeɪ oʊnli tʊk wɪmən?"

The neat cuts were like those made skinning an animal. It hit Perrin suddenly. Someone had cut Faile's clothes off! His voice shook. "They only took women?"

ə ɹaʊnd-feɪs jʌŋ meɪɾən neɪm bɹieɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "θɹi mɛn wʊɾə bɪn meɪd ɡeɪʃeɪn, aɪ θɪŋk, bʌt ðeɪ fɔt tu hɑɹɾ ən wɝ kɪld wɪð naɪf əɹ spɪɹ. ɔl ðə ɹɛs daɪd baɪ æɹoʊ."

A round-faced young Maiden named Briain shook her head. "Three men would have been made gai'shain, I think, but they fought too hard and were killed with knife or spear. All the rest died by arrow."

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑt laɪk ðæt, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə," ɛləəndə sɛd hɝidli, saʊndɪŋ ʃɑkt. ə tɔl wʊmən wɪð waɪd ʃoʊldɝz, ʃi mænədʒ tə lʊk ɔlmoʊs mʌðɝli, ðoʊ hi hæd sin əɹ nɑk ə mæn daʊn wɪð əɹ fɪst. "hɑɹmɪŋ ə ɡeɪʃeɪn ɪz laɪk hɑɹmɪŋ ə tʃaɪld, əɹ ə blæksmɪθ. ɪt wɑz ɹɔŋ tə teɪk wɛtləndɝz, bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt bɪliv ðəl bɹeɪk kʌstəm ðət fɑɹ. aɪm ʃʊɹ ðəl nɑɾ ivən bi pʌnɪʃt, ɪf ðeɪ kən bi mik əntɪl ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹəkʌvɝd. ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝz u wɪl ʃoʊ ðɛm." ʌðɝz; beɪn ən kiæɾ əɡɛn.

"It is not like that, Perrin Aybara," Elienda said hurriedly, sounding shocked. A tall woman with wide shoulders, she managed to look almost motherly, though he had seen her knock a man down with her fist. "Harming a gai'shain is like harming a child, or a blacksmith. It was wrong to take wetlanders, but I cannot believe they will break custom that far. I am sure they will not even be punished, if they can be meek until they are recovered. There are others who will show them." Others; Bain and Chiad again.

"wʌt dɝɛkʃən dɪd ðeɪ ɡoʊ?" hi æskt. kəd feɪl bi mik? hi kəd nɑt pɪktʃɝ əɹ ðət weɪ. ət lis lɛɾ əɹ tʃɹaɪ, tɪl i kəd faɪn hɝ.

"What direction did they go?" he asked. Could Faile be meek? He could not picture her that way. At least let her try, till he could find her.

"ɔlmoʊst saʊθ," səlɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "mʌtʃ nɪɹɝ saʊθ ðən ist. æftɝ ðə snoʊ hɪd ðɛɹ tʃɹæks, dʒɑndɪn bæɹən sɔ ʌðɝ tʃɹeɪsəz. wʌt ði ʌðɝz ɑɹ fɑloʊɪŋ. aɪ bɪliv hɪm. hi siz əz mʌtʃ əz ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə. ðəɹ ɪz mʌtʃ tə si." θɹʌstɪŋ əɹ spɪɹz bɪhaɪn ðə baʊ keɪs ɑn əɹ bæk, ʃi hʌŋ əɹ bʌkəlɝ fɹəm ðə hɪlt ə hɝ hɛvi bɛl naɪf. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz flæʃt hæntɔk, ən ɛləəndə ənfæsən ə sɛkənd, lɑɹdʒɝ bʌndəl ən hændəɾ ɪt tə hɝ. "mɛni pipəl ɑɹ muvɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə, ən stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz. ðɪs jə mʌst si fɝst, aɪ θɪŋk." səlɪn ənfoʊldəɾ ənʌðɝ kʌt dʒɹɛs, ðɪs wʌn ɡɹin. hi θɔɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪɾ ɑn æliændɝ. "ðiz, wi ɹəkʌvɝd wɛɹ jəɹ waɪf wɑz teɪkən." ɪnsaɪd, fɔɹɾi əɹ fɪfti il æɹoʊz ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ə hip. ðəɹ wɝ dɑɹk steɪnz ɑn ðə ʃæfs, ən i kɑt ðə sɛn ə dʒɹaɪd blʌd.

"Almost south," Sulin replied. "Much nearer south than east. After the snow hid their tracks, Jondyn Barran saw other traces. What the others are following. I believe him. He sees as much as Elyas Machera. There is much to see." Thrusting her spears behind the bow case on her back, she hung her buckler from the hilt of her heavy belt knife. Her fingers flashed handtalk, and Elienda unfastened a second, larger bundle and handed it to her. "Many people are moving out there, Perrin Aybara, and strange things. This you must see first, I think." Sulin unfolded another cut dress, this one green. He thought he remembered it on Alliandre. "These, we recovered where your wife was taken." Inside, forty or fifty Aiel arrows shifted in a heap. There were dark stains on the shafts, and he caught the scent of dried blood.

"tɑɹdæd," səlɪn sɛd, pɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ən æɹoʊ ən ɪmiɾiətli θɹoʊɪŋ ɪt tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "maɪæɡoʊmə." ʃi tɔs tu mɔɹ əsaɪd. "ɡoʊʃin." ðoʊz bɹɔɾ ə ɡɹɪmɑs tə hɝ feɪs; ʃi wɑz ɡoʊʃin. klæn baɪ klæn, ʃi neɪmd əm ɔl ɪksɛp ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, dʒɹɑpɪŋ æɹoʊz əntɪl dʒʌst oʊvɝ hæf leɪ skæɾɝd ɝaʊn hɝ. ʃi hɛld ʌp ðə kʌt dʒɹɛs hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ ɪn boʊθ hænz, ðən spɪl ðɛm. "ʃeɪɾoʊ," ʃi sɛd sɪɡnɪfɪkənli.

"Taardad," Sulin said, picking out an arrow and immediately throwing it to the ground. "Miagoma." She tossed two more aside. "Goshien." Those brought a grimace to her face; she was Goshien. Clan by clan, she named them all except the Shaido, dropping arrows until just over half lay scattered around her. She held up the cut dress holding the remainder in both hands, then spilled them. "Shaido," she said significantly.

klʌtʃɪŋ feɪlz dʒɹɛs tə hɪz tʃɛst - hɝ sɛn iz ðə peɪn ɪn ɪz hɑɹt, ən meɪɾ ɪt wɝs ət ðə seɪm taɪm - pɛɹɪn fɹaʊn ət ði æɹoʊz dʒʌmbəld ɑn ðə snoʊ. ɔlɹɛɾi, səm wɝ hæf bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə fɹɛʃ fɔl. "tu mɛni ʃeɪɾoʊ," hi sɛɾ ət læst. ðeɪ ʃəɾ ɔl bi bɑɾəld ʌp ɪn kɪnsleɪɝz dæɡɝ, faɪv hʌnʒɹəd liɡz dɪstənt. bʌɾ ɪf səm ə ðɛɹ waɪz wʌnz hæd lɝn tə tʃɹævəl . . . meɪbi ivən wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən . . . laɪt, hi wɑz ɹæmblɪŋ laɪk ə ful - wʌt wəd ðə fɔɹseɪkən əv tə də wɪð ðɪs? - ɹæmblɪŋ wən i hæd tə θɪŋk. hɪz bɹeɪn fɛlt əz wɪɹi əz ðə ɹɛst ə hɪm. "ði ʌðɝz ɑɹ mɛn u wʊdn æksɛpt ɹænd əz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn." ðoʊz kɝs kʌlɝz flæʃt ɪn ɪz hɛd. hi hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt feɪl. "ðeɪ dʒɔɪn ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ." səm ə ðə meɪɾənz əvɝɾəd ðɛɹ aɪz. ɛləəndə ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm. ðeɪ nu ðət səm hæd dʌn wʌɾ i sɛd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz θɪŋz ðeɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk tə hɪɹ sɛɾ əlaʊd. "haʊ mɛni ɔltəɡɛðɝ, dʒju ɹɛkən? nɑt ðə hoʊl klæn, ʃʊɹli?" ɪf ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ hɪɹ ɪn ə bɑɾi, ðəɹ wəd bi mɔɹ ðən ɹumɝz ə dɪstən ɹeɪdz. ivən əmʌŋ ɔl ði ʌðɝ tʃɹʌbəlz, ɔl ʌv ɑmɑdɪʃiə wəd noʊ.

Clutching Faile's dress to his chest - her scent eased the pain in his heart, and made it worse at the same time - Perrin frowned at the arrows jumbled on the snow. Already, some were half buried in the fresh fall. "Too many Shaido," he said at last. They should all be bottled up in Kinslayer's Dagger, five hundred leagues distant. But if some of their Wise Ones had learned to Travel . . . Maybe even one of the Forsaken . . . Light, he was rambling like a fool - what would the Forsaken have to do with this? - rambling when he had to think. His brain felt as weary as the rest of him. "The others are men who wouldn't accept Rand as the car'a'carn." Those cursed colors flashed in his head. He had no time for anything but Faile. "They joined the Shaido." Some of the Maidens averted their eyes. Elienda glared at him. They knew that some had done what he said, but it was one of those things they did not like to hear said aloud. "How many altogether, do you reckon? Not the whole clan, surely?" If the Shaido were here in a body, there would be more than rumors of distant raids. Even among all the other troubles, all of Amadicia would know.

"nɪɹ ɪnʌf tə bi ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn wɪð, aɪm θɪŋkɪŋ," wɪntɝ mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt mɛn tə hɪɹ.

"Near enough to be going on with, I'm thinking," Wynter muttered under his breath. Perrin was not meant to hear.

ɹitʃɪŋ ɪn əmʌŋ ðə bʌndəlz taɪd tə ði ɔɹneɪt sæɾəl, səlɪn dʒɹu aʊɾ ə ɹæɡ dɑl dʒɹɛst ɪn keɪɾɪnsɝ. "ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə faʊn ðɪs dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ wi tɝn bæk, əbaʊt fɔɹɾi maɪlz fɹəm hɪɹ." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən əɹ vɔɪs ən sɛn bɪkeɪm . . . stɑɹɾəld. "hi sɛɾ i smɛld ɪt bɪniθ ðə snoʊ. hi ən dʒɑndɪn bæɹən faʊn skɹeɪps ɑn ðə tʃɹiz ðeɪ sɛd wɝ kɑz baɪ kɑɹts. vɛɹi mɛni kɑɹts. ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ tʃɪlʒɹən . . . aɪ θɪŋk ɪt meɪ bi ə hoʊl sɛpt, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. pɝhæps mɔɹ ðən wʌn. ivən ə sɪŋɡəl sɛpt wɪl əv ət list ə θaʊzən spɪɹz, ən mɔɹ ət nid. ɛvɹi mæn bʌt ðə blæksmɪθs wɪl pɪk ʌp ə spɪɹ ət nid. ðeɪ ɑɹ deɪz saʊθ ʌv ʌs. pɝhæps mɔɹ deɪz ðən aɪ θɪŋk, ɪn ðɪs snoʊ. bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv ðoʊz u tʊk jəɹ waɪf ɑɹ gɑnə mit ðɛm."

Reaching in among the bundles tied to the ornate saddle, Sulin drew out a rag doll dressed in cadin'sor. "Elyas Machera found this just before we turned back, about forty miles from here." She shook her head, and for a moment her voice and scent became . . . startled. "He said he smelled it beneath the snow. He and Jondyn Barran found scrapes on the trees they said were caused by carts. Very many carts. If there are children . . . I think it may be a whole sept, Perrin Aybara. Perhaps more than one. Even a single sept will have at least a thousand spears, and more at need. Every man but the blacksmiths will pick up a spear at need. They are days south of us. Perhaps more days than I think, in this snow. But I believe those who took your wife are going to meet them."

"ðɪs blæksmɪθ əz pɪkt ʌp ə spɪɹ," pɛɹɪn mɝmɝd. ə θaʊzənd, meɪbi mɔɹ. hi hæɾ oʊvɝ tu θaʊzənd, kaʊntɪŋ ðə wɪŋd ɡɑɹdz ən ɑɹɡændəz mɛn. əɡɛnst il, ðoʊ, ðə nʌmbɝz wəd feɪvɝ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ. hi fɪŋɡɝd ðə dɑl ɪn səlɪnz sɪnjui hænd. wɑz ə ʃeɪɾoʊ tʃaɪld wipɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə lɔs ə hɝ dɑl? "wi ɡoʊ saʊθ."

"This blacksmith has picked up a spear," Perrin murmured. A thousand, maybe more. He had over two thousand, counting the Winged Guards and Arganda's men. Against Aiel, though, the numbers would favor the Shaido. He fingered the doll in Sulin's sinewy hand. Was a Shaido child weeping over the loss of her doll? "We go south."

hi wɑz tɝnɪŋ tə maʊn stɛpɝ wən səlɪn tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm tə stɑp hɪm. "aɪ toʊl jə wi sɔ ʌðɝ θɪŋz. twaɪs, ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə faʊn hɔɹs dʒɹɑpɪŋz ən kæmpfaɪɝz ʌndɝ ðə snoʊ. mɛni hɔɹsəz, ən mɛni kæmpfaɪɝz."

He was turning to mount Stepper when Sulin touched his arm to stop him. "I told you we saw other things. Twice, Elyas Machera found horse droppings and campfires under the snow. Many horses, and many campfires."

"θaʊzənz," ælhæɹə pʊɾ ɪn; hɪz blæk aɪz mɛt pɛɹɪnz lɛvəli, ən ɪz vɔɪs wɑz mæɾɝ-ʌv-fækt. hi wɑz sɪmpli ɹipɔɹɾɪŋ wʌt wɑz. "faɪv, meɪbi tɛn əɹ mɔɹ; ɪts hɑɹd tə tɛl. bʌt soʊlʒɝz' kæmps. ðə seɪm mɛn boʊθ pleɪsəz, aɪ θɪŋk. mækɛɹə ən bæɹən əɡɹi. huɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz, ðəɹ hɛɾɪŋ nɪɹ ɪnʌf saʊθ, tu. meɪbi ðeɪv nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ði il, bʌt ðeɪ kəd bi fɑloʊɪŋ."

"Thousands," Alharra put in; His black eyes met Perrin's levelly, and his voice was matter-of-fact. He was simply reporting what was. "Five, maybe ten or more; it's hard to tell. But soldiers' camps. The same men both places, I think. Machera and Barran agree. Whoever it is, they're heading near enough south, too. Maybe they have nothing to do with the Aiel, but they could be following."

səlɪn ɡeɪv ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən ɪmpeɪʃən fɹaʊn ən kəntɪnjud wɪð bɛɹli ə pɔz fəɹ ɪz ɪntɝʌpʃən. "θɹi taɪmz wi sɔ flaɪɪŋ kɹitʃɝz laɪk ðoʊz jə seɪ ðə sintʃæn juz, hjudʒ θɪŋz wɪð ɹɪbd wɪŋz ən pipəl ɹaɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ bæks. ən twaɪs wi sɔ tʃɹæks laɪk ðɪs." bɛndɪŋ, ʃi pɪkt ʌp wʌn ə ði æɹoʊz ən dʒɹu ə ɹaʊndəd ʃeɪp ə lɪɾəl laɪk ə lɑɹdʒ bɛɹz pɔ ɪn ðə snoʊ, bʌt wɪð sɪks toʊz lɔŋɡɝ ðən ə mænz fɪŋɡɝz. "səmtaɪmz ɪt ʃoʊz klɔz," ʃi sɛd, mɑɹkɪŋ ðɛm, lɔŋɡɝ ivən ðən wʌn ə ðə bɪɡ bɛɹz ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst. "ɪɾ əz ə lɔŋ stʃɹaɪd. aɪ θɪŋk ɪt ɹʌnz vɛɹi fæst. dʒju noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz?"

Sulin gave the Warder an impatient frown and continued with barely a pause for his interruption. "Three times we saw flying creatures like those you say the Seanchan use, huge things with ribbed wings and people riding their backs. And twice we saw tracks like this." Bending, she picked up one of the arrows and drew a rounded shape a little like a large bear's paw in the snow, but with six toes longer than a man's fingers. "Sometimes it shows claws," she said, marking them, longer even than one of the big bears in the Mountains of Mist. "It has a long stride. I think it runs very fast. Do you know what it is?"

hi dɪd nɑt - hi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ wɪð sɪks toʊz ɪksɛp ðə kæts ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz; hi hæd bɪn sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn kæts ɛlswɛɹ oʊnli hæd faɪv - bʌɾ i kəd meɪk ə seɪf ɡɛs. "ənʌðɝ sintʃæn ænəməl." soʊ ðəɹ wɝ sintʃæn tə ðə saʊθ əz wɛl əz ʃeɪɾoʊ, ən - wʌt? - waɪtkloʊks, əɹ ə sintʃæn ɑɹmi. ɪt kəd nɑt bi ɛniwʌn ɛls. hi tʃɹʌstɪd beɪlwɝz ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. "wi stɪl ɡoʊ saʊθ." ðə meɪɾənz stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i hæd toʊld əm ɪt wɑz snoʊɪŋ.

He did not - he had never heard of anything with six toes except the cats in the Two Rivers; he had been surprised to find cats elsewhere only had five - but he could make a safe guess. "Another Seanchan animal." So there were Seanchan to the south as well as Shaido, and - what? - Whitecloaks, or a Seanchan army. It could not be anyone else. He trusted Balwer's information. "We still go south." The Maidens stared at him as if he had told them it was snowing.

pʊlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɪndə stɛpɝz sæɾəl, hi tɝn bæk təwɔɹd ðə kɑləm. ðə wɔɹɾɝz wɔkt, liɾɪŋ ðɛɹ wɪɹi hɔɹdz. ðə meɪɾənz tʊk æliændɝz ɡɛldɪŋ wɪð əm əz ðeɪ tʃɹɑɾəd tə wɛɹ ðə waɪz wʌnz wɝ stændɪŋ. mɑsʊɝi ən siɑnɪd wɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə mit ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz. hi wʌndɝd waɪ ðeɪ ɔl hæd nɑt kʌm tə stɪk ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ɪn. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz əz sɪmpəl əz lɛɾɪŋ ɪm bi əloʊn wɪð ɪz ɡɹif ɪf ðə nuz tɝn aʊt bæd. pɝhæps. ɪn ɪz hɛd, hi tʃɹaɪd tə fɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ, haʊɛvɝ mɛni ðeɪ wɝ. ðə sintʃæn. ðə maʊntəɾ ɑɹmi, wɛðɝ waɪtkloʊk əɹ sintʃæn. ɪt wɑz laɪk ðə pʌzəlz mæstɝ luhən hæd tɔɾ ɪm tə meɪk, ɪntʃɹəkət twɪsts ə mɛɾəl ðət slɪɾ əpɑɹɾ ən slɪp bæk təɡɛðɝ laɪk ə dʒɹim, ɪf jə nu ðə tʃɹɪk. oʊnli, hɪz hɛd fɛl mʌɾəld, ɡɹoʊpɪŋ ət pisəz ðət wəd nɑt slaɪɾ ɛniwɛɹ.

Pulling himself up into Stepper's saddle, he turned back toward the column. The Warders walked, leading their weary hordes. The Maidens took Alliandre's gelding with them as they trotted to where the Wise Ones were standing. Masuri and Seonid were riding to meet their Warders. He wondered why they all had not come to stick their noses in. Perhaps it was as simple as letting him be alone with his grief if the news turned out bad. Perhaps. In his head, he tried to fit everything together. The Shaido, however many they were. The Seanchan. The mounted army, whether Whitecloak or Seanchan. It was like the puzzles Master Luhhan had taught him to make, intricate twists of metal that slid apart and slipped back together like a dream, if you knew the trick. Only, his head felt muddled, groping at pieces that would not slide anywhere.

ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn wɝ ɔl maʊntəɾ əɡɛn wən i ɹitʃt ðɛm. ðoʊz u hæd bɪn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ðɛɹ baʊz ɹɛɾi lʊkt ə lɪɾəl əbæʃt. ðeɪ ɔl aɪɾ ɪm ənizəli, tɛntəɾɪvli.

The Two Rivers men were all mounted again when he reached them. Those who had been on the ground with their bows ready looked a little abashed. They all eyed him uneasily, tentatively.

"ʃiz əlaɪv," hi sɛd, ən ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ɛvɹi mæn ə ðɛm stɑɹɾəd bɹiðɪŋ əɡɛn. ðeɪ tʊk ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz nuz wɪð ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪmpæsɪvnəs, səm ivən nɑɾɪŋ əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd noʊ lɛs.

"She's alive," he said, and it was as if every man of them started breathing again. They took the rest of his news with a strange impassiveness, some even nodding as though they had expected no less.

"woʊn bi ðə fɝs taɪm wiv feɪs lɔŋ ɑdz," dænɪl sɛd. "wʌt də wi du, maɪ lɔɹd?"

"Won't be the first time we've faced long odds," Dannil said. "What do we do, my Lord?"

pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪməst. ðə mæn wɑz stɪl stɪf əz ən oʊk. "fɔɹ stɑɹɾɝz, wɝ tʃɹævlɪŋ fɔɹɾi maɪlz du saʊθ. æftɝ ðæt, əl si. nild, jə ɡoʊ əhɛɾ ən faɪn ɛlaɪəs ən ði ʌðɝz. tɛl əm wʌɾ aɪm duɪŋ. ðəl bi ə ɡʊd dil fɝðɝ ɑn, baɪ ðɪs taɪm. ən əv ə kɛɹ. jə kæn faɪt tɛn əɹ ə dʌzən waɪz wʌnz." ə hoʊl sɛpt ʃəɾ əv ət lis ðət mɛni hu kəd tʃænəl. ən ɪf ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən wʌn? ə bɑɡ hi hæd tə kɹɔs wən i keɪm tə ɪt.

Perrin grimaced. The man was still stiff as an oak. "For starters, we're Traveling forty miles due south. After that, I will see. Neald, you go ahead and find Elyas and the others. Tell them what I'm doing. They will be a good deal further on, by this time. And have a care. You can't fight ten or a dozen Wise Ones." A whole sept should have at least that many who could channel. And if it was more than one? A bog he had to cross when he came to it.

nil nɑɾəd bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ ɪz ɡɛldɪŋ bæk təwɔɹd ðə kæmp, wɛɹ i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi mɛmɝaɪz ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ə fju mɔɹ ɔɹɾɝz tə ɡɪv. ɹaɪɾɝz hæd tə bi sɛn tə faɪn ðə minɝz ən ɡildænɪn, hu wəd bi muvɪŋ əpɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ kæmpt əpɑɹt. ɡɹeɪɾi θɔɾ i kəd mɛmɝaɪz ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹaɪt ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd dʒɔɪn ʌp, soʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə tɝn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɝaʊn ən fɑloʊ nil bæk. ən ðət lɛft oʊnli wʌn θɪŋ.

Neald nodded before turning his gelding back toward the camp, where he had already memorized the ground. There were only a few more orders to give. Riders had to be sent to find the Mayeners and Ghealdanin, who would be moving apart as they camped apart. Grady thought he could memorize the ground right there before they could join up, so there was no need to turn everything around and follow Neald back. And that left only one thing.

"aɪ nid tə faɪn mæsimə, dænɪl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "sʌmbɑɾi hu kən ɡɪv ɪm ə mɛsədʒ, ɛniweɪ. wɪð lʌk, aɪ woʊn bi lɔŋ."

"I need to find Masema, Dannil," Perrin said. "Somebody who can give him a message, anyway. With luck, I won't be long."

"ju ɡoʊ əmʌŋ ðət fɪlθ əloʊn, maɪ lɔɹd, ən jəl nid lʌk," dænɪl ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ hɝd səm ə ðɛm tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ju. sɛd jəɹ ʃæɾoʊzpɔn, kəz ə jəɹ aɪz." hɪz ɡeɪz mɛt pɛɹɪnz ɡoʊldən aɪz ən slɪd saɪdweɪz. "sɛd jud bɪn teɪm baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌt stɪl ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. jə ɔt tə teɪk ə fju dʌzən mɛn tə wɑtʃ jəɹ bæk."

"You go among that filth alone, my Lord, and you'll need luck," Dannil replied. "I heard some of them talking about you. Said you're Shadowspawn, because of your eyes." His gaze met Perrin's golden eyes and slid sideways. "Said you'd been tamed by the Dragon Reborn, but still Shadowspawn. You ought to take a few dozen men to watch your back."

pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, pæɾɪŋ stɛpɝz nɛk. ə fju dʌzən mɛn wəd nɑt bi ɪnʌf ɪf mæsiməz pipəl ɹɪli θɔɾ i wɑz ʃæɾoʊzpɔn ən dɪsaɪɾɪd tə teɪk mæɾɝz ɪndə ðɛɹ oʊn hænz. ɔl ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn təɡɛðɝ maɪt nɑt bi ɪnʌf. meɪbi hi dɪd nɑt nid tə tɛl mæsimə, dʒʌs lɛɾ ɪm lɝn fəɹ hɪmsɛlf.

Perrin hesitated, patting Stepper's neck. A few dozen men would not be enough if Masema's people really thought he was Shadowspawn and decided to take matters into their own hands. All the Two Rivers men together might not be enough. Maybe he did not need to tell Masema, just let him learn for himself.

hɪz ɪɹz kɑɾ ə bluəɾɪts tʃɹɪl fɹəm ðə tʃɹiz tə ðə wɛst, fɑloʊɾ ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ baɪ ə sɛkən ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn kəd hɪɹ, ən ðə dɪsɪʒən wɑz teɪkən əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt, ən wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðɪs wɑz pɑɹɾ ə biɪŋ tɑvɝən. hi ɹeɪn stɛpɝ ɝaʊn ən weɪɾəd.

His ears caught a bluetit's trill from the trees to the west, followed a moment later by a second that everyone could hear, and the decision was taken away from him. He was sure of it, and wondered whether this was part of being ta'veren. He reined Stepper around and waited.

ðə tu ɹɪvɝz mɛn nu wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt, hɪɹɪŋ ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ bɝd fɹəm bæk hoʊm. mɛn kʌmɪŋ, mɔɹ ðən ə hændfʊl, ən nɑt nɛsəsɛɹəli pisfəl. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn ə kɹʊkbɪl tʃɹɪlɪŋ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ fɹɛnz, ən ə mɑkɝz kɹaɪ ʌv əlɑɹm hæd ðeɪ bɪn klɪɹli ənfɹɛnli. ðɪs taɪm, ðeɪ bɪheɪv bɛɾɝ. əlɔŋ ðə wɛst saɪɾ ə ðə kɑləm, ɛvɹi sɛkən mæn əz fɑɹ əz pɛɹɪn kəd si ɪn ðə snoʊ dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən hændəɾ ɪz ɹeɪnz tə ðə mæn nɛks tə hɪm, ðən ɹɛɾid ɪz baʊ.

The Two Rivers men knew what it meant, hearing that particular bird from back home. Men coming, more than a handful, and not necessarily peaceful. It would have been a crookbill trilling if they were friends, and a mocker's cry of alarm had they been clearly unfriendly. This time, they behaved better. Along the west side of the column, every second man as far as Perrin could see in the snow dismounted and handed his reins to the man next to him, then readied his bow.

ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz əpɪɹd θɹu ðə skæɾɝd tʃɹiz spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɪn ə laɪn əz ɪf tə ɪnkɹis ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz. ðeɪ wɝ pɝhæps ə hʌnʒɹəd, wɪð tu ɪn ədvæns, bʌt ðɛɹ sloʊ ədvæns dɪd sim ɑmənəs. hæf kæɹid lænsɪz, nɑt kaʊtʃt bʌt hɛld əz ðoʊ ɹɛɾi bi tʌkt ʌndɝ ən ɑɹm. əɾ ə stɛɾi wɔk ðeɪ keɪm ɑn. səm wɔɹ ɑɹmɝ, ə bɹɛstpleɪɾ əɹ ə hɛlmət bʌt ɹɛɹli boʊθ. stɪl, ðeɪ wɝ bɛɾɝ ɑɹm ðən ðə dʒɛnɝəl ɹʌn ə mæsiməz fɑloʊɝz. wʌn ə ðə pɛɹ aʊt fɹʌnt wɑz mæsimə hɪmsɛlf, hɪz zɛləts feɪs stɛɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊks kaʊl laɪk ə ɹæbɪd maʊntən kæt stɛɹɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə keɪv. haʊ mɛni ʌv ðoʊz lænsɪz hæd bɔɹn ə ɹɛd stʃɹimɝ jɛstɝdeɪ mɔɹnɪŋ?

The strangers appeared through the scattered trees spread out in a line as if to increase the impression of their numbers. They were perhaps a hundred, with two in advance, but their slow advance did seem ominous. Half carried lances, not couched but held as though ready be tucked under an arm. At a steady walk they came on. Some wore armor, a breastplate or a helmet but rarely both. Still, they were better armed than the general run of Masema's followers. One of the pair out front was Masema himself, his zealot's face staring out of his cloak's cowl like a rabid mountain cat staring out of a cave. How many of those lances had borne a red streamer yesterday morning?

mæsimə stɑpt ɪz mɛn wɪð ə ɹeɪz hæn oʊnli wən i wɑz dʒʌst ə fju peɪsɪz fɹəm pɛɹɪn. pʊʃɪŋ bæk ɪz hʊd, hi ɹæn ɪz ɡeɪz əlɔŋ ðə dɪsmaʊntɪd mɛn wɪð ðɛɹ baʊz. hi simd ʌnəwɛɹ ə ðə snoʊ hɪɾɪŋ ɪz bɛɹ skælp. hɪz kəmpænjən, ə bɪɡɝ mæn wɪð ə sɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz bæk ən ənʌðɝ əɾ ɪz sæɾəlboʊ, kɛpt ɪz kaʊl ʌp, bʌt pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ɪz hɛd wɑz ʃeɪvd, tu. ðət wʌn mænədʒ tə stʌɾi ðə kɑləm ən wɑtʃ mæsimə wɪð ikwəl ɪntɛnsəɾi. hɪz dɑɹk aɪz bɝn ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz mæsiməz. pɛɹɪn θɔɾ əbaʊt tɛlɪŋ əm ðəɾ ət ðɪs ɹeɪnʒ, ə tu ɹɪvɝz lɔŋboʊ wəd pʊɾ ə paɪl ʃæft ɹaɪt θɹu ə bɹɛstpleɪt, ən aʊt ðə wɛɹɝz bæk bɪsaɪdz. hi kənsɪɾɝd mɛnʃənɪŋ sintʃæn. dɪskɹɛʃən, bɹəleɪn hæd kaʊnsəld. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz ə faɪn θɪŋ, ɪn ðə sɝkəmstænsəz.

Masema stopped his men with a raised hand only when he was just a few paces from Perrin. Pushing back his hood, he ran his gaze along the dismounted men with their bows. He seemed unaware of the snow hitting his bare scalp. His companion, a bigger man with a sword on his back and another at his saddlebow, kept his cowl up, but Perrin thought his head was shaved, too. That one managed to study the column and watch Masema with equal intensity. His dark eyes burned almost as much as Masema's. Perrin thought about telling them that at this range, a Two Rivers longbow would put a pile shaft right through a breastplate, and out the wearer's back besides. He considered mentioning Seanchan. Discretion, Berelain had counseled. Perhaps it was a fine thing, in the circumstances.

"ju wɝ kʌmɪŋ tə mit mi?" mæsimə sɛɾ əbɹʌpli. ivən ðə mænz vɔɪs siðd wɪð ɪntɛnsəɾi. nʌθɪŋ wɑz ɛvɝ kæʒəwəl ɑn ɪz tʌŋ. ɛniθɪŋ i hæd tə seɪ wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðə peɪl tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəlɝ skɑɹ ɑn ɪz tʃik pʊld ɪz sʌɾən smaɪl kɹʊkəd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɔɹmθ ɪn ɪɾ ɛniweɪ. "noʊ mæɾɝ. aɪm hɪɹ, naʊ. əz jə noʊ daʊt noʊ baɪ naʊ, ðoʊz u fɑloʊ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn - ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɪz neɪm! - ɹəfjuz tə bi lɛf bɪhaɪnd. aɪ kænɑt dɪmæn ɪɾ ə ðɛm. ðeɪ sɝv ɪm əz aɪ du."

"You were coming to meet me?" Masema said abruptly. Even the man's voice seethed with intensity. Nothing was ever casual on his tongue. Anything he had to say was important. The pale triangular scar on his cheek pulled his sudden smile crooked. There was no warmth in it anyway. "No matter. I am here, now. As you no doubt know by now, those who follow the Lord Dragon Reborn - the Light illumine his name! - refuse to be left behind. I cannot demand it of them. They serve him as I do."

pɛɹɪn sɔ ə taɪɾ ə fleɪm ɹoʊlɪŋ əkɹɔs ɑmɑdɪʃiə ɪndə ɔltɑɹə ən pɝhæps bɪɑnd, livɪŋ dɛθ ən dɛvəsteɪʃən bɪhaɪnd. hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, sʌkɪŋ koʊld ɪndə hɪz lʌŋz. feɪl wɑz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ɛniθɪŋ. ɛniθɪŋ! ɪf i bɝn fəɹ ɪt, ðən i bɝnd. "teɪk jəɹ mɛn ist." hi wɑz ʃɑkt ət haʊ stɛɾi hɪz vɔɪs wɑz. "aɪ wɪl kætʃ ʌp wən aɪ kæn. maɪ waɪf əz bɪn kɪdnæp baɪ il, ən aɪm hɛɾɪŋ saʊθ tə ɡɛɾ əɹ bæk." fəɹ wʌns, hi sɔ mæsimə sɝpɹaɪzd.

Perrin saw a tide of flame rolling across Amadicia into Altara and perhaps beyond, leaving death and devastation behind. He took a deep breath, sucking cold into his lungs. Faile was more important than anything. Anything! If he burned for it, then he burned. "Take your men east." He was shocked at how steady his voice was. "I will catch up when I can. My wife has been kidnapped by Aiel, and I'm heading south to get her back." For once, he saw Masema surprised.

"il? soʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ɹumɝ?" hi fɹaʊn ət ðə waɪz wʌnz ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə kɑləm. "saʊθ, jə seɪ?" foʊldɪŋ ɪz ɡlʌv hænz ɑn ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl, hi tɝn ɪz stʌɾi tə pɛɹɪn. ɪnsænəɾi fɪl ðə mænz sɛnt; pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt faɪn ɛniθɪŋ bʌt mædnəs ɪn ɪt. "aɪ wɪl kʌm wɪð ju," mæsimə sɛɾ ət læst, əz ɪf ɹitʃɪŋ ə dɪsɪʒən. ɑd, hi hæd bɪn ɪmpeɪʃən tə ɹitʃ ɹænd wɪθaʊt dɪleɪ. soʊ lɔŋ əz i dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bi tʌtʃt baɪ ðə paʊɝ tə də soʊ, ət list. "ɔl ðoʊz u fɑloʊ ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn - ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɪz neɪm! - wɪl kʌm. kɪlɪŋ il sævədʒəz ɪz duɪŋ ðə laɪts wɝk." hɪz aɪz flɪkɝd təwɔɹd ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən ɪz smaɪl wɑz ivən koʊldɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ.

"Aiel? So they are more than rumor?" He frowned at the Wise Ones on the far side of the column. "South, you say?" Folding his gloved hands on the pommel of his saddle, he turned his study to Perrin. Insanity filled the man's scent; Perrin could not find anything but madness in it. "I will come with you," Masema said at last, as if reaching a decision. Odd, he had been impatient to reach Rand without delay. So long as he did not have to be touched by the Power to do so, at least. "All those who follow the Lord Dragon Reborn - the Light illumine his name! - will come. Killing Aiel savages is doing the Light's work." His eyes flickered toward the Wise Ones, and his smile was even colder than before.

"aɪ wəɾ əpɹiʃieɪt ðə hɛlp," pɛɹɪn laɪd. ðət ɹæbəl wəd bi jusləs əɡɛnst il. stɪl, ðeɪ nʌmbɝɾ ɪn ðə θaʊzənz. ən ðeɪ hæd hɛld ɔf ɑɹmiz, ɪf nɑɾ ɑɹmiz ʌv il. ə pis ə ðət pʌzəl ɪn ɪz hɛd ʃɪftəd. ɹɛɾi tə dʒɹɑp wɪð fətiɡ, hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ ɪɡzækli haʊ, dʒʌs ðəɾ ɪt hæd. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪt wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən. "ðeɪ hæv ə lɔŋ lɛɾ ɑn mi, ðoʊ. aɪ ɪntɛn tə tʃɹævəl, tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ, tə kætʃ ʌp. aɪ noʊ haʊ jə fil əbaʊt ðæt."

"I would appreciate the help," Perrin lied. That rabble would be useless against Aiel. Still, they numbered in the thousands. And they had held off armies, if not armies of Aiel. A piece of that puzzle in his head shifted. Ready to drop with fatigue, he could not make out exactly how, just that it had. In any case, it was not going to happen. "They have a long lead on me, though. I intend to Travel, to use the One Power, to catch up. I know how you feel about that."

ənizi mɝmɝz ɹæn θɹu ðə mɛn bɪhaɪn mæsimə, ən ðeɪ aɪd wʌn ənʌðɝ ən ʃɪftəd wɛpənz. pɛɹɪn kɑt mʌɾɝd kɝsɪz ən ɔlsoʊ "jɛloʊ aɪz" ən "ʃæɾoʊzpɔn." ðə sɛkənd ʃeɪvən-hɛɾəd mæn ɡlɛɹɾ ət pɛɹɪn əz ðoʊ hi hæd blæsfimd, bʌt mæsimə dʒʌst stɛɹd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɔɹ ə hoʊl ɪndə pɛɹɪnz hɛɾ ən si wʌt leɪ ɪnsaɪd.

Uneasy murmurs ran through the men behind Masema, and they eyed one another and shifted weapons. Perrin caught muttered curses and also "yellow eyes" and "Shadowspawn." The second shaven-headed man glared at Perrin as though he had blasphemed, but Masema just stared, trying to bore a hole into Perrin's head and see what lay inside.

"hi wəd bi ɡɹivd ɪf hɑɹm keɪm tə jəɹ waɪf," ðə mædmæn sɛɾ ət læst. ði ɛmfəsəs neɪmd ɹænd əz klɪɹli əz ðə neɪm mæsimə dɪd nɑɾ əlaʊ tə bi spoʊkən. "ðɛɹ wɪl bi ə . . . dɪspənseɪʃən, ɪn ðɪs wʌn ɪnstəns. oʊnli tə faɪn jəɹ waɪf, kəz jə ɑɹ ɪz fɹɛnd. oʊnli ðɪs." hi spoʊk kɑmli - kɑmli fəɹ ɪm - bʌɾ ɪz dip-sɛɾ aɪz wɝ dɑɹk faɪɝ, hɪz feɪs kəntɔɹɾəd wɪð ənnoʊɪŋ ɹeɪdʒ.

"He would be grieved if harm came to your wife," the madman said at last. The emphasis named Rand as clearly as the name Masema did not allow to be spoken. "There will be a . . . dispensation, in this one instance. Only to find your wife, because you are his friend. Only this." He spoke calmly - calmly for him - but his deep-set eyes were dark fire, his face contorted with unknowing rage.

pɛɹɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ðən kloʊzd ɪt wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ. ðə sʌn maɪɾ əz wɛl ɹaɪz ɪn ðə wɛst əz mæsimə seɪ wʌɾ i dʒʌs hæd. sʌɾənli pɛɹɪn θɔt ðət feɪl maɪt bi seɪfɝ wɪð ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ ðən i wɑz hɪɹ ən naʊ.

Perrin opened his mouth, then closed it without speaking. The sun might as well rise in the west as Masema say what he just had. Suddenly Perrin thought that Faile might be safer with the Shaido than he was here and now.


tʃæptɝ sɛvən


CHAPTER 7

ðə stʃɹits ə keɪɛmlɪn


The Streets of Caemlyn

ɪleɪnz ɑntʊɹɑʒ ətʃɹæktəd plɛnti ʌv ətɛnʃən əz ɪt ɹoʊd θɹu keɪɛmlɪn, əlɔŋ stʃɹits ðət ɹoʊz ən fɛl wɪð ðə hɪlz ə ðə sɪɾi. ðə ɡoʊldən lɪli ɑn ðə bɹɛst ə hɝ fɝ-laɪn kɹɪmzən kloʊk wɑz səfɪʃən tə aɪdɛntəfaɪ hɝ fəɹ sɪɾəzənz ə ðə kæpəɾəl, bʌt ʃi kɛpt əɹ hʊd bæk, fɹeɪmɪŋ əɹ feɪs soʊ ðə sɪŋɡəl ɡoʊldən ɹoʊz ɑn ðə kɔɹənɛɾ ə ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ wɑz klɪɹli vɪzəbəl. nɑt dʒʌst ɪleɪn, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd, bʌɾ ɪleɪn ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. lɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn si, ən noʊ.

Elayne's entourage attracted plenty of attention as it rode through Caemlyn, along streets that rose and fell with the hills of the city. The Golden Lily on the breast of her fur-lined crimson cloak was sufficient to identify her for citizens of the capital, but she kept her hood back, framing her face so the single golden rose on the coronet of the Daughter-Heir was clearly visible. Not just Elayne, High Seat of House Trakand, but Elayne the Daughter-Heir. Let everyone see, and know.

ðə doʊmz ə ðə nu sɪɾi ɡlɪntɪd waɪɾ ən ɡoʊld ɪn ðə peɪl mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt, ən aɪsɪkəlz spɑɹkəld ɑn ðə bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz ə ðə tʃɹiz daʊn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə meɪn stʃɹits. ivən nɪɹɪŋ ɪts zinəθ ðə sʌn lækt wɔɹmθ, dɪspaɪɾ ə blɛsədli klaʊdləs skaɪ. lʌkəli, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɪn tədeɪ. ði ɛɹ wɑz koʊld ɪnʌf tə fɹɔst əɹ bɹɛθ, jɛt wɪð ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz klɪɹɾ ə snoʊ ivən ɑn ðə nɛɹoʊɝ, twɪstɪŋ weɪz, ðə sɪɾi wɑz əlaɪv əɡɛn, ðə stʃɹits fʊl ən bʌsəlɪŋ. kɑɹɾɝz ən wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz, hɑɹnəs baɪ ðɛɹ wɝk əz ʃʊɹli əz ðə hɔɹsəz bɪtwin ðə ʃæfs, klʌtʃt ðɛɹ kloʊks ɪn ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən əz ðeɪ meɪd sloʊ pæsədʒ θɹu ðə θɹɔŋ. ə hjudʒ wɔɾɝ wæɡən ɹʌmbəl baɪ, ɛmpti baɪ ðə saʊnd, ɑn ɪts weɪ tə bi ɹifɪl fəɹ faɪɾɪŋ ðə tu-fɹikwən ɑɹsənz. ə fju hɔkɝz ən stʃɹit pɛdlɝz bɹeɪv ðə tʃɪl tə kɹaɪ ðɛɹ wɛɹz, bʌt moʊs foʊk hɝiɾ əbaʊt ðɛɹ tæsks, iɡɝ tə bi ɪndɔɹz əz sun əz pɑsəbəl. nɑt ðət hɝiɪŋ mɛn muvɪŋ vɛɹi fæst. ðə sɪɾi bʌlʒd, ɪts pɑpjəleɪʃən swoʊlən bɪɑn ðəɾ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪn sətʃ ə swɔɹm, ivən ðə fju hu wɝ maʊntəd muv noʊ fæstɝ ðən ə mæn kəd wɔk. ɪn ðə hoʊl mɔɹnɪŋ ʃi hæd sin oʊnli tu əɹ θɹi kæɹɪdʒɪz ɪntʃɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹits. ɪf ðɛɹ pæsənʒɝz wɝ nɑɾ ɪnvələdz əɹ feɪsɪŋ maɪlz əhɛd, ðeɪ wɝ fulz.

The domes of the New City glinted white and gold in the pale morning light, and icicles sparkled on the bare branches of the trees down the center of the main streets. Even nearing its zenith the sun lacked warmth, despite a blessedly cloudless sky. Luckily, there was no wind today. The air was cold enough to frost her breath, yet with the paving stones cleared of snow even on the narrower, twisting ways, the city was alive again, the streets full and bustling. Carters and wagon drivers, harnessed by their work as surely as the horses between the shafts, clutched their cloaks in resignation as they made slow passage through the throng. A huge water wagon rumbled by, empty by the sound, on its way to be refilled for fighting the too-frequent arsons. A few hawkers and street peddlers braved the chill to cry their wares, but most folk hurried about their tasks, eager to be indoors as soon as possible. Not that hurrying meant moving very fast. The city bulged, its population swollen beyond that of Tar Valon. In such a swarm, even the few who were mounted moved no faster than a man could walk. In the whole morning she had seen only two or three carriages inching along the streets. If their passengers were not invalids or facing miles ahead, they were fools.

ɛvɹiwʌn u sɔ hɝ ən əɹ pɑɹɾi pɔzd ət ðə vɛɹi list, səm pɔɪntɪŋ əɹ aʊt tə ʌðɝz, əɹ hɔɪstɪŋ ə tʃaɪl fəɹ ə bɛɾɝ vju soʊ wʌn deɪ ðeɪ kəd tɛl ðɛɹ oʊn tʃɪlʒɹən ðeɪ hæd sin hɝ. wɛðɝ ðeɪ sɛd ðeɪ hæd sin ðə fjutʃɝ kwin əɹ sɪmpli ə wʊmən u hɛl ðə sɪɾi fəɹ ə taɪm wɑz ðə kwɛstʃən. moʊs pipəl sɪmpli stɛɹd, bʌt naʊ ən ðən ə hændfʊl ə vɔɪsəz kɹaɪɾ aʊt "tʃɹəkənd! tʃɹəkənd!" əɹ ivən "ɪleɪn ən ændɝ!" əz ʃi pæst. bɛɾɝ ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn mɔɹ tʃɪɹɪŋ, jɛt saɪləns wɑz pɹɛfɝəbəl tə dʒiɹz. ændɔɹənz wɝ aʊtspoʊkən foʊk, nʌn mɔɹ soʊ ðən keɪɛmlaɪnɝz. ɹɪbɛljənz hæd bɪɡʌn ən kwinz lɔs ðɛɹ θɹoʊnz kəz keɪɛmlaɪnɝz vɔɪs ðɛɹ dɪsplɛʒɝ ɪn ðə stʃɹits.

Everyone who saw her and her party paused at the very least, some pointing her out to others, or hoisting a child for a better view so one day they could tell their own children they had seen her. Whether they said they had seen the future Queen or simply a woman who held the city for a time was the question. Most people simply stared, but now and then a handful of voices cried out "Trakand! Trakand!" or even "Elayne and Andor!" as she passed. Better if there had been more cheering, yet silence was preferable to jeers. Andorans were outspoken folk, none more so than Caemlyners. Rebellions had begun and queens lost their thrones because Caemlyners voiced their displeasure in the streets.

ən aɪsi θɔt meɪɾ ɪleɪn ʃɪvɝ. hu hoʊlz keɪɛmlɪn hoʊlz ændɝ, ði eɪntʃən seɪɪŋ wɛnt; ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli tʃɹu, əz ɹænd hæd dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾəd, jɛt keɪɛmlɪn wɑz ændɝz hɑɹt. ʃi hæd leɪd kleɪm tə ðə sɪɾi - ðə laɪən bænɝ ən tʃɹəkənz sɪlvɝ kistoʊn ʃɛɹd pɹaɪɾ ə pleɪs ɑn ðə taʊɝz ə ði aʊɾɝ wɔl - bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt jɛt hoʊl ðə hɑɹɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn, ən ðət wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən hoʊldɪŋ stoʊn ən mɔɹɾɝ.

An icy thought made Elayne shiver. Who holds Caemlyn holds Andor, the ancient saying went; it was not exactly true, as Rand had demonstrated, yet Caemlyn was Andor's heart. She had laid claim to the city - the Lion Banner and Trakand's Silver Keystone shared pride of place on the towers of the outer wall - but she did not yet hold the heart of Caemlyn, and that was far more important than holding stone and mortar.

ðəl ɔl tʃɪɹ mi, wʌn deɪ, ʃi pɹɑməs hɝsɛlf. əl ɝn ðɛɹ əkleɪm. tədeɪ, ðoʊ, ðə kɹaʊɾəd weɪz fɛlt loʊnli bɪtwin ðoʊz fju əpɹeɪz vɔɪsəz. ʃi wɪʃt eɪvinhə wɝ ðɛɹ, dʒʌs fəɹ əɹ kʌmpəni, bʌɾ eɪvinhə sɔ noʊ ɹizən tə klaɪm ɑntu ə hɔɹs sɪmpli tə muv əbaʊt ðə sɪɾi. ɛniweɪ, ɪleɪn kəd fil hɝ. ɪt wɑz dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə bɑnd wɪð bɝdʒɪt, jɛt ʃi kəd fil əɹ sɪstɝz pɹɛzəns ɪn ðə sɪɾi, laɪk sɛnsɪŋ ən ənsin pɝsən ɪn ðə seɪm ɹum, ən ɪt wɑz kʌmfɝɾɪŋ.

They will all cheer me, one day, she promised herself. I will earn their acclaim. Today, though, the crowded ways felt lonely between those few upraised voices. She wished Aviendha were there, just for her company, but Aviendha saw no reason to climb onto a horse simply to move about the city. Anyway, Elayne could feel her. It was different from the bond with Birgitte, yet she could feel her sister's presence in the city, like sensing an unseen person in the same room, and it was comforting.

hɝ kəmpænjənz dʒɹu ðɛɹ oʊn ʃɛɹ ʌv ətɛnʃən. æftɝ bɛɹli θɹi jɪɹz əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, sɝaɪðəz dɑɹk skwɛɹ feɪs hæd nɑt jɛɾ ətʃivd eɪɡləsnəs, ən ʃi lʊkt ə pɹɑspɝəs mɝtʃən ɪn əɹ faɪn bɹɑnz-kʌlɝd wʊlənz wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ sɪlvɝ-ænd-sæfaɪɝz bɹutʃ hoʊldɪŋ əɹ kloʊk. hɝ wɔɹɾɝ, nɛd jɑɹmən, ɹoʊɾ əɾ əɹ hilz, ən i sɝɾənli kɑɾ aɪz. ə tɔl, bɹɔd-ʃoʊldɝd jʌŋ mæn wɪð bɹaɪt blu aɪz ən kɔɹn-jɛloʊ hɛɹ kɝlɪŋ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz, hi wɔɹ ə ʃɪmɝɪŋ wɔɹɾɝz kloʊk ðət meɪɾ ɪm əpɪɹ ə dɪsɪbɑɾid hɛd floʊɾɪŋ əbʌv ə tɔl ɡɹeɪ ɡɛldɪŋ ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ðəɹ iðɝ, wɛɹ ðə kloʊk dʒɹeɪpt ɪts hɔntʃɪz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz, əɹ ðəɾ ɪz pɹɛzəns ənaʊnst ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ði ʌðɝz, meɪnteɪnɪŋ ə sɝkəl ɝaʊn ɪleɪn əz ðeɪ meɪɾ ə weɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd, ətʃɹæktəd dʒʌst əz mɛni aɪz, ðoʊ. eɪt wɪmən ɪn ðə ɹɛd koʊts ən bɝnɪʃt hɛlməts ən bɹɛstpleɪts ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd wɝ nɑt sʌmθɪŋ sin ɛvɹi deɪ. əɹ ɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ, kʌm tə ðæt. ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən əm aʊt fɹəm ðə nu ɹəkɹuts hɝsɛlf fəɹ ðət vɛɹi ɹizən.

Her companions drew their own share of attention. After barely three years as Aes Sedai, Sareitha's dark square face had not yet achieved agelessness, and she looked a prosperous merchant in her fine bronze-colored woolens with a large silver-and-sapphires brooch holding her cloak. Her Warder, Ned Yarman, rode at her heels, and he certainly caught eyes. A tall, broad-shouldered young man with bright blue eyes and corn-yellow hair curling to his shoulders, he wore a shimmering Warder's cloak that made him appear a disembodied head floating above a tall gray gelding that was not entirely there either, where the cloak draped its haunches. There was no mistaking what he was, or that his presence announced an Aes Sedai. The others, maintaining a circle around Elayne as they made a way through the crowd, attracted just as many eyes, though. Eight women in the red coats and burnished helmets and breastplates of the Queen's Guard were not something seen every day. Or ever before, come to that. She had chosen them out from the new recruits herself for that very reason.

ðɛɹ ʌndɝ-lutɛnənt, keɪsil ɹɑskɑvni, lin ən hɑɹɾ əz ɛni il meɪɾən, wɑz ðət ɹɛɹəɾi ʌv ɹɛɹɪɾiz, ə wʊmən mɝtʃəns ɡɑɹd, nɪɹli twɛnti jɪɹz ɪn ðə tʃɹeɪd, əz ʃi pʊɾ ɪt. sɪlvɝ bɛlz ɪn əɹ stɑki ɹoʊn ɡɛldɪŋz meɪn neɪmd əɹ ɝæfɛlɪn, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz veɪɡ əbaʊɾ əɹ pæst. ði oʊnli ændɔɝən əmʌŋ ði eɪt wɑz ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ, plæsəd-feɪst wʊmən wɪð waɪd ʃoʊldɝz, dɪni koʊlfɝd, hu hæd kɛpt ɔɹɾɝ ɪn ə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz' tævɝn ɪn loʊ keɪɛmlɪn, aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz, ənʌðɝ ɹʌf ən sɪŋɡjəlɝ dʒɑb fəɹ ə wʊmən. dɪni dɪd nɑt jɛt noʊ haʊ tə juz ðə sɔɹɾ əɾ əɹ hɪp, bʌt bɝdʒɪt sɛd ʃi hæd vɛɹi kwɪk hænz ən kwɪkɝ aɪz, ən ʃi wɑz kwaɪɾ ədɛpt wɪð ðə peɪs-lɔŋ kʌdʒəl ðət hʌŋ ɑpəzəɾ əɹ sɔɹd. ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ wɝ hʌntɝz fəɹ ðə hɔɹn, dɪspɝɪt wɪmən, tɔl ən ʃɔɹt, slɛndɝ ən waɪd, dui-aɪɾ ən ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd, wɪð bækɡɹaʊnz əz vɛɹid, ðoʊ səm wɝ əz dɪskɹiɾ əz keɪsil ən ʌðɝz klɪɹli ɪnfleɪɾəd ðɛɹ fɔɹmɝ steɪʃən ɪn laɪf. niðɝ æɾətud wɑz ənkɑmən əmʌŋ hʌntɝz. ðeɪ hæd lɛpt ət ðə tʃæns tə bi lɪstəɾ ɑn ðə ɡɑɹdz' ɹoʊl, ðoʊ. mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ðeɪ hæd pæs bɝdʒɪts kloʊs ɪnspɛkʃən.

Their under-lieutenant, Caseille Raskovni, lean and hard as any Aiel Maiden, was that rarity of rarities, a woman merchant's guard, nearly twenty years in the trade, as she put it. Silver bells in her stocky roan gelding's mane named her Arafellin, though she was vague about her past. The only Andoran among the eight was a graying, placid-faced woman with wide shoulders, Deni Colford, who had kept order in a wagon drivers' tavern in Low Caemlyn, outside the walls, another rough and singular job for a woman. Deni did not yet know how to use the sword at her hip, but Birgitte said she had very quick hands and quicker eyes, and she was quite adept with the pace-long cudgel that hung opposite her sword. The remainder were Hunters for the Horn, disparate women, tall and short, slender and wide, dewy-eyed and gray-haired, with backgrounds as varied, though some were as discreet as Caseille and others clearly inflated their former station in life. Neither attitude was uncommon among Hunters. They had leaped at the chance to be listed on the Guards' roll, though. More important, they had passed Birgitte's close inspection.

"ðiz stʃɹits ɑɹ nɑt seɪf fəɹ ju," sɝaɪðə sɛd sʌɾənli, hilɪŋ əɹ tʃɛsnʌɾ ʌp bɪsaɪɾ ɪleɪnz blæk ɡɛldɪŋ. faɪɹhɑɹɾ ɔlmoʊs mænədʒ tə nɪp ðə slik mɛɹ bɪfɔɹ ɪleɪn ɹeɪn ɪz hɛɾ əweɪ. ðə stʃɹit wɑz nɛɹoʊ hɪɹ, kəmpɹɛsɪŋ ðə kɹaʊɾ ən fɔɹsɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən ɪn kloʊsɝ ɝaʊn ðɛm. ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝz feɪs pɪktʃɝɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəmpoʊʒɝ, bʌɾ əpɛɹən kənsɝn ʃɑɹpən əɹ toʊn. "ɛniθɪŋ maɪt hæpən ɪn ə kɹʌʃ laɪk ðɪs. ɹɪmɛmbɝ u ɪz steɪɪŋ ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn, lɛs ðən tu maɪlz fɹəm ðɪs spɑt. tɛn sɪstɝz ət wʌn ɪn ɑɹ nɑt sɪmpli sikɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn fəɹ kʌmpəni. ɪleɪɾə maɪt wɛl əv sɛn ðɛm."

"These streets are not safe for you," Sareitha said suddenly, heeling her chestnut up beside Elayne's black gelding. Fireheart almost managed to nip the sleek mare before Elayne reined his head away. The street was narrow here, compressing the crowd and forcing the Guardswomen in closer around them. The Brown sister's face pictured Aes Sedai composure, but apparent concern sharpened her tone. "Anything might happen in a crush like this. Remember who is staying at the Silver Swan, less than two miles from this spot. Ten sisters at one inn are not simply seeking their own for company. Elaida might well have sent them."

"ʃi maɪt nɑt hæv, tu," ɪleɪn ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli. mɔɹ kɑmli ðən ʃi fɛlt. ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni sɪstɝz sim tə bi weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə saɪɾ əntɪl ðə stʃɹʌɡəl bɪtwin ɪleɪɾə ən ɛɡwin wɑz oʊvɝ. tu hæd dɪpɑɹɾəd ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn ən θɹi mɔɹ kʌm dʒʌst sɪns əɹ ɝaɪvəl ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ðət dɪd nɑt saʊn laɪk ə pɑɹɾi sɛn ɑn ə mɪʃən. ən nʌn wɝ ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ; ʃʊɹli ɪleɪɾə wəɾ ɪnklud ɹɛdz. stɪl, ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ wɑtʃt əz wɛl əz ʃi kəɾ ɝeɪnʒ, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt tɛl sɝaɪðə ðæt. ɪleɪɾə vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɑntəd hɝ, mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ʃi wəd wɑn ə ɹʌnəweɪ æksɛptɪd, əɹ wʌn kənɛktəd tə ɛɡwin ən ðoʊz ɪleɪɾə kɔld ɹɛbəlz. waɪ, ʃi kəd nɑt kwaɪɾ ʌndɝstænd. ə kwin u wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd bi ə ɡɹeɪt pɹaɪz fəɹ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt bɪkʌm kwin ɪf ʃi wɑz snætʃt bæk tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ɪleɪɾə hæɾ ɪʃud ði ɔɹɾɝ tə bɹɪŋ əɹ bæk baɪ ɛni minz nɛsəsɛɹi lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðəɹ simd ɛni pɑsəbɪləɾi ʃi wəɾ əsum ðə θɹoʊn fəɹ mɛni jɪɹz tə kʌm. ɪt wɑz ə pʌzəl ʃi hæd fɹɛɾɪd oʊvɝ mɔɹ ðən wʌns sɪns ɹɑn məkʊə slɪpt əɹ ðət faʊl bɹu ðət dʌld ə wʊmənz əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl. ə vɛɹi wɝiɪŋ pʌzəl, ɪspɛʃli naʊ ʃi wɑz ənaʊnsɪŋ əɹ loʊkeɪʃən tə ðə wɝld.

"She might not have, too," Elayne replied calmly. More calmly than she felt. A great many sisters seemed to be waiting on the side until the struggle between Elaida and Egwene was over. Two had departed the Silver Swan and three more come just since her arrival in Caemlyn. That did not sound like a party sent on a mission. And none were Red Ajah; surely Elaida would include Reds. Still, they were being watched as well as she could arrange, though she did not tell Sareitha that. Elaida very much wanted her, much more than she would want a runaway Accepted, or one connected to Egwene and those Elaida called rebels. Why, she could not quite understand. A queen who was Aes Sedai would be a great prize for the White Tower, but she would not become queen if she was snatched back to Tar Valon. For that matter, Elaida had issued the order to bring her back by any means necessary long before there seemed any possibility she would assume the throne for many years to come. It was a puzzle she had fretted over more than once since Ronde Macura slipped her that foul brew that dulled a woman's ability to channel. A very worrying puzzle, especially now she was announcing her location to the world.

hɝ aɪz lɪŋɡɝɾ ə moʊmən ɑn ə blæk-hɛɹd wʊmən ɪn ə blu kloʊk wɪð əɹ hʊd θɹoʊn bæk. ðə wʊmən bɛɹli ɡlænst əɾ əɹ bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ ɪndə ə kændəlmeɪkɝz ʃɑp. ə weɪɾɪd klɔθ bæɡ hʌŋ fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. nɑɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪleɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd. mɪɹli ənʌðɝ wʊmən u eɪdʒd wɛl, laɪk zeɪɾə. "ɪn ɛni keɪs," ʃi wɛn ɑn fɝmli, "aɪ woʊn bi pɛn ʌp baɪ fɪɹ ʌv ɪleɪɾə." wʌt wɝ ðoʊz sɪstɝz ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn ʌp tə?

Her eyes lingered a moment on a black-haired woman in a blue cloak with her hood thrown back. The woman barely glanced at her before turning into a candlemaker's shop. A weighted cloth bag hung from her shoulder. Not an Aes Sedai, Elayne decided. Merely another woman who aged well, like Zaida. "In any case," she went on firmly, "I won't be penned up by fear of Elaida." What were those sisters at the Silver Swan up to?

sɝaɪðə snɔɹɾɪd, ən nɑt vɛɹi sɔfli; ʃi simd əbaʊt tə ɹoʊl əɹ aɪz, ðən θɔt bɛɾɝ ʌv ɪt. əkeɪʒənəli ɪleɪn kɑɾ ən ɑd lʊk fɹəm wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz ɪn ðə pæləs, daʊtləs θɪŋkɪŋ ə haʊ ʃi hæd bɪn ɹeɪzd, jɛɾ ɑn ðə sɝfəs, ət list, ðeɪ æksɛptɪɾ əɹ əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, æknɑlɪdʒ ðət ʃi stʊd haɪɝ əmʌŋ əm ðən ɛni ɪksɛp nɪneɪiv. ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə stɑp əm spikɪŋ ðɛɹ maɪnz, ɔfən mɔɹ blʌnli ðət ðeɪ wəɾ əv wɪð ə sɪstɝ u stʊd wɛɹ ʃi dɪɾ ən hæɾ ətʃiv ðə ʃɔl ɪn mɔɹ juʒəwəl fæʃən. "fɝɡɛɾ ɪleɪɾə, ðɛn," sɝaɪðə sɛd, "æn ɹɪmɛmbɝ u ɛls wəd laɪk tə hæv jə ɪn hænd. wʌn wɛl-eɪmd ɹɑk, ən jə ɑɹ ən ʌnkɑnʃəs bʌndəl, izəli kæɹiɾ əweɪ ɪn ðə kənfjuʒən."

Sareitha snorted, and not very softly; she seemed about to roll her eyes, then thought better of it. Occasionally Elayne caught an odd look from one of the other sisters in the Palace, doubtless thinking of how she had been raised, yet on the surface, at least, they accepted her as Aes Sedai, acknowledged that she stood higher among them than any except Nynaeve. That was not enough to stop them speaking their minds, often more bluntly that they would have with a sister who stood where she did and had achieved the shawl in more usual fashion. "Forget Elaida, then," Sareitha said, "and remember who else would like to have you in hand. One well-aimed rock, and you are an unconscious bundle, easily carried away in the confusion."

dɪd sɝaɪðə ɹɪli hæv tə tɛl əɹ wɔɾɝ wɑz wɛt? kɪdnæpɪŋ ʌðɝ kleɪməns tə ðə θɹoʊn wɑz ɔlmoʊs kʌstəmɛɹi, æftɝ ɔl. ɛvɹi haʊs ðət stʊɾ əɡɛnst əɹ hæd səpɔɹɾɝz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ ən ɑpɝtunəɾi, əɹ ʃi wəɾ əv əɹ slɪpɝz fəɹ əɹ mɪddeɪ mil. nɑt ðət ðeɪ kəd səksid, nɑt soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi kəd tʃænəl, bʌt ðeɪ wəd meɪk ði ətɛmpt ɡɪvən ə tʃæns. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ θɔt ðət sɪmpli ɹitʃɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn pɹəvaɪɾəd seɪfti.

Did Sareitha really have to tell her water was wet? Kidnapping other claimants to the throne was almost customary, after all. Every House that stood against her had supporters in Caemlyn watching for an opportunity, or she would have her slippers for her midday meal. Not that they could succeed, not so long as she could channel, but they would make the attempt given a chance. She had never thought that simply reaching Caemlyn provided safety.

"ɪf aɪ doʊn dɛɹ liv ðə pæləs, sɝaɪðə, əl nɛvɝ ɡɛt ðə pipəl bɪhaɪn mi," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "aɪ mʌs bi sin, aʊɾ ən əbaʊɾ ən ʌnəfɹeɪd." ðət wɑz waɪ ʃi hæɾ eɪt ɡɑɹdz ɪnstɛɾ ə ðə fɪfti bɝdʒɪt hæd wɑntəd. ðə wʊmən ɹəfjuz tə ɡɹæsp ðə ɹiæləɾiz ə pɑlətɪks. "bɪsaɪdz, ðeɪ wəd nid tu wɛl-eɪmd ɹɑks wɪð jə hɪɹ."

"If I don't dare leave the Palace, Sareitha, I will never get the people behind me," she said quietly. "I must be seen, out and about and unafraid." That was why she had eight Guards instead of the fifty Birgitte had wanted. The woman refused to grasp the realities of politics. "Besides, they would need two well-aimed rocks with you here."

sɝaɪðə snɔɹɾɪd əɡɛn, bʌɾ ɪleɪn dɪɾ əɹ bɛs tə ɪɡnɔɹ ði ʌðɝz ɑbstənəsi. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ ðə wʊmənz pɹɛzəns, bʌt ðət wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl. ʃi hæd mɔɹ ɹizən fəɹ ðɪs ɹaɪd ðən biɪŋ sin. hælwɪn nɔɹi ɡeɪv əɹ fæks ən fɪɡjɝz baɪ ðə ɹim, ðoʊ ðə fɝs klɝks dʒɹoʊnɪŋ vɔɪs ɔlmoʊs pʊɾ əɹ tə slip, jɛt ʃi wɑntəd tə si fəɹ hɝsɛlf. nɔɹi kəd meɪk ə ɹaɪət saʊn əz laɪfləs əz ə ɹipɔɹɾ ɑn ðə steɪɾ ə ðə sɪɾiz sɪstɝnz əɹ ði ɪkspɛns ə klinɪŋ ðə suɝz.

Sareitha snorted again, but Elayne did her best to ignore the other's obstinacy. She wished she could ignore the woman's presence, but that was impossible. She had more reason for this ride than being seen. Halwin Norry gave her facts and figures by the ream, though the First Clerk's droning voice almost put her to sleep, yet she wanted to see for herself. Norry could make a riot sound as lifeless as a report on the state of the city's cisterns or the expense of cleaning the sewers.

ðə kɹaʊdz wɝ θɪk wɪð fɔɹənɝz, kændɔɹi wɪð fɔɹk bɪɹdz ən ɪliɑnɝz wɪð bɪɹdz ðət lɛf ðɛɹ ʌpɝ lɪps bɛɹ ən ɝæfɛlɪn wɪð sɪlvɝ bɛlz ɪn ðɛɹ bɹeɪdz, kɑpɝ-skɪn dəmɑni, ɑləv-skɪn ɔltɑɹənz ən dɑɹk tɛɹənz, kɛɹhinɪn u stʊɾ aʊt fəɹ ðɛɹ ʃɔɹt stætʃɝ ən peɪl skɪnz. səm wɝ mɝtʃəns, kɑt baɪ ðə sʌɾən ɑnsɛɾ ʌv wɪntɝ əɹ hoʊpɪŋ tə stil ə dʒʌmp ɑn ðɛɹ kɑmpətɪʃən, smuð-feɪs pʌft-ʌp foʊk u nu ðət tʃɹeɪd wɑz ðə laɪfs blʌɾ ə neɪʃənz, ən ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ə meɪdʒɝ ɑɹɾɝi ivən wən bɪtʃɹeɪd baɪ ə pʊɹli daɪd koʊɾ əɹ ə bɹutʃ ə bɹæs ən ɡlæs. mɛni ʌv ðə pipəl əfʊt hæd wɔɹn ən ɹæɡəd koʊts, bɹitʃɪz aʊɾ ət ðə ni, dʒɹɛsəz wɪð tæɾɝd hɛmz, ən θɹɛdbɛɹ kloʊks əɹ nʌn əɾ ɔl. ðoʊz wɝ ɹɛfjudʒiz, iðɝ hɛɹid fɹəm ðɛɹ hoʊmz baɪ wɔɹ əɹ sɛnt wɑndɝɪŋ baɪ ðə bɪlif ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd bɹoʊkən ɛvɹi bɑn ðət hɛl ðɛm. ðeɪ hʌntʃt əɡɛns ðə koʊld, feɪsəz hæɡɝɾ ən dɪfiɾəd, ən lɛt ðɛmsɛlvz bi bəfeɪd baɪ ðə floʊ ʌv ʌðɝz ɝaʊn ðɛm.

The crowds were thick with foreigners, Kandori with forked beards and Illianers with beards that left their upper lips bare and Arafellin with silver bells in their braids, copper-skinned Domani, olive-skinned Altarans and dark Tairens, Cairhienin who stood out for their short stature and pale skins. Some were merchants, caught by the sudden onset of winter or hoping to steal a jump on their competition, smooth-faced puffed-up folk who knew that trade was the life's blood of nations, and every one of them claiming to be a major artery even when betrayed by a poorly dyed coat or a brooch of brass and glass. Many of the people afoot had worn and ragged coats, breeches out at the knee, dresses with tattered hems, and threadbare cloaks or none at all. Those were refugees, either harried from their homes by war or sent wandering by the belief that the Dragon Reborn had broken every bond that held them. They hunched against the cold, faces haggard and defeated, and let themselves be buffeted by the flow of others around them.

wɑtʃɪŋ ə dʌl-aɪd wʊmən stæɡɝ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd klʌtʃɪŋ ə smɔl tʃaɪld ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ɪleɪn fʌmbəld ə kɔɪn fɹəm əɹ pɝs ən hændəɾ ɪt tə wʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹdz, ən æpəl-tʃikt wʊmən wɪð koʊld aɪz. zɪɡən kleɪm tə bi fɹəm ɡildən, ðə dɔɾɝ ʌv ə maɪnɝ noʊbəl; wɛl, ʃi maɪt bi ɡildænɪn, ət list. wən ðə ɡɑɹdzwʊmən lin daʊn tə pɹɑfɝ ðə kɔɪn, ðə wʊmən wɪð əɹ tʃaɪl stæɡɝɾ ɑn baɪ ənhiɾɪŋ, ənsiɪŋ. ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni ɪn ðə sɪɾi laɪk ðæt. ðə pæləs fɛd θaʊzənz ɛvɹi deɪ, ət kɪtʃənz sɛɾ ʌp θɹuaʊt ðə sɪɾi, bʌt tu mɛni kəd nɑɾ ivən sʌmən ði ɛnɝdʒi tə kəlɛk ðɛɹ bɹɛɾ ən sup. ɪleɪn ɔfɝɾ ə pɹɛɹ fəɹ mʌðɝ ən tʃaɪld əz ʃi dʒɹɑp ðə kɔɪn bæk ɪndə hɝ pɝs.

Watching a dull-eyed woman stagger through the crowd clutching a small child on her shoulder, Elayne fumbled a coin from her purse and handed it to one of the Guards, an apple-cheeked woman with cold eyes. Tzigan claimed to be from Ghealdan, the daughter of a minor noble; well, she might be Ghealdanin, at least. When the Guardswoman leaned down to proffer the coin, the woman with her child staggered on by unheeding, unseeing. There were too many in the city like that. The Palace fed thousands every day, at kitchens set up throughout the city, but too many could not even summon the energy to collect their bread and soup. Elayne offered a prayer for mother and child as she dropped the coin back into her purse.

"ju kænɑt fiɾ ɛvɹiwʌn," sɝaɪðə ɔfɝd kwaɪətli.

"You cannot feed everyone," Sareitha offered quietly.

"tʃɪlʒɹən ɑɹ nɑɾ əlaʊd tə stɑɹv ɪn ændɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd, əz ɪf ɪʃuɪŋ ə dɪkɹi. bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə stɑp ɪt. fud wɑz stɪl plɛntəfəl ɪn ðə sɪɾi, bʌt noʊ kəmæn kəd fɔɹs pipəl tə it.

"Children are not allowed to starve in Andor," Elayne said, as if issuing a decree. But she did not know how to stop it. Food was still plentiful in the city, but no command could force people to eat.

səm ə ði ʌðɝ fɔɹənɝz hæd kʌm tə keɪɛmlɪn ðət weɪ, tu, mɛn ən wɪmən u noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɔɹ ɹæɡz ən hɔntəd feɪsəz. wʌtɛvɝ hæd sɛn əm flaɪɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ hoʊmz, ðeɪ hæd bɪɡʌn θɪŋkɪŋ ðət ðeɪ hæd tʃɹævəl fɑɹ ɪnʌf, θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə tʃɹeɪdz ðeɪ hæɾ əbændənd, ɔfən əlɔŋ wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðeɪ pəzɛst. ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ðoʊ, ɛniwʌn wɪð skɪl ɪn ə kɹæft ən ə lɪɾəl dʒɹaɪv kəɾ ɔlweɪz faɪn ə bæŋkɝ wɪð ɹɛɾi kɔɪn. ðəɹ wɝ nu tʃɹeɪdz biɪŋ fɑloʊɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi ðiz deɪz. ʃi hæd sin θɹi klɑkmeɪkɝz' ʃɑps ɔlɹɛɾi ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ! wɪðɪn əɹ saɪt wɝ tu ʃɑps sɛlɪŋ bloʊn ɡlæs, ən nɪɹli θɝɾi mænjəfæktɝiz hæd bɪn bɪl nɔɹθ ə ðə sɪɾi. fɹəm naʊ ɑn, keɪɛmlɪn wəɾ ɪkspɔɹt ɡlæs, nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾ ɪt, ən kɹɪstəl əz wɛl. ðə sɪɾi hæd leɪsmeɪkɝz, naʊ, pɹədusɪŋ əz faɪn əz luɡɹɾ ɛvɝ hæd, ən noʊ wʌndɝ sɪns nɪɹli ɔl ə ðɛm hæd kʌm fɹəm ðɛɹ.

Some of the other foreigners had come to Caemlyn that way, too, men and women who no longer wore rags and haunted faces. Whatever had sent them flying from their homes, they had begun thinking that they had traveled far enough, thinking about the trades they had abandoned, often along with everything they possessed. In Caemlyn, though, anyone with skill in a craft and a little drive could always find a banker with ready coin. There were new trades being followed in the city these days. She had seen three clockmakers' shops already this morning! Within her sight were two shops selling blown glass, and nearly thirty manufactories had been built north of the city. From now on, Caemlyn would export glass, not import it, and crystal as well. The city had lacemakers, now, producing as fine as Lugard ever had, and no wonder since nearly all of them had come from there.

ðət bɹaɪɾənd əɹ muɾ ə lɪɾəl - ðə tæksəz ðoʊz nu kɹæfs peɪd wəd hɛlp, ðoʊ ɪt wəd teɪk taɪm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ peɪd mʌtʃ - jɛɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl ʌðɝz ɪn ðə kɹaʊdz ʃi noʊɾəst moʊst. fɔɹən əɹ ændɔɝən, ðə mɝsənɛɹiz wɝ izəli pɪkt aʊt, hɑɹd-feɪs mɛn wɛɹɪŋ sɔɹdz, swæɡɝɪŋ ivən wən sloʊd tə ə kɹɔl baɪ ðə pɹɛs. mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz ɔlsoʊ wɛn ɑɹmd, ɹʌf fɛloʊz ʃoʊldɝɪŋ əsaɪd moʊs mɛn u ɡɑɾ ɪn ðɛɹ weɪ, bʌt ðeɪ sim səbduɾ ən soʊbɝ kəmpɛɹd tə ðə sɛl-sɔɹdz. ən ɑn ðə hoʊl, ðeɪ dɪspleɪd fjuɝ skɑɹz. mɝsənɛɹiz dɑɾəd ðə kɹaʊd laɪk ɹeɪzənz ɪn ə keɪk. wɪð sətʃ ə lɑɹdʒ pul tə dʒɹɔ ɑn, ən wɪð wɪntɝ ɛmplɔɪmən fəɹ ðɛɹ skɪlz ɔlweɪz ɪn ʃɔɹt səplaɪ, ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ wəd kʌm tu dɪɹ. ənlɛs, əz daɪɛlɪn fɪɹd, ðeɪ kɑst əɹ ændɝ. sʌmhaʊ, ʃi hæd tə faɪn ɪnʌf mɛn ðət fɔɹənɝz wɝ nɑɾ ə mədʒɔɹəɾi ɪn ðə ɡɑɹdz. ən ðə mʌni tə peɪ ðɛm.

That brightened her mood a little - the taxes those new crafts paid would help, though it would take time before they paid much - yet it was still others in the crowds she noticed most. Foreign or Andoran, the mercenaries were easily picked out, hard-faced men wearing swords, swaggering even when slowed to a crawl by the press. Merchants' guards also went armed, rough fellows shouldering aside most men who got in their way, but they seemed subdued and sober compared to the sell-swords. And on the whole, they displayed fewer scars. Mercenaries dotted the crowd like raisins in a cake. With such a large pool to draw on, and with winter employment for their skills always in short supply, she did not think they would come too dear. Unless, as Dyelin feared, they cost her Andor. Somehow, she had to find enough men that foreigners were not a majority in the Guards. And the money to pay them.

əbɹʌpli, ʃi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə bɝdʒɪt. ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɑz æŋɡɹi - ʃi ɔfən wɑz, ʌv leɪt - ən kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ. vɛɹi æŋɡɹi, ən kʌmɪŋ vɛɹi kwɪkli. ən ɑmənəs kɑmbəneɪʃən ðət sɛɾ əlɑɹm ɡɔŋz ɹɪŋɪŋ ɪn ɪleɪnz hɛd.

Abruptly, she became aware of Birgitte. The other woman was angry - she often was, of late - and coming closer. Very angry, and coming very quickly. An ominous combination that set alarm gongs ringing in Elayne's head.

ɪmiɾiətli ʃi ɔɹɾɝd ə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə pæləs baɪ ðə moʊs dɝɛkt ɹut - ðət wəd bi haʊ bɝdʒɪt wɑz kʌmɪŋ; ðə bɑnd wəd lɛɾ əɹ stʃɹeɪt tə ɪleɪn - ən ðeɪ tʊk ðə nɛks tɝn saʊθ, ɑntu niɾəl stʃɹit. ɪt wɑz æktʃəli  ə ɹæðɝ waɪd stʃɹit, ðoʊ ɪt miændɝd laɪk ə ɹɪvɝ, daʊn wʌn hɪl ən ʌp ðə nɛkst, bʌt dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz əɡoʊ ɪt hæd bɪn fʊl ə niɾəlmeɪkɝz. naʊ ə fju smɔl ɪnz ən tævɝnz wɝ dʒæmd əmʌŋ kʌtlɝz ən teɪlɝz ən ɛvɹi sɔɹɾ ə ʃɑp ɪksɛp niɾəlmeɪkɝz.

Immediately she ordered a return to the Palace by the most direct route - that would be how Birgitte was coming; the bond would lead her straight to Elayne - and they took the next turn south, onto Needle Street. It was actually a rather wide street, though it meandered like a river, down one hill and up the next, but generations ago it had been full of needlemakers. Now a few small inns and taverns were jammed among cutlers and tailors and every sort of shop except needlemakers.

bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæɾ ivən ɹitʃt ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi, bɝdʒɪt faʊn əm klaɪmɪŋ pɛɹmənz leɪn, wɛɹ ə hændfʊl ə fɹut-sɛlɝz stɪl klʌŋ tə ʃɑps hændəd daʊn sɪns ðə deɪz ʌv ɪʃɑɹə, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz pɹɛʃəs lɪɾəl tə bi sin ɪn ðɛɹ wɪndoʊz ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ. dɪspaɪt ðə kɹaʊd bɝdʒɪt kæntɝɾ ɪndə saɪt, ɹɛd kloʊk flɛɹɪŋ bɪhaɪnd, skæɾɝɪŋ pipəl bɪfɔɹ əɹ lɛft ən ɹaɪt, ən oʊnli sloʊɾ əɹ ɹeɪnʒi ɡɹeɪ wən ʃi sɔ ðɛm əhɛd.

Before they had even reached the Inner City, Birgitte found them climbing Pearman's Lane, where a handful of fruit-sellers still clung to shops handed down since the days of Ishara, though there was precious little to be seen in their windows this time of year. Despite the crowd Birgitte cantered into sight, red cloak flaring behind, scattering people before her left and right, and only slowed her rangy gray when she saw them ahead.

əz ɪf tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ əɹ hɝi, ʃi tʊk ə moʊmən tə stʌɾi ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən ən ɹɪtɝn keɪsilz səlut bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ əɹ maʊn tə wɔk bɪsaɪɾ ɪleɪnz. ənlaɪk ðɛm, ʃi wɔɹ niðɝ sɔɹd nɔɹ ɑɹmɝ. ðə mɛmɹiz ə hɝ pæs laɪvz wɝ feɪɾɪŋ - ʃi sɛd ʃi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl klɪɹli bɪfɔɹ ðə faʊndɪŋ ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, naʊ, ðoʊ fɹæɡməns stɪl floʊɾəd ʌp - bʌt wʌn θɪŋ ʃi kleɪm tə ɹikɔl æbsəlutli. ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə juz ə sɔɹd, ʃi hæd nɪɹli ɡɑɾən hɝsɛlf kɪld, ən hæɾ ivən dʌn soʊ mɔɹ ðən wʌns. hɝ stʃɹʌŋ baʊ wɑz ɪn ə lɛðɝ sæɾəl-keɪs, ðoʊ, wɪð ə bɹɪsəlɪŋ kwɪvɝ ʌv æɹoʊz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. æŋɡɝ bɔɪld ɪn hɝ, ən ʃi wɔɹ ə fɹaʊn ðəɾ oʊnli dipən əz ʃi spoʊk.

As if to make up for her hurry, she took a moment to study the Guardswomen and return Caseille's salute before turning her mount to walk beside Elayne's. Unlike them, she wore neither sword nor armor. The memories of her past lives were fading - she said she could remember nothing at all clearly before the founding of the White Tower, now, though fragments still floated up - but one thing she claimed to recall absolutely. Every time she had tried to use a sword, she had nearly gotten herself killed, and had even done so more than once. Her strung bow was in a leather saddle-case, though, with a bristling quiver of arrows on the other side. Anger boiled in her, and she wore a frown that only deepened as she spoke.

"ə hæf-fɹoʊzən pɪdʒən flu ɪndə ðə pæləs koʊɾ ə lɪɾəl waɪl əɡoʊ wɪð wɝd fɹəm ɑɹɪŋɡəl. ðə mɛn ɛskɔɹɾɪŋ nɑiən ən ɛləniə wɝ æmbʊʃt ən kɪl nɑt faɪv maɪlz aʊɾ ə ðə taʊn. lʌkəli, wʌn ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz keɪm bæk wɪð blʌɾ ɑn ðə sæɾəl, əɹ wiɾ əv noʊn nʌθɪŋ fəɹ wiks jɛt. aɪ daʊɾ əɹ lʌk ɪkstɛnz tə ðət pɛɹ biɪŋ hɛl fəɹ ɹænsəm baɪ bɹɪɡænz."

"A half-frozen pigeon flew into the Palace cote a little while ago with word from Aringill. The men escorting Naean and Elenia were ambushed and killed not five miles out of the town. Luckily, one of their horses came back with blood on the saddle, or we'd have known nothing for weeks yet. I doubt our luck extends to that pair being held for ransom by brigands."

faɪɹhɑɹt pɹænst ə fju stɛps, ən ɪleɪn ɹeɪn ɪm ɪn ʃɑɹpli. sʌmwʌn ɪn ðə kɹaʊd ʃaʊɾəd wʌt maɪɾ əv bɪn ə kɹaɪ fəɹ tʃɹəkənd. əɹ nɑt. ʃɑpkipɝz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ətʃɹækt kʌstəm ɹeɪzd ɪnʌf dɪn tə mʌfəl ðə wɝdz. "soʊ wɪv ə spaɪ ɪn ðə pæləs," ʃi sɛd, ðən kəmpɹɛst əɹ lɪps, wɪʃɪŋ ʃi hæd hɛld əɹ tʌŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə sɝaɪðə.

Fireheart pranced a few steps, and Elayne reined him in sharply. Someone in the crowd shouted what might have been a cry for Trakand. Or not. Shopkeepers trying to attract custom raised enough din to muffle the words. "So we have a spy in the Palace," she said, then compressed her lips, wishing she had held her tongue in front of Sareitha.

bɝdʒɪt dɪd nɑt sim tə kɛɹ. "ənlɛs ðɛɹz ə tɑvɝən tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ɝaʊnd wi doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd dʒɹaɪli. "meɪbi naʊ jəl lemi əsaɪn ə bɑɾiɡɑɹd. dʒʌst ə fju ɡɑɹdz, wɛl tʃoʊzən ən - "

Birgitte did not seem to care. "Unless there's a ta'veren trotting around we don't know about," she replied dryly. "Maybe now you'll let me assign a bodyguard. Just a few Guards, well chosen and - "

"noʊ!" ðə pæləs wɑz əɹ hoʊm. ʃi wəd nɑt bi ɡɑɹɾəd ðɛɹ. ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə bɹaʊn, ʃi saɪd. sɝaɪðə wɑz lɪsnɪŋ vɛɹi ətɛntɪvli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd θɪŋz naʊ. nɑt ðɪs. "ju lɛt ðə fɝs meɪd noʊ?"

"No!" The Palace was her home. She would not be guarded there. Glancing at the Brown, she sighed. Sareitha was listening very attentively. There was no point in trying to hide things now. Not this. "You let the First Maid know?"

bɝdʒɪt ɡeɪv əɹ ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk ðæt, kəmbaɪnd wɪð ə bɝst ə maɪld aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ θɹu ðɛɹ ʃɛɹd bɑnd, toʊld əɹ tə ɡoʊ titʃ əɹ ɡɹændmʌðɝ tə nɪt. "ʃi ɪntɛnz tə kwɛstʃən ɛvɹi sɝvən u dɪdn sɝv jəɹ mʌðɝ ət lis faɪv jɪɹz. aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi dʌzn min tə pʊɾ əm tə ðə kwɛstʃən. ðə lʊk ɑn əɹ feɪs wən aɪ toʊl hɝ, aɪ wɑz ɡlæd tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ stʌɾi wɪð ə hoʊl skɪn. aɪm lʊkɪŋ əɾ ʌðɝz, maɪsɛlf." ʃi mɛn ðə ɡɑɹdz, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt seɪ soʊ ɪn hɪɹɪŋ ə keɪsil ən ði ʌðɝz. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt laɪkli. ɔl ðə ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ ɡeɪv ɛniwʌn ə pɝfəkt ɑpɝtunəɾi tə slɪp ɪn aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz, jɛt wɪθaʊɾ ɛni əʃʊɹəns ðeɪ wəɾ ɛvɝ bi wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd lɝn ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl.

Birgitte gave her a sidelong look that, combined with a burst of mild outrage through their shared bond, told her to go teach her grandmother to knit. "She intends to question every servant who didn't serve your mother at least five years. I'm not sure she doesn't mean to put them to the question. The look on her face when I told her, I was glad to get out of her study with a whole skin. I'm looking at others, myself." She meant the Guards, but she would not say so in hearing of Caseille and the others. Elayne did not think it likely. All the recruiting gave anyone a perfect opportunity to slip in eyes-and-ears, yet without any assurance they would ever be where they could learn anything useful.

"ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ spaɪz ɪn ðə pæləs," sɝaɪðə sɛd kwaɪətli, "ðɛɹ meɪ bi wɝs. pɝhæps jə ʃəɾ æksɛp ðə leɪɾi bɝdʒɪts sədʒɛstʃən ʌv ə bɑɾiɡɑɹd. ðəɹ ɪz pɹɛsɪɾənt." bɝdʒɪt ʃoʊd ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝ əɹ tiθ; əz ə smaɪl, ɪt wɑz ə mɪzɝəbəl feɪljɝ. haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ʃi dɪslaɪk biɪŋ ədʒɹɛs baɪ hɝ taɪɾəl, haʊɛvɝ, ʃi tɝn hoʊpfəl aɪz ɑn ɪleɪn.

"If there are spies in the Palace," Sareitha said quietly, "there may be worse. Perhaps you should accept the Lady Birgitte's suggestion of a bodyguard. There is precedent." Birgitte showed the Brown sister her teeth; as a smile, it was a miserable failure. However much she disliked being addressed by her title, however, she turned hopeful eyes on Elayne.

"aɪ sɛd noʊ, ən aɪ min noʊ!" ɪleɪn snæpt. ə bɛɡɝ, əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ðə sloʊ-muvɪŋ sɝkəl ə hɔɹsəz wɪð ə waɪd, ɡæp-tuθt ɡɹɪn ən ɪz kæp ɪn ɪz hænd, flɪntʃt ən skɝiɾ əweɪ ɪndə ðə θɹɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ ivən θɪŋk ə ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ əɹ pɝs. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ mʌtʃ ə hɝ æŋɡɝ wɑz əɹ oʊn ən haʊ mʌtʃ bɝdʒɪts, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz əpɹoʊpɹiət.

"I said no, and I mean no!" Elayne snapped. A beggar, approaching the slow-moving circle of horses with a wide, gap-toothed grin and his cap in his hand, flinched and scurried away into the throng before she could even think of reaching for her purse. She was not sure how much of her anger was her own and how much Birgitte's, but it was appropriate.

"aɪ ʃʊɾə ɡɔn tə ɡɛɾ əm maɪsɛlf," ʃi ɡɹaʊl bɪɾɝli. ɪnstɛd, ʃi hæd woʊvən ə ɡeɪtweɪ fəɹ ðə mɛsənʒɝ ən spɛn ðə ɹɛst ə ðə deɪ miɾɪŋ wɪð mɝtʃəns ən bæŋkɝz. "æt ðə list, aɪ ʃʊɾə stʃɹɪp ðə ɡɛɹɪsən əɾ ɑɹɪŋɡəl fəɹ ɛskɔɹt. tɛn mɛn dɛd kəz aɪ blʌndɝd! wɝs - ðə laɪt hɛlp mi, ɪts wɝs! - aɪv lɔst ɛləniə ən nɑiən kəz ʌv ɪt!"

"I should have gone to get them myself," she growled bitterly. Instead, she had woven a gateway for the messenger and spent the rest of the day meeting with merchants and bankers. "At the least, I should have stripped the garrison at Aringill for escort. Ten men dead because I blundered! Worse - the Light help me, it is worse! - I've lost Elenia and Naean because of it!"

bɝdʒɪts θɪk ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd, hæŋɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ əɹ kloʊk, swʌŋ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɛmfæɾɪkli. "ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, kwinz doʊnt ɡoʊ ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf tə də ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. ðəɹ blʌɾi kwinz!" hɝ æŋɡɝ wɑz daɪɪŋ daʊn, ə lɪɾəl, bʌɾ ɪɹɪteɪʃən flɛɹɾ ɑn tɑp ʌv ɪt, ən əɹ toʊn ɹəflɛktəd boʊθ. ʃi ɹɪli wɑntəɾ ɪleɪn tə hæv ə bɑɾiɡɑɹd, vɛɹi laɪkli ivən ɪn əɹ bæθ. "jɔɹ ædvɛntʊɹɪŋ deɪz ɑɹ dʌn. ðə nɛks θɪŋ, jud bi snikɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs ɪn dɪsɡaɪz, meɪbi ivən wɑndɝɪŋ ɝaʊn æftɝ naɪtfɔl, wən jə maɪt ɡɛt jəɹ skʌl kɹækt oʊpən baɪ səm tʌf jə nɛvɝ ivən sɔ."

Birgitte's thick golden braid, hanging outside her cloak, swung as she shook her head emphatically. "In the first place, queens don't go running off to do everything themselves. They're bloody queens!" Her anger was dying down, a little, but irritation flared on top of it, and her tone reflected both. She really wanted Elayne to have a bodyguard, very likely even in her bath. "Your adventuring days are done. The next thing, you'd be sneaking out of the Palace in disguise, maybe even wandering around after nightfall, when you might get your skull cracked open by some tough you never even saw."

ɪleɪn sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl. bɝdʒɪt nu, ʌv kɔɹs - ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ɛni weɪ tə ɡɛɾ ɝaʊn ðə bɑnd, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɹ mʌs bi wʌn - bʌt ðə wʊmən hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə bɹɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp naʊ. ɪf bɝdʒɪɾ ɔfɝɾ ɪnʌf hɪns, ʃi wəɾ əv ʌðɝ sɪstɝz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɑloʊ hɝ wɪð ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz ən laɪkli skwɑdz ʌv ɡɑɹdzmɪn əz wɛl. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz soʊ ɹɪdɪkjələs əbaʊt kipɪŋ əɹ seɪf. jə wəd θɪŋk ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, mʌtʃ lɛs tæntʃəkoʊ, əɹ fɑlm. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi hæɾ oʊnli dʌn ɪt wʌns. soʊ fɑɹ. ən eɪvinhə wɛnt wɪð hɝ.

Elayne sat up straight in her saddle. Birgitte knew, of course - she did not know any way to get around the bond, though she was sure there must be one - but the woman had no right to bring it up now. If Birgitte offered enough hints, she would have other sisters trying to follow her with their Warders and likely squads of Guardsmen as well. Everyone was so ridiculous about keeping her safe. You would think she had never been in Ebou Dar, much less Tanchico, or Falme. Besides, she had only done it once. So far. And Aviendha went with her.

"koʊl dɑɹk stʃɹits doʊn kəmpɛɹ tə ə wɔɹm faɪɝ ən ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ bʊk," sɝaɪðə pʊɾ ɪn aɪdli, əz ɪf tɔkɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. stʌɾiɪŋ ðə ʃɑps ðeɪ wɝ pæsɪŋ, ʃi simd ɪntɛn ɑn ðɛm. "aɪ vɛɹi mʌtʃ dɪslaɪk wɔkɪŋ ɑn aɪsi peɪvmənt, maɪsɛlf, ɪspɛʃli ɪn ðə dɑɹk, wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə kændəl. jʌŋ, pɹɪɾi wɪmən ɔfən θɪŋk pleɪn kloʊðz ən ə dɝɾi feɪs meɪk əm ɪnvɪzəbəl." ðə ʃɪft wɑz soʊ sʌɾən, wɪð noʊ tʃeɪnʒ ɪn toʊn, ðəɾ ət fɝst ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz wʌt ʃi wɑz hɪɹɪŋ. "biɪŋ nɑk daʊn ən dʒɹæɡd ɪndə ən æli baɪ dʒɹʌŋkən ɹaʊɾiz ɪz ə hɑɹd weɪ tə lɝn dɪfɹənli. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf jə ɑɹ lʌki ɪnʌf tə hæv ə fɹɛnd wɪð jə hu ɔlsoʊ kən tʃænəl, ɪf ʃiz lʌki ɪnʌf ðət ðə tʌf feɪlz tə hɪɾ əɹ əz hɑɹɾ əz i ʃəd . . . wɛl, jə kænɑt bi lʌki ɛvɹi taɪm. wʊdn jə əɡɹi, leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt?"

"Cold dark streets don't compare to a warm fire and an interesting book," Sareitha put in idly, as if talking to herself. Studying the shops they were passing, she seemed intent on them. "I very much dislike walking on icy pavement, myself, especially in the dark, without so much as a candle. Young, pretty women often think plain clothes and a dirty face make them invisible." The shift was so sudden, with no change in tone, that at first Elayne did not realize what she was hearing. "Being knocked down and dragged into an alley by drunken rowdies is a hard way to learn differently. Of course, if you are lucky enough to have a friend with you who also can channel, if she's lucky enough that the tough fails to hit her as hard as he should . . . Well, you cannot be lucky every time. Wouldn't you agree, Lady Birgitte?"

ɪleɪn kloʊzd əɹ aɪz fəɹ ə moʊmənt. eɪvinhə hæd sɛd sʌmwʌn wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ ðɛm, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə fʊtpæd. ɛniweɪ, ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn laɪk ðæt. nɑɾ ɪɡzækli. bɝdʒɪts ɡlɛɹ pɹɑməst ə tɔkɪŋ tə, leɪɾɝ. ʃi ɹəfjuz tə ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ ə wɔɹɾɝ dʒʌs dɪd nɑt dʒɹɛs daʊn əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Elayne closed her eyes for a moment. Aviendha had said someone was following them, but she had been sure it was only a footpad. Anyway, it had not been like that. Not exactly. Birgitte's glare promised a talking to, later. She refused to understand that a Warder just did not dress down her Aes Sedai.

"ɪn ðə sɛkən pleɪs," bɝdʒɪt wɛn ɑn ɡɹɪmli, "tɛn mɛn əɹ nɪɹli θɹi hʌnʒɹəd, ðə blʌɾi aʊtkʌm wʊɾə bɪn ðə blʌɾi seɪm. bɝn mi, ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd plæn. ə fju mɛn cʊɾə bɹɔt nɑiən ən ɛləniə tə keɪɛmlɪn ənnoʊɾɪst. ɛmptiɪŋ aʊt ðə ɡɛɹɪsən wʊɾə pʊld ɛvɹi fleɪmɪŋ aɪ ɪn ði ist ʌv ændɝ, ən huɛvɝ tʊk əm wʊɾə bɹɔɾ ɪnʌf ɑɹmmɪn tə bi ʃʊɹ. vɛɹi laɪkli, ðeɪd hoʊld ɑɹɪŋɡəl naʊ ɑn tɑp ʌv ɪt. smɔl əz ðə ɡɛɹɪsən ɪz, ɑɹɪŋɡəl kips ɛnibəɾi hu wɑns tə muv əɡɛns jə ɪn ði ist ɔf bæləns, ən ðə mɔɹ ɡɑɹdz u kʌm aʊɾ ə kɛɹhin, ðə bɛɾɝ ðət ɡɛts, sɪns ðəɹ nɪɹli ɔl lɔɪəl tə ju." fəɹ sʌmwʌn u kleɪm tə bi ə sɪmpəl ɑɹtʃɝ, ʃi hæɾ ə ɡʊd ɡɹæsp ə ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən. ði oʊnli θɪŋ ʃi hæd lɛft aʊt wɑz ðə lɔs ə ðə kʌstəmz duɾiz fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ tʃɹeɪd.

"In the second place," Birgitte went on grimly, "ten men or nearly three hundred, the bloody outcome would have been the bloody same. Burn me, it was a good plan. A few men could have brought Naean and Elenia to Caemlyn unnoticed. Emptying out the garrison would have pulled every flaming eye in the east of Andor, and whoever took them would have brought enough armsmen to be sure. Very likely, they'd hold Aringill now on top of it. Small as the garrison is, Aringill keeps anybody who wants to move against you in the east off balance, and the more Guards who come out of Cairhien, the better that gets, since they're nearly all loyal to you." For someone who claimed to be a simple archer, she had a good grasp of the situation. The only thing she had left out was the loss of the customs duties from the river trade.

"hu dɪd teɪk ðɛm, leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt?" sɝaɪðə æskt, linɪŋ tə lʊk pæst ɪleɪn. "ʃʊɹli ðəɾ ɪz ə vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt kwɛstʃən." bɝdʒɪt saɪd laʊdli, ɔlmoʊst ə wɪmpɝ.

"Who did take them, Lady Birgitte?" Sareitha asked, leaning to look past Elayne. "Surely that is a very important question." Birgitte sighed loudly, almost a whimper.

"wi wɪl noʊ sun ɪnʌf, aɪ fɪɹ," ɪleɪn sɛd. ðə bɹaʊn kwɝkt ə daʊɾɪŋ aɪbɹaʊ ət hɝ, ən ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə ɡɹaɪn əɹ tiθ. ʃi sim tə bi duɪŋ ðət kwaɪɾ ə lɑt sɪns kʌmɪŋ hoʊm.

"We will know soon enough, I fear," Elayne said. The Brown quirked a doubting eyebrow at her, and she tried not to grind her teeth. She seemed to be doing that quite a lot since coming home.

eɪ tæɹɑbənɝ wʊmən ɪn ə ɡɹin sɪlk kloʊk stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ʌv ðə hɔɹsəz ən meɪɾ ə dip kɝtsi, hɝ θɪn, biɾɪd bɹeɪdz swɪŋɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ kaʊl. hɝ meɪd, ə dɪmɪnjəɾɪv wʊmən wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz fʊl ə smɔl pækədʒəz, ɪməteɪɾɪd əɹ mɪstʃɹəs ɔkwɝdli. ðə tu waɪd mɛn kloʊs bɪhaɪnd, ɡɑɹdz kæɹiɪŋ bɹæs-fɹul kɔɹɾɝstɑfs, ɹɪmeɪn əpɹaɪɾ ən əlɝt. ðɛɹ lɔŋ hɛvi lɛðɝ koʊts wəd tɝn ɔl bʌt ðə moʊs dɪtɝmən θɹʌst ʌv ə naɪf.

A Taraboner woman in a green silk cloak stepped out of the way of the horses and made a deep curtsy, her thin, beaded braids swinging out of her cowl. Her maid, a diminutive woman with her arms full of small packages, imitated her mistress awkwardly. The two wide men close behind, guards carrying brass-ferruled quarterstaffs, remained upright and alert. Their long heavy leather coats would turn all but the most determined thrust of a knife.

ɪleɪn ɪnklaɪn əɹ hɛɾ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd baɪ tə æknɑlɪdʒ ðə tæɹɑbənɝz kɝɾəsi. ʃi hæd nɑt ɹəsivd əz mʌtʃ fɹəm ɛni ændɔɝən ɪn ðə stʃɹits, soʊ fɑɹ. ðə hænsəm feɪs bɪhaɪn ðə wʊmənz ʃɪɹ veɪl ʃoʊd tu mʌtʃ eɪdʒ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. laɪt, ʃi hæd tu mʌtʃ ɑn əɹ pleɪt tə bi wɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪleɪɾə naʊ!

Elayne inclined her head as they rode by to acknowledge the Taraboner's courtesy. She had not received as much from any Andoran in the streets, so far. The handsome face behind the woman's sheer veil showed too much age to be Aes Sedai. Light, she had too much on her plate to be worrying about Elaida now!

"ɪɾ ɪz vɛɹi sɪmpəl, sɝaɪðə," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə kɛɹfəli kəntʃɹoʊl vɔɪs. "ɪf dʒɑɝɪd sɑɝən tʊk ðɛm, ɛləniə wɪl ɡɪv nɑiən ə tʃɔɪs. dɪklɛɹ ɑɝɔn fəɹ ɛləniə, wɪð səm swiɾənɪŋ ʌv ɪsteɪts fəɹ nɑiən ɪn ɹɪtɝn, əɹ ɛls əv əɹ θɹoʊt slɪɾ ɪn ə kwaɪət sɛl sʌmwɛɹ ən əɹ kɔɹps bɛɹid bɪhaɪn ə bɑɹn. nɑiən woʊnt ɡɪv ɪn izəli, bʌɾ əɹ haʊs ɪz ɑɹɡjuɪŋ oʊvɝ u ɪz ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ əntɪl ʃi ɹɪtɝnz, soʊ ðəl dɪðɝ, ɛləniə wɪl θɹɛɾən tɔɹtʃɝ ən meɪbi juz ɪt, ən ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɑɝɔn wɪl stæn bɪhaɪn sɑɝən fəɹ ɛləniə. sun tə bi dʒɔɪn baɪ ænʃɝ ən bɛɹɪn; ðəl ɡoʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ si stʃɹɛŋkθ. ɪf nɑiənz pipəl əv ðɛm, ʃɪl ɔfɝ ðə seɪm tʃɔɪsəz tə ɛləniə, bʌt dʒɑɝɪd wɪl ɡoʊ ɑn ə ɹæmpeɪdʒ əɡɛnst ɑɝɔn ənlɛs ɛləniə tɛlz ɪm nɑt tə, ən ʃi woʊn ɪf ʃi θɪŋks hiz ɛni hoʊp ə ɹɛskjuɪŋ hɝ. soʊ wi mʌs hoʊp tə hɪɹ ɪn ðə nɛks fju wiks ðəɾ ɑɝɔn ɪsteɪts ɑɹ biɪŋ bɝnd." ɪf nɑt, ʃi θɔt, aɪ hæv fɔɹ haʊsəz junaɪɾəd tə feɪs, ən aɪ stɪl doʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ aɪ ɹɪli hæv ivən tu!

"It is very simple, Sareitha," she said in a carefully controlled voice. "If Jarid Sarand took them, Elenia will give Naean a choice. Declare Arawn for Elenia, with some sweetening of estates for Naean in return, or else have her throat slit in a quiet cell somewhere and her corpse buried behind a barn. Naean won't give in easily, but her House is arguing over who is in charge until she returns, so they'll dither, Elenia will threaten torture and maybe use it, and eventually Arawn will stand behind Sarand for Elenia. Soon to be joined by Anshar and Baryn; they will go where they see strength. If Naean's people have them, she will offer the same choices to Elenia, but Jarid will go on a rampage against Arawn unless Elenia tells him not to, and she won't if she thinks he has any hope of rescuing her. So we must hope to hear in the next few weeks that Arawn estates are being burned." If not, she thought, I have four houses united to face, and I still don't know whether I really have even two!

"ðæɾ ɪz . . . vɛɹi naɪsli ɹizən aʊt," sɝaɪðə sɛd, saʊndɪŋ feɪnli sɝpɹaɪzd.

"That is . . . very nicely reasoned out," Sareitha said, sounding faintly surprised.

"aɪm ʃʊɹ jə kəd hæv, tu, wɪð taɪm," ɪleɪn sɛd, tu switli, ən fɛlt ə stæb ə plɛʒɝ wən ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝ blɪŋkt. laɪt, hɝ mʌðɝ wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə si ðət mʌtʃ wən ʃi wɑz tɛn!

"I'm sure you could have, too, with time," Elayne said, too sweetly, and felt a stab of pleasure when the other sister blinked. Light, her mother would have expected her to see that much when she was ten!

ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹaɪd bæk tə ðə pæləs pæst ɪn saɪləns, ən ʃi bɛɹli noʊɾəst ðə bɹaɪt moʊzeɪɪk taʊɝz ən ɡɹæn vɪstəz ə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi. ɪnstɛd, ʃi θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ən spaɪz ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs, əbaʊɾ u hæɾ ɛləniə ən nɑiən ən haʊ mʌtʃ bɝdʒɪt kəd stɛp ʌp ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ, əbaʊt wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz taɪm tə sɛl ðə pæləsəz pleɪɾ ən ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ dʒɛmz. ə ɡlumi lɪs tə kənsɪɾɝ, bʌt ʃi kɛpt əɹ feɪs smuð ən sɝinəli æknɑlɪdʒ ðə skæn tʃɪɹz ðət fɑloʊd hɝ. ə kwin kəd nɑt ʃoʊ hɝsɛlf əfɹeɪd, ɪspɛʃli wən ʃi wɑz.

The rest of the ride back to the Palace passed in silence, and she barely noticed the bright mosaic towers and grand vistas of the Inner City. Instead, she thought about Aes Sedai in Caemlyn and spies in the Royal Palace, about who had Elenia and Naean and how much Birgitte could step up recruiting, about whether it was time to sell the Palace's plate and the rest of her gems. A gloomy list to consider, but she kept her face smooth and serenely acknowledged the scant cheers that followed her. A queen could not show herself afraid, especially when she was.

ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs wɑz ə pjʊɹ waɪt kənfɛkʃən ʌv ɪntʃɹəkətli wɝk bælkəniz ən kɑləmd wɔks ətɑp ðə haɪəs hɪl ə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi, ðə haɪəst ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ɪts slɛndɝ spaɪɹz ən ɡɪldɪd doʊmz lumd əɡɛns ðə mɪddeɪ skaɪ, vɪzəbəl fəɹ maɪlz, pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ ðə paʊɝ ʌv ændɝ. ɡɹæn ɛntʃɹənsəz ən dɪpɑɹtʃɝz wɝ meɪɾ ət ðə fɹʌnt, ət ðə kwinz plɑzə, wɛɹ ɪn ðə pæst ɡɹeɪt kɹaʊdz hæd ɡæðɝd tə hɪɹ ðə pɹɑkləmeɪʃənz ə kwinz ən ʃaʊt ðɛɹ əkleɪm fəɹ ændɝz ɹulɝz. ɪleɪn ɛntɝɾ ət ðə ɹɪɹ ə ðə pæləs, faɪɹhɑɹts stil-ʃɑd hʊvz ɹɪŋɪŋ ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz əz ʃi tʃɹɑɾəd ɪndə ðə meɪn steɪbliɑɹd. ɪt wɑz ə bɹɔd speɪs fɹʌntɪɾ ɑn tu saɪdz baɪ ðə ɹoʊz ə tɔl ɑɹtʃt dɔɹz ə ðə steɪbəlz, oʊvɝlʊk baɪ ə sɪŋɡəl lɔŋ waɪt stoʊn bælkəni, pleɪn ən stɝɾi. sɛvɹəl ə ðə haɪ, kɑləmd wɔks ɔfɝd pɑɹʃəl vjuz fɹəm əbʌv, bʌt ðɪs wɑz ə wɝkɪŋ pleɪs. ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə sɪmpəl kɑləneɪd ðət ɡeɪv ɛntʃɹi tə ðə pæləs ɪtsɛlf ə dʌzən ɡɑɹdzmɪn pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə ɹipleɪs ðoʊz ɑn duɾi ɪn ðə plɑzə stʊd ɹɪdʒɪdli bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, biɪŋ ɪnspɛktɪd baɪ ðɛɹ ʌndɝ-lutɛnənt, ə ɡɹɪzəl fɛloʊ wɪð ə lɪmp u hæd bɪn ə bænɝmən ʌndɝ ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn. əlɔŋ ði aʊɾɝ wɔl, θɝɾi mɔɹ wɝ maʊntɪŋ, ɹɛɾi tə bɪɡɪn pətʃɹoʊlz ə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi ɪn pɛɹz. ɪn nɔɹməl deɪz, ðəɹ wʊɾə bɪn ɡɑɹdzmɪn huz meɪn duɾi wɑz pəlisɪŋ ðə stʃɹits, bʌt wɪð nʌmbɝz soʊ ɹədust, ðoʊz u pɹətɛktəd ðə pæləs hæd tə də ðəɾ əz wɛl. kɛɝin fɹænzi wɑz ðɛɹ, əz wɛl, ə stɑki wʊmən ɪn ən ɛləɡənt ɡɹin-stʃɹaɪpt ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs ən blu-ɡɹin kloʊk, sɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪ ɡɛldɪŋ waɪl wʌn ə hɝ wɔɹɾɝz, ɛnɝ koʊsən, klaɪmd ɑntu hɪz beɪ. dɑɹk, wɪð tʌtʃəz ʌv ɡɹeɪ ɪn ɪz taɪt-kɝl hɛɹ ən bɪɹd, ðə bleɪd-slɪm mæn wɔɹ ə pleɪn bɹaʊn kloʊk. əpɛɹənli ðeɪ dɪd nɑt min tə ædvɝtaɪz u ðeɪ wɝ.

The Royal Palace was a pure white confection of intricately worked balconies and columned walks atop the highest hill of the Inner City, the highest in Caemlyn. Its slender spires and gilded domes loomed against the midday sky, visible for miles, proclaiming the power of Andor. Grand entrances and departures were made at the front, at the Queen's Plaza, where in the past great crowds had gathered to hear the proclamations of queens and shout their acclaim for Andor's rulers. Elayne entered at the rear of the Palace, Fireheart's steel-shod hooves ringing on the paving stones as she trotted into the main stableyard. It was a broad space fronted on two sides by the rows of tall arched doors of the stables, overlooked by a single long white stone balcony, plain and sturdy. Several of the high, columned walks offered partial views from above, but this was a working place. In front of the simple colonnade that gave entry to the Palace itself a dozen Guardsmen preparing to replace those on duty in the Plaza stood rigidly beside their horses, being inspected by their under-lieutenant, a grizzled fellow with a limp who had been a bannerman under Gareth Bryne. Along the outer wall, thirty more were mounting, ready to begin patrols of the Inner City in pairs. In normal days, there would have been Guardsmen whose main duty was policing the streets, but with numbers so reduced, those who protected the Palace had to do that as well. Careane Fransi was there, as well, a stocky woman in an elegant green-striped riding dress and blue-green cloak, sitting her gray gelding while one of her Warders, Venr Kosaan, climbed onto his bay. Dark, with touches of gray in his tight-curled hair and beard, the blade-slim man wore a plain brown cloak. Apparently they did not mean to advertise who they were.

ɪleɪnz ɝaɪvəl bɑɾ ə flæʃ ə sɝpɹaɪz tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd. nɑt tə kɛɝin əɹ koʊsən, ʌv kɔɹs. ðə ɡɹin sɪstɝ mɪɹli lʊk θɔtfəl ɪn ðə ʃɛltɝɪŋ kaʊl ə hɝ kloʊk, ən koʊsən nɑɾ ivən ðæt. hi sɪmpli nɑɾəd tə bɝdʒɪɾ ən jɑɹmən, wɔɹɾɝ tə wɔɹɾɝ. wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ ɡlæns ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ əz sun əz ðə læst ʌv ɪleɪnz ɛskɔɹt klɪɹd ði aɪɝn-stʃɹæpt ɡeɪts. bʌt səm ə ðoʊz maʊntɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə wɔl pɔzd wɪð wʌn fʊɾ ɪn ə stɝəp, stɛɹɪŋ, ən hɛdz wɪp təwɔɹd ðə nu ɝaɪvəlz əmʌŋ ðə mɛn stændɪŋ ɪnspɛkʃən. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ɪkspɛktəd bæk fəɹ ənʌðɝ aʊɝ ət list, ən ɛksɛptɪŋ ə fju hu nɛvɝ θɔt bɪɑnd wʌt ðɛɹ hænz wɝ duɪŋ, ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə pæləs nu ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən wɑz vɑləɾəl. ɹumɝz spɹɛɾ əmʌŋ soʊlʒɝz ivən fæstɝ ðən əmʌŋ ʌðɝ mɛn, ən ðə laɪt nu, ðət wɑz seɪɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, ðə weɪ mɛn ɡɑsaɪpt. ðiz hæd tə noʊ ðət bɝdʒɪt hæd dɪpɑɹɾəd ɪn ə hɝi, ən naʊ ʃi ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ɪleɪn, əhɛɾ ə taɪm. wɑz wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ haʊsəz mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɑn keɪɛmlɪn? ɹɛɾi tə ətæk? wɝ ðeɪ tə bi ɔɹɾɝd tə ðə wɔlz ðət ðeɪ kəd nɑt mæn kəmplitli, ivən wɪð wʌt daɪɛlɪn hæɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi? moʊməns ə sɝpɹaɪz ən wɝi, ðən ðə lɛðɝi ʌndɝ-lutɛnən bɑɹkt ə kəmænd, ən aɪz snæp stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, ɑɹmz swɛpt əkɹɔs tʃɛsts ɪn səlut. oʊnli θɹi bɪsaɪdz ðə fɔɹmɝ bænɝmən hæd bɪn ɑn ðə ɹoʊlz ə fju deɪz ɡɔn, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɹɔ ɹəkɹuts hɪɹ.

Elayne's arrival bought a flash of surprise to the stableyard. Not to Careane or Kosaan, of course. The Green sister merely looked thoughtful in the sheltering cowl of her cloak, and Kosaan not even that. He simply nodded to Birgitte and Yarman, Warder to Warder. Without another glance they rode out as soon as the last of Elayne's escort cleared the iron-strapped gates. But some of those mounting along the wall paused with one foot in a stirrup, staring, and heads whipped toward the new arrivals among the men standing inspection. She had not been expected back for another hour at least, and excepting a few who never thought beyond what their hands were doing, everyone in the Palace knew the situation was volatile. Rumors spread among soldiers even faster than among other men, and the Light knew, that was saying something, the way men gossiped. These had to know that Birgitte had departed in a hurry, and now she returned with Elayne, ahead of time. Was one of the other Houses marching on Caemlyn? Ready to attack? Were they to be ordered to the walls that they could not man completely, even with what Dyelin had in the city? Moments of surprise and worry, then the leathery under-lieutenant barked a command, and eyes snapped straight ahead, arms swept across chests in salute. Only three besides the former bannerman had been on the rolls a few days gone, but there were no raw recruits here.

ɡɹumz ɪn ɹɛd koʊts wɪð ðə waɪt laɪən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn wʌn ʃoʊldɝ keɪm ɹʌʃɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ðə steɪbəl, ðoʊ ɪn fæk ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl fəɹ əm tə du. ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən kwaɪətli dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ət bɝdʒɪts ɔɹɾɝ ən bɪɡæn liɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz θɹu ðə tɔl dɔɹz. ʃi hɝsɛlf lɛp fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl ən tɔst əɹ ɹeɪnz tə wʌn ə ðə ɡɹumz, ən ʃi wɑz noʊ kwɪkɝ ðən jɑɹmən, hu hɝid tə hoʊl sɝaɪðəz bɹaɪɾəl waɪl ʃi klaɪm daʊn. hi wɑz wʌt səm sɪstɝz kɔld "fɹɛʃ kɑt," bɑndəd lɛs ðən ə jɪɹ - ðə tɝm deɪɾɪd fɹəm ə taɪm wən wɔɹɾɝz hæd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn æskt wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɑntəd ðə bɑnd - ən i wɑz vɛɹi əsɪdwəs ɪn ɪz duɾiz. bɝdʒɪt dʒʌst stʊd skaʊlɪŋ, fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps, əpɛɹənli wɑtʃɪŋ ðə mɛn u wəd pətʃɹoʊl ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi fəɹ ðə nɛks fɔɹ aʊɝz ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn ə kɑləm ə tuz. ɪleɪn wʊɾə bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf ðoʊz mɛn mɔɹ ðən kɹɔs bɝdʒɪts maɪnd, ðoʊ.

Grooms in red coats with the White Lion embroidered on one shoulder came rushing out from the stable, though in fact there was little for them to do. The Guardswomen quietly dismounted at Birgitte's order and began leading their horses through the tall doors. She herself leaped from her saddle and tossed her reins to one of the grooms, and she was no quicker than Yarman, who hurried to hold Sareitha's bridle while she climbed down. He was what some sisters called "fresh caught," bonded less than a year - the term dated from a time when Warders had not always been asked whether they wanted the bond - and he was very assiduous in his duties. Birgitte just stood scowling, fists on her hips, apparently watching the men who would patrol the Inner City for the next four hours ride out in a column of twos. Elayne would have been surprised if those men more than crossed Birgitte's mind, though.

ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, ʃi hæɾ əɹ oʊn wɝiz. tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə bi ɑbviəs əbaʊɾ ɪt, ʃi stʌɾid ðə wɪɹi wʊmən u hɛl faɪɹhɑɹts bɹaɪɾəl, ən ðə stɑki fɛloʊ hu pʊt daʊn ə lɛðɝ-kʌvɝd maʊntɪŋ stul ən hɛld əɹ stɝəp əz ʃi dɪsmaʊntɪd. hi wɑz ənsməlɪŋli stɑləɾ ən dɪlɪbɝɪt, waɪl ʃi wɑz ɹæpt ʌp ɪn stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ðə ɡɛldɪŋz noʊz ən wɪspɝɪŋ tə hɪm. niðɝ ɹɪli lʊkt əɾ ɪleɪn bɪɑn ə ɹɪspɛkfəl baʊ ʌv ðə hɛd; kɝɾəsiz keɪm sɛkən tə meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz nɑt tɔs fɹəm ðə sæɾəl baɪ ə hɔɹs meɪd skɪɾɪʃ baɪ bɑbɪŋ pipəl. noʊ mæɾɝ ðət ʃi hæd noʊ niɾ ə ðɛɹ hɛlp. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹi ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, ən ðəɹ wɝ fɔɹmz tə bi fɑloʊd. ivən soʊ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə fɹaʊn. livɪŋ əm əz ðeɪ lɛd faɪɹhɑɹɾ əweɪ, ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk bæk. bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə.

In any event, she had her own worries. Trying not to be obvious about it, she studied the wiry woman who held Fireheart's bridle, and the stocky fellow who put down a leather-covered mounting stool and held her stirrup as she dismounted. He was unsmilingly stolid and deliberate, while she was wrapped up in stroking the gelding's nose and whispering to him. Neither really looked at Elayne beyond a respectful bow of the head; courtesies came second to making sure she was not tossed from the saddle by a horse made skittish by bobbing people. No matter that she had no need of their help. She was not in the country any longer, and there were forms to be followed. Even so, she tried not to frown. Leaving them as they led Fireheart away, she did not look back. But she wanted to.

ðə wɪndoʊləs ɛntʃɹi hɔl bɪɑn ðə kɑləneɪd sim dɪm, ðoʊ ə fju ʌv ðə mɪɹɝd stænd-læmps wɝ lɪt. pleɪn læmps hɪɹ, ði aɪɝn wɝkt ɪndə sɪmpəl skɹoʊlz. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz jutɪlətɛɹiən, ðə plæstɝd kɔɹnɪsəz ʌnədɔɹnd, ðə waɪt stoʊn wɔlz bɛɹ ən smuð. wɝɾ ə ðɛɹ ɝaɪvəl hæd spɹɛd, ən bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ wɛl ɪnsaɪd, hæf ə dʌzən mɛn ən wɪmən əpɪɹd, boʊɪŋ ən kɝtsiɪŋ, tə teɪk kloʊks ən ɡlʌvz. ðɛɹ lɪvɝi dɪfɝd fɹəm ðə steɪbəlfoʊks ɪn hævɪŋ waɪt kɑlɝz ən kʌfs, ən ðə laɪən ʌv ændɝ ɑn ðə lɛf bɹɛst ɹæðɝ ðən ʃoʊldɝ. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɛniwʌn ɑn duɾi tədeɪ. moʊst sɝvəns ɪn ðə pæləs wɝ nu, ən ʌðɝz hæd kʌm aʊɾ ə ɹitaɪɝmən tə teɪk ðə pleɪsəz ə ðoʊz fɹaɪɾənd ɔf wən ɹænd kæptʃɝd ðə sɪɾi. ə bɔld, blʌf-feɪs fɛloʊ dɪd nɑt kwaɪt miɾ əɹ aɪz, bʌɾ i maɪɾ əv fɪɹɾ ɪt wəd bi tu fɔɹwɝd. ə slɛndɝ jʌŋ wʊmən wɪð ə skwɪn pʊt tu mʌtʃ ɪnθuziæzəm ɪndə hɝ kɝtsi, ən əɹ smaɪl, bʌt pɝhæps ʃi sɪmpli wɑntəd tə ʃoʊ iɡɝnəs. ɪleɪn wɔkt əweɪ, fɑloʊd baɪ bɝdʒɪt, bɪfɔɹ ʃi bɪɡæn ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðɛm. səspɪʃən hæɾ ə bɪɾɝ teɪst.

The windowless entry hall beyond the colonnade seemed dim, though a few of the mirrored stand-lamps were lit. Plain lamps here, the iron worked into simple scrolls. Everything was utilitarian, the plastered cornices unadorned, the white stone walls bare and smooth. Word of their arrival had spread, and before they were well inside, half a dozen men and women appeared, bowing and curtsying, to take cloaks and gloves. Their livery differed from the stablefolk's in having white collars and cuffs, and the Lion of Andor on the left breast rather than shoulder. Elayne did not recognize anyone on duty today. Most servants in the Palace were new, and others had come out of retirement to take the places of those frightened off when Rand captured the city. A bald, bluff-faced fellow did not quite meet her eyes, but he might have feared it would be too forward. A slender young woman with a squint put too much enthusiasm into her curtsy, and her smile, but perhaps she simply wanted to show eagerness. Elayne walked away, followed by Birgitte, before she began glaring at them. Suspicion had a bitter taste.

sɝaɪðə ən əɹ wɔɹɾɝ lɛft əm æftɝ ə fju peɪsɪz, ðə bɹaʊn mɝmɝɪŋ ən ɪkskjus əbaʊt bʊks ʃi wɑntəd tə si ɪn ðə laɪbɹɛɹi. ðə kəlɛkʃən wɑz nɑt smɔl, ðoʊ nʌθɪŋ ɪn kəmpɛɹəsən tə ðə ɡɹeɪt laɪbɹɛɹiz, ən ʃi spɛn aʊɝz ðəɹ ɛvɹi deɪ, fɹikwənli pʊlɪŋ ʌp eɪdʒ-wɔɹn vɑljumz ʃi sɛd wɝ ənnoʊn ɛlswɛɹ. jɑɹmən hild əɹ əz ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd ɔf daʊn ə kɹɔsɪŋ hɔlweɪ, ə dɑɹk stɑki swɑn dʒɹɔɪŋ ə stʃɹeɪnʒli ɡɹeɪsfəl stɔɹk ɪn əɹ weɪk. hi stɪl kæɹiɾ ɪz dɪstɝbɪŋ kloʊk, kɛɹfəli foʊldəɾ oʊvɝ wʌn ɑɹm. wɔɹɾɝz ɹɛɹli lɛt ðoʊz aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ oʊn hænz fəɹ lɔŋ. koʊsənz laɪkli wɑz ɪn ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz.

Sareitha and her Warder left them after a few paces, the Brown murmuring an excuse about books she wanted to see in the library. The collection was not small, though nothing in comparison to the great libraries, and she spent hours there every day, frequently pulling up age-worn volumes she said were unknown elsewhere. Yarman heeled her as she glided off down a crossing hallway, a dark stocky swan drawing a strangely graceful stork in her wake. He still carried his disturbing cloak, carefully folded over one arm. Warders rarely let those out of their own hands for long. Kosaan's likely was in his saddlebags.

"wʊd jə laɪk ə wɔɹɾɝz kloʊk, bɝdʒɪt?" ɪleɪn æskt, wɔkɪŋ ɑn. nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ʃi ɛnvid bɝdʒɪɾ əɹ vəlumənəs tʃɹaʊzɝz. ivən dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts meɪɾ ən ɛfɝɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ bɪɑn ə sɪdeɪt peɪs. ət list ʃi hæɾ ɑn ɹaɪɾɪŋ buts ɪnstɛɾ ə slɪpɝz. ðə bɛɹ ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt flɔɹ taɪlz wʊɾə bɪn fɹizɪŋ ɪn slɪpɝz. ðəɹ wɝ nɑɾ ɪnʌf kɑɹpəts tə leɪɝ ɪn ðə hɔlz əz wɛl əz ɪn ðə ɹumz; ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn wɔɹn aʊɾ ɪn noʊ taɪm, ɛniweɪ, dʒʌs fɹəm ðə kɑnstən tʃɹæfɪk ə sɝvəns kipɪŋ ʌp ðə pæləs. "æz sun əz ɛɡwin əz ðə taʊɝ, əl əv wʌn meɪd fəɹ ju. jə ʃəɾ əv wʌn."

"Would you like a Warder's cloak, Birgitte?" Elayne asked, walking on. Not for the first time, she envied Birgitte her voluminous trousers. Even divided skirts made an effort of anything beyond a sedate pace. At least she had on riding boots instead of slippers. The bare red-and-white floor tiles would have been freezing in slippers. There were not enough carpets to layer in the halls as well as in the rooms; they would have been worn out in no time, anyway, just from the constant traffic of servants keeping up the Palace. "As soon as Egwene has the Tower, I will have one made for you. You should have one."

"aɪ doʊn kɛɹ əbaʊt fleɪmɪŋ kloʊks," bɝdʒɪt ɹɪplaɪd ɡɹɪmli. ə fɔɹboʊɾɪŋ skaʊl sɛɾ əɹ maʊθ ɪn ə hɑɹd laɪn. "ɪt wɑz oʊvɝ soʊ fæst, aɪ θɔt jud dʒʌs blʌɾi stʌmbəld ən hɪt jəɹ blʌɾi hɛd. blʌɾ ən æʃəz! nɑk daʊn baɪ stʃɹit tʌfs! ðə laɪɾ oʊnli noʊz wʌt maɪɾ əv hæpənd!"

"I don't care about flaming cloaks," Birgitte replied grimly. A foreboding scowl set her mouth in a hard line. "It was over so fast, I thought you'd just bloody stumbled and hit your bloody head. Blood and ashes! Knocked down by street toughs! The Light only knows what might have happened!"

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə əpɑlədʒaɪz, bɝdʒɪt." aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ ən ɪndɪɡneɪʃən bɪɡæn flʌɾɪŋ θɹu ðə bɑnd, bʌt ʃi mɛn tə siz ði ædvæntɪdʒ. bɝdʒɪts tʃaɪɾɪŋ wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf ɪn pɹaɪvət; ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔlz, wɪð sɝvəns ɔl ɝaʊnd, skɝiɪŋ baɪ ɑn ɛɹənz, pɑlɪʃɪŋ ðə kɑɹvd wɔl pænəlz, tɛndɪŋ stænd-læmps ðət wɝ ɡɪldɪd hɪɹ. ðeɪ bɛɹli pɔz tə ɔfɝ saɪlən kɝɾəsiz tə bɝdʒɪɾ ən hɝ, bʌt daʊtləs ɛvɹi wʌn wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ waɪ ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl lʊk laɪk ə θʌndɝhɛɾ ən hæd ðɛɹ ɪɹz waɪd tə kætʃ wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ kʊd. "ju wɝ nɑt ðəɹ kəz aɪ dɪdnt wɑn jə ðɛɹ. əl weɪdʒɝ sɝaɪðə dɪdn əv nɛd wɪð hɝ." ɪt hɑɹdli sim pɑsəbəl ðət bɝdʒɪts feɪs kəd dɑɹkən mɔɹ. pɝhæps mɛnʃənɪŋ sɝaɪðə wɑz ə mɪsteɪk. ɪleɪn tʃeɪnʒd ðə sʌbʒɪkt. "ju ɹɪli mʌs də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt jəɹ læŋɡwədʒ. jə ɑɹ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə saʊn laɪk ðə wɝst sɔɹɾ ə laɪəbaʊt."

"There is no need to apologize, Birgitte." Outrage and indignation began flooding through the bond, but she meant to seize the advantage. Birgitte's chiding was bad enough in private; she was not about to put up with it in the halls, with servants all around, scurrying by on errands, polishing the carved wall panels, tending stand-lamps that were gilded here. They barely paused to offer silent courtesies to Birgitte and her, but doubtless every one was wondering why the Captain-General looked like a thunderhead and had their ears wide to catch whatever they could. "You were not there because I didn't want you there. I'll wager Sareitha didn't have Ned with her." It hardly seemed possible that Birgitte's face could darken more. Perhaps mentioning Sareitha was a mistake. Elayne changed the subject. "You really must do something about your language. You are beginning to sound like the worst sort of layabout."

"maɪ . . . læŋɡwədʒ," bɝdʒɪt mɝmɝd deɪnʒɝəsli. ivən əɹ stʃɹaɪdz tʃeɪnʒd, tə sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ə peɪsɪŋ lɛpɝd. "ju tɔk əbaʊt maɪ læŋɡwədʒ? ət list aɪ ɔlweɪz noʊ wʌt ðə wɝdz aɪ juz min. ət list aɪ noʊ wʌt fɪts wɛɹ, ən wʌt dʌznt." ɪleɪn kʌlɝd, ən əɹ nɛk stɪfənd. ʃi dɪd noʊ! moʊst ə ðə taɪm. ɔfən ɪnʌf, ət list. "æz fəɹ jɑɹmən," bɝdʒɪt wɛn ɑn, hɝ vɔɪs stɪl sɑft, ən stɪl deɪnʒɝəs, "hiz ə ɡʊd mæn, bʌɾ i ɪzən oʊvɝ biɪŋ ɡɑɡəl-aɪd ðət hiz ə wɔɹɾɝ jɛt. hi pɹɑbli dʒʌmps wən sɝaɪðə snæps əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. aɪ wɑz nɛvɝ ɡɑɡəl-aɪd, ən aɪ doʊn dʒʌmp. ɪz ðət waɪ jə sæɾəld mi wɪð ə taɪɾəl? dɪd jə θɪŋk ɪt wəd ɹeɪn mi ɪn? wʊdn əv bɪn ðə fɝst sɪli θɔɾ ɪn ðət hɛɾ ə jʊɹz. fəɹ sʌmwʌn u θɪŋks soʊ klɪɹli moʊst ə ðə taɪm . . . wɛl. aɪ hæv ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ dɛsk bɛɹiɾ ɪn fleɪmɪŋ ɹɪpɔɹts aɪ hæv tə ʃʌvəl θɹu ɪf jəɹ gɑnə ɡɛɾ ivən hæf ðə ɡɑɹdz jə wɑnt, bʌt wɪl əv ə ɡʊd lɔŋ tɔk tənaɪt. maɪ leɪɾi," ʃi æɾəd, mʌtʃ tu fɝmli. hɝ baʊ wɑz ɔlmoʊs mɑkəŋli fɔɹməl. ʃi stɔkt əweɪ, ən əɹ lɔŋ ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd ʃʊɾə bɪn bɹɪsəlɪŋ laɪk ən æŋɡɹi kæts teɪl.

"My . . . language," Birgitte murmured dangerously. Even her strides changed, to something like a pacing leopard. "You talk about my language? At least I always know what the words I use mean. At least I know what fits where, and what doesn't." Elayne colored, and her neck stiffened. She did know! Most of the time. Often enough, at least. "As for Yarman," Birgitte went on, her voice still soft, and still dangerous, "he's a good man, but he isn't over being goggle-eyed that he's a Warder yet. He probably jumps when Sareitha snaps her fingers. I was never goggle-eyed, and I don't jump. Is that why you saddled me with a title? Did you think it would rein me in? Wouldn't have been the first silly thought in that head of yours. For someone who thinks so clearly most of the time . . . Well. I have a writing desk buried in flaming reports I have to shovel through if you're going to get even half the Guards you want, but we'll have a good long talk tonight. My Lady," she added, much too firmly. Her bow was almost mockingly formal. She stalked away, and her long golden braid should have been bristling like an angry cat's tail.

ɪleɪn stæmpt əɹ fʊɾ ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. bɝdʒɪts taɪɾəl wɑz ə wɛl-ɝn ɹɪwɔɹd, ɝn tɛn taɪmz oʊvɝ dʒʌst sɪns ʃi bɑndəd ðə wʊmən! ən tɛn θaʊzən taɪmz oʊvɝ bɪfɔɹ ðæt. wɛl, ʃi hæd θɔɾ ə ði ʌðɝ, bʌt nɑɾ əntɪl æftɝwɝdz. mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ ɪt hæd dʌn, ɛniweɪ. wɛðɝ fɹəm lidʒ leɪɾi əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bɝdʒɪt tʃoʊz wɪtʃ kəmænz ʃi oʊbeɪd. nɑt wən ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt - nɑt wən ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ɛniweɪ - bʌɾ oʊvɝ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, ɪspɛʃli wʌt ʃi kɔld ənnɛsəsɛɹi ɹɪsks, əɹ ɪmpɹɑpɝ bɪheɪvjɝ. əz ɪf bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ kəd tɔk tə ɛniwʌn əbaʊt teɪkɪŋ ɹɪsks! ən əz fəɹ pɹɑpɝ bɪheɪvjɝ, bɝdʒɪt kɛɹzd ɪn tævɝnz! ʃi dʒɹæŋk ən ɡæmbəld, ən oʊɡəl pɹɪɾi mɛn tə but! ʃi ɛndʒɔɪd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə pɹɪɾi wʌnz ivən ɪf ʃi dɪd pɹəfɝ ðoʊz u lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn biɾən əbaʊt ðə hɛɾ ɔfən. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt wɑnə tʃeɪnʒ əɹ - ʃi ədmaɪɝd ðə wʊmən, laɪk hɝ, kaʊntəɾ əɹ ə fɹɛnd - bʌt ʃi wɪʃt ðəɹ wɝ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ʌv wɔɹɾɝ tə ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðɛɹ ɹileɪʃənʃɪp. ən mʌtʃ lɛs ə noʊɪŋ oʊldɝ sɪstɝ tə skæmpɪʃ jʌŋɡɝ.

Elayne stamped her foot in frustration. Birgitte's title was a well-earned reward, earned ten times over just since she bonded the woman! And ten thousand times over before that. Well, she had thought of the other, but not until afterwards. Much good it had done, anyway. Whether from liege lady or Aes Sedai, Birgitte chose which commands she obeyed. Not when it was important - not when she thought it was important, anyway - but over anything else, especially what she called unnecessary risks, or improper behavior. As if Birgitte Silverbow could talk to anyone about taking risks! And as for proper behavior, Birgitte caroused in taverns! She drank and gambled, and ogled pretty men to boot! She enjoyed looking at the pretty ones even if she did prefer those who looked as if they had been beaten about the head often. Elayne did not want to change her - she admired the woman, liked her, counted her a friend - but she wished there were a little more of Warder to Aes Sedai in their relationship. And much less of knowing older sister to scampish younger.

əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz stændɪŋ ðəɹ skaʊlɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ. sɝvəns hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əz ðeɪ wɛn baɪ, ən tʌk ðɛɹ hɛdz daʊn əz ɪf əfɹeɪd ʃi maɪt bi ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðɛm. smuðɪŋ əɹ feɪs, ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ə ɡæŋɡəlɪŋ, pɪmpli-feɪs bɔɪ kʌmɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔl. hi baʊd soʊ ɔkwɝdli ən soʊ dipli ðəɾ i stæɡɝɾ ən ɔlmoʊs fɛl oʊvɝ.

Abruptly she realized that she was standing there scowling at nothing. Servants hesitated as they went by, and tucked their heads down as if afraid she might be glaring at them. Smoothing her face, she gestured to a gangling, pimply-faced boy coming down the hall. He bowed so awkwardly and so deeply that he staggered and almost fell over.

"faɪn mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ ən æsk əɹ tə si mi ɪmiɾiətli ɪn maɪ əpɑɹtməns," ʃi toʊl hɪm, ðən æɾəd ɪn ə nɑɾ əŋkinli vɔɪs, "æn jə maɪt ɹɪmɛmbɝ, jəɹ supɪɹiɝz woʊn bi plizd ɪf ðeɪ faɪn jə ɡɔkɪŋ ət ðə pæləs wən jə ʃəd bi wɝkɪŋ." hɪz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd ɹɛɾ ɪz maɪnd. pɝhæps i θɔt ʃi hæd. hɪz waɪɾ aɪz flæʃt tə hɝ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ, ən i skwikt ən meɪɾ ən ivən dipɝ baʊ bɪfɔɹ dɑɹɾɪŋ əweɪ əɾ ə dɛd ɹʌn.

"Find Mistress Harfor and ask her to see me immediately in my apartments," she told him, then added in a not unkindly voice, "And you might remember, your superiors won't be pleased if they find you gawking at the Palace when you should be working." His mouth dropped open as though she had read his mind. Perhaps he thought she had. His wide eyes flashed to her Great Serpent ring, and he squeaked and made an even deeper bow before darting away at a dead run.

ʃi smaɪld ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. ɪt hæd bɪn ə waɪl stæb, bʌɾ i wɑz tu jʌŋ tə bi ɛniwʌnz spaɪ, ən tu nɝvəs nɑt tə bi ʌp tə sʌmθɪŋ i ʃəd nɑt. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd . . . hɝ smaɪl feɪɾəd. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, hi wɑz nɑt ðət mʌtʃ jʌŋɡɝ ðən ʃi.

She smiled in spite of herself. It had been a wild stab, but he was too young to be anyone's spy, and too nervous not to be up to something he should not. On the other hand . . . Her smile faded. On the other hand, he was not that much younger than she.


tʃæptɝ eɪt


CHAPTER 8

si foʊk ən kɪn


Sea Folk and Kin

ɪt wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz tə ɪleɪn wən ʃi ɪnkaʊntɝd ðə fɝs meɪd bɪfɔɹ ɹitʃɪŋ əɹ əpɑɹtməns. æftɝ ɔl, ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə seɪm pleɪs. mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ meɪɾ əɹ kɝtsi ən fɛl ɪn wɪð hɝ, kæɹiɪŋ ən ɪmbɔs lɛðɝ foʊldɝ bɪniθ wʌn ɑɹm. ʃi hæd sɝɾənli bɪn ʌp əz ɝli əz ɪleɪn ɪf nɑɾ ɝliɝ, bʌɾ əɹ skɑɹlət tɑbɝɾ əpɪɹd fɹɛʃli aɪɝnd, ðə waɪt laɪən ɑn əɹ fɹʌn əz klin ən peɪl əz nu-fɔlən snoʊ. ðə sɝvəns skɝid fæstɝ ən pɑlɪʃt hɑɹɾɝ wən ðeɪ sɔ hɝ. ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ wɑz nɑt hɑɹʃ, bʌt ʃi kɛpt əz taɪɾ ə dɪsəplən oʊvɝ ðə pæləs əz ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn ɛvɝ hæɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɡɑɹdz.

It was no surprise to Elayne when she encountered the First Maid before reaching her apartments. After all, they were both heading for the same place. Mistress Harfor made her curtsy and fell in with her, carrying an embossed leather folder beneath one arm. She had certainly been up as early as Elayne if not earlier, but her scarlet tabard appeared freshly ironed, the White Lion on her front as clean and pale as new-fallen snow. The servants scurried faster and polished harder when they saw her. Reene Harfor was not harsh, but she kept as tight a discipline over the Palace as Gareth Bryne ever had over the Guards.

"aɪ fɪɹ aɪ hævən kɑɾ ɛni spaɪz jɛt, maɪ leɪɾi," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ɹɪspɑns tə ɪleɪnz kwɛstʃən, hɝ vɔɪs pɪtʃt tə ɹitʃ ɪleɪnz ɪɹz əloʊn, "bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv aɪ ənkʌvɝɾ ə pɛɹ. ə wʊmən ən ə mæn, boʊθ teɪkən ɪn sɝvəs dʊɹɪŋ ðə læs mʌnθs ə ðə leɪt kwin jəɹ mʌðɝz ɹeɪn. ðeɪ lɛf ðə pæləs əz sun əz wɝd spɹɛd ðəɾ aɪ wɑz kwɛstʃənɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn. wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ tə ɡæðɝ ə skɹæp ə ðɛɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz, nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə kloʊk. ðæts əz ɡʊɾ əz ən ædmɪʃən, aɪd seɪ. ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ əfɹeɪɾ ə biɪŋ kɑɾ aʊɾ ɪn səm ʌðɝ mɪstʃəf," ʃi æɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli. "ðɛɹ əv bɪn keɪsəz ə pɪlfɝɪŋ, aɪm əfɹeɪd."

"I fear I haven't caught any spies yet, my Lady," she said in response to Elayne's question, her voice pitched to reach Elayne's ears alone, "but I believe I uncovered a pair. A woman and a man, both taken in service during the last months of the late Queen your mother's reign. They left the Palace as soon as word spread that I was questioning everyone. Without waiting to gather a scrap of their belongings, not so much as a cloak. That's as good as an admission, I'd say. Unless they were afraid of being caught out in some other mischief," she added reluctantly. "There have been cases of pilfering, I'm afraid."

ɪleɪn nɑɾəd θɔtfəli. nɑiən ən ɛləniə hæd bɪn mʌtʃ ɪn ðə pæləs dʊɹɪŋ ðə læs mʌnθs ə hɝ mʌðɝz ɹeɪn. mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf ɑpɝtunəɾi tə sɛɾəl aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɪn pleɪs. ðoʊz tu hæd bɪn ɪn ðə pæləs, ən mɔɹ u hæɾ əpoʊz mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənz kleɪm tə ðə θɹoʊn, æksɛptɪɾ əɹ æmnəsti wʌns ʃi hæɾ ɪt, ðən bɪtʃɹeɪd hɝ. ʃi wəd nɑt meɪk əɹ mʌðɝz mɪsteɪk. oʊ, ðəɹ mʌs bi æmnəsti wɛɹɛvɝ pɑsəbəl - ɛniθɪŋ ɛls wɑz plæntɪŋ ðə sidz fəɹ ə sɪvəl wɔɹ - bʌt ʃi plæn tə wɑtʃ ðoʊz u tʊk əɹ pɑɹɾən vɛɹi kloʊsli. laɪk ə kæt wɑtʃɪŋ ə ɹæt ðət kleɪm tə hæv ɡɪvən ʌp ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪn bɑɹnz. "ðeɪ wɝ spaɪz," ʃi sɛd. "æn ðəɹ meɪ wɛl bi ʌðɝz. nɑt dʒʌs fəɹ haʊzɪz. ðə sɪstɝz ət ðə sɪlvɝ swɑn meɪ hæv bɑɾ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɪn ðə pæləs, tu."

Elayne nodded thoughtfully. Naean and Elenia had been much in the Palace during the last months of her mother's reign. More than enough opportunity to settle eyes-and-ears in place. Those two had been in the Palace, and more who had opposed Morgase Trakand's claim to the throne, accepted her amnesty once she had it, then betrayed her. She would not make her mother's mistake. Oh, there must be amnesty wherever possible - anything else was planting the seeds for a civil war - but she planned to watch those who took her pardon very closely. Like a cat watching a rat that claimed to have given up interest in the grain barns. "They were spies," she said. "And there may well be others. Not just for Houses. The sisters at the Silver Swan may have bought eyes-and-ears in the Palace, too."

"aɪ wɪl kəntɪnju tə lʊk, maɪ leɪɾi," ɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd, ɪnklaɪnɪŋ əɹ hɛd slaɪtli. hɝ toʊn wɑz pɝfəkli ɹɪspɛkfəl; ʃi dɪd nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɹeɪz ən aɪbɹaʊ, bʌt wʌns əɡɛn ɪleɪn faʊn hɝsɛlf θɪŋkɪŋ ə titʃɪŋ əɹ ɡɹændmʌðɝ tə nɪt. ɪf oʊnli bɝdʒɪt kəd hændəl mæɾɝz ðə weɪ mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ dɪd.

"I will continue to look, my Lady," Reene replied, inclining her head slightly. Her tone was perfectly respectful; she did not so much as raise an eyebrow, but once again Elayne found herself thinking of teaching her grandmother to knit. If only Birgitte could handle matters the way Mistress Harfor did.

"æz wɛl jə ɹɪtɝn ɝli," ðə plʌmp wʊmən wɛn ɑn. "ju hæv ə bɪzi æftɝnun, aɪ fɪɹ. tə bɪɡɪn, mæstɝ nɔɹi wɪʃɪz tə spik wɪð ju. ɑn ən ɝdʒən mæɾɝ, hi sɛz." hɝ maʊθ hɑɹɾənd fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. ʃi ɔlweɪz ɹikwaɪɝd tə noʊ waɪ pipəl wɑntəd tə əpɹoʊtʃ ɪleɪn, soʊ ʃi kəd wɪnoʊ aʊt ðə tʃæf ɹæðɝ ðən lɛɾ ɪleɪn bi bɛɹiɾ ʌndɝ ɪt, bʌt ðə fɝs klɝk nɛvɝ sɔ fɪt tə ɡɪv əɹ ivən ə hɪn ə hɪz bɪznəs. ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi toʊld ɪm hɝz. boʊθ wɝ dʒɛləs ə ðɛɹ fifs. wɪð ə ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛd, ʃi dɪsmɪs hælwɪn nɔɹi. "æftɝ hɪm, ə dɛləɡeɪʃən ə təbæk mɝtʃəns əz pətɪʃən tə si ju, ən ənʌðɝ ʌv wivɝz, boʊθ æskɪŋ ɹimɪʃən ə tæksəz kəz taɪmz ɑɹ hɑɹd. maɪ leɪɾi dʌz nɑt nid maɪ ædvaɪs tə tɛl əm taɪmz ɑɹ hɑɹd fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn. ə ɡɹup ə fɔɹən mɝtʃəns ɪz weɪɾɪŋ əz wɛl; ɹæðɝ ə lɑɹdʒ ɡɹup. mɪɹli tə wɪʃ jə wɛl ɪn ə weɪ ðət dʌzn ɛnkʌmbɝ ðɛm, ʌv kɔɹs - ðeɪ wɪʃ tə bi ɑn jəɹ ɡʊd saɪd wɪθaʊɾ æntæɡənaɪzɪŋ ɛniwʌn ɛls - bʌɾ aɪ sədʒɛs miɾɪŋ əm bɹifli." ʃi leɪd plʌmp fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ðə foʊldɝ ʌndɝ əɹ ɑɹm. "ɔlsoʊ, ðə pæləs əkaʊns ɹikwaɪɝ jəɹ sɪɡnətʃɝ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kən ɡoʊ tə mæstɝ nɔɹi. ðəl meɪk ɪm saɪ, aɪ fɪɹ. aɪ hɑɹdli ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪɾ ɪn wɪntɝ, bʌt mʌtʃ ə ðə flaʊɝ ɪz fʊl ʌv wivəlz ən mɔθs, ən hæf ðə kjʊɹd hæmz əv tɝnd, əz wɛl əz moʊst ə ðə smoʊk fɪʃ." kwaɪt ɹɪspɛkfəl. ən kwaɪt fɝm.

"As well you returned early," the plump woman went on. "You have a busy afternoon, I fear. To begin, Master Norry wishes to speak with you. On an urgent matter, he says." Her mouth hardened for an instant. She always required to know why people wanted to approach Elayne, so she could winnow out the chaff rather than let Elayne be buried under it, but the First Clerk never saw fit to give her even a hint of his business. Any more than she told him hers. Both were jealous of their fiefs. With a shake of her head, she dismissed Halwin Norry. "After him, a delegation of tabac merchants has petitioned to see you, and another of weavers, both asking remission of taxes because times are hard. My Lady does not need my advice to tell them times are hard for everyone. A group of foreign merchants is waiting as well; rather a large group. Merely to wish you well in a way that doesn't encumber them, of course - they wish to be on your good side without antagonizing anyone else - but I suggest meeting them briefly." She laid plump fingers on the folder under her arm. "Also, the Palace accounts require your signature before they can go to Master Norry. They'll make him sigh, I fear. I hardly expected it in winter, but much of the flour is full of weevils and moths, and half the cured hams have turned, as well as most of the smoked fish." Quite respectful. And quite firm.

aɪ ɹul ændɝ, ɪleɪnz mʌðɝ hæd toʊld əɹ wʌns, ɪn pɹaɪvət, bʌɾ ət taɪmz aɪ θɪŋk ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ ɹulz mi. hɝ mʌðɝ hæd bɪn læfɪŋ, bʌt ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi mɛn ɪt, tu. kʌm tə θɪŋk ɑn ɪt, mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ əz ə wɔɹɾɝ wəd bi tɛn taɪmz wɝs ðən bɝdʒɪt.

I rule Andor, Elayne's mother had told her once, in private, but at times I think Reene Harfor rules me. Her mother had been laughing, but she sounded as if she meant it, too. Come to think on it, Mistress Harfor as a Warder would be ten times worse than Birgitte.

ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt wɑnə mit wɪð hælwɪn nɔɹi əɹ wɪð mɝtʃəns. ʃi wɑntəd tə sɪt kwaɪətli ən θɪŋk əbaʊt spaɪz, ən u hæd nɑiən ən ɛləniə, ən haʊ ʃi kəd kaʊntɝ ðɛm. ɪksɛpt . . . mæstɝ nɔɹi hæd kɛp keɪɛmlɪn əlaɪv sɪns əɹ mʌðɝ daɪd. ɪn tʃɹuθ, baɪ wʌt ʃi kəd si ɪn ði oʊld əkaʊns, hi hæd dʌn soʊ ɔlmoʊs fɹəm ðə deɪ ʃi hæd fɔlən ɪndə ɹɑvɪnz klʌtʃəz, ðoʊ nɔɹi wɑz veɪɡ əbaʊt ðæt. hi simd əfɛndəd baɪ ði ɪvɛns ə ðoʊz deɪz, ɪn ə ɹæðɝ dʌsti weɪ. ʃi kəd nɑt sɪmpli ʃʌfəl ɪm ɔf. bɪsaɪdz, hi nɛvɝ ɪkspɹɛst ɝdʒənsi oʊvɝ ɛniθɪŋ. ən ðə ɡʊdwɪl ə mɝtʃəns wɑz nɑt tə bi snɪɹɾ æt, ivən fɔɹən mɝtʃəns. ən ði əkaʊns dɪd nid tə bi saɪnd. wivəlz ən mɔθs? ən hæmz spɔɪlɪŋ? ɪn wɪntɝ? ðət wɑz dɪsaɪɾədli ɑd.

Elayne did not want to meet with Halwin Norry or with merchants. She wanted to sit quietly and think about spies, and who had Naean and Elenia, and how she could counter them. Except . . . Master Norry had kept Caemlyn alive since her mother died. In truth, by what she could see in the old accounts, he had done so almost from the day she had fallen into Rahvin's clutches, though Norry was vague about that. He seemed offended by the events of those days, in a rather dusty way. She could not simply shuffle him off. Besides, he never expressed urgency over anything. And the goodwill of merchants was not to be sneered at, even foreign merchants. And the accounts did need to be signed. Weevils and moths? And hams spoiling? In winter? That was decidedly odd.

ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt ðə tɔl, laɪən-kɑɹv dɔɹz ə hɝ əpɑɹtməns. smɔlɝ laɪənz ðən ɑn ðə dɔɹz tə ðoʊz əɹ mʌðɝ hæd juzd, ən smɔlɝ əpɑɹtməns, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ kənsɪɾɝd juzɪŋ ðə kwinz tʃeɪmbɝz. ðət wʊɾə bɪn əz pɹɪzʌmptʃəwəs əz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn bɪfɔɹ əɹ ɹaɪt tə ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn wɑz æknɑlɪdʒd.

They had reached the tall, lion-carved doors of her apartments. Smaller lions than on the doors to those her mother had used, and smaller apartments, but she never considered using the Queen's chambers. That would have been as presumptuous as sitting on the Lion Throne before her right to the Rose Crown was acknowledged.

wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə foʊldɝ.

With a sigh, she reached for the folder.

daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ ʃi kɑt saɪɾ ə soʊlən mɔɹɡəlɪn ən kɛɹeɪl sɝtɑvni, hɝiɪŋ əlɔŋ əz kwɪkli əz ðeɪ kəd wɪθaʊɾ əpɪɹɪŋ tə ɹʌn. flæʃɪz ə sɪlvɝ ʃoʊɾ ət ðə nɛk ə ðə sʌlən wʊmən skwiz bɪtwin ðɛm, ðoʊ ðə kɪnswɪmən hæd dʒɹeɪpt ə lɔŋ ɡɹin skɑɹf ɝaʊn əɹ tə haɪd ði æɾəmz liʃ. ðət wəd kɑz tɔk, ən ɪt wəd bi sin sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. bɛɾɝ ɪf ʃi ən ði ʌðɝz dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bi muvd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə əvɔɪɾ ɪt. bɪtwin kɪnswɪmən ən si foʊk wɪndfɪndɝz, ɹumz ɪn ðə sɝvəns' kɔɹɾɝz hæd bɪn niɾəd tə hoʊl ði oʊvɝfloʊ ivən wɪð tu ən θɹi tə ə bɛd, ən ðə pæləs hæd beɪsməns fəɹ stɔɹədʒ, nɑt dʌnʒənz. haʊ dɪd ɹænd ɔlweɪz mænədʒ tə də ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋ? biɪŋ meɪl dʒʌst wɑz nɑɾ ɪkskjuz ɪnʌf. soʊlən ən kɛɹeɪl vænɪʃt ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ wɪð ðɛɹ pɹɪznɝ.

Down the hallway she caught sight of Solain Morgeillin and Keraille Surtovni, hurrying along as quickly as they could without appearing to run. Flashes of silver showed at the neck of the sullen woman squeezed between them, though the Kinswomen had draped a long green scarf around her to hide the a'dam's leash. That would cause talk, and it would be seen sooner or later. Better if she and the others did not have to be moved, but there was no way to avoid it. Between Kinswomen and Sea Folk Windfinders, rooms in the servants' quarters had been needed to hold the overflow even with two and three to a bed, and the Palace had basements for storage, not dungeons. How did Rand always manage to do the wrong thing? Being male just was not excuse enough. Solain and Keraille vanished around a corner with their prisoner.

"mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli æsk tə si jə ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, maɪ leɪɾi." ɹɪnz vɔɪs wɑz kɛɹfəli nutʃɹəl. ʃi hæd bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ ðə kɪnswɪmən, tu, ən ə tʃɹeɪs ə fɹaʊn ɹɪmeɪn ɑn əɹ bɹɔd feɪs. ðə si foʊk wɝ ɑd, jɛt ʃi kəd fɪɾ ə klæn weɪvməstʃɹəs ən əɹ ɑntʊɹɑʒ ɪndə hɝ vju ʌv ðə wɝld ivən ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ pɹɪsaɪsli wʌɾ ə klæn weɪvməstʃɹəs wɑz. ə haɪ-ɹæŋkɪŋ fɔɹənɝ wɑz ə haɪ-ɹæŋkɪŋ fɔɹənɝ, ən fɔɹənɝz wɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə bi ɑd. bʌt ʃi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ɪleɪn hæd ɡɪvən ʃɛltɝ tə nɪɹli ə hʌnʒɹəd ən fɪfti mɝtʃəns ən kɹæftswɪmən. niðɝ "ðə kɪn" nɔɹ "ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl" wʊɾə mɛn ɛniθɪŋ tə hɝ hæd ʃi hɝd ðɛm, ən ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðə pəkjuljɝ tɛntʃənz bɪtwin ðoʊz wɪmən ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɔɹ dɪd ʃi ʌndɝstæn ðə wɪmən ði æʃəmən hæd bɹɔt, pɹɪznɝz ɪn tʃɹuθ ɪf nɑt kənfaɪn ɪn sɛlz, kɛp sɪkluɾɪd ən nɛvɝ əlaʊd tə spik tə ɛniwʌn bʌt ðə wɪmən u ɛskɔɹɾɪd əm θɹu ðə hɔlz. ðə fɝs meɪd nu wən nɑt tə æsk kwɛstʃənz, jɛt ʃi dɪslaɪk nɑɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪn ðə pæləs. hɝ vɔɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ baɪ ə hɛɹ. "ʃi sɛd ʃi hæd ɡʊd nuz fəɹ ju. ʌv ə sɔɹt, ʃi sɛd. ʃi dɪd nɑt pətɪʃən fəɹ ən ɑɾiəns, ðoʊ."

"Mistress Corly asked to see you this morning, my Lady." Reene's voice was carefully neutral. She had been watching the Kinswomen, too, and a trace of frown remained on her broad face. The Sea Folk were odd, yet she could fit a clan Wavemistress and her entourage into her view of the world even if she did not know precisely what a clan Wavemistress was. A high-ranking foreigner was a high-ranking foreigner, and foreigners were expected to be odd. But she could not understand why Elayne had given shelter to nearly a hundred and fifty merchants and craftswomen. Neither "the Kin" nor "the Knitting Circle" would have meant anything to her had she heard them, and she did not understand the peculiar tensions between those women and the Aes Sedai. Nor did she understand the women the Asha'man had brought, prisoners in truth if not confined in cells, kept secluded and never allowed to speak to anyone but the women who escorted them through the halls. The First Maid knew when not to ask questions, yet she disliked not understanding what was going on in the Palace. Her voice did not change by a hair. "She said she had good news for you. Of a sort, she said. She did not petition for an audience, though."

ɡʊd nuz ʌv ɛni sɔɹt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ɡoʊɪŋ oʊvɝ ði əkaʊns, ən ʃi hæd hoʊps ʌv wʌt ðɪs nuz maɪt bi. ɹilɪŋkwɪʃɪŋ ðə foʊldɝ ɪn ðə fɝs meɪdz hænz, ʃi sɛd, "liv ðəɾ ɑn maɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl, pliz. ən tɛl mæstɝ nɔɹi ðəɾ əl si hɪm ʃɔɹtli."

Good news of any sort was better than going over the accounts, and she had hopes of what this news might be. Relinquishing the folder in the First Maid's hands, she said, "Leave that on my writing table, please. And tell Master Norry that I will see him shortly."

sɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ðə kɪn hæd kʌm fɹəm wɪð ðɛɹ pɹɪznɝ, ʃi wɔkt kwɪkli ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝ skɝts. ɡʊd nuz əɹ noʊ ɡʊd nuz, nɔɹi ən ðə mɝtʃəns dɪɾ əv tə bi sin, ən ðə mɝtʃəns, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ði əkaʊns ɡɔn oʊvɝ ən saɪnd. ɹulɪŋ mɛn ɛnləs wiks ə dʒɹʌdʒɝi ən ɹɛɹ aʊɝz ə duɪŋ wʌt jə wɑntəd. vɛɹi ɹɛɹ aʊɝz. bɝdʒɪt leɪ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd, ə taɪt bɔl ə ðə pjʊɹəst ɪɹɪteɪʃən ən fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. noʊ daʊt, ʃi wɑz dɪɡɪŋ θɹu ðət teɪbəl paɪld wɪð peɪpɝz. wɛl, hɝ oʊn ɹilækseɪʃən ðɪs deɪ wəd bi wʌtɛvɝ taɪm wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd tə tʃeɪnʒ aʊɾ ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ kloʊðz ən snætʃ ə heɪsti mil. soʊ ʃi wɔk vɛɹi kwɪkli, lɔst ɪn θɔɾ ən hɑɹdli siɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. wʌd nɔɹi faɪn ɝdʒənt? ʃʊɹli nɑt stʃɹit ɹɪpɛɹz. haʊ mɛni spaɪz? smɔl tʃæns mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ wəd kætʃ əm ɔl.

Setting out in the direction the Kin had come from with their prisoner, she walked quickly in spite of her skirts. Good news or no good news, Norry and the merchants did have to be seen, and the merchants, not to mention the accounts gone over and signed. Ruling meant endless weeks of drudgery and rare hours of doing what you wanted. Very rare hours. Birgitte lay in the back of her head, a tight ball of the purest irritation and frustration. No doubt, she was digging through that table piled with papers. Well, her own relaxation this day would be whatever time was required to change out of riding clothes and snatch a hasty meal. So she walked very quickly, lost in thought and hardly seeing what was in front of her. What did Norry find urgent? Surely not street repairs. How many spies? Small chance Mistress Harfor would catch them all.

əz ʃi ɹaʊndəɾ ə kɔɹnɝ, oʊnli ðə sʌɾən əwɛɹnəs ʌv ʌðɝ wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl kɛpt əɹ fɹəm ɹʌnɪŋ hɛdlɔŋ ɪndə vændin kʌmɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ. ðeɪ ɹikɔɪl fɹəm wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn stɑɹɾəlmənt. əpɛɹənli ðə ɡɹin hæd bɪn dip ɪn θɔt, tu. hɝ tu kəmpænjənz ɹeɪzd ɪleɪnz aɪbɹaʊz.

As she rounded a corner, only the sudden awareness of other women who could channel kept her from running headlong into Vandene coming the other way. They recoiled from one another in startlement. Apparently the Green had been deep in thought, too. Her two companions raised Elayne's eyebrows.

kɝstʃən ən zɛɹjə wɔɹ pleɪn waɪɾ ən steɪɾ ə kɛɹfəl peɪs bɪhaɪn vændin, hænz foʊldəd mikli ət ðɛɹ weɪsts. ðɛɹ hɛɹ wɑz baʊn bæk sɪmpli, ən ðeɪ wɔɹ noʊ dʒuəlɹi. dʒuəlɹi wɑz stʃɹɔŋli dɪskɝədʒd əmʌŋ nɑvəsɪz. ðeɪ hæd bɪn kɪnswɪmən - kɝstʃən hæɾ æktʃəli  bɪn ɪn ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl ɪtsɛlf - bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɹʌnəweɪz fɹəm ðə taʊɝ, ən ðəɹ wɝ pɹiskɹaɪbd weɪz ə dilɪŋ wɪð ðoʊz, sɛɾ ɪn taʊɝ lɔ, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ lɔŋ ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɡɔn. ɹɪtɝn ɹʌnəweɪz wɝ ɹikwaɪɝd tə bi æbsəlutli pɝfəkt ɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðeɪ dɪd, ðə vɛɹi mɑɾəl ʌv ən ɪnɪʃiət stʃɹaɪvɪŋ fəɹ ðə ʃɔl, ən smɔl slɪps ðət maɪt bi oʊvɝlʊkt ɪn ʌðɝz wɝ pʌnɪʃt swɪfli ən stʃɹɔŋli. ðeɪ feɪst ə mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ pʌnɪʃmənt wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə taʊɝ, ɪn ədɪʃən, ə pʌblɪk bɝtʃɪŋ, ən ivən ðən ðeɪ wəd bi hɛl tə ðɛɹ stʃɹeɪɾ ən peɪnfəl pæθ fəɹ ət list ə jɪɹ. ə ɹɪtɝn ɹʌnəweɪ wɑz meɪd tə noʊ ɪn əɹ hɑɹt ðət ʃi nɛvɝ, ɛvɝ wɑntəd tə ɹʌn əweɪ əɡɛn. nɑɾ ɛvɝ! hæf-tʃɹeɪnd wɪmən wɝ dʒʌs tu deɪnʒɝəs tə bi lɛf lus.

Kirstian and Zarya wore plain white and stayed a careful pace behind Vandene, hands folded meekly at their waists. Their hair was bound back simply, and they wore no jewelry. Jewelry was strongly discouraged among novices. They had been Kinswomen - Kirstian had actually been in the Knitting Circle itself - but they were runaways from the Tower, and there were prescribed ways of dealing with those, set in Tower law, no matter how long they had been gone. Returned runaways were required to be absolutely perfect in everything they did, the very model of an initiate striving for the shawl, and small slips that might be overlooked in others were punished swiftly and strongly. They faced a much stronger punishment when they reached the Tower, in addition, a public birching, and even then they would be held to their straight and painful path for at least a year. A returned runaway was made to know in her heart that she never, ever wanted to run away again. Not ever! Half-trained women were just too dangerous to be left loose.

ɪleɪn hæd tʃɹaɪd tə bi liniənt, ðə fju taɪmz ʃi wɑz wɪð əm - ðə kɪnswɪmən wɝ nɑt ɹɪli hæf-tʃɹeɪnd; ðeɪ hæɾ əz mʌtʃ ɪkspɪɹiəns wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ əz ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪf nɑt ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ - ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd, oʊnli tə dɪskʌvɝ ðəɾ ivən moʊst ə ði ʌðɝ kɪnswɪmən dɪsəpɹuvd. ɡɪvən ənʌðɝ tʃæns tə bɪkʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ - ðoʊz u kʊd, ət list - ðeɪ ɛmbɹeɪst ɔl ə ðə taʊɝz lɔz ən kʌstəmz wɪð ʃɑkɪŋ fɝvɝ. ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd ət ðə səbduɾ iɡɝnəs ɪn ðə tu wɪmənz aɪz əɹ ðə weɪ ðeɪ sim tə ɹeɪɾiət ə pɹɑməs ʌv ɡʊd bɪheɪvjɝ - ðeɪ wɑntəd ðət tʃæns əz bædli əz ɛniwʌn - dʒʌs ðət ðeɪ wɝ wɪð vændin əɾ ɔl. əntɪl naʊ, ʃi hæɾ ɪɡnɔɹd ðə pɛɹ ɪntaɪɝli.

Elayne had tried to be lenient, the few times she was with them - the Kinswomen were not really half-trained; they had as much experience with the One Power as any Aes Sedai, if not the training - she had tried, only to discover that even most of the other Kinswomen disapproved. Given another chance to become Aes Sedai - those who could, at least - they embraced all of the Tower's laws and customs with shocking fervor. She was not surprised at the subdued eagerness in the two women's eyes or the way they seemed to radiate a promise of good behavior - they wanted that chance as badly as anyone - just that they were with Vandene at all. Until now, she had ignored the pair entirely.

"aɪ wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ju, ɪleɪn," vændin sɛd wɪθaʊt pɹiæmbəl. hɝ waɪt hɛɹ, ɡæðɝɾ ət ðə neɪp ə nɛk wɪð ə dɑɹk ɡɹin ɹɪbən, hæɾ ɔlweɪz ɡɪvən əɹ ən ɛɹ ʌv eɪdʒ dɪspaɪɾ əɹ smuð tʃiks. hɝ sɪstɝz mɝɾɝ hæɾ æɾəd ɡɹɪmnəs, soʊkt ɪɾ ɪndə ðə boʊn, soʊ ʃi sim laɪk ən ɪmplækəbəl dʒʌdʒ. ʃi hæd bɪn slɛndɝ; naʊ ʃi wɑz boʊni, hɝ tʃiks hɑloʊ. "ðiz tʃɪlʒɹən - " ʃi kʌɾ ɔf, ə feɪnt ɡɹɪmɑs θɪnɪŋ əɹ maʊθ.

"I was looking for you, Elayne," Vandene said without preamble. Her white hair, gathered at the nape of neck with a dark green ribbon, had always given her an air of age despite her smooth cheeks. Her sister's murder had added grimness, soaked it into the bone, so she seemed like an implacable judge. She had been slender; now she was bony, her cheeks hollow. "These children - " She cut off, a faint grimace thinning her mouth.

ɪt wɑz ðə pɹɑpɝ weɪ tə ɹəfɝ tə nɑvəsɪz - ðə wɝs moʊmən fəɹ ə wʊmən u wɛn tə ðə taʊɝ wɑz nɑt wən ʃi dɪskʌvɝd ʃi wəd nɑt bi kənsɪɾɝd fʊli ədʌlt əntɪl ʃi ɝn ðə ʃɔl, bʌt wən ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi wɔɹ nɑvəs waɪt, ʃi ɹɪli wɑz ə tʃaɪld, wʌn u maɪɾ ɪnʒɝ hɝsɛlf əɹ ʌðɝz θɹu ɪɡnɝəns ən blʌndɝɪŋ - ðə pɹɑpɝ weɪ, jɛɾ ivən tə vændin ɪt mʌst əv sim stʃɹeɪnʒ hɪɹ. moʊs nɑvəsɪz keɪm tə ðə taʊɝ ət fɪftin əɹ sɪkstin, ən əntɪl ɹisənli, nʌn oʊvɝ eɪtin, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə hændfʊl u hæd mænədʒ tə kæɹi ɔf ə laɪ. ənlaɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə kɪn juzd eɪdʒ tə sɛt ðɛɹ haɪɝɑɹki, ən zɛɹjə - ʃi hæd bɪn kɔlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɡæɹiniə ɹoʊsɔɪnd, bʌt zɛɹjə ælkeɪis wɑz ðə neɪm ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk, ən zɛɹjə ælkeɪis ʃi wəɾ ænsɝ tə - zɛɹjə, wɪð əɹ stʃɹɔŋ noʊz ən waɪd maʊθ, wɑz mɔɹ ðən naɪnti jɪɹz oʊld, ðoʊ ʃi əpɪɹd wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə hɝ mɪɾəl jɪɹz. niðɝ wʊmən hæd ði eɪɡləsnəs dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ jɪɹz ə juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, ən pɹɪɾi, blæk-aɪd kɝstʃən lʊkt ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ, pɝhæps θɝɾi əɹ soʊ. ʃi wɑz oʊvɝ θɹi hʌnʒɹəd, oʊldɝ ðən vændin hɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ. kɝstʃən hæd bɪn ɡɔn fɹəm ðə taʊɝ soʊ lɔŋ ðət ʃi hæd fɛl seɪf juzɪŋ əɹ tʃɹu neɪm əɡɛn, əɹ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ðə juʒəwəl ɹʌn ə nɑvəsɪz.

It was the proper way to refer to novices - the worst moment for a woman who went to the Tower was not when she discovered she would not be considered fully adult until she earned the shawl, but when she realized that so long as she wore novice white, she really was a child, one who might injure herself or others through ignorance and blundering - the proper way, yet even to Vandene it must have seemed strange here. Most novices came to the Tower at fifteen or sixteen, and until recently, none over eighteen, except for a handful who had managed to carry off a lie. Unlike Aes Sedai, the Kin used age to set their hierarchy, and Zarya - she had been calling herself Garenia Rosoinde, but Zarya Alkaese was the name in the novice book, and Zarya Alkaese she would answer to - Zarya, with her strong nose and wide mouth, was more than ninety years old, though she appeared well short of her middle years. Neither woman had the agelessness despite their years of using the Power, and pretty, black-eyed Kirstian looked a little older, perhaps thirty or so. She was over three hundred, older than Vandene herself, Elayne was sure. Kirstian had been gone from the Tower so long that she had felt safe using her true name again, or part of it. Not at all the usual run of novices.

"ðiz tʃɪlʒɹən," vændin wɛn ɑn mɔɹ fɝmli, ə dip fɹaʊn kɹisɪŋ əɹ fɔɹhɛd, "hæv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪvɛns ɪn hɑɹlən bɹɪdʒ." ðət wɑz wɛɹ əɹ sɪstɝ hæd bɪn mɝɾɝd. ən ɪspæn ʃɛfɹ, bʌɾ əz fɑɹ əz vændin wɑz kənsɝnd, ðə dɛθ ʌv ə blæk sɪstɝ kaʊntəd wɪð ðə dɛθ ʌv ə ɹæbɪd dɔɡ. "ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ɹæðɝ ðən kipɪŋ saɪlən əbaʊt ðɛɹ kənkluʒənz, ðeɪ keɪm tə mi. ət lis ðeɪ hævən blæðɝd wɛɹ ɛniwʌn kəd hɪɹ."

"These children," Vandene went on more firmly, a deep frown creasing her forehead, "have been thinking over events in Harlon Bridge." That was where her sister had been murdered. And Ispan Shefar, but as far as Vandene was concerned, the death of a Black sister counted with the death of a rabid dog. "Unfortunately, rather than keeping silent about their conclusions, they came to me. At least they haven't blathered where anyone could hear."

ɪleɪn fɹaʊn slaɪtli. ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə pæləs nu ʌv ðə mɝɾɝz baɪ ðɪs taɪm. "aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd," ʃi sɛd sloʊli. ən kɛɹfəli. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɡɪv ðə pɛɹ hɪns ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑt ɹɪli dʌɡ ʌp peɪnsteɪkɪŋli hɪɾən sikɹəts. "hæv ðeɪ wɝkt aʊt ðəɾ ɪt wɑz dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹɑbɝi?" ðət wɑz ðə teɪl ðeɪ hæd pʊɾ əbaʊt, tu wɪmən ɪn ən aɪsəleɪɾəd haʊs, kɪl fəɹ ðɛɹ dʒuəlɹi. oʊnli ʃi, vændin, nɪneɪiv ən læn nu ɛni ɹil mɛʒɝ ə ðə tʃɹuθ. əntɪl naʊ ɛniweɪ, ɪt simd. ðeɪ mʌst əv ɡɑɾən ðət fɑɹ, əɹ vændin wʊɾə sɛn əm əweɪ wɪð ə fli ɪn ðɛɹ kəlɛktɪv ɪɹ.

Elayne frowned slightly. Everyone in the Palace knew of the murders by this time. "I don't understand," she said slowly. And carefully. She did not want to give the pair hints if they had not really dug up painstakingly hidden secrets. "Have they worked out that it was Darkfriends instead of robbery?" That was the tale they had put about, two women in an isolated house, killed for their jewelry. Only she, Vandene, Nynaeve and Lan knew any real measure of the truth. Until now anyway, it seemed. They must have gotten that far, or Vandene would have sent them away with a flea in their collective ear.

"wɝs." vændin lʊkt ɝaʊnd, ðən muvd ə fju peɪsɪz tə ðə sɛntɝ ʌv wɛɹ ðə hɔlweɪz kɹɔst, fɔɹsɪŋ ɪleɪn tə fɑloʊ. fɹəm ðət væntədʒ, ðeɪ kəd si ɛniwʌn kʌmɪŋ əlɔŋ iðɝ kɔɹəɾɝ. ðə nɑvəsɪz ətɛntɪvli meɪnteɪn ðɛɹ pəzɪʃənz ɹɛləɾɪv tə ðə ɡɹin. meɪbi ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɑɾən ðət fli, fəɹ ɔl ðɛɹ iɡɝnəs. ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv sɝvəns ɪn saɪt, bʌt noʊ wʌn əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ, noʊ wʌn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ. vændin loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs ɛniweɪ. kwaɪətnəs dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə mæsk əɹ dɪsplɛʒɝ. "ðeɪ ɹizən aʊt ðət ðə kɪlɝ mʌs bi mɛɝɪlɪl, sɝaɪðə əɹ kɛɝin. ɡʊd θɪŋkɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ pɑɹt, aɪ səpoʊz, bʌt ðeɪ ʃʊdn əv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. ðeɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn kɛpt ət ðɛɹ lɛsənz soʊ hɑɹd ðeɪ hæd noʊ taɪm tə θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls." dɪspaɪt ðə skaʊl ʃi dɝɛktəɾ ət kɝstʃən ən zɛɹjə, ðə tu oʊvɝɪdʒ nɑvəsɪz bimd wɪð dɪlaɪt. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə kɑmpləmən bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə skoʊldɪŋ, ən vændin wɑz spɛɹɪŋ ə kɑmpləməns.

"Worse." Vandene looked around, then moved a few paces to the center of where the hallways crossed, forcing Elayne to follow. From that vantage, they could see anyone coming along either corridor. The novices attentively maintained their positions relative to the Green. Maybe they had already gotten that flea, for all their eagerness. There were plenty of servants in sight, but no one approaching, no one close enough to overhear. Vandene lowered her voice anyway. Quietness did nothing to mask her displeasure. "They reasoned out that the killer must be Merilille, Sareitha or Careane. Good thinking on their part, I suppose, but they shouldn't have been thinking about it in the first place. They should have been kept at their lessons so hard they had no time to think of anything else." Despite the scowl she directed at Kirstian and Zarya, the two overaged novices beamed with delight. There had been a compliment buried in the scolding, and Vandene was sparing of compliments.

ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt pɔɪn aʊt ðət ðə pɛɹ maɪɾ əv bɪn kɛpt ə lɪɾəl bɪziɝ ɪf vændin hæd bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə teɪk pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ lɛsənz. ɪleɪn hɝsɛlf ən nɪneɪiv hæd tu mɛni ʌðɝ duɾiz, ən sɪns ðeɪ hæɾ æɾəd deɪli lɛsənz fəɹ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz - ɛvɹiwʌn bʌt nɪneɪiv hæd, ɛniweɪ - noʊ wʌn əɾ ɔl hæd ði ɛnɝdʒi fəɹ mʌtʃ taɪm wɪð ðə tu nɑvəsɪz. titʃɪŋ ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɪmən wɑz laɪk biɪŋ fɛd θɹu ə lɔnʒɹɪsəz mæŋɡəl! ðeɪ hæd lɪɾəl ɹɪspɛk fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən ivən lɛs fəɹ ɹæŋk əmʌŋ "ðə ʃɔɹbaʊnd."

Elayne did not point out that the pair might have been kept a little busier if Vandene had been willing to take part of their lessons. Elayne herself and Nynaeve had too many other duties, and since they had added daily lessons for the Windfinders - everyone but Nynaeve had, anyway - no one at all had the energy for much time with the two novices. Teaching the Atha'an Miere women was like being fed through a laundress's mangle! They had little respect for Aes Sedai. And even less for rank among "the shorebound."

"æt lis ðeɪ dɪdn spik tə ɛniwʌn ɛls," ʃi mɝmɝd. ə blɛsɪŋ, ɪf smɔl.

"At least they didn't speak to anyone else," she murmured. A blessing, if small.

ɪt hæd bɪn ɑbviəs wən ðeɪ faʊn æɾɪliz ən ɪspæn ðət ðɛɹ kɪlɝ mʌs bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ hæd bɪn pɛɹəlaɪzd wɪð kɹɪmsɑnθɝn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ kɪld, ən ɪt wɑz ɔl bʌɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl ðət ðə wɪndfɪndɝz nu ʌv ən ɝb oʊnli faʊn fɑɹ fɹəm ðə si. ən ivən vændin wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə kɪn nʌmbɝd noʊ dɑɹkfɹɛnz əmʌŋ ðɛm. ɪspæn hæd ɹʌn əweɪ hɝsɛlf əz ə nɑvəs, ən ivən ɡɑɾən əz fɑɹ əz ɛbu dɑɹ, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn ɹəteɪkən bɪfɔɹ ðə kɪn ɹɪvil ðɛmsɛlvz tə hɝ, ðət ðeɪ wɝ mɔɹ ðən ə fju wɪmən pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ u hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ɑn ə wɪm tə hɛlp hɝ. ʌndɝ kwɛstʃənɪŋ baɪ vændin ən æɾɪliz, ʃi hæd ɹɪvild ə ɡɹeɪt dil. sʌmhaʊ ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə ɹɪzɪst seɪɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə blæk ədʒɑ ɪtsɛlf ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪkspoʊzɪŋ oʊl skimz lɔŋ kæɹiɾ aʊt, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn iɡɝ tə tɛl ɛniθɪŋ ɛls wʌns vændin ən əɹ sɪstɝ wɝ dʌn wɪð hɝ. ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn dʒɛntəl, ən ðeɪ hæd plʌmd əɹ dɛpθs, jɛt ʃi nu noʊ mɔɹ ə ðə kɪn ðən ɛni ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛni dɑɹkfɹɛnz əmʌŋ ðə kɪn, ðə blæk ədʒɑ wʊɾə noʊn ɛvɹiθɪŋ. soʊ əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ kəd wɪʃ ʌðɝwaɪz, ðə kɪlɝ wɑz wʌn ə θɹi wɪmən ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl ɡɹoʊn tə laɪk. eɪ blæk sɪstɝ ɪn ðɛɹ mɪdst. əɹ mɔɹ ðən wʌn. ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl bɪn fɹæntɪk tə kip ðət nɑlədʒ sikɹət, ət list əntɪl ðə mɝɾɝɝ wɑz ənkʌvɝd. ðə nuz wəd θɹoʊ ði ɪntaɪɝ pæləs ɪndə ə pænɪk, meɪbi ði ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi. laɪt, hu ɛls hæd bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪvɛns ɪn hɑɹlən bɹɪdʒ? wəd ðeɪv ðə sɛns tə hoʊl saɪləns?

It had been obvious when they found Adeleas and Ispan that their killer must be an Aes Sedai. They had been paralyzed with crimsonthorn before they were killed, and it was all but impossible that the Windfinders knew of an herb only found far from the sea. And even Vandene was sure the Kin numbered no Darkfriends among them. Ispan had run away herself as a novice, and even gotten as far as Ebou Dar, but she had been retaken before the Kin revealed themselves to her, that they were more than a few women put out of the Tower who had decided on a whim to help her. Under questioning by Vandene and Adeleas, she had revealed a great deal. Somehow she had managed to resist saying anything about the Black Ajah itself except for exposing old schemes long carried out, but she had been eager to tell anything else once Vandene and her sister were done with her. They had not been gentle, and they had plumbed her depths, yet she knew no more of the Kin than any other Aes Sedai. If there were any Darkfriends among the Kin, the Black Ajah would have known everything. So as much as they could wish otherwise, the killer was one of three women they had all grown to like. A Black sister in their midst. Or more than one. They had all been frantic to keep that knowledge secret, at least until the murderer was uncovered. The news would throw the entire Palace into a panic, maybe the entire city. Light, who else had been thinking over events in Harlon Bridge? Would they have the sense to hold silence?

"sʌmwʌn hæd tə teɪk əm ɪn hænd," vændin sɛd fɝmli, "tə kip əm aʊɾ ə fɝðɝ mɪstʃəf. ðeɪ nid ɹɛɡjəlɝ lɛsənz ən hɑɹd wɝk," ðə pɛɹz bimɪŋ feɪsəz hæd teɪkən ɑn ə hɪn ə smʌɡnəs, bʌɾ ɪt feɪɾəd ə lɪɾəl ət ðæt. ðɛɹ lɛsənz hæd bɪn fju, bʌt vɛɹi hɑɹd, ðə dɪsəplən vɛɹi stʃɹɪkt. "ðæt minz ju, ɪleɪn, əɹ nɪneɪiv."

"Someone had to take them in hand," Vandene said firmly, "to keep them out of further mischief. They need regular lessons and hard work," The pair's beaming faces had taken on a hint of smugness, but it faded a little at that. Their lessons had been few, but very hard, the discipline very strict. "That means you, Elayne, or Nynaeve."

ɪleɪn klɪkt əɹ tʌŋ ɪn ɛksæspɝeɪʃən. "vændin, aɪ hɑɹdli hæv ə moʊmən fəɹ maɪsɛlf tə θɪŋk. aɪm ɔlɹɛɾi stʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə ɡɪv əm ən aʊɝ naʊ ən ðɛn. ɪɾəl əv tə bi nɪneɪiv."

Elayne clicked her tongue in exasperation. "Vandene, I hardly have a moment for myself to think. I'm already straining to give them an hour now and then. It will have to be Nynaeve."

"wʌt wɪl əv tə bi nɪneɪiv?" ðə wʊmən hɝsɛlf dɪmændəd tʃɪɹfəli, dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðɛm. sʌmhaʊ ʃi hæɾ əkwaɪɝɾ ə lɔŋ, jɛloʊ-fɹɪnd ʃɔl ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð livz ən bɹaɪt flaʊɝz, bʌɾ ɪt leɪ lupt oʊvɝ əɹ ɛlboʊz. dɪspaɪt ðə tɛmpɹətʃɝz ʃi wɔɹ ə blu ɡaʊn wɪð kwaɪɾ ə loʊ nɛklaɪn fəɹ ændɝ, ðoʊ ðə θɪk, dɑɹk bɹeɪd pʊld oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ən nɛsəld ɪn əɹ klivədʒ kɛp ði ɪkspoʊʒɝ fɹəm biɪŋ tu ɡɹeɪt. ðə smɔl ɹɛd dɑt, ðə kɪsən, ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə hɝ fɔɹhɛd dɪd lʊk kwaɪt stʃɹeɪnʒ. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə mɔlkɪɹi kʌstəm, ə ɹɛd kɪsən mɑɹkt ə mɛɹid wʊmən, ən ʃi hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn wɛɹɪŋ ɪɾ əz sun əz ʃi lɝnd. tɔɪɪŋ aɪdli wɪð ði ɛn ə hɝ bɹeɪd, ʃi lʊkt . . . kɑntɛnt . . . nɑɾ ən ɪmoʊʃən ɛniwʌn juʒəwəli əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə.

"What will have to be Nynaeve?" the woman herself demanded cheerfully, joining them. Somehow she had acquired a long, yellow-fringed shawl embroidered with leaves and bright flowers, but it lay looped over her elbows. Despite the temperatures she wore a blue gown with quite a low neckline for Andor, though the thick, dark braid pulled over her shoulder and nestled in her cleavage kept the exposure from being too great. The small red dot, the ki'sain, in the middle of her forehead did look quite strange. According to Malkieri custom, a red ki'sain marked a married woman, and she had insisted on wearing it as soon as she learned. Toying idly with the end of her braid, she looked . . . content . . . not an emotion anyone usually associated with Nynaeve al'Meara.

ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən ʃi noʊɾəst læn, ə fju peɪsɪz ɔf, stʃɹoʊlɪŋ ə sɝkəl ɝaʊn əm ən kipɪŋ wɑtʃ daʊn boʊθ hɔlweɪz. əz tɔl əz ən ilmən ɪn ɪz dɑɹk ɡɹin koʊt, wɪð ʃoʊldɝz bɪlɔŋɪŋ ɑn ə blæksmɪθ, ðə hɑɹd-feɪs mæn stɪl mænədʒ tə muv laɪk ə ɡoʊst. hɪz sɔɹd wɑz bʌkəld əɾ ɪz weɪst ivən hɪɹ ɪn ðə pæləs. hi ɔlweɪz meɪɾ ɪleɪn ʃɪvɝ. dɛθ ɡeɪz fɹəm ɪz koʊl blu aɪz. ɪksɛpt wən i lʊkt ət nɪneɪiv, ɛniweɪ.

Elayne gave a start when she noticed Lan, a few paces off, strolling a circle around them and keeping watch down both hallways. As tall as an Aielman in his dark green coat, with shoulders belonging on a blacksmith, the hard-faced man still managed to move like a ghost. His sword was buckled at his waist even here in the Palace. He always made Elayne shiver. Death gazed from his cold blue eyes. Except when he looked at Nynaeve, anyway.

kəntɛnmənt vænɪʃt fɹəm nɪneɪivz feɪs əz sun əz ʃi lɝnd wʌt wəɾ əv tə bi hɝ tæsk. ʃi stɑp fɪŋɡɝɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪd, ən sizd ɪɾ ɪn ə taɪt fɪst. "naʊ jə lɪsən tə mi. ɪleɪn maɪt bi eɪbəl tə lɑl ɝaʊn pleɪɪŋ pɑlətɪks, bʌɾ aɪ hæv maɪ hænz fʊl. mɔɹ ðən hæf ðə kɪn wʊɾə vænɪʃt baɪ naʊ ɪf æləz wɑzn hoʊldɪŋ əm baɪ ðə skɹʌf ə ðə nɛk, ən sɪns ʃi hæzən ə hoʊp ə ɹitʃɪŋ ðə ʃɔl hɝsɛlf, aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ ʃɪl hoʊld ɛnibəɾi. ðə ɹɛs θɪŋk ðeɪ kən ɑɹɡju wɪð mi! jɛstɝdeɪ, sumeɪkoʊ kɔl mi . . . ɡɝl!"

Contentment vanished from Nynaeve's face as soon as she learned what would have to be her task. She stopped fingering her braid, and seized it in a tight fist. "Now you listen to me. Elayne might be able to loll around playing politics, but I have my hands full. More than half the Kin would have vanished by now if Alise wasn't holding them by the scruff of the neck, and since she hasn't a hope of reaching the shawl herself, I'm not sure how much longer she'll hold anybody. The rest think they can argue with me! Yesterday, Sumeko called me . . . girl!"

ʃi bɛɹɾ əɹ tiθ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl əɹ oʊn fɔlt, wʌn weɪ ən ənʌðɝ. æftɝ ɔl, ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn u hæd hæmɝɾ ət ðə kɪn ðət ðeɪ ɔt tə ʃoʊ səm bækboʊn ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɡɹɔvəlɪŋ tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. wɛl, ðeɪ sɝɾənli hæd stɑpt ɡɹɔvəlɪŋ. ɪnstɛd, ðeɪ wɝ ɔl tu laɪkli tə hoʊl sɪstɝz ʌp tə ðə stændɝɾ ə ðɛɹ ɹul. ən faɪn ðə sɪstɝ wɑntɪŋ! ɪt maɪt nɑt bi nɪneɪivz fɔlt, ɪɡzækli, ðət ʃi əpɪɹd tə bi lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən twɛnti - ʃi hæd sloʊɾ ɝli - bʌɾ eɪdʒ wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə ðə kɪn, ən ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən tə spɛn moʊst ə hɝ taɪm wɪð ðɛm. ʃi wɑz nɑt dʒɝkɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪd, dʒʌs pʊlɪŋ əɾ ɪt soʊ stɛɾəli ɪt mʌs bi ɹɛɾi tə pʊl fɹi ʌv əɹ skælp.

She bared her teeth, but it was all her own fault, one way and another. After all, she was the one who had hammered at the Kin that they ought to show some backbone instead of groveling to Aes Sedai. Well, they certainly had stopped groveling. Instead, they were all too likely to hold sisters up to the standard of their Rule. And find the sister wanting! It might not be Nynaeve's fault, exactly, that she appeared to be little more than twenty - she had slowed early - but age was important to the Kin, and she had chosen to spend most of her time with them. She was not jerking her braid, just pulling at it so steadily it must be ready to pull free of her scalp.

"æn ðoʊz kɝst si foʊk! ɹɛtʃɪd wɪmən! ɹɛtʃɪd; ɹɛtʃɪd; ɹɛtʃɪd! ɪf ɪt wɑzn fəɹ ðət blʌɾi bɑɹɡən . . . ! ðə læs θɪŋ aɪ niɾ ɑn maɪ hænz ɪz ə kʌpəl ʌv waɪnɪŋ, bliɾɪŋ nɑvəsɪz!" kɝstʃənz lɪps θɪn fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ən zɛɹjəz dɑɹk aɪz flæʃt ɪndɪɡneɪʃən bɪfɔɹ ʃi mænədʒ tə əsum miknəs əɡɛn. ə sɛmbləns ʌv ɪt. ðeɪ hæd sɛns ɪnʌf tə noʊ ðət nɑvəsɪz dɪd nɑɾ oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz tə ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊ.

"And those cursed Sea Folk! Wretched women! Wretched; wretched; wretched! If it wasn't for that bloody bargain . . . ! The last thing I need on my hands is a couple of whining, bleating novices!" Kirstian's lips thinned for an instant, and Zarya's dark eyes flashed indignation before she managed to assume meekness again. A semblance of it. They had sense enough to know that novices did not open their mouths to Aes Sedai, though.

ɪleɪn ʃʌv daʊn ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə smuð ɛvɹiθɪŋ oʊvɝ. ʃi wɑntəd tə slæp kɝstʃən ən zɛɹjə boʊθ. ðeɪ hæd kɑmpləkeɪɾəd ɛvɹiθɪŋ baɪ nɑt kipɪŋ ðɛɹ maʊðz ʃʌɾ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. ʃi wɑntəd tə slæp nɪneɪiv. soʊ ʃi faɪnəli hæd bɪn kɔɹnɝd baɪ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, hæd ʃi? ðəɾ ɝnd noʊ sɪmpəθi. "aɪm nɑt pleɪɪŋ əɾ ɛniθɪŋ, nɪneɪiv, ən jə wɛl noʊ ɪt! aɪ hæv æsk jəɹ ædvaɪs ɔfən ɪnʌf!" dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kɑm hɝsɛlf. ðə sɝvəns ʃi kəd si bɪɑn vændin ən ðə tu nɑvəsɪz hæd pɔzd ɪn ðɛɹ wɝk tə ɡɑɡəl ət ðə klʌstɝ ʌv wɪmən. ʃi daʊɾɪd ðeɪ mɔɹ ðən noʊɾəst læn, ɪmpɹɛsɪv əz i wɑz. ɑɹɡjuɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ sʌmθɪŋ tə wɑtʃ, ən steɪ klɪɹ ʌv. "sʌmwʌn əz tə teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ ə ðɛm," ʃi sɛd mɔɹ kwaɪətli. "ɔɹ dʒju θɪŋk jə kən dʒʌs tɛl əm tə fɝɡɛɾ ɔl ðɪs? lʊk ət ðɛm, nɪneɪiv. lɛf tə ðɛmsɛlvz, ðəl bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn aʊɾ u ɪts ɪn ə hɑɹtbit. ðeɪ wʊdn əv ɡɔn tə vændin ənlɛs ðeɪ θɔt ʃi wəd lɛɾ əm hɛlp." ðə pɛɹ bɪkeɪm pɪktʃɝz ʌv waɪd-aɪd nɑvəs ɪnəsəns, wɪð dʒʌst ə hɪn ʌv əfɛns əɾ ən əndʒʌst ækjəzeɪʃən. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt. ðeɪ hæd hæɾ ə laɪftaɪm tə wɝk ɑn dɪsɡaɪzɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz.

Elayne shoved down the desire to smooth everything over. She wanted to slap Kirstian and Zarya both. They had complicated everything by not keeping their mouths shut in the first place. She wanted to slap Nynaeve. So she finally had been cornered by the Windfinders, had she? That earned no sympathy. "I'm not playing at anything, Nynaeve, and you well know it! I have asked your advice often enough!" Drawing a deep breath, she tried to calm herself. The servants she could see beyond Vandene and the two novices had paused in their work to goggle at the cluster of women. She doubted they more than noticed Lan, impressive as he was. Arguing Aes Sedai were something to watch, and stay clear of. "Someone has to take charge of them," she said more quietly. "Or do you think you can just tell them to forget all this? Look at them, Nynaeve. Left to themselves, they will be trying to find out who it is in a heartbeat. They wouldn't have gone to Vandene unless they thought she would let them help." The pair became pictures of wide-eyed novice innocence, with just a hint of offense at an unjust accusation. Elayne did not believe it. They had had a lifetime to work on disguising themselves.

"ænd waɪ nɑt?" nɪneɪiv sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl. "laɪt, ɪleɪn, juv tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðeɪ ɑɹənt wʌt wi nɔɹməli ɪkspɛkt ɪn nɑvəsɪz." ɪleɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst - wʌt wi nɔɹməli ɪkspɛkt, ɪndid! - nɪneɪiv maɪt nɛvɝ əv bɪn ə nɑvəs, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn æksɛptɪd nɑɾ ɔl ðət lɔŋ əɡoʊ; ə waɪnɪŋ, bliɾɪŋ æksɛptɪd, ɔfən ɪnʌf, tu! - ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ən nɪneɪiv wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn. "vændin kən meɪk ɡʊd jus ə ðɛm, aɪm ʃʊɹ," ʃi sɛd. "ænd wən ʃi ɪzənt, ʃi kən ɡɪv əm ɹɛɡjəlɝ lɛsənz. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ sʌmwʌn tɛlɪŋ mi juv tɔt nɑvəsɪz bɪfɔɹ, vændin. ðɛɹ. ɪts sɛɾəld."

"And why not?" Nynaeve said after a moment, shifting her shawl. "Light, Elayne, you have to remember they aren't what we normally expect in novices." Elayne opened her mouth in protest - what we normally expect, indeed! - Nynaeve might never have been a novice, but she had been Accepted not all that long ago; a whining, bleating Accepted, often enough, too! - she opened her mouth, and Nynaeve went right on. "Vandene can make good use of them, I'm sure," she said. "And when she isn't, she can give them regular lessons. I remember someone telling me you've taught novices before, Vandene. There. It's settled."

ðə tu nɑvəsɪz smaɪl bɹɔd, iɡɝ smaɪlz ʌv æntɪsəpeɪʃən - ðeɪ ɔl bʌt ɹʌb ðɛɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ ɪn sæɾəsfækʃən - bʌt vændin skaʊld. "aɪ də nɑt nid nɑvəsɪz ɡɛɾɪŋ ʌndɝ maɪ fit waɪl aɪ - "

The two novices smiled broad, eager smiles of anticipation - they all but rubbed their hands together in satisfaction - but Vandene scowled. "I do not need novices getting under my feet while I - "

"jɔɹ dʒʌst əz blaɪn əz ɪleɪn," nɪneɪiv bɹoʊk ɪn. "ðeɪ hæv ɪkspɪɹiəns meɪkɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ teɪk əm fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ. ðeɪ kən wɝk ət jəɹ dɝɛkʃən, ən ðət wɪl ɡɪv jə taɪm tə slip ən it. aɪ doʊn bɪliv jəɹ duɪŋ iðɝ." ʃi dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, dʒɹeɪpɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl əkɹɔs əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən əlɔŋ əɹ ɑɹmz. ɪt wɑz kwaɪɾ ə pɝfɔɹməns. ʃɔɹɾ əz ʃi wɑz, noʊ tɔlɝ ðən zɛɹjə ən mɑɹkədli ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən vændin əɹ kɝstʃən, ʃi mænədʒ tə sim ðə tɔlɪst wʌn ðəɹ baɪ ɪntʃəz. ɪt wɑz ə skɪl ɪleɪn wɪʃt ʃi kəd mæstɝ. ɔlðoʊ ʃi wəd nɑt tʃɹaɪ ɪn ə dʒɹɛs kʌt ðət weɪ. nɪneɪiv wɑz ɪn deɪnʒɝ ə kʌmɪŋ ɹaɪɾ aʊt. stɪl, ðət dɪd nɑt dɪmɪnɪʃ əɹ pɹɛzəns. ʃi wɑz ði ɛsəns ə kəmænd. "ju wɪl də ɪt, vændin," ʃi sɛd fɝmli.

"You're just as blind as Elayne," Nynaeve broke in. "They have experience making Aes Sedai take them for something other than what they are. They can work at your direction, and that will give you time to sleep and eat. I don't believe you're doing either." She drew herself up, draping her shawl across her shoulders and along her arms. It was quite a performance. Short as she was, no taller than Zarya and markedly shorter than Vandene or Kirstian, she managed to seem the tallest one there by inches. It was a skill Elayne wished she could master. Although she would not try in a dress cut that way. Nynaeve was in danger of coming right out. Still, that did not diminish her presence. She was the essence of command. "You will do it, Vandene," she said firmly.

vændinz skaʊl feɪɾəd sloʊli, bʌt feɪɾ ɪt dɪd. nɪneɪiv stʊd haɪɝ ɪn ðə paʊɝ ðən ʃi, ən ivən ɪf ʃi nɛvɝ kɑnʃəsli θɔɾ ə ðə fækt, dipli ɪnɡɹeɪn kʌstəm meɪɾ əɹ jild, haʊɛvɝ ənwɪlɪŋli. baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi tɝn tə ðə tu wɪmən ɪn waɪt, hɝ feɪs wɑz əz nɪɹ kəmpoʊzd əz ɪt hæd bɪn sɪns æɾɪliz' mɝɾɝ. wɪtʃ dʒʌs mɛn ðət ðə dʒʌdʒ maɪt nɑɾ ɔɹɾɝ ən ɛksəkjuʃən ɹaɪt naʊ. leɪɾɝ, pɝhæps. hɝ ɡɔn feɪs wɑz kɑm, ən stɑɹkli ɡɹɪm.

Vandene's scowl faded slowly, but fade it did. Nynaeve stood higher in the Power than she, and even if she never consciously thought of the fact, deeply ingrained custom made her yield, however unwillingly. By the time she turned to the two women in white, her face was as near composed as it had been since Adeleas' murder. Which just meant that the judge might not order an execution right now. Later, perhaps. Her gaunt face was calm, and starkly grim.

"aɪ dɪd titʃ nɑvəsɪz fəɹ ə taɪm," ʃi sɛd. "ə ʃɔɹt taɪm. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz θɔɾ aɪ wɑz tu hɑɹɾ ɑn maɪ stuɾənts." ðə pɛɹz iɡɝnəs kuld ə bɪt. "hɝ neɪm wɑz sɛɝl beɪɡənd." zɛɹjəz feɪs wɛn əz peɪl əz kɝstʃənz, ən kɝstʃən sweɪɾ əz ɪf sʌɾənli dɪzi. əz mɪstʃɹəs ə nɑvəsɪz ən leɪɾɝ æmɪɝlɪn sit, sɛɝl wɑz ə lɛdʒənd. ðə sɔɹɾ ə lɛdʒən ðət meɪd jə weɪk ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt swɛɾɪŋ. "aɪ də it," vændin sɛd tə nɪneɪiv. "bʌɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ teɪsts laɪk æʃəz." wɪð ə kɝt dʒɛstʃɝ ət ðə tu nɑvəsɪz, ʃi lɛɾ əm əweɪ pæs læn. ðeɪ wɝ stæɡɝɪŋ slaɪtli əz ðeɪ fɑloʊd.

"I did teach novices for a time," she said. "A short time. The Mistress of Novices thought I was too hard on my students." The pair's eagerness cooled a bit. "Her name was Sereille Bagand." Zarya's face went as pale as Kirstian's, and Kirstian swayed as if suddenly dizzy. As Mistress of Novices and later Amyrlin Seat, Sereille was a legend. The sort of legend that made you wake in the middle of the night sweating. "I do eat," Vandene said to Nynaeve. "But everything tastes like ashes." With a curt gesture at the two novices, she led them away past Lan. They were staggering slightly as they followed.

"stʌbɝn wʊmən," nɪneɪiv ɡɹʌmbəld, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ bæks, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə hɪn ə sɪmpəθi ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "aɪ noʊ ə dʌzən ɝbz ðət wəd hɛlp əɹ slip, bʌt ʃi woʊn tʌtʃ ðɛm. aɪv hæf ə maɪn tə slɪp sʌmθɪŋ ɪndə hɝ ivnɪŋ waɪn."

"Stubborn woman," Nynaeve grumbled, frowning at the retreating backs, but there was more than a hint of sympathy in her voice. "I know a dozen herbs that would help her sleep, but she won't touch them. I've half a mind to slip something into her evening wine."

ə waɪz ɹulɝ, ɪleɪn θɔt, noʊz wən tə spik ən wən nɑt. wɛl, ðət wɑz wɪzdəm ɪn ɛniwʌn. ʃi dɪd nɑt seɪ ðət nɪneɪiv kɔlɪŋ ɛniwʌn stʌbɝn wɑz ðə ɹustɝ kɔlɪŋ ðə fɛzən pɹaʊd. "du jə noʊ wʌt ɹinz nuz ɪz?" ʃi sɛɾ ɪnstɛd. "ɡʊd nuz - 'ʌv ə sɔɹt' - soʊ aɪ ʌndɝstænd."

A wise ruler, Elayne thought, knows when to speak and when not. Well, that was wisdom in anyone. She did not say that Nynaeve calling anyone stubborn was the rooster calling the pheasant proud. "Do you know what Reanne's news is?" she said instead. "Good news - 'of a sort' - so I understand."

"aɪ hævən sin əɹ ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ," ði ʌðɝ wʊmən mʌɾɝd, stɪl piɹɪŋ æftɝ vændin. "aɪ hævən bɪn aʊɾ ə maɪ ɹumz." əbɹʌpli ʃi ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ən fəɹ səm ɹizən fɹaʊn səspɪʃəsli əɾ ɪleɪn. ən ðən ət læn, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz. ʌnpɝtɝbd, hi kəntɪnjud tə stænd ɡɑɹd.

"I haven't seen her this morning," the other woman muttered, still peering after Vandene. "I haven't been out of my rooms." Abruptly she gave herself a shake, and for some reason frowned suspiciously at Elayne. And then at Lan, of all things. Unperturbed, he continued to stand guard.

nɪneɪiv kleɪmd əɹ mɛɹɪdʒ wɑz ɡlɔɹiəs - ʃi kəd bi ʃɑkɪŋli fɹæŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt wɪð ʌðɝ wɪmən - bʌɾ ɪleɪn θɔt ʃi mʌs bi laɪɪŋ tə kʌvɝ ʌp dɪsəpɔɪnmənt. vɛɹi laɪkli læn wɑz ɹɛɾi fəɹ ən ətæk, ɹɛɾi tə faɪt, ivən wən əslip. ɪt wəd bi laɪk laɪɪŋ daʊn bɪsaɪɾ ə hʌŋɡɹi laɪən. bɪsaɪdz, ðət stoʊn feɪs wɑz ɪnʌf tə tʃɪl ɛni mɛɹɪdʒ bɛd. lʌkəli, nɪneɪiv hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌt ʃi θɔt. ðə wʊmən æktʃəli  smaɪld. ən əmjuz smaɪl, ɑdli. əmjuzd, ən . . . kəɾ ɪt bi kɑndɪsɛndɪŋ? ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. ɪmædʒəneɪʃən.

Nynaeve claimed her marriage was glorious - she could be shockingly frank about it with other women - but Elayne thought she must be lying to cover up disappointment. Very likely Lan was ready for an attack, ready to fight, even when asleep. It would be like lying down beside a hungry lion. Besides, that stone face was enough to chill any marriage bed. Luckily, Nynaeve had no idea what she thought. The woman actually smiled. An amused smile, oddly. Amused, and . . . could it be condescending? Of course not. Imagination.

"aɪ noʊ wɛɹ ɹin ɪz," nɪneɪiv sɛd, sɛɾəlɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl bæk daʊn tə hɝ ɛlboʊz. "kʌm wɪð mi. əl teɪk jə tə hɝ."

"I know where Reanne is," Nynaeve said, settling her shawl back down to her elbows. "Come with me. I'll take you to her."

ɪleɪn nu ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ɹin wəd bi, sɪns ʃi wɑz nɑt klɑzəɾɪd wɪð nɪneɪiv, bʌt wʌns əɡɛn ʃi skuld əɹ tʌŋ, ən lɛt nɪneɪiv lɛd hɝ. ə sɔɹɾ ə pɛnəns fəɹ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ ɝliɝ, wən ʃi ʃʊɾə tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk pis. læn fɑloʊd, ðoʊz koʊld aɪz skænɪŋ ðə hɔlz. ðə sɝvəns ðeɪ pæs flɪntʃt wən lænz ɡeɪz fɛl ɑn ðɛm. ə jʌnʒɪʃ, peɪl-hɛɹd wʊmən æktʃəli  ɡæðɝɾ əɹ skɝts ən ɹæn, bʌmpɪŋ ɪndə ə stænd-læmp ən sɛɾɪŋ ɪt ɹɑkɪŋ ɪn əɹ flaɪt.

Elayne knew exactly where Reanne would be, since she was not closeted with Nynaeve, but once again she schooled her tongue, and let Nynaeve lead her. A sort of penance for arguing earlier, when she should have tried to make peace. Lan followed, those cold eyes scanning the halls. The servants they passed flinched when Lan's gaze fell on them. A youngish, pale-haired woman actually gathered her skirts and ran, bumping into a stand-lamp and setting it rocking in her flight.

ðət ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪleɪn tə tɛl nɪneɪiv əbaʊɾ ɛləniə ən nɑiən, ən əbaʊt ðə spaɪz. nɪneɪiv tʊk ɪt kwaɪt kɑmli. ʃi əɡɹid wɪð ɪleɪn ðət ðeɪ wəd noʊ sun ɪnʌf u hæd ɹɛskjud ðə tu wɪmən, wɪð ə dɪsmɪsɪv snɪf fəɹ sɝaɪðəz daʊts. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ʃi ɪkspɹɛst sɝpɹaɪz ðət ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn teɪkən ɹaɪt fɹəm ɑɹɪŋɡəl lɔŋ sɪns. "aɪ kʊdn bɪliv ðeɪ wɝ stɪl ðəɹ wən wi ɝaɪvd ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ɛni ful kəd si ðeɪ wəd bi bɹɔt hɪɹ sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. mʌtʃ iziɝ tə ɡɛɾ əm aʊɾ ʌv ə smɔl taʊn." ə smɔl taʊn. ɑɹɪŋɡəl wʊɾə simd ə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi tə hɝ, wʌns. "æz fəɹ spaɪz . . ." ʃi fɹaʊn əɾ ə læŋki, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn fɪlɪŋ ə ɡoʊld-wɝk stænd-læmp wɪð ɔɪl, ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ʌv kɔɹs ðəɹ ɑɹ spaɪz. aɪ nu ðəɹ mʌs bi, ɹaɪt fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. jə dʒʌst əv tə wɑtʃ wʌt jə seɪ, ɪleɪn. doʊn seɪ ɛniθɪŋ tə ɛniwʌn jə doʊnt noʊ wɛl ənlɛs jə doʊn maɪn ɛvɹiwʌn noʊɪŋ."

That reminded Elayne to tell Nynaeve about Elenia and Naean, and about the spies. Nynaeve took it quite calmly. She agreed with Elayne that they would know soon enough who had rescued the two women, with a dismissive sniff for Sareitha's doubts. For that matter, she expressed surprise that they had not been taken right from Aringill long since. "I couldn't believe they were still there when we arrived in Caemlyn. Any fool could see they would be brought here sooner or later. Much easier to get them out of a small town." A small town. Aringill would have seemed a great city to her, once. "As for spies . . ." She frowned at a lanky, gray-haired man filling a gold-worked stand-lamp with oil, and shook her head. "Of course there are spies. I knew there must be, right from the start. You just have to watch what you say, Elayne. Don't say anything to anyone you don't know well unless you don't mind everyone knowing."

wən tə spik ən wən nɑt, ɪleɪn θɔt, pɝsɪŋ əɹ lɪps. səmtaɪmz ðət kəd bi ə tʃɹu pɛnəns, wɪð nɪneɪiv.

When to speak and when not, Elayne thought, pursing her lips. Sometimes that could be a true penance, with Nynaeve.

nɪneɪiv hæɾ əɹ oʊn ɪnfɝmeɪʃən tə ɪmpɑɹt. eɪtin ə ðə kɪn u hæɾ əkʌmpəniɾ əm tə keɪɛmlɪn wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪn ðə pæləs. ðeɪ hæd nɑt ɹʌn əweɪ, ðoʊ. sɪns nʌn wɑz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə tʃɹævəl, nɪneɪiv hæd woʊvən ðə ɡeɪtweɪz hɝsɛlf, sɛndɪŋ əm dip ɪndə ɔltɑɹə ən ɑmɑdɪʃiə ən tæɹɑbən, ɪndə ðə sintʃæn-hɛld lænz wɛɹ ðeɪ wəd tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn ɛni ʌv ðə kɪn u hæd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi flɛɾ ən bɹɪŋ əm bæk tə keɪɛmlɪn.

Nynaeve had her own information to impart. Eighteen of the Kin who had accompanied them to Caemlyn were no longer in the Palace. They had not run away, though. Since none was strong enough to Travel, Nynaeve had woven the gateways herself, sending them deep into Altara and Amadicia and Tarabon, into the Seanchan-held lands where they would try to find any of the Kin who had not already fled and bring them back to Caemlyn.

ɪt wʊɾə bɪn naɪs ɪf nɪneɪiv hæd θɔt tə ɪnfɔɹm əɹ jɛstɝdeɪ, wən ðeɪ lɛft, əɹ bɛɾɝ jɛt, wən ʃi ən ɹin ɹitʃt ðə dɪsɪʒən tə sɛn ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ðæt. ɪnstɛd, ʃi sɛd, "ðæts vɛɹi bɹeɪv ə ðɛm. əvɔɪɾɪŋ kæptʃɝ woʊn bi izi."

It would have been nice if Nynaeve had thought to inform her yesterday, when they left, or better yet, when she and Reanne reached the decision to send them, but Elayne did not mention that. Instead, she said, "That's very brave of them. Avoiding capture won't be easy."

"bɹeɪv, jɛs," nɪneɪiv sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɪɹəteɪɾəd. hɝ hæn kɹɛpt ʌp tə hɝ bɹeɪɾ əɡɛn. "bʌt ðəɾ ɪzənt waɪ wi tʃoʊz ðɛm. æləz θɔt ðeɪ wɝ ðə moʊs laɪkli tə ɹʌn ɪf wi dɪdnt ɡɪv əm sʌmθɪŋ tə du." ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət læn, ʃi snætʃt əɹ hæn bæk daʊn. "aɪ doʊn si haʊ ɛɡwin minz tə də ɪt," ʃi saɪd. "ɔl vɛɹi wɛl tə seɪ ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðə kɪn wɪl bi 'əsoʊsieɪɾəd' wɪð ðə taʊɝ sʌmhaʊ, bʌt haʊ? moʊst ɑɹən stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɝn ðə ʃɔl. mɛni kæn ivən ɹitʃ æksɛptɪd. ən ðeɪ sɝɾənli woʊn stæn fəɹ biɪŋ nɑvəsɪz əɹ æksɛptɪd ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛɹ laɪvz."

"Brave, yes," Nynaeve said, sounding irritated. Her hand crept up to her braid again. "But that isn't why we chose them. Alise thought they were the most likely to run if we didn't give them something to do." Glancing over her shoulder at Lan, she snatched her hand back down. "I don't see how Egwene means to do it," she sighed. "All very well to say every one of the Kin will be 'associated' with the Tower somehow, but how? Most aren't strong enough to earn the shawl. Many can't even reach Accepted. And they certainly won't stand for being novices or Accepted the rest of their lives."

ðɪs taɪm ɪleɪn sɛd nʌθɪŋ kəz ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə seɪ. ðə pɹɑməs hæd tə bi kɛpt; ʃi hæd meɪɾ ɪt hɝsɛlf. ɪn ɛɡwinz neɪm, tʃɹu, ən əɾ ɛɡwinz ɔɹɾɝ, bʌt ʃi hæd spoʊkən ðə wɝdz hɝsɛlf, ən ʃi wəd nɑt bɹeɪk əɹ wɝd. oʊnli, ʃi dɪd nɑt si haʊ tə kip ɪɾ ənlɛs ɛɡwin keɪm ʌp wɪð sʌmθɪŋ tʃɹuli wʌndɝfəl.

This time Elayne said nothing because she did not know what to say. The promise had to be kept; she had made it herself. In Egwene's name, true, and at Egwene's order, but she had spoken the words herself, and she would not break her word. Only, she did not see how to keep it unless Egwene came up with something truly wonderful.

ɹin kɔɹli wɑz dʒʌst wɛɹ ɪleɪn hæd noʊn ʃi wəd bi, ɪn ə smɔl ɹum wɪð tu nɛɹoʊ wɪndoʊz lʊkɪŋ daʊn ɑn ə smɔl, faʊnteɪn kɔɹtʃjɑɹd dip ɪn ðə pæləs, ðoʊ ðə faʊntən wɑz dʒɹaɪ, ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ, ən ðə ɡlæs keɪsməns meɪd ðə ɹum ə lɪɾəl stʌfi. ðə flɔɹ wɑz pleɪn dɑɹk taɪl wɪð noʊ kɑɹpət, ən fəɹ fɝnɪʃɪŋz ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ə nɛɹoʊ teɪbəl ən tu tʃɛɹz. ðəɹ wɝ tu pipəl wɪð ɹin wən ɪleɪn ɛntɝd. æləz tɛndʒaɪl, ɪn sɪmpəl haɪ-nɛkt ɡɹeɪ, lʊkt ʌp fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi stʊɾ ət ði ɛn ə ðə teɪbəl. simɪŋli ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl jɪɹz, ʃi wɑz ə wʊmən ə plɛzənt, ənɹɪmɑɹkəbəl əpɪɹəns u wɑz kwaɪt ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl ɪndid wʌns jə keɪm tə noʊ hɝ ən kəd bi vɛɹi ənplɛzən ɪndid wən ɪt wɑz kɔl fɔɹ. ə sɪŋɡəl ɡlæns, ən ʃi ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ stʌɾi ʌv wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ət ðə teɪbəl. ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɔɹɾɝz ən dɔɾɝ-ɛɹz dɪd nɑɾ ɪmpɹɛs æləz, nɑɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ɹin hɝsɛlf wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə teɪbəl, hɝ feɪs kɹist ən əɹ hɛɹ mɔɹ ɡɹeɪ ðən nɑt, ɪn ə ɡɹin dʒɹɛs mɔɹ ɪlæbɹət ðən æləzəz; ʃi hæd bɪn pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ æftɝ feɪlɪŋ əɹ tɛs fəɹ æksɛptɪd, ən ɔfɝɾ ə sɛkən tʃæns, ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ədɑptəd ðə kʌlɝz ə hɝ pɹəfɝɾ ədʒɑ. əkɹɔs fɹəm əɹ sæɾ ə plʌmp wʊmən ɪn pleɪn bɹaʊn wʊl, hɝ feɪs sɛɾ ɪn stʌbɝn dɪfaɪəns ən əɹ dɑɹk aɪz lɑkt ɑn ɹin, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝi sɛɡmɛntɪɾ æɾəm laɪɪŋ laɪk ə sneɪk bɪtwin əm ɑn ðə teɪbəl. hɝ hænz stʃɹoʊk ði ɛdʒ ə ðə teɪbəltɑp, ðoʊ, ən ɹin wɔɹ ə kɑnfəɾənt smaɪl ðət dipən ðə faɪn laɪnz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ aɪz.

Reanne Corly was just where Elayne had known she would be, in a small room with two narrow windows looking down on a small, fountained courtyard deep in the Palace, though the fountain was dry, this time of year, and the glass casements made the room a little stuffy. The floor was plain dark tile with no carpet, and for furnishings there were only a narrow table and two chairs. There were two people with Reanne when Elayne entered. Alise Tenjile, in simple high-necked gray, looked up from where she stood at the end of the table. Seemingly in her middle years, she was a woman of pleasant, unremarkable appearance who was quite remarkable indeed once you came to know her and could be very unpleasant indeed when it was called for. A single glance, and she returned to her study of what was going on at the table. Aes Sedai, Warders and Daughter-Heirs did not impress Alise, not any longer. Reanne herself was sitting on one side of the table, her face creased and her hair more gray than not, in a green dress more elaborate than Alise's; she had been put out of the Tower after failing her test for Accepted, and offered a second chance, she had already adopted the colors of her preferred Ajah. Across from her sat a plump woman in plain brown wool, her face set in stubborn defiance and her dark eyes locked on Reanne, avoiding the silvery segmented a'dam lying like a snake between them on the table. Her hands stroked the edge of the tabletop, though, and Reanne wore a confident smile that deepened the fine lines at the corners of her eyes.

"doʊn tɛl mi juv meɪd wʌn ə ðɛm si ɹizən," nɪneɪiv sɛd bɪfɔɹ læn hæɾ ivən ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ʃi skaʊld ət ðə wʊmən ɪn bɹaʊn əz ðoʊ ʃi wɑntəd tə bɑks əɹ ɪɹz ɪf nɑt wɝs, ðən ɡlænst əɾ æləz. ɪleɪn θɔt nɪneɪiv wɑz ə lɪɾəl ɪn ɑ ʌv æləz. ðə wʊmən wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə paʊɝ - ʃi wəd nɛvɝ əteɪn ðə ʃɔl - bʌt ʃi hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv teɪkɪŋ tʃɑɹdʒ wən ʃi wɑntəd tə ən meɪkɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ɝaʊn əɹ æksɛpt ɪt. ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪleɪn θɔt ʃi maɪt bi dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl ɪn ɑ ʌv æləz hɝsɛlf.

"Don't tell me you have made one of them see reason," Nynaeve said before Lan had even shut the door behind them. She scowled at the woman in brown as though she wanted to box her ears if not worse, then glanced at Alise. Elayne thought Nynaeve was a little in awe of Alise. The woman was far from strong in the Power - she would never attain the shawl - but she had a way of taking charge when she wanted to and making everyone around her accept it. Including Aes Sedai. Elayne thought she might be just a little in awe of Alise herself.

"ðeɪ stɪl dɪnaɪ ðeɪ kən tʃænəl," æləz mʌɾɝd, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts, ən fɹaʊn ət ðə wʊmən feɪsɪŋ ɹin. "ðeɪ kænt, ɹɪli, aɪ səpoʊz, bʌɾ aɪ kən fil . . . sʌmθɪŋ. nɑt kwaɪt ðə spɑɹk ʌv ə wʊmən bɔɹn tə ɪt, bʌɾ ɔlmoʊst. ɪts əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɹaɪɾ ət ðə bɹɪŋk ə biɪŋ eɪbəl tə tʃænəl, wʌn fʊt pɔɪz tə stɛp oʊvɝ. aɪ hæv nɛvɝ sɛnst ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ɪt bɪfɔɹ. wɛl. ət lis ðeɪ doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə ətæk əs wɪð ðɛɹ fɪsts ɛnimɔɹ. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ pʊɾ əm stʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ðæt, ət list!" ðə wʊmən ɪn bɹaʊn flæʃt ə sʌlən, æŋɡɹi ɡlɛɹ ət hɝ, bʌt dʒɝkt əɹ aɪz əweɪ fɹəm æləzəz fɝm ɡeɪz, hɝ maʊθ twɪstɪŋ ɪn ə sɪkli ɡɹɪmɑs. wən æləz sɛt sʌmbɑɾi stʃɹeɪt, ðeɪ wɝ sɛt vɛɹi stʃɹeɪɾ ɪndid. hɝ hænz kəntɪnjud tə ʃɪft əlɔŋ ðə teɪbəltɑp; ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ʌv ɪt.

"They still deny they can channel," Alise muttered, folding her arms beneath her breasts, and frowned at the woman facing Reanne. "They can't, really, I suppose, but I can feel . . . something. Not quite the spark of a woman born to it, but almost. It's as if she were right at the brink of being able to channel, one foot poised to step over. I have never sensed anything like it before. Well. At least they don't try to attack us with their fists anymore. I think I put them straight on that, at least!" The woman in brown flashed a sullen, angry glare at her, but jerked her eyes away from Alise's firm gaze, her mouth twisting in a sickly grimace. When Alise set somebody straight, they were set very straight indeed. Her hands continued to shift along the tabletop; Elayne did not think she was aware of it.

"ðeɪ stɪl dɪnaɪ siɪŋ ðə floʊz, tu, bʌt ðəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns ðɛmsɛlvz," ɹin sɛɾ ɪn əɹ haɪ, mjuzɪkəl vɔɪs. ʃi kəntɪnjud tə mit ði ʌðɝz ɑbstənət stɛɹ wɪð ə smaɪl. ɛni sɪstɝ maɪɾ əv ɛnvid ɹinz sɝɛnəɾi ən pɹɛzəns. ʃi hæd bɪn ɛldəst ə ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, ðə haɪəst əθɔɹəɾi əmʌŋ ðə kɪn. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðɛɹ ɹul, ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl ɪɡzɪstəɾ oʊnli ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz stɪl ði oʊldəst əmʌŋ ðoʊz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn lɪvɪŋ mɛmɹi, ən ʃi kəd mætʃ ɛni sɪstɝ wɪð əɹ ɛɹ ə kɑm kəmænd. "ðeɪ kleɪm wi tʃɹɪk əm wɪð ðə paʊɝ, juz ɪt tə meɪk əm bɪliv ði æɾəm kən hoʊl ðɛm. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ðəl ɹʌn aʊɾ ə laɪz." dʒɹɔɪŋ ði æɾəm tə hɝ, ʃi oʊpən ðə kɑlɝz kætʃ wɪð ə dɛf moʊʃən. "ʃæl wi tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn, mɑɹli?" ðə wʊmən ɪn bɹaʊn - mɑɹli - stɪl əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə lɛŋθ ə sɪlvɝ mɛɾəl ɪn ɹinz hænz, bʌt ʃi stɪfən ən əɹ hænz flʌɾɝd ɑn ðə teɪbəlz ɛdʒ.

"They still deny seeing the flows, too, but they're trying to convince themselves," Reanne said in her high, musical voice. She continued to meet the other's obstinate stare with a smile. Any sister might have envied Reanne's serenity and presence. She had been Eldest of the Knitting Circle, the highest authority among the Kin. According to their Rule, the Knitting Circle existed only in Ebou Dar, but she was still the oldest among those in Caemlyn, a hundred years older than any Aes Sedai in living memory, and she could match any sister with her air of calm command. "They claim we trick them with the Power, use it to make them believe the a'dam can hold them. Sooner or later, they will run out of lies." Drawing the a'dam to her, she opened the collar's catch with a deft motion. "Shall we try again, Marli?" The woman in brown - Marli - still avoided looking at the length of silver metal in Reanne's hands, but she stiffened and her hands fluttered on the table's edge.

ɪleɪn saɪd. wʌɾ ə ɡɪft ɹænd hæd sɛn hɝ. ə ɡɪft! twɛnti-naɪn sintʃæn sʌldəm nitli hɛl baɪ æɾəm, ən faɪv deɪmeɪn - ʃi heɪɾəd ðət wɝd; ɪt mɛn liʃt wʌn, əɹ sɪmpli liʃt; bʌt ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ wɝ - faɪv deɪmeɪn u kəd nɑt bi ʌnkɑlɹd fəɹ ðə sɪmpəl ɹizən ðət ðeɪ wəd tʃɹaɪ tə fɹi ðə sintʃæn wɪmən u hæd hɛld əm pɹɪznɝ. lɛpɝdz taɪd wɪð stʃɹɪŋ wʊɾə bɪn ə bɛɾɝ ɡɪft. ət lis lɛpɝdz kəd nɑt tʃænəl. ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɡɪvən ɪndə ðə kɪnz kipɪŋ kəz noʊ wʌn ɛls hæd ðə taɪm.

Elayne sighed. What a gift Rand had sent her. A gift! Twenty-nine Seanchan sul'dam neatly held by a'dam, and five damane - she hated that word; it meant Leashed One, or simply Leashed; but that was what they were - five damane who could not be uncollared for the simple reason that they would try to free the Seanchan women who had held them prisoner. Leopards tied with string would have been a better gift. At least leopards could not channel. They had been given into the Kin's keeping because no one else had the time.

stɪl, ʃi hæd sin ɹaɪɾ əweɪ wʌt tə də wɪð ðə sʌldəm. kənvɪns əm ðət ðeɪ kəd lɝn tə tʃænəl, ðən sɛn əm bæk tə ðə sintʃæn. əpɑɹt fɹəm nɪneɪiv, oʊnli ɛɡwin, eɪvinhə ən ə fju ʌv ðə kɪn nu hɝ plæn. nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin wɝ daʊtfəl, bʌt haʊɛvɝ hɑɹd ðə sʌldəm tʃɹaɪd tə haɪd wʌt ðeɪ wɝ wʌns ðeɪ wɝ ɹɪtɝnd, ɪvɛntʃəwəli wʌn wəd slɪp. ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt dʒʌst ɹipɔɹɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. sintʃæn wɝ pəkjuljɝ; ivən ðə sintʃæn əmʌŋ ðə deɪmeɪn tʃɹuli bɪliv ðəɾ ɛni wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl hæd tə bi kɑlɝd fəɹ ðə seɪfti ʌv ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. sʌldəm, wɪð ðɛɹ əbɪləɾi tə kəntʃɹoʊl wɪmən wɛɹɪŋ ði æɾəm, wɝ haɪli ɹɪspɛktɪɾ əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn. ðə nɑlədʒ ðət sʌldəm ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ eɪbəl tə tʃænəl wəd ʃeɪk ðə sintʃæn tə ðɛɹ kɔɹ, meɪbi ivən bɹeɪk əm əpɑɹt. ɪt hæd sim soʊ sɪmpəl, ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

Still, she had seen right away what to do with the sul'dam. Convince them that they could learn to channel, then send them back to the Seanchan. Apart from Nynaeve, only Egwene, Aviendha and a few of the Kin knew her plan. Nynaeve and Egwene were doubtful, but however hard the sul'dam tried to hide what they were once they were returned, eventually one would slip. If they did not just report everything right away. Seanchan were peculiar; even the Seanchan among the damane truly believed that any woman who could channel had to be collared for the safety of everyone else. Sul'dam, with their ability to control women wearing the a'dam, were highly respected among the Seanchan. The knowledge that sul'dam themselves were able to channel would shake the Seanchan to their core, maybe even break them apart. It had seemed so simple, in the beginning.

"ɹin, aɪ ʌndɝstʊd ðət jə hæd ɡʊd nuz," ʃi sɛd. "ɪf ðə sʌldəm hævən stɑɹɾəd bɹeɪkɪŋ daʊn, wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" æləz fɹaʊn ət læn, hu stʊd saɪlənt ɡɑɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə dɔɹ - ʃi dɪsəpɹuvd ə hɪm noʊɪŋ ðɛɹ plænz - bʌt ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

"Reanne, I understood that you had good news," she said. "If the sul'dam haven't started breaking down, what is it?" Alise frowned at Lan, who stood silent guard in front of the door - she disapproved of him knowing their plans - but she said nothing.

"ə moʊmənt, ɪf jə pliz," ɹin mɝmɝd. ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ə ɹɪkwɛst. nɪneɪiv tʃɹuli hæd dʌn əɹ dʒɑb tu wɛl. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ əɹ tə lɪsən." ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sʌɾənli ʃoʊn ɝaʊn hɝ. ʃi muvd əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əz ʃi tʃænəld, əz ðoʊ ɡaɪɾɪŋ ðə floʊz ʌv ɛɹ ðət baʊn mɑɹli tə hɝ tʃɛɹ, ðən taɪɾ əm ɔf ən kʌpt əɹ hænz əz ðoʊ ʃeɪpɪŋ ɪn əɹ saɪt ðə wɔɹɾ əɡɛnst saʊn ðət ʃi woʊv ɝaʊn ðə wʊmən. ðə dʒɛstʃɝz wɝ noʊ pɑɹɾ ə tʃænəlɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt nɛsəsɛɹi tə hɝ, sɪns ʃi hæd lɝn ðə wivz ðət weɪ. ðə sʌldəmz lɪps twɪstəd slaɪtli ɪn kəntɛmpt. ðə wʌn paʊɝ dɪd nɑt fɹaɪɾən əɹ əɾ ɔl.

"A moment, if you please," Reanne murmured. It was not really a request. Nynaeve truly had done her job too well. "There is no need for her to listen." The glow of saidar suddenly shone around her. She moved her fingers as she channeled, as though guiding the flows of air that bound Marli to her chair, then tied them off and cupped her hands as though shaping in her sight the ward against sound that she wove around the woman. The gestures were no part of channeling, of course, but necessary to her, since she had learned the weaves that way. The sul'dam's lips twisted slightly in contempt. The One Power did not frighten her at all.

"teɪk jəɹ taɪm," nɪneɪiv pʊɾ ɪn æsədli, plæntɪŋ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps. "ðɛɹz noʊ hɝi." ɹin dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾ əɹ ðə weɪ æləz dɪd.

"Take your time," Nynaeve put in acidly, planting her hands on her hips. "There's no hurry." Reanne did not intimidate her the way Alise did.

ðən əɡɛn, nɪneɪiv noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd ɹin, iðɝ. ɹin dɪd teɪk əɹ taɪm, stʌɾiɪŋ əɹ hændiwɝk, ðən nɑɾəd wɪð sæɾəsfækʃən bɪfɔɹ ɹaɪzɪŋ. ðə kɪn hæɾ ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə tʃænəl əz lɪɾəl əz wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi, ən ʃi tʊk ɡɹeɪt plɛʒɝ ɪn ðə fɹiɾəm tə juz seɪaɪdɑɹ əz ɔfən əz ʃi wɪʃt, əz wɛl əz pɹaɪɾ ɪn wivɪŋ wɛl.

Then again, Nynaeve no longer intimidated Reanne, either. Reanne did take her time, studying her handiwork, then nodded with satisfaction before rising. The Kin had always tried to channel as little as was necessary, and she took great pleasure in the freedom to use saidar as often as she wished, as well as pride in weaving well.

"ðə ɡʊd nuz," ʃi sɛd, stændɪŋ ən smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts, "ɪz ðət θɹi ʌv ðə deɪmeɪn sim ɹɛɾi tə bi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ kɑlɝz. pɝhæps."

"The good news," she said, standing and smoothing her skirts, "is that three of the damane seem ready to be let out of their collars. Perhaps."

ɪleɪnz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz, ən ʃi ɪkstʃeɪnʒd sɝpɹaɪz lʊks wɪð nɪneɪiv. ʌv ðə faɪv deɪmeɪn teɪm hæd hændəɾ oʊvɝ tə ðɛm, wʌn hæd bɪn teɪkən baɪ ðə sintʃæn ɑn toʊmən hɛɾ ən ənʌðɝ ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ. ði ʌðɝz hæd kʌm fɹəm sintʃæn.

Elayne's eyebrows rose, and she exchanged surprised looks with Nynaeve. Of the five damane Taim had handed over to them, one had been taken by the Seanchan on Toman Head and another in Tanchico. The others had come from Seanchan.

"tu ʌv ðə sintʃæn wɪmən, mɑɹɪl ən dʒɪlɑɹi, stɪl seɪ ðeɪ dɪzɝv tə bi kɑlɝd, nid tə bi kɑlɝd." ɹinz maʊθ taɪɾənd wɪð dɪsteɪst, bʌt ʃi pɔz fəɹ oʊnli ə moʊmənt. "ðeɪ tʃɹuli sim hɔɹəfaɪɾ ət ðə pɹɑspɛkt ə fɹiɾəm. əliviə hæz stɑp ðæt. naʊ ʃi sɛz ɪt wɑz oʊnli kəz ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd ʃi wəd bi ɹəteɪkən. ʃi sɛz ʃi heɪts ɔl ðə sʌldəm, ən ʃi sɝɾənli meɪks ə ɡʊd ʃoʊ ʌv ɪt, snɑɹlɪŋ əɾ əm ən kɝsɪŋ ðɛm, bʌt . . ." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd sloʊli ɪn daʊt. "ʃi wɑz kɑlɝɾ ət θɝtin əɹ fɔɹtin, ɪleɪn, ʃiz nɑt sɝɾən wɪtʃ, ən ʃiz bɪn deɪmeɪn fəɹ fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz! ən əsaɪd fɹəm ðæt, ʃiz . . . ʃiz . . . əliviə ɪz kənsɪɾɝəbli stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən nɪneɪiv," ʃi fɪnɪʃt ɪn ə ɹʌʃ. eɪdʒ, ðə kɪn maɪt dɪskʌs oʊpənli, bʌt ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɛɾɪsəns əbaʊt spikɪŋ ə stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ. "du wi dɛɹ lɛɾ əɹ fɹi? eɪ sintʃæn waɪldɝ u kəd tɛɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ pæləs əpɑɹt?" ðə kɪn ʃɛɹd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ vju ʌv waɪldɝz, tu. moʊs dɪd.

"Two of the Seanchan women, Marille and Jillari, still say they deserve to be collared, need to be collared." Reanne's mouth tightened with distaste, but she paused for only a moment. "They truly seem horrified at the prospect of freedom. Alivia has stopped that. Now she says it was only because she was afraid she would be retaken. She says she hates all the sul'dam, and she certainly makes a good show of it, snarling at them and cursing them, but . . ." She shook her head slowly in doubt. "She was collared at thirteen or fourteen, Elayne, she's not certain which, and she's been damane for four hundred years! And aside from that, she is . . . she's . . . Alivia is considerably stronger than Nynaeve," she finished in a rush. Age, the Kin might discuss openly, but they had all the Aes Sedai reticence about speaking of strength in the Power. "Do we dare let her free? A Seanchan wilder who could tear the entire Palace apart?" The Kin shared the Aes Sedai view of wilders, too. Most did.

sɪstɝz u nu nɪneɪiv hæd lɝn tə teɪk kɛɹ wɪð ðət wɝɾ ɝaʊn hɝ. ʃi kəd bɪkʌm kwaɪt snæpɪʃ wən ɪt wɑz juzd ɪn ə dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋ toʊn. naʊ, ʃi dʒʌst stɛɹɾ ət ɹin. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ði ænsɝ. ɪleɪn nu wʌɾ əɹ oʊn ænsɝ wəd bi, bʌt ðɪs hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð kleɪmɪŋ ðə θɹoʊn, əɹ ændɝ. ɪt wɑz ə dɪsɪʒən fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən hɪɹ, ðət mɛn ɪt wɑz nɪneɪivz tə meɪk.

Sisters who knew Nynaeve had learned to take care with that word around her. She could become quite snappish when it was used in a disparaging tone. Now, she just stared at Reanne. Perhaps she was trying to find the answer. Elayne knew what her own answer would be, but this had nothing to do with claiming the throne, or Andor. It was a decision for Aes Sedai, and here, that meant it was Nynaeve's to make.

"ɪf jə doʊnt," læn sɛd kwaɪətli fɹəm ðə dɔɹ, "ðɛn jə maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡɪv əɹ bæk tə ðə sintʃæn." hi wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl əbæʃt baɪ ðə dɑɹk lʊks ɡɪvən ɪm baɪ ðə fɔɹ wɪmən u hɝɾ ɪz dip vɔɪs toʊl ðoʊz wɝdz laɪk ə fjunɝəl ɡɔŋ. "ju wɪl əv tə wɑtʃ əɹ kloʊsli, bʌt kip əɹ kɑlɝd wən ʃi wɑns tə bi fɹi, ən jə ɑɹ noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ðeɪ ɑɹ."

"If you don't," Lan said quietly from the door, "then you might as well give her back to the Seanchan." He was not at all abashed by the dark looks given him by the four women who heard his deep voice toll those words like a funeral gong. "You will have to watch her closely, but keep her collared when she wants to be free, and you are no better than they are."

"ðæɾ ɪzən fəɹ jə tə seɪ, wɔɹɾɝ," æləz sɛd fɝmli. hi mɛɾ əɹ stɝn stɛɹ wɪð kul ikwənɪmɪɾi, ən ʃi ɡeɪv ə smɔl dɪsɡʌstəd ɡɹʌn ən θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz. "ju ʃəd ɡɪv ɪm ə ɡʊd tɔkɪŋ-tə wən jə ɡɛɾ ɪm əloʊn, nɪneɪiv."

"That isn't for you to say, Warder," Alise said firmly. He met her stern stare with cool equanimity, and she gave a small disgusted grunt and threw up her hands. "You should give him a good talking-to when you get him alone, Nynaeve."

nɪneɪiv mʌst əv bɪn filɪŋ əɹ ɑ ʌv ðə wɪmən pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli stʃɹɔŋli, kəz əɹ tʃiks kʌlɝd. "doʊn θɪŋk ðəɾ əl nɑt," ʃi sɛd laɪtli. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət læn əɾ ɔl. faɪnəli kɑndɪsɛndɪŋ tə noʊɾəs ðə tʃɪl, ʃi pʊld əɹ ʃɔl ʌp ɑntu hɝ ʃoʊldɝz, ən klɪɹɾ əɹ θɹoʊt. "hi ɪz ɹaɪt, ðoʊ. ət list wi doʊn əv tə wɝi əbaʊt ði ʌðɝ tu. aɪm dʒʌst sɝpɹaɪzd ɪt tʊk əm ðɪs lɔŋ tə stɑp ɪməteɪɾɪŋ ðoʊz ful sintʃæn."

Nynaeve must have been feeling her awe of the women particularly strongly, because her cheeks colored. "Don't think that I will not," she said lightly. She did not look at Lan at all. Finally condescending to notice the chill, she pulled her shawl up onto her shoulders, and cleared her throat. "He is right, though. At least we don't have to worry about the other two. I'm just surprised it took them this long to stop imitating those fool Seanchan."

"aɪ æm nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ," ɹin saɪd. "kɛɹə wɑz ə sɔɹɾ ʌv waɪz wʊmən ɑn toʊmən hɛd, jə noʊ. vɛɹi ɪnfluɛntʃəl ɪn əɹ vɪlədʒ. ə waɪldɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. jə wəd θɪŋk ʃid heɪt ðə sintʃæn, bʌt ʃi dʌznt, nɑɾ ɔl ə ðɛm. ʃiz vɛɹi fɑn ə ðə sʌldəm kæptʃɝd wɪð hɝ, ən vɛɹi æŋkʃəs ðət wi ʃʊdn hɝɾ ɛni ʌv ðə sʌldəm. lɛmɔɹ ɪz dʒʌs naɪntin, ə pæmpɝd noʊbəlwʊmən wɪð ði ɪkstʃɹim bæd lʌk tə hæv ðə spɑɹk mænəfɛst ɪtsɛlf ɪn əɹ ɑn ðə vɛɹi deɪ tæntʃəkoʊ fɛl. ʃi sɛz ʃi heɪts ðə sintʃæn ən wɑns tə meɪk əm peɪ fəɹ wʌt ðeɪ dɪd tə tæntʃəkoʊ, bʌt ʃi ænsɝz tə lɑɝi, hɝ deɪmeɪn neɪm, əz ɹɛɾəli əz tə lɛmɔɹ, ən ʃi smaɪlz ət ðə sʌldəm ən lɛts əm pɛt hɝ. aɪ doʊn mɪstʃɹʌs ðɛm, nɑt ðə weɪ aɪ də əliviə, bʌɾ aɪ daʊɾ iðɝ wʌn kəd stæn ʌp tə ə sʌldəm. aɪ θɪŋk ɪf ə sʌldəm ɔɹɾɝd iðɝ tə hɛlp əɹ ɪskeɪp, ʃi wʊd, ən aɪ fɪɹ ʃi maɪt nɑt faɪt tu hɑɹɾ ɪf ðə sʌldəm tʃɹaɪd tə kɑlɝ əɹ əɡɛn."

"I am not so sure," Reanne sighed. "Kara was a sort of wise woman on Toman Head, you know. Very influential in her village. A wilder, of course. You would think she'd hate the Seanchan, but she doesn't, not all of them. She is very fond of the sul'dam captured with her, and very anxious that we shouldn't hurt any of the sul'dam. Lemore is just nineteen, a pampered noblewoman with the extreme bad luck to have the spark manifest itself in her on the very day Tanchico fell. She says she hates the Seanchan and wants to make them pay for what they did to Tanchico, but she answers to Larie, her damane name, as readily as to Lemore, and she smiles at the sul'dam and lets them pet her. I don't mistrust them, not the way I do Alivia, but I doubt either one could stand up to a sul'dam. I think if a sul'dam ordered either to help her escape, she would, and I fear she might not fight too hard if the sul'dam tried to collar her again."

æftɝ ʃi stɑp spikɪŋ, ðə saɪləns stʃɹɛtʃt.

After she stopped speaking, the silence stretched.

nɪneɪiv sim tə lʊk ɪnwɝd, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ wɪð hɝsɛlf. ʃi ɡɹɪpt əɹ bɹeɪd, ðən lɛt ɡoʊ ən foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz taɪɾ əkɹɔs əɹ tʃɛst, ðə fɹɪnʒ ə hɝ ʃɔl sweɪɪŋ əz ʃi hʌɡd hɝsɛlf. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪksɛp læn. hɪm, ʃi dɪd nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlæns æt.

Nynaeve seemed to look inward, struggling with herself. She gripped her braid, then let go and folded her arms tight across her chest, the fringe of her shawl swaying as she hugged herself. She glared at everyone except Lan. Him, she did not so much as glance at.

faɪnəli ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ən skwɛɹd hɝsɛlf tə feɪs ɹin ən æləz. "wi mʌst ɹimuv ði æɾəm. wɪl hoʊld ɑn tə ðɛm əntɪl wi kən bi ʃʊɹ - ən lɛmɔɹ æftɝ; ʃi nidz tə bi pʊɾ ɪn waɪt! - ən wɪl meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ nɛvɝ lɛft əloʊn, ɪspɛʃli wɪð ðə sʌldəm, bʌt ði æɾəm kʌm ɔf!" ʃi spoʊk fɪɹsli, əz ɪf ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɑpəzɪʃən, bʌɾ ə bɹɔd smaɪl ʌv əpɹuvəl spɹɛɾ əkɹɔs ɪleɪnz feɪs. ði ədɪʃən ə θɹi mɔɹ wɪmən ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ ə hɑɹdli kaʊntəɾ əz ɡʊd nuz, bʌt ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs.

Finally she took a deep breath, and squared herself to face Reanne and Alise. "We must remove the a'dam. We will hold on to them until we can be sure - and Lemore after; she needs to be put in white! - and we will make sure they are never left alone, especially with the sul'dam, but the a'dam come off!" She spoke fiercely, as if expecting opposition, but a broad smile of approval spread across Elayne's face. The addition of three more women they could not be sure of hardly counted as good news, but there had been no other choice.

ɹin mɪɹli nɑɾəd æksɛptəns - æftɝ ə moʊmənt - bʌɾ ə smaɪlɪŋ æləz keɪm ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl tə pæt nɪneɪivz ʃoʊldɝ, ən nɪneɪiv æktʃəli  blʌʃt. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ ɪt bɪhaɪn klɪɹɪŋ əɹ θɹoʊt ɹʌfli ən ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ ət ðə sintʃæn wʊmən ɪn əɹ keɪdʒ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌɾ əɹ ɛfɝts wɝ nɑt vɛɹi ɪfɛktʃuəl, ən læn spɔɪld əm ɪn ɛni keɪs.

Reanne merely nodded acceptance - after a moment - but a smiling Alise came around the table to pat Nynaeve's shoulder, and Nynaeve actually blushed. She tried to hide it behind clearing her throat roughly and grimacing at the Seanchan woman in her cage of saidar, but her efforts were not very effectual, and Lan spoiled them in any case.

"teɪʃɝ meɪnɛðɝən," hi sɛd sɔfli.

"Tai'shar Manetheren," he said softly.

nɪneɪivz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən, ðən kɝld ɪndə ə tʃɹɛmjələs smaɪl. sʌɾən tɪɹz ɡlɪsən ɪn əɹ aɪz əz ʃi spʌn tə feɪs hɪm, hɝ feɪs dʒɔɪəs. hi smaɪl bæk ət hɝ, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ koʊld ɪn ɪz aɪz.

Nynaeve's mouth fell open, then curled into a tremulous smile. Sudden tears glistened in her eyes as she spun to face him, her face joyous. He smiled back at her, and there was nothing cold in his eyes.

ɪleɪn stʃɹʌɡəl nɑt tə ɡeɪp. laɪt! meɪbi hi dɪd nɑt tʃɪl ðɛɹ mɛɹɪdʒ bɛɾ æftɝ ɔl. ðə θɔt meɪɾ əɹ tʃiks wɔɹm. tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə lʊk ət ðɛm, hɝ aɪz fɛl ɑn mɑɹli, stɪl fæsən ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ. ðə sintʃæn wʊmən wɑz stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, tɪɹz floʊɪŋ daʊn əɹ plʌmp tʃiks. stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd. ət ðə wivz hoʊldɪŋ saʊn əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. ʃi kəd nɑt dɪnaɪ siɪŋ ðə wivz naʊ. bʌt wən ʃi sɛɾ əz mʌtʃ, ɹin ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

Elayne struggled not to gape. Light! Maybe he did not chill their marriage bed after all. The thought made her cheeks warm. Trying not to look at them, her eyes fell on Marli, still fastened in her chair. The Seanchan woman was staring straight ahead, tears flowing down her plump cheeks. Straight ahead. At the weaves holding sound away from her. She could not deny seeing the weaves now. But when she said as much, Reanne shook her head.

"ðeɪ ɔl wip ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ meɪd tə lʊk ət wivz vɛɹi lɔŋ, ɪleɪn," ʃi sɛd wɛɹəli. ən ə tʌtʃ sædli. "bʌt wʌns ðə wivz ɑɹ ɡɔn, ðeɪ kənvɪns ðɛmsɛlvz wi tʃɹɪk ðɛm. ðeɪv tə, jə ʌndɝstænd. ɛls ðeɪd bi deɪmeɪn, nɑt sʌldəm. noʊ, ɪɾəl teɪk taɪm tə kənvɪns ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə haʊnz ðət ʃiz ɹɪli ə haʊn hɝsɛlf. aɪm əfɹeɪɾ aɪ ɹɪli hævənt ɡɪvən jə ɛni ɡʊd nuz əɾ ɔl, hæv aɪ?"

"They all weep if they are made to look at weaves very long, Elayne," she said wearily. And a touch sadly. "But once the weaves are gone, they convince themselves we tricked them. They have to, you understand. Else they'd be damane, not sul'dam. No, it will take time to convince the Mistress of the Hounds that she is really a hound herself. I am afraid I really haven't given you any good news at all, have I?"

"nɑt vɛɹi mʌtʃ," ɪleɪn toʊl hɝ. nʌn, ɹɪli. dʒʌst ənʌðɝ pɹɑbləm tə stæk ʌp ɑn ɔl ðə ɹɛst. haʊ mʌtʃ bæd nuz kəd bi stæk bɪfɔɹ ðə paɪl bɛɹid ju? ʃi hæd tə ɡɛt səm ɡʊd, sun.

"Not very much," Elayne told her. None, really. Just another problem to stack up on all the rest. How much bad news could be stacked before the pile buried you? She had to get some good, soon.


tʃæptɝ naɪn


CHAPTER 9

eɪ kʌp ə ti


A Cup of Tea

wʌns ɪn əɹ dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹum, ɪleɪn hɝidli tʃeɪnʒd aʊɾ ə hɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ kloʊðz wɪð ðə hɛlp ʌv ɛsænd, ðə waɪt-hɛɹd pɛnʃənɝ ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən fəɹ əɹ meɪd. ðə slɛndɝ, dɪɡnəfaɪd wʊmən wɑz ə tʃɹaɪfəl sloʊ-muvɪŋ, bʌt ʃi nu hɝ dʒɑb ən dɪd nɑt weɪs taɪm tʃæɾɝɪŋ. ɪn fækt, ʃi sɛldəm sɛɾ ə wɝd bɪɑn sədʒɛstʃənz ɑn kloʊðɪŋ, ən ðə kɑmɛnt ɡɪvən ɛvɹi deɪ, ðəɾ ɪleɪn lʊk laɪk əɹ mʌðɝ. fleɪmz dænst ətɑp θɪk lɔɡz ɑn ə waɪd mɑɹbəl hɑɹθ ət wʌn ɛn ə ðə ɹum, bʌt ðə faɪɝ dɪd lɪɾəl tə teɪk ðə tʃɪl ɔf ði ɛɹ. kwɪkli ʃi pʊɾ ɑn ə faɪn blu wʊl wɪð pæɾɝnz ə sid pɝlz ɑn ðə haɪ nɛk ən daʊn ðə slivz, hɝ sɪlvɝ-wɝk bɛlt wɪð ə smɔl sɪlvɝ-ʃið dæɡɝ, ən ðə sɪlvɝ-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd blu vɛlvət slɪpɝz. ðəɹ maɪt bi noʊ taɪm tə tʃeɪnʒ əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ siɪŋ ðə mɝtʃəns, ən ðeɪ mʌs bi ɪmpɹɛst ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ. ʃi wəɾ əv tə bi ʃʊɹ bɝdʒɪt wɑz ðɛɹ; bɝdʒɪt wɑz moʊst ɪmpɹɛsɪv ɪn əɹ junəfɔɹm. ən bɝdʒɪt wəd teɪk ivən lɪsnɪŋ tə mɝtʃəns əz ə bɹeɪk. baɪ ðə hiɾəd nɑɾ ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən ɹɛstɪŋ ɪn ðə bæk ʌv ɪleɪnz hɛd, ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd wɑz faɪndɪŋ ðoʊz ɹɪpɔɹts hɛvi ɡoʊɪŋ.

Once in her dressing room, Elayne hurriedly changed out of her riding clothes with the help of Essande, the white-haired pensioner she had chosen for her maid. The slender, dignified woman was a trifle slow-moving, but she knew her job and did not waste time chattering. In fact, she seldom said a word beyond suggestions on clothing, and the comment given every day, that Elayne looked like her mother. Flames danced atop thick logs on a wide marble hearth at one end of the room, but the fire did little to take the chill off the air. Quickly she put on a fine blue wool with patterns of seed pearls on the high neck and down the sleeves, her silver-worked belt with a small silver-sheathed dagger, and the silver-embroidered blue velvet slippers. There might be no time to change again before seeing the merchants, and they must be impressed at the sight of her. She would have to be sure Birgitte was there; Birgitte was most impressive in her uniform. And Birgitte would take even listening to merchants as a break. By the heated knot of irritation resting in the back of Elayne's head, the Captain-General of the Queen's Guard was finding those reports heavy going.

fæsənɪŋ klʌstɝz ə pɝlz ɪn əɹ ɪɹz, ʃi dɪsmɪst ɛsæn tə hɝ oʊn faɪɝ, ɪn ðə pɛnʃənɝz' kɔɹɾɝz. ðə wʊmən hæd dɪnaɪɾ ɪt wən ɔfɝd hilɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn səspɛktəɾ əɹ dʒɔɪns ætʃt. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz ɹɛɾi. ʃi wəd nɑt wɛɹ ðə kɔɹənɛɾ ə ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ; ɪt kəd steɪ ətɑp ðə smɔl aɪvɝi dʒuəlɹi tʃɛst ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛsɪŋ teɪbəl. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv mɛni dʒɛmz; moʊs hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn pʊɾ ɪn pɔn, ən ðə ɹɛs maɪɾ əv tə ɡoʊ wən ðə pleɪt dɪd. noʊ pɔɪnt wɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt naʊ. ə fju moʊməns tə hɝsɛlf, ən ʃi wəɾ əv tə lip bæk tə duɾi.

Fastening clusters of pearls in her ears, she dismissed Essande to her own fire, in the pensioners' quarters. The woman had denied it when offered Healing, but Elayne suspected her joints ached. In any case, she herself was ready. She would not wear the coronet of the Daughter-Heir; it could stay atop the small ivory jewelry chest on her dressing table. She did not have many gems; most had already been put in pawn, and the rest might have to go when the plate did. No point worrying about it now. A few moments to herself, and she would have to leap back to duty.

hɝ dɑɹk-pænəl sɪɾɪŋ ɹum wɪð ɪts waɪd kɔɹnɪsəz ə kɑɹv bɝdz kənteɪn tu tɔl faɪɝpleɪsəz wɪð ɪlæbɹət mæntəlz, wʌn əɾ iðɝ ɛnd, wɪtʃ dɪɾ ə bɛɾɝ dʒɑb ʌv wɔɹmɪŋ ðən ðə wʌn ɪn ðə dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹum, ðoʊ hɪɹ, tu, ðə kɑɹpəts leɪɝɾ ɑn ðə waɪt-taɪl flɔɹ wɝ nɛsəsɛɹi. tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, ðə ɹum ɔlsoʊ kənteɪn hælwɪn nɔɹi. duɾi hæd lɛpt ət hɝ, ɪt simd.

Her dark-paneled sitting room with its wide cornices of carved birds contained two tall fireplaces with elaborate mantels, one at either end, which did a better job of warming than the one in the dressing room, though here, too, the carpets layered on the white-tiled floor were necessary. To her surprise, the room also contained Halwin Norry. Duty had leaped at her, it seemed.

ðə fɝs klɝk stʃɹɛtʃt ʌp aʊɾ ʌv ə loʊ-bæk tʃɛɹ əz ʃi ɛntɝd, klʌtʃɪŋ ə lɛðɝ foʊldɝ tə hɪz nɛɹoʊ tʃɛst, ən lɝtʃt ɝaʊn ðə skɹoʊl-ɛdʒ teɪbəl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum tə meɪk ən ɑkwɝd lɛɡ. nɔɹi wɑz tɔl ən lin, wɪð ə lɔŋ noʊz, hɪz spɑɹs fɹɪnʒ ə hɛɹ ɹaɪzɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz ɪɹz laɪk spɹeɪz ʌv waɪt fɛðɝz. hi ɔfən ɹimaɪndəɾ əɹ ʌv ə hɛɹən. ɛni nʌmbɝ ə klɝks ʌndɝ ɪm æktʃəli  wildɪd ðə pɛnz, jɛɾ ə smɔl ɪŋksteɪn mɑɹd wʌn ɛdʒ ə hɪz skɑɹlət tɑbɝd. ðə steɪn lʊkt oʊld, ðoʊ, ən ʃi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðə foʊldɝ hɪɾ ʌðɝz. hi hæɾ oʊnli teɪkən tə hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst wən i dɑn fɔɹməl dʒɹɛs, tu deɪz æftɝ mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ. wɛðɝ i hæd dʌn soʊ əz ən ɪkspɹɛʃən ə lɔɪəlti, əɹ sɪmpli kəz ðə fɝs meɪd hæd, wɑz stɪl ɪn kwɛstʃən.

The First Clerk stretched up out of a low-backed chair as she entered, clutching a leather folder to his narrow chest, and lurched around the scroll-edged table in the middle of the room to make an awkward leg. Norry was tall and lean, with a long nose, his sparse fringe of hair rising behind his ears like sprays of white feathers. He often reminded her of a heron. Any number of clerks under him actually wielded the pens, yet a small inkstain marred one edge of his scarlet tabard. The stain looked old, though, and she wondered whether the folder hid others. He had only taken to holding it against his chest when he donned formal dress, two days after Mistress Harfor. Whether he had done so as an expression of loyalty, or simply because the First Maid had, was still in question.

"fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ biɪŋ pɹɪsɪpɪteɪt, maɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ də bɪliv aɪ hæv mæɾɝz ə səm ɪmpɔɹɾəns, ɪf nɑɾ æktʃəwəl heɪst, tə leɪ bɪfɔɹ ju." ɪmpɔɹɾənt əɹ nɑt, hɪz vɔɪs stɪl dʒɹoʊnd.

"Forgive me for being precipitate, my Lady," he said, "but I do believe I have matters of some importance, if not actual haste, to lay before you." Important or not, his voice still droned.

"ʌv kɔɹs, mæstɝ nɔɹi. aɪ wəd nɑt wɑnə pɹɛs jə tə heɪst." hi blɪŋkt ət hɝ, ən ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə saɪ. ʃi θɔɾ i maɪt bi mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl dɛf, fɹəm ðə weɪ hi tɪltəɾ ɪz hɛd ðɪs weɪ ən ðəɾ əz ɪf tə kætʃ saʊn bɛɾɝ. meɪbi ðət wɑz waɪ hɪz vɔɪs ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd pɪtʃ. ʃi ɹeɪz hɝz ə lɪɾəl. hi maɪt dʒʌs bi ə bɔɹ, æftɝ ɔl. "sɪt, ən tɛl mi ðiz mæɾɝz ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾəns."

"Of course, Master Norry. I would not want to press you to haste." He blinked at her, and she tried not to sigh. She thought he might be more than a little deaf, from the way he tilted his head this way and that as if to catch sound better. Maybe that was why his voice almost never changed pitch. She raised hers a little. He might just be a bore, after all. "Sit, and tell me these matters of importance."

ʃi tʊk wʌn ə ðə kɑɹv tʃɛɹz əweɪ fɹəm ðə teɪbəl ən moʊʃən ɪm tə ənʌðɝ, bʌɾ i ɹɪmeɪn stændɪŋ. hi ɔlweɪz dɪd. ʃi sɛɾəld bæk tə lɪsən, kɹɔsɪŋ əɹ niz ən ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ skɝts.

She took one of the carved chairs away from the table and motioned him to another, but he remained standing. He always did. She settled back to listen, crossing her knees and adjusting her skirts.

hi dɪd nɑt ɹəfɝ tə hɪz foʊldɝ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn ðə peɪpɝz ɪn ɪt wəd bi ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd, ðə peɪpɝz ðəɹ oʊnli ɪn keɪs ʃi ɹikwaɪɝd tə si wɪð əɹ oʊn aɪz. "moʊst ɪmiɾiət, maɪ leɪɾi, ən pɝhæps moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt, lɑɹdʒ dəpɑzɪts ʌv æləm əv bɪn dɪskʌvɝɾ ɑn jəɹ ɪsteɪts ət dɑnəbɑɹ. ðə fɝs kwɑləɾi ʌv æləm. aɪ bɪliv ðə bæŋkɝz wɪl bi . . . ʌm . . . lɛs hɛzɪɾənt ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ maɪ ɪnkwaɪɝiz ɑn jəɹ bɪhæf wʌns ðeɪ lɝn ə ðɪs." hi smaɪl bɹifli, ə moʊməntɛɹi kɝvɪŋ ə θɪn lɪps. fəɹ hɪm, ðət wɑz nɪɹ tə keɪpɝɪŋ.

He did not refer to his folder. Everything on the papers in it would be inside his head, the papers there only in case she required to see with her own eyes. "Most immediate, my Lady, and perhaps most important, large deposits of alum have been discovered on your estates at Danabar. The first quality of alum. I believe the bankers will be . . . umm . . . less hesitant regarding my inquiries on your behalf once they learn of this." He smiled briefly, a momentary curving of thin lips. For him, that was near to capering.

ɪleɪn sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾ əz sun əz i mɛnʃən æləm, ən ʃi smaɪl mʌtʃ mɔɹ bɹɔdli. ʃi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl laɪk keɪpɝɪŋ hɝsɛlf. hæɾ əɹ kəmpænjən bɪn ɛniwʌn bʌt nɔɹi, ʃi maɪt hæv. hɝ ɪleɪʃən wɑz soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðət fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi fɛl bɝdʒɪts ɪɹɪɾəbɪlɪti weɪn. daɪɝz ən wivɝz dɪvaʊɝɾ æləm, ən soʊ dɪd ɡlæsmeɪkɝz ən peɪpɝmeɪkɝz əmʌŋ ʌðɝz. ði oʊnli sɔɹs fəɹ fɝs kwɑləɾi æləm wɑz ɡildən - əɹ hæd bɪn tɪl naʊ - ən dʒʌs ðə tæksəz ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪd hæd bɪn səfɪʃən tə səpɔɹt ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ɡildən fəɹ dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz. wʌt keɪm fɹəm tiɹ ən ɝæfəl wɑz nɑt nɪɹli soʊ faɪn, jɛɾ ɪt pʊɾ əz mʌtʃ kɔɪn ɪn ðoʊz kʌntʃɹiz' kɑfɝz əz ɑləv ɔɪl əɹ dʒɛmz.

Elayne sat up straight as soon as he mentioned alum, and she smiled much more broadly. She felt a little like capering herself. Had her companion been anyone but Norry, she might have. Her elation was so strong that for a moment she felt Birgitte's irritability wane. Dyers and weavers devoured alum, and so did glassmakers and papermakers among others. The only source for first quality alum was Ghealdan - or had been till now - and just the taxes on the trade had been sufficient to support the throne of Ghealdan for generations. What came from Tear and Arafel was not nearly so fine, yet it put as much coin in those countries' coffers as olive oil or gems.

"ðæɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt nuz, mæstɝ nɔɹi. ðə bɛst aɪv hæd tədeɪ." ðə bɛst sɪns ɹitʃɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn, vɛɹi laɪkli, bʌt sɝɾənli ðə bɛs tədeɪ. "haʊ kwɪkli kən jə oʊvɝkʌm ðə bæŋkɝz' 'hɛzəteɪʃən'?" ɪt hæd bɪn mɔɹ laɪk slæmɪŋ ðə dɔɹ ɪn əɹ feɪs, oʊnli nɑt soʊ ɹud. ðə bæŋkɝz nu tə ə mæn haʊ mɛni sɔɹdz stʊd bɪhaɪn əɹ ət ðə moʊmənt, ən haʊ mɛni bɪhaɪn əɹ əpoʊnəns. ivən soʊ, ʃi hæd noʊ daʊts ðə ɹɪtʃəz ʌv æləm wəd bɹɪŋ əm ɝaʊnd. niðɝ dɪd nɔɹi.

"That is important news, Master Norry. The best I've had today." The best since reaching Caemlyn, very likely, but certainly the best today. "How quickly can you overcome the bankers' 'hesitation'?" It had been more like slamming the door in her face, only not so rude. The bankers knew to a man how many swords stood behind her at the moment, and how many behind her opponents. Even so, she had no doubts the riches of alum would bring them around. Neither did Norry.

"kwaɪt kwɪkli, maɪ leɪɾi, ən ɑn vɛɹi ɡʊd tɝmz, aɪ bɪliv. aɪ ʃæl tɛl əm ɪf ðɛɹ bɛst ɔfɝz ɑɹ ɪnsəfɪʃənt, əl əpɹoʊtʃ tɛɹ əɹ kɛɹhin. ðəl nɑt ɹɪsk luzɪŋ ðə kʌstəm, maɪ leɪɾi." ɔl ɪn ðət dʒɹaɪ, flæt vɔɪs, wɪθaʊɾ ə hɪn ə ðə sæɾəsfækʃən ɛni ʌðɝ mæn wəd hæv. "ɪt wɪl bi loʊnz əɡɛns fjutʃɝ ɪnkʌm, ʌv kɔɹs, ən ðəɹ wɪl bi ɪkspɛnsəz. ðə maɪnɪŋ ɪtsɛlf. tʃɹænspɝteɪʃən. dɑnəbɑɹ ɪz ɪn maʊntənəs kʌntʃɹi, ən səm dɪstəns fɹəm ðə luɡɹd ɹoʊd. stɪl, ðəɹ ʃəd bi səfɪʃən tə mit jəɹ æmbɪʃənz fəɹ ðə ɡɑɹdz, maɪ leɪɾi. ən fəɹ jəɹ əkæɾəmi."

"Quite quickly, my Lady, and on very good terms, I believe. I shall tell them if their best offers are insufficient, I will approach Tear or Cairhien. They will not risk losing the custom, my Lady." All in that dry, flat voice, without a hint of the satisfaction any other man would have. "It will be loans against future income, of course, and there will be expenses. The mining itself. Transportation. Danabar is in mountainous country, and some distance from the Lugard Road. Still, there should be sufficient to meet your ambitions for the Guards, my Lady. And for your Academy."

"səfɪʃən ɪz hɑɹdli ðə wɝd, ɪf juv ɡɪvən oʊvɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɔk mi aʊɾ ə maɪ plænz fəɹ ði əkæɾəmi, mæstɝ nɔɹi," ʃi sɛd, nɪɹli læfɪŋ. hi wɑz əz dʒɛləs ʌv ændɝz tʃɹɛʒɝi əz ə hɛn wɪð wʌn tʃɪk, ən i hæd bɪn æɾəməntli əpoʊz tə hɝ teɪkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə skul ɹænd hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd faʊndəɾ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə hɪz ɑɹɡjəməns taɪm ən əɡɛn əntɪl ɪz vɔɪs simd ə dʒɹɪl bɔɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ skʌl. soʊ fɑɹ ðə skul kənsɪstəɾ ʌv oʊnli ə fju dʌzən skɑlɝz wɪð ðɛɹ stuɾənts, skæɾɝd əbaʊt ðə nu sɪɾi ɪn vɛɹiəs ɪnz, bʌɾ ivən ɪn wɪntɝ mɔɹ ɝaɪvd ɛvɹi deɪ, ən ðeɪ hæd bɪɡʌn tə klæmɝ fəɹ mɔɹ speɪs. ʃi dɪd nɑt pɹəpoʊz ɡɪvɪŋ əm ə pæləs, sɝɾənli, jɛt ðeɪ niɾəd sʌmθɪŋ. nɔɹi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hʌzbən ændɝz ɡoʊld, bʌt ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ tə ændɝz fjutʃɝ. tɑɹmən ɡdən wɑz kʌmɪŋ, jɛt ʃi hæd tə bɪliv ðəɹ wəd bi ə fjutʃɝ æftɝwɝd, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ɹænd bɹoʊk ðə wɝld əɡɛn. ʌðɝwaɪz, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn wɪð ɛniθɪŋ, ən ʃi kəd nɑt si dʒʌst sɪɾɪŋ daʊn tə weɪt. ivən ɪf ʃi nu fəɹ ə fæk ðət ðə læs bæɾəl wəɾ ɛn ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi kəd sɪɾ ɑn əɹ hænz. ɹænd stɑɹɾəd skulz ɪn keɪs i dɪɾ ɛn bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə wɝld, ɪn ðə hoʊp ə seɪvɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt ðɪs skul wəd bi ændɝz, nɑt ɹænd ælθɹz. ði əkæɾəmi ʌv ðə ɹoʊz, dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə ðə mɛmɹi ʌv mɔɹɡeɪs tʃɹəkənd. ðəɹ wəd bi ə fjutʃɝ, ən ðə fjutʃɝ wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ əɹ mʌðɝ. "ɔɹ əv jə dɪsaɪɾɪd ðə kɛɹhinɪn ɡoʊl kən bi tʃɹeɪs tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn æftɝ ɔl?"

"Sufficient is hardly the word, if you've given over trying to talk me out of my plans for the Academy, Master Norry," she said, nearly laughing. He was as jealous of Andor's treasury as a hen with one chick, and he had been adamantly opposed to her taking over the school Rand had ordered founded in Caemlyn, returning to his arguments time and again until his voice seemed a drill boring into her skull. So far the school consisted of only a few dozen scholars with their students, scattered about the New City in various inns, but even in winter more arrived every day, and they had begun to clamor for more space. She did not propose giving them a palace, certainly, yet they needed something. Norry was trying to husband Andor's gold, but she was looking to Andor's future. Tarmon Gai'don was coming, yet she had to believe there would be a future afterward, whether or not Rand broke the world again. Otherwise, there was no point in going on with anything, and she could not see just sitting down to wait. Even if she knew for a fact that the Last Battle would end everything, she did not think she could sit on her hands. Rand started schools in case he did end breaking the world, in the hope of saving something, but this school would be Andor's, not Rand al'Thor's. The Academy of the Rose, dedicated to the memory of Morgase Trakand. There would be a future, and the future would remember her mother. "Or have you decided the Cairhienin gold can be traced to the Dragon Reborn after all?"

"aɪ stɪl bɪliv ðə ɹɪsk tə bi vɛɹi smɔl, maɪ leɪɾi, bʌt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɝθ teɪkɪŋ ɪn vju ʌv wʌɾ aɪ hæv dʒʌs lɝn fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn." hɪz toʊn dɪd nɑɾ ɔltɝ, bʌt klɪɹli hi wɑz ædʒəteɪɾəd. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz dʒɹʌm ðə lɛðɝ foʊldɝ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst, spaɪɾɝz dænsɪŋ, ðən stɪl. "ði . . . ʌm . . . waɪt taʊɝ əz ɪʃuɾ ə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ . . . ʌm . . . lɔɹd ɹænd əz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən ɔfɝɪŋ ɪm . . . ʌm . . . pɹətɛkʃən ən ɡaɪɾəns. ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ pɹənaʊnsɪz ənæθəmə ɑn ɛniwʌn əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ɪm seɪv θɹu ðə taʊɝ. ɪts waɪz tə bi wɛɹi ʌv tɑɹ vəlɑnz æŋɡɝ, maɪ leɪɾi, əz jə jɝsɛlf ɑɹ əwɛɹ." hi lʊk sɪɡnɪfɪkənli ət ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ hæn ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ðə kɑɹvd ɑɹm ə ðə tʃɛɹ. hi nu ʌv ðə splɪɾ ɪn ðə taʊɝ, ʌv kɔɹs - meɪbi ə kɹɔftɝ ɪn seɪlaɪzɪn dɪd nɑt; noʊ wʌn ɛls kəd feɪl tə, baɪ naʊ - bʌɾ i hæd bɪn tu dɪskɹit tə æsk əɹ əlidʒəns. ðoʊ pleɪnli hi hæd bɪn əbaʊt tə seɪ "ði æmɪɝlɪn sit" ɪnstɛɾ ʌv "ðə waɪt taʊɝ." ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌɾ ɪn pleɪs ʌv "lɔɹd ɹænd." ʃi dɪd nɑt hoʊl ðəɾ əɡɛns hɪm. hi wɑz ə kɔʃəs mæn, ə kwɑləɾi niɾəd ɪn ɪz poʊst.

"I still believe the risk to be very small, my Lady, but no longer worth taking in view of what I have just learned from Tar Valon." His tone did not alter, but clearly he was agitated. His fingers drummed the leather folder against his chest, spiders dancing, then still. "The . . . umm . . . White Tower has issued a proclamation acknowledging . . . umm . . . Lord Rand as the Dragon Reborn and offering him . . . umm . . . protection and guidance. It also pronounces anathema on anyone approaching him save through the Tower. It is wise to be wary of Tar Valon's anger, my Lady, as you yourself are aware." He looked significantly at the Great Serpent ring on her hand resting on the carved arm of the chair. He knew of the split in the Tower, of course - maybe a crofter in Seleisin did not; no one else could fail to, by now - but he had been too discreet to ask her allegiance. Though plainly he had been about to say "the Amyrlin Seat" instead of "the White Tower." And the Light alone knew what in place of "Lord Rand." She did not hold that against him. He was a cautious man, a quality needed in his post.

ɪleɪɾəz pɹɑkləmeɪʃən stʌn hɝ, ðoʊ. fɹaʊnɪŋ, ʃi θʌmd əɹ ɹɪŋ θɔtfəli. ɪleɪɾə hæd wɔɹn ðət ɹɪŋ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd lɪvd. ðə wʊmən wɑz ɛɹəɡənt, ɹɔŋ-hɛɾəd, blaɪn tə ɛni vju ɪksɛpt əɹ oʊn, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt stupəd. fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt. "kæn ʃi pɑsəbli θɪŋk hɪl æksɛp sətʃ ən ɔfɝ?" ʃi mjuzd, hæf tə hɝsɛlf. "pɹətɛkʃən ən ɡaɪɾəns? aɪ kæn ɪmædʒən ə bɛɾɝ weɪ tə pʊɾ ɪz bæk ʌp!" ɡaɪɾəns? noʊ wʌn kəd ɡaɪd ɹænd wɪð ə bɑɹdʒ poʊl!

Elaida's proclamation stunned her, though. Frowning, she thumbed her ring thoughtfully. Elaida had worn that ring longer than she herself had lived. The woman was arrogant, wrong-headed, blind to any view except her own, but she was not stupid. Far from it. "Can she possibly think he will accept such an offer?" she mused, half to herself. "Protection and guidance? I can't imagine a better way to put his back up!" Guidance? No one could guide Rand with a barge pole!

"hi meɪ pɑsəbli hæv æksɛptɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi, maɪ leɪɾi, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə maɪ kɔɹəspɑndən ɪn kɛɹhin." nɔɹi wʊɾə ʃʌɾɝəd ət ðə sədʒɛstʃən i wɑz ɪn ɛni weɪ ə spaɪmæstɝ. wɛl, hi wʊɾə twɪstəɾ ɪz maʊθ ɪn dɪsteɪst, ɛniweɪ. ðə fɝs klɝk ədmɪnəstɝd ðə tʃɹɛʒɝi, kəntʃɹoʊl ðə klɝks u ɹæn ðə kæpəɾəl, ən ædvaɪz ðə θɹoʊn ɑn mæɾɝz ə steɪt. hi sɝɾənli hæd noʊ nɛtwɝk ʌv aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz, laɪk ði ədʒəz ən ivən səm ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl sɪstɝz dɪd. bʌɾ i dɪɾ ɪkstʃeɪnʒ ɹɛɡjəlɝ lɛɾɝz wɪð nɑlədʒəbəl ən ɔfən wɛl-kənɛktəd pipəl ɪn ʌðɝ kæpəɾəlz, soʊ hɪz ædvaɪs kəd bi kɝənt wɪð ɪvɛns. "ʃi sɛnz ə pɪdʒən oʊnli wʌns ə wik, ən ɪt simz ðət ɹaɪɾ æftɝ əɹ læst, sʌmwʌn ətæk ðə sʌn pæləs juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ."

"He may possibly have accepted already, my Lady, according to my correspondent in Cairhien." Norry would have shuddered at the suggestion he was in any way a spymaster. Well, he would have twisted his mouth in distaste, anyway. The First Clerk administered the treasury, controlled the clerks who ran the capital, and advised the throne on matters of state. He certainly had no network of eyes-and-ears, like the Ajahs and even some individual sisters did. But he did exchange regular letters with knowledgeable and often well-connected people in other capitals, so his advice could be current with events. "She sends a pigeon only once a week, and it seems that right after her last, someone attacked the Sun Palace using the One Power."

"ðə paʊɝ?" ʃi ɪkskleɪmd, dʒɝkɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ʃɑk.

"The Power?" she exclaimed, jerking forward in shock.

nɔɹi nɑɾəd wʌns. hi maɪɾ əv bɪn ɹipɔɹɾɪŋ ðə kɝən steɪɾ ə stʃɹit ɹɪpɛɹz. "soʊ maɪ kɔɹəspɑndən ɹɪpɔɹts, maɪ leɪɾi. ɛɛs sədaɪ, pɝhæps, əɹ æʃəmən, əɹ ivən ðə fɔɹseɪkən. ʃi ɹɪpits ɡɑsəp hɪɹ, aɪ fɪɹ. ðə wɪŋ haʊzɪŋ ði əpɑɹtməns ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz lɑɹdʒli dɪstʃɹɔɪd, ən i hɪmsɛlf əz vænɪʃt. ɪts waɪdli bɪliv ðət hiz ɡɔn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn tə nil bɪfɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. səm də bɪliv ɪm dɛɾ ɪn ði ətæk, bʌt nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni. aɪ ædvaɪz duɪŋ nʌθɪŋ əntɪl juv ə klɪɹɝ pɪktʃɝ." hi pɔzd, hɛd tɪltəɾ ɪn θɔt. "fɹʌm wʌɾ aɪ sɔ ʌv hɪm, maɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛd sloʊli, "aɪ maɪsɛlf wəd nɑt bɪliv ɪm dɛɾ ənlɛs aɪ sæt θɹi deɪz wɪð ðə kɔɹps."

Norry nodded once. He might have been reporting the current state of street repairs. "So my correspondent reports, my Lady. Aes Sedai, perhaps, or Asha'man, or even the Forsaken. She repeats gossip here, I fear. The wing housing the apartments of the Dragon Reborn was largely destroyed, and he himself has vanished. It is widely believed that he has gone to Tar Valon to kneel before the Amyrlin Seat. Some do believe him dead in the attack, but not a great many. I advise doing nothing until you have a clearer picture." He paused, head tilted in thought. "From what I saw of him, my Lady," he said slowly, "I myself would not believe him dead unless I sat three days with the corpse."

ʃi ɔlmoʊst stɛɹd. ðət wɑz vɛɹi nɪɹli ə dʒoʊk. ə ɹʌf wɪɾəsɪzəm, ət list. fɹəm hælwɪn nɔɹi! ʃi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɹænd wɑz dɛd, iðɝ. ʃi wəd nɑt bɪliv i wɑz dɛd. əz fəɹ nilɪŋ tə ɪleɪɾə, ðə mæn wɑz tu stʌbɝn tə səbmɪt tə ɛniwʌn. ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni dɪfəkəltiz kəd bi sɝmaʊntɪɾ ɪf oʊnli hi kəd bɹɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə nil tə ɛɡwin, bʌɾ i wəd nɑt də ɪt, ən ʃi wɑz ɪz tʃaɪldhʊd fɹɛnd. ɪleɪɾə stʊɾ əz mʌtʃ tʃæns əz ə ɡoʊɾ əɾ ə kɔɹt bɔl, pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli wʌns i lɝn ə hɝ pɹɑkləmeɪʃən. hu hæɾ ətæk hɪm, ðoʊ? ʃʊɹli ðə sintʃæn kəd nɑɾ əv ɹitʃt aʊt tə kɛɹhin. ɪf ðə fɔɹseɪkən hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə muv oʊpənli, ðət kəd min wɝs keɪɑs ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ðən ɔlɹɛɾi feɪs ðə wɝld, bʌt ðə wɝst wəd bi æʃəmən. ɪf ɪz oʊn kɹieɪʃənz tɝn ɑn ɪm . . . noʊ! ʃi kəd nɑt pɹətɛk hɪm, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ i niɾəd ɪt. hi wəd dʒʌst əv tə fɛn fəɹ hɪmsɛlf.

She almost stared. That was very nearly a joke. A rough witticism, at least. From Halwin Norry! She did not believe Rand was dead, either. She would not believe he was dead. As for kneeling to Elaida, the man was too stubborn to submit to anyone. A great many difficulties could be surmounted if only he could bring himself to kneel to Egwene, but he would not do it, and she was his childhood friend. Elaida stood as much chance as a goat at a court ball, particularly once he learned of her proclamation. Who had attacked him, though? Surely the Seanchan could not have reached out to Cairhien. If the Forsaken had decided to move openly, that could mean worse chaos and destruction than already faced the world, but the worst would be Asha'man. If his own creations turned on him . . . No! She could not protect him, however much he needed it. He would just have to fend for himself.

ful mæn! ʃi mʌɾɝd ɪn əɹ hɛd. hiz pɹɑbli mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɝaʊnd wɪð bænɝz, dʒʌst əz ɪf noʊ wʌn tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ɪm əɾ ɔl! jə hæd bɛɾɝ fɛn fəɹ jɝsɛlf, ɹænd ælθɹ, əɹ əl slæp jə sɪli wən aɪ ɡɛt maɪ hænz ɑn ju!

Fool man! she muttered in her head. He's probably marching around with banners, just as if no one tried to kill him at all! You had better fend for yourself, Rand al'Thor, or I'll slap you silly when I get my hands on you!

"wʌɾ ɛls də jəɹ kɔɹəspɑndəns əv tə seɪ, mæstɝ nɔɹi?" ʃi æskt əlaʊd, pʊɾɪŋ ɹænd əsaɪd. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv əɹ hænz ɑn ɪm jɛt, ən ʃi niɾəd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊld ɑn tə ændɝ.

"What else do your correspondents have to say, Master Norry?" she asked aloud, putting Rand aside. She did not have her hands on him yet, and she needed to concentrate on trying to hold on to Andor.

hɪz kɔɹəspɑndəns hæɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil tə seɪ, ðoʊ səm ʌv ɪt wɑz kwaɪɾ oʊld. nɑɾ ɔl ðə ɹaɪɾɝz juz pɪdʒənz, ən lɛɾɝz ɡɪvən tə ðə moʊs tʃɹʌstwɝði mɝtʃən kəd teɪk mʌnθs tə kʌm əkɹɔs læn ɪn ðə bɛst ə taɪmz. əntʃɹʌstwɝði mɝtʃəns æksɛptɪd ðə poʊs fi ən nɛvɝ bɑðɝd tə dɪlɪvɝ ðə lɛɾɝ. fju pipəl kəɾ əfɔɹd tə haɪɝ kɝiɝz. ɪleɪn hæɾ ə maɪn tə stɑɹɾ ə ɹɔɪəl poʊst, ɪf ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən ɛvɝ əlaʊd. nɔɹi ləmɛntɪd ðə fæk ðəɾ ɪz leɪɾəst fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ ən æmədɔɹ wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi oʊvɝteɪkən baɪ ɪvɛns ðət hæd bɪn ðə tɔk ə ðə stʃɹits fəɹ wiks.

His correspondents had a great deal to say, though some of it was quite old. Not all the writers used pigeons, and letters given to the most trustworthy merchant could take months to come across land in the best of times. Untrustworthy merchants accepted the post fee and never bothered to deliver the letter. Few people could afford to hire couriers. Elayne had a mind to start a Royal Post, if the situation ever allowed. Norry lamented the fact that his latest from Ebou Dar and Amador were already overtaken by events that had been the talk of the streets for weeks.

nɑɾ ɔl ðə nuz wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, iðɝ. hɪz lɛɾɝ ɹaɪɾɝz ɹɪli wɝ nɑɾ aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz; ðeɪ dʒʌst ɹoʊt ðə nuz ə ðɛɹ sɪɾi, ðə tɔk ə ðə kɔɹt. ðə tɔk ə tiɹ wɑz ʌv ɪnkɹisɪŋ nʌmbɝz ə si foʊk ʃɪps ðət meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə fɪŋɡɝz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən wɪθaʊt paɪləts ən naʊ kɹaʊɾəd ðə ɹɪvɝ ət ðə sɪɾi, ʌv ɹumɝz ðət si foʊk vɛsəlz hæd fɔt ðə sintʃæn ət si, ðoʊ ðət wɑz pjʊɹli ɹumɝ. ɪljən wɑz kwaɪət, ən fʊl ə ɹændz soʊlʒɝz, ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ fɹəm ə bæɾəl əɡɛns ðə sintʃæn; noʊ mɔɹ wɑz noʊn; ivən wɛðɝ ɹænd hæd bɪn ɪn ðə sɪɾi wɑz ɪn kwɛstʃən. ðə kwin ə sɑldɑiə wɑz stɪl ɑn əɹ lɔŋ ɹitʃɹiɾ ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹi, wɪtʃ ɪleɪn ɔlɹɛɾi nu əbaʊt, bʌɾ ɪt sim ðə kwin ə kændɝ hæd nɑt bɪn sin ɪn tʃeɪkɪn fəɹ mʌnθs, iðɝ, ən ðə kɪŋ ə ʃaɪnɝ wɑz səpoʊzədli stɪl ɑn ən ɪkstɛndəɾ ɪnspɛkʃən ə ðə blaɪtbɔɹɾɝ, ðoʊ ðə blaɪt wɑz ɹipɔɹɾəd kwaɪəɾɝ ðən ɛni taɪm ɪn mɛmɹi. ɪn luɡɹd, kɪŋ ɹɔdʒɹən wɑz ɡæðɝɪŋ ɛvɹi noʊbəl u wəd bɹɪŋ ɑɹmmɪn, ən ə sɪɾi ɔlɹɛɾi wɝiɾ əbaʊt tu ɡɹeɪɾ ɑɹmiz kæmp nɪɹ ðə bɔɹɾɝ wɪð ændɝ, wʌn fʊl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ði ʌðɝ fʊl ʌv ændɔɹənz, naʊ ɔlsoʊ wɝiɾ əbaʊt wʌɾ ə dɪsəlut weɪstʃɹəl laɪk ɹɔdʒɹən ɪntɛndəd.

Not all the news was important, either. His letter writers really were not eyes-and-ears; they just wrote the news of their city, the talk of the court. The talk of Tear was of increasing numbers of Sea Folk ships that made their way through the Fingers of the Dragon without pilots and now crowded the river at the city, of rumors that Sea Folk vessels had fought the Seanchan at sea, though that was purely rumor. Illian was quiet, and full of Rand's soldiers, recovering from a battle against the Seanchan; no more was known; even whether Rand had been in the city was in question. The Queen of Saldaea was still on her long retreat in the country, which Elayne already knew about, but it seemed the Queen of Kandor had not been seen in Chachin for months, either, and the King of Shienar was supposedly still on an extended inspection of the Blightborder, though the Blight was reported quieter than any time in memory. In Lugard, King Roedran was gathering every noble who would bring armsmen, and a city already worried about two great armies camped near the border with Andor, one full of Aes Sedai and the other full of Andorans, now also worried about what a dissolute wastrel like Roedran intended.

"æn jəɹ kaʊnsəl hɪɹ?" ʃi æskt wən i wɑz dʌn, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt niɾ ɪt. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi hæd nɑt niɾəd ɪɾ ɪn ði ʌðɝz. ði ɪvɛns wɝ tu fɑɹ əweɪ tə əfɛkt ændɝ, əɹ ɛls ənɪmpɔɹɾənt, dʒʌst ə vju ʌv wʌt wɑz əkɝɪŋ ɪn ʌðɝ lænz. stɪl, ʃi wɑz ɪkspɛktəd tə æsk ivən wən ðeɪ boʊθ nu ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi hæd ði ænsɝ - "du nʌθɪŋ" - ən i hæd bɪn pɹɑmpt wɪð ɪz ɹɪplaɪz. mʊɹændi wɑz niðɝ fɑɹ əweɪ nɔɹ ənɪmpɔɹɾənt, jɛt ðɪs taɪm i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, pɝsɪŋ ɪz lɪps. nɔɹi wɑz sloʊ ən məθɑɾəkəl, bʌt sɛldəm hɛzɪɾənt.

"And your counsel here?" she asked when he was done, though she did not need it. In truth, she had not needed it in the others. The events were too far away to affect Andor, or else unimportant, just a view of what was occurring in other lands. Still, she was expected to ask even when they both knew she already had the answer - "do nothing" - and he had been prompt with his replies. Murandy was neither far away nor unimportant, yet this time he hesitated, pursing his lips. Norry was slow and methodical, but seldom hesitant.

"nʌn, ɪn ðɪs ɹəɡɑɹd, maɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛɾ ət læst. "nɔɹməli, aɪ wəɾ ædvaɪz ən ɛməsɛɹi tə ɹɔdʒɹən tə ətɛmp saʊndɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz ɡoʊlz ən ɹizənz. hi meɪ bi fɪɹfəl ʌv ɪvɛns nɔɹθ ə hɪm, əɹ ə ði il ɹeɪdz wi hɪɹ soʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt. ðən əɡɛn, ðoʊ hiz ɔlweɪz bɪn ənəmbɪʃəs, hi meɪ hæv səm ɛntɝpɹaɪz ɪn nɔɹðɝn ɔltɑɹə. əɹ ɪn ændɝ, ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. ənfɔɹtʃənətli . . ." stɪl pɹɛsɪŋ ðə foʊldɝ tə hɪz tʃɛst, hi spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz slaɪtli ən saɪd, pɝhæps ɪn əpɑlədʒi, pɝhæps dɪstʃɹɛs.

"None, in this regard, my Lady," he said at last. "Normally, I would advise an emissary to Roedran to attempt sounding out his goals and reasons. He may be fearful of events north of him, or of the Aiel raids we hear so much about. Then again, though he has always been unambitious, he may have some enterprise in northern Altara. Or in Andor, under the circumstances. Unfortunately . . ." Still pressing the folder to his chest, he spread his hands slightly and sighed, perhaps in apology, perhaps distress.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, ʃi wɑz nɑt kwin jɛt, ən noʊ ɛməsɛɹi fɹəm əɹ wəd ɡɛt nɪɹ ɹɔdʒɹən. ɪf əɹ kleɪm feɪld, ən i hæd ɹəsivd əɹ ɛnvɔɪ, ðə səksɛsfəl kleɪmən maɪt siz ə swɑθ ə mʊɹændi tə titʃ ɪm ə lɛsən, ən lɔɹd lwɑn ən ði ʌðɝz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi siz tɛɹɪtɔɹi. ʃi hæd bɛɾɝ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ðən ðə fɝs klɝk, ðoʊ, fɹəm ɛɡwin. ʃi hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə ɹɪvilɪŋ əɹ sɔɹs, bʌt ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə iz ɪz dɪstʃɹɛs. ðət mʌs bi wʌt hæɾ ɪz maʊθ ɹɪŋkəld: noʊɪŋ wʌt ʃəd bi dʌn ən nɑt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə si haʊ tə də ɪt.

Unfortunately, she was not queen yet, and no emissary from her would get near Roedran. If her claim failed, and he had received her envoy, the successful claimant might seize a swath of Murandy to teach him a lesson, and Lord Luan and the others had already seized territory. She had better information than the First Clerk, though, from Egwene. She had no intention of revealing her source, but she decided to ease his distress. That must be what had his mouth wrinkled: knowing what should be done and not being able to see how to do it.

"aɪ noʊ ɹɔdʒɹənz eɪmz, mæstɝ nɔɹi, ən i eɪmz ət mʊɹændi ɪtsɛlf. ði ændɔɹənz ɪn mʊɹændi hæv æksɛptɪɾ oʊðz fɹəm mʊɹændiən noʊbəlz ɪn ðə nɔɹθ, wɪtʃ meɪk ðə ɹɛs nɝvəs. ən ðəɹ ɪz ə lɑɹdʒ bæn ə mɝsənɛɹiz - dʒɹæɡənzɔɹn, ɹɪli, bʌt ɹɔdʒɹən θɪŋks ðeɪ ɑɹ mɝsənɛɹiz - hu hiz haɪɝɾ ɪn sikɹət, tə sɪɾ ən pɹəvaɪɾ ə mɛnəs æftɝ ði ʌðɝ ɑɹmiz ɑɹ ɡɔn. hi plænz tə juz ðoʊz θɹɛts tə baɪnd noʊbəlz tə hɪm taɪtli ɪnʌf ðəɾ itʃ ɪz əfɹeɪd tə bi ðə fɝs tə bɹeɪk əweɪ wən ðə θɹɛts ɑɹ ɔl ɡɔn. hi meɪ bi ə pɹɑbləm ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ, ɪf ɪz plæn səksidz - fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, hɪl wɑn ðoʊz nɔɹðɝn lænz bæk - bʌɾ i pɹizɛns noʊ ɪmiɾiət pɹɑbləmz fəɹ ændɝ."

"I know Roedran's aims, Master Norry, and he aims at Murandy itself. The Andorans in Murandy have accepted oaths from Murandian nobles in the north, which make the rest nervous. And there is a large band of mercenaries - Dragonsworn, really, but Roedran thinks they are mercenaries - who he has hired in secret, to sit and provide a menace after the other armies are gone. He plans to use those threats to bind nobles to him tightly enough that each is afraid to be the first to break away when the threats are all gone. He may be a problem in the future, if his plan succeeds - for one thing, he will want those northern lands back - but he presents no immediate problems for Andor."

nɔɹiz aɪz waɪɾənd, ən i tɪltəɾ ɪz hɛd fɝs tə wʌn saɪd ðən ʌðɝ, stʌɾiɪŋ hɝ. hi wɛɾ ɪz lɪps bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. "ðæt wəɾ ɪkspleɪn mʌtʃ, maɪ leɪɾi. jɛs. jɛs, ɪt wʊd." hɪz tʌŋ tʌtʃt ɪz lɪps əɡɛn. "ðɛɹ wɑz wʌn ʌðɝ pɔɪn mɛnʃən baɪ maɪ kɔɹəspɑndən ɪn kɛɹhin wɪtʃ aɪ . . . ʌm . . . fɝɡɑt tə mɛnʃən. əz jə meɪ bi əwɛɹ, jəɹ ɪntɛntʃən tə kleɪm ðə sʌn θɹoʊn ɪz wɛl noʊn ðɛɹ, ən əz lɑɹdʒ səpɔɹt. ɪt simz ðət mɛni kɛɹhinɪn spik oʊpənli ʌv kʌmɪŋ tə ændɝ, tə eɪd jə ɪn ɡeɪnɪŋ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn soʊ jə kən teɪk ðə sʌn θɹoʊn sunɝ. aɪ θɪŋk pɝhæps jə də nɑt nid maɪ ædvaɪs kənsɝnɪŋ ɛni sətʃ ɔfɝz?"

Norry's eyes widened, and he tilted his head first to one side then other, studying her. He wet his lips before speaking. "That would explain much, my Lady. Yes. Yes, it would." His tongue touched his lips again. "There was one other point mentioned by my correspondent in Cairhien which I . . . umm . . . forgot to mention. As you may be aware, your intention to claim the Sun Throne is well known there, and has large support. It seems that many Cairhienin speak openly of coming to Andor, to aide you in gaining the Lion Throne so you can take the Sun Throne sooner. I think perhaps you do not need my advice concerning any such offers?"

ʃi nɑɾəd, kwaɪt ɡɹeɪʃəsli ɪn ðə sɝkəmstænsəz, ʃi θɔt. eɪd fɹəm kɛɹhin wəd bi wɝs ðən ðə mɝsənɛɹiz, fəɹ ðəɹ hæd bɪn tu mɛni wɔɹz bɪtwin ændɝ ən kɛɹhin. hi hæd nɑt fɝɡɑɾən. hælwɪn nɔɹi nɛvɝ fɝɡɑɾ ɛniθɪŋ. soʊ waɪ hæɾ i dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tɛl hɝ, ɹæðɝ ðən lɛɾ əɹ bi kɑt baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, pɝhæps baɪ ði ɝaɪvəl ə hɝ kɛɹhin səpɔɹɾɝz? hæɾ əɹ dɪspleɪ ʌv nɑlədʒ ɪmpɹɛs hɪm? əɹ meɪɾ ɪm fɪɹfəl ʃi maɪt lɝn i hæd hɛl bæk? hi weɪɾəd ɑn əɹ peɪʃənli, ə dʒɹaɪd-ʌp hɛɹən weɪɾɪŋ . . . ɑn ə fɪʃ?

She nodded, quite graciously in the circumstances, she thought. Aid from Cairhien would be worse than the mercenaries, for there had been too many wars between Andor and Cairhien. He had not forgotten. Halwin Norry never forgot anything. So why had he decided to tell her, rather than let her be caught by surprise, perhaps by the arrival of her Cairhien supporters? Had her display of knowledge impressed him? Or made him fearful she might learn he had held back? He waited on her patiently, a dried-up heron waiting . . . on a fish?

"hæv ə lɛɾɝ pɹipɛɹd fəɹ maɪ sɪɡnətʃɝ ən sil, mæstɝ nɔɹi, tə bi sɛn tə ɛvɹi meɪdʒɝ haʊs ɪn kɛɹhin. bɪɡɪn wɪð sɛɾɪŋ aʊt maɪ ɹaɪt tə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn əz ðə dɔɾɝ ə tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl dəmədʒɹd, ən seɪ ðəɾ əl kʌm tə pʊt fɔɹwɝd maɪ kleɪm wən ɪvɛns ɪn ændɝ ɑɹ mɔɹ sɛɾəld. seɪ ðəɾ əl bɹɪŋ noʊ soʊlʒɝz wɪð mi, əz aɪ noʊ ðəɾ ændɔɝən soʊlʒɝz ɑn kɛɹhinɪn sɔɪl wəɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ɔl ə kɛɹhin əɡɛns mi, ən ɹaɪtli soʊ. fɪnɪʃ wɪð maɪ əpɹiʃieɪʃən ə ðə səpɔɹɾ ɔfɝd tə maɪ kɑz baɪ mɛni kɛɹhinɪn, ən maɪ hoʊp ðəɾ ɛni dɪvɪʒənz wɪðɪn kɛɹhin kən bi hil pisfəli." ði ɪntɛlədʒənt wəd si ðə mɛsədʒ bɪhaɪn ðə wɝdz, ən wɪð lʌk, ɪkspleɪn ɪt tə ɛni hu wɝ nɑt bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf.

"Have a letter prepared for my signature and seal, Master Norry, to be sent to every major House in Cairhien. Begin with setting out my right to the Sun Throne as the daughter of Taringail Damodred, and say that I will come to put forward my claim when events in Andor are more settled. Say that I will bring no soldiers with me, as I know that Andoran soldiers on Cairhienin soil would incite all of Cairhien against me, and rightly so. Finish with my appreciation of the support offered to my cause by many Cairhienin, and my hope that any divisions within Cairhien can be healed peacefully." The intelligent would see the message behind the words, and with luck, explain it to any who were not bright enough.

"ə dɛft ɹɪspɑns, maɪ leɪɾi," nɔɹi sɛd, hʌntʃɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ɪn ə sɛmbləns ʌv ə baʊ. "aɪ ʃæl meɪk ɪt soʊ. ɪf aɪ meɪ æsk, maɪ leɪɾi, hæv jə hæd taɪm tə saɪn ði əkaʊns? ɑ. noʊ mæɾɝ. əl sɛn sʌmwʌn fəɹ əm leɪɾɝ." boʊɪŋ pɹɑpɝli, ɪf noʊ lɛs ɔkwɝdli ðən bɪfɔɹ, hi pɹipɛɹd tə ɡoʊ, ðən pɔzd. "fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ biɪŋ soʊ boʊld, maɪ leɪɾi, bʌt jə ɹimaɪn mi vɛɹi mʌtʃ ə ðə leɪt kwin jəɹ mʌðɝ."

"A deft response, my Lady," Norry said, hunching his shoulders in a semblance of a bow. "I shall make it so. If I may ask, my Lady, have you had time to sign the accounts? Ah. No matter. I will send someone for them later." Bowing properly, if no less awkwardly than before, he prepared to go, then paused. "Forgive me for being so bold, my Lady, but you remind me very much of the late Queen your mother."

wɑtʃɪŋ ðə dɔɹ kloʊs bɪhaɪn hɪm, ʃi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi kəd kaʊn ɪm ɪn əɹ kæmp. ædmɪnɪstɝɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn wɪθaʊt klɝks, mʌtʃ lɛs ændɝ, wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl, ən ðə fɝs klɝk hæd ðə paʊɝ tə bɹɪŋ ə kwin tə hɝ niz ɪf əntʃɛkt. ə kɑmpləmənt wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm əz ə dɛklɝeɪʃən ə fiəlti.

Watching the door close behind him, she wondered whether she could count him in her camp. Administering Caemlyn without clerks, much less Andor, was impossible, and the First Clerk had the power to bring a queen to her knees if unchecked. A compliment was not the same as a declaration of fealty.

ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv lɔŋ tə mʌl ðə kwɛstʃən, fəɹ oʊnli moʊməns æftɝ i dɪpɑɹɾəd, θɹi lɪvɹid meɪdz ɛntɝd, bɛɹɪŋ sɪlvɝ-doʊm tʃɹeɪz ðət ðeɪ pleɪst ɪn ə ɹoʊ ɑn ðə lɔŋ saɪd teɪbəl stændɪŋ əɡɛnst wʌn wɔl.

She did not have long to mull the question, for only moments after he departed, three liveried maids entered, bearing silver-domed trays that they placed in a row on the long side table standing against one wall.

"ðə fɝs meɪd sɛd maɪ leɪɾi fɝɡɑt tə sɛn fəɹ əɹ mɪddeɪ mil," ə ɹaʊnd, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən sɛd, kɝtsiɪŋ əz ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd fəɹ əɹ jʌŋɡɝ kəmpænjən tə ɹimuv ðə tɔl doʊmz, "soʊ ʃi sɛn ə tʃɔɪs fəɹ maɪ leɪɾi."

"The First Maid said my Lady forgot to send for her midday meal," a round, gray-haired woman said, curtsying as she gestured for her younger companion to remove the tall domes, "so she sent a choice for my Lady."

ə tʃɔɪs. ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ət ðə dɪspleɪ, ɪleɪn wɑz ɹimaɪndəd haʊ lɔŋ ɪt hæd bɪn sɪns bɹɛkfəst, iɾən wɪð ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn. ðəɹ wɑz slaɪst sæɾəl ə mʌɾən wɪð mʌstɝd sɔs, ən keɪpɑn ɹoʊstəd wɪð dʒɹaɪd fɪɡz, switbɹɛdz wɪð pɪnɛnʌts, ən kɹimi lik ən pəteɪtoʊ sup, kæbədʒ ɹoʊlz wɪð ɹeɪzənz ən pɛpɝz, ən ə skwɑʃ paɪ, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ə smɔl pleɪɾ ʌv æpəl tɑɹts ən ənʌðɝ ə tɪpsi keɪk tɑpt wɪð klɑɾəd kɹim. mɪsts ə stim ɹoʊz fɹəm tu skwɑt sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝz ʌv waɪn, ɪn keɪs ʃi pɹəfɝd wʌn sɔɹɾ ə spaɪsɪŋ oʊvɝ ənʌðɝ. ə θɝd hɛl hɑt ti. ən pʊʃt skɔɹnfəli ɪndə ə kɔɹnɝ ʌv wʌn tʃɹeɪ wɑz ðə mil ʃi ɔlweɪz ɔɹɾɝd ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə deɪ, klɪɹ bɹɔθ ən bɹɛd. ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ dɪsəpɹuvd ə ðæt; ʃi kleɪmd ɪleɪn wɑz "θɪn əz ə ɹeɪl."

A choice. Shaking her head at the display, Elayne was reminded how long it had been since breakfast, eaten with the rising sun. There was sliced saddle of mutton with mustard sauce, and capon roasted with dried figs, sweetbreads with pinenuts, and creamy leek and potato soup, cabbage rolls with raisins and peppers, and a squash pie, not to mention a small plate of apple tarts and another of tipsy cake topped with clotted cream. Mists of steam rose from two squat silver pitchers of wine, in case she preferred one sort of spicing over another. A third held hot tea. And pushed scornfully into a corner of one tray was the meal she always ordered in the middle of the day, clear broth and bread. Reene Harfor disapproved of that; she claimed Elayne was "thin as a rail."

ðə fɝs meɪd hæd spɹɛɾ əɹ əpɪnjənz. ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən pʊɾ ɑn ə ɹipɹoʊtʃfəl feɪs əz ʃi sɛt ðə bɹɛɾ ən bɹɔθ ən ti ɑn ðə teɪbəl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum wɪð ə waɪt lɪnən næpkɪn, ə θɪn blu pɔɹsələn kʌp ən sɔsɝ, ən ə sɪlvɝ pɑɾ ə hʌni. ən ə fju ʌv ðə fɪɡz ɑn ə dɪʃ. ə fʊl stʌmək ət mɪddeɪ meɪd fəɹ ə dʌl hɛɾ ɪn ði æftɝnun, əz lini juz tə seɪ. hɝ əpɪnjənz wɝ nɑt ʃɛɹd, haʊɛvɝ. ðə meɪdz wɝ ɔl kʌmfɝɾəbli pæɾəd wɪmən, ən ivən ðə jʌŋɡɝ pɛɹ lʊk dɪsəpɔɪntɪɾ əz ðeɪ dɪpɑɹɾəd wɪð ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ ə ðə fud.

The First Maid had spread her opinions. The gray-haired woman put on a reproachful face as she set the bread and broth and tea on the table in the middle of the room with a white linen napkin, a thin blue porcelain cup and saucer, and a silver pot of honey. And a few of the figs on a dish. A full stomach at midday made for a dull head in the afternoon, as Lini used to say. Her opinions were not shared, however. The maids were all comfortably padded women, and even the younger pair looked disappointed as they departed with the remainder of the food.

ɪt wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊd bɹɔθ, hɑɾ ən laɪtli spaɪst, ən ðə ti wɑz plɛzənli mɪnti, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt lɛft əloʊn wɪð əɹ mil, ən əɹ θɔts ðət pɝhæps ʃi cʊɾə teɪkən ə lɪɾəl ə ðə tɪpsi keɪk, fəɹ lɔŋ. bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd swɑloʊd tu maʊθfəlz, daɪɛlɪn stɔɹmd ɪndə ðə ɹum laɪk ə wɝlwɪn ɪn ə ɡɹin ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs, bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd. sɛɾɪŋ daʊn əɹ spun, ɪleɪn ɔfɝd ti bɪfɔɹ ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə wʌn kʌp ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi juzɪŋ, bʌt daɪɛlɪn weɪv ði ɔfɝ əsaɪd, hɝ feɪs sɛɾ ɪn ə daɪɹ fɹaʊn.

It was very good broth, hot and lightly spiced, and the tea was pleasantly minty, but she was not left alone with her meal, and her thoughts that perhaps she could have taken a little of the tipsy cake, for long. Before she had swallowed two mouthfuls, Dyelin stormed into the room like a whirlwind in a green riding dress, breathing hard. Setting down her spoon, Elayne offered tea before realizing there was only the one cup she was already using, but Dyelin waved the offer aside, her face set in a dire frown.

"ðɛɹ ɪz ən ɑɹmi ɪn bɹəm wʊd," ʃi ənaʊnst, "laɪk nʌθɪŋ sin sɪns ði il wɔɹ. ə mɝtʃən daʊn fɹəm nu bɹəm bɹɔt ðə nuz ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. ə sɑləd, ɹɪlaɪəbəl mæn, tɔɹmən; ən ɪliɑnɝ; nɑt ɡɪvən tə flaɪts ə fænsi əɹ dʒʌmpɪŋ ət ʃædoʊz. hi sɛɾ i sɔ ɝæfɛlɪn, kændɔɹi, ən ʃaɪnɝənz, ɪn dɪfɹən pleɪsəz. θaʊzənz ə ðɛm, ɔltəɡɛðɝ. tɛnz ə θaʊzənz." kəlæpsɪŋ ɪndə ə tʃɛɹ, ʃi fæn hɝsɛlf wɪð wʌn hænd. hɝ feɪs wɑz tʌtʃt wɪð ɹɛd, əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɹʌn wɪð ðə nuz. "wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɑɹ bɔɹɾɝləndɝz duɪŋ nɪɹli ɑn ðə bɔɹɾɝ ʌv ændɝ?"

"There is an army in Braem Wood," she announced, "like nothing seen since the Aiel War. A merchant down from New Braem brought the news this morning. A solid, reliable man, Tormon; an Illianer; not given to flights of fancy or jumping at shadows. He said he saw Arafellin, Kandori, and Shienarans, in different places. Thousands of them, altogether. Tens of thousands." Collapsing into a chair, she fanned herself with one hand. Her face was touched with red, as if she had run with the news. "What in the Light are Borderlanders doing nearly on the border of Andor?"

"ɪts ɹænd, əl weɪdʒɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd. staɪflɪŋ ə jɔn, ʃi dʒɹæŋk ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ ti ən ɹifɪl ðə kʌp. hɝ mɔɹnɪŋ hæd bɪn taɪɹɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪnʌf ti wəd pɝk əɹ ʌp.

"It's Rand, I'll wager," Elayne said. Stifling a yawn, she drank the rest of her tea and refilled the cup. Her morning had been tiring, but enough tea would perk her up.

daɪɛlɪn stɑp fænɪŋ ən sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt. "ju doʊn θɪŋk i sɛn ðɛm, də ju? tə . . . hɛlp ju?"

Dyelin stopped fanning and sat up straight. "You don't think he sent them, do you? To . . . help you?"

ðət pɑsəbɪləɾi hæd nɑɾ əkɝd tə ɪleɪn. ət taɪmz ʃi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd lɛɾɪŋ ði oʊldɝ wʊmən noʊ hɝ filɪŋz fəɹ ɹænd. "aɪ kænɑt θɪŋk i wɑz . . . aɪ min, wəd bi . . . ðət fulɪʃ."

That possibility had not occurred to Elayne. At times she regretted letting the older woman know her feelings for Rand. "I cannot think he was . . . I mean, would be . . . that foolish."

laɪt, ʃi wɑz taɪɝd! səmtaɪmz ɹænd bɪheɪvd əz ɪf i wɝ ðə kɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, bʌt ʃʊɹli hi wəd nɑt . . . wəd nɑt . . . wʌɾ ɪt wɑz i wəd nɑt də sim tə slaɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɝ.

Light, she was tired! Sometimes Rand behaved as if he were the King of the World, but surely he would not . . . Would not . . . What it was he would not do seemed to slide away from her.

ʃi kʌvɝɾ ənʌðɝ jɔn, ən sʌɾənli hɝ aɪz waɪɾənd əbʌv əɹ hænd, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ tikʌp. ə kul, mɪnti teɪst. kɛɹfəli, ʃi pʊt ðə kʌp daʊn, əɹ tʃɹaɪd tə. ʃi nɪɹli mɪs ðə sɔsɝ ɔltəɡɛðɝ, ən ðə kʌp tɑpəld oʊvɝ, spɪlɪŋ ti ɑntu ðə teɪbəltɑp. ti leɪst wɪð fɔkɹut. ivən noʊɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ jus, ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt tə ðə sɔɹs, tʃɹaɪd tə fɪl hɝsɛlf wɪð ðə laɪf ən dʒɔɪ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌt ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv tʃɹaɪd tə kætʃ ðə wɪn ɪn ə nɛt. bɝdʒɪts ɪɹɪteɪʃən, lɛs hɑt ðən bɪfɔɹ, wɑz stɪl lɑdʒd ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ maɪnd. fɹæntəkəli ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl ʌp fɪɹ, əɹ pænɪk. hɝ hɛd sim stʌft wɪð wʊl, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ɪt dʌld. hɛlp mi, bɝdʒɪt! ʃi θɔt. hɛlp mi!

She covered another yawn, and suddenly her eyes widened above her hand, staring at her teacup. A cool, minty taste. Carefully, she put the cup down, or tried to. She nearly missed the saucer altogether, and the cup toppled over, spilling tea onto the tabletop. Tea laced with forkroot. Even knowing there was no use, she reached out to the Source, tried to fill herself with the life and joy of saidar, but she might as well have tried to catch the wind in a net. Birgitte's irritation, less hot than before, was still lodged in a corner of her mind. Frantically she tried to pull up fear, or panic. Her head seemed stuffed with wool, everything in it dulled. Help me, Birgitte! she thought. Help me!

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" daɪɛlɪn dɪmændəd, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd ʃɑɹpli. "juv θɔɾ ə sʌmθɪŋ, ən baɪ jəɹ feɪs, ɪts hɔɹɪfɪk."

"What is it?" Dyelin demanded, leaning forward sharply. "You've thought of something, and by your face, it is horrific."

ɪleɪn blɪŋkt ət hɝ. ʃi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ði ʌðɝ wʊmən wɑz ðɛɹ. "ɡoʊ!" ʃi sɛd θɪkli, ðən swɑloʊd hɛvəli tə tʃɹaɪ klɪɹɪŋ əɹ θɹoʊt. hɝ tʌŋ stɪl fɛl twaɪs ɪts saɪz. "ɡɛt hɛlp! aɪv . . . bɪn pɔɪzənd!" ɪkspleɪnɪŋ wəd teɪk tu mʌtʃ taɪm. "ɡoʊ!"

Elayne blinked at her. She had forgotten the other woman was there. "Go!" she said thickly, then swallowed heavily to try clearing her throat. Her tongue still felt twice its size. "Get help! I've . . . been poisoned!" Explaining would take too much time. "Go!"

daɪɛlɪn ɡeɪpt ət hɝ, fɹoʊzən, ðən lɝtʃt tə hɝ fit ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə hɪlt ə hɝ bɛl naɪf.

Dyelin gaped at her, frozen, then lurched to her feet gripping the hilt of her belt knife.

ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd, ən ə sɝvən hɛzɪɾəntli pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn. ɪleɪn fɛlt ə flʌɾ ə ɹɪlif. daɪɛlɪn wəd nɑt stæb əɹ bɪfɔɹ ə wɪtnəs. ðə mæn wɛɾ ɪz lɪps, aɪ dɑɹɾɪŋ bɪtwin ðə tu wɪmən. ðən i keɪm ɪn. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə lɔŋ-bleɪɾɪd naɪf fɹəm ɪz bɛlt. tu mɔɹ mɛn ɪn ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt lɪvɝi fɑloʊd, itʃ ənʃiðɪŋ ə lɔŋ naɪf.

The door opened, and a servant hesitantly put his head in. Elayne felt a flood of relief. Dyelin would not stab her before a witness. The man wet his lips, eye darting between the two women. Then he came in. Drawing a long-bladed knife from his belt. Two more men in red-and-white livery followed, each unsheathing a long knife.

əl nɑt daɪ laɪk ə kɪɾən ɪn ə sæk, ɪleɪn θɔt bɪɾɝli. wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ʃi pʊʃt hɝsɛlf tə hɝ fit. hɝ niz wɑbəld, ən ʃi hæd tə səpɔɹt hɝsɛlf ɑn ðə teɪbəl wɪð wʌn hænd, bʌt ʃi juz ði ʌðɝ tə dʒɹɔ hɝ oʊn dæɡɝ. ðə pæɾɝn-ɛtʃt bleɪd wɑz bɛɹli əz lɔŋ əz əɹ hænd, bʌɾ ɪt wəd səfaɪs. ɪt wəd hæv, hæɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz nɑt fɛlt wʊɾən ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə hɪlt. ə tʃaɪl kəd teɪk ɪɾ əweɪ. nɑt wɪθaʊt faɪɾɪŋ bæk, ʃi θɔt. ɪt wɑz laɪk pʊʃɪŋ θɹu sɝəp, bʌt dɪtɝmən ivən soʊ. nɑt wɪθaʊt faɪɾɪŋ!

I will not die like a kitten in a sack, Elayne thought bitterly. With an effort, she pushed herself to her feet. Her knees wobbled, and she had to support herself on the table with one hand, but she used the other to draw her own dagger. The pattern-etched blade was barely as long as her hand, but it would suffice. It would have, had her fingers not felt wooden gripping the hilt. A child could take it away. Not without fighting back, she thought. It was like pushing through syrup, but determined even so. Not without fighting!

stʃɹeɪnʒli lɪɾəl taɪm sim tə hæv pæst. daɪɛlɪn wɑz dʒʌs tɝnɪŋ tə hɝ hɛntʃmən, ðə læst ə ðɛm dʒʌs kloʊzɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Strangely little time seemed to have passed. Dyelin was just turning to her henchmen, the last of them just closing the door behind him.

"mɝɾɝ!" daɪɛlɪn haʊld. pɪkɪŋ ʌp əɹ tʃɛɹ, ʃi hɝld ɪɾ ət ðə mɛn, "ɡɑɹdz! mɝɾɝ! ɡɑɹdz!"

"Murder!" Dyelin howled. Picking up her chair, she hurled it at the men, "Guards! Murder! Guards!"

ðə θɹi tʃɹaɪd tə dɑdʒ ðə tʃɛɹ, bʌt wʌn wɑz tu sloʊ, ən ɪt kɑɾ ɪm ɑn ðə lɛɡz. wɪð ə jɛl, hi fɛl ɪndə ðə mæn nɛks tə hɪm, ən ðeɪ boʊθ wɛn daʊn. ði ʌðɝ, ə slɛndɝ, toʊhɛɾɪd jʌŋ mæn wɪð bɹaɪt blu aɪz, skɪp baɪ wɪð ɪz naɪf ədvænst.

The three tried to dodge the chair, but one was too slow, and it caught him on the legs. With a yell, he fell into the man next to him, and they both went down. The other, a slender, towheaded young man with bright blue eyes, skipped by with his knife advanced.

daɪɛlɪn mɛɾ ɪm wɪð əɹ oʊn, slæʃɪŋ, stæbɪŋ, bʌɾ i muv laɪk ə fɛɹət, əvɔɪɾɪŋ əɹ ətæk wɪð iz. hɪz oʊn lɔŋ bleɪd slæʃt, ən daɪɛlɪn stʌmbəl bæk wɪð ə ʃɹik, wʌn hæn klʌtʃɪŋ əɾ əɹ mɪɾəl. hi dæns fɔɹwɝd nɪmbli, stæbɪŋ, ən ʃi skɹimd ən fɛl laɪk ə ɹæɡ dɑl. hi stɛpt oʊvɝ hɝ, wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn.

Dyelin met him with her own, slashing, stabbing, but he moved like a ferret, avoiding her attack with ease. His own long blade slashed, and Dyelin stumbled back with a shriek, one hand clutching at her middle. He danced forward nimbly, stabbing, and she screamed and fell like a rag doll. He stepped over her, walking toward Elayne.

nʌθɪŋ ɛls ɪɡzɪstəd fəɹ əɹ ɪksɛp hɪm, ən ðə naɪf ɪn ɪz hænd. hi dɪd nɑt ɹʌʃ ət hɝ. ðoʊz bɪɡ blu aɪz stʌɾid əɹ kɔʃəsli əz i ədvænst əɾ ə stɛɾi peɪs. ʌv kɔɹs. hi nu ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi hæd tə bi wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ðə poʊʃən hæd dʌn ɪts wɝk. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə stæn stʃɹeɪt, tə ɡlɛɹ ət hɪm, tə wɪn ə fju moʊməns baɪ blʌf, bʌɾ i nɑɾəd tə hɪmsɛlf, hɛftɪŋ ɪz naɪf. ɪf ʃi cʊɾə dʌn ɛniθɪŋ, ɪt wʊɾə hæpən baɪ naʊ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ plɛʒɝ ɑn ɪz feɪs. hi wɑz dʒʌst ə mæn wɪð ə dʒɑb tə du.

Nothing else existed for her except him, and the knife in his hand. He did not rush at her. Those big blue eyes studied her cautiously as he advanced at a steady pace. Of course. He knew she was Aes Sedai. He had to be wondering whether the potion had done its work. She tried to stand straight, to glare at him, to win a few moments by bluff, but he nodded to himself, hefting his knife. If she could have done anything, it would have happened by now. There was no pleasure on his face. He was just a man with a job to do.

əbɹʌpli, hi stɑpt, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ət hɪmsɛlf ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. ɪleɪn stɛɹd, tu. ət ðə fʊɾ ə stil stɪkɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ɪz tʃɛst. blʌd bʌbəld ɪn ɪz maʊθ əz i tɑpəld ɪndə ðə teɪbəl, ʃʌvɪŋ ɪt hɑɹd.

Abruptly, he stopped, staring down at himself in astonishment. Elayne stared, too. At the foot of steel sticking out from his chest. Blood bubbled in his mouth as he toppled into the table, shoving it hard.

stæɡɝɪŋ, ɪleɪn fɛl tə hɝ niz, ən bɛɹli kɑt ði ɛdʒ ə ðə teɪbəl əɡɛn tə stɑp hɝsɛlf fɔlɪŋ fɝðɝ. əmeɪzd, ʃi stɛɹɾ ət ðə mæn bliɾɪŋ ɑntu ðə kɑɹpəts. ðəɹ wɑz ə sɔɹd hɪl stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz bæk. hɝ lɛɾən θɔts wɝ wɑndɝɪŋ. ðoʊz kɑɹpəts maɪt nɛvɝ kʌm klin, wɪð ɔl ðət blʌd. sloʊli ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ aɪz, pæs ðə moʊʃənləs fɔɹm ə daɪɛlɪn. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə bi bɹiðɪŋ. tə ðə dɔɹ. ði oʊpən dɔɹ. wʌn ə ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ tu əsæsənz leɪ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪt, hɪz hɛɾ əɾ ən ɑɾ æŋɡəl, oʊnli hæf ətætʃt tə hɪz nɛk. ði ʌðɝ wɑz stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ wɪð ənʌðɝ ɹɛd-koʊɾəd mæn, ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm ɡɹʌntɪŋ ən ɹoʊlɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, boʊθ stʃɹaɪvɪŋ fəɹ ðə seɪm dæɡɝ. ðə wʊd-bi kɪlɝ wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹaɪ ði ʌðɝz fɪs fɹəm ɪz θɹoʊt wɪð ɪz fɹi hænd. ði ʌðɝ. ə mæn wɪð ə feɪs laɪk ən æks. ɪn ðə waɪt-kɑlɝd koʊɾ ʌv ə ɡɑɹdzmæn.

Staggering, Elayne fell to her knees, and barely caught the edge of the table again to stop herself falling further. Amazed, she stared at the man bleeding onto the carpets. There was a sword hilt sticking out of his back. Her leaden thoughts were wandering. Those carpets might never come clean, with all that blood. Slowly she raised her eyes, past the motionless form of Dyelin. She did not appear to be breathing. To the door. The open door. One of the remaining two assassins lay in front of it, his head at an odd angle, only half attached to his neck. The other was struggling with another red-coated man, the pair of them grunting and rolling on the floor, both striving for the same dagger. The would-be killer was trying to pry the other's fist from his throat with his free hand. The other. A man with a face like an axe. In the white-collared coat of a Guardsman.

hɝi, bɝdʒɪt, ʃi θɔt dʌli. pliz hɝi.

Hurry, Birgitte, she thought dully. Please hurry.

dɑɹknəs kənsum hɝ.

Darkness consumed her.


tʃæptɝ tɛn


CHAPTER 10

eɪ plæn səksidz


A Plan Succeeds

ɪleɪnz aɪz oʊpən ɪn dɑɹknəs, stɛɹɪŋ ət dɪm ʃædoʊz dænsɪŋ ɑn mɪsti pælnəs. hɝ feɪs wɑz koʊld, ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ hɑɾ ən swɛɾi, ən sʌmθɪŋ kənfaɪn əɹ ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz. fəɹ ən ɪnstən pænɪk flɛɹd. ðən ʃi sɛnst eɪvinhəz pɹɛzəns ɪn ðə ɹum, ə sɪmpəl, kʌmfɝɾɪŋ əwɛɹnəs, ən bɝdʒɪts, ə fɪst ə kɑm, kəntʃɹoʊld æŋɡɝ ɪn əɹ hɛd. ðeɪ suðd əɹ baɪ biɪŋ ðɛɹ. ʃi wɑz ɪn əɹ oʊn bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ, laɪɪŋ bɪniθ blæŋkəts ɪn əɹ oʊn bɛɾ ən stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə tɔt lɪnən kænəpi wɪð hɑt-wɔɾɝ bɑɾəlz pækt əlɔŋ əɹ saɪdz. ðə hɛvi wɪntɝ bɛdkɝɾənz wɝ taɪd bæk əɡɛns ðə kɑɹv poʊsts, ən ði oʊnli laɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹum keɪm fɹəm taɪni flɪkɝɪŋ fleɪmz ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs, dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə meɪk ʃædoʊz ʃɪft, nɑt dɪspɛl ðɛm.

Elayne's eyes opened in darkness, staring at dim shadows dancing on misty paleness. Her face was cold, the rest of her hot and sweaty, and something confined her arms and legs. For an instant panic flared. Then she sensed Aviendha's presence in the room, a simple, comforting awareness, and Birgitte's, a fist of calm, controlled anger in her head. They soothed her by being there. She was in her own bedchamber, lying beneath blankets in her own bed and staring up at the taut linen canopy with hot-water bottles packed along her sides. The heavy winter bedcurtains were tied back against the carved posts, and the only light in the room came from tiny flickering flames in the fireplace, just enough to make shadows shift, not dispel them.

wɪθaʊt θɔt ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt fəɹ ðə sɔɹs ən faʊn ɪt. tʌtʃt seɪaɪdɑɹ, wɑnʒɹəsli, wɪθaʊt dʒɹɔɪŋ ɑn ɪt. ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə dʒɹɔ dipli wɛld ʌp stʃɹɔŋ ɪn hɝ, bʌt ɹɪlʌktənli ʃi ɹitʃɹiɾəd. oʊ, soʊ ɹɪlʌktənli, ən nɑt dʒʌs kəz əɹ wɑntɪŋ tə bi fɪld wɪð ðə dipɝ laɪf ə seɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz ɔfən ə bɑɾəmləs nid ðət mʌs bi kəntʃɹoʊld. hɝ ɡɹeɪɾəst fɪɹ dʊɹɪŋ ðoʊz ɛnləs mɪnəts ə tɛɹɝ hæd nɑt bɪn dɛθ, bʌt ðət ʃi wəd nɛvɝ tʌtʃ ðə sɔɹs əɡɛn. wʌns, ʃi wʊɾə θɔt ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ.

Without thought she reached out for the Source and found it. Touched saidar, wondrously, without drawing on it. The desire to draw deeply welled up strong in her, but reluctantly she retreated. Oh, so reluctantly, and not just because her wanting to be filled with the deeper life of saidar was often a bottomless need that must be controlled. Her greatest fear during those endless minutes of terror had not been death, but that she would never touch the Source again. Once, she would have thought that strange.

əbɹʌpli, mɛmɹi ɹɪtɝnd, ən ʃi sæɾ ʌp ənstɛɾəli, ðə blæŋkəts slaɪɾɪŋ tə hɝ weɪst. ɪmiɾiətli, ʃi pʊld əm bæk ʌp. ði ɛɹ wɑz koʊld əɡɛnst əɹ bɛɹ skɪn slɪk wɪð swɛt. ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ ivən lɛft əɹ ə ʃɪft, ən tʃɹaɪ əz ʃi wəd tə kɑpi eɪvinhəz iz əbaʊt biɪŋ ənkloʊðd ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ʌðɝz, ʃi kəd nɑt mænədʒ ɪt. "daɪɛlɪn," ʃi sɛɾ æŋkʃəsli, twɪstɪŋ tə dʒɹeɪp ðə blæŋkəts ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf bɛɾɝ. ɪt wɑz ən ɑkwɝɾ ɑpɝeɪʃən; ʃi fɛlt ɹʌŋ aʊɾ ən mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl wɑbəli. "æn ðə ɡɑɹdzmæn. ɑɹ ðeɪ . . . ?"

Abruptly, memory returned, and she sat up unsteadily, the blankets sliding to her waist. Immediately, she pulled them back up. The air was cold against her bare skin slick with sweat. They had not even left her a shift, and try as she would to copy Aviendha's ease about being unclothed in front of others, she could not manage it. "Dyelin," she said anxiously, twisting to drape the blankets around herself better. It was an awkward operation; she felt wrung out and more than a little wobbly. "And the Guardsman. Are they . . . ?"

"ðə mæn dɪdn sʌfɝ ə skɹætʃ," nɪneɪiv sɛd, stɛpɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ʃɪftɪŋ ʃædoʊz, ə ʃædoʊ hɝsɛlf. ʃi ɹɛstəɾ əɹ hæn ɑn ɪleɪnz fɔɹhɛɾ ən ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪn sæɾəsfækʃən ət faɪndɪŋ ɪt kul. "aɪ hil daɪɛlɪn. ʃɪl nid taɪm tə ɹɪkʌvɝ əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ fʊli, ðoʊ. ʃi lɔst ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə blʌd. jə ɑɹ duɪŋ wɛl, tu. fəɹ ə taɪm, aɪ θɔt jə wɝ teɪkɪŋ ə fivɝ. ðət kən kʌm ɑn sʌɾənli wən jəɹ wikənd."

"The man didn't suffer a scratch," Nynaeve said, stepping out of the shifting shadows, a shadow herself. She rested her hand on Elayne's forehead and grunted in satisfaction at finding it cool. "I Healed Dyelin. She will need time to recover her strength fully, though. She lost a great deal of blood. You are doing well, too. For a time, I thought you were taking a fever. That can come on suddenly when you're weakened."

"ʃi ɡeɪv jə ɝbz ɪnstɛɾ ə hilɪŋ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd saʊɝli fɹəm ə tʃɛɹ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɛd. ɪn ðə nɪɹ dɑɹknəs, ʃi wɑz dʒʌst ə skwɑt, ɑmənəs ʃeɪp.

"She gave you herbs instead of Healing," Birgitte said sourly from a chair at the foot of the bed. In the near darkness, she was just a squat, ominous shape.

"nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə ɪz waɪz ɪnʌf tə noʊ wʌt ʃi kænɑt du," eɪvinhə sɛɾ ɪn lɛvəl toʊnz. oʊnli hɝ waɪt blaʊs ən ə flæʃ ə pɑlɪʃt sɪlvɝ wɝ ɹɪli vɪzəbəl, loʊ əɡɛns ðə wɔl. əz juʒəwəl, ʃi hæd tʃoʊzən ðə flɔɹ oʊvɝ ə tʃɛɹ. "ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə teɪst ə ðɪs fɔkɹuɾ ɪn ðə ti ən dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə wɝk əɹ wivz əɡɛnst ɪt, soʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt teɪk fulɪʃ tʃænsəz."

"Nynaeve al'Meara is wise enough to know what she cannot do," Aviendha said in level tones. Only her white blouse and a flash of polished silver were really visible, low against the wall. As usual, she had chosen the floor over a chair. "She recognized the taste of this forkroot in the tea and did not know how to work her weaves against it, so she did not take foolish chances."

nɪneɪiv snɪft ʃɑɹpli. noʊ daʊɾ əz mʌtʃ əɾ eɪvinhəz dɪfɛns ə hɝ əz bɝdʒɪts əsɪɾəti. pɝhæps mɔɹ soʊ. nɪneɪiv biɪŋ nɪneɪiv, ʃi pɹɑbli wʊɾə pɹəfɝd tə lɛt slaɪd wʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ən kəd nɑt du. ən ʃi wɑz mɔɹ pɹɪkli ðən juʒəwəl əbaʊt hilɪŋ, ʌv leɪt. ɛvɝ sɪns ɪt bɪkeɪm klɪɹ ðət sɛvɹəl ə ðə kɪn wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi aʊtstʃɹɪpɪŋ əɹ skɪl. "ju ʃʊɾə ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪt jɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə bɹʌsk vɔɪs. "æɾ ɛni ɹeɪt, ɡɹinwɝɾ ən ɡoʊtstɔŋ maɪt meɪk jə slip, bʌt ðəɹ sɑvɹən fəɹ stʌmək kɹæmps. aɪ θɔt jə wəd pɹəfɝ ðə slip."

Nynaeve sniffed sharply. No doubt as much at Aviendha's defense of her as Birgitte's acidity. Perhaps more so. Nynaeve being Nynaeve, she probably would have preferred to let slide what she did not know and could not do. And she was more prickly than usual about Healing, of late. Ever since it became clear that several of the Kin were already outstripping her skill. "You should have recognized it yourself, Elayne," she said in a brusque voice. "At any rate, greenwort and goatstongue might make you sleep, but they're sovereign for stomach cramps. I thought you would prefer the sleep."

fɪʃɪŋ lɛðɝ hɑt-wɔɾɝ bɑɾəlz fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə kʌvɝz ən dʒɹɑpɪŋ əm ɑntu ðə kɑɹpəts soʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑɹt ɹoʊstɪŋ əɡɛn, ɪleɪn ʃʌɾɝəd. ðə deɪz ɹaɪɾ æftɝ ɹɑn məkʊə doʊzd əɹ ən nɪneɪiv wɪð fɔkɹut hæd bɪn ə mɪzɝi ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə fɝɡɛt. wʌtɛvɝ ði ɝbz wɝ ðət nɪneɪiv hæd ɡɪvən hɝ, ʃi fɛl noʊ wikɝ ðən ðə fɔkɹut wʊɾə meɪd hɝ. ʃi θɔt ʃi kəd wɔk, soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə wɔk fɑɹ əɹ stæn lɔŋ. ən ʃi kəd θɪŋk klɪɹli. ðə keɪsməns ʃoʊɾ oʊnli θɪn munlaɪt. haʊ dipli ɪndə ðə naɪt wɑz ɪt?

Fishing leather hot-water bottles from under the covers and dropping them onto the carpets so she did not start roasting again, Elayne shuddered. The days right after Ronde Macura dosed her and Nynaeve with forkroot had been a misery she had tried to forget. Whatever the herbs were that Nynaeve had given her, she felt no weaker than the forkroot would have made her. She thought she could walk, so long as she did not have to walk far or stand long. And she could think clearly. The casements showed only thin moonlight. How deeply into the night was it?

ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs əɡɛn, ʃi tʃænəl fɔɹ θɹɛdz ə faɪɝ tə laɪt fɝst wʌn stænd-læmp, ðən ə sɛkənd. ðə smɔl, mɪɹɝd fleɪmz bɹaɪɾənd ðə ɹum ɡɹeɪtli æftɝ ðə dɑɹknəs, ən bɝdʒɪt pʊɾ ə hæn ʌp tə ʃild əɹ aɪz, ət fɝst. ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəlz koʊt tʃɹuli dɪd sut hɝ; ʃi wʊɾə ɪmpɹɛs ðə mɝtʃəns noʊ ɛnd.

Embracing the Source again, she channeled four threads of Fire to light first one stand-lamp, then a second. The small, mirrored flames brightened the room greatly after the darkness, and Birgitte put a hand up to shield her eyes, at first. The Captain-General's coat truly did suit her; she would have impressed the merchants no end.

"ju ʃəd nɑt bi tʃænəlɪŋ jɛt," nɪneɪiv fʌst, skwɪntɪŋ ət ðə sʌɾən laɪt. ʃi stɪl wɔɹ ðə seɪm loʊ-kʌt blu dʒɹɛs ɪleɪn hæd sin əɹ ɪn ɝliɝ, wɪð əɹ jɛloʊ-fɹɪnd ʃɔl kɑɾ ɪn əɹ ɛlboʊz. "ə fju deɪz tə ɹɪɡeɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ wəd bi bɛst, wɪð plɛnti ʌv slip." ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðə hɑt-wɔɾɝ bɑɾəlz tʌmbəld ɑn ðə flɔɹ. "æn jə nid tə bi kɛpt wɔɹm. bɛɾɝ tə əvɔɪɾ ə fivɝ ðən nid tə hil ɪt."

"You should not be channeling yet," Nynaeve fussed, squinting at the sudden light. She still wore the same low-cut blue dress Elayne had seen her in earlier, with her yellow-fringed shawl caught in her elbows. "A few days to regain strength would be best, with plenty of sleep." She frowned at the hot-water bottles tumbled on the floor. "And you need to be kept warm. Better to avoid a fever than need to Heal it."

"aɪ θɪŋk daɪɛlɪn pɹuvd əɹ lɔɪəlti tədeɪ," ɪleɪn sɛd, ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ pɪloʊz soʊ ʃi kəd lin bæk əɡɛns ðə hɛdbɔɹd, ən nɪneɪiv θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz ɪn dɪsɡʌst. ə smɔl sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ ɑn wʌn ə ðə saɪd teɪbəlz flæŋkɪŋ ðə bɛd hɛld ə sɪŋɡəl sɪlvɝ kʌp fɪld wɪð dɑɹk waɪn ðəɾ ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ə bɹif, mɪstʃɹʌstɪŋ lʊk. "ə hɑɹd weɪ tə pɹuv ɪt. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ hæv toʊ təwɔɹd hɝ, eɪvinhə."

"I think Dyelin proved her loyalty today," Elayne said, shifting her pillows so she could lean back against the headboard, and Nynaeve threw up her hands in disgust. A small silver tray on one of the side tables flanking the bed held a single silver cup filled with dark wine that Elayne gave a brief, mistrusting look. "A hard way to prove it. I think I have toh toward her, Aviendha."

eɪvinhə ʃɹʌɡd. ɑn ðɛɹ ɝaɪvəl ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ʃi hæd ɹɪtɝn tə il ɡɑɹməns wɪð ɔlmoʊs læfəbəl heɪst, fɔɹseɪkɪŋ sɪlks fəɹ ælɡoʊd blaʊsəz ən bʌlki wʊlən skɝts əz ðoʊ sʌɾənli əfɹeɪɾ ʌv wɛtləndɝ lʌɡʒɝi. wɪð ə dɑɹk ʃɔl taɪɾ ɝaʊn əɹ weɪst ən ə dɑɹk foʊldəd kɝtʃəf hoʊldɪŋ əɹ lɔŋ hɛɹ bæk, ʃi wɑz ði ɪmədʒ ʌv ə waɪz wʌnz əpɹɛntəs, ðoʊ hɝ oʊnli dʒuəlɹi wɑz ə kɑmpləkeɪɾəd sɪlvɝ nɛkləs ʌv ɪntʃɹəkətli wɝk dɪsks, ə ɡɪft fɹəm ɛɡwin. ɪleɪn stɪl dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn əɹ hɝi. məleɪn ən ði ʌðɝz hæd simd wɪlɪŋ tə lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ hɝ oʊn weɪ soʊ lɔŋ əz ʃi wɔɹ wɛtləndɝ kloʊðz, bʌt naʊ ðeɪ hæɾ əɹ bæk ɪn ðɛɹ ɡɹɪp əz taɪtli əz ɛni nɑvəs ɪn ðə hænz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. ði oʊnli ɹizən ðeɪ əlaʊɾ əɹ tə steɪ ɛni taɪm əɾ ɔl ɪn ðə pæləs - ɪn ðə sɪɾi, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ - wɑz ðət ʃi ən ɪleɪn wɝ fɝst-sɪstɝz.

Aviendha shrugged. On their arrival in Caemlyn she had returned to Aiel garments with almost laughable haste, forsaking silks for algode blouses and bulky woolen skirts as though suddenly afraid of wetlander luxury. With a dark shawl tied around her waist and a dark folded kerchief holding her long hair back, she was the image of a Wise One's apprentice, though her only jewelry was a complicated silver necklace of intricately worked discs, a gift from Egwene. Elayne still did not understand her hurry. Melaine and the others had seemed willing to let her go her own way so long as she wore wetlander clothes, but now they had her back in their grip as tightly as any novice in the hands of Aes Sedai. The only reason they allowed her to stay any time at all in the Palace - in the city, for that matter - was that she and Elayne were first-sisters.

"ɪf jə θɪŋk jə du, ðən jə du." hɝ toʊnz ə pɔɪntɪŋ aʊt ði ɑbviəs slɪɾ ɪndə ən əfɛkʃənət tʃaɪɾɪŋ. "bʌɾ ə smɔl toʊ, ɪleɪn. jə hæd ɹizən tə daʊt. jə kænɑɾ əsum ɑbləɡeɪʃən fəɹ ɛvɹi θɔt, sɪstɝ." ʃi læft əz ɪf sʌɾənli siɪŋ ə wʌndɝfəl dʒoʊk. "ðæt weɪ laɪz tu mʌtʃ pɹaɪd, ən əl əv tə bi oʊvɝpɹaʊd wɪð ju, oʊnli ðə waɪz wʌnz wɪl nɑt kɔl tə jə tə əkaʊn fəɹ ɪt."

"If you think you do, then you do." Her tones of pointing out the obvious slid into an affectionate chiding. "But a small toh, Elayne. You had reason to doubt. You cannot assume obligation for every thought, sister." She laughed as if suddenly seeing a wonderful joke. "That way lies too much pride, and I will have to be overproud with you, only the Wise Ones will not call to you to account for it."

nɪneɪiv ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz ɑstənteɪʃəsli, bʌɾ eɪvinhə sɪmpli ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, wɛɹəli peɪʃənt wɪð ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz ɪɡnɝəns. ʃi hæd bɪn stʌɾiɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ðə paʊɝ wɪð ðə waɪz wʌnz.

Nynaeve rolled her eyes ostentatiously, but Aviendha simply shook her head, wearily patient with the other woman's ignorance. She had been studying more than the Power with the Wise Ones.

"wɛl, wi wʊdnt wɑn ðə pɛɹ ə jə biɪŋ tu pɹaʊd," bɝdʒɪt sɛd wɪð wʌt saʊndəd səspɪʃəsli laɪk səpɹɛs mɝθ. hɝ feɪs wɑz mʌtʃ tu smuð, ɔlmoʊst ɹɪdʒəd wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ ə nɑt læfɪŋ.

"Well, we wouldn't want the pair of you being too proud," Birgitte said with what sounded suspiciously like suppressed mirth. Her face was much too smooth, almost rigid with the effort of not laughing.

eɪvinhə aɪd bɝdʒɪt wɪð ə wʊɾən-feɪst wɛɹinɪs. sɪns ʃi ən ɪleɪn hæɾ ədɑptəd wʌn ənʌðɝ, bɝdʒɪt hæɾ ədɑptəd hɝ, tu, ɪn weɪ. nɑɾ əz ə wɔɹɾɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt wɪð ðə seɪm ɛldɝ-sɪstɝ æɾətud ʃi ɔfən dɪspleɪd təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn. eɪvinhə wɑz nɑt kwaɪt ʃʊɹ wʌt tə meɪk ʌv ɪt, əɹ haʊ tə ɹɪspɑnd. dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə taɪni sɝkəl u nu hu bɝdʒɪt ɹɪli wɑz sɝɾənli hæd nɑt hɛlpt. ʃi baʊns bɪtwin fɪɹs dɪtɝməneɪʃən tə ʃoʊ ðət bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ dɪd nɑɾ oʊvɝeɪ hɝ ən ə stɑɹtlɪŋ miknəs, wɪð ɑd stɑps ɪn bɪtwin.

Aviendha eyed Birgitte with a wooden-faced wariness. Since she and Elayne had adopted one another, Birgitte had adopted her, too, in way. Not as a Warder, of course, but with the same elder-sister attitude she often displayed toward Elayne. Aviendha was not quite sure what to make of it, or how to respond. Joining the tiny circle who knew who Birgitte really was certainly had not helped. She bounced between fierce determination to show that Birgitte Silverbow did not overawe her and a startling meekness, with odd stops in between.

bɝdʒɪt smaɪld ət hɝ, ən əmjuz smaɪl, bʌɾ ɪt feɪɾəd əz ʃi pɪkt ʌp ə nɛɹoʊ bʌndəl fɹəm əɹ læp ən bɪɡæn ənfoʊldɪŋ ðə klɔθ wɪð ɡɹeɪt kɛɹ. baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi ɹɪvild ə dæɡɝ wɪð ə lɛðɝ-ɹæp hɪlt ən ə lɔŋ bleɪd, hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz səvɪɹ, ən taɪɾ æŋɡɝ floʊd θɹu ðə bɑnd. ɪleɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə naɪf ɪnstənli; ʃi hæd læst sin ɪts twɪn ɪn ðə hæn ʌv ə toʊ-hɛɾəd əsæsən.

Birgitte smiled at her, an amused smile, but it faded as she picked up a narrow bundle from her lap and began unfolding the cloth with great care. By the time she revealed a dagger with a leather-wrapped hilt and a long blade, her expression was severe, and tight anger flowed through the bond. Elayne recognized the knife instantly; she had last seen its twin in the hand of a tow-headed assassin.

"ðeɪ wɝ nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪdnæp ju, sɪstɝ," eɪvinhə sɛd sɔfli.

"They were not trying to kidnap you, sister," Aviendha said softly.

bɝdʒɪts toʊn wɑz ɡɹɪm. "æftɝ mɛlɝ kɪl ðə fɝs tu - ðə sɛkən baɪ spɪɹɪŋ ɪm wɪð ɪz sɔɹɾ əkɹɔs ðə wɪdθ ə ðə ɹum laɪk sʌmbɑɾi ɪn ə blʌɾi ɡlimənz teɪl," ʃi hɛl ðə dæɡɝ əpɹaɪt baɪ ði ɛn ə ðə hɪlt, "hi tʊk ðɪs fɹəm ðə læs fɛloʊ ən kɪld ɪm wɪð ɪt. ðeɪ hæd fɔɹ nɪɹ aɪdɛntɪkəl dæɡɝz bɪtwin ðɛm. ðɪs wʌn ɪz pɔɪzənd."

Birgitte's tone was grim. "After Mellar killed the first two - the second by spearing him with his sword across the width of the room like somebody in a bloody gleeman's tale," she held the dagger upright by the end of the hilt, "he took this from the last fellow and killed him with it. They had four near identical daggers between them. This one is poisoned."

"ðoʊz bɹaʊn steɪnz ɑn ðə bleɪɾ ɑɹ ɡɹeɪ fɛnəl mɪkst wɪð paʊɾɝd pitʃ pɪt," nɪneɪiv sɛd, sɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə bɛd, ən ɡɹɪməst ɪn dɪsɡʌst. "wʌn lʊk əɾ ɪz aɪz ən tʌŋ, ən aɪ nu ðət wɑz wʌt kɪl ðə fɛloʊ, nɑt ðə naɪf."

"Those brown stains on the blade are gray fennel mixed with powdered peach pit," Nynaeve said, sitting down on the edge of the bed, and grimaced in disgust. "One look at his eyes and tongue, and I knew that was what killed the fellow, not the knife."

"wɛl," ɪleɪn sɛd kwaɪətli æftɝ ə moʊmənt. wɛl, ɪndid. "fɔkɹut soʊ aɪ kʊdn tʃænəl, əɹ stæn ʌp, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ən tu mɛn tə hoʊl mi ɑn maɪ fit waɪl ðə θɝd pʊɾ ə pɔɪzən dæɡɝ ɪn mi. ə kɑmpləkeɪɾəd plæn."

"Well," Elayne said quietly after a moment. Well, indeed. "Forkroot so I couldn't channel, or stand up, for that matter, and two men to hold me on my feet while the third put a poisoned dagger in me. A complicated plan."

"wɛtləndɝz laɪk kɑmpləkeɪɾəd plænz," eɪvinhə sɛd. ɡlænsɪŋ ət bɝdʒɪɾ ənizəli, ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɡɛns ðə wɔl ən æɾəd, "sʌm du."

"Wetlanders like complicated plans," Aviendha said. Glancing at Birgitte uneasily, she shifted against the wall and added, "Some do."

"sɪmpəl, ɪn ɪts weɪ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, ɹiɹæpɪŋ ðə naɪf wɪð əz ɡɹeɪɾ ə kɛɹ əz ʃi hæd ʃoʊn ənɹæpɪŋ. "ju wɝ izi tə ɹitʃ. ɛvɹiwʌn noʊz jə it jəɹ mɪddeɪ mil əloʊn." hɝ lɔŋ bɹeɪd swʌŋ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ə lʌki θɪŋ ðə fɝs mæn tə ɹitʃ jə dɪdn əv ðɪs; wʌn stæb, ən jud bi dɛd. ə lʌki θɪŋ mɛlɝ hæpən tə bi wɔkɪŋ baɪ ən hɝɾ ə mæn kɝsɪŋ ɪn jəɹ ɹumz. ɪnʌf lʌk fəɹ ə tɑvɝən."

"Simple, in its way," Birgitte said, rewrapping the knife with as great a care as she had shown unwrapping. "You were easy to reach. Everyone knows you eat your midday meal alone." Her long braid swung as she shook her head. "A lucky thing the first man to reach you didn't have this; one stab, and you'd be dead. A lucky thing Mellar happened to be walking by and heard a man cursing in your rooms. Enough luck for a ta'veren."

nɪneɪiv snɔɹɾɪd. "ju maɪt bi dɛd fɹəm ə dip ɪnʌf kʌɾ ɑn jəɹ ɑɹm. ðə pɪɾ ɪz ðə moʊs pɔɪzənəs pɑɹɾ ʌv ə pitʃ. daɪɛlɪn wʊdn əv hæɾ ə tʃæns ɪf ði ʌðɝ bleɪdz hæd bɪn pɔɪzən əz wɛl."

Nynaeve snorted. "You might be dead from a deep enough cut on your arm. The pit is the most poisonous part of a peach. Dyelin wouldn't have had a chance if the other blades had been poisoned as well."

ɪleɪn lʊkt ɝaʊn əɾ əɹ fɹɛnz' flæt, ɪkspɹɛʃənləs feɪsəz ən saɪd. ə vɛɹi kɑmpləkeɪɾəd plæn. əz ɪf spaɪz ɪn ðə pæləs wɝ nɑt bæɾ ɪnʌf. "ə smɔl bɑɾiɡɑɹd, bɝdʒɪt," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "sʌmθɪŋ . . . dɪskɹit." ʃi ʃʊɾə noʊn ðə wʊmən wəd bi pɹipɛɹd, bɝdʒɪts feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ɪn ðə slaɪɾəst, bʌt ðə taɪniəs bɝst ə sæɾəsfækʃən flɛɹd θɹu ðɛɹ ʃɛɹd bɑnd.

Elayne looked around at her friends' flat, expressionless faces and sighed. A very complicated plan. As if spies in the Palace were not bad enough. "A small bodyguard, Birgitte," she said finally. "Something . . . discreet." She should have known the woman would be prepared, Birgitte's face did not change in the slightest, but the tiniest burst of satisfaction flared through their shared bond.

"ðə wɪmən u ɡɑɹɾəd jə tədeɪ, fəɹ ə stɑɹt," ʃi sɛd, wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz pɹitɛndɪŋ tə pɔz fəɹ θɔt, "æn ə fju mɔɹ ðəɾ əl pɪk. meɪbi twɛnti əɹ soʊ, ɔltəɡɛðɝ. tu fju kæn pɹətɛk jə deɪ ən naɪt, ən jə blʌɾi wɛl mʌs bi," ʃi pʊɾ ɪn fɝmli, ðoʊ ɪleɪn hæd nɑɾ ɔfɝɾ ɛni pɹoʊɾɛst. "wɪmən kən ɡɑɹd jə wɛɹ mɛn kænt, ən ðəl bi dɪskɹit dʒʌs baɪ biɪŋ u ðeɪ ɑɹ. moʊs pipəl wɪl θɪŋk ðəɹ sɛɹəmoʊniəl - jəɹ vɛɹi oʊn meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ - ən wɪl ɡɪv əm sʌmθɪŋ, ə sæʃ meɪbi, tə meɪk əm lʊk mɔɹ soʊ." ðəɾ ɝn əɹ ə vɛɹi ʃɑɹp lʊk fɹəm eɪvinhə, wɪtʃ ʃi əfɛktəd nɑt tə noʊɾəs. "ðə pɹɑbləm ɪz u tə kəmænd," ʃi sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ ɪn θɔt. "tu əɹ θɹi noʊbəlz, hʌntɝz, ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi ɑɹɡjuɪŋ fəɹ ɹæŋk 'səfɪʃən tə ðɛɹ steɪʃən.' ðə blʌɾi wɪmən noʊ haʊ tə ɡɪv ɔɹɾɝz, bʌɾ aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ ðeɪ noʊ ðə ɹaɪt blʌɾi ɔɹɾɝz tə ɡɪv. aɪ kəd pɹəmoʊt keɪsil tə lutɛnənt, bʌt ʃiz mɔɹ ə bænɝmən ət hɑɹt, aɪ θɪŋk." bɝdʒɪt ʃɹʌɡd. "meɪbi wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz wɪl ʃoʊ pɹɑməs, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ ɑɹ bɛɾɝ fɑloʊɝz ðən liɾɝz."

"The women who guarded you today, for a start," she said, without so much as pretending to pause for thought, "and a few more that I'll pick. Maybe twenty or so, altogether. Too few can't protect you day and night, and you bloody well must be," she put in firmly, though Elayne had not offered any protest. "Women can guard you where men can't, and they'll be discreet just by being who they are. Most people will think they're ceremonial - your very own Maidens of the Spear - and we'll give them something, a sash maybe, to make them look more so." That earned her a very sharp look from Aviendha, which she affected not to notice. "The problem is who to command," she said, frowning in thought. "Two or three nobles, Hunters, are already arguing for rank 'sufficient to their station.' The bloody women know how to give orders, but I'm not sure they know the right bloody orders to give. I could promote Caseille to lieutenant, but she's more a bannerman at heart, I think." Birgitte shrugged. "Maybe one of the others will show promise, but I think they are better followers than leaders."

oʊ, jɛs; ɔl θɔɾ aʊt. twɛnti əɹ soʊ? ʃi wəɾ əv tə kip ə kloʊs aɪ ɑn bɝdʒɪt tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə nʌmbɝ dɪd nɑt klaɪm tə fɪfti. əɹ mɔɹ. eɪbəl tə ɡɑɹɾ əɹ wɛɹ mɛn kəd nɑt. ɪleɪn wɪnst. ðət pɹɑbli mɛnt ɡɑɹdz wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ beɪð ət ðə vɛɹi list. "keɪsil wɪl du, ʃʊɹli. ə bænɝmən kən hændəl twɛnti." ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ʃi kəd tɔk keɪsil ɪndə kipɪŋ ɪɾ ɔl ʌnəbtʃɹusɪv. ən kipɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹdz aʊtsaɪd waɪl ʃi tʊk ə bæθ. "ðə mæn u ɝaɪv dʒʌst ɪn ðə nɪk ə taɪm. mɛlɝ? wʌt dʒju noʊ ʌv hɪm, bɝdʒɪt?"

Oh, yes; all thought out. Twenty or so? She would have to keep a close eye on Birgitte to make sure the number did not climb to fifty. Or more. Able to guard her where men could not. Elayne winced. That probably meant guards watching her bathe at the very least. "Caseille will do, surely. A bannerman can handle twenty." She was certain she could talk Caseille into keeping it all unobtrusive. And keeping the guards outside while she took a bath. "The man who arrived just in the nick of time. Mellar? What do you know of him, Birgitte?"

"dɔɪlɪn mɛlɝ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd sloʊli, hɝ bɹaʊz dʒɹɔɪŋ daʊn əɾ ə ʃɑɹp æŋɡəl. "ə koʊldhɑɹɾɪd fɛloʊ, ðoʊ hi smaɪlz ə lɑt. meɪnli ət wɪmən. hi pɪntʃɪz sɝvɪŋ ɡɝlz, ən hiz tʌmbəl θɹi ɪn fɔɹ deɪz ðəɾ aɪ noʊ ʌv - hi laɪks tə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪz 'kɑnkwɛsts' - bʌɾ i hæzən pɹɛst ɛniwʌn u sɛd noʊ. hi kleɪmz tə hæv bɪn ə mɝtʃəns ɡɑɹɾ ən ðən ə mɝsənɛɹi, ən naʊ ə hʌntɝ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn, ən i sɝɾənli hæz ðə skɪlz. ɪnʌf ðəɾ aɪ meɪɾ ɪm ə lutɛnənt. hiz ændɔɝən, fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ aʊt wɛst, nɪɹ bɛɹlən, ən i sɛz i fɔt fəɹ jəɹ mʌðɝ dʊɹɪŋ ðə səksɛʃən, ðoʊ hi kʊdn əv bɪn mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ə bɔɪ ət ðə taɪm. ɛniweɪ, hi noʊz ðə ɹaɪɾ ænsɝz - aɪ tʃɛkt - soʊ meɪbi hi wɑz ɪnvɑlvd ɪn ɪt. mɝsənɛɹiz laɪ əbaʊt ðɛɹ pæsts wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ twaɪs."

"Doilin Mellar," Birgitte said slowly, her brows drawing down at a sharp angle. "A coldhearted fellow, though he smiles a lot. Mainly at women. He pinches serving girls, and he's tumbled three in four days that I know of - he likes to talk about his 'conquests' - but he hasn't pressed anyone who said no. He claims to have been a merchant's guard and then a mercenary, and now a Hunter for the Horn, and he certainly has the skills. Enough that I made him a lieutenant. He's Andoran, from somewhere out west, near Baerlon, and he says he fought for your mother during the Succession, though he couldn't have been much more than a boy at the time. Anyway, he knows the right answers - I checked - so maybe he was involved in it. Mercenaries lie about their pasts without thinking twice."

foʊldɪŋ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ mɪɾəl, ɪleɪn kənsɪɾɝd dɔɪlɪn mɛlɝ. ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ oʊnli ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ʌv ə wɪɹi mæn wɪð ə ʃɑɹp feɪs, tʃoʊkɪŋ wʌn ə hɝ əseɪləns waɪl ðeɪ stʃɹʌɡəld oʊvɝ ðə pɔɪzən dæɡɝ. ə mæn wɪð ɪnʌf ʌv ə soʊlʒɝz skɪlz ðət bɝdʒɪt hæd meɪɾ ɪm ən ɔfəsɝ. ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðəɾ əz mɛni əz pɑsəbəl ə ði ɔfəsɝz, ət list, wɝ ændɔɝən. ə ɹɛskju dʒʌst ɪn taɪm, wʌn mæn əɡɛns θɹi, ən ə sɔɹd hɝld əkɹɔs ðə ɹum laɪk ə spɪɹ; vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk ə ɡlimənz teɪl. "hi dɪzɝvz ə suɾəbəl ɹɪwɔɹd. ə pɹəmoʊʃən tə kæptən ən kəmæn ə maɪ bɑɾiɡɑɹd, bɝdʒɪt. keɪsil kən bi hɪz sɛkənd."

Folding her hands on her middle, Elayne considered Doilin Mellar. She remembered only the impression of a wiry man with a sharp face, choking one of her assailants while they struggled over the poisoned dagger. A man with enough of a soldier's skills that Birgitte had made him an officer. She was trying to make sure that as many as possible of the officers, at least, were Andoran. A rescue just in time, one man against three, and a sword hurled across the room like a spear; very much like a gleeman's tale. "He deserves a suitable reward. A promotion to captain and command of my bodyguard, Birgitte. Caseille can be his second."

"ɑɹ jə mæd?" nɪneɪiv bɝst aʊt, bʌɾ ɪleɪn ʃʌʃt hɝ.

"Are you mad?" Nynaeve burst out, but Elayne shushed her.

"aɪl fil mʌtʃ seɪfɝ noʊɪŋ hiz ðɛɹ, nɪneɪiv. hi woʊn tʃɹaɪ pɪntʃɪŋ mi, nɑt wɪð keɪsil ən twɛnti mɔɹ laɪk əɹ ɝaʊn hɪm. wɪð ɪz ɹɛpjəteɪʃən, ðəl wɑtʃ ɪm laɪk hɔks. jə dɪd seɪ twɛnti, bɝdʒɪt? əl hoʊl jə tə ðæt."

"I'll feel much safer knowing he's there, Nynaeve. He won't try pinching me, not with Caseille and twenty more like her around him. With his reputation, they'll watch him like hawks. You did say twenty, Birgitte? I will hold you to that."

"twɛnti," bɝdʒɪt sɛɾ æbsənli. "ɔɹ soʊ." ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ æbsən əbaʊt ðə ɡeɪz ʃi fɪkst ɑn ɪleɪn, ðoʊ. ʃi lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntɛnli, hænz ɑn əɹ niz. "aɪ səpoʊz jə noʊ wʌt jəɹ duɪŋ." ɡʊd; ʃi wɑz gɑnə bɪheɪv laɪk ə wɔɹɾɝ fəɹ wʌns ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɑɹɡjuɪŋ. "ɡɑɹdzmæn-lutɛnən mɛlɝ bɪkʌmz ɡɑɹdzmæn-kæptən mɛlɝ, fəɹ seɪvɪŋ ðə laɪf ə ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ. ðət wɪl æd tə hɪz swæɡɝ. ənlɛs jə θɪŋk ɪts bɛɾɝ tə kip ðə hoʊl θɪŋ sikɹət."

"Twenty," Birgitte said absently. "Or so." There was nothing absent about the gaze she fixed on Elayne, though. She leaned forward intently, hands on her knees. "I suppose you know what you're doing." Good; she was going to behave like a Warder for once instead of arguing. "Guardsman-Lieutenant Mellar becomes Guardsman-Captain Mellar, for saving the life of the Daughter-Heir. That will add to his swagger. Unless you think it's better to keep the whole thing secret."

ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "oʊ, noʊ; nɑɾ əɾ ɔl. lɛt ðə hoʊl sɪɾi noʊ. sʌmwʌn tʃɹaɪd tə mɝɾɝ mi, ən lutɛnənt - kæptən - mɛlɝ seɪv maɪ laɪf. wɪl kip ðə pɔɪzən tə aʊɝsɛlvz, ðoʊ. dʒʌst ɪn keɪs sʌmwʌn meɪks ə slɪp ə ðə tʌŋ."

Elayne shook her head. "Oh, no; not at all. Let the whole city know. Someone tried to murder me, and Lieutenant - Captain - Mellar saved my life. We will keep the poison to ourselves, though. Just in case someone makes a slip of the tongue."

nɪneɪiv hæɹəmft ən ɡeɪv əɹ ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlɛɹ. "wʌn deɪ jəl bi tu klɛvɝ, ɪleɪn. soʊ ʃɑɹp jə kʌt jɝsɛlf."

Nynaeve harrumphed and gave her a sidelong glare. "One day you will be too clever, Elayne. So sharp you cut yourself."

"ʃi ɪz klɛvɝ, nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə." ɹaɪzɪŋ smuðli tə hɝ fit, eɪvinhə sɛɾəld əɹ hɛvi skɝts, ðən pæɾəd əɹ hɔɹn-hɪltɪd bɛl naɪf. ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ lɑɹdʒ əz ðə bleɪd ʃi hæd wɔɹn əz ə meɪɾən, jɛt stɪl ə kɹɛɾəbəl wɛpən. "ænd ʃiz mi tə wɑtʃ əɹ bæk. aɪ hæv pɝmɪʃən tə steɪ wɪð hɝ, naʊ."

"She is clever, Nynaeve al'Meara." Rising smoothly to her feet, Aviendha settled her heavy skirts, then patted her horn-hilted belt knife. It was not so large as the blade she had worn as a Maiden, yet still a credible weapon. "And she has me to watch her back. I have permission to stay with her, now."

nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ æŋɡɹəli. ən fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, kloʊzd ɪɾ əɡɛn, kəmpoʊzɪŋ hɝsɛlf vɪzəbli, smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts ən əɹ fitʃɝz. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɔl stɛɹɪŋ æt?" ʃi mʌɾɝd. "ɪf ɪleɪn wɑns ðɪs fɛloʊ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə pɪntʃ əɹ wɛnɛvɝ i filz laɪk, hu æm aɪ tə ɑɹɡju?" bɝdʒɪts maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən, ən ɪleɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ eɪvinhə wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə tʃoʊk. hɝ aɪz wɝ sɝɾənli pɑpɪŋ.

Nynaeve opened her mouth angrily. And for a wonder, closed it again, composing herself visibly, smoothing her skirts and her features. "What are you all staring at?" she muttered. "If Elayne wants this fellow close enough to pinch her whenever he feels like, who am I to argue?" Birgitte's mouth dropped open, and Elayne wondered whether Aviendha was going to choke. Her eyes were certainly popping.

ðə feɪn saʊn ə ðə ɡɔŋ ətɑp ðə pæləsəz tɔlɪs taʊɝ, toʊlɪŋ ði aʊɝ, meɪɾ əɹ dʒɝk. ɪt wɑz leɪɾɝ ðən ʃi hæd θɔt. "nɪneɪiv, ɛɡwin maɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bi weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ʌs." nʌn ə hɝ kloʊðz wɝ ɛniwɛɹ tə bi sin. "wɛɹz maɪ pɝs? maɪ ɹɪŋ ɪz ɪn ɪt." hɝ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ wɑz ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝ, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt ðə wʌn ʃi mɛnt.

The faint sound of the gong atop the Palace's tallest tower, tolling the hour, made her jerk. It was later than she had thought. "Nynaeve, Egwene might already be waiting for us." None of her clothes were anywhere to be seen. "Where's my purse? My ring is in it." Her Great Serpent ring was on her finger, but that was not the one she meant.

"aɪ wɪl si ɛɡwin əloʊn," nɪneɪiv sɛd fɝmli. "ju ɑɹ ɪn noʊ kəndɪʃən tə ɛntɝ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ɪn ɛni keɪs, jə dʒʌst slɛp ði æftɝnun əweɪ. jə woʊnt ɡoʊ tə slip əɡɛn sun, əl weɪdʒɝ. ən aɪ noʊ juv hæd noʊ lʌk pʊɾɪŋ jɝsɛlf ɪndə ə weɪkɪŋ tʃɹæns, soʊ ðəɾ ɪz ðæt." ʃi smaɪl smʌɡli, sɝɾən ə hɝ vɪktɝi. ʃi hæd ɡɔn kɹɔs-aɪɾ ən dɪzi ətɛmptɪŋ tə ɛntɝ ðə weɪkɪŋ tʃɹæns ɛɡwin hæd tʃɹaɪd tə titʃ ðɛm.

"I will see Egwene alone," Nynaeve said firmly. "You are in no condition to enter Tel'aran'rhiod. In any case, you just slept the afternoon away. You won't go to sleep again soon, I'll wager. And I know you've had no luck putting yourself into a waking trance, so that is that." She smiled smugly, certain of her victory. She had gone cross-eyed and dizzy attempting to enter the waking trance Egwene had tried to teach them.

"jul weɪdʒɝ ðæt, wɪl ju?" ɪleɪn mɝmɝd. "wʌt wɪl jə bɛt? kəz aɪ ɪntɛn tə dʒɹɪŋk ðæt," ʃi ɡlænst ət ðə sɪlvɝ kʌp ɑn ðə saɪdtəbəl, "æn aɪ weɪdʒɝ əl ɡoʊ ɹaɪt tə slip. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf jə dɪdn pʊt sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ɪt, ɪf jə dɪdn ɪntɛn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃɹɪk mi ɪndə dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ɪt . . . wɛl, ʌv kɔɹs, jə wʊdn də ðæt. soʊ wʌt ʃæl wi weɪdʒɝ?"

"You'll wager that, will you?" Elayne murmured. "What will you bet? Because I intend to drink that," she glanced at the silver cup on the sidetable, "and I wager I'll go right to sleep. Of course, if you didn't put something in it, if you didn't intend trying to trick me into drinking it . . . Well, of course, you wouldn't do that. So what shall we wager?"

ðəɾ ɪnsʌfɝəbəl smaɪl slɪd ɡɹisəli ɔf nɪneɪivz feɪs, ɹipleɪs baɪ bɹaɪt spɑts ə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks.

That insufferable smile slid greasily off Nynaeve's face, replaced by bright spots of color in her cheeks.

"ə faɪn θɪŋ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd, stændɪŋ. fɪsts ɑn hɪps, ʃi skwɛɹd hɝsɛlf ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɛd, hɝ feɪs ən toʊn əlaɪk sɛnʒɹɪŋ. "ðə wʊmən seɪvz jə ə ɹɔɪlɪŋ bɛli, ən jə snɪp əɾ əɹ laɪk mɪstʃɹəs pɹɪs. meɪbi ɪf jə dʒɹɪŋk ðət kʌp ən ɡoʊ tə slip ən fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊɾ ædvɛntʊɹɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz tənaɪt, əl dɪsaɪd juv ɡɹoʊn ʌp ɪnʌf ðəɾ aɪ kən tʃɹʌs fjuɝ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd ɡɑɹdz tə kip jə əlaɪv. əɹ də aɪ nid tə hoʊl jəɹ noʊz tə meɪk jə dʒɹɪŋk?" wɛl, ɪleɪn hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə kip hoʊldɪŋ bæk fəɹ lɔŋ. fjuɝ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd?

"A fine thing," Birgitte said, standing. Fists on hips, she squared herself at the foot of the bed, her face and tone alike censuring. "The woman saves you a roiling belly, and you snip at her like Mistress Priss. Maybe if you drink that cup and go to sleep and forget about adventuring in the World of Dreams tonight, I'll decide you've grown up enough that I can trust fewer than a hundred guards to keep you alive. Or do I need to hold your nose to make you drink?" Well, Elayne had not expected her to keep holding back for long. Fewer than a hundred?

eɪvinhə spʌn tə feɪs bɝdʒɪt bɪfɔɹ ʃi fɪnɪʃt, ən bɛɹli weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə læst wɝd tə liv ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz maʊθ. "ju ʃəd nɑt spik tə hɝ soʊ, bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən," ʃi sɛd, dʒɹɔɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə ɡeɪn ðə fʊl ædvæntɪdʒ ə hɝ ɡɹeɪɾɝ haɪt. ɡɪvən ðə ɹeɪz hilz ɑn bɝdʒɪts buts, ɪt wɑz nɑt ðət mʌtʃ, jɛt wɪð əɹ ʃɔl dʒɹɔn taɪtli oʊvɝ əɹ bɹɛsts, ʃi lʊk vɛɹi mʌtʃ ə waɪz wʌn ɹæðɝ ðən ən əpɹɛntəs. səm hæd feɪsəz nɑt mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ðən hɝz. "ju ɑɹ əɹ wɔɹɾɝ. æsk ənælaɪn haʊ tə bɪheɪv. hiz ə ɡɹeɪt mæn, jɛɾ i oʊbeɪz əz nɪneɪiv tɛlz hɪm." ənælaɪn wɑz læn, ðə mæn əloʊn, hɪz stɔɹi wɛl noʊn ən mʌtʃ ədmaɪɝɾ əmʌŋ ði il.

Aviendha spun to face Birgitte before she finished, and barely waited for the last word to leave the other woman's mouth. "You should not speak to her so, Birgitte Trahelion," she said, drawing herself to gain the full advantage of her greater height. Given the raised heels on Birgitte's boots, it was not that much, yet with her shawl drawn tightly over her breasts, she looked very much a Wise One rather than an apprentice. Some had faces not much older than hers. "You are her Warder. Ask Aan'allein how to behave. He is a great man, yet he obeys as Nynaeve tells him." Aan'allein was Lan, The Man Alone, his story well known and much admired among the Aiel.

bɝdʒɪɾ aɪɾ əɹ ʌp ən daʊn əz ɪf mɛʒɝɪŋ hɝ, ən ədɑptəɾ ə laʊnʒɪŋ pɑstʃɝ ðəɾ ɔl bʌt lɔs ði ɛkstʃɹə ɪntʃəz ə hɝ but hilz. wɪð ə mɑkɪŋ ɡɹɪn, ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, pleɪnli ɹɛɾi tə pɹɪk eɪvinhəz bʌbəl ɪf ʃi kʊd. ʃi juʒəwəli kʊd. bɪfɔɹ ʃi sɛɾ ə wɝd, nɪneɪiv spoʊk kwaɪətli ən kwaɪt fɝmli.

Birgitte eyed her up and down as if measuring her, and adopted a lounging posture that all but lost the extra inches of her boot heels. With a mocking grin, she opened her mouth, plainly ready to prick Aviendha's bubble if she could. She usually could. Before she said a word, Nynaeve spoke quietly and quite firmly.

"oʊ, fəɹ ðə lʌv ə ðə laɪt, ɡɪv oʊvɝ, bɝdʒɪt. ɪf ɪleɪn sɛz ʃiz ɡoʊɪŋ, ðən ʃiz ɡoʊɪŋ. naʊ, nɑɾ ənʌðɝ wɝɾ aʊɾ ə ju." ʃi stæbd ə fɪŋɡɝ ət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. "ɔɹ jə ən əl əv wɝdz, leɪɾɝ."

"Oh, for the love of the Light, give over, Birgitte. If Elayne says she's going, then she is going. Now, not another word out of you." She stabbed a finger at the other woman. "Or you and I will have words, later."

bɝdʒɪt stɛɹɾ ət nɪneɪiv, hɝ maʊθ wɝkɪŋ saʊnləsli, ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn kæɹiɪŋ ən ɪntɛns blɛn ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən ən fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. ət læst, ʃi flʌŋ hɝsɛlf bæk ɪndə hɝ tʃɛɹ, lɛɡz spɹɔld ən buts bælənst ɑn əɹ laɪən-hɛd spɝz, ən bɪɡæn ə sʌlən mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. ɪf ɪleɪn hæd nɑt noʊn əɹ bɛɾɝ, ʃi wʊɾə swɔɹn ðə wʊmən wɑz sʌlkɪŋ. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi nu haʊ nɪneɪiv dɪɾ ɪt. wʌns, nɪneɪiv hæd bɪn əz mʌtʃ ɪn ɑ ʌv bɝdʒɪɾ əz eɪvinhə ɛvɝ wɑz, bʌt ðət hæd tʃeɪnʒd. kəmplitli. naʊ nɪneɪiv bʊlid bɝdʒɪɾ əz ɹɛɾəli əz ɛniwʌn ɛls. ən mɔɹ səksɛsfəli ðən wɪð moʊst. ʃiz ə wʊmən dʒʌs laɪk ɛni ʌðɝ, nɪneɪiv hæd sɛd. ʃi toʊl mi soʊ hɝsɛlf, ən aɪ ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt. əz ɪf ðəɾ ɪkspleɪn ɛniθɪŋ. bɝdʒɪt wɑz stɪl bɝdʒɪt.

Birgitte stared at Nynaeve, her mouth working soundlessly, the Warder bond carrying an intense blend of irritation and frustration. At last, she flung herself back into her chair, legs sprawled and boots balanced on her lion-head spurs, and began a sullen muttering under her breath. If Elayne had not known her better, she would have sworn the woman was sulking. She wished she knew how Nynaeve did it. Once, Nynaeve had been as much in awe of Birgitte as Aviendha ever was, but that had changed. Completely. Now Nynaeve bullied Birgitte as readily as anyone else. And more successfully than with most. She's a woman just like any other, Nynaeve had said. She told me so herself, and I realized she was right. As if that explained anything. Birgitte was still Birgitte.

"maɪ pɝs?" ɪleɪn sɛd, ən ʌv ɔl pipəl, bɝdʒɪt wɛn tə fɛtʃ ðə ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɹɛd pɝs fɹəm ðə dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹum. wɛl, ə wɔɹɾɝ dɪd də ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ, bʌt bɝdʒɪɾ ɔlweɪz meɪd səm kɑmɛnt wən ʃi dɪd. ðoʊ pɝhæps əɹ ɹɪtɝn wɑz mɛn fəɹ wʌn. ʃi pɹizɛntəd ðə pɝs tə ɪleɪn wɪð ə flɝɪʃɪŋ baʊ. ən ə twɪst ə hɝ lɪps fəɹ nɪneɪiv ən eɪvinhə. ɪleɪn saɪd. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðət ði ʌðɝ wɪmən dɪslaɪkt wʌn ənʌðɝ; ðeɪ ɹɪli ɡɑɾ ɑn vɛɹi wɛl, ɪf jə ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛɹ lɪɾəl fɔɪbəlz. ðeɪ dʒʌst ɹʌbd əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ səmtaɪmz.

"My purse?" Elayne said, and of all people, Birgitte went to fetch the gold-embroidered red purse from the dressing room. Well, a Warder did do that sort of thing, but Birgitte always made some comment when she did. Though perhaps her return was meant for one. She presented the purse to Elayne with a flourishing bow. And a twist of her lips for Nynaeve and Aviendha. Elayne sighed. It was not that the other women disliked one another; they really got on very well, if you ignored their little foibles. They just rubbed against each other sometimes.

ði ɑdli twɪstəd stoʊn ɹɪŋ, stʃɹʌŋ ɑn ə pleɪn lup ə lɛðɝ, leɪ ɪn ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə pɝs ʌndɝniθ ə mɪks ə kɔɪnz, nɛks tə ðə kɛɹfəli foʊldəd sɪlk hæŋkɝtʃɪf fʊl ə fɛðɝz ʃi kənsɪɾɝd əɹ ɡɹeɪɾəst tʃɹɛʒɝ. ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil əpɪɹd tə bi stoʊn, ɛniweɪ, ɔl flɛks ən stʃɹaɪps ə blu ən ɹɛɾ ən bɹaʊn, bʌɾ ɪt fɛlt əz hɑɹɾ ən slɪk əz stil, ən tu hɛvi ivən fəɹ ðæt. sɛɾəlɪŋ ðə lɛðɝ kɔɹɾ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, ən ðə ɹɪŋ bɪtwin əɹ bɹɛsts, ʃi pʊl ðə dʒɹɔstʃɹɪŋz taɪɾ ən sɛt ðə pɝs ɑn ðə saɪd teɪbəl, teɪkɪŋ ʌp ðə sɪlvɝ kʌp ɪnstɛd. ðə fɹeɪɡɹəns wɑz sɪmpli ðəɾ ʌv ɡʊd waɪn, bʌt ʃi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ɛniweɪ ən smaɪld ət nɪneɪiv.

The oddly twisted stone ring, strung on a plain loop of leather, lay in the bottom of the purse underneath a mix of coins, next to the carefully folded silk handkerchief full of feathers she considered her greatest treasure. The ter'angreal appeared to be stone, anyway, all flecks and stripes of blue and red and brown, but it felt as hard and slick as steel, and too heavy even for that. Settling the leather cord around her neck, and the ring between her breasts, she pulled the drawstrings tight and set the purse on the side table, taking up the silver cup instead. The fragrance was simply that of good wine, but she raised an eyebrow anyway and smiled at Nynaeve.

"aɪ wɪl ɡoʊ tə maɪ oʊn ɹum," nɪneɪiv sɛd stɪfli. ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə mætʃɹəs, ʃi ʃɛɹɾ aʊɾ ə stɝn lʊk bɪtwin bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə. sʌmhaʊ, ðə kɪsən ɑn əɹ fɔɹhɛd meɪɾ ɪt sim ivən mɔɹ ənkɑmpɹəmaɪzɪŋ. "ðə pɛɹ ə jə steɪ əweɪk ən kip jəɹ aɪz oʊpən! əntɪl juv ðoʊz wɪmən ɝaʊn hɝ, ʃiz stɪl ɪn deɪnʒɝ. ən æftɝ, aɪ hoʊp aɪ doʊn əv tə ɹimaɪn ju."

"I will go to my own room," Nynaeve said stiffly. Rising from the mattress, she shared out a stern look between Birgitte and Aviendha. Somehow, the ki'sain on her forehead made it seem even more uncompromising. "The pair of you stay awake and keep your eyes open! Until you have those women around her, she is still in danger. And after, I hope I don't have to remind you."

"ju θɪŋk aɪ də nɑt noʊ ðæt?" eɪvinhə pɹətɛstəɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət bɝdʒɪt ɡɹaʊld, "aɪm nɑɾ ə ful, nɪneɪiv!"

"You think I do not know that?" Aviendha protested at the same time that Birgitte growled, "I'm not a fool, Nynaeve!"

"soʊ jə seɪ," nɪneɪiv ænsɝɾ əm boʊθ. "aɪ hoʊp soʊ, fəɹ ɪleɪnz seɪk. ən fəɹ jəɹ oʊn." ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl, ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd fɹəm ðə ɹum, əz steɪtli əz ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd wɪʃ tə bi. ʃi wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət ðæt.

"So you say," Nynaeve answered them both. "I hope so, for Elayne's sake. And for your own." Gathering her shawl, she glided from the room, as stately as any Aes Sedai could wish to be. She was getting very good at that.

"jud θɪŋk ʃi wɑz ðə blʌɾi kwin hɪɹ," bɝdʒɪt mʌɾɝd.

"You'd think she was the bloody queen here," Birgitte muttered.

"ʃi ɪz ðə wʌn u ɪz oʊvɝpɹaʊd, bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən," eɪvinhə ɡɹʌmbəld. "æz pɹaʊɾ əz ə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɪð wʌn ɡoʊt." ðeɪ nɑɾəd ət wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn pɝfəkt əɡɹimənt.

"She is the one who is overproud, Birgitte Trahelion," Aviendha grumbled. "As proud as a Shaido with one goat." They nodded at one another in perfect agreement.

bʌɾ ɪleɪn noʊɾəst ðət ðeɪ hæd weɪɾəd tə spik əntɪl ðə dɔɹ hæd ʃʌt bɪhaɪnd nɪneɪiv. ðə wʊmən u hæd dɪnaɪd soʊ hɑɹd wɑntɪŋ tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɛɛs sədaɪ. pɝhæps læn hæd sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðæt. koʊtʃɪŋ hɝ, fɹəm ɪz ɪkspɪɹiəns. ʃi stɪl hæd tə wɝk ət steɪɪŋ kəmpoʊzd, səmtaɪmz, bʌɾ ɪt sim tə kʌm mɔɹ ən mɔɹ izəli sɪns əɹ pəkjuljɝ wɛɾɪŋ.

But Elayne noticed that they had waited to speak until the door had shut behind Nynaeve. The woman who had denied so hard wanting to be Aes Sedai was becoming very much Aes Sedai. Perhaps Lan had something to do with that. Coaching her, from his experience. She still had to work at staying composed, sometimes, but it seemed to come more and more easily since her peculiar wedding.

ðə fɝst sɪp ə ðə waɪn hæd noʊ teɪst ʌðɝ ðən waɪn, ə vɛɹi ɡʊd waɪn, bʌɾ ɪleɪn fɹaʊn ət ðə kʌp ən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. əntɪl ʃi ɹilaɪzd wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, ən waɪ. ðə mɛmɹi ʌv fɔkɹut hɪɾən ɪn əɹ ti wɑz stɪl stʃɹɔŋ. wʌt hæd nɪneɪiv pʊɾ ɪn hɪɹ? nɑt fɔkɹut, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt wʌt? ɹeɪzɪŋ ðə kʌp tə teɪk ə fʊl swɑloʊ sim vɛɹi dɪfəkəlt. dɪfaɪənli, ʃi dʒɹeɪn ðə waɪn. aɪ wɑz θɝsti, ðæts ɔl, ʃi θɔt, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ tə sɛt ðə kʌp bæk ɑn ðə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ. aɪ sɝɾənli wɑzn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹuv ɛniθɪŋ.

The first sip of the wine had no taste other than wine, a very good wine, but Elayne frowned at the cup and hesitated. Until she realized what she was doing, and why. The memory of forkroot hidden in her tea was still strong. What had Nynaeve put in here? Not forkroot, of course, but what? Raising the cup to take a full swallow seemed very difficult. Defiantly, she drained the wine. I was thirsty, that's all, she thought, stretching to set the cup back on the silver tray. I certainly wasn't trying to prove anything.

ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən hæd bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ, bʌɾ əz ʃi bɪɡæn sɛɾəlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪn ə mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl pəzɪʃən fəɹ slip, ðeɪ tɝn tə wʌn ənʌðɝ.

The other two women had been watching her, but as she began settling herself in a more comfortable position for sleep, they turned to one another.

"aɪl kip wɑtʃ ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum," bɝdʒɪt sɛd. "aɪ hæv maɪ baʊ ən kwɪvɝ ɪn ðɛɹ. jə steɪ hɪɹ ɪn keɪs ʃi nidz jə fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ."

"I'll keep watch in the sitting room," Birgitte said. "I have my bow and quiver in there. You stay here in case she needs you for anything."

ɹæðɝ ðən ɑɹɡjuɪŋ, eɪvinhə dʒɹu hɝ bɛl naɪf ən nɛlt, ɹɛɾi tə spɹɪŋ ʌp əɡɛn, ɔf tə wʌn saɪd, wɛɹ ʃi wəd si ɛniwʌn kʌmɪŋ θɹu ðə dɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ sɔ hɝ. "nɑk twaɪs, ðən wʌns, ən neɪm jɝsɛlf bɪfɔɹ jə ɛntɝ," ʃi sɛd. "ʌðɝwaɪz, əl əsum ɪts ən ɛnəmi." ən bɝdʒɪt nɑɾəd əz ɪf ðət wɝ ðə moʊst ɹizənəbəl θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld.

Rather than arguing, Aviendha drew her belt knife and knelt, ready to spring up again, off to one side, where she would see anyone coming through the door before they saw her. "Knock twice, then once, and name yourself before you enter," she said. "Otherwise, I will assume it is an enemy." And Birgitte nodded as if that were the most reasonable thing in the world.

"ðɪs ɪz sɪl - " ɪleɪn smʌðɝɾ ə jɔn bɪhaɪn əɹ hænd. "sɪli," ʃi fɪnɪʃt wən ʃi kəd spik əɡɛn. "noʊ wʌn ɪz gɑnə tʃɹaɪ tə - " ənʌðɝ jɔn, ən ʃi cʊɾə pʊɾ əɹ fɪst ɪndə hɝ maʊθ! laɪt, wʌt hæd nɪneɪiv pʊɾ ɪn ðət waɪn? "tə kɪl mi - tənaɪt," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaʊsəli, "æn jə - boʊθ noʊ - " hɝ aɪlɪdz wɝ lɛɾən, slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn dɪspaɪɾ ɛvɹi ɛfɝt tə kip əm oʊpən. ʌnkɑnʃəsli snʌɡəlɪŋ əɹ feɪs ɪndə hɝ pɪloʊ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə fɪnɪʃ wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn əbaʊt tə seɪ, bʌt . . .

"This is sil - " Elayne smothered a yawn behind her hand. "Silly," she finished when she could speak again. "No one is going to try to - " Another yawn, and she could have put her fist into her mouth! Light, what had Nynaeve put in that wine? "To kill me - tonight," she said drowsily, "and you - both know - " Her eyelids were leaden, sliding down despite every effort to keep them open. Unconsciously snuggling her face into her pillow, she tried to finish what she had been about to say, but . . .

ʃi wɑz ɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl, ðə θɹoʊn ɹum ə ðə pæləs. ɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔlz ɹəflɛkʃən ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. hɪɹ, ðə twɪstəd stoʊn ɹɪŋ ðət fɛl tu hɛvi fəɹ ɪts saɪz ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝl sim laɪɾ ɪnʌf tə floʊɾ ʌp fɹəm bɪtwin əɹ bɹɛsts. ðəɹ wɑz laɪt, ʌv kɔɹs, simɪŋ tə kʌm fɹəm ɛvɹiwɛɹ ən noʊwɛɹ. ɪt wɑz nɑt laɪk sʌnlaɪt, əɹ læmps, bʌɾ ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz naɪt hɪɹ, tu, ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ɪnʌf ə ðəɾ ɑd laɪt tə si. əz ɪn ə dʒɹim. ði ɛvɝ-pɹɛzən sɛnseɪʃən ʌv ənsin aɪz wɑtʃɪŋ wɑz nɑt dʒɹimlaɪk - mɔɹ laɪk ə naɪtmɛɹ - bʌt ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn əkʌstəm tə ðæt.

She was in the Grand Hall, the throne room of the Palace. In the Grand Hall's reflection in Tel'aran'rhiod. Here, the twisted stone ring that felt too heavy for its size in the waking world seemed light enough to float up from between her breasts. There was light, of course, seeming to come from everywhere and nowhere. It was not like sunlight, or lamps, but even if it was night here, too, there was always enough of that odd light to see. As in a dream. The ever-present sensation of unseen eyes watching was not dreamlike - more like a nightmare - but she had grown accustomed to that.

ɡɹeɪɾ ɑɾiənsəz wɝ hɛld ɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl, fɔɹən æmbæsəɾɝz fɔɹməli ɹəsivd, ɪmpɔɹɾənt tʃɹiɾiz ən dɛklɝeɪʃənz ʌv wɔɹ ənaʊns tə ɡæðɝd dɪɡnətɛɹiz, ən ðə lɔŋ tʃeɪmbɝ suɾəd ɪts neɪm ən fʌŋkʃən. ɛmpti ʌv pipəl seɪv fəɹ hɝ, ɪt sim kævɝnəs. tu ɹoʊz ə θɪk ɡlimɪŋ waɪt kɑləmz, tɛn spænz haɪ, mɑɹtʃt ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə ɹum, ən ət wʌn ɛnd, ðə laɪən θɹoʊn stʊɾ ətɑp ə mɑɹbəl deɪz, wɪð ɹɛd kɑɹpəɾɪŋ klaɪmɪŋ ðə waɪt stɛps fɹəm ðə ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt flɔɹ taɪlz. ðə θɹoʊn wɑz saɪz fəɹ ə wʊmən, bʌt stɪl mæsɪv ɑn ɪts hɛvi laɪən-pɔd lɛɡz, kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd, wɪð ðə waɪt laɪən pɪkt aʊɾ ɪn munstoʊnz ɑn ə fild ə ɹubiz ət ðə tɑp ʌv ɪts haɪ bæk, ənaʊnsɪŋ ðət huɛvɝ sæt ðəɹ ɹuld ə ɡɹeɪt neɪʃən. fɹəm lɑɹdʒ, kʌlɝd wɪndoʊz sɛɾ ɪn ði ɑɹtʃt silɪŋ haɪ oʊvɝhɛd, ðə kwinz u hæd faʊndəɾ ændɝ stɛɹd daʊn, ðɛɹ ɪmədʒəz ɔltɝneɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə waɪt laɪən ən sinz ə ðə bæɾəlz ðeɪ hæd fɔt tə bɪld ændɝ fɹəm ə sɪŋɡəl sɪɾi ɪn ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ʃæɾɝɪŋ ɛmpaɪɝ ɪndə ðət neɪʃən. mɛni lænz ðət hæd kʌm aʊɾ ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪɡzɪstəd, jɛɾ ændɝ hæd sɝvaɪv ðə θaʊzən jɪɹz sɪns ən pɹɑspɝd. səmtaɪmz ɪleɪn fɛl ðoʊz ɪmədʒəz dʒʌdʒɪŋ hɝ, weɪɪŋ əɹ wɝθ tə fɑloʊ ɪn ðɛɹ fʊtstɛps.

Great audiences were held in the Grand Hall, foreign ambassadors formally received, important treaties and declarations of war announced to gathered dignitaries, and the long chamber suited its name and function. Empty of people save for her, it seemed cavernous. Two rows of thick gleaming white columns, ten spans high, marched the length of the room, and at one end, the Lion Throne stood atop a marble dais, with red carpeting climbing the white steps from the red-and-white floor tiles. The throne was sized for a woman, but still massive on its heavy lion-pawed legs, carved and gilded, with the White Lion picked out in moonstones on a field of rubies at the top of its high back, announcing that whoever sat there ruled a great nation. From large, colored windows set in the arched ceiling high overhead, the queens who had founded Andor stared down, their images alternating with the White Lion and scenes of the battles they had fought to build Andor from a single city in Artur Hawkwing's shattering empire into that nation. Many lands that had come out of the War of the Hundred Years no longer existed, yet Andor had survived the thousand years since and prospered. Sometimes Elayne felt those images judging her, weighing her worth to follow in their footsteps.

noʊ sunɝ dɪd ʃi faɪn hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə ɡɹæn hɔl ðən ənʌðɝ wʊmən əpɪɹd, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn, ə dɑɹk-hɛɹd jʌŋ wʊmən ɪn floʊɪŋ ɹɛd sɪlk ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn sɪlvɝ laɪənz ɑn ðə slivz ən hɛm, wɪð ə stʃɹæn ə faɪɝdʒɹɑps əz lɑɹdʒ əz pɪdʒənz ɛɡz ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk ən ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn sɪɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ hɛd. wʌn hæn ɹɛstɪŋ laɪtli ɑn ðə laɪən-hɛɾəd ɑɹm ə ðə θɹoʊn, ʃi ɡeɪzd ɹiɡəli əbaʊt ðə hɔl. ðən əɹ aɪz fɛl ɑn ɪleɪn, ən ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən dɔnd, əlɔŋ wɪð kənfjuʒən. kɹaʊn ən faɪɝdʒɹɑps ən sɪlks vænɪʃt, ɹipleɪs baɪ pleɪn wʊlənz ən ə lɔŋ eɪpɹən. ən ɪnstən leɪɾɝ, ðə jʌŋ wʊmən vænɪʃt, tu.

No sooner did she find herself in the Grand Hall than another woman appeared, sitting on the Lion Throne, a dark-haired young woman in flowing red silk embroidered in silver lions on the sleeves and hem, with a strand of firedrops as large as pigeon's eggs around her neck and the Rose Crown sitting on her head. One hand resting lightly on the lion-headed arm of the throne, she gazed regally about the Hall. Then her eyes fell on Elayne, and recognition dawned, along with confusion. Crown and firedrops and silks vanished, replaced by plain woolens and a long apron. An instant later, the young woman vanished, too.

ɪleɪn smaɪld ɪn əmjuzmənt. ivən skʌljənz dʒɹimd ə sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn. ʃi hoʊp ðə jʌŋ wʊmən hæd nɑt bɪn wækən ɪn fɹaɪt baɪ ðə stɑɹt ʃi ɹəsivd, əɹ ət lis ðət ʃi hæd ɡɔn ɑn tə ənʌðɝ plɛzən dʒɹim. ə seɪfɝ dʒɹim ðən tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd.

Elayne smiled in amusement. Even scullions dreamed of sitting on the Lion Throne. She hoped the young woman had not been wakened in fright by the start she received, or at least that she had gone on to another pleasant dream. A safer dream than Tel'aran'rhiod.

ʌðɝ θɪŋz ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðə θɹoʊn ɹum. ði ɪlæbɹətli wɝk stænd-læmps stændɪŋ ɪn ɹoʊz daʊn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ sim tə vaɪbɹeɪɾ əɡɛns ðə tɔl kɑləmz. ðə ɡɹeɪɾ ɑɹtʃt dɔɹz stʊd naʊ oʊpən, naʊ kloʊzd, ɪn ðə blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ. oʊnli θɪŋz ðət hæd stʊɾ ɪn wʌn pleɪs fəɹ ə ɡʊdli taɪm hæɾ ə tʃɹuli pɝmənən ɹəflɛkʃən ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz.

Other things shifted in the throne room. The elaborately worked stand-lamps standing in rows down the chamber seemed to vibrate against the tall columns. The great arched doors stood now open, now closed, in the blink of an eye. Only things that had stood in one place for a goodly time had a truly permanent reflection in the World of Dreams.

ɪleɪn ɪmædʒən ə stænd-mɪɹɝ, ən ɪt wɑz bɪfɔɹ hɝ, ɹəflɛktɪŋ əɹ ɪmədʒ ɪn haɪ-nɛkt ɡɹin sɪlk wɝkt ɪn sɪlvɝ əkɹɔs ðə bɑɾəs, wɪð ɛmɹəlz ɪn əɹ ɪɹz ən smɔlɝ wʌnz stʃɹʌŋ ɪn əɹ ɹɛd-ɡoʊl kɝlz. ʃi meɪd ði ɛmɹəlz dɪsəpɪɹ fɹəm əɹ hɛɹ, ən nɑɾəd. fɪt fəɹ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, bʌt nɑt tu ɑstənteɪʃəs. jə hæd tə bi kɛɹfəl ə haʊ jə ɪmædʒən jɝsɛlf, hɪɹ, əɹ ɛls. . . . hɝ mɑɾəst ɡɹin sɪlk ɡaʊn bɪkeɪm ðə snʌɡ, fɔɹm-hʌɡɪŋ foʊlz ʌv ə tæɹɑbənɝ ɡaʊn, ðən flæʃt tə dɑɹk, waɪd si foʊk tʃɹaʊzɝz ən bɛɹ fit, kəmplit wɪð ɡoʊldən ɪɹɪŋz ən noʊz ɹɪŋ ən tʃeɪn fʊl ə mədæljənz, ən ivən dɑɹk tætuz ɑn əɹ hænz. bʌt wɪθaʊɾ ə blaʊs, ðə weɪ ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɛn ət si. tʃiks kʌlɝɪŋ, ʃi heɪstəli ɹɪtɝn ɛvɹiθɪŋ tə haʊ ɪt hæd bɪn, ðən tʃeɪnʒd ði ɛmɹəld ɪɹɪŋz fəɹ pleɪn sɪlvɝ hups. ðə sɪmpəlɝ jə ɪmædʒən jəɹ ɡɑɹb, ði iziɝ ɪt wɑz tə meɪnteɪn.

Elayne imagined a stand-mirror, and it was before her, reflecting her image in high-necked green silk worked in silver across the bodice, with emeralds in her ears and smaller ones strung in her red-gold curls. She made the emeralds disappear from her hair, and nodded. Fit for the Daughter-Heir, but not too ostentatious. You had to be careful of how you imagined yourself, here, or else. . . . Her modest green silk gown became the snug, form-hugging folds of a Taraboner gown, then flashed to dark, wide Sea Folk trousers and bare feet, complete with golden earrings and nose ring and chain full of medallions, and even dark tattoos on her hands. But without a blouse, the way the Atha'an Miere went at sea. Cheeks coloring, she hastily returned everything to how it had been, then changed the emerald earrings for plain silver hoops. The simpler you imagined your garb, the easier it was to maintain.

lɛɾɪŋ ðə stænd-mɪɹɝ dɪsəpɪɹ - ʃi dʒʌs hæd tə stɑp kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪt - ʃi lʊkt ʌp ət ðoʊz stɝn feɪsəz oʊvɝhɛd. "wɪmən əv teɪkən ðə θɹoʊn əz jʌŋ əz aɪ," ʃi toʊl ðɛm. nɑt vɛɹi mɛni, ðoʊ; oʊnli sɛvən u hæd mænədʒ tə wɛɹ ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn fəɹ vɛɹi lɔŋ. "wɪmən jʌŋɡɝ ðən aɪ." θɹi. ən wʌn ə ðoʊz læstəd bɛɹli ə jɪɹ. "aɪ doʊn kleɪm əl bi əz ɡɹeɪɾ əz ju, bʌɾ əl nɑt meɪk jə əʃeɪmd, iðɝ. əl bi ə ɡʊd kwin."

Letting the stand-mirror disappear - she just had to stop concentrating on it - she looked up at those stern faces overhead. "Women have taken the throne as young as I," she told them. Not very many, though; only seven who had managed to wear the Rose Crown for very long. "Women younger than I." Three. And one of those lasted barely a year. "I don't claim I will be as great as you, but I will not make you ashamed, either. I will be a good queen."

"tɔkɪŋ tə wɪndoʊz?" nɪneɪiv sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ɪleɪn stɑɹɾ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. juzɪŋ ə kɑpi ʌv ðə ɹɪŋ ɪleɪn wɔɹ nɛks tə hɝ skɪn, ʃi əpɪɹd mɪsti, ɔlmoʊs tʃɹænspɛɹənt. fɹaʊnɪŋ, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə stʃɹaɪd təwɔɹɾ ɪleɪn ən stæɡɝd, nɪɹli tʃɹɪp baɪ ðə hɑbəlɪŋ skɝɾ ʌv ə dip blu tæɹɑbənɝ dʒɹɛs ðət wɑz mʌtʃ taɪɾɝ ðən ðə wʌn ɪleɪn hæɾ ɪmædʒən ɑn hɝsɛlf. nɪneɪiv ɡeɪp daʊn ət ðə θɪŋ, ən əbɹʌpli ɪt wɑz ən ændɔɝən ɡaʊn ɪn ðə seɪm kʌlɝd sɪlk, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn ɡoʊld ɑn ðə slivz ən ətɑp ðə bɑɾəs. ʃi stɪl wɛn ɑn əbaʊt "ɡʊd, staʊt tu ɹɪvɝz wʊl" biɪŋ ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ hɝ, bʌɾ ivən hɪɹ wɛɹ ʃi kəɾ əpɪɹ ɪn ɪɾ ɪf ʃi wɪʃt, ʃi ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ dɪd.

"Talking to windows?" Nynaeve said, making Elayne start in surprise. Using a copy of the ring Elayne wore next to her skin, she appeared misty, almost transparent. Frowning, she tried to stride toward Elayne and staggered, nearly tripped by the hobbling skirt of a deep blue Taraboner dress that was much tighter than the one Elayne had imagined on herself. Nynaeve gaped down at the thing, and abruptly it was an Andoran gown in the same colored silk, embroidered in gold on the sleeves and atop the bodice. She still went on about "good, stout Two Rivers wool" being good enough for her, but even here where she could appear in it if she wished, she almost never did.

"wʌt dɪd jə pʊɾ ɪn ðət waɪn, nɪneɪiv?" ɪleɪn æskt. "aɪ wɛn aʊt laɪk ə snʌf kændəl."

"What did you put in that wine, Nynaeve?" Elayne asked. "I went out like a snuffed candle."

"doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə sʌbʒɪkt. ɪf jə ɑɹ tɔkɪŋ tə wɪndoʊz, jə ʃəd ɹɪli bi əslip ɪnstɛɾ ə hɪɹ. aɪv hæf ə maɪn tə ɔɹɾɝ jə - "

"Don't try to change the subject. If you are talking to windows, you should really be asleep instead of here. I've half a mind to order you - "

"pliz doʊnt. aɪm nɑt vændin, nɪneɪiv. laɪt, aɪ doʊn ivən noʊ hæf ðə kʌstəmz vændin ən ði ʌðɝz teɪk fəɹ ɡɹæntəd. bʌɾ aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ nɑt dɪsəbeɪ ju, soʊ doʊnt, pliz."

"Please don't. I'm not Vandene, Nynaeve. Light, I don't even know half the customs Vandene and the others take for granted. But I would rather not disobey you, so don't, please."

nɪneɪiv ɡlaʊɝɾ ət hɝ, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪd wʌn fɝm tʌɡ. dɪteɪlz ə hɝ dʒɹɛs tʃeɪnʒd, ðə skɝts ɡɹoʊɪŋ ə tʃɹaɪfəl fʊlɝ, ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝiz pæɾɝn ɔltɝɪŋ, ðə haɪ nɛk sɪŋkɪŋ, ðən ɹaɪzɪŋ əɡɛn, spɹaʊɾɪŋ leɪs. ʃi wɑz dʒʌs nɑt vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ət ðə nɛsəsɛɹi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən. ðə ɹɛd dɑɾ ɑn əɹ fɔɹhɛd nɛvɝ weɪvɝd, ðoʊ.

Nynaeve glowered at her, giving her braid one firm tug. Details of her dress changed, the skirts growing a trifle fuller, the embroidery's pattern altering, the high neck sinking, then rising again, sprouting lace. She was just not very good at the necessary concentration. The red dot on her forehead never wavered, though.

"vɛɹi wɛl," ʃi sɛd kɑmli, ðə skaʊl vænɪʃɪŋ. hɝ jɛloʊ-fɹɪnd ʃɔl əpɪɹɾ ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ən əɹ feɪs tʊk ɑn sʌmθɪŋ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ eɪɡləsnəs. ðəɹ wɝ wɪŋz ʌv waɪɾ əɾ əɹ tɛmpəlz. hɝ wɝdz kəntʃɹæstəd wɪð əɹ əpɪɹəns ən kəmpoʊz toʊn, ðoʊ. "lɛt mi də ðə tɔkɪŋ wən ɛɡwin ɡɛts hɪɹ. aɪ min əbaʊt wʌt hæpən tədeɪ. jə ɔlweɪz ɛn ʌp tʃæɾɝɪŋ əz ɪf jəɹ bɹʌʃɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝz hɛɹ fəɹ bɛd. laɪt! aɪ doʊnt wɑn əɹ kʌmɪŋ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn wɪð mi, ən jə noʊ ʃɪl bi ɔl oʊvɝ boʊθ ʌv əs ɪf ʃi faɪnz aʊt."

"Very well," she said calmly, the scowl vanishing. Her yellow-fringed shawl appeared on her shoulders, and her face took on something of the Aes Sedai agelessness. There were wings of white at her temples. Her words contrasted with her appearance and composed tone, though. "Let me do the talking when Egwene gets here. I mean about what happened today. You always end up chattering as if you're brushing each other's hair for bed. Light! I don't want her coming to the Amyrlin with me, and you know she will be all over both of us if she finds out."

"ɪf aɪ faɪn aʊt wʌt?" ɛɡwin sɛd. nɪneɪivz hɛd wɪpt ɝaʊnd, aɪz pænɪk-stʃɹɪkən, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən əɹ fɹɪnd ʃɔl ən sɪlk ɡaʊn wɝ ɹipleɪs baɪ ən æksɛptɪdz bændɪd waɪt. ivən ðə kɪsən wɛnt. dʒʌst ə moʊmənt, ən ʃi wɑz bæk əz ʃi hæd bɪn ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə waɪɾ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, jɛt ðət wɑz ɪnʌf tə pʊɾ ə ɹufəl ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɛɡwinz feɪs. ʃi nu nɪneɪiv vɛɹi wɛl. "ɪf aɪ faɪn aʊt wʌt, nɪneɪiv?" ʃi æsk fɝmli.

"If I find out what?" Egwene said. Nynaeve's head whipped around, eyes panic-stricken, and for a moment her fringed shawl and silk gown were replaced by an Accepted's banded white. Even the ki'sain went. Just a moment, and she was back as she had been except for the white in her hair, yet that was enough to put a rueful expression on Egwene's face. She knew Nynaeve very well. "If I find out what, Nynaeve?" she asked firmly.

ɪleɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. ʃi hæd nɑɾ ɪntɛndəd tə hoʊld ɛniθɪŋ bæk, ɪɡzækli. nɑɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə ɛɡwin, ɛniweɪ. bʌɾ ɪn əɹ pɹɛzən mud, nɪneɪiv wɑz laɪkli tə bæbəl ɛvɹiθɪŋ, əɹ ɛls ɡɹoʊ stʌbɝn ən tʃɹaɪ ɪnsɪstɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə faɪn aʊt. wɪtʃ wəɾ oʊnli meɪk ɛɡwin dɪɡ hɑɹɾɝ.

Elayne drew a deep breath. She had not intended to hold anything back, exactly. Not anything important to Egwene, anyway. But in her present mood, Nynaeve was likely to babble everything, or else grow stubborn and try insisting there was nothing to find out. Which would only make Egwene dig harder.

"sʌmwʌn pʊt fɔkɹuɾ ɪn maɪ mɪddeɪ ti," ʃi sɛd, ən wɛn ɑn səksɪŋkli əbaʊt ðə mɛn wɪð ðɛɹ dæɡɝz ən dɔɪlɪn mɛlɝz fɔɹtuɪɾəs əpɪɹəns, ən haʊ daɪɛlɪn hæd pɹuv hɝsɛlf. fəɹ ɡʊd mɛʒɝ ʃi æɾəd ðə nuz ʌv ɛləniə ən nɑiən, ən ðə fɝs meɪdz sɝtʃ fəɹ spaɪz ɪn ðə pæləs, ən ivən zɛɹjə ən kɝstʃən biɪŋ əsaɪn tə vændin, ən ði ətæk ɑn ɹænd ən ɪz dɪsəpɪɹəns. ɛɡwin əpɪɹd tə bi ənɹʌfəl baɪ ðə ɹəsaɪɾəl - ʃi ivən kʌɾ ɪleɪn ʃɔɹɾ əbaʊt ɹænd, seɪɪŋ ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi nu - bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv ə dɪsmɪsɪv ʃeɪk ə hɝ hɛɾ ət hɪɹɪŋ ðət vændin hæd meɪd noʊ pɹɑɡɹɛs ɪn lɝnɪŋ u ðə blæk sɪstɝ wɑz, ən ðət wɑz ə ðə ɡɹævəs kənsɝn tə hɝ. "oʊ, ən aɪm tə hæv ə bɑɾiɡɑɹd," ɪleɪn fɪnɪʃt. "twɛnti wɪmən, kəmændəd baɪ kæptən mɛlɝ. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk bɝdʒɪt wɪl faɪn mi ɛni meɪɾənz, bʌt ʃɪl kʌm kloʊs."

"Someone put forkroot in my midday tea," she said, and went on succinctly about the men with their daggers and Doilin Mellar's fortuitous appearance, and how Dyelin had proved herself. For good measure she added the news of Elenia and Naean, and the First Maid's search for spies in the Palace, and even Zarya and Kirstian being assigned to Vandene, and the attack on Rand and his disappearance. Egwene appeared to be unruffled by the recital - she even cut Elayne short about Rand, saying she already knew - but she gave a dismissive shake of her head at hearing that Vandene had made no progress in learning who the Black sister was, and that was of the gravest concern to her. "Oh, and I'm to have a bodyguard," Elayne finished. "Twenty women, commanded by Captain Mellar. I don't think Birgitte will find me any Maidens, but she will come close."

ə bækləs ɑɹmtʃɛɹ əpɪɹd bɪhaɪn ɛɡwin, ən ʃi sæt wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɪt. ʃi wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ skɪl hɪɹ ðən ɪleɪn əɹ nɪneɪiv. ʃi wɔɹ ə dɑɹk ɡɹin wʊlən ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs, faɪn ən wɛl-kʌt bʌɾ ʌnədɔɹnd, laɪkli wʌt ʃi hæd wɔɹn əweɪk ðət deɪ. ən ɪt ɹɪmeɪn ə ɡɹin wʊlən ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs. "aɪ wəd tɛl jə tə dʒɔɪn mi ɪn mʊɹændi təmɑɹoʊ - tənaɪt," ʃi sɛd, "ɪf ði ɝaɪvəl ə ðə kɪnswɪmən wəd nɑt laɪɾ ə waɪldfaɪɝ əmʌŋ ðə sɪɾɝz."

A backless armchair appeared behind Egwene, and she sat without looking for it. She was much more skilled here than Elayne or Nynaeve. She wore a dark green woolen riding dress, fine and well-cut but unadorned, likely what she had worn awake that day. And it remained a green woolen riding dress. "I would tell you to join me in Murandy tomorrow - tonight," she said, "if the arrival of the Kinswomen would not light a wildfire among the Sitters."

nɪneɪiv hæd ɹəkʌvɝd hɝsɛlf, ðoʊ ʃi ɡeɪv əɹ skɝts ən ənniɾɪd ədʒʌstɪŋ ʃeɪk. ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs wɑz sɪlvɝ, naʊ. "aɪ θɔt jə hæd ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ ʌndɝ jəɹ θʌm, naʊ."

Nynaeve had recovered herself, though she gave her skirts an unneeded adjusting shake. The embroidery on her dress was silver, now. "I thought you had the Hall of the Tower under your thumb, now."

"ðæts vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk hævɪŋ ə fɛɹəɾ ʌndɝ jəɹ θʌm," ɛɡwin sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ɪt twɪsts ən ɹɪθz ən ɹɪəlz ɝaʊn tə nɪp ət jəɹ ɹɪst. oʊ, ðeɪ də dʒʌst əz aɪ seɪ wən ɪt kənsɝnz ðə wɔɹ wɪð ɪleɪɾə - ðeɪ kænt ɡɛɾ ɝaʊn ðæt, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðeɪ ɡɹʌmbəl oʊvɝ ði ɪkspɛns ə mɔɹ soʊlʒɝz! - bʌt ði əɡɹimənt wɪð ðə kɪn ɪz noʊ pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɔɹ, əɹ lɛɾɪŋ ðə kɪn lɝn ðə taʊɝ hæd noʊn əbaʊɾ əm ɔl əlɔŋ. əɹ θɔɾ ɪt dɪd. ði ɪntaɪɝ hɔl wəɾ əv æpəplɛksi, dʒʌst ət faɪndɪŋ aʊt haʊ mʌtʃ ðeɪ dɪdnt noʊ. ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ vɛɹi hɑɹd tə faɪn ə weɪ tə stɑp æksɛptɪŋ nu nɑvəsɪz."

"That's very much like having a ferret under your thumb," Egwene said dryly. "It twists and writhes and wriggles around to nip at your wrist. Oh, they do just as I say when it concerns the war with Elaida - they can't get around that, however much they grumble over the expense of more soldiers! - but the agreement with the Kin is no part of the war, or letting the Kin learn the Tower had known about them all along. Or thought it did. The entire Hall would have apoplexy, just at finding out how much they didn't know. They are trying very hard to find a way to stop accepting new novices."

"ðeɪ kænt, kən ðeɪ?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. ʃi meɪɾ ə tʃɛɹ fəɹ hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə kɑpi ʌv ɛɡwinz wən ʃi lʊk tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ, ə θɹi-lɛɡəd stul əz ʃi bɪɡæn tə sɪt, ən ə læɾɝ-bækt fɑɹm tʃɛɹ baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi sɛɾəld ɑn ɪt. hɝ dʒɹɛs hæd dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts, naʊ. "ju meɪɾ ə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən. ɛni wʊmən ʌv ɛni eɪdʒ, ɪf ʃi tɛstəd tʃɹu. ɔl juv tə də ɪz meɪk ənʌðɝ, əbaʊt ðə kɪn." ɪleɪn meɪɾ əɹ oʊn siɾ ə kɑpi ʌv wʌn ə ðə tʃɛɹz ɪn əɹ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. mʌtʃ iziɝ tə hoʊld ɑntu.

"They can't, can they?" Nynaeve demanded. She made a chair for herself, but it was a copy of Egwene's when she looked to make sure it was there, a three-legged stool as she began to sit, and a ladder-backed farm chair by the time she settled on it. Her dress had divided skirts, now. "You made a proclamation. Any woman of any age, if she tested true. All you have to do is make another, about the Kin." Elaine made her own seat a copy of one of the chairs in her sitting room. Much easier to hold onto.

"oʊ, ən æmɪɝlɪnz pɹɑkləmeɪʃən ɪz əz ɡʊɾ əz lɔ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "əntɪl ðə hɔl siz ə weɪ ɝaʊn ɪt. ðə nuəs kəmpleɪn ɪz ðət wi oʊnli hæv sɪkstin æksɛptɪd. ðoʊ moʊst sɪstɝz də tʃɹit fɑoʊleɪn ən θiədʒɹɪn əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ stɪl æksɛptɪd. bʌɾ ivən eɪtin ɪzənt nɪɹ səfɪʃən tə ɡɪv ðə nɑvəs lɛsənz ðəɾ æksɛptɪɾ ɑɹ səpoʊz tə hændəl. sɪstɝz əv tə teɪk ðɛm, ɪnstɛd. aɪ θɪŋk səm wɝ hoʊpɪŋ ðə wɛðɝ wəd hoʊl ðə nʌmbɝz daʊn, bʌɾ ɪt hæzənt." ʃi smaɪl sʌɾənli, ə laɪɾ ə mɪstʃəf ɪn əɹ dɑɹk aɪz. "ðɛɹz wʌn nu nɑvəs aɪd laɪk jə tə mit, nɪneɪiv. ʃɛɝinə mɛlɔɪ. ə ɡɹændmʌðɝ. aɪ θɪŋk jəl əɡɹi ʃiz ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl wʊmən."

"Oh, an Amyrlin's proclamation is as good as law," Egwene said. "Until the Hall sees a way around it. The newest complaint is that we only have sixteen Accepted. Though most sisters do treat Faolain and Theodrin as if they were still Accepted. But even eighteen isn't near sufficient to give the novice lessons that Accepted are supposed to handle. Sisters have to take them, instead. I think some were hoping the weather would hold the numbers down, but it hasn't." She smiled suddenly, a light of mischief in her dark eyes. "There's one new novice I'd like you to meet, Nynaeve. Sharina Melloy. A grandmother. I think you'll agree she's a remarkable woman."

nɪneɪivz tʃɛɹ dɪsəpɪɹd kəmplitli, ən ʃi hɪt ðə flɔɹ wɪð ən ɑɾəbəl smæk. ʃi hɑɹdli sim tə noʊɾəs, sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ ən stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɛɡwin ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. "ʃɛɝinə mɛlɔɪ?" ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə ʃeɪki vɔɪs. "ʃiz ə nɑvəs?" hɝ dʒɹɛs wɑz ə staɪl ɪleɪn hæd nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ, wɪð floʊɪŋ slivz ən ə dipli skup nɛk wɝkt wɪð flaʊɝz ɪn ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ən sid pɝlz. hɝ hɛɹ floʊd tə hɝ weɪst, hɛl baɪ ə kæp ə munstoʊnz ən sæfaɪɝz ɑn ɡoʊldən waɪɝz noʊ θɪkɝ ðən θɹɛdz. ən ðəɹ wɑz ə pleɪn ɡoʊldən bæn ɑn əɹ lɛft fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ. oʊnli ðə kɪsən ən əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɹɪmeɪn ðə seɪm.

Nynaeve's chair disappeared completely, and she hit the floor with an audible smack. She hardly seemed to notice, sitting there and staring at Egwene in astonishment. "Sharina Melloy?" she said in a shaky voice. "She's a novice?" Her dress was a style Elayne had never seen before, with flowing sleeves and a deeply scooped neck worked with flowers in embroidery and seed pearls. Her hair flowed to her waist, held by a cap of moonstones and sapphires on golden wires no thicker than threads. And there was a plain golden band on her left forefinger. Only the ki'sain and her Great Serpent ring remained the same.

ɛɡwin blɪŋkt. "ju noʊ ðə neɪm?"

Egwene blinked. "You know the name?"

ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɝ fit, nɪneɪiv stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs. ʃi hɛld ʌp əɹ lɛf hæn ən tʌtʃt ðə pleɪn ɡoʊld ɹɪŋ ɔlmoʊs hɛzɪɾəntli. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ʃi lɛft ɛvɹiθɪŋ əz ɪt wɑz. "ɪt maɪt nɑt bi ðə seɪm wʊmən," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "ɪt kʊdn bi!" meɪkɪŋ ənʌðɝ tʃɛɹ laɪk ɛɡwinz, ʃi fɹaʊn əɾ ɪɾ əz ɪf kəmændɪŋ ɪt tə steɪ, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl hæɾ ə haɪ bæk ən kɑɹvɪŋ baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi sæt. "ðɛɹ wɑz ə ʃɛɝinə mɛlɔɪ. . . . ɪt wɑz dʊɹɪŋ maɪ tɛs fəɹ æksɛptɪd," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə ɹʌʃ, "aɪ doʊn əv tə tɔk əbaʊt ðæt; ɪts ðə ɹul!"

Getting to her feet, Nynaeve stared at her dress. She held up her left hand and touched the plain gold ring almost hesitantly. Strangely, she left everything as it was. "It might not be the same woman," she muttered. "It couldn't be!" Making another chair like Egwene's, she frowned at it as if commanding it to stay, but it still had a high back and carving by the time she sat. "There was a Sharina Melloy. . . . It was during my test for Accepted," she said in a rush, "I don't have to talk about that; it's the rule!"

"ʌv kɔɹs jə doʊnt," ɛɡwin sɛd, ðoʊ ðə lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv wɑz sɝɾənli əz stʃɹeɪnʒ əz ɪleɪn nu hɝ oʊn mʌs bi. stɪl, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə bi dʌn; wən nɪneɪiv wɑntəd tə bi stʌbɝn, ʃi kəd titʃ mjulz.

"Of course you don't," Egwene said, though the look she gave Nynaeve was certainly as strange as Elayne knew her own must be. Still, there was nothing to be done; when Nynaeve wanted to be stubborn, she could teach mules.

"sɪns jə bɹɔɾ ʌp ðə kɪn, ɛɡwin," ɪleɪn sɛd, "hæv jə θɔt fɝðɝ ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑd?"

"Since you brought up the Kin, Egwene," Elayne said, "have you thought further on the Oath Rod?"

ɛɡwin ɹeɪzd wʌn hæn əz ɪf tə stɑp hɝ, bʌɾ əɹ ɹɪplaɪ wɑz kɑm ən lɛvəl. "ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə θɪŋk fɝðɝ, ɪleɪn. ðə θɹi oʊðz, swɔɹn ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑd, ɑɹ wʌt meɪk əs ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ dɪdn si ðæt, ət fɝst, bʌɾ aɪ du, naʊ. ðə vɛɹi fɝs deɪ wɪv ðə taʊɝ, əl swɛɹ ðə θɹi oʊðz, ɑn ði oʊθ ɹɑd."

Egwene raised one hand as if to stop her, but her reply was calm and level. "There's no need to think further, Elayne. The Three Oaths, sworn on the Oath Rod, are what make us Aes Sedai. I didn't see that, at first, but I do, now. The very first day we have the Tower, I will swear the Three Oaths, on the Oath Rod."

"ðæts mædnəs!" nɪneɪiv bɝst aʊt, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, stɪl ðə seɪm tʃɛɹ. ən stɪl ðə seɪm dʒɹɛs. vɛɹi sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ. hɝ hænz wɝ fɪsts ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn əɹ læp. "ju noʊ wʌɾ ɪt dʌz; ðə kɪn ɑɹ pɹuf! haʊ mɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ laɪv pæs θɹi hʌnʒɹəd? əɹ ɹitʃ ɪt? ən doʊn tɛl mi aɪ ʃʊdn tɔk əbaʊɾ eɪdʒ. ðæts ə ɹɪdɪkjələs kʌstəm, ən jə noʊ ɪt. ɛɡwin, ɹin wɑz kɔld ɛldəs kəz ʃi wɑz ði oʊldəs kɪnswʊmən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. ði oʊldəst ɛniwɛɹ ɪz ə wʊmən kɔld ɑlɔɪsiə nimoʊsni, ən ɔɪl mɝtʃən ɪn tɛɹ. ɛɡwin, ʃiz nɪɹli sɪks . . . hʌnʒɹəd . . . jɪɹz . . . oʊld! wən ðə hɔl hɪɹz ðæt, aɪ weɪdʒɝ ðəl bi ɹɛɾi tə pʊt ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ɑn ə ʃɛlf."

"That's madness!" Nynaeve burst out, leaning forward in her chair. Surprisingly, still the same chair. And still the same dress. Very surprising. Her hands were fists resting on her lap. "You know what it does; the Kin are proof! How many Aes Sedai live past three hundred? Or reach it? And don't tell me I shouldn't talk about age. That's a ridiculous custom, and you know it. Egwene, Reanne was called Eldest because she was the oldest Kinswoman in Ebou Dar. The oldest anywhere is a woman called Aloisia Nemosni, an oil merchant in Tear. Egwene, she's nearly six . . . hundred . . . years . . . old! When the Hall hears that, I wager they'll be ready to put the Oath Rod on a shelf."

"ðə laɪt noʊz θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ɪz ə lɔŋ taɪm," ɪleɪn pʊɾ ɪn, "bʌɾ aɪ kæn seɪ aɪm hæpi maɪsɛlf ət ðə pɹɑspɛkt ə pɝhæps kʌɾɪŋ maɪ laɪf ɪn hæf, ɛɡwin. ən wʌɾ ə ði oʊθ ɹɑɾ ən jəɹ pɹɑməs tə ðə kɪn? ɹin wɑns tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt wʌt hæpənz wən ʃi swɛɹz? wʌɾ əbaʊɾ ɑlɔɪsiə? wɪl ʃi fɔl oʊvɝ dɛd? jə kæn æsk əm tə swɛɹ, nɑt noʊɪŋ."

"The Light knows three hundred years is a long time," Elayne put in, "but I can't say I'm happy myself at the prospect of perhaps cutting my life in half, Egwene. And what of the Oath Rod and your promise to the Kin? Reanne wants to be Aes Sedai, but what happens when she swears? What about Aloisia? Will she fall over dead? You can't ask them to swear, not knowing."

"aɪ doʊn æsk ɛniθɪŋ." ɛɡwinz feɪs wɑz stɪl smuð, bʌɾ əɹ bæk hæd stʃɹeɪɾənd, hɝ vɔɪs kuld. ən hɑɹɾənd. hɝ aɪz ɔɡɝd dip. "ɛni wʊmən u wɑns tə bi ə sɪstɝ wɪl swɛɹ. ən ɛniwʌn u ɹəfjuzəz ən stɪl kɔlz hɝsɛlf ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl fil ðə fʊl weɪɾ ə taʊɝ dʒʌstəs."

"I don't ask anything." Egwene's face was still smooth, but her back had straightened, her voice cooled. And hardened. Her eyes augered deep. "Any woman who wants to be a sister will swear. And anyone who refuses and still calls herself Aes Sedai will feel the full weight of Tower justice."

ɪleɪn swɑloʊd hɑɹɾ ʌndɝ ðət stɛɾi ɡeɪz. nɪneɪivz feɪs peɪld. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ ɛɡwinz minɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt hɪɹɪŋ ə fɹɛnd naʊ, bʌt ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæd noʊ fɹɛnz wən ɪt keɪm taɪm tə pɹənaʊns dʒʌdʒmənt.

Elayne swallowed hard under that steady gaze. Nynaeve's face paled. There was no mistaking Egwene's meaning. They were not hearing a friend now, but the Amyrlin Seat, and the Amyrlin Seat had no friends when it came time to pronounce judgment.

əpɛɹənli sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð wʌt ʃi sɔ ɪn ðɛm, ɛɡwin ɹɪlækst. "aɪ də noʊ ðə pɹɑbləm," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə mɔɹ nɔɹməl toʊn. mɔɹ nɔɹməl, bʌt stɪl nɑɾ ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ ɑɹɡjəmənt. "aɪ ɪkspɛkt ɛni wʊmən huz neɪm ɪz ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk tə ɡoʊ əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kæn, tə ɝn ðə ʃɔl ɪf ʃi kæn, ən sɝv əz ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛniwʌn tə daɪ fəɹ ɪt wən ðeɪ kəd lɪv. wʌns ðə hɔl lɝnz əbaʊt ðə kɪn - wʌns ðəɹ oʊvɝ pɪtʃɪŋ fɪts - aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən ɡɛɾ əm tə əɡɹi ðəɾ ə sɪstɝ u wɑns tə ɹɪtaɪɹ ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə. wɪð ði oʊðz ɹimuvd." ðeɪ hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd lɔŋ əɡoʊ ðət ðə ɹɑd kəd bi juz tə ənbaɪn əz wɛl əz baɪnd, ɛls haʊ kəd blæk sɪstɝz laɪ?

Apparently satisfied with what she saw in them, Egwene relaxed. "I do know the problem," she said in a more normal tone. More normal, but still not inviting argument. "I expect any woman whose name is in the novice book to go as far as she can, to earn the shawl if she can, and serve as Aes Sedai, but I don't want anyone to die for it when they could live. Once the Hall learns about the Kin - once they're over pitching fits - I think I can get them to agree that a sister who wants to retire should be able to. With the Oaths removed." They had decided long ago that the Rod could be used to unbind as well as bind, else how could Black sisters lie?

"aɪ səpoʊz ðət wəd bi ɔl ɹaɪt," nɪneɪiv əlaʊd dʒudɪʃɪsli. ɪleɪn sɪmpli nɑɾəd; ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ.

"I suppose that would be all right," Nynaeve allowed judiciously. Elayne simply nodded; she was certain there was more.

"ɹɪtaɪɹ ɪndə ðə kɪn, nɪneɪiv," ɛɡwin sɛd dʒɛnli. "ðæt weɪ, ðə kɪn ɑɹ baʊn tə ðə taʊɝ, tu. ðə kɪn wɪl kip ðɛɹ oʊn weɪz, ʌv kɔɹs, ðɛɹ ɹul, bʌt ðəl əv tə əɡɹi ðət ðɛɹ nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl ɪz bɪniθ ði æmɪɝlɪn, ɪf nɑt ðə hɔl, ən ðət kɪnswɪmən stæn bɪloʊ sɪstɝz. aɪ də min əm tə bi pɑɹɾ ə ðə taʊɝ, nɑt ɡoʊ ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ. bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ðəl æksɛpt."

"Retire into the Kin, Nynaeve," Egwene said gently. "That way, the Kin are bound to the Tower, too. The Kin will keep their own ways, of course, their Rule, but they will have to agree that their Knitting Circle is beneath the Amyrlin, if not the Hall, and that Kinswomen stand below sisters. I do mean them to be part of the Tower, not go their own way. But I think they will accept."

nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd əɡɛn, hæpəli, bʌɾ əɹ smaɪl feɪɾəd əz ðə fʊl ɪmpɔɹt ɹitʃt hɝ. ʃi spləɾɝd ɪndɪɡnənli. "bʌt . . . ! stændɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə kɪn ɪz baɪ eɪdʒ! jəl əv sɪstɝz teɪkɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz fɹəm wɪmən u kʊdn ivən ɹitʃ æksɛptɪd!"

Nynaeve nodded again, happily, but her smile faded as the full import reached her. She spluttered indignantly. "But . . . ! Standing among the Kin is by age! You'll have sisters taking orders from women who couldn't even reach Accepted!"

"fɔɹmɝ sɪstɝz, nɪneɪiv." ɛɡwin fɪŋɡɝd ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hæn ən saɪd feɪnli. "ivən kɪnswɪmən u ɝn ðə ɹɪŋ doʊnt wɛɹ ɪt. soʊ wɪl əv tə ɡɪv ɪɾ ʌp, tu. wɪl bi kɪnswɪmən, nɪneɪiv, nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ." ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi kəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi fil ðət dɪstən deɪ, ðət dɪstən lɔs, bʌt ʃi tʊk əɹ hæn fɹəm ðə ɹɪŋ ən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "naʊ. ɪz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls? aɪ hæv ə lɔŋ naɪɾ əhɛɾ ə mi, ən aɪ wəd laɪk tə ɡɛɾ ə lɪɾəl ɹil slip bɪfɔɹ aɪ hæv tə feɪs ðə sɪɾɝz əɡɛn."

"Former sisters, Nynaeve." Egwene fingered the Great Serpent ring on her right hand and sighed faintly. "Even Kinswomen who earned the ring don't wear it. So we will have to give it up, too. We will be Kinswomen, Nynaeve, not Aes Sedai any longer." She sounded as if she could already feel that distant day, that distant loss, but she took her hand from the ring and took a deep breath. "Now. Is there anything else? I have a long night ahead of me, and I would like to get a little real sleep before I have to face the Sitters again."

fɹaʊnɪŋ, nɪneɪiv hæd klɛntʃt əɹ fɪs taɪɾ ən leɪɾ əɹ ʌðɝ hæn oʊvɝ ɪt tə kʌvɝ əɹ ɹɪŋz, bʌt ʃi əpɪɹd ɹɛɾi tə ɡɪv ʌp ɑɹɡjuɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə kɪn. fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ. "du jəɹ hɛdeɪks stɪl tʃɹʌbəl ju? aɪd θɪŋk ɪf ðət wʊmənz məsɑʒɪz dɪɾ ɛni ɡʊd, jud stɑp hævɪŋ ðɛm."

Frowning, Nynaeve had clenched her fist tight and laid her other hand over it to cover her rings, but she appeared ready to give up arguing over the Kin. For the time being. "Do your headaches still trouble you? I'd think if that woman's massages did any good, you'd stop having them."

"hɑliməz məsɑʒɪz wɝk wʌndɝz, nɪneɪiv. aɪ kʊdn slip əɾ ɔl wɪθaʊt hɝ. naʊ, ɪz ðəɹ . . . ?" ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, stɛɹɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹz ət ði ɛntʃɹəns ə ðə θɹoʊn ɹum, ən ɪleɪn tɝn tə lʊk.

"Halima's massages work wonders, Nynaeve. I couldn't sleep at all without her. Now, is there . . . ?" She trailed off, staring toward the doors at the entrance of the throne room, and Elayne turned to look.

ə mæn wɑz stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ, ə mæn əz tɔl əz ən ilmən, wɪð dɑɹk ɹɛd hɛɹ feɪnli stʃɹikt wɪð waɪt, bʌɾ ɪz haɪ-kɑlɝd blu koʊt wəd nɛvɝ bi wɔɹn baɪ ən il. hi əpɪɹd mʌskjəlɝ, ən ɪz hɑɹd feɪs sim sʌmhaʊ fəmɪljɝ. wən i sɔ ðɛm lʊkɪŋ, hi tɝn ən ɹæn daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ aʊɾ ə saɪt.

A man was standing there watching, a man as tall as an Aielman, with dark red hair faintly streaked with white, but his high-collared blue coat would never be worn by an Aiel. He appeared muscular, and his hard face seemed somehow familiar. When he saw them looking, he turned and ran down the corridor out of sight.

fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ɪleɪn ɡeɪpt. hi hæd nɑt dʒʌst æksədɛntəli dʒɹim hɪmsɛlf ɪndə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, əɹ i wʊɾə vænɪʃt baɪ naʊ, bʌt ʃi kəd stɪl hɪɹ ɪz buts, laʊɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ taɪlz. iðɝ i wɑz ə dʒɹimwɔkɝ - ɹɛɹ əmʌŋ mɛn, soʊ ðə waɪz wʌnz sɛd - əɹ i hæɾ ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ə hɪz oʊn.

For an instant, Elayne gaped. He had not just accidentally dreamed himself into Tel'aran'rhiod, or he would have vanished by now, but she could still hear his boots, loud on the floor tiles. Either he was a dreamwalker - rare among men, so the Wise Ones said - or he had a ter'angreal of his own.

lipɪŋ tə hɝ fit, ʃi ɹæn æftɝ hɪm, bʌɾ əz fæst əz ʃi wɑz, ɛɡwin wɑz fæstɝ. wʌn ɪnstən ɛɡwin wɑz bɪhaɪnd, ðə nɛkst ʃi wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, piɹɪŋ ðə weɪ ðə mæn hæd ɡɔn. ɪleɪn tʃɹaɪd θɪŋkɪŋ ə hɝsɛlf stændɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɛɡwin, ən ʃi wɑz. ðə kɔɹəɾɝ wɑz saɪlənt, naʊ, ən ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ stænd-læmps ən tʃɛsts ən tæpəstʃɹiz, ɔl flɪkɝɪŋ ən ʃɪftɪŋ.

Leaping to her feet, she ran after him, but as fast as she was, Egwene was faster. One instant Egwene was behind, the next she was standing in the doorway, peering the way the man had gone. Elayne tried thinking of herself standing beside Egwene, and she was. The corridor was silent, now, and empty except for stand-lamps and chests and tapestries, all flickering and shifting.

"haʊ dɪd jə də ðæt?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd, ɹʌnɪŋ ʌp wɪð əɹ skɝts hɔɪstəɾ əbʌv əɹ niz. hɝ stɑkɪŋz wɝ sɪlk, ən fɛd! heɪstəli lɛɾɪŋ əɹ skɝts fɔl wən ʃi ɹilaɪzd ɪleɪn hæd noʊɾəst əɹ stɑkɪŋz, ʃi pɪɹd daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ. "wɛɹ dɪɾ i ɡoʊ? hi cʊɾə hɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ! dɪd jə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɪm? hi ɹimaɪndəd mi ʌv sʌmwʌn; aɪ doʊnt noʊ hu."

"How did you do that?" Nynaeve demanded, running up with her skirts hoisted above her knees. Her stockings were silk, and fed! Hastily letting her skirts fall when she realized Elayne had noticed her stockings, she peered down the hallway. "Where did he go? He could have heard everything! Did you recognize him? He reminded me of someone; I don't know who."

"ɹænd," ɛɡwin sɛd. "hi cʊɾə bɪn ɹændz ʌŋkəl."

"Rand," Egwene said. "He could have been Rand's uncle."

ʌv kɔɹs, ɪleɪn θɔt. ɪf ɹænd hæɾ ə min ʌŋkəl.

Of course, Elayne thought. If Rand had a mean uncle.

ə mətælɪk klɪk ɛkoʊd fɹəm ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə θɹoʊn ɹum. ðə dɔɹ ɪndə ðə dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹumz bɪhaɪn ðə deɪz, kloʊzɪŋ. dɔɹz wɝ oʊpən əɹ kloʊzd əɹ səmtaɪmz ɪn bɪtwin ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd; ðeɪ dɪd nɑt swɪŋ ʃʌt.

A metallic click echoed from the far end of the throne room. The door into the dressing rooms behind the dais, closing. Doors were open or closed or sometimes in between in Tel'aran'rhiod; they did not swing shut.

"laɪt!" nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd. "haʊ mɛni pipəl əv bɪn ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ɑn ʌs? nɑt tə mɛnʃən hu, ən waɪ?"

"Light!" Nynaeve muttered. "How many people have been eavesdropping on us? Not to mention who, and why?"

"huɛvɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ," ɛɡwin ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli, "ðeɪ əpɛɹənli doʊnt noʊ tɛlɝɑnɹhiəɾ əz wɛl əz wi du. nɑt fɹɛnz, seɪf tə seɪ, əɹ ðeɪ wʊdn bi ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ. ən aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ meɪ nɑt bi fɹɛnz tə wʌn ənʌðɝ, ʌðɝwaɪz, waɪ lɪsən fɹəm ɑpəzəɾ ɛnz ə ðə ɹum? ðət mæn wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ə ʃaɪnɝən koʊt. ðəɹ ɑɹ ʃaɪnɝənz ɪn maɪ ɑɹmi, bʌt jə boʊθ noʊ ðɛm ɔl. nʌn ɹɪzɛmbəl ɹænd."

"Whoever they are," Egwene replied calmly, "they apparently don't know Tel'aran'rhiod as well as we do. Not friends, safe to say, or they wouldn't be eavesdropping. And I think they may not be friends to one another, otherwise, why listen from opposite ends of the room? That man was wearing a Shienaran coat. There are Shienarans in my army, but you both know them all. None resemble Rand."

nɪneɪiv snɪft. "wɛl, huɛvɝ i ɪz, ðəɹ ɑɹ tu mɛni pipəl lɪsnɪŋ ət kɔɹnɝz. ðæts wʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk. aɪ wɑnə bi bæk ɪn maɪ oʊn bɑɾi, wɛɹ ɔl aɪ hæv tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɑɹ spaɪz ən pɔɪzən dæɡɝz."

Nynaeve sniffed. "Well, whoever he is, there are too many people listening at corners. That's what I think. I want to be back in my own body, where all I have to worry about are spies and poisoned daggers."

ʃaɪnɝənz, ɪleɪn θɔt. bɔɹɾɝləndɝz. haʊ kəd ðəɾ əv slɪpt əɹ maɪnd? wɛl, ðəɹ hæd bɪn ðə lɪɾəl mæɾɝ ə fɔkɹut. "ðɛɹ ɪz wʌn mɔɹ θɪŋ," ʃi sɛɾ əlaʊd, ðoʊ ɪn ə kɛɹfəl vɔɪs ʃi hoʊpt wəd nɑt kæɹi, ən ɹɪleɪɾɪd daɪɛlɪnz nuz ə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz ɪn bɹəm wʊd. ʃi æɾəd mæstɝ nɔɹiz kɔɹəspɑndəns, tu, ɔl ðə waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɑtʃ boʊθ weɪz əlɔŋ ðə kɔɹəɾɝ ən ðə θɹoʊn ɹum əz wɛl. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi kɑt næpɪŋ baɪ ənʌðɝ spaɪ. "aɪ θɪŋk ðoʊz ɹulɝz ɑɹ ɪn bɹəm wʊd," ʃi fɪnɪʃt, "ɔl fɔɹ ə ðɛm."

Shienarans, Elayne thought. Borderlanders. How could that have slipped her mind? Well, there had been the little matter of forkroot. "There is one more thing," she said aloud, though in a careful voice she hoped would not carry, and related Dyelin's news of Borderlanders in Braem Wood. She added Master Norry's correspondence, too, all the while trying to watch both ways along the corridor and the throne room as well. She did not want to be caught napping by another spy. "I think those rulers are in Braem Wood," she finished, "all four of them."

"ɹænd," ɛɡwin bɹiðd, saʊndɪŋ ɪɹəteɪɾəd. "ivən wən i kæn bi faʊn i kɑmplɪkeɪts θɪŋz. juv ɛni aɪdiə wɛðɝ ðeɪ keɪm tə ɔfɝ ɪm əlidʒəns əɹ tʃɹaɪ tə hæn ɪm oʊvɝ tə ɪleɪɾə? aɪ kæn θɪŋk ʌv ɛni ʌðɝ ɹizənz fəɹ əm tə mɑɹtʃ ə θaʊzən liɡz. ðeɪ mʌs bi bɔɪlɪŋ ʃuz fəɹ sup baɪ naʊ! juv ɛni aɪdiə haʊ hɑɹɾ ɪts tə kip ən ɑɹmi səplaɪɾ ɑn ðə mɑɹtʃ?"

"Rand," Egwene breathed, sounding irritated. "Even when he can't be found he complicates things. Do you have any idea whether they came to offer him allegiance or try to hand him over to Elaida? I can't think of any other reasons for them to march a thousand leagues. They must be boiling shoes for soup by now! Do you have any idea how hard it is to keep an army supplied on the march?"

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən faɪn aʊt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "waɪ, aɪ min. ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm. . . . jə ɡeɪv mi ði aɪdiə, ɛɡwin." ʃi kəd nɑt hɛlp smaɪlɪŋ. sʌmθɪŋ ɡʊd hæd kʌm ə tədeɪ. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ maɪt dʒʌs bi eɪbəl tə juz əm tə sɪkjʊɹ ðə laɪən θɹoʊn."

"I think I can find out," Elayne said. "Why, I mean. And at the same time. . . . You gave me the idea, Egwene." She could not help smiling. Something good had come of today. "I think I might just be able to use them to secure the Lion Throne."

æn ɪɡzæmən ðə tɔl ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi fɹeɪm ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ ən ɡeɪv ə saɪ ðət tɝn ɪndə ə jɔn. ðə flɪkɝɪŋ læmps ɡeɪv ə pʊɹ laɪt fəɹ ðɪs, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt ðə ɹizən əɹ bɝdz ɔl sim lɑpsaɪɾɪd. ʃi wɑntəd tə bi ɪn əɹ bɛd, ən ʃi dɪspaɪzd ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. bʌt ʃi hæd tə bi əweɪk, ən ðɪs wɑz ði oʊnli weɪ tə əvɔɪd kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð tʃɛzməl. wʌt tʃɛzməl kɔl kɑnvɝseɪʃən. ðə smʌɡli ɛɹəɡən jɛloʊ wɑz ɪntɛn ɑn əɹ oʊn ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum, ən ʃi əsum ðəɾ ɛniwʌn u tʊk ʌp ə niɾəl hæɾ əɹ oʊn kin ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ðə wɝk. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, æn nu, ɪf ʃi ɹoʊz fɹəm əɹ tʃɛɹ, tʃɛzməl wəd sun stɑɹt ɹɪɡeɪlɪŋ əɹ wɪð teɪlz ə hɝ oʊn ɪmpɔɹɾəns. ɪn ðə mʌnθs sɪns mɑɡiɾin vænɪʃt, ʃi hæd hɝd tʃɛzməlz pɑɹɾ ɪn pʊɾɪŋ tæmɹə ɑspɪnjə tə ðə kwɛstʃən ət lis twɛnti taɪmz, ən haʊ tʃɛzməl hæɾ ɪndus ðə ɹɛdz tə mɝɾɝ siɹɪn veɪu bɪfɔɹ siɹɪn kəɾ ɔɹɾɝ əɹ ɝɛs pɝhæps fɪfti! tə hɪɹ tʃɛzməl tɛl ɪt, ʃi hæd seɪv ðə blæk ədʒɑ sɪŋɡəl-hændəd, ən ʃi wəd tɛl ɪt, ɡɪvən hæf ə tʃæns. ðət sɔɹɾ ə tɔk wɑz nɑɾ oʊnli bɔɹɪŋ, ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs. ivən dɛdli, ɪf ðə səpɹim kaʊnsəl lɝn ʌv ɪt. soʊ æn staɪfəld ənʌðɝ jɔn, skwɪntɪɾ əɾ əɹ wɝk, ən pʊʃt ðə niɾəl θɹu ðə taɪtli stʃɹɛtʃt lɪnən. pɝhæps ɪf ʃi meɪd ðə ɹɛdbɝd lɑɹdʒɝ, ʃi kəɾ ivən ʌp ðə wɪŋz.

Asne examined the tall embroidery frame in front of her and gave a sigh that turned into a yawn. The flickering lamps gave a poor light for this, but that was not the reason her birds all seemed lopsided. She wanted to be in her bed, and she despised embroidery. But she had to be awake, and this was the only way to avoid conversation with Chesmal. What Chesmal called conversation. The smugly arrogant Yellow was intent on her own embroidery, on the other side of the room, and she assumed that anyone who took up a needle had her own keen interest in the work. On the other hand, Asne knew, if she rose from her chair, Chesmal would soon start regaling her with tales of her own importance. In the months since Moghedien vanished, she had heard Chesmal's part in putting Tamra Ospenya to the question at least twenty times, and how Chesmal had induced the Reds to murder Sierin Vayu before Sierin could order her arrest perhaps fifty! To hear Chesmal tell it, she had saved the Black Ajah single-handed, and she would tell it, given half a chance. That sort of talk was not only boring, it was dangerous. Even deadly, if the Supreme Council learned of it. So Asne stifled another yawn, squinted at her work, and pushed the needle through the tightly stretched linen. Perhaps if she made the redbird larger, she could even up the wings.

ðə klɪk ə ðə dɔɹlætʃ bɹɔt boʊθ wɪmənz hɛdz ʌp. ðə tu sɝvəns nu nɑt tə bɑðɝ ðɛm, ən ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðə wʊmən ən əɹ hʌzbənd ʃəd bi fæst əslip. æn ɛmbɹeɪst seɪaɪdɑɹ, ɹɛɾiɪŋ ə wiv ðət wəd sɪɹ ən ɪntʃɹuɾɝ tə ðə boʊn, ən ðə ɡloʊ sɝaʊndəd tʃɛzməl, tu. ɪf ðə ɹɔŋ pɝsən stɛp θɹu ðət dɔɹ, ðeɪ wəd ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɪɾ əntɪl ðeɪ daɪd.

The click of the doorlatch brought both women's heads up. The two servants knew not to bother them, and in any case, the woman and her husband should be fast asleep. Asne embraced saidar, readying a weave that would sear an intruder to the bone, and the glow surrounded Chesmal, too. If the wrong person stepped through that door, they would regret it until they died.

ɪt wɑz ɛlʒɹɪθ, ɡlʌvz ɪn hænd, wɪð əɹ dɑɹk kloʊk stɪl hæŋɪŋ daʊn əɹ bæk. ðə plʌmp bɹaʊnz dʒɹɛs wɑz dɑɹk, tu, ən ʌnədɔɹnd. æn heɪɾəd wɛɹɪŋ pleɪn wʊlənz, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nid tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs. ðə dʒɹæb kloʊðz suɾəd ɛlʒɹɪθ.

It was Eldrith, gloves in hand, with her dark cloak still hanging down her back. The plump Brown's dress was dark, too, and unadorned. Asne hated wearing plain woolens, but they did need to avoid notice. The drab clothes suited Eldrith.

ʃi stɑpt ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðɛm, blɪŋkɪŋ, ə moʊməntɛɹi lʊk ə kənfjuʒən ɑn əɹ ɹaʊn feɪs. "oʊ, maɪ," ʃi sɛd. "hu dɪd jə θɪŋk aɪ wɑz?" θɹoʊɪŋ əɹ ɡlʌvz ɑntu ðə smɔl teɪbəl baɪ ðə dɔɹ, ʃi sʌɾənli bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə hɝ kloʊk ən fɹaʊn əz ɪf dʒʌst ɹilaɪzɪŋ ʃi hæd wɔɹn ɪɾ əpstɛɹz. kɛɹfəli ənpɪnɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝ bɹutʃ əɾ əɹ nɛk, ʃi tɔs ðə kloʊk ɑntu ə tʃɛɹ ɪn ə tʌmbəl hip.

She stopped at the sight of them, blinking, a momentary look of confusion on her round face. "Oh, my," she said. "Who did you think I was?" Throwing her gloves onto the small table by the door, she suddenly became aware of her cloak and frowned as if just realizing she had worn it upstairs. Carefully unpinning the silver brooch at her neck, she tossed the cloak onto a chair in a tumbled heap.

ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ wɪŋkt aʊɾ ɝaʊn tʃɛzməl əz ʃi twɪstəɾ əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi fɹeɪm əsaɪd soʊ ʃi kəd stænd. hɝ stɝn feɪs meɪɾ əɹ sim tɔlɝ ðən ʃi wɑz, ən ʃi wɑz ə tɔl wʊmən. ðə bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd flaʊɝz ʃi hæɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪn ə ɡɑɹɾən. "wɛɹ əv jə bɪn?" ʃi dɪmændəd. ɛlʒɹɪθ stʊd haɪəst əmʌŋ ðɛm, ən mɑɡiɾin hæd lɛft əɹ ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ bɪsaɪdz, bʌt tʃɛzməl hæd bɪɡʌn teɪkɪŋ oʊnli kɝsɝi noʊɾəs ɪf ðæt. "ju wɝ səpoʊz tə bi bæk baɪ æftɝnun, ən ðə naɪɾ ɪz hæf ɡɔn!"

The light of saidar winked out around Chesmal as she twisted her embroidery frame aside so she could stand. Her stern face made her seem taller than she was, and she was a tall woman. The brightly colored flowers she had embroidered might have been in a garden. "Where have you been?" she demanded. Eldrith stood highest among them, and Moghedien had left her in charge besides, but Chesmal had begun taking only cursory notice if that. "You were supposed to be back by afternoon, and the night is half gone!"

"aɪ lɔs tʃɹæk ə ði aʊɝ, tʃɛzməl," ɛlʒɹɪθ ɹɪplaɪɾ æbsənli, əpɪɹɪŋ lɔst ɪn θɔt. "ɪɾ əz bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm sɪns aɪ wɑz læst ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi ɪz fæsəneɪɾɪŋ, ən aɪ hæɾ ə dɪlaɪtfəl mil əɾ ən ɪn aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ðoʊ aɪ mʌst seɪ, ðəɹ wɝ fjuɝ sɪstɝz əbaʊt ðɛn. noʊ wʌn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz mi, haʊɛvɝ." ʃi pɪɹɾ əɾ əɹ bɹutʃ əz ðoʊ wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ ɪt hæd kʌm fɹʌm, ðən tʌkt ɪɾ ɪndə hɝ bɛl paʊtʃ.

"I lost track of the hour, Chesmal," Eldrith replied absently, appearing lost in thought. "It has been a long time since I was last in Caemlyn. The Inner City is fascinating, and I had a delightful meal at an inn I remembered. Though I must say, there were fewer sisters about then. No one recognized me, however." She peered at her brooch as though wondering where it had come from, then tucked it into her belt pouch.

"ju lɔs tʃɹæk," tʃɛzməl sɛd flætli, lɑsɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz təɡɛðɝ əɾ əɹ weɪst. pɝhæps tə kip əm fɹəm ɛlʒɹɪθs θɹoʊt. hɝ aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd wɪð æŋɡɝ. "ju lɔs tʃɹæk."

"You lost track," Chesmal said flatly, lacing her fingers together at her waist. Perhaps to keep them from Eldrith's throat. Her eyes glittered with anger. "You lost track."

wʌns mɔɹ ɛlʒɹɪθ blɪŋkt, əz ɪf stɑɹɾəld tə bi ədʒɹɛst. "oʊ. wɝ jə əfɹeɪd kɛnɪt hæd faʊn mi əɡɛn? aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, sɪns sæmɝə aɪ hæv bɪn kwaɪt kɛɹfəl ət kipɪŋ ðə bɑn mæskt."

Once more Eldrith blinked, as if startled to be addressed. "Oh. Were you afraid Kennit had found me again? I assure you, since Samara I have been quite careful at keeping the bond masked."

ət taɪmz, æn wʌndɝd haʊ mʌtʃ ʌv ɛlʒɹɪθs əpɛɹən veɪɡnɪs wɑz ɹil. noʊ wʌn soʊ ʌnəwɛɹ ə ðə wɝld ɝaʊn əɹ cʊɾə sɝvaɪv ðɪs lɔŋ. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ʃi hæd bɪn ənfoʊkəst ɪnʌf tə lɛt ðə mæskɪŋ slɪp mɔɹ ðən wʌns bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃt sæmɝə, ɪnʌf fəɹ əɹ wɔɹɾɝ tə tʃɹæk hɝ. oʊbiɾiənt tə mɑɡiɾinz ɔɹɾɝz tə əweɪɾ əɹ ɹɪtɝn, ðeɪ hæd hɪɾən θɹu ðə ɹaɪəts æftɝ əɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ, weɪɾəd waɪl ðə soʊ-kɔl pɹɑfəts mɑbz swɛp saʊθ ɪndə ɑmɑdɪʃiə, steɪɾ ɪn ðət ɹɛtʃɪd, ɹuən taʊn ivən æftɝ æn bɪkeɪm kənvɪns ðət mɑɡiɾin hæɾ əbændən ðɛm. hɝ lɪp kɝld ət ðə mɛmɹi. wʌt hæd spɑɹk ðə dɪsɪʒən tə liv wɑz ði ɝaɪvəl ʌv ɛlʒɹɪθs kɛnɪɾ ɪn ðə taʊn, ʃʊɹ ðət ʃi wɑz ə mɝɾɝɝ, hæf kənvɪnst ʃi wɑz blæk ədʒɑ, ən dɪtɝmən tə kɪl əɹ noʊ mæɾɝ ðə kɑnsəkwɛnsəz tə hɪmsɛlf. nɑt sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ʃi hæd bɪn ənwɪlɪŋ tə feɪs ðoʊz kɑnsəkwɛnsəz hɝsɛlf, ən ɹəfjuz tə lɛɾ ɛniwʌn kɪl ðə mæn. ði oʊnli ɔltɝnəɾɪv wɑz tə fli. ðən əɡɛn, ɛlʒɹɪθ wɑz ðə wʌn u hæd pɔɪntəɾ aʊt keɪɛmlɪn əz ðɛɹ oʊnli hoʊp.

At times, Asne wondered how much of Eldrith's apparent vagueness was real. No one so unaware of the world around her could have survived this long. On the other hand, she had been unfocused enough to let the masking slip more than once before they reached Samara, enough for her Warder to track her. Obedient to Moghedien's orders to await her return, they had hidden through the riots after her departure, waited while the so-called Prophet's mobs swept south into Amadicia, stayed in that wretched, ruined town even after Asne became convinced that Moghedien had abandoned them. Her lip curled at the memory. What had sparked the decision to leave was the arrival of Eldrith's Kennit in the town, sure that she was a murderer, half convinced she was Black Ajah, and determined to kill her no matter the consequences to himself. Not surprisingly, she had been unwilling to face those consequences herself, and refused to let anyone kill the man. The only alternative was to flee. Then again, Eldrith was the one who had pointed out Caemlyn as their only hope.

"dɪd jə lɝn ɛniθɪŋ, ɛlʒɹɪθ?" æn æsk pəlaɪtli. tʃɛzməl wɑz ə ful. haʊɛvɝ tæɾɝd ðə wɝl simd ət ðə moʊmənt, əfɛɹz wəd ɹaɪt ðɛmsɛlvz. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ.

"Did you learn anything, Eldrith?" Asne asked politely. Chesmal was a fool. However tattered the world seemed at the moment, affairs would right themselves. One way or another.

"wʌt? oʊ. oʊnli ðət ðə pɛpɝ sɔs wɑzn əz ɡʊɾ əz aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ʌv kɔɹs, ðət wɑz fɪfti jɪɹz əɡoʊ."

"What? Oh. Only that the pepper sauce wasn't as good as I remembered. Of course, that was fifty years ago."

æn səpɹɛst ə saɪ. pɝhæps æftɝ ɔl ɪt wɑz taɪm fəɹ ɛlʒɹɪθ tə hæv ən æksəɾənt.

Asne suppressed a sigh. Perhaps after all it was time for Eldrith to have an accident.

ðə dɔɹ oʊpən ən təmeɪl slɪpt ɪndə ðə ɹum soʊ saɪlənli ðeɪ wɝ ɔl kɑt baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. ðə dɪmɪnjəɾɪv fɑks-feɪst ɡɹeɪ hæd tɔst ə ɹoʊb ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð laɪənz oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, bʌɾ ɪt ɡeɪp daʊn ðə fɹʌnt, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ə kɹim-kʌlɝd sɪlk naɪtdʒɹɛs ðət moʊldəɾ ɪtsɛlf tə hɝ ɪndɪsənli. dʒɹeɪpt oʊvɝ wʌn hænd ʃi kæɹiɾ ə bɹeɪslət meɪɾ ə twɪstəd ɡlæs ɹɪŋz. ðeɪ lʊkt ən fɛlt laɪk ɡlæs, ət list, bʌɾ ə hæmɝ kəd nɑɾ əv tʃɪpt wʌn.

The door opened and Temaile slipped into the room so silently they were all caught by surprise. The diminutive fox-faced Gray had tossed a robe embroidered with lions over her shoulders, but it gaped down the front, exposing a cream-colored silk nightdress that molded itself to her indecently. Draped over one hand she carried a bracelet made of twisted glass rings. They looked and felt like glass, at least, but a hammer could not have chipped one.

"juv bɪn tə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd," ɛlʒɹɪθ sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. ʃi dɪd nɑt spik fɔɹsfəli, ðoʊ. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ə lɪɾəl əfɹeɪɾ ə təmeɪl sɪns mɑɡiɾin hæd meɪɾ əm əbzɝv ðə læst ə liɑnʒɹɪn biɪŋ bɹoʊkən. æn hæd lɔs tʃɹæk ə haʊ ɔfən ʃi hæd kɪld əɹ tɔɹtʃɝɾ ɪn ðə hʌnʒɹəd ən θɝɾi-ɑd jɪɹz sɪns ʃi ɡeɪn ðə ʃɔl, bʌt ʃi hæd sɛldəm sin ɛniwʌn soʊ . . . ɪnθuziæstɪk . . . əz təmeɪl. wɑtʃɪŋ təmeɪl ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹitɛnd nɑt tə, tʃɛzməl simd ʌnəwɛɹ ðət ʃi wɑz lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps nɝvəsli. æn hɝidli pʊɾ əɹ oʊn tʌŋ bæk bɪhaɪn əɹ tiθ ən hoʊp noʊ wʌn hæd noʊɾəst. ɛlʒɹɪθ sɝɾənli hæd nɑt. "wi əɡɹid nɑt tə juz ðoʊz," ʃi sɛd, nɑt vɛɹi fɑɹ ʃɔɹɾ ə pliɾɪŋ. "aɪm sɝɾən ɪt wɑz nɪneɪiv u wundəd mɑɡiɾin, ən ɪf ʃi kən bɛst wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, wʌt tʃæns də wi hæv?" ɹaʊndɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝz, ʃi ətɛmptəɾ ə skoʊldɪŋ toʊn. "dɪd jə tu noʊ əbaʊt ðɪs?" ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə saʊn pivɪʃ.

"You've been to Tel'aran'rhiod," Eldrith said, frowning at the ter'angreal. She did not speak forcefully, though. They were all a little afraid of Temaile since Moghedien had made them observe the last of Liandrin being broken. Asne had lost track of how often she had killed or tortured in the hundred and thirty-odd years since she gained the shawl, but she had seldom seen anyone so . . . enthusiastic . . . as Temaile. Watching Temaile and trying to pretend not to, Chesmal seemed unaware that she was licking her lips nervously. Asne hurriedly put her own tongue back behind her teeth and hoped no one had noticed. Eldrith certainly had not. "We agreed not to use those," she said, not very far short of pleading. "I'm certain it was Nynaeve who wounded Moghedien, and if she can best one of the Chosen in Tel'aran'rhiod, what chance do we have?" Rounding on the others, she attempted a scolding tone. "Did you two know about this?" She had managed to sound peevish.

tʃɛzməl mɛɾ ɛlʒɹɪθs stɛɹ ɪndɪɡnənli, waɪl æn ɡeɪv əɹ sɝpɹaɪzd ɪnəsəns. ðeɪ hæd noʊn, bʌɾ u wɑz gɑnə stæn ɪn təmeɪlz weɪ? ʃi daʊɾɪd vɛɹi mʌtʃ ðəɾ ɛlʒɹɪθ wʊɾə meɪd mɔɹ ðən ə toʊkən pɹoʊɾɛst hæd ʃi bɪn ðɛɹ.

Chesmal met Eldrith's stare indignantly, while Asne gave her surprised innocence. They had known, but who was going to stand in Temaile's way? She doubted very much that Eldrith would have made more than a token protest had she been there.

təmeɪl nu ɪɡzækli hɝ ɪfɛkt ɑn ðɛm. ʃi ʃəɾ əv hʌŋ əɹ hɛɾ əɾ ɛlʒɹɪθs lɛktʃɝ, feɪnthɑɹɾɪd əz ɪt wɑz, ən əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ əɡɛnst əɹ wɪʃɪz. ɪnstɛd, ʃi smaɪld. ðət smaɪl nɛvɝ ɹitʃt əɹ aɪz, ðoʊ, lɑɹdʒ ən dɑɹk ən mʌtʃ tu bɹaɪt. "ju wɝ ɹaɪt, ɛlʒɹɪθ. ɹaɪt ðəɾ ɪleɪn wəd kʌm hɪɹ, ən ɹaɪt ðət nɪneɪiv wəd kʌm wɪð hɝ, ɪt simz. ðeɪ wɝ təɡɛðɝ, ən ɪts klɪɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ boʊθ ɪn ðə pæləs."

Temaile knew exactly her effect on them. She should have hung her head at Eldrith's lecture, fainthearted as it was, and apologized for going against her wishes. Instead, she smiled. That smile never reached her eyes, though, large and dark and much too bright. "You were right, Eldrith. Right that Elayne would come here, and right that Nynaeve would come with her, it seems. They were together, and it is clear they are both in the Palace."

"jɛs," ɛlʒɹɪθ sɛd, skwɝmɪŋ slaɪtli ʌndɝ təmeɪlz ɡeɪz. "wɛl." ən ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps, ən ʃɪftəɾ əɹ fit, tu. "ivən soʊ, əntɪl wi kən si haʊ tə ɡɛɾ əɾ əm pæst ɔl ðoʊz waɪldɝz - "

"Yes," Eldrith said, squirming slightly under Temaile's gaze. "Well." And she licked her lips, and shifted her feet, too. "Even so, until we can see how to get at them past all those wilders - "

"ðeɪ ɑɹ waɪldɝz, ɛlʒɹɪθ." təmeɪl θɹu hɝsɛlf daʊn ɪn ə tʃɛɹ, lɪmz spɹɔlɪŋ kɛɹləsli, ən əɹ toʊn hɑɹɾənd. nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə sim kəmændɪŋ, bʌt stɪl mɔɹ ðən mɪɹli fɝm. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ oʊnli θɹi sɪstɝz tə tʃɹʌbəl ʌs, ən wi kən dɪspoʊz ə ðɛm. wi kən teɪk nɪneɪiv, ən pɝhæps ɪleɪn ɪn ðə bɑɹɡən." əbɹʌpli ʃi lin fɔɹwɝd, hænz ɑn ði ɑɹmz ə ðə tʃɛɹ. dɪsɹeɪd kloʊðɪŋ əɹ nɑt, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʃɹɛɾ ʌv ɪndələns əbaʊɾ əɹ naʊ. ɛlʒɹɪθ stɛp bæk əz ðoʊ pʊʃt baɪ təmeɪlz aɪz. "ɛls waɪ ɑɹ wi hɪɹ, ɛlʒɹɪθ? ɪts wʌt wi keɪm fɔɹ."

"They are wilders, Eldrith." Temaile threw herself down in a chair, limbs sprawling carelessly, and her tone hardened. Not enough to seem commanding, but still more than merely firm. "There are only three sisters to trouble us, and we can dispose of them. We can take Nynaeve, and perhaps Elayne in the bargain." Abruptly she leaned forward, hands on the arms of the chair. Disarrayed clothing or not, there was no shred of indolence about her now. Eldrith stepped back as though pushed by Temaile's eyes. "Else why are we here, Eldrith? It is what we came for."

noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə seɪ tə ðæt. bɪhaɪn əm leɪ ə stʃɹɪŋ ə feɪljɝz - ɪn tiɹ, ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ - ðət maɪt wɛl kɑst əm ðɛɹ laɪvz wən ðə səpɹim kaʊnsəl leɪd hænz ɑn ðɛm. bʌt nɑɾ ɪf ðeɪ hæd wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən fəɹ ə peɪtʃɹən, ən ɪf mɑɡiɾin hæd wɑntəd nɪneɪiv soʊ bædli, pɝhæps ənʌðɝ ə ðɛm wʊd, tu. ðə ɹil dɪfəkəlti wəd bi faɪndɪŋ wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən tə pɹizɛnt wɪð ðɛɹ ɡɪft. noʊ wʌn bʌɾ æn sim tə hæv kənsɪɾɝd ðət pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt.

No one had anything to say to that. Behind them lay a string of failures - in Tear, in Tanchico - that might well cost them their lives when the Supreme Council laid hands on them. But not if they had one of the Chosen for a patron, and if Moghedien had wanted Nynaeve so badly, perhaps another of them would, too. The real difficulty would be finding one of the Chosen to present with their gift. No one but Asne seemed to have considered that part of it.

"ðɛɹ wɝ ʌðɝz, ðɛɹ," təmeɪl wɛn ɑn, linɪŋ bæk wʌns mɔɹ. ʃi saʊndəɾ ɔlmoʊs bɔɹd. "spaɪɪŋ ɑn əɹ tu æksɛptɪd. ə mæn u lɛɾ əm si hɪm, ən sʌmwʌn ɛls aɪ kəd nɑt si." ʃi paʊɾɪd ɪɹɪɾəbli. ət list, ɪt wʊɾə bɪn ə paʊɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ əɹ aɪz. "aɪ hæd tə steɪ bɪhaɪn ə kɑləm soʊ ðə ɡɝlz wəd nɑt si mi. ðət ʃəd pliz ju, ɛlʒɹɪθ. ðət ðeɪ dɪd nɑt si mi. ɑɹ jə plizd?"

"There were others, there," Temaile went on, leaning back once more. She sounded almost bored. "Spying on our two Accepted. A man who let them see him, and someone else I could not see." She pouted irritably. At least, it would have been a pout except for her eyes. "I had to stay behind a column so the girls would not see me. That should please you, Eldrith. That they did not see me. Are you pleased?"

ɛlʒɹɪθ ɔlmoʊst stæmɝd ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊt haʊ plizd ʃi wɑz.

Eldrith almost stammered getting out how pleased she was.

æn lɛt hɝsɛlf fil əɹ fɔɹ wɔɹɾɝz, kʌmɪŋ ɛvɝ kloʊsɝ. ʃi hæd stɑp mæskɪŋ hɝsɛlf wən ðeɪ lɛf sæmɝə. oʊnli paʊl wɑz ə fɹɛn ə ðə dɑɹk, ʌv kɔɹs, jɛt ði ʌðɝz wəd də wʌtɛvɝ ʃi sɛd, bɪliv wʌtɛvɝ ʃi toʊl ðɛm. ɪt wəd bi nɛsəsɛɹi tə kip əm kənsil fɹəm ði ʌðɝz ənlɛs æbsəlutli nɛsəsɛɹi, bʌt ʃi wɑntəɾ ɑɹmd mɛn kloʊs ət hænd. mʌsəlz ən stil wɝ vɛɹi jusfəl. ən ɪf wɝs keɪm tə wɝst, ʃi kəɾ ɔlweɪz ɹɪvil ðə lɔŋ, fluɾəd ɹɑd ðət mɑɡiɾin hæd nɑt hɪɾən soʊ wɛl əz ʃi θɔt ʃi hæd.

Asne let herself feel her four Warders, coming ever closer. She had stopped masking herself when they left Samara. Only Powl was a Friend of the Dark, of course, yet the others would do whatever she said, believe whatever she told them. It would be necessary to keep them concealed from the others unless absolutely necessary, but she wanted armed men close at hand. Muscles and steel were very useful. And if worse came to worst, she could always reveal the long, fluted rod that Moghedien had not hidden so well as she thought she had.

ði ɝli mɔɹnɪŋ laɪɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹumz wɪndoʊz wɑz ɡɹeɪ, ən ɝliɝ aʊɝ ðən ðə leɪɾi ʃieɪn juʒəwəli ɹoʊz, bʌt ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ ʃi hæd bɪn dʒɹɛst waɪl ɪt wɑz stɪl fʊl dɑɹk. ðə leɪɾi ʃieɪn wɑz haʊ ʃi θɔɾ ə hɝsɛlf, naʊ. mili skeɪn, ðə sæɾəlɝz dɔɾɝ, wɑz ɔlmoʊs kəmplitli fɝɡɑɾən. ɪn ɛvɹi weɪ ðət mæɾɝd, ʃi ɹɪli wɑz ðə leɪɾi ʃieɪn əvɑɹhən, ən hæd bɪn fəɹ jɪɹz. lɔɹd wɪlɪm əvɑɹhən hæd bɪn ɪmpɑvɹɪʃt, ɹədus tə lɪvɪŋ ɪn ə ɹæmʃækəl fɑɹmhaʊs ən əneɪbəl tə kip ivən ðəɾ ɪn ɡʊd ɹɪpɛɹ. hi ən ɪz oʊnli dɔɾɝ, ðə læst ʌv ə dɪklaɪnɪŋ laɪn, hæd steɪɾ ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹi, fɑɹ fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ ðɛɹ pɪnɹi maɪt bi ɪkspoʊzd, ən naʊ ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli boʊnz bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə fɔɹəs nɪɹ ðət fɑɹmhaʊs, ən ʃi wɑz ðə leɪɾi ʃieɪn, ən ɪf ðɪs tɔl, wɛl-əpɔɪntəd stoʊn haʊs wɑz nɑɾ ə mænɝ, ɪt stɪl hæd bɪn ðə pɹɑpɝɾi ʌv ə wɛl-tə-du mɝtʃənt. ʃi wɑz lɔŋ dɛd, tu, æftɝ saɪnɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ɡoʊl tə hɝ "ɛɹ." ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz wɝ wɛl meɪd, ðə kɑɹpəts kɑsli, ðə tæpəstʃɹiz ən ivən ðə sit kʊʃənz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð θɹɛd-ʌv-ɡoʊld, ən ðə faɪɝ ɹɔɹɾ ɪn ə waɪd blu-veɪn mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪs. ʃi hæd hæd ðə wʌns-pleɪn lɪntəl kɑɹvd wɪð əvɑɹhənz hɑɹɾ ən hæn ɹoʊ ɑn ɹoʊ.

The early morning light in the sitting room's windows was gray, an earlier hour than the Lady Shiaine usually rose, but this morning she had been dressed while it was still full dark. The Lady Shiaine was how she thought of herself, now. Mili Skane, the saddler's daughter, was almost completely forgotten. In every way that mattered, she really was the Lady Shiaine Avarhin, and had been for years. Lord Willim Avarhin had been impoverished, reduced to living in a ramshackle farmhouse and unable to keep even that in good repair. He and his only daughter, the last of a declining line, had stayed in the country, far from anywhere their penury might be exposed, and now they were only bones buried in the forest near that farmhouse, and she was the Lady Shiaine, and if this tall, well-appointed stone house was not a manor, it still had been the property of a well-to-do merchant. She was long dead, too, after signing over her gold to her "heir." The furnishings were well made, the carpets costly, the tapestries and even the seat cushions embroidered with thread-of-gold, and the fire roared in a wide blue-veined marble fireplace. She had had the once-plain lintel carved with Avarhin's Heart and Hand row on row.

"mɔɹ waɪn, ɡɝl," ʃi sɛd kɝtli, ən fæljən skɝid wɪð ðə tɔl-nɛk sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ tə ɹifɪl əɹ ɡɑblət wɪð stimɪŋ spaɪst waɪn. ðə lɪvɝi ʌv ə meɪd, wɪð ðə ɹɛd hɑɹɾ ən ɡoʊldən hæn ɑn əɹ bɹɛst, suɾəd fæljən. hɝ lɔŋ feɪs wɑz ə stɪf mæsk əz ʃi hɝid tə ɹipleɪs ðə pɪtʃɝ ɑn ðə dʒɹɔɝd haɪtʃəst ən teɪk ʌp əɹ pleɪs bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ.

"More wine, girl," she said curtly, and Falion scurried with the tall-necked silver pitcher to refill her goblet with steaming spiced wine. The livery of a maid, with the Red Heart and Golden Hand on her breast, suited Falion. Her long face was a stiff mask as she hurried to replace the pitcher on the drawered highchest and take up her place beside the door.

"ju pleɪ ə deɪnʒɝəs ɡeɪm," mɑɹilɪn ɡəmɑlfɪn sɛd, ɹoʊlɪŋ əɹ oʊn ɡɑblət bɪtwin əɹ pɑmz. ə skɪni wʊmən wɪð laɪfləs peɪl bɹaʊn hɛɹ, ðə bɹaʊn sɪstɝ dɪd nɑt lʊk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. hɝ nɛɹoʊ feɪs ən waɪd noʊz wʊɾə fɪɾəd bɛɾɝ əbʌv fæljənz lɪvɝi ðən ɪt dɪɾ əbʌv əɹ faɪn blu wʊl, ən ðət wɑz suɾəbəl oʊnli fəɹ ə mɪɾəlɪŋ mɝtʃənt. "ʃi ɪz ʃildɪd sʌmhaʊ, aɪ noʊ, bʌt wən ʃi kən tʃænəl əɡɛn, ʃɪl meɪk jə haʊl fəɹ ðɪs." hɝ θɪn lɪps kwɝkt ɪn ə hjumɝləs smaɪl. "ju meɪ faɪn jɝsɛlf wɪʃɪŋ jə kəd haʊl."

"You play a dangerous game," Marillin Gemalphin said, rolling her own goblet between her palms. A skinny woman with lifeless pale brown hair, the Brown sister did not look an Aes Sedai. Her narrow face and wide nose would have fitted better above Falion's livery than it did above her fine blue wool, and that was suitable only for a middling merchant. "She is shielded somehow, I know, but when she can channel again, she will make you howl for this." Her thin lips quirked in a humorless smile. "You may find yourself wishing you could howl."

"mɔɹaɪɾɪn tʃoʊz ðɪs fəɹ hɝ," ʃieɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ʃi feɪld ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ən i ɔɹɾɝd əɹ pʌnɪʃt. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðə dɪteɪlz ən doʊnt wɑn tə, bʌɾ ɪf mɔɹaɪɾɪn wɑns əɹ noʊz ɡɹaʊn ɪn ðə mʌd, əl pʊʃ ɪt soʊ dip ʃiz bɹiðɪŋ mʌɾ ə jɪɹ fɹəm naʊ. əɹ dʒju sədʒɛst aɪ dɪsəbeɪ wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən?" ʃi bɛɹli səpɹɛst ə ʃʌɾɝ ət ðə vɛɹi θɔt. mɑɹilɪn tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɪn dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz taɪɾənd. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ju, fæljən?" ʃieɪn æskt. "wʊd jə laɪk mi tə æsk mɔɹaɪɾɪn tə teɪk jə əweɪ? hi maɪt faɪn jə sʌmθɪŋ lɛs oʊnɝəs." mjulz maɪt sɪŋ laɪk naɪɾɪŋɡəlz, tu.

"Moridin chose this for her," Shiaine replied. "She failed in Ebou Dar, and he ordered her punished. I don't know the details and don't want to, but if Moridin wants her nose ground in the mud, I'll push it so deep she is breathing mud a year from now. Or do you suggest I disobey one of the Chosen?" She barely suppressed a shudder at the very thought. Marillin tried to hide her expression in drinking, but her eyes tightened. "What about you, Falion?" Shiaine asked. "Would you like me to ask Moridin to take you away? He might find you something less onerous." Mules might sing like nightingales, too.

fæljən dɪd nɑɾ ivən hɛzəteɪt. ʃi bɑbd ə meɪdz stʃɹeɪt-bækt kɝtsi, hɝ feɪs ɡoʊɪŋ ivən pəlɝ ðən ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi wɑz. "noʊ, mɪstʃɹəs," ʃi sɛd heɪstəli. "aɪ æm kəntɛnt wɪð maɪ sɪtʃueɪʃən, mɪstʃɹəs."

Falion did not even hesitate. She bobbed a maid's straight-backed curtsy, her face going even paler than it already was. "No, mistress," she said hastily. "I am content with my situation, mistress."

"ju si?" ʃieɪn sɛd tə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi daʊɾɪd vɛɹi mʌtʃ ðət fæljən wɑz ɛniθɪŋ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ kɑntɛnt, bʌt ðə wʊmən wəɾ æksɛpt wʌtɛvɝ wɑz hændəɾ aʊt ɹæðɝ ðən feɪs mɔɹaɪɾɪnz dɪsplɛʒɝ dɝɛkli. fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən, ʃieɪn wəd ɹul əɹ wɪð ə vɛɹi hɛvi hænd. jə nɛvɝ nu wʌt wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən maɪt lɝn ʌv, ən teɪk əmɪs. ʃi hɝsɛlf θɔɾ əɹ oʊn feɪljɝ wɑz bɛɹid dip, bʌt ʃi wəd teɪk noʊ tʃænsəz. "wɛn ʃi kən tʃænəl əɡɛn, ʃi woʊn əv tə bi ə meɪɾ ɔl ðə taɪm, mɑɹilɪn." ɛniweɪ, mɔɹaɪɾɪn hæd sɛd ʃieɪn kəd kɪl əɹ ɪf ʃi wɪʃt. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ðæt, ɪf əɹ pəzɪʃən bɪɡæn tə tʃeɪf tu mʌtʃ. hi hæd sɛd ʃi kəd kɪl boʊθ sɪstɝz, ɪf ʃi wɪʃt.

"You see?" Shiaine said to the other Aes Sedai. She doubted very much that Falion was anything approaching content, but the woman would accept whatever was handed out rather than face Moridin's displeasure directly. For the same reason, Shiaine would rule her with a very heavy hand. You never knew what one of the Chosen might learn of, and take amiss. She herself thought her own failure was buried deep, but she would take no chances. "When she can channel again, she won't have to be a maid all the time, Marillin." Anyway, Moridin had said Shiaine could kill her if she wished. There was always that, if her position began to chafe too much. He had said she could kill both sisters, if she wished.

"ðæts əz meɪ bi," mɑɹilɪn sɛd dɑɹkli. ʃi kæst ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlæns ət fæljən ən ɡɹɪməst. "naʊ, mɑɡiɾin ɪnstʃɹʌktəd mi tə ɔfɝ jə wʌɾ əsɪstəns aɪ θɔɾ aɪ kəd ɡɪv, bʌɾ əl tɛl jə ɹaɪt naʊ, aɪ woʊn ɛntɝ ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs. ðə hoʊl sɪɾi hæz tu mɛni sɪstɝz ɪn ɪt fəɹ maɪ teɪst, bʌt ðə pæləs ɪz stʌft wɪð waɪldɝz ɑn tɑp. aɪ wʊdnt ɡɛt tɛn fit wɪθaʊt sʌmwʌn noʊɪŋ aɪ wɑz ðɛɹ."

"That's as may be," Marillin said darkly. She cast a sidelong glance at Falion and grimaced. "Now, Moghedien instructed me to offer you what assistance I thought I could give, but I'll tell you right now, I won't enter the Royal Palace. The whole city has too many sisters in it for my taste, but the Palace is stuffed with wilders on top. I wouldn't get ten feet without someone knowing I was there."

saɪɪŋ, ʃieɪn lin bæk ən kɹɔst əɹ lɛɡz, aɪdli kɪkɪŋ ə slɪpɝd fʊt. waɪ dɪd pipəl ɔlweɪz θɪŋk jə dɪd nɑt noʊ əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ? ðə wɝld wɑz fʊl ə fulz! "mɑɡiɾin ɔɹɾɝd jə tə oʊbeɪ mi, mɑɹilɪn. aɪ noʊ, kəz mɔɹaɪɾɪn toʊl mi. hi dɪd nɑt seɪ soʊ ɹaɪɾ aʊt, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk wən i snæps ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, mɑɡiɾin dʒʌmps." tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə tʃoʊzən ðɪs weɪ wɑz deɪnʒɝəs, bʌt ʃi hæd tə meɪk mæɾɝz klɪɹ. "du jə wɑnə tɛl mi əɡɛn wʌt jə woʊn du?"

Sighing, Shiaine leaned back and crossed her legs, idly kicking a slippered foot. Why did people always think you did not know as much as they? The world was full of fools! "Moghedien ordered you to obey me, Marillin. I know, because Moridin told me. He did not say so right out, but I think when he snaps his fingers, Moghedien jumps." Talking about the Chosen this way was dangerous, but she had to make matters clear. "Do you want to tell me again what you won't do?"

ðə nɛɹoʊ-feɪst ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪkt əɹ lɪps, dɑɹɾɪŋ ənʌðɝ ɡlæns ət fæljən. dɪd ðə wʊmən fɪɹ ʃi wəɾ ɛn ʌp ðət weɪ? tʃɹuθ tə tɛl, ʃieɪn wʊɾə tʃɹeɪɾɪd fæljən fəɹ ə pɹɑpɝ leɪɾiz meɪɾ ɪn ə hɑɹtbit. wɛl, əz lɔŋ əz ʃi kəd ɹɪteɪn əɹ ʌðɝ sɝvəsəz. vɛɹi laɪkli, ðeɪ boʊθ wəɾ əv tə daɪ wən ðɪs wɑz fɪnɪʃt. ʃieɪn dɪd nɑt laɪk livɪŋ lus ɛnz.

The narrow-faced Aes Sedai licked her lips, darting another glance at Falion. Did the woman fear she would end up that way? Truth to tell, Shiaine would have traded Falion for a proper lady's maid in a heartbeat. Well, as long as she could retain her other services. Very likely, they both would have to die when this was finished. Shiaine did not like leaving loose ends.

"aɪ wɑzn laɪɪŋ əbaʊt ðæt," mɑɹilɪn sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ ɹɪli wʊdnt ɡɛt tɛn fit. bʌt ðɛɹz ə wʊmən ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə pæləs. ʃi kən də wʌt jə nid. ɪt meɪ teɪk taɪm tə meɪk kɑntækt, ðoʊ."

"I wasn't lying about that," Marillin said slowly. "I really wouldn't get ten feet. But there's a woman already in the Palace. She can do what you need. It may take time to make contact, though."

"dʒʌs meɪk ʃʊɹ ɪts nɑt tu lɔŋ ə taɪm, mɑɹilɪn." soʊ. wʌn ə ðə sɪstɝz ɪn ðə pæləs wɑz blæk ədʒɑ, wɑz ʃi? ʃi wəɾ əv tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ, nɑt dʒʌst ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, tə də wʌt ʃieɪn niɾəd.

"Just make sure it's not too long a time, Marillin." So. One of the sisters in the Palace was Black Ajah, was she? She would have to be Aes Sedai, not just a Darkfriend, to do what Shiaine needed.

ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd, ən mɹɛlɪn lʊkt ɪn kwɛstʃənɪŋli, hɪz hɛvəli mʌsəl bʌlk ɔlmoʊs fɪlɪŋ ðə dɔɹweɪ. bɪɑn hɪm, ʃi kəd meɪk aʊɾ ənʌðɝ mæn. əɾ əɹ nɑd, mɹɛlɪn stɛpt əsaɪɾ ən moʊʃən dɑv hænlən tə ɛntɝ, kloʊzɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm. hænlən wɑz swɑðd ɪn ə dɑɹk kloʊk, bʌɾ i sneɪkt aʊt wʌn hæn tə kʌp fæljənz bɑɾəm θɹu hɝ dʒɹɛs. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm bɪɾɝli, bʌt dɪd nɑt muv əweɪ. hænlən wɑz pɑɹɾ ə hɝ pʌnɪʃmənt. stɪl, ʃieɪn hæd noʊ wɪʃ tə wɑtʃ ɪm fɑndəl ðə wʊmən.

The door opened, and Murellin looked in questioningly, his heavily muscled bulk almost filling the doorway. Beyond him, she could make out another man. At her nod, Murellin stepped aside and motioned Daved Hanlon to enter, closing the door behind him. Hanlon was swathed in a dark cloak, but he snaked out one hand to cup Falion's bottom through her dress. She glared at him bitterly, but did not move away. Hanlon was part of her punishment. Still, Shiaine had no wish to watch him fondle the woman.

"du ðət leɪɾɝ," ʃi ɔɹɾɝd. "dɪɾ ɪt ɡoʊ wɛl?"

"Do that later," she ordered. "Did it go well?"

ə bɹɔd smaɪl splɪɾ ɪz æks-laɪk feɪs. "ɪt wɛn ɪɡzækli əz aɪ plæn ɪt, ʌv kɔɹs." hi θɹu wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə dɑɹk kloʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ɹɪvilɪŋ ɡoʊldən nɑts ə ɹæŋk ɑn ɪz ɹɛd koʊt. "ju ɑɹ spikɪŋ tə ðə kæptən ə ðə kwinz bɑɾiɡɑɹd."

A broad smile split his axe-like face. "It went exactly as I planned it, of course." He threw one side of the dark cloak over his shoulder, revealing golden knots of rank on his red coat. "You are speaking to the Captain of the Queen's Bodyguard."


tʃæptɝ ɪlɛvən


CHAPTER 11

aɪdiəz ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾəns


Ideas of Importance

wɪθaʊɾ ivən teɪkɪŋ ə lʊk, ɹænd stɛp θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪndə ə lɑɹdʒ dɑɹk ɹum. ðə stʃɹeɪn ə hoʊldɪŋ ðə wiv, ʌv faɪɾɪŋ seɪɾɪn, meɪɾ ɪm sweɪ; hi wɑntəd tə ɡæɡ, tə dʌbəl oʊvɝ ən spju ʌp ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn hɪm. hoʊldɪŋ hɪmsɛlf əpɹaɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt. ə lɪɾəl laɪt kɹɛp θɹu kɹæks bɪtwin ðə ʃʌɾɝz ɑn ə fju smɔl wɪndoʊz sɛt haɪ ɪn wʌn wɔl, dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə si baɪ wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn hɪm. fɝnɪtʃɝ ən lɑɹdʒ klɔθ-kʌvɝd ʃeɪps nɪɹli fɪl ðə ɹum, ɪntɝspɝst wɪð waɪd bæɹəlz ə ðə sɔɹt juz tə stɔɹ kɹɑkɝi, tʃɛsts ʌv ɔl ʃeɪps ən saɪzəz, bɑksəz ən kɹeɪts ən nɪknæks. lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən wɔkweɪz ə peɪs əɹ tu waɪd ɹɪmeɪn klɪɹ. hi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ i wəd nɑt faɪn sɝvəns hʌntɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ, əɹ klinɪŋ ʌp. ðə haɪəs flɔɹ ə ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs hæd sɛvɹəl sətʃ stɔɹɹumz, lʊkɪŋ laɪk ði æɾɪks ə hjudʒ fɑɹmhaʊsəz ən dʒʌst əbaʊt fɝɡɑɾən. bɪsaɪdz, hi wɑz tɑvɝən, æftɝ ɔl. ə ɡʊd θɪŋ noʊ wʌn hæd bɪn ðəɹ wən ðə ɡeɪtweɪ oʊpənd. wʌn ɛdʒ ʌv ɪt hæd slaɪs ðə kɔɹnɝ ɔf ən ɛmpti tʃɛs baʊn ɪn kɹækt, ɹɑɾɪŋ lɛðɝ, ən ði ʌðɝ hæd teɪkən ə ɡlæs-smuð ʃeɪvɪŋ daʊn ðə lɛŋθ ʌv ə lɔŋ, ɪnleɪd teɪbəl stækt wɪð veɪsəz ən wʊɾən bɑksəz. meɪbi səm kwin ʌv ændɝ hæɾ iɾən ət ðət teɪbəl, ə sɛntʃɝi əɹ tu ɡɔn.

Without even taking a look, Rand stepped through the gateway into a large dark room. The strain of holding the weave, of fighting saidin, made him sway; he wanted to gag, to double over and spew up everything in him. Holding himself upright was an effort. A little light crept through cracks between the shutters on a few small windows set high in one wall, just enough to see by with the Power in him. Furniture and large cloth-covered shapes nearly filled the room, interspersed with wide barrels of the sort used to store crockery, chests of all shapes and sizes, boxes and crates and knickknacks. Little more than walkways a pace or two wide remained clear. He had been sure he would not find servants hunting for something, or cleaning up. The highest floor of the Royal Palace had several such storerooms, looking like the attics of huge farmhouses and just about forgotten. Besides, he was ta'veren, after all. A good thing no one had been there when the gateway opened. One edge of it had sliced the corner off an empty chest bound in cracked, rotting leather, and the other had taken a glass-smooth shaving down the length of a long, inlaid table stacked with vases and wooden boxes. Maybe some Queen of Andor had eaten at that table, a century or two gone.

ə sɛntʃɝi əɹ tu, luz θɝɪn læf θɪkli ɪn ɪz hɛd. ə vɛɹi lɔŋ taɪm. fəɹ ðə lʌv ə ðə laɪt, lɛt ɡoʊ! ðɪs ɪz ðə pɪɾ ə dum! ðə vɔɪs dwɪndəld əz ðə mæn flɛɾ ɪndə ðə ɹisɛsəz ə ɹændz maɪnd.

A century or two, Lews Therin laughed thickly in his head. A very long time. For the love of the Light, let go! This is the Pit of Doom! The voice dwindled as the man fled into the recesses of Rand's mind.

fəɹ wʌns, hi hæɾ ɪz oʊn ɹizənz tə lɪsən tə luz θɝɪnz kəmpleɪns. heɪstəli hi moʊʃən mɪn tə fɑloʊ hɪm fɹəm ðə fɔɹəs klɪɹɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ən əz sun əz ʃi dɪd, hi lɛɾ ɪt kloʊs bɪhaɪn əɹ ɪn ə kwɪk vɝɾɪkəl slæʃ ə laɪt baɪ ɹilisɪŋ seɪɾɪn. blɛsədli, ðə nɔziə wɛnt wɪð ɪt. hɪz hɛd stɪl spʌn ə lɪɾəl, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt fil əz ɪf i wɝ gɑnə vɑməɾ əɹ fɔl oʊvɝ əɹ boʊθ. ðə fil ə fɪlθ ɹɪmeɪnd, ðoʊ, ðə dɑɹk wʌnz teɪn uzɪŋ ɪndə hɪm fɹəm ðə wivz i hæd taɪɾ ɔf ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf. ʃɪftɪŋ ðə stʃɹæp ə hɪz lɛðɝ skɹɪp fɹəm wʌn ʃoʊldɝ tə ði ʌðɝ, hi tʃɹaɪd tə juz ðə moʊʃən tə haɪd waɪpɪŋ swɛt fɹəm ɪz feɪs wɪð ɪz sliv. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə wɝi əbaʊt mɪn noʊɾɪsɪŋ æftɝ ɔl, haʊɛvɝ.

For once, he had his own reasons to listen to Lews Therin's complaints. Hastily he motioned Min to follow him from the forest clearing on the other side of the gateway, and as soon as she did, he let it close behind her in a quick vertical slash of light by releasing saidin. Blessedly, the nausea went with it. His head still spun a little, but he did not feel as if he were going to vomit or fall over or both. The feel of filth remained, though, the Dark One's taint oozing into him from the weaves he had tied off around himself. Shifting the strap of his leather scrip from one shoulder to the other, he tried to use the motion to hide wiping sweat from his face with his sleeve. He did not have to worry about Min noticing after all, however.

hɝ blu, hil buts stɝd ðə dʌst ɑn ðə flɔɹ əɾ əɹ fɝst stɛp, ən əɹ sɛkən meɪɾ ɪt ɹaɪz. ʃi pʊld ə leɪs-ɛdʒ hæŋkɝtʃɪf fɹəm əɹ koʊtsliv dʒʌst ɪn taɪm tə kætʃ ə vaɪələn sniz, fɑloʊd baɪ ə sɛkən ən θɝd, itʃ wɝs ðən ðə læst. hi wɪʃt ʃi hæd bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə steɪ ɪn ə dʒɹɛs. ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd waɪt flaʊɝz dɛkɝeɪɾəd ðə slivz ən ləpɛlz ə hɝ blu koʊt, ən pəlɝ blu bɹitʃɪz moʊldəɾ əɹ lɛɡz snʌɡli. wɪð jɛloʊ-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd bɹaɪt blu ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz tʌk bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt, ən ə kloʊk ɛdʒd wɪð jɛloʊ skɹɑlwɝk ən hɛl baɪ ə ɡoʊldən pɪn ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə ɹoʊz, ʃi dɪd lʊk əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɝaɪv baɪ mɔɹ nɔɹməl minz, bʌt ʃi wəd dʒɹɔ ɛvɹi aɪ. hi wɑz ɪn kɔɹs bɹaʊn wʊlənz ɛni leɪbɝɝ maɪt wɛɹ. moʊs pleɪsəz ɪn ðə læs fju deɪz, hi hæd bɪn bleɪɾənt wɪð ɪz pɹɛzəns; ðɪs taɪm i dɪd nɑt wɑn dʒʌs tə bi ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn nu hi hæd bɪn hɪɹ, hi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɛniwʌn bʌɾ ə spɛʃəl fju tə ɛvɝ noʊ hi hæd bɪn.

Her blue, heeled boots stirred the dust on the floor at her first step, and her second made it rise. She pulled a lace-edged handkerchief from her coatsleeve just in time to catch a violent sneeze, followed by a second and third, each worse than the last. He wished she had been willing to stay in a dress. Embroidered white flowers decorated the sleeves and lapels of her blue coat, and paler blue breeches molded her legs snugly. With yellow-embroidered bright blue riding gloves tucked behind her belt, and a cloak edged with yellow scrollwork and held by a golden pin in the shape of a rose, she did look as if she had arrived by more normal means, but she would draw every eye. He was in coarse brown woolens any laborer might wear. Most places in the last few days, he had been blatant with his presence; this time he did not want just to be gone before anyone knew he had been here, he did not want anyone but a special few to ever know he had been.

"waɪ ɑɹ jə ɡɹɪnɪŋ ət mi ən θʌmɪŋ jəɹ ɪɹ laɪk ə lubi?" ʃi dɪmændəd, stʌfɪŋ ðə hæŋkɝtʃɪf bæk ɪndə hɝ sliv. səspɪʃən fɪld əɹ bɪɡ, dɑɹk aɪz.

"Why are you grinning at me and thumbing your ear like a loobie?" she demanded, stuffing the handkerchief back into her sleeve. Suspicion filled her big, dark eyes.

"aɪ wɑz dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ haʊ bjuɾəfəl jə ɑɹ," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. ʃi wɑz. hi kəd nɑt lʊk əɾ əɹ wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ soʊ. əɹ wɪθaʊt ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz tu wik tə sɛn əɹ əweɪ tə seɪfti.

"I was just thinking how beautiful you are," he said quietly. She was. He could not look at her without thinking so. Or without regretting that he was too weak to send her away to safety.

ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, ən sniz bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ ivən klæp ə hæn oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ, ðən ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm əz ɪf ɪt wɝ sʌmhaʊ hɪz fɔlt. "aɪ əbændən maɪ hɔɹs fəɹ ju, ɹænd ælθɹ. aɪ kɝl maɪ hɛɹ fəɹ ju. aɪ ɡeɪv ʌp maɪ laɪf fəɹ ju! əl nɑt ɡɪv ʌp maɪ koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz! bɪsaɪdz, noʊ wʌn hɪɹ əz ɛvɝ sin mi ɪn ə dʒɹɛs fəɹ mɔɹ taɪm ðən ɪt tʊk mi tə tʃeɪnʒ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. jə noʊ ðɪs woʊnt wɝk ənlɛs aɪm ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd. jə sɝɾənli kæn pɹitɛn jə wɑndɝɾ ɪn ɔf ðə stʃɹit wɪð ðət feɪs."

She drew a deep breath, and sneezed before she could even clap a hand over her mouth, then glared at him as if it were somehow his fault. "I abandoned my horse for you, Rand al'Thor. I curled my hair for you. I gave up my life for you! I will not give up my coat and breeches! Besides, no one here has ever seen me in a dress for more time than it took me to change out of it. You know this won't work unless I'm recognized. You certainly can't pretend you wandered in off the street with that face."

ənθɪŋkɪŋ, hi ɹæn ə hæn əkɹɔs ɪz dʒɔ, filɪŋ ɪz oʊn feɪs, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt mɪn sɔ. ɛniwʌn lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm wəd si ə mæn ɪntʃəz ʃɔɹɾɝ ən jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən ɹænd ælθɹ, wɪð læŋk blæk hɛɹ, dʌl bɹaʊn aɪz ən ə wɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz bʌlbəs noʊz. oʊnli sʌmwʌn u tʌtʃt ɪm kəd pɪɹs ðə mæsk ə mɪɹɝz. ivən ən æʃəmən wəd nɑt si ɪt, wɪð ðə wivz ɪnvɝɾɪd. ðoʊ ɪf ðəɹ wɝ æʃəmən ɪn ðə pæləs, ɪt maɪt min ɪz plænz hæd ɡɔn fɝðɝ ɝaɪ ðən i bɪlivd. ðɪs vɪzət kəd nɑt, mʌs nɑt, kʌm tə kɪlɪŋ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt; ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə feɪs ðət wʊɾə bɪn əlaʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ʌv ændɝ ənɛkɔɹɾɪd.

Unthinking, he ran a hand across his jaw, feeling his own face, but that was not what Min saw. Anyone looking at him would see a man inches shorter and years older than Rand al'Thor, with lank black hair, dull brown eyes and a wart on his bulbous nose. Only someone who touched him could pierce the Mask of Mirrors. Even an Asha'man would not see it, with the weaves inverted. Though if there were Asha'man in the Palace, it might mean his plans had gone further awry than he believed. This visit could not, must not, come to killing. In any case, she was right; it was not a face that would have been allowed into the Royal Palace of Andor unescorted.

"æz lɔŋ əz wi kən fɪnɪʃ ðɪs ən bi ɡɔn kwɪkli," hi sɛd. "bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn əz taɪm tə θɪŋk ðəɾ ɪf jəɹ hɪɹ, meɪbi aɪ æm, tu."

"As long as we can finish this and be gone quickly," he said. "Before anyone has time to think that if you're here, maybe I am, too."

"ɹænd," ʃi sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs sɑft, ən i aɪɾ əɹ wɛɹəli. ɹɛstɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, ʃi lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪm wɪð ə sɪɹiəs ɪkspɹɛʃən. "ɹænd, jə ɹɪli nid tə si ɪleɪn. ən eɪvinhə, aɪ səpoʊz; jə noʊ ʃiz pɹɑbli hɪɹ, tu. ɪf jə - "

"Rand," she said, her voice soft, and he eyed her warily. Resting a hand on his chest, she looked up at him with a serious expression. "Rand, you really need to see Elayne. And Aviendha, I suppose; you know she's probably here, too. If you - "

hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən wɪʃt i hæd nɑt. ðə dɪzinəs hæd stɪl nɑt ɡɔn kəmplitli. "noʊ!" hi sɛd kɝtli. laɪt! noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt mɪn sɛd, hi dʒʌs kəd nɑt bɪliv ðəɾ ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə boʊθ lʌv hɪm. əɹ ðət ðə fæk ðeɪ dɪd, ɪf ɪt wɑz ə fækt, dɪd nɑɾ əpsɛt hɝ. wɪmən wɝ nɑt ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ! ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə hæd ɹizən tə heɪt hɪm, nɑt lʌv hɪm, ən ɪleɪn, ət list, hæd meɪd hɝsɛlf klɪɹ. wɝs, hi wɑz ɪn lʌv wɪð boʊθ ə ðɛm, əz wɛl əz wɪð mɪn! hi hæd tə bi əz hɑɹɾ əz stil, bʌɾ i θɔɾ i maɪt ʃæɾɝ ɪf i hæd tə feɪs ɔl θɹi ət wʌns. "wi faɪnd nɪneɪiv ən mæt, ən ɡoʊ, əz fæst əz wi kæn." ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌɾ i ɡeɪv əɹ noʊ tʃæns tə spik. "doʊn ɑɹɡju wɪð mi, mɪn. ðɪs ɪz noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɪt!"

He shook his head, and wished he had not. The dizziness had still not gone completely. "No!" he said curtly. Light! No matter what Min said, he just could not believe that Elayne and Aviendha both loved him. Or that the fact they did, if it was a fact, did not upset her. Women were not that strange! Elayne and Aviendha had reason to hate him, not love him, and Elayne, at least, had made herself clear. Worse, he was in love with both of them, as well as with Min! He had to be as hard as steel, but he thought he might shatter if he had to face all three at once. "We find Nynaeve and Mat, and go, as fast as we can." She opened her mouth, but he gave her no chance to speak. "Don't argue with me, Min. This is no time for it!"

tɪltɪŋ əɹ hɛd tə wʌn saɪd, mɪn pʊɾ ɑn ə smɔl, əmjuz smaɪl. "wɛn də aɪ ɛvɝ ɑɹɡju wɪð ju? doʊn aɪ ɔlweɪz də ɪɡzækli əz jə tɛl mi?" ɪf ðət laɪ wɝ nɑt bæɾ ɪnʌf, ʃi æɾəd, "aɪ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ, ɪf jə wɑnə hɝi, waɪ ɑɹ wi stændɪŋ ɪn ðɪs dʌsti stɔɹɹum ɔl deɪ?" fəɹ pʌŋktʃueɪʃən, ʃi snizd əɡɛn.

Tilting her head to one side, Min put on a small, amused smile. "When do I ever argue with you? Don't I always do exactly as you tell me?" If that lie were not bad enough, she added, "I was going to say, if you want to hurry, why are we standing in this dusty storeroom all day?" For punctuation, she sneezed again.

ʃi wɑz ðə lis laɪkli tə kɑz kɑmɛnt, ivən dʒɹɛst əz ʃi wɑz, soʊ ʃi pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum fɝst. əpɛɹənli ðə stɔɹɹum wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli fɝɡɑɾən; ðə hɛvi dɔɹz hɪnʒɪz bɛɹli kɹikt. ə kwɪk lʊk boʊθ weɪz, ən ʃi hɝiɾ aʊt, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ ɪm tə fɑloʊ. tɑvɝən əɹ noʊ, hi wɑz ɹɪliv tə faɪn ðə lɔŋ kɔɹəɾɝ ɛmpti. ðə moʊs tɪmɪd sɝvən maɪɾ əv wʌndɝɾ ət siɪŋ əm ɪmɝdʒ fɹəm ə stɔɹɹum ɪn ði ʌpɝ ɹitʃəz ə ðə pæləs. stɪl, ðeɪ wəɾ ɪnkaʊntɝ pipəl sun ɪnʌf. ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs dɪd nɑt ɹʌn əz hɛvəli tə sɝvəns əz ðə sʌn pæləs əɹ ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ stɪl hʌnʒɹədz ə ðɛm ɪn ə pleɪs ðɪs saɪz. wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪsaɪd mɪn, hi tʃɹaɪd tə ʃæmbəl ən ɡɔk ət bɹaɪt tæpəstʃɹiz ən kɑɹvd wɔl pænəlz ən pɑlɪʃt haɪtʃəsts. nʌn wɝ soʊ faɪn ðɪs haɪ əz ðeɪ wəd bi loʊɝ daʊn, bʌɾ ə kɑmən wɝkmən wəd ɡɔk.

She was the least likely to cause comment, even dressed as she was, so she put her head out of the room first. Apparently the storeroom was not entirely forgotten; the heavy door's hinges barely creaked. A quick look both ways, and she hurried out, gesturing him to follow. Ta'veren or no, he was relieved to find the long corridor empty. The most timid servant might have wondered at seeing them emerge from a storeroom in the upper reaches of the Palace. Still, they would encounter people soon enough. The Royal Palace did not run as heavily to servants as the Sun Palace or the Stone of Tear, but there were still hundreds of them in a place this size. Walking along beside Min, he tried to shamble and gawk at bright tapestries and carved wall panels and polished highchests. None were so fine this high as they would be lower down, but a common workman would gawk.

"wi nid tə ɡɛt daʊn tə ə loʊɝ flɔɹ əz fæst əz wi kæn," hi mɝmɝd. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl noʊ wʌn ɪn saɪt, bʌt ðəɹ maɪt bi tɛn pipəl ɝaʊn ðə nɛks kɔɹnɝ. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ, dʒʌst æsk ðə fɝst sɝvənt wi si wɛɹ tə faɪnd nɪneɪiv ən mæt. doʊn ɪlæbɹəɾ ənlɛs juv tə."

"We need to get down to a lower floor as fast as we can," he murmured. There was still no one in sight, but there might be ten people around the next corner. "Remember, just ask the first servant we see where to find Nynaeve and Mat. Don't elaborate unless you have to."

"waɪ, θæŋk jə fəɹ ɹimaɪndɪŋ mi, ɹænd. aɪ nu sʌmθɪŋ hæd slɪp maɪ maɪnd, ən aɪ dʒʌs kʊdn ɪmædʒən wʌt." hɝ bɹif smaɪl wɑz mʌtʃ tu taɪt, ən ʃi mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ.

"Why, thank you for reminding me, Rand. I knew something had slipped my mind, and I just couldn't imagine what." Her brief smile was much too tight, and she muttered something under her breath.

ɹænd saɪd. ðɪs wɑz tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt fəɹ əɹ tə pleɪ ɡeɪmz, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə, ɪf i lɛt hɝ. nɑt ðət ʃi sɔ ɪt ðət weɪ. səmtaɪmz, ðoʊ, hɝ aɪdiəz ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾənt dɪfɝd waɪdli fɹəm hɪz. vɛɹi waɪdli. hi wəɾ əv tə kip ə kloʊs aɪ ɑn hɝ.

Rand sighed. This was too important for her to play games, but she was going to, if he let her. Not that she saw it that way. Sometimes, though, her ideas of important differed widely from his. Very widely. He would have to keep a close eye on her.

"waɪ, mɪstʃɹəs fɑɹʃɔ," ə wʊmənz vɔɪs sɛd bɪhaɪn ðɛm. "ɪɾ ɪz mɪstʃɹəs fɑɹʃɔ, ɪzən ɪt?"

"Why, Mistress Farshaw," a woman's voice said behind them. "It is Mistress Farshaw, isn't it?"

ðə skɹɪp swʌŋ ən θʌmpt ɹændz bæk hɛvəli əz i spʌn ɝaʊnd. ðə plʌmp ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən stɛɹɪŋ ət mɪn ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt wɑz pɝhæps ðə læs pɝsən i wɑntəd tə mit, bɪsaɪdz ɪleɪn əɹ eɪvinhə. wʌndɝɪŋ waɪ ʃi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ə ɹɛd tɑbɝd wɪð ðə waɪt laɪən lɑɹdʒ ɑn ðə fɹʌnt, hi slaʊtʃt ən əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ dɝɛkli. dʒʌst ə wɝkmən duɪŋ ɪz dʒɑb. noʊ ɹizən tə ɡlæns əɾ ɪm twaɪs.

The scrip swung and thumped Rand's back heavily as he spun around. The plump graying woman staring at Min in astonishment was perhaps the last person he wanted to meet, besides Elayne or Aviendha. Wondering why she was wearing a red tabard with the White Lion large on the front, he slouched and avoided looking at her directly. Just a workman doing his job. No reason to glance at him twice.

"mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ?" mɪn ɪkskleɪmd, bimɪŋ dɪlaɪɾɪdli. "jɛs, ɪts mi. ən jə ɑɹ dʒʌs ðə wʊmən aɪ wɑz lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ. aɪm əfɹeɪɾ aɪm lɔst. kən jə tɛl mi wɛɹ tə faɪnd nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə? ən mæt kɔθən? ðɪs fɛloʊ hæz sʌmθɪŋ nɪneɪiv æskt ɪm tə dɪlɪvɝ."

"Mistress Harfor?" Min exclaimed, beaming delightedly. "Yes, it's me. And you are just the woman I was looking for. I'm afraid I am lost. Can you tell me where to find Nynaeve al'Meara? And Mat Cauthon? This fellow has something Nynaeve asked him to deliver."

ðə fɝs meɪd fɹaʊn slaɪtli ət ɹænd bɪfɔɹ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ əɹ ətɛnʃən tə mɪn. ʃi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət mɪnz ɡɑɹməns, əɹ meɪbi ət ðə dʌst ɑn ðɛm, bʌt ʃi mɛnʃənd niðɝ. "mæt kɔθən? aɪ doʊn bɪliv aɪ noʊ hɪm. ənlɛs hiz wʌn ə ðə nu sɝvəns əɹ ɡɑɹdzmɪn?" ʃi æɾəd daʊtfəli. "æz fəɹ nɪneɪiv sədaɪ, ʃiz vɛɹi bɪzi. aɪ səpoʊz ɪɾəl bi ɔl ɹaɪt wɪð əɹ ɪf aɪ æksɛpt wʌtɛvɝ ɪts ən pʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn əɹ ɹum."

The First Maid frowned slightly at Rand before returning her attention to Min. She raised an eyebrow at Min's garments, or maybe at the dust on them, but she mentioned neither. "Mat Cauthon? I don't believe I know him. Unless he's one of the new servants or Guardsmen?" she added doubtfully. "As for Nynaeve Sedai, she's very busy. I suppose it will be all right with her if I accept whatever it is and put it in her room."

ɹænd dʒɝkt əpɹaɪt. nɪneɪiv sədaɪ? waɪ wəd ði ʌðɝz - ðə ɹil ɛɛs sədaɪ - lɛɾ əɹ pleɪ ət ðət stɪl? ən mæt wɑz nɑt hɪɹ? hæd nɛvɝ bɪn hɪɹ, əpɛɹənli. kʌlɝz wɝld ɪn ɪz hɛd, ɔlmoʊst ən ɪmədʒ i kəd meɪk aʊt. ɪn ə hɑɹtbiɾ ɪt vænɪʃt, bʌɾ i stæɡɝd. mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm əɡɛn, ən snɪft. laɪkli ʃi θɔɾ ɪm dʒɹʌŋk.

Rand jerked upright. Nynaeve Sedai? Why would the others - the real Aes Sedai - let her play at that still? And Mat was not here? Had never been here, apparently. Colors whirled in his head, almost an image he could make out. In a heartbeat it vanished, but he staggered. Mistress Harfor frowned at him again, and sniffed. Likely she thought him drunk.

mɪn fɹaʊnd, tu, bʌɾ ɪn θɔt, tæpɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ ɑn əɹ tʃɪn, ən ðəɾ oʊnli læstəɾ ə moʊmənt. "aɪ θɪŋk nɪneɪiv . . . sədaɪ wɑns tə si hɪm." ðə hɛzəteɪʃən wɑz bɛɹli noʊɾəsəbəl. "kʊd juv ɪm ʃoʊn tə hɝ ɹumz, mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ? aɪ hæv ənʌðɝ ɛɹən bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɡoʊ. jə maɪn jəɹ mænɝz, naʊ, nuli, ən də əz jəɹ toʊld. ðɛɹz ə ɡʊd fɛloʊ."

Min frowned, too, but in thought, tapping a finger on her chin, and that only lasted a moment. "I think Nynaeve . . . Sedai wants to see him." The hesitation was barely noticeable. "Could you have him shown to her rooms, Mistress Harfor? I have another errand before I go. You mind your manners, now, Nuli, and do as you're told. There's a good fellow."

ɹænd oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə wɝd ʃi dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, ɔlmoʊst ɹʌnɪŋ. hɝ kloʊk flɛɹd bɪhaɪn hɝ, ʃi wɑz muvɪŋ soʊ kwɪkli. bɝn hɝ, ʃi wɑz gɑnə tʃɹaɪ faɪndɪŋ ɪleɪn! ʃi kəd ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ!

Rand opened his mouth, but before he could get out a word she darted away down the corridor, almost running. Her cloak flared behind her, she was moving so quickly. Burn her, she was going to try finding Elayne! She could ruin everything!

jəɹ plænz feɪl kəz jə wɑnə lɪv, mædmæn. luz θɝɪnz vɔɪs wɑz ə ɹʌf, swɛɾi wɪspɝ. æksɛp ðət jə ɑɹ dɛd. æksɛpt ɪt, ən stɑp tɔɹməntɪŋ mi, mædmæn! ɹænd səpɹɛs ðə vɔɪs tə ə mjuɾɪd bʌz, ə baɪtim bʌzɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs ə hɪz hɛd. nuli? wʌt kaɪndə neɪm wɑz nuli?

Your plans fail because you want to live, madman. Lews Therin's voice was a rough, sweaty whisper. Accept that you are dead. Accept it, and stop tormenting me, madman! Rand suppressed the voice to a muted buzz, a biteme buzzing in the darkness of his head. Nuli? What kind of name was Nuli?

mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ ɡeɪpt æftɝ mɪn əntɪl ʃi vænɪʃt ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ, ðən ɡeɪv əɹ tɑbɝɾ ən ədʒʌstɪŋ tʌɡ ɪt dɪd nɑt nid. ʃi tɝn əɹ dɪsəpɹuvəl ɑn ɹænd. ivən wɪð ðə mæsk ə mɪɹɝz ʃi sɔ ə mæn u taʊɝɾ oʊvɝ hɝ, bʌt ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊmən tə lɛɾ ə smɔl θɪŋ laɪk ðət pʊɾ əɹ ɔf stʃɹaɪd fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. "aɪ mɪstʃɹʌs ðə lʊks ə ju, nuli," ʃi sɛd, hɝ aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹɔn daʊn ʃɑɹpli, "soʊ jə wɑtʃ jəɹ stɛp. jəl wɑtʃ ɪt vɛɹi kɛɹfəli, ɪf juv ɛni bɹeɪn əɾ ɔl."

Mistress Harfor gaped after Min until she vanished around a corner, then gave her tabard an adjusting tug it did not need. She turned her disapproval on Rand. Even with the Mask of Mirrors she saw a man who towered over her, but Reene Harfor was not a woman to let a small thing like that put her off stride for an instant. "I mistrust the looks of you, Nuli," she said, her eyebrows drawn down sharply, "so you watch your step. You'll watch it very carefully, if you have any brain at all."

hoʊldɪŋ ðə skɹɪps ʃoʊldɝ stʃɹæp wɪð wʌn hænd, hi tʌɡd ɪz fɔɹlɑk wɪð ði ʌðɝ. "jɛs, mɪstʃɹəs," hi mʌɾɝd ɡɹʌflaɪ. ðə fɝs meɪd maɪt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪz ɹil vɔɪs. mɪn hæd bɪn səpoʊz tə də ɔl ðə tɔkɪŋ əntɪl ðeɪ faʊnd nɪneɪiv ən mæt. wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt wɑz i gɑnə də ɪf ʃi dɪd bɹɪŋ ɪleɪn? ən meɪbi eɪvinhə. ʃi pɹɑbli wɑz hɪɹ, tu. laɪt! "pɑɹɾən, mɪstʃɹəs, bʌt wi ɔt tə hɝi. ɪts ɝdʒən aɪ si nɪneɪiv əz sun əz pɑsəbəl." hi hɛftəd ðə skɹɪp slaɪtli. "ʃi wɑntəd ðɪs ɹil ɪmpɔɹɾənt laɪk." ɪf i wɑz dʌn wən mɪn ɹɪtɝnd, hi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð əɹ bɪfɔɹ i hæd tə feɪs ði ʌðɝ tu.

Holding the scrip's shoulder strap with one hand, he tugged his forelock with the other. "Yes, Mistress," he muttered gruffly. The First Maid might recognize his real voice. Min had been supposed to do all the talking until they found Nynaeve and Mat. What in the Light was he going to do if she did bring Elayne? And maybe Aviendha. She probably was here, too. Light! "Pardon, Mistress, but we ought to hurry. It's urgent I see Nynaeve as soon as possible." He hefted the scrip slightly. "She wanted this real important like." If he was done when Min returned, he might be able to get away with her before he had to face the other two.

"ɪf nɪneɪiv sədaɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ɝdʒənt," ðə plʌmp wʊmən toʊld ɪm tɑɹtli, pleɪsɪŋ hɛvi ɛmfəsəs ɑn ði ɑnɝɪfɪk i hæɾ oʊmɪɾəd, "ʃi wʊɾə lɛft wɝd jə wɝ ɪkspɛktəd. naʊ, fɑloʊ mi, ən kip jəɹ kɑmɛns ən əpɪnjənz tə jɝsɛlf."

"If Nynaeve Sedai thought it was urgent," the plump woman told him tartly, placing heavy emphasis on the honorific he had omitted, "she would have left word you were expected. Now, follow me, and keep your comments and opinions to yourself."

ʃi stɑɹɾəd ɔf wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə ɹɪplaɪ, wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk, ɡlaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ wɪð ə steɪtli ɡɹeɪs. æftɝ ɔl, wʌt kəɾ i də ɪksɛpt əz i hæd bɪn toʊld? əz i ɹɪkɔld, ðə fɝs meɪd wɑz əkʌstəm tə ɛvɹiwʌn duɪŋ əz ðeɪ wɝ toʊld. stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ tə kætʃ ʌp, hi tʊk oʊnli wʌn stɛp əɾ əɹ saɪd bɪfɔɹ əɹ stɑɹɾəld lʊk meɪɾ ɪm dʒɹɑp bæk, tʌɡɪŋ ɪz fɔɹlɑk ən mʌmbəlɪŋ əpɑlədʒiz. hi wɑz nɑt juz tə hævɪŋ tə wɔk bɪhaɪn ɛniwʌn. ɪt wɑz nɑt kælkjəleɪɾəd tə mɑɾɝeɪt ɪz mud. ðə tæɡ ɛn ə dɪzinəs hʌŋ ɑn, tu, ən ðə fɪlθ ə ðə teɪnt. hi sim tə bi ɪn ə faʊl mud mɔɹ ɔfən ðən nɑɾ ə leɪt, ənlɛs mɪn wɑz wɪð hɪm.

She started off without waiting for a reply, without looking back, gliding along with a stately grace. After all, what could he do except as he had been told? As he recalled, the First Maid was accustomed to everyone doing as they were told. Striding to catch up, he took only one step at her side before her startled look made him drop back, tugging his forelock and mumbling apologies. He was not used to having to walk behind anyone. It was not calculated to moderate his mood. The tag end of dizziness hung on, too, and the filth of the taint. He seemed to be in a foul mood more often than not of late, unless Min was with him.

bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn vɛɹi fɑɹ, lɪvɹid sɝvəns bɪɡæn tə əpɪɹ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ, pɑlɪʃɪŋ ən dʌstɪŋ ən kæɹiɪŋ, skɝiɪŋ ɛvɹi wɪtʃ weɪ. pleɪnli ði æbsəns ə pipəl wən i ən mɪn lɛf ðə stɔɹɹum wɑz ə ɹɛɹ əkɝəns. tɑvɝən əɡɛn. daʊn ə flaɪɾ ə nɛɹoʊ sɝvəs stɛɹz bɪlt ɪndə ðə wɔl, ən ðəɹ wɝ ivən mɔɹ. ən sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni wɪmən u wɝ nɑɾ ɪn lɪvɝi. kɑpɝ-skɪn dəmɑni wɪmən, ʃɔɹt peɪl kɛɹhinɪn, wɪmən wɪð ɑləv skɪnz ən dɑɹk aɪz u wɝ sɝɾənli nɑɾ ændɔɝən. ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪm smaɪl, ə taɪt sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl. nʌn hæd wʌɾ i kəd kɔl ən eɪdʒləs feɪs, ən ə nʌmbɝ ivən bɔɹ laɪnz ən ɹɪŋkəlz ðət nɛvɝ dɛkɝeɪɾəd ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs, bʌt səmtaɪmz ɡus bʌmps dænst ɑn ɪz skɪn wən i keɪm nɪɹ wʌn ə ðɛm. ðeɪ wɝ tʃænəlɪŋ, əɹ lis hoʊldɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ. mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ lɛɾ ɪm pæs kloʊz dɔɹz wɛɹ ðət pɹɪklɪŋ ɹeɪst, tu. bɪhaɪn ðoʊz dɔɹz, stɪl ʌðɝ wɪmən hæd tə bi tʃænəlɪŋ.

Before they had gone very far, liveried servants began to appear in the hallway, polishing and dusting and carrying, scurrying every which way. Plainly the absence of people when he and Min left the storeroom was a rare occurrence. Ta'veren again. Down a flight of narrow service stairs built into the wall, and there were even more. And something else, a great many women who were not in livery. Copper-skinned Domani women, short pale Cairhienin, women with olive skins and dark eyes who were certainly not Andoran. They made him smile, a tight satisfied smile. None had what he could call an ageless face, and a number even bore lines and wrinkles that never decorated any Aes Sedai's face, but sometimes goose bumps danced on his skin when he came near one of them. They were channeling, or least holding saidar. Mistress Harfor led him past closed doors where that prickling raced, too. Behind those doors, still other women had to be channeling.

"pɑɹɾən, mɪstʃɹəs," hi sɛɾ ɪn ðə kɔɹs vɔɪs i hæɾ ədɑptəd fəɹ nuli. "haʊ mɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ ðəɹ ɪn ðə pæləs?"

"Pardon, Mistress," he said in the coarse voice he had adopted for Nuli. "How many Aes Sedai are there in the Palace?"

"ðæɾ ɪz noʊ kənsɝn ə jʊɹz," ʃi snæpt. ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ ət hɪm, ðoʊ, ʃi saɪɾ ən ɹɪlɛntɪd. "aɪ doʊn səpoʊz ðəɹ ɪz ɛni hɑɹm ɪn jə noʊɪŋ. faɪv, kaʊntɪŋ ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv sədaɪ." ə tʌtʃ ə pɹaɪɾ ɛntɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs. "ɪɾ əz bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm sɪns ðət mɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ kleɪmd ɡɛstʃɹaɪt hɪɹ ət wʌn taɪm."

"That is no concern of yours," she snapped. Glancing over one shoulder at him, though, she sighed and relented. "I don't suppose there is any harm in you knowing. Five, counting the Lady Elayne and Nynaeve Sedai." A touch of pride entered her voice. "It has been a long time since that many Aes Sedai claimed guestright here at one time."

ɹænd kəɾ əv læft, ðoʊ wɪθaʊɾ əmjuzmənt. faɪv? noʊ, ðəɾ ɪnkluɾəd nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn. θɹi ɹil ɛɛs sədaɪ. θɹi! huɛvɝ ðə ɹɛst wɝ dɪd nɑt ɹɪli mæɾɝ. hi hæd bɪɡʌn tə bɪliv ðət ðə ɹumɝz ə hʌnʒɹədz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ muvɪŋ təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn wɪð ən ɑɹmi mɛn ðəɹ ɹɪli maɪt bi ðət mɛni ɹɛɾi tə fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ɪnstɛd, ivən ɪz ɝɪdʒənəl hoʊp fəɹ ə dʌbəl hændfʊl ə ðɛm hæd bɪn waɪldli ɑptəmɪstɪk. ðə ɹumɝz wɝ oʊnli ɹumɝz. əɹ ɛls səm skim ʌv ɪleɪɾəz meɪkɪŋ. laɪt, wɛɹ wɑz mæt? kʌlɝ flæʃt ɪn ɪz hɛd - fəɹ ən ɪnstən i θɔɾ ɪt wɑz mæts feɪs - ən i stʌmbəld.

Rand could have laughed, though without amusement. Five? No, that included Nynaeve and Elayne. Three real Aes Sedai. Three! Whoever the rest were did not really matter. He had begun to believe that the rumors of hundreds of Aes Sedai moving toward Caemlyn with an army meant there really might be that many ready to follow the Dragon Reborn. Instead, even his original hope for a double handful of them had been wildly optimistic. The rumors were only rumors. Or else some scheme of Elaida's making. Light, where was Mat? Color flashed in his head - for an instant he thought it was Mat's face - and he stumbled.

"ɪf jə keɪm hɪɹ dʒɹʌŋk, nuli," mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ sɛd fɝmli, "ju wɪl liv ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ɪt bɪɾɝli. əl si tə ɪt maɪsɛlf!"

"If you came here drunk, Nuli," Mistress Harfor said firmly, "you will leave regretting it bitterly. I will see to it myself!"

"jɛs, mɪstʃɹəs," ɹænd mʌɾɝd, dʒɝkɪŋ əɾ ɪz fɔɹlɑk. ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd, luz θɝɪn kækəld ɪn mæd, wipɪŋ læftɝ. hi hæd hæd tə kʌm hɪɹ - ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi - bʌɾ i wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɪt.

"Yes, Mistress," Rand muttered, jerking at his forelock. Inside his head, Lews Therin cackled in mad, weeping laughter. He had had to come here - it was necessary - but he was already beginning to regret it.

sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ, nɪneɪiv ən tɑlɑn feɪst wʌn ənʌðɝ ət fɔɹ peɪsɪz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, wɛɹ ə bɹɪsk bleɪz hæd mænədʒ tə teɪk ɔl tʃɪl aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ. əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz ɛfɝt ðət hæd wɔɹm hɝ, nɪneɪiv θɔt saʊɝli. ðɪs lɛsən hæd læstəɾ ən aʊɝ ɔlɹɛɾi, baɪ ði ɔɹneɪt klɑk ɑn ðə kɑɹv mæntəl. ən aʊɝ ə tʃænəlɪŋ wɪθaʊt ɹɛst wəd wɔɹm ɛniwʌn. sɝaɪðə wɑz səpoʊz tə bi hɪɹ, nɑt hɝ, bʌt ðə bɹaʊn hæd slɪpt aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs livɪŋ ə noʊɾ əbaʊɾ ən ɝdʒən ɛɹən ɪn ðə sɪɾi. kɛɝin hæd ɹəfjuz tə teɪk tu deɪz ɪn ə ɹoʊ, ən vændin stɪl ɹəfjuz tə teɪk ɛni, ɑn ðə ɹɪdɪkjələs ɡɹaʊnz ðət titʃɪŋ kɝstʃən ən zɛɹjə lɛft əɹ noʊ taɪm.

Surrounded by the light of saidar, Nynaeve and Talaan faced one another at four paces in front of the fireplace, where a brisk blaze had managed to take all chill out of the air. Or maybe it was effort that had warmed her, Nynaeve thought sourly. This lesson had lasted an hour already, by the ornate clock on the carved mantel. An hour of channeling without rest would warm anyone. Sareitha was supposed to be here, not her, but the Brown had slipped out of the Palace leaving a note about an urgent errand in the city. Careane had refused to take two days in a row, and Vandene still refused to take any, on the ridiculous grounds that teaching Kirstian and Zarya left her no time.

"laɪk ðɪs," ʃi sɛd, wɪpɪŋ əɹ floʊ ʌv spɪɹəɾ ɝaʊn ðə bɔɪ-slɪm si foʊk əpɹɛntəsəz ətɛmpt ət fɛndɪŋ əɹ ɔf. æɾɪŋ ðə fɔɹs ə hɝ oʊn floʊ, ʃi pʊʃt ðə ɡɝlz fɝðɝ əweɪ ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm tʃænəld ɛɹ ɪn θɹi sɛpɹət wivz. wʌn tɪkəl tɑlɑnz ɹɪbz θɹu hɝ blu lɪnən blaʊs. ə sɪmpəl plɔɪ, bʌt ðə ɡɝl ɡæspt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən fəɹ ən ɪnstən əɹ ɛmbɹeɪs ə ðə sɔɹs lɛsən dʒʌst ə hɛɹ, ðə feɪntəs flɪkɝ ɪn ðə paʊɝ fɪlɪŋ hɝ. ɪn ðət hɑɹtbit nɪneɪiv stɑp ðə pʊʃɪŋ ʃi hæd dʒʌs bɪɡʌn ɑn ði ʌðɝz floʊ ən snæpt əɹ oʊn bæk tə ɪts ɝɪdʒənəl tɑɹɡət. fɔɹsɪŋ ðə ʃild ɑntu tɑlɑn stɪl fɛl mʌtʃ laɪk slæpɪŋ ə wɔl - ɪksɛp ðə stɪŋ wɑz spɹɛɾ ivənli əkɹɔs əɹ skɪn ɹæðɝ ðən dʒʌst ɪn əɹ pɑm, hɑɹdli ən ɪmpɹuvmənt - bʌt ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ vænɪʃt dʒʌst əz ðə læs tu floʊz ʌv ɛɹ tʃɹæp tɑlɑnz ɑɹmz əɾ əɹ saɪdz ən pʊld əɹ niz təɡɛðɝ ɪn ðɛɹ waɪd, dɑɹk tʃɹaʊzɝz.

"Like this," she said, whipping her flow of Spirit around the boy-slim Sea Folk apprentice's attempt at fending her off. Adding the force of her own flow, she pushed the girl's further away and at the same time channeled Air in three separate weaves. One tickled Talaan's ribs through her blue linen blouse. A simple ploy, but the girl gasped in surprise, and for an instant her embrace of the Source lessened just a hair, the faintest flicker in the Power filling her. In that heartbeat Nynaeve stopped the pushing she had just begun on the other's flow and snapped her own back to its original target. Forcing the shield onto Talaan still felt much like slapping a wall - except the sting was spread evenly across her skin rather than just in her palm, hardly an improvement - but the glow of saidar vanished just as the last two flows of Air trapped Talaan's arms at her sides and pulled her knees together in their wide, dark trousers.

vɛɹi nitli dʌn, ɪf nɪneɪiv dɪd θɪŋk soʊ hɝsɛlf. ðə ɡɝl wɑz vɛɹi ædʒəl, vɛɹi dɛft wɪð əɹ wivz. bɪsaɪdz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃil sʌmwʌn u hɛl ðə paʊɝ wɑz tʃænsi ət bɛst ən fjuɾəl ət wɝst, ənlɛs jə wɝ vɛɹi mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðeɪ - səmtaɪmz ɪf jə wɝ - ən tɑlɑn mætʃt əɹ əz kloʊsli əz meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns. ðət hɛlp kip ə sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl fɹəm əɹ feɪs. ɪt simd ə vɛɹi ʃɔɹt taɪm əɡoʊ ðət sɪstɝz hæd bɪn stɑɹɾəld əɾ əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ ən bɪliv ðəɾ oʊnli səm ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən pəzɛst ɡɹeɪɾɝ. tɑlɑn hæd nɑt sloʊd, jɛt; ʃi wɑz lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə tʃaɪld. fɪftin? meɪbi jʌŋɡɝ! ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌɾ əɹ pətɛnʃəl wɑz. ət list, nʌn ə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz hæd mɛnʃən ɪt, ən nɪneɪiv wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə æsk. ʃi hæd noʊ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn noʊɪŋ haʊ mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ʃi ə si foʊk ɡɝl wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə bi. nʌn əɾ ɔl.

Very neatly done, if Nynaeve did think so herself. The girl was very agile, very deft with her weaves. Besides, trying to shield someone who held the Power was chancy at best and futile at worst, unless you were very much stronger than they - sometimes if you were - and Talaan matched her as closely as made no difference. That helped keep a satisfied smile from her face. It seemed a very short time ago that sisters had been startled at her strength and believed that only some of the Forsaken possessed greater. Talaan had not slowed, yet; she was little more than a child. Fifteen? Maybe younger! The Light alone knew what her potential was. At least, none of the Windfinders had mentioned it, and Nynaeve was not about to ask. She had no interest in knowing how much stronger than she a Sea Folk girl was going to be. None at all.

bɛɹ fit ʃʌflɪŋ ɑn ðə pæɾɝnd ɡɹin kɑɹpət, tɑlɑn meɪd wʌn fjuɾəl ətɛmp tə bɹeɪk ðə ʃil ðət nɪneɪiv hɛld izəli, ðən saɪɾ ɪn dɪfiɾ ən loʊɝɾ əɹ aɪz. ivən wən ʃi hæd səksiɾəd ɪn fɑloʊɪŋ nɪneɪivz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃən, ʃi bɪheɪvd əz ɪf ʃi hæd feɪld, ən naʊ ʃi slʌmp soʊ dɪdʒɛktɪdli jə maɪɾ əv θɔt ðə wivz ʌv ɛɹ wɝ ɔl ðət hɛld əɹ əpɹaɪt.

Bare feet shuffling on the patterned green carpet, Talaan made one futile attempt to break the shield that Nynaeve held easily, then sighed in defeat and lowered her eyes. Even when she had succeeded in following Nynaeve's instruction, she behaved as if she had failed, and now she slumped so dejectedly you might have thought the weaves of Air were all that held her upright.

lɛɾɪŋ əɹ floʊz dɪsəpeɪt, nɪneɪiv ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə tɛl tɑlɑn wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn ɹɔŋ. ən tə pɔɪn aʊt - wʌns əɡɛn - ðəɾ ɪt wɑz jusləs tə tʃɹaɪ bɹeɪkɪŋ fɹi ənlɛs jə wɝ mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən huɛvɝ hæd ʃildɪd ju. ðə si foʊk hɑɹdli sim tə bɪliv ɛniθɪŋ ʃi toʊld əm əntɪl ʃi toʊld əm tɛn taɪmz ən ʃoʊɾ əm twɛnti.

Letting her flows dissipate, Nynaeve adjusted her shawl and opened her mouth to tell Talaan what she had done wrong. And to point out - once again - that it was useless to try breaking free unless you were much stronger than whoever had shielded you. The Sea Folk hardly seemed to believe anything she told them until she told them ten times and showed them twenty.

"ʃi juz jəɹ oʊn fɔɹs əɡɛns ju," sɛnaɪn dɪn ɹiɑl sɛd blʌnli bɪfɔɹ nɪneɪiv kəd spik. "æn dɪstʃɹækʃən, əɡɛn. ɪts laɪk ɹɛslɪŋ, ɡɝl. jə noʊ haʊ tə ɹɛsəl."

"She used your own force against you," Senine din Ryal said bluntly before Nynaeve could speak. "And distraction, again. It is like wrestling, girl. You know how to wrestle."

"tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn," zeɪɾə kəmændəd wɪð ə bɹɪsk dʒɛstʃɝ ʌv wʌn dɑɹk, tætud hænd.

"Try again," Zaida commanded with a brisk gesture of one dark, tattooed hand.

ɔl ə ðə tʃɛɹz ɪn ðə ɹum hæd bɪn muvd əɡɛns ðə wɔl, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹil nid fəɹ ə klɪɹ speɪs, ən zeɪɾə sæt wɑtʃɪŋ ðə lɛsən flæŋk baɪ sɪks wɪndfɪndɝz, ə ɹaɪəɾ ə ɹɛdz ən jɛloʊz ən bluz ɪn bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd sɪlks ən bɹaɪtli daɪd lɪnənz, ə flɪntʃ-ɪndusɪŋ dɪspleɪ ʌv ɪɹɪŋz ən noʊz ɹɪŋz ən mədæljən-leɪɾən tʃeɪnz. ðət wɑz ɔlweɪz ðə weɪ; wʌn ə ðə tu əpɹɛntəsɪz wɑz juz fəɹ ði æktʃəwəl lɛsən - əɹ mɛɝɪlɪl, nɪneɪiv hæd hɝd, æktʃəli  fɔɹs tə teɪk ðə pɑɹɾ ʌv ən əpɹɛntəs ənlɛs ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz titʃɪŋ - waɪl zeɪɾə ən wʌn ɡɹup əɹ ənʌðɝ ʌv wɪndfɪndɝz wɑtʃt. ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs kəd nɑt tʃænəl, ʌv kɔɹs, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz pɹɛzənt, ən nʌn ə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wəɾ æktʃəli  stup tə pɑɹtɪsəpeɪɾɪŋ pɝsənəli. oʊ, nɛvɝ ðæt.

All of the chairs in the room had been moved against the wall, though there was no real need for a clear space, and Zaida sat watching the lesson flanked by six Windfinders, a riot of reds and yellows and blues in brocaded silks and brightly dyed linens, a flinch-inducing display of earrings and nose rings and medallion-laden chains. That was always the way; one of the two apprentices was used for the actual lesson - or Merilille, Nynaeve had heard, actually forced to take the part of an apprentice unless she herself was teaching - while Zaida and one group or another of Windfinders watched. The Wavemistress could not channel, of course, though she was always present, and none of the Windfinders would actually stoop to participating personally. Oh, never that.

ɪn nɪneɪivz ɛstəmeɪʃən, tədeɪz ɡɹupɪŋ wɑz vɛɹi ɑd, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə si foʊks' əbsɛʃən wɪð ɹæŋk. zeɪɾəz oʊn wɪndfɪndɝ, ʃilɪn, sæɾ ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt, ə slɛndɝ, kuli ɹɪzɝvd wʊmən ɔlmoʊst əz tɔl əz eɪvinhə ən taʊɝɪŋ oʊvɝ zeɪɾə. ðət wɑz pɹɑpɝ, əz fɑɹ əz nɪneɪiv ʌndɝstʊd, bʌɾ ət zeɪɾəz lɛft wɑz sɛnaɪn, ən ʃi sɝvd ɑn ə sɔɹɝ, wʌn ə ðə si foʊks smɔlɝ vɛsəlz, ən hɝz əmʌŋ ðə smɔləst ə ðoʊz. ʌv kɔɹs, ðə wɛðɝd wʊmən, wɪð əɹ kɹis feɪs ən hɛɹ θɪk wɪð ɡɹeɪ, hæd wɔɹn mɔɹ ðən əɹ pɹɛzən sɪks ɪɹɪŋz ɪn ðə pæst, ən mɔɹ ɡoʊldən mədæljənz ɑn ðə tʃeɪn əkɹɔs əɹ dɑɹk lɛf tʃik. ʃi hæd bɪn wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps bɪfɔɹ nɛstə dɪn ɹiz wɑz ɪlɛktəd tə ðə poʊst, bʌt baɪ ðɛɹ lɔ, wən ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps əɹ ə weɪvməstʃɹəs daɪd, hɝ wɪndfɪndɝ hæd tə bɪɡɪn əɡɛn ət ðə loʊəs lɛvəl. ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ tə ɪt ðən ɹɪspɛk fəɹ sɛnaɪnz fɔɹmɝ pəzɪʃən, ðoʊ, nɪneɪiv wɑz sɝɾən. ɹeɪnɪn, ən æpəl-tʃik jʌŋ wʊmən u sɝvd ɑn ə dɑɹɾɝ, ɑkjəpaɪd ðə tʃɛɹ nɛks tə sɛnaɪn, ən stoʊn-feɪst, flæt-aɪd kɹɪn sæt bɪsaɪd ʃilɪn laɪk ə blæk kɑɹvɪŋ. ðɪs ɹɛləɡeɪɾɪd kɛɹ ən tɛbɹl tə ði aʊɾɝmoʊst tʃɛɹz, ən ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ wɪndfɪndɝz tə weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz ðɛmsɛlvz, wɪð fɔɹ fæɾ ɪɹɪŋz ɪn itʃ ɪɹ ən nɪɹli əz mɛni mədæljənz əz zeɪɾə hɝsɛlf. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz dʒʌs tə kip ðə hɔɾi-aɪd sɪstɝz əpɑɹt, ðoʊ. ðeɪ heɪɾəd wʌn ənʌðɝ wɪð ə pæʃən oʊnli blʌd kɪn kəɾ ətʃiv. pɝhæps ðət wɑz ɪt. ʌndɝstændɪŋ ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɑz wɝs ðən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʌndɝstæn mɛn. ə wʊmən kəd ɡoʊ mæd tʃɹaɪɪŋ.

In Nynaeve's estimation, today's grouping was very odd, considering the Sea Folks' obsession with rank. Zaida's own Windfinder, Shielyn, sat on her right, a slender, coolly reserved woman almost as tall as Aviendha and towering over Zaida. That was proper, as far as Nynaeve understood, but at Zaida's left was Senine, and she served on a soarer, one of the Sea Folk's smaller vessels, and hers among the smallest of those. Of course, the weathered woman, with her creased face and hair thick with gray, had worn more than her present six earrings in the past, and more golden medallions on the chain across her dark left cheek. She had been Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships before Nesta din Reas was elected to the post, but by their law, when the Mistress of the Ships or a Wavemistress died, her Windfinder had to begin again at the lowest level. There was more to it than respect for Senine's former position, though, Nynaeve was certain. Rainyn, an apple-cheeked young woman who served on a darter, occupied the chair next to Senine, and stone-faced, flat-eyed Kurin sat beside Shielyn like a black carving. This relegated Caire and Tebreille to the outermost chairs, and they were both Windfinders to Wavemistresses themselves, with four fat earrings in each ear and nearly as many medallions as Zaida herself. Perhaps it was just to keep the haughty-eyed sisters apart, though. They hated one another with a passion only blood kin could achieve. Perhaps that was it. Understanding the Atha'an Miere was worse than trying to understand men. A woman could go mad trying.

mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf, nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv əɹ ʃɔl ə dʒɝk ən pɹipɛɹd hɝsɛlf, ɹɛɾiɪŋ əɹ floʊz. ðə pjʊɹ dʒɔɪ ʌv hoʊldɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ kəd hɑɹdli kəmpit wɪð əɹ vɛkseɪʃən. tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn, nɪneɪiv. wʌn mɔɹ taɪm, nɪneɪiv. də ɪt naʊ, nɪneɪiv. ət list ɹɪneɪl wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ. ɔfən ðeɪ wɑntəɾ əɹ tə titʃ θɪŋz ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ əz wɛl əz ʌðɝz - tu ɔfən, θɪŋz ʃi bɛɹli nu əɾ ɔl, ʃi ədmɪɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli; ʃi hæd nɑt ɹɪli hæd mʌtʃ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə taʊɝ - ən wɛnɛvɝ ʃi fʌmbəld ɪn ðə slaɪɾəst, ɹɪneɪl pɑzəɾɪvli dɪlaɪɾəd ɪn meɪkɪŋ əɹ swɛt. ði ʌðɝz meɪɾ əɹ swɛt, tu, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə teɪk soʊ mʌtʃ plɛʒɝ ɪn ɪt. ɛniweɪ, æftɝ ə sɑləɾ aʊɝ, ʃi wɑz taɪɝd. dʒɹæt sɝaɪðə ən əɹ ɛɹənd!

Muttering to herself, Nynaeve gave her shawl a jerk and prepared herself, readying her flows. The pure joy of holding saidar could hardly compete with her vexation. Try again, Nynaeve. One more time, Nynaeve. Do it now, Nynaeve. At least Renaile was not there. Often they wanted her to teach things she did not know as well as others - too often, things she barely knew at all, she admitted reluctantly; she had not really had much training in the Tower - and whenever she fumbled in the slightest, Renaile positively delighted in making her sweat. The others made her sweat, too, but they did not seem to take so much pleasure in it. Anyway, after a solid hour, she was tired. Drat Sareitha and her errand!

ʃi stʃɹʌk aʊɾ əɡɛn, bʌt ðɪs taɪm tɑlɑnz floʊ ʌv spɪɹət mɛt hɝz mʌtʃ mɔɹ laɪtli ðən ʃi ɪkspɛktəd, ən əɹ oʊn floʊ swɛp ði ʌðɝ fɝðɝ əsaɪd ðən ʃi hæd mɛnt. əbɹʌpli sɪks wivz ʌv ɛɹ ʃɑɾ aʊt fɹəm ðə ɡɝl, dɑɹɾɪŋ təwɔɹd nɪneɪiv, ən nɪneɪiv kwɪkli slaɪst əm wɪð faɪɝ. ðə sɛvɝd floʊz snæp bæk ɪndə tɑlɑn, dʒoʊltɪŋ əɹ vɪzəbli, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæd vænɪʃt pɹɑpɝli, sɪks mɔɹ əpɪɹd, fæstɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ. nɪneɪiv slæʃt. ən ɡeɪpt əz tɑlɑnz wiv ə spɪɹət flɪkɝɾ ɝaʊn hɝz ən ɹæpt ɝaʊn hɝ, kʌɾɪŋ ɔf seɪaɪdɑɹ. ʃi wɑz ʃildɪd! tɑlɑn hæd ʃildɪd hɝ! fəɹ ðə faɪnəl ɪndɪɡnəɾi, floʊz ʌv ɛɹ pɪnjən əɹ ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz taɪtli, kɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ skɝts. ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn soʊ əpsɛɾ ət sɝaɪðə, ɪt nɛvɝ wəɾ əv hæpənd.

She struck out again, but this time Talaan's flow of Spirit met hers much more lightly than she expected, and her own flow swept the other further aside than she had meant. Abruptly six weaves of Air shot out from the girl, darting toward Nynaeve, and Nynaeve quickly sliced them with Fire. The severed flows snapped back into Talaan, jolting her visibly, but before they had vanished properly, six more appeared, faster than before. Nynaeve slashed. And gaped as Talaan's weave of Spirit flickered around hers and wrapped around her, cutting off saidar. She was shielded! Talaan had shielded her! For the final indignity, flows of Air pinioned her arms and legs tightly, crushing her skirts. If she had not been so upset at Sareitha, it never would have happened.

"ðə ɡɝl əz hɝ," kɛɹ sɛd, saʊndɪŋ sɝpɹaɪzd. noʊ wʌn wəd θɪŋk ʃi wɑz tɑlɑnz mʌðɝ baɪ ðə koʊld lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv hɝ. ɪndid, tɑlɑn simd ɪmbɛɹəs baɪ hɝ oʊn səksɛs, ɹilisɪŋ ðə floʊz ɪmiɾiətli ən dʒɹɑpɪŋ əɹ aɪz tə ðə flɔɹ.

"The girl has her," Caire said, sounding surprised. No one would think she was Talaan's mother by the cold look she gave her. Indeed, Talaan seemed embarrassed by her own success, releasing the flows immediately and dropping her eyes to the floor.

"vɛɹi ɡʊd, tɑlɑn," nɪneɪiv sɛd, sɪns noʊ wʌn ɛls wɑz ɔfɝɪŋ ə wɝɾ ə pɹeɪz əɹ ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt. ɪɹɪɾəbli ʃi ʃʊk aʊɾ əɹ ʃɔl bɪhaɪn əɹ ən sɛɾəld ɪɾ ɪndə ðə kɹʊks ə hɝ ɛlboʊz. noʊ nid tə tɛl ðə ɡɝl ʃi hæd bɪn lʌki. ʃi wɑz kwɪk, tʃɹu, bʌt nɪneɪiv wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi hɝsɛlf kəd kip tʃænəlɪŋ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ. ʃi sɝɾənli wɑz nɑɾ əɾ əɹ bɛs naʊ. "aɪm əfɹeɪd ðəɾ ɪz ɔl ðə taɪm aɪ hæv tədeɪ, soʊ - "

"Very good, Talaan," Nynaeve said, since no one else was offering a word of praise or encouragement. Irritably she shook out her shawl behind her and settled it into the crooks of her elbows. No need to tell the girl she had been lucky. She was quick, true, but Nynaeve was not sure she herself could keep channeling much longer. She certainly was not at her best now. "I'm afraid that is all the time I have today, so - "

"tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn," zeɪɾə kəmændəd, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntɛnli. "aɪ wɑnə si sʌmθɪŋ." ðət wɑz nɑɾ ən ɛkspləneɪʃən, əɹ ɛniθɪŋ nɪɹ əpɑlədʒi, sɪmpli ə steɪtmən ə fækt. zeɪɾə nɛvɝ ɪkspleɪn əɹ əpɑlədʒaɪzd. ʃi dʒʌst ɪkspɛktəɾ oʊbiɾiəns.

"Try again," Zaida commanded, leaning forward intently. "I want to see something." That was not an explanation, or anything near apology, simply a statement of fact. Zaida never explained or apologized. She just expected obedience.

nɪneɪiv kənsɪɾɝd tɛlɪŋ ðə wʊmən ʃi kəd nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ ɛniweɪ, bʌt ʃi ɹɪdʒɛktɪd ðə θɔɾ ɪmiɾiətli. nɑt wɪð sɪks wɪndfɪndɝz ɪn ðə ɹum. tu deɪz ɝliɝ ʃi hæd vɔɪst əɹ əpɪnjənz fɹili, ən ʃi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt wɑn ə ɹɪpiɾ ə ðæt. ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪɾ əz ə pɛnəns, fəɹ spikɪŋ wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt hɛlp vɛɹi mʌtʃ. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ tɔɾ əm tə lɪŋk.

Nynaeve considered telling the woman she could not see anything they were doing anyway, but she rejected the thought immediately. Not with six Windfinders in the room. Two days earlier she had voiced her opinions freely, and she certainly did not want a repeat of that. She had tried thinking of it as a penance, for speaking without thinking, but that did not help very much. She wished she had never taught them to link.

"wʌn mɔɹ taɪm," ʃi sɛd taɪtli, tɝnɪŋ bæk tə tɑlɑn, "æn ðən aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ."

"One more time," she said tightly, turning back to Talaan, "and then I must go."

ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi fəɹ ðə ɡɝlz tʃɹɪk ðɪs taɪm. tʃænəlɪŋ, ʃi mɛt tɑlɑnz wiv mɔɹ dɛkstɝəsli, ən wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ fɔɹs. ðə ɡɝl smaɪld əɾ əɹ ənsɝteɪnli. θɪŋkɪŋ nɪneɪiv wəd nɑt bi dɪstʃɹæktəd baɪ ɛkstʃɹeɪniəs floʊz ʌv ɛɹ ðɪs taɪm, wɑz ʃi? tɑlɑnz wiv bɪɡæn tə kɝl ɝaʊn hɝz, ən ʃi nɪmbli spʌn əɹ oʊn tə kætʃ ɪt. ʃi wəd bi ɹɛɾi wən ðə wʊmən pɹədust əɹ floʊz ʌv ɛɹ. əɹ meɪbi nɑɾ ɛɹ, ðɪs taɪm. nʌθɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs ʃʊɹli. ðɪs wɑz pɹæktəs. oʊnli, tɑlɑnz floʊ ʌv spɪɹət dɪd nɑt kəmplit ðət kɝl, ən nɪneɪivz swʌŋ waɪd waɪl tɑlɑnz stʃɹʌk stʃɹeɪɾ əɾ əɹ ən lætʃt ɑn. wʌns əɡɛn, seɪaɪdɑɹ wɪŋkt aʊɾ ə hɝ, ən bɑnz ʌv ɛɹ snæpt əɹ ɑɹmz tə hɝ saɪdz, fæsən əɹ niz.

She was ready for the girl's trick this time. Channeling, she met Talaan's weave more dexterously, and without so much force. The girl smiled at her uncertainly. Thinking Nynaeve would not be distracted by extraneous flows of Air this time, was she? Talaan's weave began to curl around hers, and she nimbly spun her own to catch it. She would be ready when the woman produced her flows of Air. Or maybe not Air, this time. Nothing dangerous surely. This was practice. Only, Talaan's flow of Spirit did not complete that curl, and Nynaeve's swung wide while Talaan's struck straight at her and latched on. Once again, saidar winked out of her, and bonds of Air snapped her arms to her sides, fastened her knees.

kɛɹfəli, ʃi dʒɹu bɹɛθ. ʃi wəɾ əv tə kənɡɹætʃəleɪt ðə jʌŋ wʊmən. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. ɪf ʃi hæd hæɾ ə hæn fɹi, ʃi wʊɾə jæŋkt əɹ bɹeɪd ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ skælp.

Carefully, she drew breath. She would have to congratulate the young woman. There was no getting out of it. If she had had a hand free, she would have yanked her braid right out of her scalp.

"hoʊld!" zeɪɾə kəmændəd, ɹaɪzɪŋ tə stʃɹaɪd ɡɹeɪsfəli təwɔɹd nɪneɪiv, hɝ ɹɛd sɪlk tʃɹaʊzɝz wɪskɪŋ sɔfli əbʌv əɹ bɛɹ fit, ɪntʃɹəkətli nɑɾɪd ɹɛd sæʃ sweɪɪŋ əɡɛnst əɹ θaɪ. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz stʊd wɪð əɹ ən fɑloʊd, ɪn ɔɹɾɝ ə ɹæŋk. kɛɹ ən tɛbɹl aɪsɪli ɪɡnɔɹd wʌn ənʌðɝ əz ðeɪ hɝid tə teɪk pleɪsəz nɪɹəs ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs waɪl sɛnaɪn ən ɹeɪnɪn fɛl ə peɪs tə ðə ɹɪɹ.

"Hold!" Zaida commanded, rising to stride gracefully toward Nynaeve, her red silk trousers whisking softly above her bare feet, intricately knotted red sash swaying against her thigh. The Windfinders stood with her and followed, in order of rank. Caire and Tebreille icily ignored one another as they hurried to take places nearest the Wavemistress while Senine and Rainyn fell a pace to the rear.

oʊbiɾiəntli, tɑlɑn hɛl ðə ʃild ɑn nɪneɪiv, ən ðə bɑnz, livɪŋ əɹ stændɪŋ laɪk ə stætʃu. ən fjumɪŋ laɪk ə kɛɾəl tu lɔŋ ɑn ðə bɔɪl. ʃi ɹəfjuz tə ʃʌfəl əbaʊt, ə bɹoʊkən pʌpət, ən ðət wɑz ɔl ðət wɑz lɛf tə hɝ ɪksɛp stændɪŋ stɪl. kɛɹ ən tɛbɹl stʌɾid əɹ wɪð aɪsi dɪsdeɪn, kɹɪn wɪð ðə hɑɹd kəntɛmpt ʃi hæd fəɹ ɔl læn dwɛlɝz. ðə stoʊn-aɪd wʊmən dɪd nɑt snɪɹ əɹ ɡɹɪmɑs əɹ wɛɹ ɛni ɹil ɪkspɹɛʃən əɾ ɔl, bʌt jə kəd nɑt bi wɪð əɹ lɔŋ wɪθaʊt bɪkʌmɪŋ əwɛɹ ə hɝ əpɪnjən. oʊnli ɹeɪnɪn dɪspleɪd ðə smɔləs tʌtʃ ə sɪmpəθi, ə slaɪt ɹufəl smaɪl.

Obediently, Talaan held the shield on Nynaeve, and the bonds, leaving her standing like a statue. And fuming like a kettle too long on the boil. She refused to shuffle about, a broken puppet, and that was all that was left to her except standing still. Caire and Tebreille studied her with icy disdain, Kurin with the hard contempt she had for all land dwellers. The stone-eyed woman did not sneer or grimace or wear any real expression at all, but you could not be with her long without becoming aware of her opinion. Only Rainyn displayed the smallest touch of sympathy, a slight rueful smile.

zeɪɾəz aɪz mɛt nɪneɪivz lɛvəli. ðeɪ wɝ mʌtʃ ðə seɪm haɪt. "ʃi ɪz hɛld əz taɪtli əz jə kæn, əpɹɛntəs?"

Zaida's eyes met Nynaeve's levelly. They were much the same height. "She is held as tightly as you can, apprentice?"

tɑlɑn baʊd dipli, pɛɹəlɛl tə ðə flɔɹ, tʌtʃɪŋ əɹ fɔɹhɛd, lɪps ən hɑɹt. "æz jə kəmændəd, weɪvməstʃɹəs," ʃi ɔl bʌt wɪspɝd.

Talaan bowed deeply, parallel to the floor, touching her forehead, lips and heart. "As you commanded, Wavemistress," she all but whispered.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðə minɪŋ ə ðɪs?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. "lɛt mi ɡoʊ. jə meɪ ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð tʃɹiɾɪŋ mɛɝɪlɪl ðɪs weɪ, bʌɾ ɪf jə θɪŋk fəɹ wʌn mɪnət - !"

"What is the meaning of this?" Nynaeve demanded. "Let me go. You may get away with treating Merilille this way, but if you think for one minute - !"

"ju seɪ ðəɹ ɪz noʊ weɪ tə bɹeɪk ðɪs ʃild ənlɛs jə ɑɹ mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ," zeɪɾə kʌɾ əɹ ɔf. hɝ toʊn wɑz nɑt hɑɹʃ, bʌt ʃi mɛn tə bi hɝd, nɑt tə lɪsən. "ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, wɪl lɝn wɛðɝ jə toʊld əs kɝɛkli. ɪts wɛl noʊn haʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪk tʃɹuθ spɪn laɪk ə wɝlpul. wɪndfɪndɝz, jəl fɔɹm ə sɝkəl. kɹɪn, jəl lid. ɪf ʃi dʌz bɹeɪk fɹi, si ðət ʃi kɑzəz noʊ hɑɹm. fəɹ ɪnsɛntɪv . . . əpɹɛntəs, pɹipɛɹ tə tɝn əɹ ʌpsaɪd daʊn ət maɪ kaʊn ə faɪv. wʌn."

"You say there is no way to break this shield unless you are much stronger," Zaida cut her off. Her tone was not harsh, but she meant to be heard, not to listen. "The Light willing, we will learn whether you told us correctly. It is well known how Aes Sedai make truth spin like a whirlpool. Windfinders, you will form a circle. Kurin, you will lead. If she does break free, see that she causes no harm. For incentive . . . Apprentice, prepare to turn her upside down at my count of five. One."

ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɛnvɛləp ðə wɪndfɪndɝz, ɔl ə ðɛm təɡɛðɝ, əz ðeɪ lɪŋkt. kɹɪn stʊd wɪð əɹ fiɾ əpɑɹɾ ən əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps, əz ɪf bælənsɪŋ ɑn ðə dɛk ʌv ə ʃɪp. hɝ vɛɹi læk ʌv ɪkspɹɛʃən sim tə kənveɪ ðət ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi kənvɪns ðeɪ wəɾ ənkʌvɝ pɹɛvɝəkeɪʃən ɪf nɑɾ ən aʊtʃɹaɪt laɪ. tɑlɑn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, ən fəɹ wʌns stʊd vɛɹi stʃɹeɪt, nɑɾ ivən blɪŋkɪŋ əz ʃi kɛpt əɹ æŋkʃəs aɪz ɑn zeɪɾə.

The light of saidar enveloped the Windfinders, all of them together, as they linked. Kurin stood with her feet apart and her hands on her hips, as if balancing on the deck of a ship. Her very lack of expression seemed to convey that she was already convinced they would uncover prevarication if not an outright lie. Talaan drew a deep breath, and for once stood very straight, not even blinking as she kept her anxious eyes on Zaida.

nɪneɪiv blɪŋkt. noʊ! ðeɪ kəd nɑt də ðɪs tə hɝ! nɑɾ əɡɛn! "aɪ æm tɛlɪŋ ju," ʃi sɛd, mʌtʃ mɔɹ kɑmli ðən ʃi fɛlt, "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ weɪ fəɹ mi tə bɹeɪk ðə ʃild. tɑlɑn ɪz tu stʃɹɔŋ."

Nynaeve blinked. No! They could not do this to her! Not again! "I am telling you," she said, much more calmly than she felt, "there is no way for me to break the shield. Talaan is too strong."

"tu," zeɪɾə sɛd, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts ən stɛɹɪŋ ət nɪneɪiv əz ðoʊ ʃi ɹɪli kəd si ðə wivz.

"Two," Zaida said, folding her arms beneath her breasts and staring at Nynaeve as though she really could see the weaves.

nɪneɪiv pʊʃt tɛntəɾɪvli ət ðə ʃild. ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl pʊʃ əɾ ə stoʊn wɔl fəɹ ɔl ðə ɡɪv ɪn ɪt. "lɪsən tə mi, zɑ . . . ʌ . . . weɪvməstʃɹəs." ðəɹ wɑz sɝɾənli noʊ nid tə æntæɡənaɪz ðə wʊmən fɝðɝ. ðeɪ wɝ stɪklɝz fəɹ pɹɑpɝ fɔɹmz ʌv ədʒɹɛs. stɪklɝz fəɹ ɔl tu mɛni θɪŋz. "aɪm ʃʊɹ mɛɝɪlɪl əz toʊl jə sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ʃildɪŋ, ət list. ʃi swɔɹ ðə θɹi oʊðz. ʃi kæn laɪ." meɪbi ɛɡwin wɑz ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt ði oʊθ ɹɑd.

Nynaeve pushed tentatively at the shield. She might as well push at a stone wall for all the give in it. "Listen to me, Za . . . uh . . . Wavemistress." There was certainly no need to antagonize the woman further. They were sticklers for proper forms of address. Sticklers for all too many things. "I'm sure Merilille has told you something about shielding, at least. She swore the Three Oaths. She can't lie." Maybe Egwene was right about the Oath Rod.

zeɪɾəz ɡeɪz nɛvɝ weɪvɝd, hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd. "θɹi."

Zaida's gaze never wavered, her expression never changed. "Three."

"lɪsən tə mi," nɪneɪiv sɛd, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɔl ɪf ʃi saʊndəɾ ə bɪt dɛspɹɪt. meɪbi mɔɹ ðən dʒʌst ə bɪt. ʃi pʊʃt əɡɛns ðə ʃil hɑɹɾɝ, ðən əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd. ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv biɾ əɹ hɛɾ əɡɛnst ə boʊldɝ fəɹ ɔl ði ɪfɛkt ɪt hæd. ɪnstɪŋktɪvli, jusləsli, ʃi stʃɹʌɡəld ɪn ðə bɑnz ʌv ɛɹ hoʊldɪŋ hɝ, ðə fɹɪnʒ ən lus foʊlz ə hɝ ʃɔl dænsɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ. ʃi hæɾ əz mʌtʃ tʃæns ə bɹeɪkɪŋ fɹi ʌv ðoʊz bɑnz əz ʃi dɪɾ ə bɹeɪkɪŋ θɹu ðə ʃild, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp hɝsɛlf. nɑɾ əɡɛn! ʃi kəd nɑt feɪs ðæt! "ju hæv tə lɪsən!"

"Listen to me," Nynaeve said, not caring at all if she sounded a bit desperate. Maybe more than just a bit. She pushed against the shield harder, then as hard as she could. She might as well have beat her head against a boulder for all the effect it had. Instinctively, uselessly, she struggled in the bonds of Air holding her, the fringe and loose folds of her shawl dancing around her. She had as much chance of breaking free of those bonds as she did of breaking through the shield, but she could not stop herself. Not again! She could not face that! "You have to listen!"

"fɔɹ."

"Four."

noʊ! noʊ! nɑɾ əɡɛn! fɹæntəkəli ʃi skɹæbəld ət ðə ʃild. ɪt maɪt bi əz hɑɹɾ əz stoʊn, bʌɾ ɪt fɛl mɔɹ laɪk ɡlæs, slik ən slɪpɝi. ʃi kəd fil ðə sɔɹs bɪɑn ɪt, ɔlmoʊst si ðə sɔɹs, laɪk laɪɾ ən wɔɹmθ dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə kɔɹnɝ ə vɪʒən. ɪn dɛspɝeɪʃən, pæntɪŋ, ʃi fɛlt əɹ weɪ əkɹɔs ðə smuð sɝfəs. ɪt hæɾ ən ɛdʒ, laɪk ə sɝkəl ət wʌns smɔl ɪnʌf tə hoʊld ɪn əɹ hænz ən lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə kʌvɝ ðə wɝld, bʌt wən ʃi ətɛmptəd tə slɪp ɝaʊn ðəɾ ɛdʒ, ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf ɹaɪt bæk ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə slɪk hɑɹd sɝkəl əɡɛn. ðɪs wɑz jusləs. ʃi hæd lɝn ɔl ðɪs lɔŋ əɡoʊ, tʃɹaɪɾ ɪɾ ɔl lɔŋ əɡoʊ. hɝ hɑɹt paʊndɪd fɪt tə bɝst aʊɾ ə hɝ ɹɪbz. stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ veɪnli fəɹ kɑm, ʃi hɝidli fɛlt əɹ weɪ bæk tə ði ɛdʒ, fɛlt əlɔŋ ɪt wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊnd. ðəɹ wɑz wʌn pleɪs wɛɹ ɪt fɛlt . . . sɑftɝ. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ noʊɾəst ðət bɪfɔɹ. ðə sɑf pɔɪnt - ə slaɪt lʌmp? - sim noʊ dɪfɹən ɪn ɛni ʌðɝ weɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɛst, ən ɪt wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ sɑftɝ, bʌt ʃi hɝl hɝsɛlf əɾ ɪt. ən faʊn hɝsɛlf bæk ɪn ðə sɛntɝ. ɪn ə fɹɛnzi, ʃi flʌŋ ɔl ə hɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ ət ðə sɑf spɑt, əɡɛn ən əɡɛn, biɪŋ hɝl bæk tə ðə sɛntɝ, nɑɾ ivən pɔzɪŋ bɪfɔɹ lɔntʃɪŋ hɝsɛlf əɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn. əɡɛn. oʊ, laɪt! pliz! ʃi hæd tə, bɪfɔɹ . . . !

No! No! Not again! Frantically she scrabbled at the shield. It might be as hard as stone, but it felt more like glass, sleek and slippery. She could feel the Source beyond it, almost see the Source, like light and warmth just beyond the corner of vision. In desperation, panting, she felt her way across the smooth surface. It had an edge, like a circle at once small enough to hold in her hands and large enough to cover the world, but when she attempted to slip around that edge, she found herself right back in the center of the slick hard circle again. This was useless. She had learned all this long ago, tried it all long ago. Her heart pounded fit to burst out of her ribs. Struggling vainly for calm, she hurriedly felt her way back to the edge, felt along it without trying to go around. There was one place where it felt . . . softer. She had never noticed that before. The soft point - a slight lump? - seemed no different in any other way from the rest, and it was not much softer, but she hurled herself at it. And found herself back in the center. In a frenzy, she flung all of her strength at the soft spot, again and again, being hurled back to the center, not even pausing before launching herself at it again. Again. Oh, Light! Please! She had to, before . . . !

əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət zeɪɾə stɪl hæd nɑt sɛd faɪv. ɡʌlpɪŋ ɛɹ əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɹʌn tɛn maɪlz, ʃi stɛɹd. swɛt ɹoʊl daʊn əɹ feɪs, hɝ bæk. ɪt tʃɹɪkəl bɪtwin əɹ bɹɛsts, slɪd daʊn əɹ bɛli. hɝ lɛɡz wɑbəld. ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs lʊk stʃɹeɪɾ ɪndə hɝ aɪz, θɔtfəli tæpɪŋ fʊl lɪps wɪð ə slɪm fɪŋɡɝ. ðə ɡloʊ stɪl ɛnvɛləp ðə sɝkəl ə sɪks, kɹɪn stɪl cʊɾə bɪn ə skɔɹnfəli stoʊni stætʃu, bʌt zeɪɾə hæd nɑt sɛd faɪv.

Abruptly she realized that Zaida still had not said five. Gulping air as if she had run ten miles, she stared. Sweat rolled down her face, her back. It trickled between her breasts, slid down her belly. Her legs wobbled. The Wavemistress looked straight into her eyes, thoughtfully tapping full lips with a slim finger. The glow still enveloped the circle of six, Kurin still could have been a scornfully stony statue, but Zaida had not said five.

"dɪd ʃi tʃɹuli tʃɹaɪ əz hɑɹɾ əz ɪt simd, kɹɪn," ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs æsk faɪnəli, "ɔɹ wɑz ɔl ðət θɹæʃɪŋ əbaʊɾ ən wɪmpɝɪŋ dʒʌst ə ʃoʊ?" nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪd tə sʌmən ən ɪndɪɡnənt ɡlɛɹ. ʃi hæd nɑt wɪmpɝd! hæd ʃi? hɝ skaʊl, sətʃ əz ɪt wɑz, meɪd noʊ mɔɹ ɪmpɹɛʃən ɑn zeɪɾə ðən ɹeɪn ɑn ə ɹɑk.

"Did she truly try as hard as it seemed, Kurin," the Wavemistress asked finally, "or was all that thrashing about and whimpering just a show?" Nynaeve tried to summon an indignant glare. She had not whimpered! Had she? Her scowl, such as it was, made no more impression on Zaida than rain on a rock.

"wɪð ðət mʌtʃ ɛfɝt, weɪvməstʃɹəs," kɹɪn sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli, "ʃi cʊɾə kæɹiɾ ə ɹeɪkɝ ɑn əɹ bæk." ðə flæt blæk pɛbəlz ə hɝ aɪz stɪl hɛl kəntɛmpt, ðoʊ. oʊnli ðoʊz u lɪvd ət si ɡɑɾ ɛni ɹɪspɛk fɹəm hɝ.

"With that much effort, Wavemistress," Kurin said reluctantly, "she could have carried a raker on her back." The flat black pebbles of her eyes still held contempt, though. Only those who lived at sea got any respect from her.

"ɹilis hɝ, tɑlɑn," zeɪɾə kəmændəd, ən ʃild ən bɑnz vænɪʃt əz ʃi tɝn əweɪ, stɑɹɾɪŋ bæk təwɔɹd ðə tʃɛɹz wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ ɡlæns ət nɪneɪiv. "wɪndfɪndɝz, əl əv wɝdz wɪð jə æftɝ ʃi ɡoʊz. əl si jə ət ðə seɪm aʊɝ təmɑɹoʊ, nɪneɪiv sədaɪ."

"Release her, Talaan," Zaida commanded, and shield and bonds vanished as she turned away, starting back toward the chairs without another glance at Nynaeve. "Windfinders, I will have words with you after she goes. I will see you at the same hour tomorrow, Nynaeve Sedai."

smuðɪŋ əɹ ɹʌmpəl skɝts ən ɪɹɪɾəbli ʃeɪkɪŋ aʊɾ əɹ ʃɔl əɡɛn, nɪneɪiv ətɛmptəd tə ɹiɡɑðɝ ə lɪɾəl dɪɡnəɾi. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi, swɛt-slɪkt ən tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. ʃi sɝɾənli hæd nɑt wɪmpɝd! ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lʊk ət ðə wʊmən u hæd ʃildɪd hɝ. twaɪs! stændɪŋ ðəɹ mik əz bʌɾɝ, wɪð əɹ aɪz fɪkst ɑn ðə kɑɹpət. hɑ! nɪneɪiv dʒɝkt əɹ ʃɔl ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. "sɝaɪðə sədaɪ wɪl teɪk əɹ tɝn təmɑɹoʊ, weɪvməstʃɹəs." ət list əɹ vɔɪs wɑz stɛɾi. "aɪ wɪl bi bɪzi əntɪl - "

Smoothing her rumpled skirts and irritably shaking out her shawl again, Nynaeve attempted to regather a little dignity. It was not easy, sweat-slicked and trembling. She certainly had not whimpered! She tried not to look at the woman who had shielded her. Twice! Standing there meek as butter, with her eyes fixed on the carpet. Ha! Nynaeve jerked her shawl around her shoulders. "Sareitha Sedai will take her turn tomorrow, Wavemistress." At least her voice was steady. "I will be busy until - "

"jɔɹ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃən ɪz mɔɹ ɛɾəfaɪɪŋ ðən ðəɾ ə ði ʌðɝz," zeɪɾə sɛd, stɪl nɑt bɑðɝɪŋ tə lʊk ət hɝ. "æt ðə seɪm aʊɝ, əɹ əl sɛn jəɹ pjupəlz tə bɹɪŋ ju. jə meɪ liv naʊ." ən ðət hæd ðə saʊn ə jəl liv naʊ.

"Your instruction is more edifying than that of the others," Zaida said, still not bothering to look at her. "At the same hour, or I will send your pupils to bring you. You may leave now." And that had the sound of you will leave now.

wɪð ən ɛfɝt, nɪneɪiv swɑloʊɾ əɹ ɑɹɡjəməns. ðeɪ hæɾ ə bɪɾɝ teɪst. mɔɹ ɛɾəfaɪɪŋ? wʌd ðət min? ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi ɹɪli wɑntəd tə noʊ.

With an effort, Nynaeve swallowed her arguments. They had a bitter taste. More edifying? What did that mean? She did not think she really wanted to know.

əntɪl ʃi æktʃəli  lɛf ðə ɹum, ʃi wɑz stɪl ðə titʃɝ - ðə si foʊk wɝ ɹɪdʒəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ ɹulz; nɪneɪiv səpoʊz ðət læks ɹulz ɑn ʃɪps kəd lid tə tʃɹʌbəl, bʌt ʃi wɪʃt ðeɪ wəd ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɑn ə ʃɪp - ʃi wɑz stɪl ðə titʃɝ, ən ðət mɛnt ʃi kəd nɑt sɪmpli stɔk aʊt, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ʃi wɑntəd tə. wɝs, ðɛɹ ɹulz wɝ kwaɪt spəsɪfɪk əbaʊt titʃɝz fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə ʃɔɹbaʊnd. ʃi kəd sɪmpli hæv ɹəfjuz tə koʊɑpɝeɪt, ʃi səpoʊzd, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi vaɪəleɪɾɪd ðɛɹ bɑɹɡən baɪ ə hɛɹ, ðiz wɪmən wəd spɹɛɾ ɪt fɹəm tiɹ tə ðə laɪt nu wɛɹ! ðə hoʊl wɝld wəd noʊ ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɹoʊkən ðɛɹ wɝd. wʌt ðət wəd də tə ɛɛs sədaɪ stændɪŋ dɪd nɑt bɛɹ θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz! ɛɡwin wɑz ɹaɪt, ən bɝn əɹ fəɹ ɪt!

Until she actually left the room, she was still the teacher - the Sea Folk were rigid in their rules; Nynaeve supposed that lax rules on ships could lead to trouble, but she wished they would realize they were not on a ship - she was still the teacher, and that meant she could not simply stalk out, however much she wanted to. Worse, their rules were quite specific about teachers from among the shorebound. She could simply have refused to cooperate, she supposed, but if she violated their bargain by a hair, these women would spread it from Tear to the Light knew where! The whole world would know that Aes Sedai had broken their word. What that would do to Aes Sedai standing did not bear thinking about. Blood and bloody ashes! Egwene was right, and burn her for it!

"θæŋk ju, weɪvməstʃɹəs, fəɹ əlaʊɪŋ mi tə ɪnstʃɹʌk ju," ʃi sɛd, boʊɪŋ ən tʌtʃɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz tə fɔɹhɛd, lɪps ən hɑɹt. nɑɾ ə vɛɹi dip baʊ, bʌɾ ə kwɪk bɑb wɑz ɔl ðeɪ wɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ tədeɪ. wɛl, tu. ðə wɪndfɪndɝz hæd tə hæv wʌn. "θæŋk ju, wɪndfɪndɝz, fəɹ əlaʊɪŋ mi tə ɪnstʃɹʌk ju." ðə sɪstɝz u faɪnəli wɛn tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ wəɾ ɪksploʊd wən ðeɪ lɝn ðət ðɛɹ pjupəlz kəd tɛl əm wʌt tə titʃ ən wɛn, ən ivən ɔɹɾɝ wʌt ðeɪ dɪd wən nɑt titʃɪŋ. ɑn ə si foʊk vɛsəl, ə lænd-dwɛlɪŋ titʃɝ aʊtʃɹæŋk ðə kɑmən dɛkhənz, bʌɾ oʊnli dʒʌst. ən ðə sɪstɝz wəd nɑɾ ivən ɡɛt ðə fæt pɝsɪz ʌv ɡoʊl juz tə lʊɹ ʌðɝ titʃɝz ɑn bɔɹd.

"Thank you, Wavemistress, for allowing me to instruct you," she said, bowing and touching fingers to forehead, lips and heart. Not a very deep bow, but a quick bob was all they were getting today. Well, two. The Windfinders had to have one. "Thank you, Windfinders, for allowing me to instruct you." The sisters who finally went to the Atha'an Miere would explode when they learned that their pupils could tell them what to teach and when, and even order what they did when not teaching. On a Sea Folk vessel, a land-dwelling teacher outranked the common deckhands, but only just. And the sisters would not even get the fat purses of gold used to lure other teachers on board.

zeɪɾə ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ɹiæktəd vɛɹi mʌtʃ əz ɪf ðə loʊəs dɛkhæn hæɾ ənaʊnst əɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ. ðəɾ ɪz, ðeɪ stʊɾ ɪn ə saɪlən klʌstɝ, pleɪnli weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əɹ tə ɡoʊ, ən nɑt vɛɹi peɪʃən əbaʊɾ ɪt. oʊnli ɹeɪnɪn feɪvɝɾ əɹ wɪð əz mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns. ən ɪmpeɪʃənt ɡlæns. ʃi wɑz ə wɪndfɪndɝ, æftɝ ɔl wɑz sɛɾ ən dʌn. tɑlɑn stɪl stʊd wɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn lɛft, ə mik fɪɡjɝ ɡeɪzɪŋ ət ðə kɑɹpəɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ bɛɹ fit.

Zaida and the Windfinders reacted very much as if the lowest deckhand had announced her departure. That is, they stood in a silent cluster, plainly waiting for her to go, and not very patient about it. Only Rainyn favored her with as much as a glance. An impatient glance. She was a Windfinder, after all was said and done. Talaan still stood where she had been left, a meek figure gazing at the carpet in front of her bare feet.

hɛd haɪ ən bæk stʃɹeɪt, nɪneɪiv lɛf ðə ɹum wɪð ɛvɹi ʃɹɛɾ ə dɪɡnəɾi ʃi kəd ɹæp ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf. swɛɾi, ɹʌmpəld ʃɹɛdz. ɪn ðə hɔl, ʃi siz ðə dɔɹ ɪn boʊθ hænz ən slæmd ɪɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd. ðə ɡɹeɪt, ɛkoʊɪŋ kɹæʃ wɑz vɛɹi sæɾɪsfaɪɪŋ. ʃi kəɾ ɔlweɪz seɪ ɪt hæd slɪpt aʊɾ ə hɝ hænz, ɪf ɛniwʌn kəmpleɪnd. ɪt ɹɪli hæd, wʌns ʃi ɡɑɾ ə ɡʊd swɪŋ ɡoʊɪŋ.

Head high and back straight, Nynaeve left the room with every shred of dignity she could wrap around herself. Sweaty, rumpled shreds. In the hall, she seized the door in both hands and slammed it as hard as she could. The great, echoing crash was very satisfying. She could always say it had slipped out of her hands, if anyone complained. It really had, once she got a good swing going.

tɝnɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɔɹ, ʃi dʌstɪɾ əɹ hænz wɪð sæɾəsfækʃən. ən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əɾ u wɑz weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ fəɹ hɝ.

Turning from the door, she dusted her hands with satisfaction. And gave a start at who was waiting in the corridor for her.

ɪn ə sɪmpəl dɑɹk blu dʒɹɛs pɹəvaɪɾəd baɪ wʌn ə ðə kɪnswɪmən, əliviə dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ ɔl ənjuʒəwəl ət fɝst ɡlæns, ə wʊmən ə lɪɾəl tɔlɝ ðən nɪneɪiv, wɪð faɪn laɪnz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ blu aɪz ən θɹɛdz ʌv waɪɾ ɪn əɹ ɡoʊldən jɛloʊ hɛɹ. ðoʊz blu aɪz kɹækəld wɪð ɪntɛnsəɾi, ðoʊ, laɪk ði aɪz ʌv ə hɔk foʊkəst ɑn pɹeɪ.

In a simple dark blue dress provided by one of the Kinswomen, Alivia did not look at all unusual at first glance, a woman a little taller than Nynaeve, with fine lines at the corners of her blue eyes and threads of white in her golden yellow hair. Those blue eyes crackled with intensity, though, like the eyes of a hawk focused on prey.

"mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli sɛn mi tə tɛl jə ʃid laɪk tə si jə ət dɪnɝ tənaɪt," ðə blu-aɪd hɔk sɛɾ ɪn ə sloʊ sintʃæn dʒɹɔl. "mɪstʃɹəs kɛɹɪstoʊvən, mɪstʃɹəs ɑɹmən, ən mɪstʃɹəs wɑɹd wɪl bi ðɛɹ."

"Mistress Corly sent me to tell you she'd like to see you at dinner tonight," the blue-eyed hawk said in a slow Seanchan drawl. "Mistress Karistovan, Mistress Arman, and Mistress Juarde will be there."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ əloʊn?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd bi laɪk moʊst ʌðɝ sɪstɝz, əwɛɹ ʌv ənʌðɝ wʊmənz stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɝ ɹɪli θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt, bʌt ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ʃi hæd nɑt hæd taɪm tə lɝn. meɪbi səm ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən tɑpt əliviə, bʌt ʃʊɹli noʊ wʌn ɛls. ən ʃi wɑz sintʃæn. nɪneɪiv wɪʃt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmwʌn ɛls ðəɹ bɪsaɪdz ðə tu ʌv ðɛm. ivən læn, ən ʃi hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd ɪm tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ lɛsənz wɪð ðə si foʊk. ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən i bɪlivd əɹ stɔɹi əbaʊt slɪpɪŋ ɑn ðə stɛɹz ði ʌðɝ deɪ. "ju ɑɹən səpoʊz tə ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ wɪθaʊɾ ən ɛskɔɹt!"

"What are you doing here alone?" Nynaeve demanded. She wished she could be like most other sisters, aware of another woman's strength without ever really thinking about it, but that was something else she had not had time to learn. Maybe some of the Forsaken topped Alivia, but surely no one else. And she was Seanchan. Nynaeve wished there was someone else there besides the two of them. Even Lan, and she had ordered him to stay away from her lessons with the Sea Folk. She was not certain he believed her story about slipping on the stairs the other day. "You aren't supposed to go anywhere without an escort!"

əliviə ʃɹʌɡd, ə slaɪt muvmən ʌv wʌn ʃoʊldɝ. ə fju deɪz əɡoʊ, ʃi hæd bɪn ə bʌndəl ə sɪmpɝz ðət meɪd tɑlɑn lʊk boʊld. ʃi dɪd nɑt sɪmpɝ fəɹ ɛnibəɾi, naʊ. "ðɛɹ wɑzn ɛniwʌn fɹi, soʊ aɪ slɪpt aʊt baɪ maɪsɛlf. ɛniweɪ, ɪf jə ɔlweɪz ɡɑɹd mi, jəl nɛvɝ kʌm tə tʃɹʌs mi, ən əl nɛvɝ ɡɛt tə kɪl sʌldəm." sʌmhaʊ ðət saʊndəɾ ivən mɔɹ tʃɪlɪŋ, dɪlɪvɝɾ ɪn sətʃ ə kæʒəwəl toʊn. "ju ɔt tə bi lɝnɪŋ fɹəm mi. ðoʊz æʃəmən seɪ ðəɹ wɛpənz, ən ðeɪ ɑɹən bæd, aɪ noʊ fəɹ ə fækt, bʌɾ aɪm bɛɾɝ."

Alivia shrugged, a slight movement of one shoulder. A few days ago, she had been a bundle of simpers that made Talaan look bold. She did not simper for anybody, now. "There wasn't anyone free, so I slipped out by myself. Anyway, if you always guard me, you'll never come to trust me, and I'll never get to kill sul'dam." Somehow that sounded even more chilling, delivered in such a casual tone. "You ought to be learning from me. Those Asha'man say they're weapons, and they aren't bad, I know for a fact, but I'm better."

"ðæts əz meɪ bi," nɪneɪiv ɹɪplaɪd ʃɑɹpli, ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl. "æn meɪbi wi noʊ mɔɹ ðən jə θɪŋk wi du." ʃi wəd nɑt maɪn dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ə fju ʌv ðə wivz ʃi hæd lɝn fɹəm mɑɡiɾin fəɹ ðɪs wʊmən. ɪnkluɾɪŋ ə fju ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl əɡɹid wɝ tu næsti tə də tə ɛniwʌn. ɪksɛpt . . . ʃi wɑz fɛɹli sɝɾən ði ʌðɝ wʊmən kəɾ oʊvɝpaʊɝ əɹ izəli, wʌtɛvɝ ʃi dɪd. kipɪŋ əɹ fit fɹəm ʃɪftɪŋ ʌndɝ ðəɾ ɪntɛns stɛɹ wɑz nɑɾ izi. "əntɪl - ənlɛs! - wi dɪsaɪd dɪfɹənli, jə woʊn lemi si jə wɪθaʊt tu əɹ θɹi kɪnswɪmən əɡɛn, ɪf jə noʊ wʌts ɡʊd fəɹ ju."

"That's as may be," Nynaeve replied sharply, shifting her shawl. "And maybe we know more than you think we do." She would not mind demonstrating a few of the weaves she had learned from Moghedien for this woman. Including a few they had all agreed were too nasty to do to anyone. Except . . . She was fairly certain the other woman could overpower her easily, whatever she did. Keeping her feet from shifting under that intense stare was not easy. "Until - unless! - we decide differently, you won't let me see you without two or three Kinswomen again, if you know what's good for you."

"ɪf jə seɪ soʊ," əliviə sɛd, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl əbæʃt. "wʌt mɛsədʒ dʒju wɑn mi tə teɪk bæk tə mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli?"

"If you say so," Alivia said, not at all abashed. "What message do you want me to take back to Mistress Corly?"

"tɛl mɪstʃɹəs kɔɹli aɪ hæv tə dɪklaɪn əɹ kaɪn ɪnvɪteɪʃən. ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ aɪ toʊl ju!"

"Tell Mistress Corly I have to decline her kind invitation. And remember what I told you!"

"aɪl tɛl hɝ," ðə sintʃæn wʊmən dʒɹɔld, kəmplitli ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ði ædmənɪʃən. "bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ɪɡzækli ən ɪnvɪteɪʃən. ən aʊɝ æftɝ fɝs dɑɹk, ʃi sɛd. jə maɪt wɑnə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt." wɪð ə slaɪt, noʊɪŋ smaɪl, ʃi wɔkt əweɪ, nɑt hɝiɪŋ əɾ ɔl tə ɹɪtɝn wɛɹ ʃi bɪlɔŋd.

"I'll tell her," the Seanchan woman drawled, completely ignoring the admonition. "But I don't think it was exactly an invitation. An hour after first dark, she said. You might want to remember that." With a slight, knowing smile, she walked away, not hurrying at all to return where she belonged.

nɪneɪiv ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ wʊmənz bæk, ən nɑt kəz ə hɝ læk ʌv ə kɝtsi. wɛl, nɑɾ oʊnli ðæt. ə pɪɾi ʃi hæd nɑt hʌŋ ɑn tə ə fju ʌv əɹ sɪmpɝz, fəɹ sɪstɝz, ɛniweɪ. wɪð ə ɡlæns ət ðə dɔɹ ðət hɪd ði æθɑn maɪɹ, nɪneɪiv kənsɪɾɝd fɑloʊɪŋ əliviə tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi dɪɾ əz ʃi hæd bɪn toʊld. ɪnstɛd, ʃi wɛn ɪn ði ɑpəzət dɝɛkʃən. ʃi dɪd nɑt hɝi. ɪt wəd bi ənplɛzən ɪf ðə si foʊk keɪm aʊɾ ən dɪsaɪɾɪd ʃi hæd bɪn ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ, bʌt ʃi dɛfənətli dɪd nɑt hɝi. ʃi mɪɹli wɑntəd tə wɔk bɹɪskli. ðət wɑz ɔl.

Nynaeve glared at the retreating woman's back, and not because of her lack of a curtsy. Well, not only that. A pity she had not hung on to a few of her simpers, for sisters, anyway. With a glance at the door that hid the Atha'an Miere, Nynaeve considered following Alivia to make sure she did as she had been told. Instead, she went in the opposite direction. She did not hurry. It would be unpleasant if the Sea Folk came out and decided she had been eavesdropping, but she definitely did not hurry. She merely wanted to walk briskly. That was all.

ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɝ hɑɹdli ði oʊnli wʌnz ɪn ðə pæləs ʃi wɑntəd tə əvɔɪd. nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ən ɪnvɪteɪʃən, wɑz ɪt? sumeɪkoʊ kɛɹɪstoʊvən, tʃɪlɛɹz ɑɹmən ən feɪmɛl wɑɹd hæd bɪn ɪn ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl wɪð ɹin kɔɹli. dɪnɝ wɑz oʊnli ən ɪkskjus. ðeɪ wəd wɑnə tɔk tə hɝ əbaʊt ðə wɪndfɪndɝz. mɔɹ spəsɪfɪkli, əbaʊt ðə ɹileɪʃənʃɪp bɪtwin ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə pæləs ən ðə si foʊk "waɪldɝz." ðeɪ wəd nɑt kwaɪɾ ʌpbɹeɪɾ əɹ fəɹ feɪlɪŋ tə meɪnteɪn ðə dɪɡnəɾi ʌv ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðeɪ hæd nɑt ɡɔn ðət fɑɹ; nɑt jɛt, ðoʊ ðeɪ sim tə bi kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ. bʌt ðə hoʊl dɪnɝ wəd bi fʊl ə pɔɪntəd kwɛstʃənz ən ʃɑɹpɝ kɑmɛns. nʌθɪŋ ʃi kəd sɪmpli ɔɹɾɝ əm tə stɑp. ʃi daʊɾɪd ðeɪ wəd fəɹ lɛs ðən ə kəmænd. ən ðeɪ wɝ kwaɪt keɪpəbəl ə kʌmɪŋ tə faɪn əɹ ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ tə ðɛm. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə titʃ əm tə ʃoʊ bækboʊn hæd bɪn ə tɛɹəbəl mɪsteɪk. ət list ʃi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn u hæd tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɪt, ðoʊ ʃi θɔɾ ɪleɪn hæd mænədʒ tə əvɔɪd ðə wɝst. oʊ, haʊ ʃi lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə siɪŋ əm bæk ɪn nɑvəs waɪɾ əɹ æksɛptɪdz dʒɹɛsəz. haʊ ʃi lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə siɪŋ ðə læst ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ!

The Atha'an Miere were hardly the only ones in the Palace she wanted to avoid. Not exactly an invitation, was it? Sumeko Karistovan, Chilares Arman and Famelle Juarde had been in the Knitting Circle with Reanne Corly. Dinner was only an excuse. They would want to talk to her about the Windfinders. More specifically, about the relationship between the Aes Sedai in the Palace and the Sea Folk "wilders." They would not quite upbraid her for failing to maintain the dignity of the White Tower. They had not gone that far; not yet, though they seemed to be coming closer. But the whole dinner would be full of pointed questions and sharper comments. Nothing she could simply order them to stop. She doubted they would for less than a command. And they were quite capable of coming to find her if she did not go to them. Trying to teach them to show backbone had been a terrible mistake. At least she was not the only one who had to put up with it, though she thought Elayne had managed to avoid the worst. Oh, how she looked forward to seeing them back in novice white or Accepted's dresses. How she looked forward to seeing the last of the Atha'an Miere!

"nɪneɪiv!" keɪm ə stʃɹeɪnʒli mjuɾɪd kɹaɪ bɪhaɪn hɝ. ɪn si foʊk æksɛns. "nɪneɪiv!"

"Nynaeve!" came a strangely muted cry behind her. In Sea Folk accents. "Nynaeve!"

fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ hæn əweɪ fɹəm əɹ bɹeɪd, nɪneɪiv spʌn ɑn əɹ hil, ɹɛɾi tə dɪlɪvɝ ə tʌŋ-læʃɪŋ. ʃi wɑz nɑt titʃɪŋ naʊ, ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ ɑn ə ʃɪp, ən ðeɪ kəd blʌɾi wɛl liv əɹ əloʊn!

Forcing her hand away from her braid, Nynaeve spun on her heel, ready to deliver a tongue-lashing. She was not teaching now, they were not on a ship, and they could bloody well leave her alone!

tɑlɑn skɪɾəd tə ə hɔlt ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, bɛɹ fit slaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə dɑɹk ɹɛd flɔɹ taɪlz. pæntɪŋ, ðə jʌŋ wʊmən swɪvəld əɹ hɛɾ əz ɪf əfɹeɪd sʌmwʌn wəd snik ʌp ɑn hɝ. ʃi flɪntʃt ɛvɹi taɪm ə lɪvɹid sɝvən muv dʒʌst ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ saɪt, ən oʊnli bɹiðd əɡɛn wən ʃi sɔ ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə sɝvənt. "kæn aɪ ɡoʊ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ?" ʃi æsk bɹɛθləsli, ɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ hænz ən dænsɪŋ fɹəm fʊt tə fʊt. "aɪ wɪl nɛvɝ bi tʃoʊzən. ə sækɹəfaɪs, ðeɪ kɔl ɪt, livɪŋ ðə si fɝɛvɝ, bʌɾ aɪ dʒɹim ə bɪkʌmɪŋ ə nɑvəs. əl mɪs maɪ mʌðɝ tɛɹəbli, bʌt . . . pliz. jə mʌs teɪk mi tə ðə taʊɝ. jə mʌst!"

Talaan skidded to a halt in front of her, bare feet sliding on the dark red floor tiles. Panting, the young woman swiveled her head as if afraid someone would sneak up on her. She flinched every time a liveried servant moved just on the edge of her sight, and only breathed again when she saw it was just a servant. "Can I go to the White Tower?" she asked breathlessly, wringing her hands and dancing from foot to foot. "I will never be chosen. A sacrifice, they call it, leaving the sea forever, but I dream of becoming a novice. I will miss my mother terribly, but . . . Please. You must take me to the Tower. You must!"

nɪneɪiv blɪŋkt ət ði ɔnslɔt. mɛni wɪmən dʒɹimd ə bɪkʌmɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ hɝd wʌn seɪ ʃi dʒɹimd ə bɪkʌmɪŋ ə nɑvəs. bɪsaɪdz . . . ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɹəfjuz pæsədʒ tə ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn ɛni ʃɪp huz wɪndfɪndɝ kəd tʃænəl, bʌt tə kip sɪstɝz fɹəm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk dipɝ, ɛvɹi soʊ ɔfən ən əpɹɛntəs wɑz tʃoʊzən tə ɡoʊ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ɛɡwin sɛd ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli θɹi sɪstɝz fɹəm əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk ət pɹizɛnt, ɔl wik ɪn ðə paʊɝ. fəɹ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz ðət hæd bɪn ɪnʌf tə kənvɪns ðə taʊɝ ðət ði əbɪləɾi wɑz ɹɛɹ ən smɔl wɪð æθɑn maɪɹ wɪmən, nɑt wɝθ ɪnvɛstəɡeɪɾɪŋ. tɑlɑn wɑz ɹaɪt; noʊ wʌn əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ʃi wəɾ ɛvɝ bi əlaʊd tə ɡoʊ tə ðə taʊɝ, ivən naʊ ðət ðɛɹ sʌbtɝfjudʒ wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə ən ɛnd. ɪn fækt, ɪt wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ðə bɑɹɡən wɪð əm ðəɾ æθɑn maɪɹ sɪstɝz bi əlaʊd tə ɡɪv ʌp biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɹɪtɝn tə ðə ʃɪps. ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ wəd nɑt hæf haʊl əbaʊt ðæt!

Nynaeve blinked at the onslaught. Many women dreamed of becoming Aes Sedai, but she had never before heard one say she dreamed of becoming a novice. Besides . . . The Atha'an Miere refused passage to Aes Sedai on any ship whose Windfinder could channel, but to keep sisters from trying to look deeper, every so often an apprentice was chosen to go to the White Tower. Egwene said there were only three sisters from among the Sea Folk at present, all weak in the Power. For three thousand years that had been enough to convince the Tower that the ability was rare and small with Atha'an Miere women, not worth investigating. Talaan was right; no one as strong as she would ever be allowed to go to the Tower, even now that their subterfuge was coming to an end. In fact, it was part of the bargain with them that Atha'an Miere sisters be allowed to give up being Aes Sedai and return to the ships. The Hall of the Tower would not half howl about that!

"wɛl, ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪz vɛɹi hɑɹd, tɑlɑn," ʃi sɛd dʒɛnli, "æn jə mʌs bi ət lis fɪftin. bɪsaɪdz . . ." sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ðə jʌŋ wʊmən æd sɛd stʃɹʌk əɹ sʌɾənli. "ju wɪl mɪs jəɹ mʌðɝ?" ʃi sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ haʊ ɪt saʊndəd.

"Well, the training is very hard, Talaan," she said gently, "and you must be at least fifteen. Besides . . ." Something else the young woman ad said struck her suddenly. "You will miss your mother?" she said incredulously, not caring how it sounded.

"aɪ æm naɪntin!" tɑlɑn ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪndɪɡnənli. lʊkɪŋ ət ðət bɔɪɪʃ feɪs ən fɔɹm, nɪneɪiv wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi bɪlivd. "æn ə kɔɹs əl mɪs maɪ mʌðɝ. də aɪ lʊk ənnætʃɹəl? oʊ; aɪ si. jə də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. wəɹ vɛɹi əfɛkʃənəɾ ɪn pɹaɪvət, bʌt ʃi mʌst əvɔɪɾ ɛni saɪn ə feɪvɝ ɪn pʌblɪk. ðəɾ ɪz ə sɪɹiəs kɹaɪm, wɪð ʌs. ɪt kəɾ əv mʌðɝ stʃɹɪpt ə hɝ ɹæŋk, ən boʊθ ʌv əs hʌŋ ʌpsaɪd daʊn ɪn ðə ɹɪɡɪŋ tə bi flɑɡd."

"I am nineteen!" Talaan replied indignantly. Looking at that boyish face and form, Nynaeve was not sure she believed. "And of course I will miss my mother. Do I look unnatural? Oh; I see. You do not understand. We are very affectionate in private, but she must avoid any sign of favor in public. That is a serious crime, with us. It could have mother stripped of her rank, and both of us hung upside down in the rigging to be flogged."

nɪneɪiv ɡɹɪməst ət ðə mɛnʃən ʌv ʌpsaɪd daʊn. "aɪ sɝɾənli kən si wɛɹ jə wəd wɑnə əvɔɪd ðæt," ʃi sɛd. "ivən soʊ - "

Nynaeve grimaced at the mention of upside down. "I certainly can see where you would want to avoid that," she said. "Even so - "

"ɛvɹiwʌn tʃɹaɪz tə əvɔɪɾ ivən ə hɪn ə feɪvɝ, bʌɾ ɪts wɝs fəɹ mi, nɪneɪiv!" ɹɪli, ðə ɡɝl - wʊmən - jʌŋ wʊmən - wəɾ əv tə lɝn nɑt tə stɛp ɑn wʌɾ ə sɪstɝ wɑz seɪɪŋ ɪf ʃi dɪd bɪkʌm ə nɑvəs. nɑt ðət ʃi kʊd, ʌv kɔɹs. nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪɡeɪn ði ɪnɪʃəɾɪv, bʌt wɝdz pɔɹɾ aʊɾ ə tɑlɑn ɪn ə tɔɹənt. "maɪ ɡɹændmʌðɝ ɪz wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs ə klæn ɹoʊseɪn, maɪ ɡɹeɪt-ɡɹændmʌðɝ ɪz wɪndfɪndɝ tə klæn dɑkən, ən əɹ sɪstɝ tə klæn tɑkænə. maɪ fæmli ɪz ɑnɝd ðət faɪv ʌv əs əv ɹɪzən soʊ haɪ. ən ɛvɹiwʌn wɑtʃəz fəɹ saɪnz ðət ɡɛlɪn əbjuzɪz ɪts ɪnfluəns. ɹaɪtli soʊ, aɪ noʊ - feɪvɝ kænɑt bi əlaʊd - bʌt maɪ sɪstɝ wɑz kɛpt ən əpɹɛntəs faɪv jɪɹz lɔŋɡɝ ðən nɔɹməl, ən maɪ kʌzən sɪks! dʒʌst soʊ noʊ wʌn kən kleɪm ðeɪ wɝ feɪvɝd. wən aɪ kæs ðə stɑɹz ən ɡɪv əɹ pəzɪʃən kɝɛkli, aɪm pʌnɪʃt fəɹ biɪŋ sloʊ ivən wən aɪ hæv ði ænsɝ əz fæst əz wɪndfɪndɝ ɛvən! wən aɪ teɪs ðə si ən neɪm ðə koʊst wəɹ əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ, aɪm pʌnɪʃt kəz ðə teɪst aɪ neɪm ɪz nɑt kwaɪt wʌt wɪndfɪndɝ ɛvən teɪsts! aɪ ʃildɪd jə twaɪs, bʌt tənaɪɾ əl hæŋ baɪ maɪ æŋkəlz fəɹ nɑt duɪŋ soʊ sunɝ! aɪm pʌnɪʃt fəɹ flɔz ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪn ʌðɝz, fəɹ flɔz aɪ nɛvɝ meɪk, kəz aɪ maɪt! wɑz jəɹ nɑvəs tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɛni hɑɹɾɝ ðən ðæt, nɪneɪiv?"

"Everyone tries to avoid even a hint of favor, but it is worse for me, Nynaeve!" Really, the girl - woman - young woman - would have to learn not to step on what a sister was saying if she did become a novice. Not that she could, of course. Nynaeve tried to regain the initiative, but words poured out of Talaan in a torrent. "My grandmother is Windfinder to the Wavemistress of Clan Rossaine, my great-grandmother is Windfinder to Clan Dacan, and her sister to Clan Takana. My family is honored that five of us have risen so high. And everyone watches for signs that Gelyn abuses its influence. Rightly so, I know - favor cannot be allowed - but my sister was kept an apprentice five years longer than normal, and my cousin six! Just so no one can claim they were favored. When I cast the stars and give our position correctly, I am punished for being slow even when I have the answer as fast as Windfinder Ehvon! When I taste the sea and name the coast we are approaching, I am punished because the taste I name is not quite what Windfinder Ehvon tastes! I shielded you twice, but tonight I will hang by my ankles for not doing so sooner! I am punished for flaws ignored in others, for flaws I never make, because I might! Was your novice training any harder than that, Nynaeve?"

"maɪ nɑvəs tʃɹeɪnɪŋ," nɪneɪiv sɛd feɪnli. ʃi wɪʃt ðə wʊmən wəd nɑt kip bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp biɪŋ hʌŋ baɪ ði æŋkəlz. "jɛs. wɛl. jə ɹɪli doʊnt wɑnə hɪɹ əbaʊt ðæt." fɔɹ dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz ʌv wɪmən wɪð ði əbɪləɾi? laɪt! ivən dɔɾɝ fɑloʊɪŋ mʌðɝ wɑz ɹɛɹ ɪnʌf. ðə taʊɝ ɹɪli wəd wɑn tɑlɑn. ðət wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən, ðoʊ. "aɪ səpoʊz kɛɹ ən tɛbɹl ɹɪli lʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ, tu?" ʃi sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə sʌbʒɪkt.

"My novice training," Nynaeve said faintly. She wished the woman would not keep bringing up being hung by the ankles. "Yes. Well. You really don't want to hear about that." Four generations of women with the ability? Light! Even daughter following mother was rare enough. The Tower really would want Talaan. That was not going to happen, though. "I suppose Caire and Tebreille really love one another, too?" she said, trying to change the subject.

tɑlɑn snɪɹd. "maɪ æn ɪz slaɪ ən dəsitfəl. ʃi sɛləbɹeɪts ɛni hjumɪlieɪʃən ʃi kən kɑz maɪ mʌðɝ. bʌt maɪ mʌðɝ wɪl bɹɪŋ əɹ loʊ, əz ʃi dɪzɝvz. wʌn deɪ, tɛbɹl wɪl faɪn hɝsɛlf sɝvɪŋ ɑn ə sɔɹɝ, bɪniθ ə seɪlməstʃɹəs wɪð ən aɪɝn hæn ən sɔɹ tiθ!" ʃi ɡeɪv ə ɡɹɪm, sæɾəsfaɪd nɑɾ ət ðə θɔt. ən ðən dʒʌmpt, waɪd-aɪɾ əz ə fɔn, wən ə sɝvɪŋ mæn hɝid baɪ bɪhaɪn hɝ. ðət ɹɪkɔld əɹ tə hɝ pɝpəs. ʃi wɛn bæk tə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ɛvɹi weɪ ət wʌns əz ʃi spoʊk heɪstəli. "ju kænɑt spik aʊt dʊɹɪŋ ðə lɛsənz, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm wɪl du. ənaʊns ðəɾ aɪm tə ɡoʊ tə ðə taʊɝ, ən ðəl nɑt bi eɪbəl tə dɪnaɪ ju. jə ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ!"

Talaan sneered. "My aunt is sly and deceitful. She celebrates any humiliation she can cause my mother. But my mother will bring her low, as she deserves. One day, Tebreille will find herself serving on a soarer, beneath a Sailmistress with an iron hand and sore teeth!" She gave a grim, satisfied nod at the thought. And then jumped, wide-eyed as a fawn, when a serving man hurried by behind her. That recalled her to her purpose. She went back to trying to look every way at once as she spoke hastily. "You cannot speak out during the lessons, of course, but any other time will do. Announce that I am to go to the Tower, and they will not be able to deny you. You are Aes Sedai!"

nɪneɪiv ɡɑɡəld ət ðə ɡɝl. ən ðeɪ wʊɾə fɝɡɑɾən ɔl əbaʊɾ ɪt baɪ ðə nɛks taɪm ʃi ɡeɪv ə lɛsən? ðə ful hæd sin wʌt ðeɪ dɪd tə hɝ! "aɪ kən si haʊ mʌtʃ jə wɑnə ɡoʊ, tɑlɑn," ʃi sɛd, "bʌt - "

Nynaeve goggled at the girl. And they would have forgotten all about it by the next time she gave a lesson? The fool had seen what they did to her! "I can see how much you want to go, Talaan," she said, "but - "

"θæŋk ju," tɑlɑn bɹoʊk ɪn, meɪkɪŋ ə kwɪk baʊ. "θæŋk ju!" ən ʃi dɑɹɾɪd bæk ðə weɪ ʃi hæd kʌm əɾ ə dɛd ɹʌn.

"Thank you," Talaan broke in, making a quick bow. "Thank you!" And she darted back the way she had come at a dead run.

"weɪt!" nɪneɪiv ʃaʊɾəd, teɪkɪŋ ə fju stɛps æftɝ hɝ. "kʌm bæk! aɪ dɪdn pɹɑməs ɛniθɪŋ!"

"Wait!" Nynaeve shouted, taking a few steps after her. "Come back! I didn't promise anything!"

sɝvəns tɝn tə stɛɹ ət hɝ, ən kəntɪnjud tə ʃut wʌndɝɪŋ ɡlænsɪz ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən ivən æftɝ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðɛɹ tæsks. ʃi wʊɾə ɹʌn æftɝ ði ɪɾiət ɪksɛp ðət ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd ʃi wəɾ əv tə fɑloʊ hɝ stʃɹeɪt tə zeɪɾə ən ði ʌðɝz. ən ðə ful wəd pɹɑbli ɡʌʃ aʊt ðət ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə taʊɝ, ðət nɪneɪiv hæd pɹɑməst. laɪt, ʃi wəd pɹɑbli tɛl əm ɛniweɪ!

Servants turned to stare at her, and continued to shoot wondering glances in her direction even after returning to their tasks. She would have run after the idiot except that she was afraid she would have to follow her straight to Zaida and the others. And the fool would probably gush out that she was going to the Tower, that Nynaeve had promised. Light, she would probably tell them anyway!

"ju lʊk əz ɪf jə dʒʌst swɑloʊɾ ə ɹɑɾən plʌm," læn sɛd, əpɪɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ saɪd, tɔl ən stɑɹkli hænsəm ɪn ɪz wɛl-fɪɾɪŋ ɡɹin koʊt. ʃi wʌndɝd haʊ lɔŋ i hæd bɪn ðɛɹ. ɪt dɪd nɑt sim pɑsəbəl ðəɾ ə mæn soʊ lɑɹdʒ, soʊ kəmændɪŋ ɪn ɪz pɹɛzəns, kəd stæn stɪl ɪnʌf ðət jə feɪl tə noʊɾəs hɪm, ivən wɪθaʊɾ ə wɔɹɾɝz kloʊk.

"You look as if you just swallowed a rotten plum," Lan said, appearing at her side, tall and starkly handsome in his well-fitting green coat. She wondered how long he had been there. It did not seem possible that a man so large, so commanding in his presence, could stand still enough that you failed to notice him, even without a Warder's cloak.

"ə bæskətfəl ə ðɛm," ʃi mɝmɝd, pɹɛsɪŋ əɹ feɪs əɡɛnst əɹ hʌzbənz bɹɔd tʃɛst. ɪt fɛl vɛɹi ɡʊd tə lin əɡɛnst ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ, dʒʌs fəɹ ə moʊmənt, waɪl i stʃɹoʊkt əɹ hɛɹ sɔfli. ivən ɪf ʃi dɪɾ əv tə ʃɪft ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt aʊɾ ə hɝ ɹɪbz. ən ɛniwʌn u wɑntəd tə stɛɹ ət sətʃ ə pʌblɪk dɪspleɪ ʌv əfɛkʃən kəd ɡoʊ hæŋ ðɛmsɛlvz. ʃi kəd si dɪzæstɝ paɪlɪŋ ʌp ɑn dɪzæstɝ. ivən ɪf ʃi toʊl zeɪɾə ən ði ʌðɝz ʃi hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə teɪkɪŋ tɑlɑn ɛniwɛɹ, ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə skɪn hɝ. ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ haɪɾɪŋ ɪt fɹəm læn ðɪs taɪm. ɪf ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə ðə fɝst. ɹin ən ði ʌðɝz wəd lɝn ʌv ɪt. ən æləz! ðeɪ wəd stɑɹt tʃɹiɾɪŋ əɹ ðə weɪ ðeɪ dɪd mɛɝɪlɪl, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ əɹ ɔɹɾɝz, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ əbaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ ɹɪspɛkt əz ðə wɪndfɪndɝz dɪd tɑlɑn. sʌmhaʊ ʃi wəd bi sæɾəld wɪð ɡɑɹɾɪŋ əliviə, ən səm kətæstʃɹəfi wəd kʌm ʌv ɪt, səm ʌɾɝ hjumɪlieɪʃən. ðət wɑz ɔl ʃi sim fɪt tə du, leɪtli; faɪn ənʌðɝ weɪ tə bi hjumɪlieɪɾɪd. ən ɛvɹi fɔɹθ deɪ, ʃi wəd stɪl əv tə feɪs zeɪɾə ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz.

"A basketful of them," she murmured, pressing her face against her husband's broad chest. It felt very good to lean against his strength, just for a moment, while he stroked her hair softly. Even if she did have to shift his sword hilt out of her ribs. And anyone who wanted to stare at such a public display of affection could go hang themselves. She could see disaster piling up on disaster. Even if she told Zaida and the others she had no intention of taking Talaan anywhere, they were going to skin her. There would be no hiding it from Lan this time. If she had managed to the first. Reanne and the others would learn of it. And Alise! They would start treating her the way they did Merilille, ignoring her orders, giving her about as much respect as the Windfinders did Talaan. Somehow she would be saddled with guarding Alivia, and some catastrophe would come of it, some utter humiliation. That was all she seemed fit to do, lately; find another way to be humiliated. And every fourth day, she would still have to face Zaida and the Windfinders.

"du jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ jə kɛp mi ɪn əɹ ɹumz jɛstɝdeɪ mɔɹnɪŋ?" ʃi mɝmɝd, lʊkɪŋ ʌp ɪn taɪm tə kætʃ ə ɡɹɪn ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ kənsɝn ɑn ɪz feɪs. ʌv kɔɹs i ɹɪmɛmbɝd. hɝ feɪs ɡɹu hɑt. tɔkɪŋ tə fɹɛnz wɑz wʌn θɪŋ, bʌt biɪŋ fɔɹwɝd wɪð əɹ oʊn hʌzbən stɪl sim kwaɪɾ ənʌðɝ. "wɛl, aɪ wɑn jə tə teɪk mi bæk ðəɹ ɹaɪt naʊ ən kip mi fɹəm pʊɾɪŋ ɑn ɛni kloʊðz fəɹ əbaʊɾ ə jɪɹ!" ʃi hæd bɪn kwaɪt fjʊɹiəs əbaʊt ðæt, ət fɝst. bʌɾ i hæd weɪz tə meɪk əɹ fɝɡɛt tə bi fjʊɹiəs.

"Do you remember how you kept me in our rooms yesterday morning?" she murmured, looking up in time to catch a grin replacing concern on his face. Of course he remembered. Her face grew hot. Talking to friends was one thing, but being forward with her own husband still seemed quite another. "Well, I want you to take me back there right now and keep me from putting on any clothes for about a year!" She had been quite furious about that, at first. But he had ways to make her forget to be furious.

hi θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən læft, ə ɡɹeɪt bumɪŋ saʊnd, ən æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi ɛkoʊd hɪm. ʃi wɑntəd tə wip, ðoʊ. ʃi hæd nɑt ɹɪli bɪn dʒoʊkɪŋ.

He threw back his head and laughed, a great booming sound, and after a moment, she echoed him. She wanted to weep, though. She had not really been joking.

hævɪŋ ə hʌzbən mɛn ðət ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə ʃɛɹ ə bɛd wɪð ənʌðɝ wʊmən, əɹ tu, ən ɪt ɡeɪn əɹ ə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. ɪt wɑz nɑt lɑɹdʒ, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɔlweɪz sim snʌɡ, wɪð ə ɡʊd faɪɝpleɪs ən ə smɔl teɪbəl wɪð fɔɹ tʃɛɹz. sɝɾənli əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi ən læn niɾəd. hɝ hoʊps fəɹ pɹaɪvəsi wɝ dæʃt əz sun əz ðeɪ ɛntɝd ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ðoʊ. ðə fɝs meɪd wɑz weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə flaʊɝd kɑɹpət, əz steɪtli əz ə kwin, əz nitli tɝn aʊɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd dʒʌs fɪnɪʃt dʒɹɛsɪŋ, ən nɑɾ əɾ ɔl plizd. ən ɪn wʌn kɔɹnɝ ə ðə ɹum wɑz ə ɹʌfli dʒɹɛst, lʌmpi fɛloʊ wɪð ə hɔɹəbəl wɔɹɾ ɑn ɪz noʊz ən ə skɹɪp dæŋɡəlɪŋ hɛvəli fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

Having a husband meant that she did not have to share a bed with another woman, or two, and it gained her a sitting room. It was not large, but it always seemed snug, with a good fireplace and a small table with four chairs. Certainly as much as she and Lan needed. Her hopes for privacy were dashed as soon as they entered the sitting room, though. The First Maid was waiting in the middle of the flowered carpet, as stately as a queen, as neatly turned out as if she had just finished dressing, and not at all pleased. And in one corner of the room was a roughly dressed, lumpy fellow with a horrible wart on his nose and a scrip dangling heavily from his shoulder.

"ðɪs mæn kleɪmz hiz sʌmθɪŋ jə wɑn ɝdʒənli," mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ sɛd wʌns ʃi hæd meɪd bɹif kɝɾəsiz. vɛɹi bɹif, ɪf pɹɑpɝ; ʃi dɪd nɑt weɪst əm ɑn ɛniwʌn ɪksɛpt ɪleɪn. ʃi saʊndəɾ ikwəli dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ ə nɪneɪiv ən ðə fɛloʊ wɪð ðə wɔɹt. "aɪ doʊn maɪn tɛlɪŋ ju, aɪ də nɑt laɪk ðə lʊks ə hɪm."

"This man claims he has something you want urgently," Mistress Harfor said once she had made brief courtesies. Very brief, if proper; she did not waste them on anyone except Elayne. She sounded equally disapproving of Nynaeve and the fellow with the wart. "I don't mind telling you, I do not like the looks of him."

taɪɝɾ əz nɪneɪiv wɑz, ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs wɑz ɔlmoʊs bɪɑn hɝ, bʌt ʃi mænədʒd ɪɾ ɪn ə flæʃ, spɝd baɪ θɔts ʌv əsæsənz ən ðə laɪt nu wʌt. læn mʌst əv kɑt səm tʃeɪnʒ ɪn əɹ feɪs, kəz i tʊk ə stɛp təwɔɹd ðə wɔɹɾi fɛloʊ; hi dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ ɪz sɔɹd, bʌt sʌɾənli hɪz hoʊl stæns simd əz ɪf ðə bleɪd wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi dʒɹɔn. haʊ hi səmtaɪmz mænədʒ tə ɹiɾ əɹ maɪnd wən ənʌðɝ hɛld ɪz bɑnd, ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ, bʌt ʃi wɑz plizd. ʃi hæd mænədʒ tə mætʃ tɑlɑn - ɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ, ət list! - bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd tʃænəl ɪnʌf ɹaɪt ðən tə nɑk oʊvɝ ə tʃɛɹ. "aɪ nɛvɝ," ʃi bɪɡæn.

Tired as Nynaeve was, embracing the Source was almost beyond her, but she managed it in a flash, spurred by thoughts of assassins and the Light knew what. Lan must have caught some change in her face, because he took a step toward the warty fellow; he did not touch his sword, but suddenly his whole stance seemed as if the blade were already drawn. How he sometimes managed to read her mind when another held his bond, she could not say, but she was pleased. She had managed to match Talaan - in strength, at least! - but she was not sure she could channel enough right then to knock over a chair. "I never," she began.

"pɑɹɾən, mɪstʃɹəs," ðə lʌmpi fɛloʊ mʌɾɝd hɝidli, tʌɡɪŋ ɪz ɡɹisi fɔɹlɑk. "mɪstʃɹəs θeɪn sɛd jə wɑntəd tə si mi ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. wɪmənz sɝkəl bɪznəs, ʃi sɛd. sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt sɛn bui."

"Pardon, Mistress," the lumpy fellow muttered hurriedly, tugging his greasy forelock. "Mistress Thane said you wanted to see me right away. Women's Circle business, she said. Something about Cenn Buie."

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ən æftɝ ə moʊmən ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə kloʊz əɹ maʊθ. "jɛs," ʃi sɛd sloʊli, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə fɛloʊ. siɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt ðəɾ ɑfəl wɔɹt wɑz dɪfəkəlt, bʌt ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ʃi hæd nɛvɝ leɪɾ aɪz ɑn ɪm bɪfɔɹ. wɪmənz sɝkəl bɪznəs. noʊ mæn wəd bi əlaʊɾ ə snɪf ə ðæt. ɪt wɑz sikɹət. ʃi hɛld ɑn tə seɪaɪdɑɹ, ðoʊ. "aɪ . . . ɹɪmɛmbɝ, naʊ. θæŋk ju, mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ. aɪm ʃʊɹ juv ɔl sɔɹts ə θɪŋz tə si tə."

Nynaeve gave herself a shake, and after a moment remembered to close her mouth. "Yes," she said slowly, staring at the fellow. Seeing anything but that awful wart was difficult, but she was certain she had never laid eyes on him before. Women's Circle business. No man would be allowed a sniff of that. It was secret. She held on to saidar, though. "I . . . remember, now. Thank you, Mistress Harfor. I'm sure you have all sorts of things to see to."

ɹæðɝ ðən teɪk ðə hɪnt, ðə fɝs meɪd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ əɹ səspɪʃəsli. ðət fɹaʊn slɪɾ ɝaʊn tə ðə lʌmpi mæn, ðən sɛɾəld ɑn læn ən vænɪʃt. ʃi nɑɾəd tə hɝsɛlf, əz ɪf ɪz pɹɛzəns sʌmhaʊ meɪd ðə dɪfɝəns! "aɪ wɪl liv ju, ðɛn. aɪm ʃʊɹ lɔɹd læn kən hændəl ðɪs fɛloʊ."

Rather than take the hint, the First Maid hesitated, frowning at her suspiciously. That frown slid around to the lumpy man, then settled on Lan and vanished. She nodded to herself, as if his presence somehow made the difference! "I will leave you, then. I'm sure Lord Lan can handle this fellow."

staɪflɪŋ əɹ ɪndɪɡneɪʃən, nɪneɪiv bɛɹli weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ tə kloʊz bɪfɔɹ ɹaʊndɪŋ ɑn ðə lʌmpi fɛloʊ ən ɪz wɔɹt. "hu ɑɹ ju?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "haʊ dʒju noʊ ðoʊz neɪmz? jəɹ noʊ tu ɹɪv - "

Stifling her indignation, Nynaeve barely waited for the door to close before rounding on the lumpy fellow and his wart. "Who are you?" she demanded. "How do you know those names? You're no Two Riv - "

ðə mæn . . . ɹɪpəld. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʌðɝ wɝd fəɹ ɪt. hi ɹɪpəld ən stʃɹɛtʃt tɔlɝ, ən sʌɾənli ɪt wɑz ɹænd, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ ən swɑloʊɪŋ, ɪn ɹʌmpəld wʊlənz wɪð ðoʊz ɑfəl hɛdz ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɹɛd-ænd-ɡoʊld ɑn ðə bæks ə hɪz hænz ən ə lɛðɝ skɹɪp ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. wɛɹ hæɾ i lɝn ðæt? hu hæd tɔt hɪm? ʃi ɹɪzɪstɪd ði aɪdiə ʌv dɪsɡaɪzɪŋ hɝsɛlf, dʒʌs fəɹ ə moʊmənt, tə ʃoʊ hɪm ʃi kəd də əz mʌtʃ.

The man . . . rippled. There was no other word for it. He rippled and stretched taller, and suddenly it was Rand, grimacing and swallowing, in rumpled woolens with those awful heads glittering red-and-gold on the backs of his hands and a leather scrip on his shoulder. Where had he learned that? Who had taught him? She resisted the idea of disguising herself, just for a moment, to show him she could do as much.

"aɪ si jə dɪdn teɪk jəɹ oʊn ædvaɪs," ɹænd sɛd tə læn, dʒʌst əz ɪf ʃi wɝ nɑt ðɛɹ. "bʌt waɪ dʒju lɛɾ əɹ pɹitɛn tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ? ivən ɪf ðə ɹil ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛt hɝ, ʃi kən ɡɛt hɝt."

"I see you didn't take your own advice," Rand said to Lan, just as if she were not there. "But why do you let her pretend to be Aes Sedai? Even if the real Aes Sedai let her, she can get hurt."

"bɪkɔz ʃiz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃifɝɾɝ," læn ɹɪplaɪd kwaɪətli. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ əɹ iðɝ! ən i stɪl simd ɹɛɾi tə dʒɹɔ hɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn ə hɑɹtbit. "æz fəɹ ði ʌðɝ . . . səmtaɪmz, ʃiz stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ju. dɪd jə teɪk ɪt?"

"Because she is Aes Sedai, sheepherder," Lan replied quietly. He did not look at her either! And he still seemed ready to draw his sword in a heartbeat. "As for the other . . . Sometimes, she is stronger than you. Did you take it?"

ɹænd lʊkt əɾ əɹ ðɛn. tə fɹaʊn dɪsbɪlivɪŋli. ivən wən ʃi pɔɪntɪdli ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl soʊ ðə jɛloʊ fɹɪnʒ sweɪd. wʌɾ i sɛd ðoʊ, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd sloʊli, wɑz "noʊ. jəɹ ɹaɪt. səmtaɪmz jəɹ dʒʌs tu wik tə də wʌt jə ʃʊd."

Rand looked at her then. To frown disbelievingly. Even when she pointedly adjusted her shawl so the yellow fringe swayed. What he said though, shaking his head slowly, was "No. You're right. Sometimes you're just too weak to do what you should."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tu blæðɝɪŋ əbaʊt?" ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli.

"What are you two blathering about?" she said sharply.

"dʒʌs θɪŋz ðət mɛn tɔk əbaʊt," læn ɹɪplaɪd.

"Just things that men talk about," Lan replied.

"ju wʊdn ʌndɝstænd," ɹænd sɛd.

"You wouldn't understand," Rand said.

ʃi snɪft ət ðæt. ɡɑsəp ən aɪɾəl tʃæɾɝ, ðət wɑz wʌt mɛnz tɔk wɑz, naɪn taɪmz ɪn tɛn. ət bɛst. wɛɹəli, ʃi lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ. ɹɪlʌktənli. ʃi dɪd nɑt nid tə pɹətɛk hɝsɛlf əɡɛnst ɹænd, sɝɾənli, bʌt ʃi wʊɾə laɪk tə hoʊld ɑn ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ, dʒʌs tə tʌtʃ ɪt, taɪɝɾ əɹ nɑt.

She sniffed at that. Gossip and idle chatter, that was what men's talk was, nine times in ten. At best. Wearily, she let go of saidar. Reluctantly. She did not need to protect herself against Rand, certainly, but she would have liked to hold on a little longer, just to touch it, tired or not.

"wi noʊ əbaʊt kɛɹhin, ɹænd," ʃi sɛd, sɪŋkɪŋ ɡɹeɪtfəli ɪndə ə tʃɛɹ. ðoʊz kɝst si foʊk hæd wɔɹn əɹ aʊt! "ɪz ðət waɪ jəɹ hɪɹ, dʒɹɛs ðət weɪ? ɪf jəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd fɹəm huɛvɝ ɪt wɑz . . ." hi lʊk taɪɝd. hɑɹɾɝ ðən ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd, bʌt vɛɹi taɪɝd. hi ɹɪmeɪn stændɪŋ, ðoʊ. stʃɹeɪnʒli, hi simd mʌtʃ laɪk læn, ɹɛɾi tə dʒɹɔ ə sɔɹɾ i wɑz nɑt wɛɹɪŋ. meɪbi ðəɾ ətɛmp tə kɪl ɪm wəd bi ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪm si sɛns. "ɹænd, ɛɡwin kən hɛlp ju."

"We know about Cairhien, Rand," she said, sinking gratefully into a chair. Those cursed Sea Folk had worn her out! "Is that why you're here, dressed that way? If you're trying to hide from whoever it was . . ." He looked tired. Harder than she remembered, but very tired. He remained standing, though. Strangely, he seemed much like Lan, ready to draw a sword he was not wearing. Maybe that attempt to kill him would be enough to make him see sense. "Rand, Egwene can help you."

"aɪm nɑt haɪɾɪŋ ɪɡzækli," hi sɛd. "æt list, dʒʌst əntɪl aɪ kɪl səm mɛn u nid kɪlɪŋ." laɪt, hi wɑz əz mæɾɝ ə fækt əbaʊɾ ɪɾ əz əliviə! waɪ dɪɾ i ən læn kip aɪɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ ən pɹitɛndɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt? "ɛniweɪ, haʊ kəɾ ɛɡwin hɛlp?" hi wɛn ɑn, sɛɾɪŋ ðə skɹɪp ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ɪt meɪɾ ə sɑf bʌt sɑləd saʊn ʌv weɪɾ ɪnsaɪd. "aɪ səpoʊz ʃiz ɛɛs sədaɪ, tu?" hi saʊndəɾ əmjuzd! "ɪz ʃi hɪɹ, əz wɛl? jə θɹi, ən tu ɹil ɛɛs sədaɪ. oʊnli tu! noʊ. aɪ doʊn əv taɪm fəɹ ðæt. aɪ nid jə tə kip sʌmθɪŋ əntɪl - "

"I'm not hiding exactly," he said. "At least, just until I kill some men who need killing." Light, he was as matter of fact about it as Alivia! Why did he and Lan keep eyeing one another and pretending they were not? "Anyway, how could Egwene help?" he went on, setting the scrip on the table. It made a soft but solid sound of weight inside. "I suppose she's Aes Sedai, too?" He sounded amused! "Is she here, as well? You three, and two real Aes Sedai. Only two! No. I don't have time for that. I need you to keep something until - "

"ɛɡwin ɪz ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, jə ful wʊlhɛd," ʃi ɡɹaʊld. ɪt wɑz naɪs tə bi eɪbəl tə ɪntɝʌp sʌmwʌn ɛls fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ. "ɪleɪɾə ɪz ə jusɝpɝ. aɪ hoʊp juv hæd sɛns ɪnʌf nɑt tə ɡoʊ nɪɹ hɝ! jə wʊdn liv ðət miɾɪŋ ɑn jəɹ oʊn tu lɛɡz, aɪ kən tɛl ju! ðəɹ ɑɹ faɪv ɹil ɛɛs sədaɪ hɪɹ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ mi, ən θɹi hʌnʒɹəd mɔɹ wɪð ɛɡwin ən ən ɑɹmi, ɹɛɾi tə pʊl ɪleɪɾə daʊn. lʊk ət jɝsɛlf! wʌtɛvɝ jəɹ bɹeɪv tɔk, sʌmbɑɾi ɔlmoʊs kɪl ju, ən jəɹ snikɪŋ ɝaʊn dʒɹɛs laɪk ə steɪbəlmən! wʌt seɪfɝ pleɪs fəɹ jə ðən wɪð ɛɡwin? ivən ðoʊz æʃəmən ə jʊɹz wʊdn dɛɹ ɡoʊ əɡɛns θɹi hʌnʒɹəd sɪstɝz!" oʊ, jɛs; vɛɹi naɪs ɪndid. hi tʃɹaɪd tə mæsk ɪz sɝpɹaɪz, bʌɾ i meɪɾ ə pʊɹ dʒɑb ʌv ɪt, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɝ.

"Egwene is the Amyrlin Seat, you fool woolhead," she growled. It was nice to be able to interrupt someone else for a change. "Elaida is a usurper. I hope you've had sense enough not to go near her! You wouldn't leave that meeting on your own two legs, I can tell you! There are five real Aes Sedai here, including me, and three hundred more with Egwene and an army, ready to pull Elaida down. Look at yourself! Whatever your brave talk, somebody almost killed you, and you're sneaking around dressed like a stableman! What safer place for you than with Egwene? Even those Asha'man of yours wouldn't dare go against three hundred sisters!" Oh, yes; very nice indeed. He tried to mask his surprise, but he made a poor job of it, staring at her.

"jud bi sɝpɹaɪzd wʌt maɪ æʃəmən wəd dɛɹ," hi sɛd dʒɹaɪli æftɝ ə mɪnət. "aɪ səpoʊz mæt ɪz wɪð ɛɡwinz ɑɹmi?" pʊɾɪŋ ə hæn tə hɪz hɛd, hi stæɡɝd.

"You'd be surprised what my Asha'man would dare," he said dryly after a minute. "I suppose Mat is with Egwene's army?" Putting a hand to his head, he staggered.

oʊnli hæf ə stɛp, bʌt ʃi wɑz aʊɾ ə hɝ tʃɛɹ bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɹaɪt hɪmsɛlf. ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ʃi ɹitʃt ʌp tə klæsp ɪz hɛd bɪtwin əɹ hænz, ən ləbɔɹiəsli woʊv ə dɛlvɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm. ʃi hæd tʃɹaɪd faɪndɪŋ ə bɛɾɝ weɪ tə faɪnd wʌɾ eɪl sʌmwʌn, soʊ fɑɹ wɪθaʊt səksɛs. ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf. noʊ sunɝ hæd ðə wiv sɛɾəld ɑn ɪm ðən əɹ bɹɛθ kɑt. ʃi hæd noʊn əbaʊt ðə waʊn ɪn ɪz saɪd fɹəm fɑlm, nɛvɝ hilɪŋ kəmplitli, ɹɪzɪstɪŋ ɔl ðə hilɪŋ ʃi nu, laɪk ə pʌstʃul ʌv ivəl ɪn ɪz flɛʃ. naʊ ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ hæf-hild waʊn ətɑp ði oʊld, ən ðət pʌlsd wɪð ivəl, tu. ə dɪfɹən sɔɹɾ ʌv ivəl, sʌmhaʊ, laɪk ə mɪɹɝ ə ði ʌðɝ, jɛt dʒʌst əz vɪɹələnt. ən ʃi kəd nɑt tʌtʃ iðɝ wɪð ðə paʊɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli wɑnə - dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪt meɪɾ əɹ skɪn kɹɔl! - bʌt ʃi tʃɹaɪd. ən sʌmθɪŋ ənsin hɛld əɹ əweɪ. laɪk ə wɔɹd. ə wɔɹd ʃi kəd nɑt si. ə wɔɹɾ ə seɪɾɪn?

Only half a step, but she was out of her chair before he could right himself. Embracing saidar with an effort, she reached up to clasp his head between her hands, and laboriously wove a Delving around him. She had tried finding a better way to find what ailed someone, so far without success. It was enough. No sooner had the weave settled on him than her breath caught. She had known about the wound in his side from Falme, never healing completely, resisting all the Healing she knew, like a pustule of evil in his flesh. Now there was another half-healed wound atop the old, and that pulsed with evil, too. A different sort of evil, somehow, like a mirror of the other, yet just as virulent. And she could not touch either with the Power. She did not really want to - just thinking of it made her skin crawl! - but she tried. And something unseen held her away. Like a ward. A ward she could not see. A ward of saidin?

ðət meɪɾ əɹ stɑp tʃænəlɪŋ ən stɛp bæk. ʃi klʌŋ tə ðə sɔɹs; noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ taɪɝd ʃi wɑz, ʃi wʊɾə hæd tə fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə lɛt ɡoʊ. noʊ sɪstɝ kəd θɪŋk ə ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ wɪθaʊɾ ət list ə tʌtʃ ə fɪɹ. hi lʊk daʊn əɾ əɹ kɑmli, ən ðət meɪɾ əɹ ʃɪvɝ. hi simd ənʌðɝ mæn ɪntaɪɝli fɹəm ðə ɹænd ælθɹ ʃi hæd wɑtʃt ɡɹoʊ ʌp. ʃi wɑz vɛɹi ɡlæd ðət læn wɑz ðɛɹ, hɑɹɾ əz ðət wɑz tə ədmɪt. sʌɾənli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i hæd nɑt ɹɪlæks baɪ ə wɪskɝ. hi maɪt tʃæɾɝ wɪð ɹænd laɪk tu mɛn oʊvɝ paɪps ən eɪl, bʌɾ i θɔt ɹænd wɑz deɪnʒɝəs. ən ɹænd lʊkt ət læn əz ɪf i nu ɪt, ən æksɛptɪɾ ɪt.

That made her stop channeling and step back. She clung to the Source; no matter how tired she was, she would have had to force herself to let go. No sister could think of the male half of the Power without at least a touch of fear. He looked down at her calmly, and that made her shiver. He seemed another man entirely from the Rand al'Thor she had watched grow up. She was very glad that Lan was there, hard as that was to admit. Suddenly she realized that he had not relaxed by a whisker. He might chatter with Rand like two men over pipes and ale, but he thought Rand was dangerous. And Rand looked at Lan as if he knew it, and accepted it.

"nʌn ə ðəɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt naʊ," ɹænd sɛd, tɝnɪŋ tə ðə skɹɪp ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ i mɛn ɪz wunz əɹ wɛɹ mæt wɑz. fɹəm ðə skɹɪp i pɹədus tu stætʃuɛts ə fʊt haɪ, ə waɪz-lʊkɪŋ, bɪɹɾəd mæn ən ən ikwəli waɪz ən sɝin wʊmən, itʃ ɪn floʊɪŋ ɹoʊbz ən hoʊldɪŋ əlɔft ə klɪɹ kɹɪstəl sfɪɹ. fɹəm ðə weɪ hi hændəl ðɛm, ðeɪ wɝ hɛviɝ ðən ðeɪ əpɪɹd. "aɪ wɑn jə tə kip ðiz hɪɾən fəɹ mi əntɪl aɪ sɛn fəɹ ðɛm, nɪneɪiv." wʌn hæn ɑn ðə fɪɡjɝ ə ðə wʊmən, hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "æn fəɹ ju. əl nid jə wən aɪ juz ðɛm. wən wi juz ðɛm. æftɝ aɪ teɪk kɛɹ ə ðoʊz mɛn. ðəɾ əz tə kʌm fɝst."

"None of that is important now," Rand said, turning to the scrip on the table. She did not know whether he meant his wounds or where Mat was. From the scrip he produced two statuettes a foot high, a wise-looking, bearded man and an equally wise and serene woman, each in flowing robes and holding aloft a clear crystal sphere. From the way he handled them, they were heavier than they appeared. "I want you to keep these hidden for me until I send for them, Nynaeve." One hand on the figure of the woman, he hesitated. "And for you. I'll need you when I use them. When we use them. After I take care of those men. That has to come first."

"juz ðɛm?" ʃi sɛd səspɪʃəsli. waɪ dɪd kɪlɪŋ ɛniwʌn əv tə kʌm fɝst? ðət wɑz hɑɹdli ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt kwɛstʃən, ðoʊ. "fɔɹ wʌt? ɑɹ ðeɪ tɛɹæŋɡɹil?"

"Use them?" she said suspiciously. Why did killing anyone have to come first? That was hardly the important question, though. "For what? Are they ter'angreal?"

hi nɑɾəd. "wɪð ðɪs, jə kən tʌtʃ ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst sɑŋɡɹil ɛvɝ meɪd fəɹ ə wʊmən. ɪts bɛɹiɾ ɑn tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ, aɪ ʌndɝstænd, bʌt ðət dʌzn mæɾɝ." hɪz hæn muv tə ðə fɪɡjɝ ə ðə mæn. "wɪð ðɪs wʌn, aɪ kən tʌtʃ ɪts meɪl twɪn. aɪ wɑz toʊl baɪ . . . sʌmwʌn . . . wʌns, ðəɾ ə mæn ən wʊmən juzɪŋ ðoʊz sɑŋɡɹil kəd tʃælənʒ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðeɪ maɪɾ əv tə bi juz fəɹ ðæt, wʌn deɪ, bʌɾ ɪn ðə mintaɪm, aɪ hoʊp ðəɹ ɪnʌf tə klɛnz ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə sɔɹs."

He nodded. "With this, you can touch the greatest sa'angreal ever made for a woman. It's buried on Tremalking, I understand, but that doesn't matter." His hand moved to the figure of the man. "With this one, I can touch its male twin. I was told by . . . someone . . . once, that a man and woman using those sa'angreal could challenge the Dark One. They might have to be used for that, one day, but in the meantime, I hope they're enough to cleanse the male half of the Source."

"ɪf ɪt kəd bi dʌn, wʊdn ðeɪv dʌn ɪɾ ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz?" læn sɛd kwaɪətli. kwaɪət ðə weɪ stil slaɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ə skæbɝd wɑz kwaɪət. "ju sɛd wʌns ðəɾ aɪ kəd ɡɛɾ əɹ hɝt." ɪt simd ɪmpɑsəbəl ɪz vɔɪs kəd ɡɹoʊ ɛni hɑɹɾɝ, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd. "ju kəd kɪl hɝ, ʃifɝɾɝ." ən ɪz toʊn meɪd klɪɹ ðəɾ i wəd nɑɾ əlaʊ ðæt.

"If it could be done, wouldn't they have done it in the Age of Legends?" Lan said quietly. Quiet the way steel sliding from a scabbard was quiet. "You said once that I could get her hurt." It seemed impossible his voice could grow any harder, but it did. "You could kill her, sheepherder." And his tone made clear that he would not allow that.

ɹænd mɛt lænz koʊl blu stɛɹ wɪð wʌn dʒʌst əz koʊld. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ ðeɪ dɪdnt. aɪ doʊn kɛɹ waɪ. ɪts tə bi tʃɹaɪd."

Rand met Lan's cold blue stare with one just as cold. "I don't know why they didn't. I don't care why. It has to be tried."

nɪneɪiv bɪɾ əɹ loʊɝ lɪp. ʃi səpoʊzd ɹænd meɪd ðɪs ə pʌblɪk əkeɪʒən - ʃɪftɪŋ fɹəm pʌblɪk tə pɹaɪvət, dəsaɪɾɪŋ wɪtʃ wɑz wɪtʃ, meɪɾ əɹ dɪzi səmtaɪmz - bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ ðət læn hæd spoʊkən aʊɾ ə tɝn. hi wɑz bæd ðət weɪ, ɪn ɛni keɪs, bʌt ʃi laɪkt ən aʊtspoʊkən mæn. ʃi niɾəd tə θɪŋk. nɑɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ dɪsɪʒən. ʃi hæd meɪd ðæt. əbaʊt haʊ tə ɪmpləmɛn ɪt. ɹænd maɪt nɑt laɪk ɪt. læn sɝɾənli wəd nɑt. wɛl, mɛn ɔlweɪz wɑntəd ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ. səmtaɪmz jə dʒʌs hæd tə titʃ əm ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz əv ɪt.

Nynaeve bit her lower lip. She supposed Rand made this a public occasion - shifting from public to private, deciding which was which, made her dizzy sometimes - but she did not care that Lan had spoken out of turn. He was bad that way, in any case, but she liked an outspoken man. She needed to think. Not about her decision. She had made that. About how to implement it. Rand might not like it. Lan certainly would not. Well, men always wanted their own way. Sometimes you just had to teach them they could not always have it.

"aɪ θɪŋk ɪts ə wʌndɝfəl aɪdiə," ʃi sɛd. ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ə laɪ. ɪt wɑz wʌndɝfəl, kəmpɛɹd tə ði ɔltɝnəɾɪvz. "bʌɾ aɪ doʊn si waɪ aɪ ʃəd sɪt hɪɹ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ jəɹ sʌmənz laɪk ə sɝvɪŋ meɪd. əl də ɪt, bʌt wi ɔl ɡoʊ təɡɛðɝ."

"I think it is a wonderful idea," she said. That was not exactly a lie. It was wonderful, compared to the alternatives. "But I don't see why I should sit here waiting for your summons like a serving maid. I'll do it, but we all go together."

ʃi hæd bɪn ɹaɪt. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt wʌn bɪt.

She had been right. They did not like it one bit.


tʃæptɝ twɛlv


CHAPTER 12

eɪ lɪli ɪn wɪntɝ


A Lily in Winter

ənʌðɝ sɝvɪŋ mæn nɪɹli fɛl ɑn ɪz noʊz boʊɪŋ, ən ɪleɪn saɪɾ əz ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd pæst əlɔŋ ðə pæləs kɔɹəɾɝ. ət list, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɡlaɪd. ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ, steɪtli ən sɝin. ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹʌn, ðoʊ hɝ dɑɹk blu skɝts pɹɑbli wʊɾə tʃɹɪpt əɹ hæd ʃi tʃɹaɪd. ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil ðə staʊt mænz ɡɑəlɪŋ aɪz fɑloʊɪŋ əɹ ən əɹ kəmpænjənz. ə maɪnɝ ɪɹəɾənt, ən wʌn ðət wəd pæs; ə ɡɹeɪn ə sæn ɪn əɹ slɪpɝ. ɹænd blʌɾi θɪŋks-hi-noʊz-bɛst-fɔɹ-ɛvɹibɑɾi ælθɹ ɪz ɪtʃhoʊk daʊn maɪ bæk! ʃi θɔt. ɪf i mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ ðɪs taɪm . . . !

Another serving man nearly fell on his nose bowing, and Elayne sighed as she glided past along the Palace corridor. At least, she tried to glide. The Daughter-Heir of Andor, stately and serene. She wanted to run, though her dark blue skirts probably would have tripped her had she tried. She could almost feel the stout man's goggling eyes following her and her companions. A minor irritant, and one that would pass; a grain of sand in her slipper. Rand bloody thinks-he-knows-best-for-everybody al'Thor is itchoak down my back! she thought. If he managed to get away from her this time . . . !

"dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. "hi hɪɹz nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt spaɪz, əɹ fɔkɹut, əɹ ɛni ʌv ðæt!" ðə vɛɹi læs θɪŋ ʃi niɾəd wɑz ɪm dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə "ɹɛskju" hɝ. mɛn dɪd ðət sɔɹɾ ə nɑnsɛns; nɪneɪiv kɔld ɪt "θɪŋkɪŋ wɪð ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts." laɪt, hi wəd pɹɑbli tʃɹaɪ tə muv ði il ən ðə sɑldəiənz bæk ɪndə ðə sɪɾi! ɪndə ðə pæləs ɪtsɛlf! bɪɾɝ əz ɪt wɑz tə ədmɪt, ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp ɪm ɪf i dɪd, nɑt ʃɔɹɾ ʌv oʊpən wɔɹ, ən ivən ðət maɪt nɑt bi ɪnʌf.

"Just remember," she said firmly. "He hears nothing about spies, or forkroot, or any of that!" The very last thing she needed was him deciding to "rescue" her. Men did that sort of nonsense; Nynaeve called it "thinking with the hair on their chests." Light, he would probably try to move the Aiel and the Saldaeans back into the city! Into the Palace itself! Bitter as it was to admit, she could not stop him if he did, not short of open war, and even that might not be enough.

"aɪ doʊn tɛl ɪm θɪŋz i dʌznt nid tə noʊ," mɪn sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ ə læŋki, waɪd-aɪd sɝvɪŋ wʊmən huz kɝtsi nɪɹli kəlæpst ɪndə ə spɹɔl ɑn ðə ɹɛd-bɹaʊn flɔɹ taɪlz. aɪɪŋ mɪn saɪdweɪz, ɪleɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əɹ oʊn taɪm wɛɹɪŋ bɹitʃɪz, ən wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi maɪt nɑt tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn. ðeɪ wɝ sɝɾənli fɹiɝ ðən skɝts. nɑt ðə hil buts, ðoʊ, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd dʒudɪʃɪsli. ðeɪ meɪd mɪn ɔlmoʊst əz tɔl əz eɪvinhə, bʌɾ ivən bɝdʒɪt sweɪɾ ɪn ðoʊz, ən wɪð mɪnz snʌɡ bɹitʃɪz ən ə koʊt ðət bɛɹli kʌvɝɾ əɹ hɪps, ɪt lʊk pɑzəɾɪvli skændələs.

"I don't tell him things he doesn't need to know," Min said, frowning at a lanky, wide-eyed serving woman whose curtsy nearly collapsed into a sprawl on the red-brown floor tiles. Eyeing Min sideways, Elayne remembered her own time wearing breeches, and wondered whether she might not try again. They were certainly freer than skirts. Not the heeled boots, though, she decided judiciously. They made Min almost as tall as Aviendha, but even Birgitte swayed in those, and with Min's snug breeches and a coat that barely covered her hips, it looked positively scandalous.

"ju laɪ tə hɪm?" səspɪʃən lɑɹɾɪd eɪvinhəz toʊn. ivən ðə weɪ ʃi ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ dɑɹk ʃɔl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz kæɹid dɪsəpɹuvəl, ən ʃi ɡlɛɹd pæst ɪleɪn ət mɪn.

"You lie to him?" Suspicion larded Aviendha's tone. Even the way she adjusted her dark shawl on her shoulders carried disapproval, and she glared past Elayne at Min.

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt," mɪn ɹɪplaɪd ʃɑɹpli, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ɹaɪt bæk. "nɑɾ ənlɛs ɪts nɛsəsɛɹi." eɪvinhə tʃʌkəld, ðən lʊk stɑɹɾəld ðət ʃi hæd, ən pʊɾ ɑn ə stoʊni feɪs.

"Of course not," Min replied sharply, glaring right back. "Not unless it's necessary." Aviendha chuckled, then looked startled that she had, and put on a stony face.

wʌt wɑz ʃi tə də əbaʊt ðɛm? ðeɪ hæd tə laɪk wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðeɪ dʒʌs hæd tə. bʌt ðə tu wɪmən hæd bɪn stɛɹɪŋ əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ laɪk stʃɹeɪnʒ kæts ɪn ə smɔl ɹum ɛvɝ sɪns ðeɪ mɛt. oʊ, ðeɪ hæɾ əɡɹid tə ɛvɹiθɪŋ - ðəɹ ɹɪli hæd bɪn noʊ tʃɔɪs, nɑt wən nʌn ə ðɛm kəd ɡɛs wən ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl əv ðə mæn ət hæn əɡɛn - bʌt ʃi hoʊp ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ wʌn ənʌðɝ əɡɛn haʊ skɪlfəli ðeɪ hændəl ðɛɹ naɪvz. vɛɹi kæʒəwəli, nɑɾ æktʃəli  ɪmplaɪɪŋ ɛni θɹɛt, bʌt vɛɹi oʊpən əbaʊɾ ɪt, tu. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, eɪvinhə hæd bɪn kwaɪɾ ɪmpɹɛst wɪð ðə nʌmbɝ ə naɪvz mɪn kæɹiɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ pɝsən.

What was she to do about them? They had to like one another. They just had to. But the two women had been staring at each other like strange cats in a small room ever since they met. Oh, they had agreed to everything - there really had been no choice, not when none of them could guess when they would all have the man at hand again - but she hoped they did not show one another again how skillfully they handled their knives. Very casually, not actually implying any threat, but very open about it, too. On the other hand, Aviendha had been quite impressed with the number of knives Min carried about her person.

ə ɡæŋli jʌŋ sɝvɪŋ mæn kæɹiɪŋ ə tʃɹeɪ ʌv tɔl mæntəlz fəɹ ðə stænd-læmps baʊɾ əz ʃi swɛp baɪ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, hi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ i fɝɡɑt tə peɪ ətɛnʃən tə hɪz bɝɾən. ðə kɹæʃ ʌv ɡlæs ʃæɾɝɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ taɪlz fɪl ðə kɔɹəɾɝ.

A gangly young serving man carrying a tray of tall mantles for the stand-lamps bowed as she swept by. Unfortunately, he was staring so hard that he forgot to pay attention to his burden. The crash of glass shattering on the floor tiles filled the corridor.

ɪleɪn saɪɾ əɡɛn. ʃi dɪd hoʊp ɛvɹiwʌn bɪkeɪm juz tə ðə nu ɔɹɾɝ ə θɪŋz sun. ʃi wɑz nɑt ði əbdʒɛkt ʌv ɔl ðət ɡeɪpɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, əɹ eɪvinhə, əɹ ivən mɪn, ðoʊ ʃi pɹɑbli dʒɹu sʌm. noʊ, ɪt wɑz keɪsil ən dɪni, fɑloʊɪŋ kloʊs bɪhaɪnd, hu wɝ meɪkɪŋ aɪz pɑp ən sɝvəns stʌmbəl. ʃi hæɾ eɪt bɑɾiɡɑɹdz, naʊ, ən ðoʊz tu hæd bɪn stændɪŋ ɡɑɹɾ əɾ əɹ dɔɹ wən ʃi woʊk.

Elayne sighed again. She did hope everyone became used to the new order of things soon. She was not the object of all that gaping, of course, or Aviendha, or even Min, though she probably drew some. No, it was Caseille and Deni, following close behind, who were making eyes pop and servants stumble. She had eight bodyguards, now, and those two had been standing guard at her door when she woke.

vɛɹi laɪkli səm ə ðə ɡeɪpɪŋ wɑz dʒʌs ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæd ɡɑɹdzwɪmən tʃɹeɪlɪŋ bɪhaɪn əɹ əɾ ɔl, ən ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli ðət ðeɪ wɝ wɪmən. noʊ wʌn wɑz juz tə ðæt, jɛt. bʌt bɝdʒɪt hæd sɛd ʃi wəd meɪk əm əpɪɹ sɛɹəmoʊniəl, ən ʃi hæd. ʃi mʌst əv sɛɾ ɛvɹi simstʃɹɪs ən mɪlɪnɝ ɪn ðə pæləs wɝkɪŋ əz sun əz ʃi lɛft ɪleɪnz ɹumz ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ. itʃ wʊmən wɔɹ ə bɹaɪt ɹɛd hæt wɪð ə lɔŋ waɪt plum laɪɪŋ flæɾ əlɔŋ ðə waɪd bɹɪm, ən ə waɪd ɹɛd sæʃ ɛdʒd ɪn snoʊi leɪi əkɹɔs əɹ tʃɛst wɪð ɹæmpənt waɪt laɪənz mɑɹtʃɪŋ ʌp ɪt. ðɛɹ waɪt-kɑlɝd kɹɪmzən koʊts wɝ sɪlk, ən ðə kʌt hæd bɪn ɔltɝɾ ə lɪɾəl, soʊ ðeɪ fɪt bɛɾɝ ən hʌŋ ɔlmoʊs tə ðə ni əbʌv skɑɹlət bɹitʃɪz wɪð ə waɪt stʃɹaɪp ʌp ði aʊtsaɪdz ə ðə lɛɡz. peɪl leɪs hʌŋ θɪkli ət ðɛɹ ɹɪsts ən nɛks, ən ðɛɹ blæk buts hæd bɪn wæks tɪl ðeɪ ʃoʊn. ðeɪ lʊkt kwaɪt dæʃɪŋ, ən ivən plæsəd-aɪd dɪni swæɡɝd dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl. ɪleɪn səspɛktəd ðeɪ wəd bi ivən pɹaʊɾɝ wʌns ðə sɔɹd bɛls ən skæbɝdz wɪð ɡoʊl tulɪŋ wɝ ɹɛɾi, ən ðə lækɝd hɛlməts ən bɹɛstpleɪts. bɝdʒɪt wɑz hævɪŋ bɹɛstpleɪts meɪd tə fɪt wɪmən, wɪtʃ ɪleɪn səspɛktəd hæd sɝɾənli meɪd ðə pæləs ɑɹmɔɹɝz aɪz pɑp!

Very likely some of the gaping was just that Elayne had Guardswomen trailing behind her at all, and almost certainly that they were women. No one was used to that, yet. But Birgitte had said she would make them appear ceremonial, and she had. She must have set every seamstress and milliner in the Palace working as soon as she left Elayne's rooms the night before. Each woman wore a bright red hat with a long white plume lying flat along the wide brim, and a wide red sash edged in snowy laee across her chest with rampant White Lions marching up it. Their white-collared crimson coats were silk, and the cut had been altered a little, so they fit better and hung almost to the knee above scarlet breeches with a white stripe up the outsides of the legs. Pale lace hung thickly at their wrists and necks, and their black boots had been waxed till they shone. They looked quite dashing, and even placid-eyed Deni swaggered just a little. Elayne suspected they would be even prouder once the sword belts and scabbards with gold tooling were ready, and the lacquered helmets and breastplates. Birgitte was having breastplates made to fit women, which Elayne suspected had certainly made the Palace armorer's eyes pop!

ət ðə moʊmənt, bɝdʒɪt wɑz bɪzi ɪntɝvjuɪŋ wɪmən tə ɹaʊn aʊt ðə twɛnti fəɹ ðə bɑɾiɡɑɹd. ɪleɪn kəd fil əɹ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ, wɪð noʊ saɪn ə fɪzɪkəl æktɪvəɾi, soʊ ɪt mʌs bi ðæt, ənlɛs ʃi wɑz ɹiɾɪŋ, əɹ pleɪɪŋ stoʊnz, ən ʃi sɛldəm tʊk ə moʊmən əweɪ fɹəm əɹ duɾiz fəɹ hɝsɛlf. ɪleɪn hoʊpt ʃi wəd kip ɪt tə dʒʌs twɛnti. ʃi hoʊp bɝdʒɪt wɑz bɪzi ɪnʌf ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs əntɪl tu leɪt wən ʃi mæsk ðə bɑnd. tə θɪŋk ðət ʃi hæd bɪn soʊ wɝiɾ əbaʊt bɝdʒɪt sɛnsɪŋ wʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn əɹ tə wən ðə səluʃən leɪ ɪn ə sɪmpəl kwɛstʃən tə vændin. ði ænsɝ hæd bɪn ə ɹufəl ɹimaɪndɝ haʊ lɪɾəl ʃi æktʃəli  nu əbaʊt biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪspɛʃli ðə pɑɹts ʌðɝ sɪstɝz tʊk fəɹ ɡɹæntəd. əpɛɹənli, ɛvɹi sɪstɝ u hæɾ ə wɔɹɾɝ nu haʊ, ivən ðoʊz u ɹɪmeɪn sɛləbət.

At the moment, Birgitte was busy interviewing women to round out the twenty for the bodyguard. Elayne could feel her concentrating, with no sign of physical activity, so it must be that, unless she was reading, or playing stones, and she seldom took a moment away from her duties for herself. Elayne hoped she would keep it to just twenty. She hoped Birgitte was busy enough that she did not notice until too late when she masked the bond. To think that she had been so worried about Birgitte sensing what she did not want her to when the solution lay in a simple question to Vandene. The answer had been a rueful reminder how little she actually knew about being Aes Sedai, especially the parts other sisters took for granted. Apparently, every sister who had a Warder knew how, even those who remained celibate.

ɪt wɑz ɑd haʊ θɪŋz keɪm əbaʊt, səmtaɪmz. ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə bɑɾiɡɑɹdz, ɪf nɑt fəɹ wʌndɝɪŋ haʊ ʃi kəd mænədʒ tə ɪluɾ əm ən bɝdʒɪt, ʃi wəd nɛvɝ əv θɔt tə æsk, wəd nɛvɝ əv lɝn ðə mæskɪŋ ɪn taɪm fəɹ ðɪs. nɑt ðət ʃi plæn tə ɪluɾ əɹ ɡɑɹdz ɛni taɪm sun, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛs tə bi pɹipɛɹɾ ɪn ədvæns ə nid. bɝdʒɪt sɝɾənli wɑz nɑt gɑnə əlaʊ hɝ ən eɪvinhə tə wɑndɝ ðə sɪɾi əloʊn, deɪ əɹ naɪt, nɑɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ.

It was odd how things came about, sometimes. If not for the bodyguards, if not for wondering how she could manage to elude them and Birgitte, she would never have thought to ask, would never have learned the masking in time for this. Not that she planned to elude her guards any time soon, but it was best to be prepared in advance of need. Birgitte certainly was not going to allow her and Aviendha to wander the city alone, day or night, not any longer.

ðɛɹ ɝaɪvəl ət nɪneɪivz dɔɹ pʊt θɔts ə bɝdʒɪt kəmplitli aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd. ɪksɛp ðət ʃi mʌs nɑt mæsk ðə bɑn əntɪl ðə vɛɹi læst ɪnstənt. ɹænd wɑz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðət dɔɹ. ɹænd u səmtaɪmz kɹaʊɾəd əɹ θɔts əntɪl ʃi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz laɪk səm ful wʊmən ɪn ə stɔɹi hu θɹu hɝ hɛɾ oʊvɝ ðə wɔl kəz ʌv ə mæn. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz θɔt ðoʊz stɔɹiz mʌst əv bɪn ɹɪɾən baɪ mɛn. oʊnli, ɹænd səmtaɪmz dɪd meɪk əɹ fil wɪtləs. ət list i dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ɪt, θæŋk ðə laɪt.

Their arrival at Nynaeve's door put thoughts of Birgitte completely out of her head. Except that she must not mask the bond until the very last instant. Rand was on the other side of that door. Rand who sometimes crowded her thoughts until she wondered whether she was like some fool woman in a story who threw her head over the wall because of a man. She had always thought those stories must have been written by men. Only, Rand sometimes did make her feel witless. At least he did not realize it, thank the Light.

"weɪɾ aʊt hɪɹ, ən ədmɪt noʊ wʌn," ʃi kəmændəd ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹɾ ɪntɝʌpʃənz əɹ ətɛnʃən naʊ. wɪð lʌk, hɝ bɑɾiɡɑɹd wɑz nu ɪnʌf ðət noʊ wʌn wəɾ ivən ɹɛkəɡnaɪz wʌt ðɛɹ faɪn junəfɔɹmz mɛnt. "aɪ wɪl oʊnli bi ə fju mɪnəts."

"Wait out here, and admit no one," she commanded the Guardswomen. She could not afford interruptions or attention now. With luck, her bodyguard was new enough that no one would even recognize what their fine uniforms meant. "I will only be a few minutes."

ðeɪ səluɾəd bɹɪskli, ən ɑɹm əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst, ən tʊk pəzɪʃənz ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə dɔɹ, keɪsil stoʊnfeɪst wɪð ə hæn ɑn əɹ sɔɹd hɪlt, dɪni teɪkɪŋ əɹ lɔŋ kʌdʒəl ɪn boʊθ hænz ən smaɪlɪŋ feɪnli. ɪleɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə stɑki wʊmən θɔt mɪn hæd bɹɔɾ əɹ hɪɹ tə miɾ ə sikɹət lʌvɝ. ʃi səspɛktəd keɪsil maɪt, əz wɛl. ðeɪ hæd hɑɹdli bɪn əz dɪskɹiɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə tu wɪmən əz ðeɪ maɪt hæv; noʊ wʌn hæd mɛnʃən ɪz neɪm, bʌt ðəɹ hæd mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf ʌv "hi ðɪs" ən "hi ðæt." ət lis niðɝ hæd tʃɹaɪd meɪkɪŋ ən ɪkskjus tə liv soʊ ʃi kəd ɹipɔɹt tə bɝdʒɪt. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əɹ bɑɾiɡɑɹd, ðən ðeɪ wɝ əɹ bɑɾiɡɑɹd, nɑt bɝdʒɪts. ɪksɛp ðət ðeɪ wəd nɑt kip bɝdʒɪɾ aʊɾ ɪf ʃi mæsk ðə bɑn tu sun.

They saluted briskly, an arm across the chest, and took positions on either side of the door, Caseille stonefaced with a hand on her sword hilt, Deni taking her long cudgel in both hands and smiling faintly. Elayne was sure the stocky woman thought Min had brought her here to meet a secret lover. She suspected Caseille might, as well. They had hardly been as discreet in front of the two women as they might have; no one had mentioned his name, but there had more than enough of "he this" and "he that." At least neither had tried making an excuse to leave so she could report to Birgitte. If they were her bodyguard, then they were her bodyguard, not Birgitte's. Except that they would not keep Birgitte out if she masked the bond too soon.

ən ʃi wɑz dɪðɝɪŋ, ʃi ɹilaɪzd. ðə mæn ʃi dʒɹimd ʌv ɛvɹi naɪt wɑz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðət dɔɹ, ən ʃi wɑz stændɪŋ ðəɹ laɪk ə wɪɾəlɪŋ. ʃi hæd weɪɾəd soʊ lɔŋ, wɑntəd soʊ mʌtʃ, ən naʊ ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst əfɹeɪd. ʃi wəd nɑt lɛt ðɪs ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ. wɪð ən ɛfɝt, ʃi ɡæðɝd hɝsɛlf.

And she was dithering, she realized. The man she dreamed of every night was on the other side of that door, and she was standing there like a witling. She had waited so long, wanted so much, and now she was almost afraid. She would not let this go wrong. With an effort, she gathered herself.

"ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi?" hɝ vɔɪs wɑz nɑɾ əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ʃi kəɾ əv hoʊpt, bʌɾ ət list ɪt dɪd nɑt tʃɹɛmbəl. bʌɾɝflaɪz ðə saɪz ə fɑksəz flʌɾɝd ɪn əɹ stʌmək. ðət hæd nɑt hæpən ɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm.

"Are you ready?" Her voice was not as strong as she could have hoped, but at least it did not tremble. Butterflies the size of foxes fluttered in her stomach. That had not happened in a long time.

"ʌv kɔɹs," eɪvinhə sɛd, bʌt ʃi hæd tə swɑloʊ fɝst.

"Of course," Aviendha said, but she had to swallow first.

"aɪm ɹɛɾi," mɪn sɛd feɪnli.

"I'm ready," Min said faintly.

ðeɪ wɛn ɪn wɪθaʊt nɑkɪŋ, hɝidli kloʊzɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

They went in without knocking, hurriedly closing the door behind them.

nɪneɪiv dʒʌmp tə hɝ fit, waɪd-aɪd, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ wɛl ɪndə ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, bʌɾ ɪleɪn bɛɹli noʊɾəst əɹ əɹ læn, ðoʊ ðə swit smɛl ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz paɪp fɪl ðə ɹum. ɹænd ɹɪli wɑz ðɛɹ; ɪt hæd bɪn hɑɹd tə bɪliv i wəd bi. ðət dʒɹɛdfəl dɪsɡaɪz mɪn hæd dɪskɹaɪbd wɑz ɡɔn, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə ʃæbi kloʊðɪŋ ən ɹʌf ɡlʌvz, ən i wɑz . . . bjuɾəfəl.

Nynaeve jumped to her feet, wide-eyed, before they were well into the sitting room, but Elayne barely noticed her or Lan, though the sweet smell of the Warder's pipe filled the room. Rand really was there; it had been hard to believe he would be. That dreadful disguise Min had described was gone, except for the shabby clothing and rough gloves, and he was . . . beautiful.

hi lɛp fɹəm ɪz tʃɛɹ ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ, tu, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i wɑz kəmplitli əpɹaɪt, hi stæɡɝɾ ən ɡɹæb ðə teɪbəl wɪð boʊθ hænz, ɡæɡɪŋ ən hivɪŋ wɪð dʒɹaɪ ɹɛtʃəz. ɪleɪn ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs ən tʊk ə stɛp təwɔɹd hɪm, ðən stɑpt ən meɪd hɝsɛlf lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ. hɝ əbɪləɾi wɪð hilɪŋ wɑz taɪni, ən ɛniweɪ, nɪneɪiv hæd muvd əz kwɪkli əz ʃi, ðə ʃaɪn ə seɪaɪdɑɹ sʌɾənli ɝaʊn hɝ, hænz ɹeɪz təwɔɹd ɹænd.

He leaped from his chair at the sight of her, too, but before he was completely upright, he staggered and grabbed the table with both hands, gagging and heaving with dry retches. Elayne embraced the Source and took a step toward him, then stopped and made herself let go of the Power. Her ability with Healing was tiny, and anyway, Nynaeve had moved as quickly as she, the shine of saidar suddenly around her, hands raised toward Rand.

hi ɹikɔɪld, weɪvɪŋ əɹ əweɪ. "ɪts nʌθɪŋ jə kən hil, nɪneɪiv," hi sɛd ɹʌfli. "ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪt simz jə wɪn ði ɑɹɡjəmənt." hɪz feɪs wɑz ə ɹɪdʒəd mæsk haɪɾɪŋ ɪmoʊʃən, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz sim tə ɪleɪn tə bi dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ əɹ ɪn. ən eɪvinhə əz wɛl. ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə fil ɡlæɾənd baɪ ðæt. ʃi hæd hoʊpt ɪt wəd bi ðət weɪ, hoʊpt ʃi kəd mænədʒ fəɹ əɹ sɪstɝz seɪk, ən naʊ ɪt tʊk noʊ mænɪdʒɪŋ əɾ ɔl. stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ ʌp wɑz ə vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt fəɹ hɪm, ən pʊlɪŋ ɪz ɡeɪz əweɪ fɹəm əɹ ən eɪvinhə, ðoʊ hi tʃɹaɪd tə haɪd boʊθ. "ɪɾ ɪz pæs taɪm tə bi ɡɔn, mɪn," hi sɛd.

He recoiled, waving her away. "It's nothing you can Heal, Nynaeve," he said roughly. "In any case, it seems you win the argument." His face was a rigid mask hiding emotion, but his eyes seemed to Elayne to be drinking her in. And Aviendha as well. She was surprised to feel gladdened by that. She had hoped it would be that way, hoped she could manage for her sister's sake, and now it took no managing at all. Straightening up was a visible effort for him, and pulling his gaze away from her and Aviendha, though he tried to hide both. "It is past time to be gone, Min," he said.

ɪleɪnz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt. "ju θɪŋk jə kən dʒʌst ɡoʊ wɪθaʊɾ ivən spikɪŋ tə mi, tə ʌs?" ʃi mænədʒd.

Elayne's jaw dropped. "You think you can just go without even speaking to me, to us?" she managed.

"mɛn!" mɪn ən eɪvinhə bɹiðd əɾ ɔlmoʊs ðə seɪm ɪnstənt, ən ɡeɪv wʌn ənʌðɝ stɑɹɾəld lʊks. heɪstəli ðeɪ ənfoʊldəd ðɛɹ ɑɹmz. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, dɪspaɪt ðə dɪspɛɹəɾi ɪn dʒʌst əbaʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛm, ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɔlmoʊs mɪɹɝ ɪmədʒəz ʌv wʊmənli dɪsɡʌst.

"Men!" Min and Aviendha breathed at almost the same instant, and gave one another startled looks. Hastily they unfolded their arms. For an instant, despite the disparity in just about everything about them, they had been almost mirror images of womanly disgust.

"ðə mɛn u tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mi ɪn kɛɹhin wəd tɝn ðɪs pæləs ɪndə ə slæɡ hip ɪf ðeɪ nu aɪ wɑz hɪɹ," ɹænd sɛd kwaɪətli. "meɪbi ɪf ðeɪ dʒʌst səspɛktəd. aɪ səpoʊz mɪn toʊl jə ɪt wɑz æʃəmən. doʊn tʃɹʌst ɛni ʌv ðɛm. ɪksɛp fəɹ θɹi, meɪbi. deɪmɝ flɪn, dʒɑhɹ nɛɹɪʃmə ən ɛbən hɑpwəl. jə meɪ bi eɪbəl tə tʃɹʌs ðɛm. fəɹ ðə ɹɛst . . ." hi klɛntʃt ɡɔntələɾəd fɪsts əɾ ɪz saɪdz, simɪŋli ʌnəwɛɹ. "səmtaɪmz ə sɔɹd tɝnz ɪn jəɹ hænd, bʌɾ aɪ stɪl niɾ ə sɔɹd. dʒʌst steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ɛni mæn ɪn ə blæk koʊt. lʊk, ðɛɹz noʊ taɪm fəɹ tɔkɪŋ. ɪts bɛst aɪ ɡoʊ kwɪkli." ʃi hæd bɪn ɹɔŋ. hi wɑz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli əz ʃi hæd dʒɹimd ə hɪm. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə bɔɪɪʃnəs əbaʊɾ ɪm səmtaɪmz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɡɔn əz ɪf bɝn əweɪ. ʃi mɔɹn ðət fəɹ hɪm. ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i dɪd, əɹ kʊd.

"The men who tried to kill me in Cairhien would turn this palace into a slag heap if they knew I was here," Rand said quietly. "Maybe if they just suspected. I suppose Min told you it was Asha'man. Don't trust any of them. Except for three, maybe. Damer Flinn, Jahar Narishma and Eben Hopwil. You may be able to trust them. For the rest . . ." He clenched gauntleted fists at his sides, seemingly unaware. "Sometimes a sword turns in your hand, but I still need a sword. Just stay away from any man in a black coat. Look, there's no time for talking. It's best I go quickly." She had been wrong. He was not exactly as she had dreamed of him. There had been a boyishness about him sometimes, but it was gone as if burned away. She mourned that for him. She did not think he did, or could.

"hi ɪz ɹaɪɾ ɪn wʌn θɪŋ," læn sɛɾ ɝaʊn ɪz paɪpɛstəm wɪð ðə seɪm sɔɹɾ ə kwaɪət. ənʌðɝ mæn u sim nɛvɝ tə hæv bɪn ə bɔɪ. hɪz aɪz wɝ blu aɪs bɪniθ ðə bɹeɪɾɪd lɛðɝ kɔɹd ðəɾ ɪnsɝkəld ɪz bɹaʊz. "ɛniwʌn nɪɹ ɪm ɪz ɪn ɡɹeɪt deɪnʒɝ. ɛniwʌn." fəɹ səm ɹizən, nɪneɪiv snɔɹɾɪd. ðən pʊɾ əɹ hæn ɑn ə lɛðɝ skɹɪp wɪð hɑɹd bʌlʒɪz laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən smaɪld. ðoʊ æftɝ ə moʊmən əɹ smaɪl fɔltɝd.

"He is right in one thing," Lan said around his pipestem with the same sort of quiet. Another man who seemed never to have been a boy. His eyes were blue ice beneath the braided leather cord that encircled his brows. "Anyone near him is in great danger. Anyone." For some reason, Nynaeve snorted. Then put her hand on a leather scrip with hard bulges lying on the table and smiled. Though after a moment her smile faltered.

"du maɪ fɝst-sɪstɝ ən aɪ fɪɹ deɪnʒɝ?" eɪvinhə dɪmændəd, plæntɪŋ əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps. hɝ ʃɔl slɪp fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən fɛl tə ðə flɔɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz soʊ ɪntɛn ðət ʃi simd ʌnəwɛɹ ə ðə lɔs. "ðɪs mæn əz toʊ tə ʌs, ənælaɪn, ən wi tə hɪm. ɪt mʌs bi wɝkt aʊt."

"Do my first-sister and I fear danger?" Aviendha demanded, planting her fists on her hips. Her shawl slipped from her shoulders and fell to the floor, but she was so intent that she seemed unaware of the loss. "This man has toh to us, Aan'allein, and we to him. It must be worked out."

mɪn spɹɛɾ əɹ hænz. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɛnibəɾiz toʊz əv tə də wɪð ɛniθɪŋ, əɹ fiɾ iðɝ, bʌɾ aɪm nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ ɛniwɛɹ əntɪl jə tɔk tə ðɛm, ɹænd!" ʃi əfɛktəd nɑt tə noʊɾəs eɪvinhəz aʊtʃɹeɪdʒd ɡlɛɹ.

Min spread her hands. "I don't know what anybody's toes have to do with anything, or feet either, but I'm not going anywhere until you talk to them, Rand!" She affected not to notice Aviendha's outraged glare.

saɪɪŋ, ɹænd lin əɡɛnst ə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə teɪbəl ən ɹeɪkt ɡlʌv fɪŋɡɝz θɹu ðə dɑɹk, ɹɛɾɪʃ kɝlz ðət hʌŋ tə hɪz nɛk. hi sim tə bi ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wɪð hɪmsɛlf ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ.

Sighing, Rand leaned against a corner of the table and raked gloved fingers through the dark, reddish curls that hung to his neck. He seemed to be arguing with himself under his breath.

"aɪm sɑɹi jə ɛndəɾ ʌp wɪð ðə sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn," hi sɛd faɪnəli. hi dɪd saʊn sɑɹi, bʌt nɑt vɛɹi; hi maɪɾ əv bɪn ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðə koʊld. "teɪm wɑz səpoʊz tə dɪlɪvɝ əm tə ðə sɪstɝz aɪ θɔt wɝ wɪð ju. bʌɾ aɪ səpoʊz ɛniwʌn kən meɪk ə mɪsteɪk laɪk ðæt. meɪbi hi θɔɾ ɔl ðoʊz wɪsdəmz ən waɪz wɪmən nɪneɪiv əz ɡæðɝd wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ." hɪz smaɪl wɑz kwaɪət. ɪt dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ ɪz aɪz.

"I'm sorry you ended up with the sul'dam and damane," he said finally. He did sound sorry, but not very; he might have been regretting the cold. "Taim was supposed to deliver them to the sisters I thought were with you. But I suppose anyone can make a mistake like that. Maybe he thought all those Wisdoms and Wise Women Nynaeve has gathered were Aes Sedai." His smile was quiet. It did not touch his eyes.

"ɹænd," mɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə loʊ, wɔɹnɪŋ toʊn.

"Rand," Min said in a low, warning tone.

hi hæd ðə nɝv tə lʊk əɾ əɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋli, əz ɪf i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. ən i wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn. "ɛniweɪ, jə sim tə hæv ɪnʌf ə ðɛm tə hoʊld ɑn tə ə hændfʊl ʌv wɪmən əntɪl jə kən tɝn əm oʊvɝ tə ðə . . . ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz, ðə wʌnz wɪð ɛɡwin. θɪŋz nɛvɝ tɝn aʊt kwaɪt ðə weɪ jə ɪkspɛkt, də ðeɪ? hu wʊɾə θɔɾ ə fju sɪstɝz ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɪleɪɾə wəd ɡɹoʊ ɪndə ə ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ðə waɪt taʊɝ? wɪð ɛɡwin əz æmɪɝlɪn! ən ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hæn fəɹ əɹ ɑɹmi. aɪ səpoʊz mæt kən steɪ ðəɹ əwaɪl." fəɹ səm ɹizən i blɪŋkt ən tʌtʃt ɪz fɔɹhɛd, ðən wɛn ɑn ɪn ðəɾ ɪɹɪteɪɾɪŋli kæʒəwəl toʊn. "wɛl. ə stʃɹeɪnʒ tɝn ʌv ɪvɛns ɔl ɝaʊnd. ət ðɪs ɹeɪt, aɪ woʊn bi sɝpɹaɪzd ɪf maɪ fɹɛnz ɪn ðə taʊɝ wɝk ʌp ɪnʌf kɝədʒ tə kʌm aʊɾ ɪn ði oʊpən."

He had the nerve to look at her questioningly, as if he did not understand. And he went right on. "Anyway, you seem to have enough of them to hold on to a handful of women until you can turn them over to the . . . the other sisters, the ones with Egwene. Things never turn out quite the way you expect, do they? Who would have thought a few sisters running away from Elaida would grow into a rebellion against the White Tower? With Egwene as Amyrlin! And the Band of the Red Hand for her army. I suppose Mat can stay there awhile." For some reason he blinked and touched his forehead, then went on in that irritatingly casual tone. "Well. A strange turn of events all around. At this rate, I won't be surprised if my friends in the Tower work up enough courage to come out in the open."

ɑɹtʃɪŋ ən aɪbɹaʊ, ɪleɪn ɡlænst, ət nɪneɪiv. wɪsdəmz ən waɪz wɪmən? ðə bænd wɑz ɛɡwinz ɑɹmi, ən mæt wɑz wɪð ɪt? nɪneɪivz ətɛmpt ət waɪd-aɪɾ ɪnəsəns meɪɾ əɹ lʊk laɪk ɡɪl neɪl tə ə dɔɹ. ɪleɪn səpoʊzd ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. hi wəd lɝn ðə tʃɹuθ sun ɪnʌf, ɪf i kəd bi tɔkt ɪndə ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɛɡwin. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi hæd mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz tə teɪk ʌp wɪð hɪm. ðə mæn wɑz bæbəlɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ ɔfhæn i mænədʒ tə saʊnd, tɔsɪŋ aʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðeɪ maɪt snæp əɾ ɪn hoʊps ə daɪvɝɾɪŋ ðɛm.

Arching an eyebrow, Elayne glanced, at Nynaeve. Wisdoms and Wise Women? The Band was Egwene's army, and Mat was with it? Nynaeve's attempt at wide-eyed innocence made her look like guilt nailed to a door. Elayne supposed it did not matter. He would learn the truth soon enough, if he could be talked into going to Egwene. In any case, she had more important matters to take up with him. The man was babbling, however offhand he managed to sound, tossing out anything they might snap at in hopes of diverting them.

"ɪt woʊn du, ɹænd." ɪleɪn taɪɾənd əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ skɝts tə kip hɝsɛlf fɹəm ʃeɪkɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ ət hɪm. əɹ ə fɪst; ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɪtʃ ɪt wəd bi. ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz? ðə ɹil ɛɛs sədaɪ, hi hæd bɪn əbaʊt tə seɪ. haʊ dɛɹ hi? ən ɪz fɹɛnz ɪn ðə taʊɝ! kəɾ i stɪl bɪliv ɑlviɛɝɪnz stʃɹeɪnʒ lɛɾɝ? hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kul ən fɝm ən stɛɾi, bɹʊkɪŋ noʊ nɑnsɛns. "nʌn ə ðət mæɾɝz ə hɛɹ, nɑt naʊ. jə ən eɪvinhə ən mɪn ən aɪ ɑɹ wʌt wi nid tə tɔk əbaʊt. ən wi wɪl. wi ɔl wɪl, ɹænd ælθɹ, ən jə ɑɹ nɑt livɪŋ ðə pæləs əntɪl wi du!"

"It won't do, Rand." Elayne tightened her hands on her skirts to keep herself from shaking a finger at him. Or a fist; she was not sure which it would be. The other sisters? The real Aes Sedai, he had been about to say. How dare he? And his friends in the Tower! Could he still believe Alviarin's strange letter? Her voice was cool and firm and steady, brooking no nonsense. "None of that matters a hair, not now. You and Aviendha and Min and I are what we need to talk about. And we will. We all will, Rand al'Thor, and you are not leaving the Palace until we do!"

fəɹ ðə lɔŋɡəs taɪm, hi sɪmpli lʊkt ət hɝ, hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. ðən i ɪnheɪld ɑɾəbli, ən ɪz feɪs tɝn tə ɡɹænət. "aɪ lʌv ju, ɪleɪn." wɪθaʊɾ ə pɔz, hi wɛn ɑn, wɝdz ɹʌʃɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪm, wɔɾɝ fɹəm ə bɝs dæm. ən ɪz feɪs ə stoʊn wɔl. "aɪ lʌv ju, eɪvinhə. aɪ lʌv ju, mɪn. ən nɑt wʌn ə wɪskɝ mɔɹ əɹ lɛs ðən ði ʌðɝ tu. aɪ doʊn dʒʌst wɑnt wʌn ə ju, aɪ wɑn ɔl θɹi. soʊ ðəɹ juv ɪt. ɪm ə lɛtʃɝ. naʊ jə kən wɔk əweɪ ən nɑt lʊk bæk. ɪts mædnəs, ɛniweɪ. aɪ kæn əfɔɹd tə lʌv ɛnibəɾi!"

For the longest time, he simply looked at her, his expression never changing. Then he inhaled audibly, and his face turned to granite. "I love you, Elayne." Without a pause, he went on, words rushing out of him, water from a burst dam. And his face a stone wall. "I love you, Aviendha. I love you, Min. And not one a whisker more or less than the other two. I don't just want one of you, I want all three. So there you have it. I'm a lecher. Now you can walk away and not look back. It's madness, anyway. I can't afford to love anybody!"

"ɹæn ælθɹ," nɪneɪiv ʃɹikt, "ðæɾ ɪz ðə moʊst aʊtʃɹeɪdʒəs θɪŋ aɪ ɛvɝ hɝɾ aʊɾ ə jəɹ maʊð! ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə ʌv tɛlɪŋ θɹi wɪmən jə lʌv ðɛm! jəɹ wɝs ðən ə lɛtʃɝ! jə əpɑlədʒaɪz ɹaɪt naʊ!" læn hæd snætʃt ɪz paɪp fɹəm ɪz maʊθ ən wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ɹænd.

"Rand al'Thor," Nynaeve shrieked, "that is the most outrageous thing I ever heard out of your mouth! The very idea of telling three women you love them! You're worse than a lecher! You apologize right now!" Lan had snatched his pipe from his mouth and was staring at Rand.

"aɪ lʌv ju, ɹænd," ɪleɪn sɛd sɪmpli, "æn ɔlðoʊ jə hævən æskt, aɪ wɑnə mɛɹi ju." ʃi blʌʃt feɪnli, bʌt ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə bi mʌtʃ mɔɹ fɔɹwɝd bɪfɔɹ vɛɹi lɔŋ, soʊ ʃi səpoʊz ðɪs hɑɹdli kaʊntəd. nɪneɪivz maʊθ wɝkt, bʌt noʊ saʊn keɪm aʊt.

"I love you, Rand," Elayne said simply, "and although you haven't asked, I want to marry you." She blushed faintly, but she intended to be much more forward before very long, so she supposed this hardly counted. Nynaeve's mouth worked, but no sound came out.

"maɪ hɑɹɾ ɪz ɪn jəɹ hænz, ɹænd," eɪvinhə sɛd, tʃɹiɾɪŋ ɪz neɪm laɪk sʌmθɪŋ ɹɛɹ ən pɹɛʃəs. "ɪf aɪ kən kənvɪns maɪ fɝst-sɪstɝ, wɪl meɪk ə bɹaɪɾəl ɹiθ fəɹ ju." ən ʃi blʌʃt, tu, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kʌvɝ ɪɾ ɪn bɛndɪŋ tə teɪk əɹ ʃɔl fɹəm ðə flɔɹ ən ɝeɪnʒɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn əɹ ɑɹmz. baɪ il kʌstəmz, ʃi ʃəd nɛvɝ hæd sɛɾ ɛni ʌv ðæt. nɪneɪiv faɪnəli ɡɑɾ ə saʊn aʊt. ə skwik.

"My heart is in your hands, Rand," Aviendha said, treating his name like something rare and precious. "If I can convince my first-sister, we will make a bridal wreath for you." And she blushed, too, trying to cover it in bending to take her shawl from the floor and arranging it on her arms. By Aiel customs, she should never had said any of that. Nynaeve finally got a sound out. A squeak.

"ɪf jə doʊnt noʊ baɪ ðɪs taɪm ðəɾ aɪ lʌv ju," mɪn sɛd, "ðɛn jəɹ blaɪnd, dɛf ən dɛd!" ʃi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt blʌʃ; ðəɹ wɑz ə mɪstʃəvəs laɪɾ ɪn əɹ dɑɹk aɪz, ən ʃi simd ɹɛɾi tə læf. "æn əz fəɹ mɛɹɪdʒ, wɛl, wɪl wɝk ðəɾ aʊt bɪtwin ðə θɹi ʌv ʌs, soʊ ðɛɹ!" nɪneɪiv tʊk ə ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ bɹeɪd wɪð boʊθ hænz ən ɡeɪv ɪɾ ə stɛɾi pʊl, bɹiðɪŋ hɛvəli θɹu hɝ noʊz. læn hæd bɪɡʌn ən ɪntɛns stʌɾi ʌv ðə kɑntɛns ə hɪz paɪps boʊl.

"If you don't know by this time that I love you," Min said, "then you're blind, deaf and dead!" She certainly did not blush; there was a mischievous light in her dark eyes, and she seemed ready to laugh. "And as for marriage, well, we'll work that out between the three of us, so there!" Nynaeve took a grip on her braid with both hands and gave it a steady pull, breathing heavily through her nose. Lan had begun an intense study of the contents of his pipe's bowl.

ɹænd ɪɡzæmən ðə θɹi ʌv əm əz ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ sin ə wʊmən bɪfɔɹ ən wʌndɝd wʌt ðeɪ wɝ. "jɔɹ ɔl mæd," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "aɪd mɛɹi ɛni ʌv jə - ɔl ə ju, ðə laɪt hɛlp mi! - bʌɾ ɪt kæn bi, ən jə noʊ ɪt." nɪneɪiv kəlæpst ɪndə ə tʃɛɹ, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. ʃi mʌɾɝd tə hɝsɛlf, ðoʊ ɔl ɪleɪn kəɾ ʌndɝstænd wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl swɑloʊɪŋ ðɛɹ tʌŋz.

Rand examined the three of them as if he had never seen a woman before and wondered what they were. "You're all mad," he said finally. "I'd marry any of you - all of you, the Light help me! - but it can't be, and you know it." Nynaeve collapsed into a chair, shaking her head. She muttered to herself, though all Elayne could understand was something about the Women's Circle swallowing their tongues.

"ðɛɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls wi nid tə dɪskʌs," ɪleɪn sɛd. laɪt, mɪn ən eɪvinhə cʊɾə bɪn lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə peɪstʃɹi! wɪð ən ɛfɝt ʃi mænədʒ tə meɪk əɹ oʊn smaɪl ə lɪɾəl lɛs . . . iɡɝ. "ɪn maɪ ɹumz, aɪ θɪŋk. ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə bɑðɝ nɪneɪiv ən læn." əɹ ɹæðɝ, ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd ðət nɪneɪiv wəd tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ðɛm, ɪf ʃi hɝd. ðə wʊmən wɑz vɛɹi kwɪk tə juz əɹ əθɔɹəɾi wən ɪt keɪm tə ɛɛs sədaɪ mæɾɝz.

"There is something else we need to discuss," Elayne said. Light, Min and Aviendha could have been looking at a pastry! With an effort she managed to make her own smile a little less . . . eager. "In my rooms, I think. There's no need to bother Nynaeve and Lan." Or rather, she was afraid that Nynaeve would try to stop them, if she heard. The woman was very quick to use her authority when it came to Aes Sedai matters.

"jɛs," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. ən ðɛn, stʃɹeɪnʒli, æɾəd, "aɪ sɛd jud wʌn, nɪneɪiv. aɪ woʊn liv wɪθaʊt siɪŋ jə əɡɛn."

"Yes," Rand said slowly. And then, strangely, added, "I said you'd won, Nynaeve. I won't leave without seeing you again."

"oʊ!" nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "jɛs. ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. aɪ wɑtʃt ɪm ɡɹoʊ ʌp," ʃi blæðɝd, tɝnɪŋ ə sɪkli smaɪl ɑn ɪleɪn. "ɔlmoʊs fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. wɑtʃt ɪz fɝst stɛps. hi kænt ɡoʊ wɪθaʊɾ ə ɡʊd lɔŋ tɔk wɪð mi."

"Oh!" Nynaeve gave a start. "Yes. Of course not. I watched him grow up," she blathered, turning a sickly smile on Elayne. "Almost from the start. Watched his first steps. He can't go without a good long talk with me."

ɪleɪn aɪɾ əɹ səspɪʃəsli. laɪt, ʃi saʊndəd fəɹ ɔl ðə wɝld laɪk ən eɪdʒɪd nɝs. ðoʊ lini hæd nɛvɝ bæbəld. ʃi hoʊp lini wɑz əlaɪv ən wɛl, bʌt ʃi wɑz vɛɹi mʌtʃ əfɹeɪd ðət niðɝ wɑz tʃɹu. waɪ wɑz nɪneɪiv kæɹiɪŋ ɑn ɪn ðɪs fæʃən? ðə wʊmən wɑz ʌp tə sʌmθɪŋ, ən ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə juz əɹ stændɪŋ tə kæɹi ɪɾ ɔf, ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ivən ʃi nu wɑz ɹɔŋ.

Elayne eyed her suspiciously. Light, she sounded for all the world like an aged nurse. Though Lini had never babbled. She hoped Lini was alive and well, but she was very much afraid that neither was true. Why was Nynaeve carrying on in this fashion? The woman was up to something, and if she was not going to use her standing to carry it off, it was something even she knew was wrong.

sʌɾənli, ɹænd sim tə weɪvɝ, əz ðoʊ ði ɛɹ ɝaʊn ɪm wɝ ʃɪmɝɪŋ wɪð hit, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls flu aʊɾ ʌv ɪleɪnz hɛd. ɪn ən ɪnstənt, hi wɑz . . . sʌmwʌn ɛls, ʃɔɹɾɝ ən θɪkɝ, kɔɹs ən bɹuɾɪʃ. ən soʊ ɹipʌlsɪv tə lʊk ət ðət ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən kənsɪɾɝ ðə fæk ðəɾ i wɑz juzɪŋ ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ. ɡɹisi blæk hɛɹ hʌŋ daʊn ɑntu ən ənhɛlθəli peɪl feɪs dɑməneɪɾəd baɪ hɛɹi wɔɹts, ɪnkluɾɪŋ wʌn ɑn ə bʌlbəs noʊz əbʌv θɪk slæk lɪps ðəɾ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə dʒɹulɪŋ. hi skwizd ɪz aɪz ʃʌɾ ən swɑloʊd, hænz ɡɹɪpɪŋ ði ɑɹmz ə hɪz tʃɛɹ, əz ɪf i kəd nɑt stæn tə si ðɛm lʊk ət hɪm.

Suddenly, Rand seemed to waver, as though the air around him were shimmering with heat, and everything else flew out of Elayne's head. In an instant, he was . . . someone else, shorter and thicker, coarse and brutish. And so repulsive to look at that she did not even consider the fact that he was using the male half of the Power. Greasy black hair hung down onto an unhealthily pale face dominated by hairy warts, including one on a bulbous nose above thick slack lips that appeared on the edge of drooling. He squeezed his eyes shut and swallowed, hands gripping the arms of his chair, as if he could not stand to see them look at him.

"ju ɑɹ stɪl bjuɾəfəl, ɹænd," ʃi sɛd dʒɛnli.

"You are still beautiful, Rand," she said gently.

"hɑ!" mɪn sɛd. "ðæt feɪs wəd meɪk ə ɡoʊt feɪnt!" wɛl, ɪt wʊd, bʌt ʃi ʃəd nɑɾ əv sɛd soʊ.

"Ha!" Min said. "That face would make a goat faint!" Well, it would, but she should not have said so.

eɪvinhə læft. "ju hæv ə sɛns ə hjumɝ, mɪn fɑɹʃɔ. ðət feɪs wəd meɪk ə hɝɾ ʌv ɡoʊts feɪnt." oʊ, laɪt, ɪt wʊd! ɪleɪn swɑloʊɾ ə ɡɪɡəl dʒʌst ɪn taɪm.

Aviendha laughed. "You have a sense of humor, Min Farshaw. That face would make a herd of goats faint." Oh, Light, it would! Elayne swallowed a giggle just in time.

"aɪ æm u aɪ æm," ɹænd sɛd, pʊʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɛɹ. "ju dʒʌst woʊn si ɪt."

"I am who I am," Rand said, pushing himself up out of the chair. "You just won't see it."

ət dɪniz fɝst saɪɾ ə ɹænd ɪn ɪz dɪsɡaɪz, ðə smaɪl slɪd kɹʊkədli ɔf ðə stɑki wʊmənz feɪs. keɪsilz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ θɔts ə sikɹət lʌvɝz, ɪleɪn θɔt, læfɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf ɪn əmjuzmənt. ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ i dʒɹu əz mɛni stɛɹz əz ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən, ʃæmbəlɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪtwin əm wɪð ə sʌlən skaʊl. sɝɾənli noʊ wʌn kəd səspɛkt u hi wɑz. ðə sɝvəns ɪn ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz pɹɑbli θɔɾ i hæd bɪn æpɹəhɛndəɾ ɪn səm kɹaɪm. hi sɝɾənli hæd ðə lʊk. keɪsil ən dɪni kɛpt ə hɑɹɾ aɪ ɑn ɪm əz ɪf ðeɪ θɔt soʊ, tu.

At Deni's first sight of Rand in his disguise, the smile slid crookedly off the stocky woman's face. Caseille's mouth dropped open. So much for thoughts of secret lovers, Elayne thought, laughing to herself in amusement. She was sure he drew as many stares as the Guardswomen, shambling along between them with a sullen scowl. Certainly no one could suspect who he was. The servants in the corridors probably thought he had been apprehended in some crime. He certainly had the look. Caseille and Deni kept a hard eye on him as if they thought so, too.

ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən keɪm nɪɹ tə ɑɹɡjuɪŋ wən ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd ʃi ɪntɛndəɾ əm tə weɪɾ aʊtsaɪɾ əɹ əpɑɹtməns waɪl ðə θɹi ʌv əm tʊk ɪm ɪnsaɪd. sʌɾənli, ɹændz dɪsɡaɪz dɪd nɑt sim əmjuzɪŋ əɾ ɔl ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. keɪsilz maʊθ θɪnd, ən dɪniz waɪd feɪs sɛɾ ɪn stʌbɝn dɪsplɛʒɝ. ɪleɪn ɔlmoʊs hæd tə weɪv əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ bɪniθ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ tʊk pəzɪʃənz bɪsaɪɾ əɹ dɔɹ, skaʊlɪŋ. ʃi ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ sɔfli, kʌɾɪŋ ɔf ðə saɪɾ ə ðɛɹ fɹaʊnz, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə slæm ɪt. laɪt, ðə mæn cʊɾə tʃoʊzən sʌmθɪŋ ə lɪɾəl lɛs ənseɪvɝi fəɹ ɪz dɪsɡaɪz.

The Guardswomen came near to arguing when they realized she intended them to wait outside her apartments while the three of them took him inside. Suddenly, Rand's disguise did not seem amusing at all any longer. Caseille's mouth thinned, and Deni's wide face set in stubborn displeasure. Elayne almost had to wave her Great Serpent ring beneath their noses before they took positions beside her door, scowling. She shut the door softly, cutting off the sight of their frowns, but she wanted to slam it. Light, the man could have chosen something a little less unsavory for his disguise.

ən əz fəɹ hɪm, hi wɛn stʃɹeɪt tə ði ɪnleɪd teɪbəl, linɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪt waɪl ði ɛɹ ɝaʊn ɪm ʃɪmɝɾ ən i bɪkeɪm hɪmsɛlf wʌns mɔɹ. ðə dʒɹæɡənz hɛdz ɑn ðə bæks ə hɪz hænz ɡlɪɾɝd mɛɾəlɪkli, skɑɹləɾ ən ɡoʊld. "aɪ niɾ ə dʒɹɪŋk," hi mʌɾɝd θɪkli, kætʃɪŋ saɪɾ ə ðə tɔl-nɛk sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ ɑn ðə lɔŋ saɪd-teɪbəl əɡɛns ðə wɔl.

And as for him, he went straight to the inlaid table, leaning against it while the air around him shimmered and he became himself once more. The Dragon's heads on the backs of his hands glittered metallically, scarlet and gold. "I need a drink," he muttered thickly, catching sight of the tall-necked silver pitcher on the long side-table against the wall.

stɪl nɑt lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ əɹ mɪn əɹ eɪvinhə, hi wɔkt oʊvɝ ənstɛɾəli ən fɪld ə sɪlvɝ waɪnkʌp ðəɾ i hæf-dʒɹeɪn ɪn wʌn lɔŋ swɑloʊ. ðət swit spaɪsi waɪn hæd bɪn lɛft wən əɹ bɹɛkfəst wɑz teɪkən əweɪ. ɪt mʌs bi koʊld əz aɪs baɪ naʊ. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ɪkspɛktəd tə ɹɪtɝn tə hɝ ɹumz soʊ sun, ən ðə faɪɝ ɑn ðə hɑɹθ hæd bɪn bæŋk daʊn bɪniθ æʃəz. bʌɾ i meɪd noʊ muv ʃi kəd si tə wɔɹm ðə waɪn baɪ tʃænəlɪŋ. ʃi wʊɾə sin stim, ət list. ən waɪ hæɾ i wɔk tə ðə waɪn, ɪnstɛɾ ə tʃænəlɪŋ tə bɹɪŋ ɪt tə hɪm? ðət wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ i ɔlweɪz dɪd, floʊɾɪŋ waɪnkʌps ən læmps əbaʊɾ ɑn floʊz ʌv ɛɹ.

Still not looking at her or Min or Aviendha, he walked over unsteadily and filled a silver winecup that he half-drained in one long swallow. That sweet spicy wine had been left when her breakfast was taken away. It must be cold as ice by now. She had not been expected to return to her rooms so soon, and the fire on the hearth had been banked down beneath ashes. But he made no move she could see to warm the wine by channeling. She would have seen steam, at least. And why had he walked to the wine, instead of channeling to bring it to him? That was the sort of thing he always did, floating winecups and lamps about on flows of Air.

"ɑɹ jə wɛl, ɹænd?" ɪleɪn æskt. "aɪ min, ɑɹ jə sɪk?" hɝ stʌmək taɪɾənd ət ðə θɔɾ ʌv wʌt sɪknəs ɪt maɪt bi, wɪð hɪm. "nɪneɪiv kən - "

"Are you well, Rand?" Elayne asked. "I mean, are you sick?" Her stomach tightened at the thought of what sickness it might be, with him. "Nynaeve can - "

"aɪ æm əz faɪn əz aɪ kən bi," hi sɛd flætli. stɪl wɪð ɪz bæk tə ðɛm. ɛmptiɪŋ ðə kʌp, hi bɪɡæn tə fɪl ɪɾ əɡɛn. "naʊ wʌɾ ɪz ɪt jə doʊnt wɑnt nɪneɪiv tə hɪɹ?"

"I am as fine as I can be," he said flatly. Still with his back to them. Emptying the cup, he began to fill it again. "Now what is it you don't want Nynaeve to hear?"

ɪleɪnz aɪbɹaʊz ʃɑɾ ʌp, ən ʃi ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð eɪvinhə ən mɪn. ɪf i hæd sin θɹu hɝ sʌbtɝfjudʒ, nɪneɪiv sɝɾənli hæd. waɪ hæd ʃi lɛɾ əm ɡoʊ? ən haʊ hæɾ i sin θɹu ɪt? eɪvinhə ʃʊk əɹ hɛd slaɪtli ɪn wʌndɝ. mɪn ʃʊk hɝz, tu, bʌt wɪð ə ɡɹɪn ðət sɛd jə dʒʌs hæd tə ɪkspɛk ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ naʊ ən ðɛn. ɪleɪn fɛl ðə smɔləst stæb ʌv - nɑt kwaɪt dʒɛləsi; dʒɛləsi wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən, fəɹ əm - dʒʌst ɪɹɪteɪʃən ðət mɪn hæd hæd soʊ mʌtʃ taɪm wɪð ɪm ən ʃi hæd nɑt. wɛl, ɪf i wɑntəd tə pleɪ sɝpɹaɪzəz . . .

Elayne's eyebrows shot up, and she exchanged looks with Aviendha and Min. If he had seen through her subterfuge, Nynaeve certainly had. Why had she let them go? And how had he seen through it? Aviendha shook her head slightly in wonder. Min shook hers, too, but with a grin that said you just had to expect this sort of thing now and then. Elayne felt the smallest stab of - not quite jealousy; jealousy was out of the question, for them - just irritation that Min had had so much time with him and she had not. Well, if he wanted to play surprises . . .

"wi wɑnə bɑn jə əɹ wɔɹɾɝ," ʃi sɛd, smuðɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɛs ʌndɝ əɹ əz ʃi tʊk ə tʃɛɹ. mɪn sæɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə teɪbəl, lɛɡz dæŋɡəlɪŋ, ən eɪvinhə sɛɾəld ɑntu ðə kɑɹpət kɹɔs-lɛɡəd, kɛɹfəli spɹɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ əɹ hɛvi wʊlən skɝts. "ɔl θɹi ʌv ʌs. ɪts kʌstəmɛɹi tə æsk, fɝst."

"We want to bond you our Warder," she said, smoothing her dress under her as she took a chair. Min sat on the edge of the table, legs dangling, and Aviendha settled onto the carpet cross-legged, carefully spreading out her heavy woolen skirts. "All three of us. It is customary to ask, first."

hi spʌn ɝaʊnd, waɪn slɑʃɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz kʌp, mɔɹ pɔɹɪŋ fɹəm ðə pɪtʃɝ bɪfɔɹ i kəd bɹɪŋ ɪɾ əpɹaɪt. wɪð ə mʌɾɝd oʊθ, hi heɪstəli stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə spɹɛɾɪŋ wɛtnəs ɑn ðə kɑɹpəɾ ən pʊt ðə pɪtʃɝ bæk ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ. ə lɑɹdʒ dæmp spɑt dɛkɝeɪɾəd ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz ɹʌf koʊt, ən dʒɹɑpləts ə dɑɹk waɪn ðəɾ i tʃɹaɪd tə bɹʌʃ əweɪ wɪð ɪz fɹi hænd. vɛɹi sæɾəsfæktʃɹi.

He spun around, wine sloshing out of his cup, more pouring from the pitcher before he could bring it upright. With a muttered oath, he hastily stepped out of the spreading wetness on the carpet and put the pitcher back on the tray. A large damp spot decorated the front of his rough coat, and droplets of dark wine that he tried to brush away with his free hand. Very satisfactory.

"ju ɹɪli ɑɹ mæd," hi ɡɹaʊld. "ju noʊ wʌts əhɛɾ ə mi. jə noʊ wʌɾ ɪt minz fəɹ ɛniwʌn aɪm bɑndəd tə. ivən ɪf aɪ doʊnt ɡoʊ ɪnseɪn, ʃiz tə lɪv θɹu mi daɪɪŋ! ən wʌt dʒju min, ɔl θɹi ʌv ju? mɪn kæn tʃænəl. ɛniweɪ, ɑlɑnə mɑsvɑni ɡɑt ðəɹ əhɛɾ ə ju, ən ʃi dɪdn bɑðɝ æskɪŋ. ʃi ən vɛɹɪn wɝ teɪkɪŋ səm tu ɹɪvɝz ɡɝlz tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ. aɪv bɪn bɑndəd tə hɝ fəɹ mʌnθs, naʊ."

"You really are mad," he growled. "You know what's ahead of me. You know what it means for anyone I'm bonded to. Even if I don't go insane, she has to live through me dying! And what do you mean, all three of you? Min can't channel. Anyway, Alanna Mosvani got there ahead of you, and she didn't bother asking. She and Verin were taking some Two Rivers girls to the White Tower. I've been bonded to her for months, now."

"æn jə kɛpt ɪt fɹəm mi, jə wʊlhɛɾɪd ʃifɝɾɝ?" mɪn dɪmændəd. "ɪf aɪd noʊn - !" ʃi dɛfli pɹədust ə slɪm naɪf fɹəm əɹ sliv, ðən ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪɾ ən ɡlʌmli pʊɾ ɪt bæk. ðət kjʊɹ wʊɾə bɪn əz hɑɹɾ ɑn ɹænd əz ɑn ɑlɑnə.

"And you kept it from me, you woolheaded sheepherder?" Min demanded. "If I'd known - !" She deftly produced a slim knife from her sleeve, then glared at it and glumly put it back. That cure would have been as hard on Rand as on Alanna.

"ðɪs wɑz əɡɛns kʌstəm," eɪvinhə sɛd, hæf kwɛstʃənɪŋ. ʃi ʃɪftəɾ ɑn ðə kɑɹpəɾ ən fɪŋɡɝɾ əɹ bɛl naɪf.

"This was against custom," Aviendha said, half questioning. She shifted on the carpet and fingered her belt knife.

"vɛɹi mʌtʃ soʊ," ɪleɪn ɹɪplaɪd ɡɹɪmli. ðəɾ ə sɪstɝ wəd də ðət tə ɛni mæn wɑz dɪsɡʌstɪŋ! ðəɾ ɑlɑnə hæd dʌn ɪt tə ɹænd . . . ! ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə dɑɹk, faɪɝi ɡɹin wɪð əɹ kwɪksɪlvɝ hjumɝ ən əɹ kwɪksɪlvɝ tɛmpɝ. "ɑlɑnə hæz mɔɹ toʊ tə hɪm ðən ʃi kəd ɹipeɪ ɪn ə laɪftaɪm! ən tə ʌs. ivən ɪf ʃi dʌznt, ʃɪl wɪʃ aɪ hæd dʒʌs kɪld əɹ æftɝ aɪ leɪ hænz ɑn hɝ!"

"Very much so," Elayne replied grimly. That a sister would do that to any man was disgusting! That Alanna had done it to Rand . . . ! She remembered the dark, fiery Green with her quicksilver humor and her quicksilver temper. "Alanna has more toh to him than she could repay in a lifetime! And to us. Even if she doesn't, she will wish I had just killed her after I lay hands on her!"

"æftɝ wi leɪ hænz ɑn hɝ," eɪvinhə sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ fəɹ ɛmfəsəs.

"After we lay hands on her," Aviendha said, nodding for emphasis.

"soʊ." ɹænd pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɪz waɪn. "ju kən si ðɛɹz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn ðɪs. aɪ . . . aɪ θɪŋk aɪd bɛɾɝ ɡoʊ bæk tə nɪneɪiv, naʊ. ɑɹ jə kʌmɪŋ, mɪn?" dɪspaɪt wʌt ðeɪ hæd toʊl hɪm, hi saʊndəɾ əz ðoʊ hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv, əz ɪf mɪn maɪɾ əbændən ɪm naʊ. hi dɪd nɑt saʊn əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪt, oʊnli ɹɪzaɪnd.

"So." Rand peered into his wine. "You can see there's no point in this. I . . . I think I'd better go back to Nynaeve, now. Are you coming, Min?" Despite what they had told him, he sounded as though he did not really believe, as if Min might abandon him now. He did not sound afraid of it, only resigned.

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə pɔɪnt," ɪleɪn sɛɾ ɪnsɪstənli. ʃi lin təwɔɹd hɪm, tʃɹaɪɪŋ baɪ ðə fɔɹs ə hɝ wɪl tə meɪk ɪm æksɛpt wʌt ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ. "wʌn bɑn dʌznt wɔɹd jə əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ. sɪstɝz doʊn bɑn ðə seɪm mæn kəz ə kʌstəm, ɹænd, kəz ðeɪ doʊnt wɑnə ʃɛɹ hɪm, nɑt kəz ɪt kæn bi dʌn. ən ɪɾ ɪzən əɡɛns taʊɝ lɔ, iðɝ." ʌv kɔɹs, səm kʌstəmz wɝ stʃɹɔŋ əz lɔ, ət list ɪn ði aɪz ə ðə sɪstɝz. nɪneɪiv sim tə ɡoʊ ɑn mɔɹ ɛvɹi deɪ əbaʊɾ əphoʊldɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ kʌstəmz ən dɪɡnəɾi. wən ʃi lɝn ə ðɪs, ʃi wəd pɹɑbli ɪksploʊd ɹaɪt θɹu ðə ɹuf. "wɛl, wi də wɑnə ʃɛɹ ju! wɪl ʃɛɹ ju, ɪf jə əɡɹi."

"There is a point," Elayne said insistently. She leaned toward him, trying by the force of her will to make him accept what she was saying. "One bond doesn't ward you against another. Sisters don't bond the same man because of custom, Rand, because they don't want to share him, not because it can't be done. And it isn't against Tower law, either." Of course, some customs were strong as law, at least in the eyes of the sisters. Nynaeve seemed to go on more every day about upholding Aes Sedai customs and dignity. When she learned of this, she would probably explode right through the roof. "Well, we do want to share you! We will share you, if you agree."

haʊ izi ɪt wɑz tə seɪ ðæt! ʃi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ʃi kəd nɑt, wʌns. əntɪl ʃi keɪm tə ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi lʌvd eɪvinhə əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi dɪd hɪm, dʒʌst ɪn ə dɪfɹənt weɪ. ən mɪn, tu; ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ, ivən ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ ədɑptəd wʌn ənʌðɝ. ʃi wəd stʃɹaɪp ɑlɑnə fɹəm tɑp tə bɑɾəm fəɹ tʌtʃɪŋ hɪm, ɡɪvən ðə tʃæns, bʌɾ eɪvinhə ən mɪn wɝ dɪfɹənt. ðeɪ wɝ pɑɹɾ ə hɝ. ɪn ə weɪ, ðeɪ wɝ hɝ, ən ʃi ðɛm.

How easy it was to say that! She had been sure she could not, once. Until she came to realize that she loved Aviendha as much as she did him, just in a different way. And Min, too; another sister, even if they had not adopted one another. She would stripe Alanna from top to bottom for touching him, given the chance, but Aviendha and Min were different. They were part of her. In a way, they were her, and she them.

ʃi sɔfən əɹ toʊn. "aɪ æm æskɪŋ, ɹænd. wəɹ æskɪŋ. pliz lɛɾ əs bɑn ju."

She softened her tone. "I am asking, Rand. We are asking. Please let us bond you."

"mɪn," hi mɝmɝd, ɔlmoʊst əkjuzɪŋli. hɪz aɪz ɑn mɪnz feɪs wɝ fɪld wɪð dɪspɛɹ. "ju nu, dɪdn ju? jə nu ɪf aɪ leɪɾ aɪz ɑn əm . . ." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, əneɪbəl əɹ ənwɪlɪŋ tə ɡoʊ ɑn.

"Min," he murmured, almost accusingly. His eyes on Min's face were filled with despair. "You knew, didn't you? You knew if I laid eyes on them . . ." He shook his head, unable or unwilling to go on.

"aɪ dɪdnt noʊ əbaʊt ðə bɑndɪŋ əntɪl ðeɪ toʊl mi lɛs ðən ən aʊɝ əɡoʊ," ʃi sɛd, miɾɪŋ ɪz ɡeɪz wɪð ðə moʊs dʒɛntəl lʊk ɪleɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. "bʌɾ aɪ nu, aɪ hoʊpt, wʌt wəd hæpən ɪf jə sɔ ðɛm əɡɛn. səm θɪŋz əv tə bi, ɹænd. ðeɪv tə bi."

"I didn't know about the bonding until they told me less than an hour ago," she said, meeting his gaze with the most gentle look Elayne had ever seen. "But I knew, I hoped, what would happen if you saw them again. Some things have to be, Rand. They have to be."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ɪndə ðə waɪnkʌp, moʊməns simɪŋ tə stʃɹɛtʃ laɪk aʊɝz, ən ət læst sɛɾ ɪt bæk ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ. "ɔl ɹaɪt," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. "aɪ kæn seɪ aɪ də nɑt wɑn ðɪs, kəz aɪ du. ðə laɪt bɝn mi fəɹ ɪt! bʌt θɪŋk ə ðə kɑst. θɪŋk ə ðə pɹaɪs jəl peɪ."

Rand stared into the winecup, moments seeming to stretch like hours, and at last set it back on the tray. "All right," he said quietly. "I can't say I do not want this, because I do. The Light burn me for it! But think of the cost. Think of the price you'll pay."

ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt nid tə θɪŋk ə ðə pɹaɪs. ʃi hæd noʊn ɪt fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, hæd dɪskʌst ɪt wɪð eɪvinhə tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi ʌndɝstænd, tu. ʃi hæɾ ɪkspleɪn ɪt tə mɪn. teɪk wʌt jə wɑnt, ən peɪ fəɹ ɪt, ði oʊl seɪɪŋ wɛnt. nʌn ə ðɛm hæd tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðə pɹaɪs; ðeɪ nu, ən ðeɪ wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə peɪ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm tə weɪst, ðoʊ. ivən naʊ, ʃi dɪd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæst ɪm tə dɪsaɪd ðət pɹaɪs wɑz tu haɪ. əz ɪf ðət wɝ ɪz dɪsɪʒən tə meɪk!

Elayne did not need to think of the price. She had known it from the beginning, had discussed it with Aviendha to make sure she understand, too. She had explained it to Min. Take what you want, and pay for it, the old saying went. None of them had to think about the price; they knew, and they were willing to pay. There was no time to waste, though. Even now, she did not put it past him to decide that price was too high. As if that were his decision to make!

oʊpənɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə seɪaɪdɑɹ, ʃi lɪŋkt wɪð eɪvinhə, ʃɛɹɪŋ ə smaɪl wɪð hɝ. ði ɪnkɹist əwɛɹnəs ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ, ðə mɔɹ ɪntəmət ʃɛɹɪŋ ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz ən fɪzɪkəl filɪŋz, wɑz ɔlweɪz ə plɛʒɝ wɪð əɹ sɪstɝ. ɪt wɑz vɛɹi mʌtʃ laɪk wʌt ðeɪ wəd sun ʃɛɹ wɪð ɹænd. ʃi hæd wɝk ðɪs aʊt kɛɹfəli, stʌɾid ɪt fɹəm ɛvɹi æŋɡəl. wʌt ʃi hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə lɝn ə ði il ədɑpʃən wivz hæd bɪn ə ɡɹeɪt hɛlp. ðət sɛɹəmoʊni hæd bɪn wən ði aɪdiə fɝs keɪm tə hɝ.

Opening herself to saidar, she linked with Aviendha, sharing a smile with her. The increased awareness of one another, the more intimate sharing of emotions and physical feelings, was always a pleasure with her sister. It was very much like what they would soon share with Rand. She had worked this out carefully, studied it from every angle. What she had been able to learn of the Aiel adoption weaves had been a great help. That ceremony had been when the idea first came to her.

kɛɹfəli ʃi woʊv spɪɹət, ə floʊ ʌv oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd θɹɛdz, ɛvɹi θɹɛd pleɪs dʒʌst soʊ, ən leɪd ðə wiv ɑn eɪvinhə sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ðən dɪd ðə seɪm tə mɪn ɑn ðə teɪbəlz ɛdʒ. ɪn ə weɪ, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt tu sɛpɹət wivz əɾ ɔl. ðeɪ ɡloʊd wɪð ə pɹɪsaɪs sɪməlɛɹəɾi, ən ɪt sim ðət lʊkɪŋ ət wʌn, ʃi sɔ ði ʌðɝ əz wɛl. ðiz wɝ nɑt ðə wivz juzd ɪn ði ədɑpʃən sɛɹəmoʊni, bʌt ðeɪ juz ðə seɪm pɹɪnsəpəlz. ðeɪ ɪnkluɾəd; wʌt hæpən tə wʌn mɛʃt ɪn ðət wiv, hæpən tə ɔl ɪn ɪt. əz sun əz ðə wivz wɝ ɪn pleɪs, ʃi pæs ðə lɛɾ ə ðə sɝkəl ə tu tə eɪvinhə. ðə wivz ɔlɹɛɾi meɪd ɹɪmeɪnd, ən eɪvinhə ɪmiɾiətli woʊv aɪdɛntɪkəl wivz ɝaʊn ɪleɪn, ən ɝaʊn mɪn əɡɛn, blɛndɪŋ ðət wʌn əntɪl ɪt wɑz ɪndɪstɪŋɡwɪʃəbəl fɹəm ɪleɪnz bɪfɔɹ pæsɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl bæk. ðeɪ dɪd ðət vɛɹi izəli naʊ, æftɝ ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə pɹæktəs. fɔɹ wivz, əɹ ɹæðɝ, θɹi naʊ, jɛt ðeɪ ɔl sim ðə seɪm wiv.

Carefully she wove Spirit, a flow of over a hundred threads, every thread placed just so, and laid the weave on Aviendha sitting on the floor, then did the same to Min on the table's edge. In a way, they were not two separate weaves at all. They glowed with a precise similarity, and it seemed that looking at one, she saw the other as well. These were not the weaves used in the adoption ceremony, but they used the same principles. They included; what happened to one meshed in that weave, happened to all in it. As soon as the weaves were in place, she passed the lead of the circle of two to Aviendha. The weaves already made remained, and Aviendha immediately wove identical weaves around Elayne, and around Min again, blending that one until it was indistinguishable from Elayne's before passing control back. They did that very easily now, after a great deal of practice. Four weaves, or rather, three now, yet they all seemed the same weave.

ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɹɛɾi. eɪvinhə wɑz ə ɹɑk ə kɑnfəɾəns əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɛniθɪŋ ɪleɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ fɛl fɹəm bɝdʒɪt. mɪn sæt ɡɹɪpɪŋ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə teɪbəl, hɝ æŋkəlz lɑk təɡɛðɝ; ʃi kəd nɑt si ðə floʊz, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv ən əʃʊɹd ɡɹɪn ðət wɑz oʊnli spɔɪld ə lɪɾəl wən ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps. ɪleɪn bɹið dipli. tə hɝ aɪz, ðeɪ θɹi wɝ sɝaʊndəɾ ən kənɛktəd baɪ ə tʃɹeɪsɝi ʌv spɪɹət ðət meɪd ðə faɪnəs leɪs sim dʒɹæb. naʊ ɪf oʊnli ɪt wɝkt əz ʃi bɪlivd ɪt wʊd.

Everything was ready. Aviendha was a rock of confidence as strong as anything Elayne had ever felt from Birgitte. Min sat gripping the edge of the table, her ankles locked together; she could not see the flows, but she gave an assured grin that was only spoiled a little when she licked her lips. Elayne breathed deeply. To her eyes, they three were surrounded and connected by a tracery of Spirit that made the finest lace seem drab. Now if only it worked as she believed it would.

fɹəm itʃ ə ðɛm, ʃi ɪkstɛndəd ðə wiv ɪn nɛɹoʊ laɪnz təwɔɹd ɹænd, twɪstɪŋ ðə θɹi laɪnz ɪndə wʌn, tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪɾ ɪndə ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑnd. ðæt, ʃi leɪɾ ɑn ɹænd əz sɔfli əz ɪf ʃi wɝ leɪɪŋ ə blæŋkəɾ ɑn ə beɪbi. ðə spaɪɾɝwɛb ə spɪɹət sɛɾəld ɝaʊn hɪm, sɛɾəld ɪndə hɪm. hi dɪd nɑɾ ivən blɪŋk, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz dʌn. ʃi lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ. dʌn.

From each of them, she extended the weave in narrow lines toward Rand, twisting the three lines into one, changing it into the Warder bond. That, she laid on Rand as softly as if she were laying a blanket on a baby. The spiderweb of Spirit settled around him, settled into him. He did not even blink, but it was done. She let go of saidar. Done.

hi stɛɹɾ ət ðɛm, ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, ən sloʊli pʊɾ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz tə hɪz tɛmpəlz.

He stared at them, expressionless, and slowly put his fingers to his temples.

"oʊ, laɪt, ɹænd, ðə peɪn," mɪn mɝmɝɾ ɪn ə hɝt vɔɪs. "aɪ nɛvɝ nu; aɪ nɛvɝ ɪmædʒənd. haʊ kən jə stæn ɪt? ðəɹ ɑɹ peɪnz jə doʊn ivən sim tə noʊ, əz ɪf juv lɪvd wɪð əm soʊ lɔŋ ðəɹ pɑɹɾ ə ju. ðoʊz hɛɹənz ɑn jəɹ hænz; jə kən stɪl fil ðə bɹændɪŋ. ðoʊz θɪŋz ɑn jəɹ ɑɹmz hɝt! ən jəɹ saɪd. oʊ, laɪt, jəɹ saɪd! waɪ ɑɹən jə kɹaɪɪŋ, ɹænd? waɪ ɑɹən jə kɹaɪɪŋ?"

"Oh, Light, Rand, the pain," Min murmured in a hurt voice. "I never knew; I never imagined. How can you stand it? There are pains you don't even seem to know, as if you've lived with them so long they're part of you. Those herons on your hands; you can still feel the branding. Those things on your arms hurt! And your side. Oh, Light, your side! Why aren't you crying, Rand? Why aren't you crying?"

"hi ɪz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn," eɪvinhə sɛd, læfɪŋ, "æz stʃɹɔŋ əz ðə θɹi-foʊld læn ɪtsɛlf!" hɝ feɪs wɑz pɹaʊd - oʊ, soʊ pɹaʊd - bʌɾ ivən əz ʃi læft, tɪɹz stʃɹim daʊn əɹ sʌn-dɑɹk tʃiks. "ðə veɪnz ʌv ɡoʊld. oʊ, ðə veɪnz ʌv ɡoʊld. jə də lʌv mi, ɹænd."

"He is the Car'a'carn," Aviendha said, laughing, "as strong as the Three-fold Land itself!" Her face was proud - oh, so proud - but even as she laughed, tears streamed down her sun-dark cheeks. "The veins of gold. Oh, the veins of gold. You do love me, Rand."

ɪleɪn sɪmpli stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, fɛlt ɪm ɪn əɹ hɛd. ðə peɪn ʌv wunz ən hɝts i ɹɪli hæd fɝɡɑɾən. ðə tɛnʃən ən dɪsbɪlif; ðə wʌndɝ. hɪz ɪmoʊʃənz wɝ tu ɹɪdʒəd, ðoʊ, laɪk ə nɑɾ ə hɑɹɾənd paɪn sæp, ɔlmoʊst stoʊn. jɛt leɪs θɹu ðɛm, ɡoʊldən veɪnz pʌlsd ən ɡloʊd wɛnɛvɝ i lʊkt ət mɪn, əɹ eɪvinhə. əɹ hɝ. hi dɪd lʌv hɝ. hi lʌvd ɔl θɹi ʌv ðɛm. ən ðət meɪɾ əɹ wɑnə læf wɪð dʒɔɪ. ʌðɝ wɪmən maɪt faɪn daʊts, bʌt ʃi wəɾ ɔlweɪz noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ə hɪz lʌv.

Elayne simply stared at him, felt him in her head. The pain of wounds and hurts he really had forgotten. The tension and disbelief; the wonder. His emotions were too rigid, though, like a knot of hardened pine sap, almost stone. Yet laced through them, golden veins pulsed and glowed whenever he looked at Min, or Aviendha. Or her. He did love her. He loved all three of them. And that made her want to laugh with joy. Other women might find doubts, but she would always know the truth of his love.

"ðə laɪt sɛn jə noʊ wʌt juv dʌn," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs. "ðə laɪt sɛn jə ɑɹənt . . ." ðə paɪn sæp ɡɹu ə tʃɹaɪfəl hɑɹɾɝ. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wəd bi hɝt, ən wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi stilɪŋ hɪmsɛlf. "aɪ . . . aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ, naʊ. ət list əl noʊ jə ɑɹ ɔl wɛl naʊ; aɪ woʊn əv tə wɝi əbaʊt ju." sʌɾənli hi ɡɹɪnd; hi maɪɾ əv lʊkt ɔlmoʊs bɔɪɪʃ ɪf ɪt hæd ɹitʃt ɪz aɪz. "nɪneɪiv wɪl bi fɹæntɪk θɪŋkɪŋ aɪv slɪpt əweɪ wɪθaʊt siɪŋ hɝ. nɑt ðət ʃi dʌzn dɪzɝv ə lɪɾəl flʌstɝɪŋ."

"The Light send you know what you've done," he said in a low voice. "The Light send you aren't . . ." The pine sap grew a trifle harder. He was sure they would be hurt, and was already steeling himself. "I . . . I have to go, now. At least I'll know you are all well now; I won't have to worry about you." Suddenly he grinned; he might have looked almost boyish if it had reached his eyes. "Nynaeve will be frantic thinking I've slipped away without seeing her. Not that she doesn't deserve a little flustering."

"ðɛɹ ɪz wʌn mɔɹ θɪŋ, ɹænd," ɪleɪn sɛd, ən stɑp tə swɑloʊ. laɪt, ʃi hæd θɔt ðɪs wəd bi ði izi pɑɹt.

"There is one more thing, Rand," Elayne said, and stopped to swallow. Light, she had thought this would be the easy part.

"aɪ səpoʊz eɪvinhə ən aɪ hæv tə tɔk waɪl wi kæn," mɪn sɛd hɝidli, spɹɪŋɪŋ ɔf ðə teɪbəl. "sʌmwɛɹ wi kən bi əloʊn. ɪf jəl ɪkskjus ʌs?"

"I suppose Aviendha and I have to talk while we can," Min said hurriedly, springing off the table. "Somewhere we can be alone. If you'll excuse us?"

eɪvinhə ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə kɑɹpət ɡɹeɪsfəli, smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts. "jɛs. mɪn fɑɹʃɔ ən aɪ mʌs lɝn əbaʊt wʌn ənʌðɝ." ʃi aɪd mɪn daʊtfəli, ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl, bʌt ðeɪ lɛft ɑɹm ɪn ɑɹm.

Aviendha rose from the carpet gracefully, smoothing her skirts. "Yes. Min Farshaw and I must learn about one another." She eyed Min doubtfully, adjusting her shawl, but they left arm in arm.

ɹænd wɑtʃt əm wɛɹəli, əz ɪf i nu ðɛɹ livɪŋ hæd bɪn plænd. ə kɔɹnɝd wʊlf. bʌt ðoʊz veɪnz ʌv ɡoʊld ɡlimd ɪn əɹ hɛd.

Rand watched them warily, as if he knew their leaving had been planned. A cornered wolf. But those veins of gold gleamed in her head.

"ðɛɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪv hæd fɹəm jə ðəɾ aɪ hævənt," ɪleɪn bɪɡæn, ən tʃoʊkt, ə flʌʃ skɔldɪŋ əɹ feɪs. blʌɾ ən æʃəz! haʊ dɪɾ ʌðɝ wɪmən ɡoʊ əbaʊt ðɪs? kɛɹfəli ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ðə bʌndəl ə sɛnseɪʃənz ɪn əɹ hɛd ðət wɑz hɪm, ən ðə bʌndəl ðət wɑz bɝdʒɪt. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl noʊ tʃeɪnʒ ɪn ðə sɛkənd. ʃi ɪmædʒən ɹæpɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn ə kɝtʃəf, nɑɾɪŋ ðə kɝtʃəf snʌɡli, ən bɝdʒɪt wɑz ɡɔn. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ɹænd. ən ðoʊz ʃaɪnɪŋ ɡoʊldən veɪnz. bʌɾɝflaɪz ðə saɪz ʌv wʊlfhnz dʒɹʌm ðɛɹ wɪŋz ɪn əɹ mɪɾəl. swɑloʊɪŋ hɑɹd, ʃi tʊk ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ. "ju wɪl əv tə hɛlp mi wɪð maɪ bʌɾənz," ʃi sɛɾ ənstɛɾəli. "aɪ kænɑt teɪk ðɪs dʒɹɛs ɔf baɪ maɪsɛlf."

"There is something they have had from you that I haven't," Elayne began, and choked, a flush scalding her face. Blood and ashes! How did other women go about this? Carefully she considered the bundle of sensations in her head that was him, and the bundle that was Birgitte. There was still no change in the second. She imagined wrapping it in a kerchief, knotting the kerchief snugly, and Birgitte was gone. There was only Rand. And those shining golden veins. Butterflies the size of wolfhounds drummed their wings in her middle. Swallowing hard, she took a long breath. "You will have to help me with my buttons," she said unsteadily. "I cannot take this dress off by myself."

ðə tu ɡɑɹdzwɪmən stɝd wən mɪn keɪm ɪndə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ wɪð ði il wʊmən, ən dʒɝkt ɪɹɛkt wən ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd, əz mɪn kloʊz ðə dɔɹ, ðət noʊ wʌn ɛls wɑz kʌmɪŋ aʊt.

The two Guardswomen stirred when Min came into the corridor with the Aiel woman, and jerked erect when they realized, as Min closed the door, that no one else was coming out.

"hɝ teɪs kæn bi ðət bæd," ðə blɑki, slipi-aɪd wʌn mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, hænz taɪɾənɪŋ ɑn əɹ lɔŋ kʌdʒəl. mɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛniwʌn hæd bɪn mɛn tə hɪɹ.

"Her taste can't be that bad," the blocky, sleepy-eyed one muttered under her breath, hands tightening on her long cudgel. Min did not think anyone had been meant to hear.

"tu mʌtʃ kɝədʒ, ən tu mʌtʃ ɪnəsəns," ðə lin, mænɪʃ wʌn ɡɹaʊld. "ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl wɔɹn əs əbaʊt ðæt." ʃi pʊɾ ə ɡɔntələɾəd hæn ɑn ðə laɪən-hɛɾəd dɔɹlætʃ.

"Too much courage, and too much innocence," the lean, mannish one growled. "The Captain-General warned us about that." She put a gauntleted hand on the lion-headed doorlatch.

"ju ɡoʊ ɪn ðəɹ naʊ, ən ʃi maɪt skɪn ju, tu," mɪn sɛd blaɪθli. "hæv jə ɛvɝ sin əɹ ɪn ə tɛmpɝ? ʃi kəd meɪk ə bɛɹ wip!"

"You go in there now, and she might skin you, too," Min said blithely. "Have you ever seen her in a temper? She could make a bear weep!"

eɪvinhə dɪsɪnɡeɪdʒd əɹ ɑɹm fɹəm mɪnz ən pʊɾ ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns bɪtwin ðɛm. ɪt wɑz ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən u ɹəsivd əɹ skaʊl, ðoʊ. "ju daʊt maɪ sɪstɝ kən hændəl ə sɪŋɡəl mæn? ʃiz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən əz ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ə laɪən. ən jə ɑɹ oʊθ-swɔɹn tə fɑloʊ hɝ! jə fɑloʊ wɛɹ ʃi lidz, nɑt pʊt jəɹ noʊzɪz ʌp əɹ sliv."

Aviendha disengaged her arm from Min's and put a little distance between them. It was the Guardswomen who received her scowl, though. "You doubt my sister can handle a single man? She is Aes Sedai, and has the heart of a lion. And you are oath-sworn to follow her! You follow where she leads, not put your noses up her sleeve."

ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə lɔŋ lʊk. ðə hɛviɝ wʊmən ʃɹʌɡd. ðə wɪɹi wʌn ɡɹɪməst, bʌt ʃi tʊk əɹ hæn fɹəm ðə dɔɹlætʃ. "aɪm oʊθ-swɔɹn tə kip ðət ɡɝl əlaɪv," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə hɑɹd vɔɪs, "æn aɪ min tə. naʊ jə tʃɪlʒɹən ɡoʊ pleɪ wɪð jəɹ dɑlz ən lemi də maɪ dʒɑb."

The Guardswomen exchanged a long look. The heavier woman shrugged. The wiry one grimaced, but she took her hand from the doorlatch. "I'm oath-sworn to keep that girl alive," she said in a hard voice, "and I mean to. Now you children go play with your dolls and let me do my job."

mɪn kənsɪɾɝd pɹədusɪŋ ə naɪf ən pɝfɔɹmɪŋ wʌn ə ðə flæʃi fɪŋɡɝ-ɹoʊlz tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn hæd tɔt hɝ. dʒʌs tə ʃoʊ ðɛm u wɑz ə tʃaɪld. ðə lin wʊmən wɑz nɑt jʌŋ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ən ʃi lʊkt kwaɪt stʃɹɔŋ. ən kwɪk. mɪn wɑntəd tə bɪliv səm ə ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz bʌlk wɑz fæt, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt. ʃi kəd nɑt si ɛni ɪmədʒəz əɹ ɔʊɹəz ɝaʊn iðɝ, bʌt niðɝ lʊkt ɪn ðə list əfɹeɪd tə də wʌtɛvɝ ʃi θɔt niɾəd duɪŋ. wɛl, ət lis ðeɪ wɝ livɪŋ ɪleɪn ən ɹænd əloʊn. meɪbi ðə naɪf wɑz ənnɛsəsɛɹi.

Min considered producing a knife and performing one of the flashy finger-rolls Thom Merrilin had taught her. Just to show them who was a child. The lean woman was not young, but there was no gray in her hair, and she looked quite strong. And quick. Min wanted to believe some of the other woman's bulk was fat, but she did not. She could not see any images or auras around either, but neither looked in the least afraid to do whatever she thought needed doing. Well, at least they were leaving Elayne and Rand alone. Maybe the knife was unnecessary.

fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ ʃi kɑt saɪɾ ə ði il ɹɪlʌktənli lɛɾɪŋ ə hæn fɔl fɹəm əɹ bɛl naɪf. ɪf ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt stɑp mɪɹɝɪŋ əɹ ðɪs weɪ, ʃi wɑz gɑnə stɑɹt θɪŋkɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ tə ðɪs dʒɪɝi-poʊkɝi wɪð ðə paʊɝ ðən ʃi hæd bɪn toʊld. ðən əɡɛn, ɪt hæd bɪɡʌn bɪfɔɹ ðə dʒɪɝi-poʊkɝi. meɪbi ðeɪ dʒʌs θɔɾ əlaɪk. ə dɪstɝbɪŋ aɪdiə. laɪt, ɔl ðɪs tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪm mɛɹiɪŋ ɔl θɹi ʌv əm wɑz vɛɹi wɛl fəɹ tɔk, bʌt wɪtʃ wʌn wɑz i ɹɪli ɡoʊɪŋ tə mɛɹi?

From the corner of her eye she caught sight of the Aiel reluctantly letting a hand fall from her belt knife. If the woman did not stop mirroring her this way, she was going to start thinking there was more to this jiggery-pokery with the Power than she had been told. Then again, it had begun before the jiggery-pokery. Maybe they just thought alike. A disturbing idea. Light, all this talk about him marrying all three of them was very well for talk, but which one was he really going to marry?

"ɪleɪn ɪz bɹeɪv," ʃi toʊl ðə ɡɑɹdz, "æz bɹeɪv əz ɛnibəɾi aɪv ɛvɝ mɛt. ən ʃi ɪzən stupəd. ɪf jə stɑɹɾ ɔf θɪŋkɪŋ ʃi ɪz, jəl sun ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ wɪð hɝ." ðeɪ stɛɹd daʊn əɾ əɹ fɹəm ðə væntədʒ ʌv ən æɾəd fɪftin əɹ twɛnti jɪɹz, sɑləd, ʌnpɝtɝbd ən dɪtɝmənd. ɪn ə moʊmən ðeɪ wəd tɛl əɹ tə ɹʌn əlɔŋ, əɡɛn. "wɛl, wi kæn stæn ɝaʊn hɪɹ ɪf wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɔk, kən wi, eɪvinhə?"

"Elayne is brave," she told the Guards, "as brave as anybody I've ever met. And she isn't stupid. If you start off thinking she is, you'll soon go wrong with her." They stared down at her from the vantage of an added fifteen or twenty years, solid, unperturbed and determined. In a moment they would tell her to run along, again. "Well, we can't stand around here if we're going to talk, can we, Aviendha?"

"noʊ," ði il wʊmən bɹiðd ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən. "wi kænɑt stæn hɪɹ."

"No," the Aiel woman breathed in a tight voice, glaring at the Guardswomen. "We cannot stand here."

ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən tʊk noʊ noʊɾəs ə ðɛɹ ɡoʊɪŋ əɾ ɔl. ðeɪ hæɾ ə dʒɑb tə du, ən ɪt hæd nʌθɪŋ tə wɪð wɑtʃɪŋ ɪleɪnz fɹɛnz. mɪn hoʊp ðeɪ dɪd ðɛɹ dʒɑb wɛl. ʃi ɪzən əɾ ɔl stupəd, ʃi θɔt. ʃi dʒʌs lɛts əɹ kɝədʒ lɛd ðə weɪ, səmtaɪmz. ʃi hoʊp ðeɪ wəd nɑt lɛɾ ɪleɪn skɹæmbəl ɪndə bɹæmbəlz ʃi kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ʌv.

The Guardswomen took no notice of their going at all. They had a job to do, and it had nothing to with watching Elayne's friends. Min hoped they did their job well. She isn't at all stupid, she thought. She just lets her courage lead the way, sometimes. She hoped they would not let Elayne scramble into brambles she could not get out of.

wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə hɔlweɪ, ʃi aɪd ði il wʊmən saɪdweɪz. eɪvinhə stʃɹoʊɾ əlɔŋ əz fɑɹ fɹəm əɹ əz ʃi kəd bi ən stɪl ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə seɪm kɔɹəɾɝ. nɑɾ ivən ɡlænsɪŋ ɪn mɪnz dɝɛkʃən, ʃi pʊld ə θɪkli kɑɹvd aɪvɝi bɹeɪslət fɹəm əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ ən slɪpt ɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ lɛft ɹɪst wɪð ə smɔl, sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl. ʃi hæd hæɾ ə flaɪ ɑn əɹ noʊz fɹəm ðə fɝst, ən mɪn dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ. il wɝ səpoʊz tə bi juz tə wɪmən ʃɛɹɪŋ ə mæn. ə fɑɹ kɹaɪ mɔɹ ðən ʃi kəd seɪ fəɹ hɝsɛlf. ʃi dʒʌs lʌvd ɪm soʊ bædli ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə ʃɛɹ, ən ɪf ʃi mʌst, ðən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə wɝld ʃi wəd ɹæðɝ ʃɛɹ wɪð ðən ɪleɪn. wɪð hɝ, ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst wɑzn laɪk ʃɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɔl. ðɪs il wʊmən wɑz ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ, ðoʊ. ɪleɪn hæd sɛɾ ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðeɪ ɡɛt tə noʊ wʌn ənʌðɝ, bʌt haʊ kəd ðeɪ ɪf ðə wʊmən wəd nɑt tɔk tə hɝ?

Walking along the hallway, she eyed the Aiel woman sideways. Aviendha strode along as far from her as she could be and still remain in the same corridor. Not even glancing in Min's direction, she pulled a thickly carved ivory bracelet from her belt pouch and slipped it over her left wrist with a small, satisfied smile. She had had a fly on her nose from the first, and Min did not understand why. Aiel were supposed to be used to women sharing a man. A far cry more than she could say for herself. She just loved him so badly she was willing to share, and if she must, then there was no one in the world she would rather share with than Elayne. With her, it almost wasn't like sharing at all. This Aiel woman was a stranger, though. Elayne had said it was important they get to know one another, but how could they if the woman would not talk to her?

ʃi dɪd nɑt spɛn mʌtʃ taɪm wɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪleɪn, ðoʊ, əɹ eɪvinhə. wʌt leɪ ɪn əɹ hɛd wɑz tu wʌnʒɹəs. ɹænd. ə lɪɾəl bɔl ðət toʊld əɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm. ʃi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ðə hoʊl θɪŋ wəd feɪl, fəɹ əɹ ət list. wʌt wəd meɪkɪŋ lʌv wɪð ɪm bi laɪk æftɝ ðɪs, wən ʃi nu ɛvɹiθɪŋ! laɪt! ʌv kɔɹs, hi wəd noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ, tu. ʃi wɑz dɛfənətli ənsɝɾən haʊ ʃi fɛlt əbaʊt ðæt!

She did not spend much time worrying about Elayne, though, or Aviendha. What lay in her head was too wondrous. Rand. A little ball that told her everything about him. She had been sure the whole thing would fail, for her at least. What would making love with him be like after this, when she knew everything! Light! Of course, he would know everything about her, too. She was definitely uncertain how she felt about that!

əbɹʌpli ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ðə bʌndəl ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz ən sɛnseɪʃənz wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðə seɪm əz ət fɝst. ðəɹ wɑz ə . . . ɹɛd ɹɔɹɪŋ . . . tə ɪt, naʊ, laɪk waɪldfaɪɝ ɹeɪdʒɪŋ θɹu ə tɪndɝ dʒɹaɪ fɔɹəst. wʌt kəd . . . ? laɪt! ʃi stʌmbəld, ən dʒʌs kɑɾ əɹ fʊɾɪŋ ʃɔɹɾ ə tʌmbəlɪŋ. ɪf ʃi hæd noʊn ðɪs fɝnəs, ðɪs fɪɹs hʌŋɡɝ, wɑz ɪnsaɪd hɪm, ʃi wʊɾə bɪn əfɹeɪd tə lɛɾ ɪm tʌtʃ hɝ! ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd . . . ɪt maɪt bi naɪs, noʊɪŋ ʃi hæd spɑɹk sətʃ ən ɪnfɝnoʊ. ʃi kəd nɑt weɪt tə si wɛðɝ ʃi pɹədus ðə seɪm ɪfɛkt əz . . . ʃi stʌmbəld əɡɛn, ən ðɪs taɪm hæd tə kætʃ hɝsɛlf ɑn ən ɔɹnətli kɑɹv haɪtʃəst. oʊ, laɪt! ɪleɪn! hɝ feɪs fɛlt laɪk ə fɝnəs. ðɪs wɑz laɪk pikɪŋ θɹu ðə bɛdkɝɾənz!

Abruptly she realized that the bundle of emotions and sensations was no longer the same as at first. There was a . . . red roaring . . . to it, now, like wildfire raging through a tinder dry forest. What could . . . ? Light! She stumbled, and just caught her footing short of tumbling. If she had known this furnace, this fierce hunger, was inside him, she would have been afraid to let him touch her! On the other hand . . . It might be nice, knowing she had sparked such an inferno. She could not wait to see whether she produced the same effect as . . . She stumbled again, and this time had to catch herself on an ornately carved highchest. Oh, Light! Elayne! Her face felt like a furnace. This was like peeking through the bedcurtains!

hɝidli ʃi tʃɹaɪd ðə tʃɹɪk ɪleɪn hæd toʊld əɹ əbaʊt, ɪmɪdʒɪŋ ðət bɔl ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz taɪɾ ʌp ɪn ə kɝtʃəf. nʌθɪŋ hæpənd. fɹæntəkəli ʃi tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn, bʌt ðə ɹeɪdʒɪŋ faɪɝ wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ! ʃi hæd tə stɑp lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪt, stɑp filɪŋ ɪt. ɛniθɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən ɛniwɛɹ bʌt ðɛɹ! ɛniθɪŋ! meɪbi ɪf ʃi stɑɹɾəd tɔkɪŋ.

Hurriedly she tried the trick Elayne had told her about, imaging that ball of emotions tied up in a kerchief. Nothing happened. Frantically she tried again, but the raging fire was still there! She had to stop looking at it, stop feeling it. Anything to get her attention anywhere but there! Anything! Maybe if she started talking.

"ʃi ʃəɾ əv dʒɹʌŋk ðət hɑɹtlif ti," ʃi bæbəld. ʃi nɛvɝ toʊld wʌt ʃi sɔ ɪksɛp tə ðoʊz ɪnvɑlvd, ən oʊnli ðən ɪf ðeɪ wɑntəd tə hɪɹ, bʌt ʃi hæd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ. "ʃil ɡɛt wɪð tʃaɪl fɹəm ðɪs. tu ʌv ðɛm; ə bɔɪ ən ə ɡɝl; boʊθ hɛlθi ən stʃɹɔŋ."

"She should have drunk that heartleaf tea," she babbled. She never told what she saw except to those involved, and only then if they wanted to hear, but she had to say something. "She'll get with child from this. Two of them; a boy and a girl; both healthy and strong."

"ʃi wɑns ɪz beɪbiz," ði il wʊmən mʌmbəld. hɝ ɡɹin aɪz stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd; hɝ dʒɔ wɑz taɪt, ən swɛt biɾɪd ɑn əɹ fɔɹhɛd. "aɪ wɪl nɑt dʒɹɪŋk ðə ti maɪsɛlf ɪf aɪ - " ɡɪvɪŋ hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ʃi fɹaʊn əkɹɔs ðə wɪdθ ə ðə hɔl ət mɪn. "maɪ sɪstɝ ən ðə waɪz wʌnz toʊl mi əbaʊt ju. jə ɹɪli si θɪŋz əbaʊt pipəl ðət kʌm tʃɹu?"

"She wants his babies," the Aiel woman mumbled. Her green eyes stared straight ahead; her jaw was tight, and sweat beaded on her forehead. "I will not drink the tea myself if I - " Giving herself a shake, she frowned across the width of the hall at Min. "My sister and the Wise Ones told me about you. You really see things about people that come true?"

"səmtaɪmz aɪ si θɪŋz, ən ɪf aɪ noʊ wʌt ðeɪ min, ðeɪ hæpən," mɪn sɛd. ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz, ɹeɪz tə ɹitʃ itʃ ʌðɝ, kæɹiɾ əlɔŋ ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt-lɪvɹid sɝvəns tɝn tə stɛɹ ət ðɛm. mɪn muv tə ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə hɔlweɪ. ʃi wəd mit ði ʌðɝ wʊmən hæfweɪ, noʊ mɔɹ. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, eɪvinhə dʒɔɪn hɝ.

"Sometimes I see things, and if I know what they mean, they happen," Min said. Their voices, raised to reach each other, carried along the corridor. Red-and-white-liveried servants turned to stare at them. Min moved to the center of the hallway. She would meet the other woman halfway, no more. After a moment, Aviendha joined her.

mɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ tə tɛl əɹ wʌt ʃi hæd sin waɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɔl təɡɛðɝ. eɪvinhə wəɾ əv ɹændz beɪbiz, tu. fɔɹ ə ðɛm ət wʌns! sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ɑɾ əbaʊt ðæt, ðoʊ. ðə beɪbiz wəd bi hɛlθi, bʌt stɪl sʌmθɪŋ ɑd. ən pipəl ɔfən dɪd nɑt laɪk hɪɹɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ fjutʃɝz, ivən wən ðeɪ sɛd ðeɪ wɑntəd tə. ʃi wɪʃt sʌmwʌn kəd tɛl əɹ wɛðɝ ʃi hɝsɛlf wʊd. . . .

Min wondered whether to tell her what she had seen while they were all together. Aviendha would have Rand's babies, too. Four of them at once! Something was odd about that, though. The babies would be healthy, but still something odd. And people often did not like hearing about their futures, even when they said they wanted to. She wished someone could tell her whether she herself would. . . .

wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪn saɪləns, eɪvinhə waɪp swɛt fɹəm əɹ feɪs wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ən swɑloʊd hɑɹd. mɪn hæd tə swɑloʊ, tu. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹænd wɑz filɪŋ wɑz ɪn ðət bɔl. ɛvɹiθɪŋ!

Walking along in silence, Aviendha wiped sweat from her face with her fingers and swallowed hard. Min had to swallow, too. Everything Rand was feeling was in that ball. Everything!

"ðə kɝtʃəf tʃɹɪk dɪdnt wɝk fəɹ ju, iðɝ?" ʃi sɛd hɔɹsli.

"The kerchief trick didn't work for you, either?" she said hoarsely.

eɪvinhə blɪŋkt, ən kɹɪmzən dɑɹkən əɹ feɪs. ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ, ʃi sɛd, "ðæɾ ɪz bɛɾɝ. θæŋk ju. aɪ . . . wɪð ɪm ɪn maɪ hɛd, aɪ fɝɡɑt." ʃi fɹaʊnd. "ɪt dɪd nɑt wɝk fəɹ ju?"

Aviendha blinked, and crimson darkened her face. A moment later, she said, "That is better. Thank you. I . . . With him in my head, I forgot." She frowned. "It did not work for you?"

mɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd mɪzɝəbli. ðɪs wɑz ɪndisənt! "ɪt hɛlps ɪf aɪ tɔk, ðoʊ." ʃi hæd tə meɪk fɹɛnz wɪð ðɪs wʊmən, sʌmhaʊ, ɪf ðɪs hoʊl pəkjuljɝ bɪznəs wɑz tə hæv ə hoʊp ʌv wɝkɪŋ. "aɪm sɑɹi fəɹ wʌɾ aɪ sɛd. əbaʊt toʊz, aɪ min. aɪ noʊ ə lɪɾəl ə jəɹ kʌstəmz. ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðət mæn ðət dʒʌs meɪks mi tʃiki. aɪ kæn kəntʃɹoʊl maɪ tʌŋ. bʌt doʊn θɪŋk aɪm gɑnə lɛt jə stɑɹt hɪɾɪŋ mi əɹ kɑɹvɪŋ ɑn mi. meɪbi aɪ hæv toʊ, bʌt wɪl əv tə faɪn səm ʌðɝ weɪ. aɪ kəɾ ɔlweɪz ɡɹum jəɹ hɔɹs, wən wɪv taɪm."

Min shook her head miserably. This was indecent! "It helps if I talk, though." She had to make friends with this woman, somehow, if this whole peculiar business was to have a hope of working. "I'm sorry for what I said. About toes, I mean. I know a little of your customs. There's something about that man that just makes me cheeky. I can't control my tongue. But don't think I'm going to let you start hitting me or carving on me. Maybe I have toh, but we'll have to find some other way. I could always groom your horse, when we have time."

"ju ɑɹ əz pɹaʊɾ əz maɪ sɪstɝ," eɪvinhə mʌɾɝd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. wʌd ʃi min baɪ ðæt? "ju hæv ə ɡʊd sɛns ə hjumɝ, tu." ʃi sim tə bi tɔkɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. "ju dɪd nɑt meɪk ə ful ə jɝsɛlf əbaʊt ɹænd ən ɪleɪn ðə weɪ moʊst wɛtləndɝ wɪmən wʊd. ən jə dɪd ɹimaɪn mi. . . ." wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi flɪpt əɹ ʃɔl ʌp ɑntu hɝ ʃoʊldɝz. "aɪ noʊ wɛɹ ðəɹ ɪz səm uskaɪ. ɪf jə ɑɹ tu dʒɹʌŋk tə θɪŋk, ðən - " stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ, ʃi stɑp dɛd. "noʊ!" ʃi ɡɹaʊld. "nɑt jɛt!"

"You are as proud as my sister," Aviendha muttered, frowning. What did she mean by that? "You have a good sense of humor, too." She seemed to be talking to herself. "You did not make a fool of yourself about Rand and Elayne the way most wetlander women would. And you did remind me. . . ." With a sigh, she flipped her shawl up onto her shoulders. "I know where there is some oosquai. If you are too drunk to think, then - " Staring down the hallway, she stopped dead. "No!" she growled. "Not yet!"

kʌmɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əm wɑz ən æpɝɪʃən ðət meɪd mɪnz dʒɔ dʒɹɑp. kɑnstɝneɪʃən pʊʃt ɹænd bɪɑn əwɛɹnəs. fɹəm kɑmɛns ʃi hæd noʊn ðət ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ʌv ɪleɪnz ɡɑɹdz wɑz ə wʊmən, ən ɪleɪnz wɔɹɾɝ tə but, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɛls. ðɪs wʊmən hæɾ ə θɪk, ɪntʃɹəkət ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd pʊld oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ ə hɝ ʃɔɹt, waɪt-kɑlɝd ɹɛd koʊt, ən əɹ vəlumənəs blu tʃɹaʊzɝz wɝ tʌkt ɪndə buts wɪð hilz əz haɪ əz mɪnz. ɔʊɹəz dænst ɝaʊn əɹ ən ɪmədʒəz flɪkɝd, mɔɹ ðən mɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ɝaʊn ɛniwʌn, θaʊzənz ɪt simd, kæskeɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɪleɪnz wɔɹɾɝ ən kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz . . . wɑbəld . . . ə lɪɾəl, əz ðoʊ ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn ɪndə ði uskaɪ. sɝvəns u kɑt saɪɾ ə hɝ dɪsaɪɾɪd ðeɪ hæd wɝk ɪn ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæləs, livɪŋ ðə θɹi ʌv əm əloʊn ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə si mɪn ən eɪvinhə əntɪl ʃi ɔlmoʊst wɔkt ɪndə ðɛm.

Coming toward them was an apparition that made Min's jaw drop. Consternation pushed Rand beyond awareness. From comments she had known that the Captain-General of Elayne's Guards was a woman, and Elayne's Warder to boot, but nothing else. This woman had a thick, intricate golden braid pulled over one shoulder of her short, white-collared red coat, and her voluminous blue trousers were tucked into boots with heels as high as Min's. Auras danced around her and images flickered, more than Min had ever seen around anyone, thousands it seemed, cascading over one another. Elayne's Warder and Captain-General of the Queen's Guards . . . wobbled . . . a little, as though she had already been into the oosquai. Servants who caught sight of her decided they had work in another part of the Palace, leaving the three of them alone in the corridor. She did not seem to see Min and Aviendha until she almost walked into them.

"ju blʌɾi hɛlpt əɹ ɪn ðɪs, dɪdn ju?" ʃi ɡɹaʊld, foʊkəsɪŋ ɡlæsi-lʊkɪŋ blu aɪz ɑn eɪvinhə. "fɝst, ʃi fleɪmɪŋ vænɪʃɪz aʊɾ ə maɪ hɛd, ən ðən . . . !" ʃi tʃɹɛmbəld, ən vɪzəbli kəntʃɹoʊl hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ ivən ðən ʃi wɑz bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹd. hɝ lɛɡz dɪd nɑt sim tə wɑnə hoʊld əɹ əpɹaɪt. lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps, ʃi swɑloʊɾ ən wɛn ɑn æŋɡɹəli. "bɝn hɝ, aɪ kæn kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɪnʌf tə ʃeɪk ɪɾ ɔf! jə lemi tɛl ju, ɪf ʃiz duɪŋ wʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz duɪŋ, əl kɪk əɹ tɪkəl-hɑɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə blʌɾi pæləs, ən ðən əl fleɪmɪŋ wɛlt əɹ tɪl ʃi kæn sɪt fəɹ ə mʌnθ - ən jə əlɔŋsaɪd hɝ! - ɪf aɪ hæv tə faɪn fɔkɹut tə də ɪt!"

"You bloody helped her in this, didn't you?" she growled, focusing glassy-looking blue eyes on Aviendha. "First, she flaming vanishes out of my head, and then . . . !" She trembled, and visibly controlled herself, but even then she was breathing hard. Her legs did not seem to want to hold her upright. Licking her lips, she swallowed and went on angrily. "Burn her, I can't concentrate enough to shake it off! You let me tell you, if she's doing what I think she's doing, I'll kick her tickle-heart around the bloody Palace, and then I'll flaming welt her till she can't sit for a month - and you alongside her! - if I have to find forkroot to do it!"

"maɪ fɝst-sɪstɝ ɪz ə ɡɹoʊn wʊmən, bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən," eɪvinhə sɛd tʃɹʌkjələnli. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ toʊn, hɝ ʃoʊldɝz wɝ hʌntʃt, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt kwaɪt mit ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz stɛɹ. "ju mʌst stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃɹiɾ əs əz tʃɪlʒɹən!"

"My first-sister is a grown woman, Birgitte Trahelion," Aviendha said truculently. Despite her tone, her shoulders were hunched, and she did not quite meet the other woman's stare. "You must stop trying to treat us as children!"

"wɛn ʃi blʌɾi wɛl bɪheɪvz laɪk ən ədʌlt, aɪ blʌɾi wɛl tʃɹiɾ əɹ əz wʌn, bʌt ʃiz noʊ ɹaɪt tə də ðɪs, nɑɾ ɪn maɪ fleɪmɪŋ hɛd, ʃi dʌznt! nɑɾ ɪn maɪ - !" əbɹʌpli, bɝdʒɪts ɡleɪz blu aɪz bʌlʒd. ðə ɡoʊldən hɛɹd wʊmənz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən, ən ʃi wʊɾə fɔlən ɪf mɪn ən eɪvinhə hæd nɑɾ itʃ sizd ən ɑɹm.

"When she bloody well behaves like an adult, I bloody well treat her as one, but she has no right to do this, not in my flaming head, she doesn't! Not in my - !" Abruptly, Birgitte's glazed blue eyes bulged. The golden haired woman's mouth dropped open, and she would have fallen if Min and Aviendha had not each seized an arm.

skwizɪŋ əɹ aɪz ʃʌt, ʃi sɑbd, dʒʌst wʌns, ən wɪmpɝd, "tu mʌnθs!" ʃeɪkɪŋ fɹi ʌv ðɛm, ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd ən fɪkst eɪvinhə wɪð blu aɪz klɪɹ əz wɔɾɝ ən hɑɹɾ əz aɪs. "ʃild əɹ fəɹ mi, ən əl lɛt jə ɔf jəɹ ʃɛɹ." eɪvinhəz sʌlən, ɪndɪɡnənt ɡlɛɹ dʒʌst slɪɾ ɔf hɝ.

Squeezing her eyes shut, she sobbed, just once, and whimpered, "Two months!" Shaking free of them, she straightened and fixed Aviendha with blue eyes clear as water and hard as ice. "Shield her for me, and I'll let you off your share." Aviendha's sullen, indignant glare just slid off her.

"jɔɹ bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ!" mɪn bɹiðd. ʃi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ivən bɪfɔɹ eɪvinhə sɛd ðə neɪm. noʊ wʌndɝ ði il wʊmən wɑz bɪheɪvɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi fɪɹd ðoʊz θɹɛts wəd bi kæɹiɾ aʊt ɹaɪt ðən ən ðɛɹ. bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ! "aɪ sɔ jə ət fɑlm!"

"You're Birgitte Silverbow!" Min breathed. She had been sure even before Aviendha said the name. No wonder the Aiel woman was behaving as if she feared those threats would be carried out right then and there. Birgitte Silverbow! "I saw you at Falme!"

bɝdʒɪt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz ɪf ɡusd, ðən lʊkt ɝaʊn hɝidli. wʌns ʃi ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn, ʃi ɹɪlækst. ə lɪɾəl. ʃi aɪd mɪn ʌp ən daʊn. "wʌtɛvɝ jə sɔ, sɪlvɝboʊ ɪz dɛd," ʃi sɛd blʌnli. "aɪm bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən, naʊ, ən ðæts ɔl." hɝ lɪps twɪstəd ɹaɪli fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "ðə fleɪmɪŋ leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən, ɪf jə fleɪmɪŋ pliz. kɪs ə ʃip ɑn mʌðɝz deɪ ɪf aɪ kən də ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðæt, aɪ səpoʊz. ən u maɪt jə bi wən jəɹ tə hoʊm? dʒju ɔlweɪz ʃoʊ ɔf jəɹ lɛɡz laɪk ə blʌɾi fɛðɝ dænsɝ?"

Birgitte gave a start as if goosed, then looked around hurriedly. Once she realized they were alone, she relaxed. A little. She eyed Min up and down. "Whatever you saw, Silverbow is dead," she said bluntly. "I'm Birgitte Trahelion, now, and that's all." Her lips twisted wryly for a moment. "The flaming Lady Birgitte Trahelion, if you flaming please. Kiss a sheep on Mother's Day if I can do anything about that, I suppose. And who might you be when you're to home? Do you always show off your legs like a bloody feather dancer?"

"aɪ æm mɪn fɑɹʃɔ," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd kɝtli. ðɪs wɑz bɝdʒɪt sɪlvɝboʊ, hɪɹoʊ ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd lɛdʒənz? ðə wʊmən wɑz faʊl-maʊðd! ən wʌd ʃi min, sɪlvɝboʊ wɑz dɛd? ðə wʊmən wɑz stændɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ! bɪsaɪdz, ðoʊz mʌltətʃjudz ʌv ɪmədʒəz ən ɔʊɹəz flæʃt baɪ tu kwɪkli fəɹ əɹ tə meɪk aʊɾ ɛni klɪɹli, bʌt ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ðeɪ ɪndəkeɪɾəd mɔɹ ædvɛntʃɝz ðən ə wʊmən kəɾ əv ɪn wʌn laɪftaɪm. stʃɹeɪnʒli, səm wɝ kənɛktəd tə ən ʌɡli mæn u wɑz oʊldɝ ðən ʃi, ən ʌðɝz tə ən ʌɡli mæn u wɑz mʌtʃ jʌŋɡɝ, jɛt sʌmhaʊ mɪn nu ðeɪ wɝ ðə seɪm mæn. lɛdʒən əɹ noʊ lɛdʒənd, ðət supɪɹiɝ ɛɹ ɪɹəteɪɾəd əɹ noʊ ɛnd. "ɪleɪn, eɪvinhə ən aɪ dʒʌs bɑndəɾ ə wɔɹɾɝ," ʃi sɛd wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ. "æn ɪf ɪleɪn ɪz sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ ə lɪɾəl, wɛl, jə bɛɾɝ θɪŋk twaɪs əbaʊt stɔɹmɪŋ ɪn, əɹ jəl bi ðə wʌn sɪɾɪŋ tɛndɝ."

"I am Min Farshaw," she replied curtly. This was Birgitte Silverbow, hero of a hundred legends? The woman was foul-mouthed! And what did she mean, Silverbow was dead? The woman was standing right in front of her! Besides, those multitudes of images and auras flashed by too quickly for her to make out any clearly, but she was certain they indicated more adventures than a woman could have in one lifetime. Strangely, some were connected to an ugly man who was older than she, and others to an ugly man who was much younger, yet somehow Min knew they were the same man. Legend or no legend, that superior air irritated her no end. "Elayne, Aviendha and I just bonded a Warder," she said without thinking. "And if Elayne is celebrating a little, well, you better think twice about storming in, or you'll be the one sitting tender."

ðət wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ əwɛɹ ə ɹænd əɡɛn. ðət ɹeɪdʒɪŋ fɝnəs wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, hɑɹdli lɛsən əɾ ɔl, bʌt θæŋk ðə laɪt, hi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ . . . blʌd ɹʌʃt ɪndə hɝ tʃiks. hi hæd leɪn ɔfən ɪnʌf ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz, kætʃɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ ɪn ðə tæŋɡəl ə ðɛɹ bɛɾɪŋ, bʌt ðɪs ɹɪli dɪd sim laɪk pipɪŋ!

That was enough to make her aware of Rand again. That raging furnace was still there, hardly lessened at all, but thank the Light, he was no longer . . . Blood rushed into her cheeks. He had lain often enough in her arms, catching his breath in the tangle of their bedding, but this really did seem like peeping!

"hɪm?" bɝdʒɪt sɛd sɔfli. "mʌðɝz' mɪlk ɪn ə kʌp! ʃi cʊɾə fɔlən ɪn lʌv wɪð ə kʌtpɝs əɹ ə hɔɹsɛθif, bʌt ʃi hæd tə tʃuz hɪm, mɔɹ ful hɝ. baɪ wʌɾ aɪ sɔ ʌv ɪm ət ðət pleɪs jə mɛnʃənd, ðə mænz tu pɹɪɾi tə bi ɡʊd fəɹ ɛni wʊmən. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃiz tə stɑp."

"Him?" Birgitte said softly. "Mothers' milk in a cup! She could have fallen in love with a cutpurse or a horsethief, but she had to choose him, more fool her. By what I saw of him at that place you mentioned, the man's too pretty to be good for any woman. In any case, she has to stop."

"ju hæv noʊ ɹaɪt!" eɪvinhə ɪnsɪstəɾ ɪn ə sʌlki vɔɪs, ən bɝdʒɪt tʊk ɑn ə lʊk ə peɪʃəns. stʃɹɛtʃt peɪʃəns, bʌt stɪl peɪʃəns.

"You have no right!" Aviendha insisted in a sulky voice, and Birgitte took on a look of patience. Stretched patience, but still patience.

"ʃi maɪt bi pɹɑpɝ əz ə tælmɹi meɪɾən ɪksɛpt wən ɪt kʌmz tə pʊɾɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɑn ðə tʃɑpɪŋ blɑk, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ʃɪl waɪn ʌp əɹ kɝədʒ tə pʊɾ ɪm θɹu hɪz peɪsɪz əɡɛn, ən ivən ɪf ʃi dʌz wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz ʃi dɪd, ʃɪl fɝɡɛɾ ən bi bæk ɪn maɪ hɛd. aɪ woʊn blʌɾi ɡoʊ θɹu ðəɾ əɡɛn!" ʃi skwɛɹd hɝsɛlf, pleɪnli ɹɛɾi tə mɑɹtʃ ɔf ən kənfɹʌn ɪleɪn.

"She might be proper as a Talmouri maiden except when it comes to putting her head on the chopping block, but I think she'll wind up her courage to put him through his paces again, and even if she does whatever it was she did, she'll forget and be back in my head. I won't bloody go through that again!" She squared herself, plainly ready to march off and confront Elayne.

"θɪŋk ʌv ɪɾ əz ə ɡʊd dʒoʊk," eɪvinhə sɛd pliɾɪŋli. pliɾɪŋli! "ʃi hæz pleɪɾ ə ɡʊd dʒoʊk ɑn ju, ðəɾ ɪz ɔl." ə kɝl ə bɝdʒɪts lɪp ɪkspɹɛst wʌt ʃi θɔɾ ə ðæt.

"Think of it as a good joke," Aviendha said pleadingly. Pleadingly! "She has played a good joke on you, that is all." A curl of Birgitte's lip expressed what she thought of that.

"ðɛɹz ə tʃɹɪk ɪleɪn toʊl mi," mɪn sɛd hɝidli, kætʃɪŋ hoʊld ə bɝdʒɪts sliv. "ɪt dɪdnt wɝk fəɹ mi, bʌt meɪbi . . ." ənfɔɹtʃənətli, wʌns ʃi hæɾ ɪkspleɪnd . . .

"There's a trick Elayne told me," Min said hurriedly, catching hold of Birgitte's sleeve. "It didn't work for me, but maybe . . ." Unfortunately, once she had explained . . .

"ʃiz stɪl ðɛɹ," bɝdʒɪt sɛd ɡɹɪmli æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "stɛp aʊɾ ə maɪ weɪ, mɪn fɑɹʃɔ," ʃi sɛd, pʊlɪŋ əɹ ɑɹm fɹi, "ɔɹ - "

"She's still there," Birgitte said grimly after a moment. "Step out of my way, Min Farshaw," she said, pulling her arm free, "or - "

"uskaɪ!" eɪvinhə vɔɪs ɹoʊz dɛspɝətli, ən ʃi wɑz æktʃəli  ɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ hænz! "aɪ noʊ wɛɹ ðəɹ ɪz uskaɪ! ɪf jə ɑɹ dʒɹʌŋk . . . ! pliz, bɝdʒɪt! aɪ . . əl wɪl plɛdʒ maɪsɛlf tə oʊbeɪ ju, əz əpɹɛntəs tə mɪstʃɹəs, bʌt pliz də nɑɾ ɪntɝʌp hɝ! də nɑt ʃeɪm əɹ soʊ!"

"Oosquai!" Aviendha voice rose desperately, and she was actually wringing her hands! "I know where there is oosquai! If you are drunk . . . ! Please, Birgitte! I . . . I will pledge myself to obey you, as apprentice to mistress, but please do not interrupt her! Do not shame her so!"

"uskaɪ?" bɝdʒɪt mjuzd, ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ dʒɔ. "ɪz ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ laɪk bɹændi? m. aɪ θɪŋk ðə ɡɝl ɪz blʌʃɪŋ! ʃi ɹɪli ɪz pɹɪm moʊst ə ðə taɪm, jə noʊ. ə dʒoʊk, jə sɛd?" sʌɾənli ʃi ɡɹɪnd, ən spɹɛɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ɪkspænsɪvli. "lɛd mi tə ðɪs uskaɪ ʌv jʊɹz, eɪvinhə. aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt jə tu, bʌɾ aɪ ɪntɛn tə ɡɛt dʒɹʌŋk ɪnʌf tə . . . wɛl . . . tə teɪk ɔf maɪ kloʊðz ən dæns ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ən nɑɾ ə hɛɹ dʒɹʌŋkɝ."

"Oosquai?" Birgitte mused, rubbing her jaw. "Is that anything like brandy? Hmm. I think the girl is blushing! She really is prim most of the time, you know. A joke, you said?" Suddenly she grinned, and spread her arms expansively. "Lead me to this oosquai of yours, Aviendha. I don't know about you two, but I intend to get drunk enough to . . . well . . . to take off my clothes and dance on the table. And not a hair drunker."

mɪn dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ əɾ ɔl, əɹ waɪ eɪvinhə stɛɹɾ ət bɝdʒɪɾ ən sʌɾənli bɪɡæn læfɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt biɪŋ "ə wʌndɝfəl dʒoʊk," bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi nu waɪ ɪleɪn wɑz blʌʃɪŋ, ɪf ʃi æktʃəli  wɑz. ðət hɑɹd bɔl ə sɛnseɪʃənz ɪn əɹ hɛd wɑz ə ɹeɪdʒɪŋ waɪldfaɪɝ əɡɛn.

Min did not understand that at all, or why Aviendha stared at Birgitte and suddenly began laughing about it being "a wonderful joke," but she was sure she knew why Elayne was blushing, if she actually was. That hard ball of sensations in her head was a raging wildfire again.

"kʊd wi ɡoʊ faɪn ðəɾ uskaɪ, naʊ?" ʃi sɛd. "aɪ wɑnə ɡɛt dʒɹʌŋk əz ə dʒɹaʊn maʊs, ən fæst!"

"Could we go find that oosquai, now?" she said. "I want to get drunk as a drowned mouse, and fast!"

wən ɪleɪn woʊk ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ, ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ wɑz aɪsi, ə laɪt snoʊ wɑz fɔlɪŋ ɑn keɪɛmlɪn, ən ɹænd wɑz ɡɔn. ɪksɛpt ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ hɛd. ðət wəd du. ʃi smaɪld, ə sloʊ smaɪl. fəɹ naʊ, ɪt wʊd. stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ læŋɔɝəsli bɪniθ ðə blæŋkəts, ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əɹ əbændən ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ - ən moʊst ə ðə deɪ əz wɛl! ʃi kəd hɑɹdli bɪliv ɪt hæd bɪn hɝ! - ən θɔt ðət ʃi ʃəd bi blʌʃɪŋ laɪk ðə sʌn! bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə bi əbændənd wɪð ɹænd, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wəɾ ɛvɝ blʌʃ əɡɛn, nɑt fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ kənɛktəd tə hɪm.

When Elayne woke the next morning, the bedchamber was icy, a light snow was falling on Caemlyn, and Rand was gone. Except inside her head. That would do. She smiled, a slow smile. For now, it would. Stretching languorously beneath the blankets, she remembered her abandon the night before - and most of the day as well! She could hardly believe it had been her! - and thought that she should be blushing like the sun! But she wanted to be abandoned with Rand, and she did not think she would ever blush again, not for anything connected to him.

bɛst ʌv ɔl, hi hæd lɛft əɹ ə pɹɛzənt. ɑn ðə pɪloʊ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ wən ʃi woʊk leɪ ə ɡoʊldən lɪli ɪn fʊl blum, ðə du fɹɛʃ ɑn ðə lʌʃ pɛɾəlz. wɛɹ i cʊɾə ɡɑɾən sətʃ ə θɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv wɪntɝ ʃi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɪmædʒən. bʌt ʃi woʊv ə kipɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪt, ən sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ə saɪd teɪbəl wɛɹ ʃi wəd si ɪɾ ɛvɹi mɔɹnɪŋ wən ʃi woʊk. ðə wiv wɑz mɑɡiɾinz titʃɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wəd hoʊl ðə blɑsəm fɹɛʃ fɝɛvɝ, ðə dudʒɹɑps nɛvɝ ɪvæpɝeɪɾɪŋ, ə kɑnstən ɹimaɪndɝ ə ðə mæn u hæd ɡɪvən əɹ ɪz hɑɹt.

Best of all, he had left her a present. On the pillow beside her when she woke lay a golden lily in full bloom, the dew fresh on the lush petals. Where he could have gotten such a thing in the middle of winter she could not begin to imagine. But she wove a Keeping around it, and set it on a side table where she would see it every morning when she woke. The weave was Moghedien's teaching, but it would hold the blossom fresh forever, the dewdrops never evaporating, a constant reminder of the man who had given her his heart.

hɝ mɔɹnɪŋ wɑz teɪkən ʌp wɪð ðə nuz ðəɾ əliviə hæd vænɪʃt dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt, ə sɪɹiəs mæɾɝ ðət pʊt ðə kɪn ɪn ə tuməlt. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əntɪl zeɪɾə əpɪɹɾ ɪn ə teɪkɪŋ kəz nɪneɪiv hæd nɑt kʌm fəɹ ə lɛsən wɪð ði æθɑn maɪɹ ðəɾ ɪleɪn lɝn ðət nɪneɪiv ən læn wɝ boʊθ ɡɔn fɹəm ðə pæləs, tu, ən noʊ wʌn nu wən əɹ haʊ. nɑɾ əntɪl mʌtʃ leɪɾɝ dɪd ʃi lɝn ðət ðə kəlɛkʃən ʌv æŋɡɹil ən tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðeɪ hæd kæɹiɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ wɑz mɪsɪŋ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ə ðə θɹi æŋɡɹil, ən sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ aɪɾəmz bɪsaɪdz. səm ə ðoʊz, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ, wɝ ɪntɛndəd fəɹ ə wʊmən u ɪkspɛktəd tə bi ətækt əɾ ɛni moʊmənt wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. wɪtʃ meɪd ðə heɪstəli skɹɪbəl noʊt nɪneɪiv hæd lɛf hɪɾən əmʌŋ ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ ɔl ðə mɔɹ dɪstɝbɪŋ.

Her morning was taken up with the news that Alivia had vanished during the night, a serious matter that put the Kin in a tumult. It was not until Zaida appeared in a taking because Nynaeve had not come for a lesson with the Atha'an Miere that Elayne learned that Nynaeve and Lan were both gone from the Palace, too, and no one knew when or how. Not until much later did she learn that the collection of angreal and ter'angreal they had carried out of Ebou Dar was missing the most powerful of the three angreal, and several other items besides. Some of those, she was sure, were intended for a woman who expected to be attacked at any moment with the One Power. Which made the hastily scribbled note Nynaeve had left hidden among the remainder all the more disturbing.


tʃæptɝ θɝtin


CHAPTER 13

wʌndɝfəl nuz


Wonderful News

ðə sʌn pæləsəz sʌnɹum wɑz koʊl dɪspaɪt faɪɝz ɹɔɹɪŋ ɑn hɑɹθs əɾ iðɝ ɛn ə ðə ɹum, θɪkli leɪɝd kɑɹpəts, ən ə slæntəd ɡlæs ɹuf ðət lɛɾ ɪn bɹaɪt mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt wɛɹ snoʊ kɑɾ ɑn ðə θɪn mʌntɪnz dɪd nɑt ʃild ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz suɾəbəl fəɹ hoʊldɪŋ ɑɾiənsəz. kædzueɪn hæd θɔɾ ɪt bɛs nɑt tə əpɹoʊpɹieɪt ðə θɹoʊn ɹum. soʊ fɑɹ, lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn hæd ɹɪmeɪn kwaɪəɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ hoʊldɪŋ kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹɾ ən dɑɹlɪn sɪsnɛɹə - ʃi sɔ noʊ bɛɾɝ weɪ tə kip əm fɹəm ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn wɪð ðɛɹ mɪstʃəf ðən kipɪŋ əm ɪn ə fɝm ɡɹɪp - bʌt dɑbɹeɪn maɪt bɪɡɪn tə fʌs oʊvɝ ðəɾ ɪf ʃi pʊʃt bɪɑnd wʌɾ i kənsɪɾɝd pɹɑpɝ. hi wɑz tu kloʊz tə ðə bɔɪ fəɹ əɹ tə wɑnə fɔɹs hɪm, ən feɪθfəl tə hɪz oʊðz. ʃi kəd lʊk bæk ɑn əɹ laɪf ən ɹikɔl feɪljɝz, səm bɪɾɝli ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd, ən mɪsteɪks ðət hæd kɑs laɪvz, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd mɪsteɪks əɹ feɪljɝ hɪɹ. moʊs dɛfənətli nɑt feɪljɝ. laɪt, ʃi wɑntəd tə baɪt sʌmwʌn!

The Sun Palace's sunroom was cold despite fires roaring on hearths at either end of the room, thickly layered carpets, and a slanted glass roof that let in bright morning light where snow caught on the thin muntins did not shield it, but it was suitable for holding audiences. Cadsuane had thought it best not to appropriate the throne room. So far, Lord Dobraine had remained quiet about her holding Caraline Damodred and Darlin Sisnera - she saw no better way to keep them from going on with their mischief than keeping them in a firm grip - but Dobraine might begin to fuss over that if she pushed beyond what he considered proper. He was too close to the boy for her to want to force him, and faithful to his oaths. She could look back on her life and recall failures, some bitterly regretted, and mistakes that had cost lives, but she could not afford mistakes or failure here. Most definitely not failure. Light, she wanted to bite someone!

"aɪ dɪmæn ðə ɹɪtɝn ə maɪ wɪndfɪndɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ!" hɑɹɪn dɪn toʊɡɑɹə, ɔl ɪn ɡɹin bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd sɪlk, sæt ɹɪdʒɪdli ɪn fɹʌn ə kædzueɪn, hɝ fʊl maʊθ taɪt. dɪspaɪɾ ən ənlaɪn feɪs, waɪt stʃɹikt əɹ stʃɹeɪt blæk hɛɹ. weɪvməstʃɹəs ə hɝ klæn fəɹ tɛn jɪɹz, ʃi hæd kəmændəɾ ə lɑɹdʒ vɛsəl lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðæt. hɝ seɪlməstʃɹəs, dɪɹə dɪn sɛlɑn, ə jʌŋɡɝ wʊmən ɔl ɪn blu, sæɾ ɑn ə tʃɛɹ pleɪst ə kɛɹfəl fʊt fɑɹðɝ bæk ɪn əkɔɹɾəns wɪð ðɛɹ noʊʃənz ə pɹəpɹaɪəɾi. ðə pɛɹ maɪɾ əv bɪn dɑɹk kɑɹvɪŋz ʌv aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ, ən ðɛɹ aʊtlændɪʃ dʒuəlɹi sʌmhaʊ æɾəd tə ði ɪfɛkt. niðɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz flɪkɝɾ ən aɪ təwɔɹɾ ɛbən wən i baʊɾ ən ɔfɝd sɪlvɝ ɡoʊbləts ə hɑt spaɪst waɪn ɑn ə tʃɹeɪ.

"I demand the return of my Windfinder, Aes Sedai!" Harine din Togara, all in green brocaded silk, sat rigidly in front of Cadsuane, her full mouth tight. Despite an unlined face, white streaked her straight black hair. Wavemistress of her clan for ten years, she had commanded a large vessel long before that. Her Sailmistress, Derah din Selaan, a younger woman all in blue, sat on a chair placed a careful foot farther back in accordance with their notions of propriety. The pair might have been dark carvings of outrage, and their outlandish jewelry somehow added to the effect. Neither so much as flickered an eye toward Eben when he bowed and offered silver goblets of hot spiced wine on a tray.

ðə bɔɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊ wʌt tə də nɛkst wən ðeɪ tʊk nʌθɪŋ. fɹaʊnɪŋ ənsɝteɪnli, hi ɹɪmeɪn bɛn əntɪl deɪdʒiən plʌkt əɾ ɪz ɹɛd koʊɾ ən lɛɾ ɪm əweɪ smaɪlɪŋ, ən əmjuz paʊɾɝ pɪdʒən ɪn dɑɹk blu slæʃt wɪð waɪt. ə slɛndɝ læd wɪð ə bɪɡ noʊz ən lɑɹdʒ ɪɹz, nɛvɝ tə bi kɔl hænsəm mʌtʃ lɛs pɹɪɾi, bʌt ʃi wɑz vɛɹi pəzɛsɪv ə hɪm. ðeɪ tʊk sits kloʊs təɡɛðɝ ɑn ə pæɾəd bɛntʃ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪsəz ən bɪɡæn pleɪɪŋ kæts kɹeɪɾəl.

The boy did not seem to know what to do next when they took nothing. Frowning uncertainly, he remained bent until Daigian plucked at his red coat and led him away smiling, an amused pouter pigeon in dark blue slashed with white. A slender lad with a big nose and large ears, never to be called handsome much less pretty, but she was very possessive of him. They took seats close together on a padded bench in front of one of the fireplaces and began playing cat's cradle.

"jɔɹ sɪstɝ ɪz əsɪstɪŋ əs ɪn lɝnɪŋ wʌt hæpən ɑn ði ənfɔɹtʃənət deɪ," kædzueɪn sɛd smuðli, ən sʌmwʌɾ æbsənli. teɪkɪŋ ə swɑloʊ ʌv əɹ oʊn spaɪst waɪn, ʃi weɪɾəd, ənkɛɹɪŋ wɛðɝ ðeɪ sɔ hɝ ɪmpeɪʃəns. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ dɑbɹeɪn ɡɹʌmbəld əbaʊt haʊ ɪmpɑsəbəl ɪt wɑz tə mit ðə tɝmz ə ðəɾ ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl bɑɹɡən ɹæfɛlə ən mɛɹænə hæd meɪɾ ɑn bɪhæf ə ði ælθɹ bɔɪ, hi stɪl maɪɾ əv hændəl ðə si foʊk hɪmsɛlf. ʃi kəd hɑɹdli ɡɪv əm hæf ə hɝ maɪnd. pɹɑbli ðət wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛl fəɹ ðɛm. ɪf ʃi foʊkəst ɑn ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ʃi wəd bi hɑɹd-pɹɛs nɑt tə swɑɾ əm laɪk baɪtmz, ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ðə ɹil sɔɹs ə hɝ ɛksæspɝeɪʃən.

"Your sister is assisting us in learning what happened on the unfortunate day," Cadsuane said smoothly, and somewhat absently. Taking a swallow of her own spiced wine, she waited, uncaring whether they saw her impatience. No matter how Dobraine grumbled about how impossible it was to meet the terms of that incredible bargain Rafela and Merana had made on behalf of the al'Thor boy, he still might have handled the Sea Folk himself. She could hardly give them half of her mind. Probably that was just as well for them. If she focused on the Atha'an Miere, she would be hard-pressed not to swat them like bitemes, though they were not the real source of her exasperation.

faɪv sɪstɝz wɝ ɝeɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝpleɪs ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə sʌnɹum fɹəm deɪdʒiən ən ɛbən. nɛsun hæɾ ə lɑɹdʒ wʊd baʊn vɑljum fɹəm ðə pæləs laɪbɹɛɹi spɹɛɾ ɑn ə ɹɛɾɪŋ stæn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ tʃɛɹ. laɪk ði ʌðɝz, ʃi wɔɹ ə pleɪn wʊlən dʒɹɛs mɔɹ suɾəd tə ə mɝtʃən ðən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪf ɛni ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ðə læk ə sɪlks, əɹ mʌni fəɹ sɪlks, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ ɪt. sɝin, wɪð əɹ θɪn, biɾɪd bɹeɪdz, stʊd wɝkɪŋ əɾ ə lɑɹdʒ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi fɹeɪm, hɝ niɾəl meɪkɪŋ ðə taɪni stɪtʃɪz ə jɛɾ ənʌðɝ flaʊɝ ɪn ə fild ə blɑsəmz. ɛɹiən ən bɛldaɪn wɝ pleɪɪŋ stoʊnz, wɑtʃt baɪ ɛlzə, hu weɪɾəd əɹ tɝn tə teɪk ɑn ðə wɪnɝ. baɪ ɔl əpɪɹənsəz ðeɪ wɝ ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ən aɪɾəl mɔɹnɪŋ, wɪθaʊɾ ə kɛɹ ɪn ðə wɝld. pɝhæps ðeɪ nu ðeɪ wɝ hɪɹ kəz ʃi wɑntəd tə stʌɾi ðɛm. waɪ hæd ðeɪ swɔɹn fiəlti tə ði ælθɹ bɔɪ? ət lis kaɪɹunə ən ði ʌðɝz hæd bɪn ɪn ɪz pɹɛzəns wən ðeɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd tə swɛɹ. ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə ədmɪt ðət noʊ wʌn kəd ɹɪzɪs ði ɪnfluəns ʌv ə tɑvɝən wən ɪt kɑt ju. bʌt ðiz faɪv hæd teɪkən ə hɑɹʃ pɛnəns fəɹ kɪdnæpɪŋ ɪm ən ɹitʃt ðɛɹ dɪsɪʒən tə ɔfɝ oʊθ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ bɹɔt nɪɹ hɪm. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʃi hæd bɪn ɪnklaɪn tə æksɛp ðɛɹ vɛɹiəs ɛkspləneɪʃənz, bʌɾ oʊvɝ ðə læs fju deɪz ðəɾ ɪnkləneɪʃən hæd teɪkən hɑɹd nɑks. dɪstɝbɪŋli hɑɹd nɑks.

Five sisters were arrayed around the fireplace at the other end of the sunroom from Daigian and Eben. Nesune had a large wood bound volume from the Palace library spread on a reading stand in front of her chair. Like the others, she wore a plain woolen dress more suited to a merchant than an Aes Sedai. If any regretted the lack of silks, or money for silks, they did not show it. Sarene, with her thin, beaded braids, stood working at a large embroidery frame, her needle making the tiny stitches of yet another flower in a field of blossoms. Erian and Beldeine were playing stones, watched by Elza, who waited her turn to take on the winner. By all appearances they were enjoying an idle morning, without a care in the world. Perhaps they knew they were here because she wanted to study them. Why had they sworn fealty to the al'Thor boy? At least Kiruna and the others had been in his presence when they decided to swear. She was willing to admit that no one could resist the influence of a ta'veren when it caught you. But these five had taken a harsh penance for kidnapping him and reached their decision to offer oath before they were brought near him. In the beginning she had been inclined to accept their various explanations, but over the last few days that inclination had taken hard knocks. Disturbingly hard knocks.

"maɪ wɪndfɪndɝ ɪz nɑt sʌbʒɪkt tə jəɹ əθɔɹəɾi, ɛɛs sədaɪ," hɑɹɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli, əz ɪf dɪnaɪɪŋ ðə blʌd kənɛkʃən. "ʃələn mʌst ən wɪl bi ɹɪtɝn tə mi ət wʌns." dɪɹə nɑɾəd kɝɾ əɡɹimənt. kædzueɪn θɔt ðə seɪlməstʃɹəs maɪt də ðə seɪm ɪf hɑɹɪn ɔɹɾɝd əɹ tə dʒʌmp fɹəm ə klɪf. ɪn ði æθɑn maɪɹz haɪɝɑɹki, dɪɹə stʊɾ ə lɔŋ dɪstəns bɪloʊ hɑɹɪn. ən ðət wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz kædzueɪn nu ʌv ðɛm. ðə si foʊk maɪt pɹuv jusfəl əɹ maɪt nɑt, bʌt ʃi kəd faɪn ə weɪ tə ɡɛɾ ə ɡɹɪp ɑn əm ɪn ɛni keɪs.

"My Windfinder is not subject to your authority, Aes Sedai," Harine said sharply, as if denying the blood connection. "Shalon must and will be returned to me at once." Derah nodded curt agreement. Cadsuane thought the Sailmistress might do the same if Harine ordered her to jump from a cliff. In the Atha'an Miere's hierarchy, Derah stood a long distance below Harine. And that was almost as much as Cadsuane knew of them. The Sea Folk might prove useful or might not, but she could find a way to get a grip on them in any case.

"ðɪs ɪz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪnkwaɪɹi," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd blænli. "wi mʌs fɑloʊ taʊɝ lɔ." lusli ɪntɝpɹəɾəd, tə bi ʃʊɹ. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪliv ðə spɪɹəɾ ə ðə lɔ wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ðə lɛɾɝ.

"This is an Aes Sedai inquiry," she replied blandly. "We must follow Tower law." Loosely interpreted, to be sure. She had always believed the spirit of the law was far more important than the letter.

hɑɹɪn pʌft ʌp laɪk ən æɾɝ ən bɪɡæn jɛɾ ənʌðɝ hɝæŋ lɪstɪŋ əɹ ɹaɪts ən dɪmænz, bʌt kædzueɪn lɪsənd wɪð hæf ən ɪɹ.

Harine puffed up like an adder and began yet another harangue listing her rights and demands, but Cadsuane listened with half an ear.

ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝstæn ɛɹiən, ə peɪl, blæk-hɛɹɾ ɪliɑnɝ, fɪɹsli ɪnsɪstɪŋ ðət ʃi mʌs bi ət ðə bɔɪz saɪd wən i fɔt ðə læs bæɾəl. ən bɛldaɪn, soʊ nu tə ðə ʃɔl ðət ʃi hæd nɑt jɛɾ ətʃivd eɪɡləsnəs, soʊ dɪtɝmən tə bi ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðəɾ ə ɡɹin ʃəd bi. ən ɛlzə, ə plɛzənt-feɪst ændɔɝən huz aɪz ɔlmoʊst ɡloʊd wən ʃi spoʊk ə meɪkɪŋ sɝɾən ðəɾ i lɪv tə feɪs ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ənʌðɝ ɡɹin, ən ivən mɔɹ ɪntɛns ðən moʊst. nɛsun, hʌntʃt fɔɹwɝd tə pɪɹ əɾ əɹ bʊk, lʊk laɪk ə blæk-aɪd bɝɾ ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ə wɝm. eɪ bɹaʊn, ʃi wəd klaɪm ɪndə ə bɑks wɪð ə skɔɹpiən ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə stʌɾi ɪt. sɝin maɪt bi ful ɪnʌf tə bi stɑɹɾəld ðəɾ ɛniwʌn θɔɾ əɹ pɹɪɾi, mʌtʃ lɛs stʌnɪŋ, bʌt ðə waɪɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn ðə kul pɹisɪʒən ə hɝ lɑdʒɪk; ælθɹ wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən lɑdʒɪkli, ʃi mʌs fɑloʊ hɪm. tɛmpɛstʃuəs ɹizənz, ɪɾiɑtɪk ɹizənz, jɛt ʃi cʊɾə æksɛptɪd ðɛm, ɪf nɑt fəɹ ði ʌðɝz.

She could almost understand Erian, a pale, black-haired Illianer, fiercely insisting that she must be at the boy's side when he fought the Last Battle. And Beldeine, so new to the shawl that she had not yet achieved agelessness, so determined to be everything that a Green should be. And Elza, a pleasant-faced Andoran whose eyes almost glowed when she spoke of making certain that he lived to face the Dark One. Another Green, and even more intense than most. Nesune, hunched forward to peer at her book, looked like a black-eyed bird examining a worm. A Brown, she would climb into a box with a scorpion if she wanted to study it. Sarene might be fool enough to be startled that anyone thought her pretty, much less stunning, but the White insisted on the cool precision of her logic; al'Thor was the Dragon Reborn, and logically, she must follow him. Tempestuous reasons, idiotic reasons, yet she could have accepted them, if not for the others.

ðə dɔɹ tə ðə hɔl oʊpən tə ədmɪt vɛɹɪn ən sɔɹɪliə. ðə lɛðɝi, waɪt-hɛɹɾ il wʊmən hændəd sʌmθɪŋ smɔl tə vɛɹɪn ðət ðə bɹaʊn tʌkt ɪndə hɝ bɛl paʊtʃ. vɛɹɪn wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ə flaʊɝd bɹutʃ ɑn əɹ sɪmpəl bɹɑnz-kʌlɝd dʒɹɛs, ðə fɝs dʒuəlɹi kædzueɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ɑn əɹ əsaɪd fɹəm əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ.

The door to the hall opened to admit Verin and Sorilea. The leathery, white-haired Aiel woman handed something small to Verin that the Brown tucked into her belt pouch. Verin was wearing a flowered brooch on her simple bronze-colored dress, the first jewelry Cadsuane had ever seen on her aside from her Great Serpent ring.

"ðæt wɪl hɛlp jə slip," sɔɹɪliə sɛd, "bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝ, dʒʌs θɹi dʒɹɑps ɪn wɔɾɝ əɹ wʌn ɪn waɪn. ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ, ən jə maɪt slip ə deɪ əɹ lɔŋɡɝ. mʌtʃ mɔɹ, ən jəl nɑt weɪk. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ teɪs tə wɔɹn ju, soʊ jə mʌs bi kɛɹfəl."

"That will help you sleep," Sorilea said, "but remember, just three drops in water or one in wine. A little more, and you might sleep a day or longer. Much more, and you will not wake. There is no taste to warn you, so you must be careful."

soʊ vɛɹɪn wɑz hævɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl slipɪŋ, tu. kædzueɪn hæd nɑt hæɾ ə ɡʊd naɪts ɹɛst sɪns ðə bɔɪ flɛd ðə sʌn pæləs. ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt faɪnd wʌn sun, ʃi θɔt ʃi maɪt baɪt sʌmwʌn. nɛsun ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ aɪɪŋ sɔɹɪliə ənizəli. ðə bɔɪ hæd meɪɾ əm əpɹɛntəs ðɛmsɛlvz tə ðə waɪz wʌnz, ən ðeɪ hæd lɝn ðət ði il wɪmən tʊk ðət vɛɹi sɪɹiəsli. wʌn snæp ə sɔɹɪliəz boʊni fɪŋɡɝz kəɾ ɛn ðɛɹ aɪɾəl mɔɹnɪŋ.

So Verin was having trouble sleeping, too. Cadsuane had not had a good night's rest since the boy fled the Sun Palace. If she did not find one soon, she thought she might bite someone. Nesune and the others were eyeing Sorilea uneasily. The boy had made them apprentice themselves to the Wise Ones, and they had learned that the Aiel women took that very seriously. One snap of Sorilea's bony fingers could end their idle morning.

hɑɹɪn lin fɔɹwɝɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ tʃɛɹ ən ɡeɪv kædzueɪnz tʃik ə ʃɑɹp tæp wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz! "ju ɑɹ nɑt lɪsnɪŋ tə mi," ʃi sɛd hɑɹʃli. hɝ feɪs wɑz ə θʌndɝhɛd, ən ðəɾ ə hɝ seɪlməstʃɹəs skɛɹsli lɛs stɔɹmi. "ju wɪl lɪsən!"

Harine leaned forward out of her chair and gave Cadsuane's cheek a sharp tap with her fingers! "You are not listening to me," she said harshly. Her face was a thunderhead, and that of her Sailmistress scarcely less stormy. "You will listen!"

kædzueɪn pʊɾ əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ ən ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ðə wʊmən oʊvɝ əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps. noʊ. ʃi wəd nɑt stæn ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs ɑn əɹ hɛd hɪɹ ən naʊ. ʃi wəd nɑt sɛn ðə wʊmən bæk tə hɝ əpɑɹtməns wipɪŋ. ʃi wəd bi əz dɪpləmæɾɪk əz kɔɪɹən kəd wɪʃ. heɪstəli ʃi skæn θɹu wʌt ʃi hæd hɝd. "ju spik fəɹ ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, wɪð ɔl ə hɝ əθɔɹəɾi, wɪtʃ ɪz mɔɹ ðən aɪ kən ɪmædʒən," ʃi sɛd maɪldli. "ɪf jəɹ wɪndfɪndɝ ɪz nɑt ɹɪtɝn tə jə wɪðɪn ði aʊɝ, jəl si ðət ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ pʌnɪʃəz mi səvɪɹli. jə ɹikwaɪɝ ən əpɑlədʒi fəɹ jəɹ wɪndfɪndɝz ɪmpɹɪzənmənt. ən jə ɹikwaɪɝ mi tə meɪk lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn sɛɾ əsaɪd ðə læn pɹɑməs baɪ ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ ɪmiɾiətli. aɪ bɪliv ðət kʌvɝz ði ɪsɛnʃəl pɔɪns." ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə wʌn əbaʊt hævɪŋ əɹ flɑɡd!

Cadsuane put her hands together and regarded the woman over her fingertips. No. She would not stand the Wavemistress on her head here and now. She would not send the woman back to her apartments weeping. She would be as diplomatic as Coiren could wish. Hastily she scanned through what she had heard. "You speak for the Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere, with all of her authority, which is more than I can imagine," she said mildly. "If your Windfinder is not returned to you within the hour, you will see that the Coramoor punishes me severely. You require an apology for your Windfinder's imprisonment. And you require me to make Lord Dobraine set aside the land promised by the Coramoor immediately. I believe that covers the essential points." Except for the one about having her flogged!

"ɡʊd," hɑɹɪn sɛd, linɪŋ bæk kʌmfɝɾəbli, ɪn kəmænd naʊ. hɝ smaɪl wɑz sɪkənɪŋli sɛlf-sæɾəsfaɪd. "ju wɪl lɝn ðət - "

"Good," Harine said, leaning back comfortably, in command now. Her smile was sickeningly self-satisfied. "You will learn that - "

"aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ ə fɪɡ fəɹ jəɹ kɔɹəmʊɹ," kædzueɪn kəntɪnjud, hɝ vɔɪs stɪl maɪld. ɔl ðə fɪɡz ɪn ðə wɝl fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, bʌt nɑt wʌn fəɹ ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɔltɝ əɹ toʊn baɪ ə hɛɹ. "ɪf jə ɛvɝ tʌtʃ mi əɡɛn wɪθaʊt pɝmɪʃən, əl əv jə stʃɹɪpt, stʃɹaɪpt, baʊn ən kæɹid bæk tə jəɹ ɹumz ɪn ə sæk." wɛl, dɪploʊməsi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn əɹ stʃɹɔŋɡəs pɔɪnt. "ɪf jə də nɑt sis pɛstɝɪŋ mi əbaʊt jəɹ sɪstɝ . . . wɛl, aɪ maɪɾ æktʃəli  ɡɹoʊ æŋɡɹi." stændɪŋ, ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd ðə si foʊk wʊmənz ɪndɪɡnən pʌfɪŋ ən ɡeɪpɪŋ ən ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs tə bi hɝɾ ət ði ɛn ə ðə ɹum. "sɝin!"

"I do not care a fig for your Coramoor," Cadsuane continued, her voice still mild. All the figs in the world for the Dragon Reborn, but not one for the Coramoor. She did not alter her tone by a hair. "If you ever touch me again without permission, I will have you stripped, striped, bound and carried back to your rooms in a sack." Well, diplomacy had never been her strongest point. "If you do not cease pestering me about your sister . . . Well, I might actually grow angry." Standing, she ignored the Sea Folk woman's indignant puffing and gaping and raised her voice to be heard at the end of the room. "Sarene!"

ðə slɛndɝ tæɹɑbənɝ wɝl fɹəm əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, biɾɪd bɹeɪdz klɪkɪŋ, ən hɝid tə kædzueɪnz saɪd, bɛɹli hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ bɪfɔɹ spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ skɝts ɪn ə kɝtsi. ðə waɪz wʌnz hæd hæd tə titʃ əm tə lip wən ə waɪz wʌn spoʊk, bʌt mɔɹ ðən kʌstəm meɪɾ əm lip fəɹ hɝ. ðəɹ tʃɹuli wɝ ædvæntɪdʒɪz tə biɪŋ ə lɛdʒənd, ɪspɛʃli ən ʌnpɹɪdɪktəbəl lɛdʒənd.

The slender Taraboner whirled from her embroidery, beaded braids clicking, and hurried to Cadsuane's side, barely hesitating before spreading her dark gray skirts in a curtsy. The Wise Ones had had to teach them to leap when a Wise One spoke, but more than custom made them leap for her. There truly were advantages to being a legend, especially an unpredictable legend.

"ɛskɔɹt ðiz tu tə ðɛɹ ɹumz," kædzueɪn kəmændəd. "ðeɪ wɪʃ tə fæst ən mɛɾəteɪt ɑn səvɪləɾi. si ðət ðeɪ du. ən ɪf ðeɪ ɔfɝ wʌn ʌnsɪvəl wɝd, spæŋk əm boʊθ. bʌt bi dɪpləmæɾɪk əbaʊɾ ɪt."

"Escort these two to their rooms," Cadsuane commanded. "They wish to fast and meditate on civility. See that they do. And if they offer one uncivil word, spank them both. But be diplomatic about it."

sɝin ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, hæf oʊpənɪŋ əɹ maʊθ əz ɪf tə pɹoʊtɛs ði ɪlɑdʒɪk ə ðæt, bʌt wʌn ɡlæns ət kædzueɪnz feɪs ən ʃi kwɪkli tɝn tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ wɪmən, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ fəɹ əm tə ɹaɪz.

Sarene gave a start, half opening her mouth as if to protest the illogic of that, but one glance at Cadsuane's face and she quickly turned to the Atha'an Miere women, gesturing for them to rise.

hɑɹɪn spɹæŋ tə hɝ fit, hɝ dɑɹk feɪs hɑɹɾ ən skaʊlɪŋ. bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ ʌɾɝ ə wɝɾ ə hɝ noʊ daʊt fjʊɹiəs taɪɹeɪd, ðoʊ, dɪɹə tʌtʃt əɹ ɑɹm ən lin kloʊs tə wɪspɝ ɪndə hɝ ɹɪŋ-hɛvi ɪɹ bɪhaɪn ə kʌp hæn kʌvɝd wɪð dɑɹk tætuz. wʌtɛvɝ ðə seɪlməstʃɹəs hæd tə seɪ, hɑɹɪn kloʊzd əɹ maʊð. hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt sɑfən, jɛt ʃi aɪd ðə sɪstɝz ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə ɹum ən æftɝ ə moʊmən kɝtli moʊʃən sɝin tə lid ðə weɪ. hɑɹɪn maɪt pɹitɛn ðəɾ ɪt wɑz əɹ dɪsɪʒən tə liv, bʌt dɪɹə fɑloʊd soʊ kloʊs ɑn əɹ hilz ʃi əpɪɹd tə bi hɝɾɪŋ əɹ ən ʃɑɾ ən ənizi ɡlæns bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ bɪfɔɹ ðə dɔɹ ʃʌɾ əɹ fɹəm saɪt.

Harine sprang to her feet, her dark face hard and scowling. Before she could utter a word of her no doubt furious tirade, though, Derah touched her arm and leaned close to whisper into her ring-heavy ear behind a cupped hand covered with dark tattoos. Whatever the Sailmistress had to say, Harine closed her mouth. Her expression certainly did not soften, yet she eyed the sisters at the far end of the room and after a moment curtly motioned Sarene to lead the way. Harine might pretend that it was her decision to leave, but Derah followed so close on her heels she appeared to be herding her and shot an uneasy glance back over her shoulder before the door shut her from sight.

kædzueɪn ɔlmoʊst ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ɡɪvɪŋ ðət fɹɪvələs ɔɹɾɝ. sɝin wəd də ɪɡzækli əz ʃi hæd bɪn toʊld. ðə si foʊk wɪmən wɝ ən ɪɹəɾənt, ən jusləs ðʌs fɑɹ, bɪsaɪdz. ði ɪɹɪteɪʃən mʌs bi ɹimuv soʊ ʃi kəd kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn wʌt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ən ɪf ʃi faʊn ə jus fəɹ ðɛm, tulz niɾəd tə bi ʃeɪpt wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ. ʃi wɑz tu æŋɡɹi wɪð əm tə kɛɹ haʊ ðət wɑz dʌn, ən ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl bɪɡɪn naʊ əz leɪɾɝ. noʊ, ʃi wɑz æŋɡɹi wɪð ðə bɔɪ, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt leɪ hænz ɑn ɪm jɛt.

Cadsuane almost regretted giving that frivolous order. Sarene would do exactly as she had been told. The Sea Folk women were an irritant, and useless thus far, besides. The irritation must be removed so she could concentrate on what was important, and if she found a use for them, tools needed to be shaped one way or another. She was too angry with them to care how that was done, and it might as well begin now as later. No, she was angry with the boy, but she could not lay hands on him yet.

wɪð ə laʊd hæɹəmf, sɔɹɪliə tɝn fɹəm wɑtʃɪŋ sɝin ən ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɡoʊ ən dɝɛktəɾ əɹ skaʊl ət ðə sɪstɝz ɡæðɝɾ ət ði ɛn ə ðə soʊlɝ. bɹeɪslɪts klæɾɝd ɑn əɹ ɹɪsts əz ʃi ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ ʃɔl. ənʌðɝ wʊmən nɑɾ ɪn əɹ bɛs tɛmpɝ. ðə si foʊk hæd pəkjuljɝ noʊʃənz ʌv "il sævədʒəz" - ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ nɑt ðət mʌtʃ stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ðən səm kædzueɪn hɝsɛlf hæd bɪliv bɪfɔɹ miɾɪŋ sɔɹɪliə - ən ðə waɪz wʌn dɪd nɑt laɪk əm ə hɛɹ.

With a loud harrumph, Sorilea turned from watching Sarene and the Atha'an Miere go and directed her scowl at the sisters gathered at the end of the solar. Bracelets clattered on her wrists as she adjusted her shawl. Another woman not in her best temper. The Sea Folk had peculiar notions of "Aiel savages" - though in truth not that much stranger than some Cadsuane herself had believed before meeting Sorilea - and the Wise One did not like them a hair.

kædzueɪn wɛn tə miɾ əɹ wɪð ə smaɪl. sɔɹɪliə wɑz nɑɾ ə wʊmən jə meɪd kʌm tə ju. ɛvɹiwʌn θɔt ðeɪ wɝ bɪkʌmɪŋ fɹɛnz - wɪtʃ ðeɪ maɪt jɛt, ʃi ɹilaɪzd ɪn sɝpɹaɪz - bʌt noʊ wʌn nu ʌv ðɛɹ əlaɪəns. ɛbən əpɪɹd wɪð ɪz tʃɹeɪ, ən əpɪɹd ɹɪlivd wən ʃi sɛɾ əɹ hæf-ɛmpti ɡɑbləɾ ɑn ɪt.

Cadsuane went to meet her with a smile. Sorilea was not a woman you made come to you. Everyone thought they were becoming friends - which they might yet, she realized in surprise - but no one knew of their alliance. Eben appeared with his tray, and appeared relieved when she set her half-empty goblet on it.

"leɪt læs naɪt," sɔɹɪliə sɛɾ əz ðə ɹɛd-koʊɾəd bɔɪ hɝid bæk tə deɪdʒiən, "tʃɪseɪn nɝbaɪə æsk tə sɝv ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn." dɪsəpɹuvəl leɪ hɛvi ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "bɪfɔɹ fɝs laɪt, dʒənin pævlɑɹə æskt, ðən ɪninə dɛɹənhoʊld, ðən veɪɛl kæmsə. ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn əlaʊd tə spik tə wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðəɹ kəd bi noʊ kəluʒən. aɪ æksɛptɪd ðɛɹ pliz."

"Late last night," Sorilea said as the red-coated boy hurried back to Daigian, "Chisaine Nurbaya asked to serve the Car'a'carn." Disapproval lay heavy in her voice. "Before first light, Janine Pavlara asked, then Innina Darenhold, then Vayelle Kamsa. They had not been allowed to speak to one another. There could be no collusion. I accepted their pleas."

kædzueɪn meɪɾ ə vɛkst saʊnd. "aɪ səpoʊz jə ɔlɹɛɾi hæv əm sɝvɪŋ pɛnəns," ʃi mɝmɝd, θɪŋkɪŋ hɑɹd. naɪntin sɪstɝz hæd bɪn pɹɪznɝz ɪn ði il kæmp, naɪntin sɪstɝz sɛn baɪ ðət ful ɪleɪɾə tə kɪdnæp ðə bɔɪ, ən naʊ ðeɪ ɔl hæd swɔɹn tə fɑloʊ hɪm! ðiz læst wɝ ðə wɝst. "wʌt kəd meɪk ɹɛd sɪstɝz swɛɹ fiəlti tə ə mæn u kən tʃænəl?"

Cadsuane made a vexed sound. "I suppose you already have them serving penance," she murmured, thinking hard. Nineteen sisters had been prisoners in the Aiel camp, nineteen sisters sent by that fool Elaida to kidnap the boy, and now they all had sworn to follow him! These last were the worst. "What could make Red sisters swear fealty to a man who can channel?"

vɛɹɪn bɪɡæn tə meɪk ən ɑbzɝveɪʃən, bʌt fɛl saɪlən fəɹ ði il wʊmən. stʃɹeɪnʒli, vɛɹɪn hæd teɪkən tə hɝ oʊn ɛnfɔɹst əpɹɛntəsʃɪp laɪk ə hɛɹən tə ðə mɑɹʃ. ʃi spɛn mɔɹ taɪm ɪn ði il kæmp ðən aʊɾ ʌv ɪt.

Verin began to make an observation, but fell silent for the Aiel woman. Strangely, Verin had taken to her own enforced apprenticeship like a heron to the marsh. She spent more time in the Aiel camp than out of it.

"nɑt pɛnəns, kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn." sɔɹɪliə meɪɾ ə dɪsmɪsɪv dʒɛstʃɝ wɪð wʌn sɪnjui hæn ɪn ənʌðɝ ɹæɾəl ʌv ɡoʊld ən aɪvɝi bɹeɪslɪts. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ətɛmptɪŋ tə mit toʊ ðət kænɑt bi mɛt. əz fulɪʃ ɪn ɪts weɪ əz əɹ neɪmɪŋ əm dætsæŋ ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, bʌt pɝhæps ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt bɪɑn ɹɪdɛmpʃən ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ wɪlɪŋ tə tʃɹaɪ," ʃi əlaʊd ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. sɔɹɪliə mɔɹ ðən mɪɹli dɪslaɪk ðoʊz naɪntin sɪstɝz. ʃi ɡeɪv ə θɪn smaɪl. "ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, wɪl titʃ əm mʌtʃ ðeɪ nid tə lɝn." ðə wʊmən sim tə bɪliv ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd də wɪð taɪm əpɹɛntɪsɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə waɪz wʌnz.

"Not penance, Cadsuane Melaidhrin." Sorilea made a dismissive gesture with one sinewy hand in another rattle of gold and ivory bracelets. "They are attempting to meet toh that cannot be met. As foolish in its way as our naming them da'tsang in the first place, but perhaps they are not beyond redemption if they are willing to try," she allowed grudgingly. Sorilea more than merely disliked those nineteen sisters. She gave a thin smile. "In any event, we will teach them much they need to learn." The woman seemed to believe all Aes Sedai could do with time apprenticing under the Wise Ones.

"aɪ hoʊp jəl kəntɪnju tə wɑtʃ əm ɔl kloʊsli," kædzueɪn sɛd. "ɪspɛʃli ðiz læs fɔɹ." ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wəd kip ðət ɹɪdɪkjələs oʊθ, ɪf nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ɪn weɪz ðə bɔɪ wəd laɪk, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət wʌn əɹ tu maɪt bi blæk ədʒɑ. wʌns ʃi hæd θɔt hɝsɛlf ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə ɹuɾɪŋ aʊt ðə blæk oʊnli tə wɑtʃ əɹ kwɔɹi slɪp θɹu hɝ fɪŋɡɝz laɪk smoʊk, hɝ bɪɾɝəst feɪljɝ ɪksɛpt pɑsəbli fəɹ feɪlɪŋ tə lɝn wʌt kæɹɑlin dəmədʒɹdz kʌzən hæd bɪn ʌp tə ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz əntɪl ðə nɑlədʒ wɑz jɪɹz tu leɪt tə də ɛni ɡʊd. naʊ, ivən ðə blæk ədʒɑ simd ə daɪvɝʒən fɹəm wʌt wɑz tʃɹuli ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

"I hope you will continue to watch them all closely," Cadsuane said. "Especially these last four." She was sure they would keep that ridiculous oath, if not always in ways the boy would like, but there was always the possibility that one or two might be Black Ajah. Once she had thought herself on the point of rooting out the Black only to watch her quarry slip through her fingers like smoke, her bitterest failure except possibly for failing to learn what Caraline Damodred's cousin had been up to in the Borderlands until the knowledge was years too late to do any good. Now, even the Black Ajah seemed a diversion from what was truly important.

"əpɹɛntəsɪz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz wɑtʃt kloʊsli," ðə wɛðɝd wʊmən ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ mʌst ɹimaɪn ðiz ʌðɝz tə bi ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ biɪŋ əlaʊd tə lɑl əbaʊt laɪk klæn tʃifs."

"Apprentices are always watched closely," the weathered woman replied. "I think I must remind these others to be grateful for being allowed to loll about like clan chiefs."

ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ fɔɹ sɪstɝz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs ɹoʊz wɪð əlækɹəɾi əɾ əɹ əpɹoʊtʃ, meɪd dip kɝtsiz, ən lɪsən kɛɹfəli tə wʌt ʃi toʊld əm ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs wɪð mʌtʃ fɪŋɡɝ ʃeɪkɪŋ. sɔɹɪliə maɪt θɪŋk ʃi hæd mʌtʃ tə titʃ ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi lɝn ðəɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃɔl ɔfɝd noʊ pɹətɛkʃən tə ə waɪz wʌnz əpɹɛntəs. toʊ simd ə ɡɹeɪt dil laɪk pɛnəns tə kædzueɪn.

The remaining four sisters in front of the fireplace rose with alacrity at her approach, made deep curtsies, and listened carefully to what she told them in a low voice with much finger shaking. Sorilea might think she had much to teach them, but they had already learned that an Aes Sedai shawl offered no protection to a Wise One's apprentice. Toh seemed a great deal like penance to Cadsuane.

"ʃi ɪz . . . fɔɹməɾəbəl," vɛɹɪn mɝmɝd. "aɪ æm vɛɹi ɡlæd ʃiz ɑn əɹ saɪd. ɪf ʃi ɪz."

"She is . . . formidable," Verin murmured. "I am very glad she is on our side. If she is."

kædzueɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. "ju hæv ði əpɪɹəns ʌv ə wʊmən wɪð sʌmθɪŋ tə seɪ ðət jə doʊnt wɑn tə. əbaʊt sɔɹɪliə?" ðəɾ əlaɪəns wɑz vɛɹi veɪɡli dɪfaɪnd. fɹɛndʃɪp əɹ noʊ fɹɛndʃɪp, ʃi ən ðə waɪz wʌn stɪl maɪt tɝn aʊt tə bi eɪmɪŋ ət dɪfɹənt ɡoʊlz.

Cadsuane gave her a sharp look. "You have the appearance of a woman with something to say that you don't want to. About Sorilea?" That alliance was very vaguely defined. Friendship or no friendship, she and the Wise One still might turn out to be aiming at different goals.

"nɑt ðæt," ðə staʊt lɪɾəl wʊmən saɪd. dɪspaɪɾ ə skwɛɹ feɪs, tɪltɪŋ əɹ hɛd tə wʌn saɪd meɪɾ əɹ lʊk laɪk ə vɛɹi plʌmp spɛɹoʊ. "aɪ noʊ ɪt wɑz nɑt maɪ bɪznəs, kædzueɪn, bʌt bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə wɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ noʊwɛɹ wɪð əɹ ɡɛsts, soʊ aɪ hæɾ ə lɪɾəl tɔk əloʊn wɪð ʃələn. æftɝ ə lɪɾəl dʒɛntəl kwɛstʃənɪŋ, ʃi spɪld aʊt ðə hoʊl stɔɹi, ən eɪlɪl kənfɝmd ɛvɹiθɪŋ wʌns ʃi ɹilaɪzd aɪ ɔlɹɛɾi nu. sun æftɝ ðə si foʊk fɝst ɝaɪv hɪɹ, eɪlɪl əpɹoʊtʃt ʃələn hoʊpɪŋ tə lɝn wʌt ðeɪ wɑntəd wɪð jʌŋ ælθɹ. fəɹ əɹ pɑɹt, ʃələn wɑntəd tə lɝn wʌtɛvɝ ʃi kəɾ əbaʊt hɪm, ən əbaʊt ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən hɪɹ. ðət lɛd tə miɾɪŋz, wɪtʃ lɛd tə fɹɛndʃɪp, wɪtʃ lɛd tə ðɛm bɪkʌmɪŋ pɪloʊ fɹɛnz. əz mʌtʃ fɹəm loʊnlinəs əz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, aɪ səspɛkt. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðət wɑz wʌt ðeɪ wɝ haɪɾɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ðɛɹ mjutʃəwəl snupɪŋ."

"Not that," the stout little woman sighed. Despite a square face, tilting her head to one side made her look like a very plump sparrow. "I know it was not my business, Cadsuane, but Bera and Kiruna were getting nowhere with our guests, so I had a little talk alone with Shalon. After a little gentle questioning, she spilled out the whole story, and Ailil confirmed everything once she realized I already knew. Soon after the Sea Folk first arrived here, Ailil approached Shalon hoping to learn what they wanted with young al'Thor. For her part, Shalon wanted to learn whatever she could about him, and about the situation here. That led to meetings, which led to friendship, which led to them becoming pillow friends. As much from loneliness as anything else, I suspect. In any case, that was what they were hiding more than their mutual snooping."

"ðeɪ pʊɾ ʌp wɪð deɪz ʌndɝ ðə kwɛstʃən tə haɪd ðæt?" kædzueɪn sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. bɛɹə ən kaɪɹunə hæd hæd ðə pɛɹ haʊlɪŋ!

"They put up with days under the question to hide that?" Cadsuane said incredulously. Bera and Kiruna had had the pair howling!

vɛɹɪnz aɪz twɪŋkəld wɪð səpɹɛs mɝθ. "kɛɹhinɪn ɑɹ pɹɪm ən pɹuɾɪʃ, kædzueɪn, ɪn pʌblɪk ət list. ðeɪ maɪt kæɹi ɑn laɪk ɹæbəts wən ðə kɝɾənz ɑɹ dʒɹɔn, bʌt ðeɪ wʊdn ədmɪt tə tʌtʃɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn hʌzbənz ɪf ɛniwʌn maɪɾ oʊvɝhɪɹ! ən ðə si foʊk ɑɹ ɔlmoʊst əz stʃɹeɪtleɪsd. ət list, ʃələn ɪz mɛɹid tə ə mæn wɪð duɾiz ɛlswɛɹ, ən bɹeɪkɪŋ mɛɹɪdʒ vaʊz ɪz ə vɛɹi sɪɹiəs kɹaɪm. ə bɹitʃ ə pɹɑpɝ dɪsəplən, ɪt simz. ɪf əɹ sɪstɝ faʊn aʊt, ʃələn wəd bi - 'wɪndfɪndɝ ɑn ə ɹoʊboʊt,' aɪ θɪŋk əɹ ɪɡzækt wɝdz wɝ."

Verin's eyes twinkled with suppressed mirth. "Cairhienin are prim and prudish, Cadsuane, in public at least. They might carry on like rabbits when the curtains are drawn, but they wouldn't admit to touching their own husbands if anyone might overhear! And the Sea Folk are almost as straitlaced. At least, Shalon is married to a man with duties elsewhere, and breaking marriage vows is a very serious crime. A breach of proper discipline, it seems. If her sister found out, Shalon would be - 'Windfinder on a rowboat,' I think her exact words were."

kædzueɪn wɑz əwɛɹ ə hɝ hɛɹ ɔɹnəməns sweɪɪŋ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. wən ðə tu wɪmən hæd bɪn dɪskʌvɝd ɹaɪɾ æftɝ ði ətæk ɑn ðə pæləs, baʊn ən ɡæɡd ən stʌft ʌndɝ eɪlɪlz bɛd, ʃi hæd səspɛktəd ðeɪ nu mɔɹ ə ði ətæk ðən ðeɪ wɝ ædmɪɾɪŋ. wʌns ðeɪ ɹəfjuz tə seɪ waɪ ðeɪ hæd bɪn miɾɪŋ ɪn sikɹət, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ. pɝhæps ivən ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɪnvɑlvd ɪn səm weɪ, ðoʊ ði ətæk əpɛɹənli wɑz ðə wɝk ə ɹɛnəɡeɪɾ æʃəmən. səpoʊzədli ɹɛnəɡeɪd, ət list. ɔl ðət taɪm ən ɛfɝt weɪstəɾ ɑn nʌθɪŋ. əɹ pɝhæps nɑt kwaɪt nʌθɪŋ, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ soʊ dɛspɹɪt tə kip θɪŋz hɪɾən.

Cadsuane was aware of her hair ornaments swaying as she shook her head. When the two women had been discovered right after the attack on the Palace, bound and gagged and stuffed under Ailil's bed, she had suspected they knew more of the attack than they were admitting. Once they refused to say why they had been meeting in secret, she was sure. Perhaps even that they were involved in some way, though the attack apparently was the work of renegade Asha'man. Supposedly renegade, at least. All that time and effort wasted on nothing. Or perhaps not quite nothing, if they were so desperate to keep things hidden.

"ɹɪtɝn ðə leɪɾi eɪlɪl tə hɝ əpɑɹtməns wɪð əpɑlədʒiz fəɹ əɹ tʃɹitmənt, vɛɹɪn. ɡɪv əɹ vɛɹi . . . tɛnjəwəs . . . əʃʊɹənsɪz ðəɾ əɹ kɑnfəɾənsɪz wɪl bi kɛpt. bi ʃʊɹ ʃiz əwɛɹ dʒʌs haʊ tɛnjəwəs. ən sədʒɛst stʃɹɔŋli ðət ʃi maɪt wɪʃ tə kip mi əbɹɛst ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ʃi hɪɹz kənsɝnɪŋ əɹ bɹʌðɝ." blækmeɪl wɑz ə tul ʃi dɪslaɪk juzɪŋ, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi juzd ɪɾ ɑn ðə θɹi æʃəmən, ən tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən maɪt stɪl kɑz tʃɹʌbəl ivən ɪf ɪz ɹɪbɛljən dɪd sim tə hæv ɪvæpɝeɪɾəd. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi kɛɹd lɪɾəl u sæɾ ɑn ðə sʌn θɹoʊn, jɛt ðə plɑts ən skimz ə ðoʊz u kənsɪɾɝd θɹoʊnz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɔfən hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv ɪntɝfɪɹɪŋ wɪð mɔɹ səɡnɪfɪkən mæɾɝz.

"Return the Lady Ailil to her apartments with apologies for her treatment, Verin. Give her very . . . tenuous . . . assurances that her confidences will be kept. Be sure she is aware just how tenuous. And suggest strongly that she might wish to keep me abreast of anything she hears concerning her brother." Blackmail was a tool she disliked using, but she had already used it on the three Asha'man, and Toram Riatin might still cause trouble even if his rebellion did seem to have evaporated. In truth, she cared little who sat on the Sun Throne, yet the plots and schemes of those who considered thrones important often had a way of interfering with more significant matters.

vɛɹɪn smaɪld, hɝ bʌn bɑbɪŋ əz ʃi nɑɾəd. "oʊ, jɛs, aɪ θɪŋk ðət wɪl wɝk vɛɹi naɪsli. ɪspɛʃli sɪns ʃi dɪslaɪks əɹ bɹʌðɝ ɪntɛnsli. ðə seɪm fəɹ ʃələn, aɪ səpoʊz? ɪksɛp ðət jəl wɑnə hɪɹ ʌv ɪvɛns əmʌŋ ði æθɑn maɪɹ? aɪm nɑt sɝɾən haʊ fɑɹ ʃɪl bɪtʃɹeɪ hɑɹɪn, noʊ mæɾɝ ðə kɑnsəkwɛnsəz tə hɝsɛlf."

Verin smiled, her bun bobbing as she nodded. "Oh, yes, I think that will work very nicely. Especially since she dislikes her brother intensely. The same for Shalon, I suppose? Except that you will want to hear of events among the Atha'an Miere? I'm not certain how far she will betray Harine, no matter the consequences to herself."

"ʃi wɪl bɪtʃɹeɪ wʌɾ aɪ ɹikwaɪɝ əɹ tə bɪtʃɹeɪ," kædzueɪn sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "kip əɹ əntɪl təmɑɹoʊ, leɪt." hɑɹɪn mʌs nɑt bi əlaʊd tə θɪŋk fəɹ ə moʊmən ðəɾ əɹ dɪmænz wɝ biɪŋ mɛt. ðə si foʊk wɝ ənʌðɝ tul tə bi juzd ɑn ðə bɔɪ, noʊ mɔɹ. ɛvɹiwʌn ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd tə bi vjuɾ ɪn ðət laɪt.

"She will betray what I require her to betray," Cadsuane said grimly. "Keep her until tomorrow, late." Harine must not be allowed to think for a moment that her demands were being met. The Sea Folk were another tool to be used on the boy, no more. Everyone and everything had to be viewed in that light.

bɪɑn vɛɹɪn, kɔɹəl slɪpt ɪndə ðə sʌnɹum ən ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ kɛɹfəli bɪhaɪn əɹ əz ɪf hoʊpɪŋ nɑt tə dɪstɝb ɛniwʌn. ðət wɑz nɑɾ əɹ weɪ. bɔɪɪʃli slɪm, wɪð θɪk blæk aɪbɹaʊz ən ə mæs ʌv ɡlɔsi blæk hɛɹ floʊɪŋ daʊn əɹ bæk ðət ɡeɪv əɹ ə waɪld əpɪɹəns noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ niɾ əɹ kloʊðz wɝ, ðə jɛloʊ wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ laɪkli tə swip ɪndə ə ɹum læfɪŋ. ɹʌbɪŋ ði ɛn ə hɝ ʌptɝnd noʊz, ʃi lʊkt ət kædzueɪn hɛzɪɾəntli, wɪð nʌn ə ðə juʒəwəl spɑɹkəl ɪn əɹ blu aɪz.

Beyond Verin, Corele slipped into the sunroom and shut the door carefully behind her as if hoping not to disturb anyone. That was not her way. Boyishly slim, with thick black eyebrows and a mass of glossy black hair flowing down her back that gave her a wild appearance no matter how neat her clothes were, the Yellow was much more likely to sweep into a room laughing. Rubbing the end of her upturned nose, she looked at Cadsuane hesitantly, with none of the usual sparkle in her blue eyes.

kædzueɪn meɪɾ ə pɝɛmptɝi dʒɛstʃɝ ət hɝ, ən kɔɹəl dʒɹu ə bɹɛθ ən ɡlaɪɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə kɑɹpəts ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ jɛloʊ-slæʃt blu skɝts wɪð boʊθ hænz. aɪɪŋ ðə sɪstɝz klʌstɝɾ ɝaʊn sɔɹɪliə ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə ɹum, ən deɪdʒiən pleɪɪŋ kæts kɹeɪɾəl wɪð ɛbən ət ði ʌðɝ ɛnd, ʃi spoʊk ɪn ə sɑf vɔɪs ðət kæɹid ðə lɪltɪŋ æksɛns ə mʊɹændi.

Cadsuane made a peremptory gesture at her, and Corele drew a breath and glided across the carpets gripping her yellow-slashed blue skirts with both hands. Eyeing the sisters clustered around Sorilea at the far end of the room, and Daigian playing cat's cradle with Eben at the other end, she spoke in a soft voice that carried the lilting accents of Murandy.

"aɪ hæv ðə moʊst wʌndɝfəl nuz, kædzueɪn." baɪ ðə saʊn ə hɝ, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɔl sɝɾən haʊ wʌndɝfəl ɪt wɑz. "aɪ noʊ jə sɛɾ aɪ ʃəd kip deɪmɝ bɪzi hɪɹ ɪn ðə pæləs, bʌɾ i ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn lʊkɪŋ ət ðə sɪstɝz stɪl ɪn ði il kæmp. maɪld-tɛmpɝɾ əz i ɪz, hiz vɛɹi ɪnsɪstənt wən i wɑns tə bi, ən ʃʊɹ əz ðə sʌn ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ kæn bi hild. ænd, wɛl, ðə fækt ʌv ɪɾ ɪz, hiz ɡɔn ən hild ɝɡən. kædzueɪn, ɪts əz ɪf ʃid nɛvɝ bɪn . . ." ʃi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, əneɪbəl tə seɪ ðə wɝd. ɪt hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ ivən soʊ. stɪld.

"I have the most wonderful news, Cadsuane." By the sound of her, she was not all certain how wonderful it was. "I know you said I should keep Damer busy here in the Palace, but he insisted on looking at the sisters still in the Aiel camp. Mild-tempered as he is, he's very insistent when he wants to be, and sure as the sun there's nothing can't be Healed. And, well, the fact of it is, he's gone and Healed Irgain. Cadsuane, it's as if she'd never been . . ." She trailed off, unable to say the word. It hung in the air even so. Stilled.

"wʌndɝfəl nuz," kædzueɪn sɛd flætli. ɪt wɑz. ɛvɹi sɪstɝ kæɹid ðə fɪɹ sʌmwɛɹ dip ɪnsaɪd ðət ʃi maɪt bi kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm ðə paʊɝ. ən naʊ ə weɪ tə hil wʌt kəd nɑt bi hil hæd bɪn dɪskʌvɝd. baɪ ə mæn. ðəɹ wəd bi tɛɹz ən ɹɪkɹɪmɪneɪʃənz bɪfɔɹ ðɪs wɑz dʌn wɪð. ɪn ɛni keɪs, waɪl ɛvɹi sɪstɝ u hɝd wəd kənsɪɾɝ ɪɾ ə wɝld-ʃeɪkɪŋ dɪskʌvɝi - ɪn mɔɹ weɪz ðən wʌn; ə mæn! - ɪt wɑz ə stɔɹm ɪn ə tikʌp kəmpɛɹd tə ɹænd ælθɹ. "aɪ səpoʊz ʃiz ɔfɝɪŋ hɝsɛlf ʌp tə bi biɾən laɪk ði ʌðɝz?"

"Wonderful news," Cadsuane said flatly. It was. Every sister carried the fear somewhere deep inside that she might be cut off from the Power. And now a way to Heal what could not be Healed had been discovered. By a man. There would be tears and recriminations before this was done with. In any case, while every sister who heard would consider it a world-shaking discovery - in more ways than one; a man! - it was a storm in a teacup compared to Rand al'Thor. "I suppose she is offering herself up to be beaten like the others?"

"ʃi woʊnt nid tə," vɛɹɪn sɛɾ æbsənli. ʃi wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ ən ɪŋksteɪn ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝ, bʌt ʃi sim tə bi stʌɾiɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ bɪɑnd. "ðə waɪz wʌnz əpɛɹənli dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət ɹænd hæd pʌnɪʃt ɝɡən ən ði ʌðɝ tu səfɪʃənli wən i . . . dɪd wʌɾ i dɪd. ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹiɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝz laɪk wɝθləs ænəməlz, ðeɪv bɪn wɝkɪŋ tə kip ðoʊz θɹi əlaɪv. aɪ hɝd tɔk əbaʊt faɪndɪŋ ɹɑneɪl ə hʌzbənd."

"She won't need to," Verin said absently. She was frowning at an inkstain on her finger, but she seemed to be studying something beyond. "The Wise Ones apparently decided that Rand had punished Irgain and the other two sufficiently when he . . . did what he did. At the same time they were treating the others like worthless animals, they have been working to keep those three alive. I heard talk about finding Ronaille a husband."

"ɝɡən noʊz ɔl əbaʊt ði oʊðz ði ʌðɝz swɔɹ." kɔɹəlz vɔɪs tʊk ɑn toʊnz ʌv əmeɪzmənt. "ʃi stɑɹɾəd wipɪŋ fəɹ ðə lɔs ə hɝ wɔɹɾɝz ɔlmoʊst əz sun əz deɪmɝ fɪnɪʃt wɪð hɝ, bʌt ʃiz ɹɛɾi tə swɛɹ, tu. ðə θɪŋ ʌv ɪɾ ɪz, deɪmɝ wɑns tə tʃɹaɪ wɪð sæʃəl ən ɹɑneɪl, tu." sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ʃi dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp ɔlmoʊs dɪfaɪənli. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn əz ɛɹəɡən əz ɛni ʌðɝ jɛloʊ, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz noʊn wɛɹ ʃi stʊd wɪð kædzueɪn. "aɪ kæn si lɛɾɪŋ ə sɪstɝ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðət kəndɪʃən ɪf ðɛɹz ə weɪ aʊt, kædzueɪn. aɪ wɑnə lɛt deɪmɝ tʃɹaɪ hɪz hænd wɪð ðɛm."

"Irgain knows all about the oaths the others swore." Corele's voice took on tones of amazement. "She started weeping for the loss of her Warders almost as soon as Damer finished with her, but she's ready to swear, too. The thing of it is, Damer wants to try with Sashalle and Ronaille, too." Surprisingly, she drew herself up almost defiantly. She had always been as arrogant as any other Yellow, but she had always known where she stood with Cadsuane. "I can't see letting a sister remain in that condition if there's a way out, Cadsuane. I want to let Damer try his hand with them."

"ʌv kɔɹs, kɔɹəl." ɪt sim səm ə deɪmɝz ɪnsɪstəns wɑz ɹʌbɪŋ ɔf ɑn hɝ. kædzueɪn wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə lɛt ðət ɡoʊ, soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ tu fɑɹ. ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn ɡæðɝɪŋ sɪstɝz ʃi tʃɹʌstɪd, ðoʊz hɪɹ wɪð əɹ ən ʌðɝz, ðə deɪ ʃi fɝs hɝɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪvɛns ɪn ʃaɪnɝ - hɝ aɪz ən ɪɹz hæd kɛpt wɑtʃ ɑn sɪuən sɑntʃ ən mɔɪɹeɪn dəmədʒɹd fəɹ jɪɹz wɪθaʊt lɝnɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl əntɪl ðən - jɛt dʒʌs kəz ʃi tʃɹʌstɪɾ əm dɪd nɑt min ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə lɛɾ əm stɑɹt ɡoʊɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ. tu mʌtʃ leɪ ət steɪk. bʌɾ ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi kəd nɑt liv ə sɪstɝ laɪk ðæt, iðɝ.

"Of course, Corele." It seemed some of Damer's insistence was rubbing off on her. Cadsuane was willing to let that go, so long as it did not go too far. She had begun gathering sisters she trusted, those here with her and others, the day she first heard of strange events in Shienar - her eyes and ears had kept watch on Siuan Sanche and Moiraine Damodred for years without learning anything useful until then - yet just because she trusted them did not mean she intended to let them start going their own way. Too much lay at stake. But in any case, she could not leave a sister like that, either.

ðə dɔɹ bæŋd oʊpən tə ədmɪt dʒɑhɹ əɾ ə ɹʌn, ðə sɪlvɝ bɛlz ɑn ði ɛnz ə hɪz dɑɹk bɹeɪdz dʒæŋɡəlɪŋ. hɛdz tɝn tə lʊk ət ðə juθ ɪn ðə wɛl-fɪɾəd blu koʊt mɛɹaɪs hæd tʃoʊzən fəɹ ɪm - ivən sɔɹɪliə ən sɝin stɛɹd - bʌt ðə wɝdz ðət keɪm aʊɾ ə hɪm ɪn ə ɹʌʃ dʒɹoʊv əweɪ θɔts ə haʊ pɹɪɾi hɪz sʌn-dɑɹk feɪs wɑz.

The door banged open to admit Jahar at a run, the silver bells on the ends of his dark braids jangling. Heads turned to look at the youth in the well-fitted blue coat Merise had chosen for him - even Sorilea and Sarene stared - but the words that came out of him in a rush drove away thoughts of how pretty his sun-dark face was.

"ɑlɑnəz ʌnkɑnʃəs, kædzueɪn. ʃi dʒʌs kəlæpst ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ. mɛɹaɪs hæɾ əɹ teɪkən tə ə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ ən sɛn mi fəɹ ju."

"Alanna's unconscious, Cadsuane. She just collapsed in the hallway. Merise had her taken to a bedchamber and sent me for you."

ɹaɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ɛkskləmeɪʃənz ə ʃɑk, kædzueɪn ɡæðɝd kɔɹəl ən sɔɹɪliə - hu kəd nɑt bi lɛf bɪhaɪn ɪn ðɪs - ən ɔɹɾɝd dʒɑhɹ tə lid ðə weɪ. vɛɹɪn keɪm əz wɛl, ən kædzueɪn dɪd nɑt stɑp hɝ. vɛɹɪn hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv noʊɾɪsɪŋ wʌɾ ʌðɝz mɪst.

Riding over exclamations of shock, Cadsuane gathered Corele and Sorilea - who could not be left behind in this - and ordered Jahar to lead the way. Verin came as well, and Cadsuane did not stop her. Verin had a way of noticing what others missed.

ðə blæk-lɪvɹid sɝvəns hæd noʊ aɪdiə hu əɹ wʌt dʒɑhɹ wɑz, bʌt ðeɪ stɛp laɪvli tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə kædzueɪnz weɪ əz ʃi wɔkt kwɪkli əlɔŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. ʃi wʊɾə toʊld ɪm tə bi kwɪkɝ əbaʊɾ ɪt, bʌɾ ɛni fæstɝ, ən ʃi wʊɾə hæd tə ɹʌn. bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd ɡɔn vɛɹi fɑɹ, ə ʃɔɹt mæn wɪð ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz hɛd ʃeɪvd, ɪn ə dɑɹk koʊt wɪð hɔɹəzɑntəl stʃɹaɪps ə kʌlɝ daʊn ðə fɹʌnt, stɛpt ɪndə hɝ pæθ ən baʊd. ʃi hæd tə stɑp fəɹ hɪm.

The black-liveried servants had no idea who or what Jahar was, but they stepped lively to get out of Cadsuane's way as she walked quickly along behind him. She would have told him to be quicker about it, but any faster, and she would have had to run. Before she had gone very far, a short man with the front of his head shaved, in a dark coat with horizontal stripes of color down the front, stepped into her path and bowed. She had to stop for him.

"ɡɹeɪs feɪvɝ ju, kædzueɪn sədaɪ," hi sɛd smuðli, "fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ bɑðɝɪŋ jə wən jə ɑɹ ɪn sətʃ ə hɝi, bʌɾ aɪ θɔɾ aɪ ʃəd tɛl jə ðət ðə leɪɾi kæɹɑlin ən ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn ɑɹ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪn ðə leɪɾi ɑɹɪlɪnz pæləs. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɑn ə ɹɪvɝʃɪp baʊn fəɹ tɛɹ. bɪɑn jəɹ ɹitʃ baɪ ðɪs taɪm, aɪ fɪɹ."

"Grace favor you, Cadsuane Sedai," he said smoothly, "Forgive me for bothering you when you are in such a hurry, but I thought I should tell you that the Lady Caraline and the High Lord Darlin are no longer in the Lady Arilyn's palace. They are on a rivership bound for Tear. Beyond your reach by this time, I fear."

"ju maɪt bi sɝpɹaɪzd wʌɾ ɪz wɪðɪn maɪ ɹitʃ, lɔɹd dɑbɹeɪn," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə koʊl vɔɪs. ʃi ʃʊɾə lɛft ət list wʌn sɪstɝ əɾ ɑɹɪlɪnz pæləs, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn sɝɾən ðə pɛɹ wɑz sɪkjʊɹ. "wɑz ðɪs waɪz?" ʃi hæd noʊ daʊɾ ɪt wɑz ɪz wɝk, ðoʊ ʃi daʊɾɪd i hæd ðə nɝv tə ədmɪɾ ɪt. noʊ wʌndɝ i hæd nɑt pɹɛst əɹ oʊvɝ ðɛm.

"You might be surprised what is within my reach, Lord Dobraine," she said in a cold voice. She should have left at least one sister at Arilyn's palace, but she had been certain the pair was secure. "Was this wise?" She had no doubt it was his work, though she doubted he had the nerve to admit it. No wonder he had not pressed her over them.

hɝ toʊn meɪd noʊ ɪmpɹɛʃən ɑn ðə fɛloʊ. ən i sɝpɹaɪz hɝ. "ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn ɪz tə bi ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡənz stuɝɾ ə tiɹ, ən ɪt dɪd sim waɪz tə sɛn ðə leɪɾi kæɹɑlin aʊɾ ə ðə kʌntʃɹi. ʃiz fɔɹ-swɔɹn əɹ ɹɪbɛljən ən əɹ kleɪmz tə ðə sʌn θɹoʊn, bʌɾ ʌðɝz stɪl maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə juz hɝ. pɝhæps, kædzueɪn sədaɪ, ɪt wɑz ənwaɪz tə liv əm ɪn ðə tʃɑɹdʒ ə sɝvəns. ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, jə mʌs nɑt hoʊld əm ət fɔlt. ðeɪ wɝ eɪbəl tə hoʊl tu . . . ɡɛsts . . . bʌt nɑt tə stæn ʌp tə maɪ ɑɹmmɪn."

Her tone made no impression on the fellow. And he surprised her. "The High Lord Darlin is to be the Lord Dragon's Steward of Tear, and it did seem wise to send the Lady Caraline out of the country. She has fore-sworn her rebellion and her claims to the Sun Throne, but others still might try to use her. Perhaps, Cadsuane Sedai, it was unwise to leave them in the charge of servants. Under the Light, you must not hold them at fault. They were able to hold two . . . guests . . . but not to stand up to my armsmen."

dʒɑhɹ wɑz ɔl bʌt dænsɪŋ wɪð æŋzaɪəɾi tə ɡoʊ ɑn. mɛɹaɪs hæɾ ə fɝm hænd. kædzueɪn hɝsɛlf wɑz æŋkʃəs tə ɹitʃ ɑlɑnə.

Jahar was all but dancing with anxiety to go on. Merise had a firm hand. Cadsuane herself was anxious to reach Alanna.

"aɪ hoʊp juv ðə seɪm əpɪnjən ɪn ə jɪɹ," ʃi sɛd. dɑbɹeɪn mɪɹli baʊd.

"I hope you have the same opinion in a year," she said. Dobraine merely bowed.

ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ wɛɹ ɑlɑnə hæd bɪn teɪkən wɑz ðə nɪɹəs ðət hæd bɪn əveɪləbəl, ən ɪt wɑz nɑt lɑɹdʒ, əpɪɹɪŋ smɔlɝ fəɹ ðə dɑɹk pænəlɪŋ ðət kɛɹhinɪn laɪk soʊ mʌtʃ. ɪt sim kwaɪt kɹaʊɾəd wʌns ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz ɪnsaɪd. mɛɹaɪs snæpt əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ən pɔɪntəd, ən dʒɑhɹ ɹitʃɹiɾəd tə ə kɔɹnɝ, bʌt ðət hɛlp lɪɾəl.

The bedchamber where Alanna had been taken was the nearest that had been available, and it was not large, appearing smaller for the dark paneling that Cairhienin liked so much. It seemed quite crowded once everyone was inside. Merise snapped her fingers and pointed, and Jahar retreated to a corner, but that helped little.

ɑlɑnə wɑz laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə bɛd, hɝ aɪz kloʊzd, wɪð əɹ wɔɹɾɝ, ɪvɑn, nilɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪt tʃeɪfɪŋ əɹ ɹɪst. "ʃi simz əfɹeɪd tə weɪk," ðə tɔl, slɛndɝ mæn sɛd. "ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð əɹ ðəɾ aɪ kən tɛl, bʌt ʃi simz əfɹeɪd."

Alanna was lying on the bed, her eyes closed, with her Warder, Ihvon, kneeling beside it chafing her wrist. "She seems afraid to wake," the tall, slender man said. "There's nothing wrong with her that I can tell, but she seems afraid."

kɔɹəl bɹʌʃt ɪm əsaɪd soʊ ʃi kəd kʌp ɑlɑnəz feɪs ɪn əɹ hænz. ðə ɡloʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ sɝaʊndəd ðə jɛloʊ, ən ðə wiv ə hilɪŋ sɛɾəld ɑn ɑlɑnə, bʌt ðə slɪm ɡɹin dɪd nɑɾ ivən twɪtʃ. kɔɹəl dʒɹu bæk, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd.

Corele brushed him aside so she could cup Alanna's face in her hands. The glow of saidar surrounded the Yellow, and the weave of Healing settled on Alanna, but the slim Green did not even twitch. Corele drew back, shaking her head.

"maɪ skɪl wɪð hilɪŋ, ɪt meɪ nɑɾ ikwəl jʊɹz, kɔɹəl," mɛɹaɪs sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "bʌɾ aɪ dɪd tʃɹaɪ." ði æksɛns ə tæɹɑbən wɝ stɪl stʃɹɔŋ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs æftɝ ɔl ðiz jɪɹz, bʌt ʃi wɔɹ əɹ dɑɹk hɛɹ dʒɹɔn bæk səvɪɹli fɹəm əɹ stɝn feɪs. kædzueɪn tʃɹʌstɪɾ əɹ pɝhæps mɔɹ ðən ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz. "wʌt də wi də naʊ, kædzueɪn?"

"My skill with Healing, it may not equal yours, Corele," Merise said dryly, "but I did try." The accents of Tarabon were still strong in her voice after all these years, but she wore her dark hair drawn back severely from her stern face. Cadsuane trusted her perhaps more than any of the others. "What do we do now, Cadsuane?"

sɔɹɪliə stɛɹɾ ət ðə wʊmən stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɑn ðə bɛd wɪð noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən bɪɑn ə θɪnɪŋ ə hɝ lɪps. kædzueɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz ɹiɪvæljueɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ əlaɪəns. vɛɹɪn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɑlɑnə, tu, ən ʃi lʊkt æbsəlutli tɛɹəfaɪd. kædzueɪn hæd nɑt θɔɾ ɛniθɪŋ kəd fɹaɪɾən vɛɹɪn ðət fɑɹ. bʌt ʃi fɛlt ə θɹɪl ə tɛɹɝ hɝsɛlf. ɪf ʃi lɔs ðɪs kənɛkʃən tə ðə bɔɪ naʊ . . .

Sorilea stared at the woman stretched out on the bed with no expression beyond a thinning of her lips. Cadsuane wondered whether she was reevaluating their alliance. Verin was staring at Alanna, too, and she looked absolutely terrified. Cadsuane had not thought anything could frighten Verin that far. But she felt a thrill of terror herself. If she lost this connection to the boy now . . .

"wi sɪt daʊn ən weɪt fəɹ əɹ tə weɪk," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə kɑm vɔɪs. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɛls tə du. nʌθɪŋ.

"We sit down and wait for her to wake," she said in a calm voice. There was nothing else to do. Nothing.

"wɛɹ ɪz hi?" dɪmɑndɝd ɡɹaʊld, klɛntʃɪŋ ɪz fɪsts bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. stændɪŋ wɪð ɪz fiɾ əpɑɹt, hi wɑz əwɛɹ ðəɾ i dɑməneɪɾəd ðə ɹum. hi ɔlweɪz dɪd. ivən soʊ, hi wɪʃt sɛmɝhɪdʒ əɹ mɛsænə wɝ pɹɛzənt. ðɛɹ əlaɪəns wɑz dɛləkət - ə sɪmpəl əɡɹimən ðət ðeɪ wəd nɑt tɝn ɑn wʌn ənʌðɝ əntɪl ði ʌðɝz hæd bɪn ɪlɪməneɪɾəd - jɛɾ ɪt hæd hɛld ɔl ðɪs taɪm. wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ hæɾ ənbælənst əpoʊnən æftɝ əpoʊnənt, tɑpəlɪŋ mɛni tə ðɛɹ dɛθs əɹ wɝs. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl fəɹ sɛmɝhɪdʒ tə ətɛn ðiz miɾɪŋz, ən mɛsænə hæd bɪn ʃaɪ, ʌv leɪt. ɪf ʃi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɛndɪŋ ði əlaɪəns . . . "ælθɹ əz bɪn sin ɪn faɪv sɪɾiz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðət kɝs pleɪs ɪn ðə weɪst, ən ə dʌzən taʊnz sɪns ðoʊz blaɪn fulz - ðoʊz ɪɾiəts! - feɪld ɪn kɛɹhin. ən ðəɾ oʊnli ɪnkludz ðə ɹɪpɔɹts wi hæv! ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ oʊnli noʊz wʌɾ ɛls ɪz kɹɔlɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əs baɪ hɔɹs, əɹ ʃip, əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɛls ðiz sævədʒəz kən faɪn tə kæɹi ə mɛsədʒ."

"Where is he?" Demandred growled, clenching his fists behind his back. Standing with his feet apart, he was aware that he dominated the room. He always did. Even so, he wished Semirhage or Mesaana were present. Their alliance was delicate - a simple agreement that they would not turn on one another until the others had been eliminated - yet it had held all this time. Working together, they had unbalanced opponent after opponent, toppling many to their deaths or worse. But it was difficult for Semirhage to attend these meetings, and Mesaana had been shy, of late. If she was thinking of ending the alliance . . . "Al'Thor has been seen in five cities, including that cursed place in the Waste, and a dozen towns since those blind fools - those idiots! - failed in Cairhien. And that only includes the reports we have! The Great Lord only knows what else is crawling toward us by horse, or sheep, or whatever else these savages can find to carry a message."

ɡɹeɪndəl hæd tʃoʊzən ðə sɛɾɪŋ, sɪns ʃi hæd bɪn fɝs tə ɝaɪv, ən ɪɾ ɪɹəteɪɾəd hɪm. vju-wɔlz meɪd ðə stʃɹaɪpt wʊɾən flɔɹ əpɪɹ tə bi sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə fɔɹəs fʊl ə bɹaɪtli flaʊɝd vaɪnz ən flʌɾɝɪŋ bɝdz ðət wɝ ivən mɔɹ kʌlɝfəl. swit sɛns ən sɑf bɝdkɔlz fɪl ði ɛɹ. oʊnli ði ɑɹtʃ ə ðə dɔɹweɪ spɔɪl ði ɪluʒən. waɪ dɪd ʃi wɑn ə ɹimaɪndɝ ʌv wʌt wɑz lɔst? ðeɪ kəɾ əz sun meɪk ʃɑklənsɪz əɹ ʃoʊɪŋz əz ə vju-wɔl aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðɪs pleɪs, kloʊs tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi dɪspaɪzd ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð neɪtʃɝ, əz i ɹɪkɔld.

Graendal had chosen the setting, since she had been first to arrive, and it irritated him. View-walls made the striped wooden floor appear to be surrounded by a forest full of brightly flowered vines and fluttering birds that were even more colorful. Sweet scents and soft birdcalls filled the air. Only the arch of the doorway spoiled the illusion. Why did she want a reminder of what was lost? They could as soon make shocklances or showings as a view-wall outside of this place, close to Shayol Ghul. In any case, she despised anything to do with nature, as he recalled.

oʊsɑnɡɝ fɹaʊn ət "ɪɾiəts" ən "blaɪn fulz," əz wɛl i maɪt, bʌɾ i kwɪkli smuðd ðət pleɪn, kɹis feɪs, soʊ ənlaɪk ðə wʌn i hæd bɪn bɔɹn wɪð. baɪ wʌtɛvɝ neɪm i wɑz kɔld, hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz noʊn u hi dɛɹd tʃælənʒ ən u nɑt. "ə mæɾɝ ə tʃæns," hi sɛd kɑmli, ðoʊ hi dɪd bɪɡɪn dʒɹaɪ-wɑʃɪŋ ɪz hænz. ən oʊl hæbət. hi wɑz ɡɑɹb laɪk səm ɹulɝ ə ðɪs eɪdʒ, ɪn ə koʊt soʊ hɛvi wɪð ɡoʊldən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ðəɾ ɪɾ ɔlmoʊs hɪd ðə ɹɛɾ ə ðə klɔθ, ən buts fɹɪnd wɪð ɡoʊldən tæsəlz. ðəɹ wɑz ɪnʌf waɪt leɪs əɾ ɪz nɛk ən ɹɪsts tə kloʊð ə tʃaɪld. ðə mæn hæd nɛvɝ noʊn ðə minɪŋ ʌv ɛksɛs. ɪf nɑt fəɹ ɪz pɝtɪkjəlɝ skɪlz, hi nɛvɝ wʊɾə bɪn tʃoʊzən. ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌɾ ɪz hænz wɝ duɪŋ, oʊsɑnɡɝ snætʃt ðə tɔl kwəndɪlɝ wɪnɛɡlæs fɹəm ðə ɹaʊn teɪbəl bɪsaɪɾ ɪz tʃɛɹ ən ɪnheɪl ðə dɑɹk waɪnz ɝoʊmə dipli. "sɪmpli pɹɑbəbɪləɾiz," hi mɝmɝd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə saʊn ɔfhænd. "nɛks taɪm, hɪl bi kɪld əɹ teɪkən. tʃæns kæn pɹətɛkt ɪm fɝɛvɝ."

Osan'gar frowned at "idiots" and "blind fools," as well he might, but he quickly smoothed that plain, creased face, so unlike the one he had been born with. By whatever name he was called, he had always known who he dared challenge and who not. "A matter of chance," he said calmly, though he did begin dry-washing his hands. An old habit. He was garbed like some ruler of this Age, in a coat so heavy with golden embroidery that it almost hid the red of the cloth, and boots fringed with golden tassels. There was enough white lace at his neck and wrists to clothe a child. The man had never known the meaning of excess. If not for his particular skills, he never would have been Chosen. Realizing what his hands were doing, Osan'gar snatched the tall cuendillar wineglass from the round table beside his chair and inhaled the dark wine's aroma deeply. "Simply probabilities," he murmured, trying to sound offhand. "Next time, he will be killed or taken. Chance can't protect him forever."

"ju ɑɹ gɑnə dɪpɛn ɑn tʃæns?" ɝæŋɡɝ wɑz stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɪn ə lɔŋ, floʊɪŋ tʃɛɹ əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ ə bɛdtʃɛɹ. dɝɛktɪŋ ə smoʊki smaɪl əɾ oʊsɑnɡɝ, ʃi ɑɹtʃt wʌn lɛɡ ɑn bɛɹ toʊz soʊ ðə slɪɾ ɪn əɹ bɹaɪt ɹɛd skɝts ɪkspoʊzd əɹ tə ðə hɪp. ɛvɹi bɹɛθ θɹɛɾənd tə fɹi hɝ fɹəm ðə ɹɛd sæɾən ðət dʒʌs kənteɪn əɹ fʊl bɹɛsts. ɔl ə hɝ mænɝɪzəmz hæd tʃeɪnʒd sɪns ʃi bɪkeɪm ə wʊmən, bʌt nɑt ðə kɔɹ ʌv wʌt hæd bɪn pleɪst ɪndə ðət fimeɪl bɑɾi. dɪmɑndɝd hɑɹdli skɔɹn flɛʃli plɛʒɝz, bʌt wʌn deɪ hɝ kɹeɪvɪŋz wəd bi ðə dɛθ ə hɝ. əz ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi hæd bɪn wʌns. nɑt ðəɾ i wəd mɔɹn, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf ðə nɛks taɪm wɑz faɪnəl. "ju wɝ ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, oʊsɑnɡɝ," ʃi wɛn ɑn, hɝ vɔɪs kɝɛsɪŋ ɛvɹi sɪləbəl. "ju, ən dɪmɑndɝd." oʊsɑnɡɝ flɪntʃt, flɪkɪŋ ɪz tʌŋ əɡɛnst ɪz lɪps, ən ʃi læf θɹoʊəɾəli. "maɪ oʊn tʃɑɹdʒ ɪz . . ." ʃi pɹɛst ə θʌm daʊn ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə tʃɛɹ əz ɪf pɪnɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ən læft əɡɛn.

"You are going to depend on chance?" Aran'gar was stretched out in a long, flowing chair as though it were a bedchair. Directing a smoky smile at Osan'gar, she arched one leg on bare toes so the slit in her bright red skirts exposed her to the hip. Every breath threatened to free her from the red satin that just contained her full breasts. All of her mannerisms had changed since she became a woman, but not the core of what had been placed into that female body. Demandred hardly scorned fleshly pleasures, but one day her cravings would be the death of her. As they already had been once. Not that he would mourn, of course, if the next time was final. "You were responsible for watching him, Osan'gar," she went on, her voice caressing every syllable. "You, and Demandred." Osan'gar flinched, flicking his tongue against his lips, and she laughed throatily. "My own charge is . . ." She pressed a thumb down on the edge of the chair as if pinning something and laughed again.

"aɪ ʃəd θɪŋk jə wəd bi mɔɹ wɝid, ɝæŋɡɝ," ɡɹeɪndəl mɝmɝɾ oʊvɝ əɹ waɪn. ʃi kənsild əɹ kəntɛmpt əbaʊɾ əz wɛl əz ði ɔlmoʊs tʃɹænspɛɹən sɪlvɝi mɪst ə hɝ stʃɹaɪθ ɡaʊn kənsild əɹ ɹaɪp kɝvz. "ju, ən oʊsɑnɡɝ, ən dɪmɑndɝd. ən mɔɹaɪɾɪn, wɛɹɛvɝ i ɪz. pɝhæps jə ʃəd fɪɹ ælθɹz səksɛs əz mʌtʃ əz ɪz feɪljɝ."

"I should think you would be more worried, Aran'gar," Graendal murmured over her wine. She concealed her contempt about as well as the almost transparent silvery mist of her streith gown concealed her ripe curves. "You, and Osan'gar, and Demandred. And Moridin, wherever he is. Perhaps you should fear al'Thor's success as much as his failure."

læfɪŋ, ɝæŋɡɝ kɑt ðə stændɪŋ wʊmənz hæn ɪn wʌn ə hɝz. hɝ ɡɹin aɪz spɑɹkəld. "æn pɝhæps jə kəɾ ɪkspleɪn wʌt jə min bɛɾɝ ɪf wi wɝ əloʊn?"

Laughing, Aran'gar caught the standing woman's hand in one of hers. Her green eyes sparkled. "And perhaps you could explain what you mean better if we were alone?"

ɡɹeɪndəlz ɡaʊn tɝn tə stɑɹk blæk kənsilɪŋ smoʊk. dʒɝkɪŋ əɹ hæn fɹi wɪð ə kɔɹs oʊθ, ʃi stɔkt əweɪ fɹəm ðə tʃɛɹ. ɝæŋɡɝ . . . ɡɪɡəld.

Graendal's gown turned to stark black concealing smoke. Jerking her hand free with a coarse oath, she stalked away from the chair. Aran'gar . . . giggled.

"wʌt dʒju min?" oʊsɑnɡɝ sɛd ʃɑɹpli, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz tʃɛɹ. wʌns ɑn ɪz fit, hi stʃɹʌk ə lɛktʃɝɝz poʊz, ɡɹɪpɪŋ ɪz ləpɛlz, ən ɪz toʊn bɪkeɪm pədæntɪk. "ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs, maɪ dɪɹ ɡɹeɪndəl, aɪ daʊt ðəɾ ivən aɪ kəd dɪvaɪz ə mɛθəd tə ɹimuv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz ʃædoʊ fɹəm seɪɾɪn. ælθɹ ɪz ə pɹɪməɾɪv. ɛniθɪŋ i tʃɹaɪz ɪnɛvəɾəbli wɪl pɹuv ɪnsəfɪʃənt, ən aɪ, fəɹ wʌn, kænɑt bɪliv i kən ivən ɪmædʒən haʊ tə bɪɡɪn. ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, wɪl stɑp ɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ kəz ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd kəmænz ɪt. aɪ kən ʌndɝstæn fɪɹ ə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz dɪsplɛʒɝ ɪf wi sʌmhaʊ feɪld, ənlaɪkli əz ðət maɪt bi, bʌt waɪ ʃəd ðoʊz ʌv əs jə neɪmd əv ɛni spɛʃəl fɪɹ?"

"What do you mean?" Osan'gar said sharply, struggling out of his chair. Once on his feet, he struck a lecturer's pose, gripping his lapels, and his tone became pedantic. "In the first place, my dear Graendal, I doubt that even I could devise a method to remove the Great Lord's shadow from saidin. Al'Thor is a primitive. Anything he tries inevitably will prove insufficient, and I, for one, cannot believe he can even imagine how to begin. In any event, we will stop him trying because the Great Lord commands it. I can understand fear of the Great Lord's displeasure if we somehow failed, unlikely as that might be, but why should those of us you named have any special fear?"

"blaɪn əz ɛvɝ, ən dʒɹaɪ əz ɛvɝ," ɡɹeɪndəl mɝmɝd. wɪð ðə ɹɪtɝn ə kəmpoʊʒɝ, hɝ ɡaʊn wɑz klɪɹ mɪst əɡɛn, ðoʊ ɹɛd. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz nɑt soʊ kɑm əz ʃi pɹitɛndəd. əɹ pɝhæps ʃi wɑntəɾ əm tə bɪliv ʃi wɑz kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ səm ædʒəteɪʃən. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə stʃɹaɪθ, hɝ ədɔɹnməns ɔl keɪm fɹəm ðɪs eɪdʒ, faɪɝdʒɹɑps ɪn əɹ ɡoʊldən hɛɹ, ə lɑɹdʒ ɹubi dæŋɡəlɪŋ bɪtwin əɹ bɹɛsts, ɔɹneɪt ɡoʊldən bɹeɪslɪts ɑn boʊθ ɹɪsts. ən sʌmθɪŋ kwaɪt stʃɹeɪnʒ, ðət dɪmɑndɝd wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ɛniwʌn ɛls hæd noʊɾəst. ə sɪmpəl ɹɪŋ ʌv ɡoʊld ɑn ðə lɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝ ə hɝ lɛf hænd. sɪmpəl wɑz nɛvɝ əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð ɡɹeɪndəl. "ɪf ðə jʌŋ mæn dʌz sʌmhaʊ ɹimuv ðə ʃædoʊ, wɛl . . . jə hu tʃænəl seɪɾɪn wɪl noʊ lɔŋɡɝ nid ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz spɛʃəl pɹətɛkʃən. wɪl i tʃɹʌs jəɹ . . . lɔɪəlti . . . ðɛn?" smaɪlɪŋ, ʃi sɪpt əɹ waɪn.

"Blind as ever, and dry as ever," Graendal murmured. With the return of composure, her gown was clear mist again, though red. Perhaps she was not so calm as she pretended. Or perhaps she wanted them to believe she was controlling some agitation. Except for the streith, her adornments all came from this age, firedrops in her golden hair, a large ruby dangling between her breasts, ornate golden bracelets on both wrists. And something quite strange, that Demandred wondered whether anyone else had noticed. A simple ring of gold on the little finger of her left hand. Simple was never associated with Graendal. "If the young man does somehow remove the shadow, well . . . You who channel saidin will no longer need the Great Lord's special protection. Will he trust your . . . loyalty . . . then?" Smiling, she sipped her wine.

oʊsɑnɡɝ dɪd nɑt smaɪl. hɪz feɪs peɪld, ən i skɹʌbd ə hæn əkɹɔs ɪz maʊθ. ɝæŋɡɝ sæɾ ʌp ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɝ lɔŋ tʃɛɹ, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bi sɛntʃəwəs. hɝ hænz fɔɹm klɔz ɑn əɹ læp, ən ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ət ɡɹeɪndəl əz ɪf ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ fəɹ əɹ θɹoʊt.

Osan'gar did not smile. His face paled, and he scrubbed a hand across his mouth. Aran'gar sat up on the edge of her long chair, no longer trying to be sensuous. Her hands formed claws on her lap, and she glared at Graendal as if ready to go for her throat.

dɪmɑndɝdz fɪsts ənklɛntʃt. ɪt wɑz aʊɾ ɪn ði oʊpən ət læst. hi hæd hoʊp tə hæv ælθɹ dɛd - əɹ feɪlɪŋ ðæt, kæptɪv - bɪfɔɹ ðɪs səspɪʃən ɹɪɹɾ ɪts hɛd. dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə paʊɝ, mɔɹ ðən ə dʌzən ə ðə tʃoʊzən hæd daɪɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz səspɪʃən.

Demandred's fists unclenched. It was out in the open at last. He had hoped to have al'Thor dead - or failing that, captive - before this suspicion reared its head. During the War of Power, more than a dozen of the Chosen had died of the Great Lord's suspicion.

"ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ɪz ʃʊɹ jə ɑɹ ɔl feɪθfəl," mɔɹaɪɾɪn ənaʊnst, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn əz ðoʊ hi wɝ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk hɪmsɛlf. hi hæɾ ɔfən sim tə bɪliv i wɑz, ən ðə bɔɪz feɪs i wɔɹ naʊ hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd ðæt. ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪz wɝdz, ðət feɪs wɑz ɡɹɪm, ən ɪz ʌnɹiliv blæk meɪɾ ɪz neɪm, dɛθ, fɪt. "ju nid nɑt wɝi əntɪl i stɑps biɪŋ ʃʊɹ." ðə ɡɝl, sɪndeɪn, tʃɹɑɾəd əɾ ɪz hilz laɪk ə boʊsəmi lɪɾəl sɪlvɝ-hɛɹd pɛɾ ɪn ɹɛd-ænd-blæk. fəɹ səm ɹizən, mɔɹaɪɾɪn hæɾ ə ɹæt ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, peɪl noʊz snɪfɪŋ ði ɛɹ, blæk aɪz stʌɾiɪŋ ðə ɹum wɛɹəli. əɹ fəɹ noʊ ɹizən, pɝhæps. ə juθfəl feɪs hæd nɑt meɪɾ ɪm ɛni seɪnɝ, iðɝ.

"The Great Lord is sure you are all faithful," Moridin announced, striding in as though he were the Great Lord of the Dark himself. He had often seemed to believe he was, and the boy's face he wore now had not changed that. In spite of his words, that face was grim, and his unrelieved black made his name, Death, fit. "You need not worry until he stops being sure." The girl, Cyndane, trotted at his heels like a bosomy little silver-haired pet in red-and-black. For some reason, Moridin had a rat riding his shoulder, pale nose sniffing the air, black eyes studying the room warily. Or for no reason, perhaps. A youthful face had not made him any saner, either.

"waɪ hæv jə kɔld əs hɪɹ?" dɪmɑndɝd dɪmændəd. "aɪ hæv mʌtʃ tə du, ən noʊ taɪm fəɹ aɪɾəl tɔk." ʌnkɑnʃəsli hi tʃɹaɪd tə stæn tɔlɝ, tə mætʃ ði ʌðɝ mæn.

"Why have you called us here?" Demandred demanded. "I have much to do, and no time for idle talk." Unconsciously he tried to stand taller, to match the other man.

"mɛsænə ɪz æbsən əɡɛn?" mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ænsɝɪŋ. "ə pɪɾi. ʃi ʃəd hɪɹ wʌɾ aɪ hæv tə seɪ." plʌkɪŋ ðə ɹæt fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝ baɪ ɪts teɪl, hi wɑtʃt ði ænəməl weɪv ɪts lɛɡz fjuɾɪlli. nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə ɹæt sim tə ɪɡzɪs fəɹ hɪm. "smɔl, əpɛɹənli ənɪmpɔɹɾənt mæɾɝz kən bɪkʌm vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt," hi mɝmɝd. "ðɪs ɹæt. wɛðɝ ɪsəm səksidz ɪn faɪndɪŋ ən kɪlɪŋ ðəɾ ʌðɝ vɝmɪn, feɪn. ə wɝd wɪspɝɾ ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ ɪɹ, əɹ nɑt spoʊkən tə ðə ɹaɪt. ə bʌɾɝflaɪ stɝz ɪts wɪŋz ɑn ə bɹæntʃ, ən ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɝld ə maʊntən kəlæpsɪz." sʌɾənli ðə ɹæt twɪstəd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sɪŋk ɪts tiθ ɪndə hɪz ɹɪst. kæʒəwəli, hi flʌŋ ðə kɹitʃɝ əweɪ. ɪn mɪdɛɹ, ðəɹ wɑz ə bɝst ə fleɪm, sʌmθɪŋ hɑɾɝ ðən fleɪm, ən ðə ɹæt wɑz ɡɔn. mɔɹaɪɾɪn smaɪld.

"Mesaana is absent again?" Moridin said instead of answering. "A pity. She should hear what I have to say." Plucking the rat from his shoulder by its tail, he watched the animal wave its legs futilely. Nothing except the rat seemed to exist for him. "Small, apparently unimportant matters can become very important," he murmured. "This rat. Whether Isam succeeds in finding and killing that other vermin, Fain. A word whispered in the wrong ear, or not spoken to the right. A butterfly stirs its wings on a branch, and on the other side of the world a mountain collapses." Suddenly the rat twisted, trying to sink its teeth into his wrist. Casually, he flung the creature away. In midair, there was a burst of flame, something hotter than flame, and the rat was gone. Moridin smiled.

dɪmɑndɝd flɪntʃt ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. ðət hæd bɪn ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ; hi hæd fɛl nʌθɪŋ. ə blæk spɛk floʊɾəd əkɹɔs mɔɹaɪɾɪnz blu aɪz, ðən ənʌðɝ, ɪn ə stɛɾi stʃɹim. ðə mæn mʌst əv bɪn juzɪŋ ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ ɪksklusɪvli sɪns i læst sɔ hɪm tə ɡeɪn soʊ mɛni sæɑ soʊ kwɪkli. hi hɪmsɛlf hæd nɛvɝ tʌtʃt ðə tʃɹu paʊɝ ɪksɛpt ət nid. ɡɹeɪt nid. ʌv kɔɹs, oʊnli mɔɹaɪɾɪn hæd ðət pɹɪvlədʒ naʊ, sɪns ɪz . . . ænɔɪntɪŋ. ðə mæn tʃɹuli wɑz ɪnseɪn tə juz ɪt soʊ fɹili. ɪt wɑz ə dʒɹʌɡ mɔɹ ədɪktɪv ðən seɪɾɪn, mɔɹ dɛdli ðən pɔɪzən.

Demandred flinched in spite of himself. That had been the True Power; he had felt nothing. A black speck floated across Moridin's blue eyes, then another, in a steady stream. The man must have been using the True Power exclusively since he last saw him to gain so many saa so quickly. He himself had never touched the True Power except at need. Great need. Of course, only Moridin had that privilege now, since his . . . anointing. The man truly was insane to use it so freely. It was a drug more addictive than saidin, more deadly than poison.

kɹɔsɪŋ ðə stʃɹaɪp flɔɹ, mɔɹaɪɾɪn leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn oʊsɑnɡɝz ʃoʊldɝ, hɪz smaɪl meɪd mɔɹ ɑmənəs baɪ ðə sæɑ. ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ mæn swɑloʊd, ən ɡeɪv ə weɪvɝɪŋ smaɪl ɪn ɹɪtɝn. "ɪɾ ɪz wɛl juv nɛvɝ kənsɪɾɝd haʊ tə ɹimuv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz ʃædoʊ," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd kwaɪətli. haʊ lɔŋ hæɾ i bɪn aʊtsaɪd? oʊsɑnɡɝz smaɪl ɡɹu ivən mɔɹ sɪkli. "ælθɹ ɪz nɑɾ əz waɪz əz ju. tɛl ðɛm, sɪndeɪn."

Crossing the striped floor, Moridin laid a hand on Osan'gar's shoulder, his smile made more ominous by the saa. The shorter man swallowed, and gave a wavering smile in return. "It is well you've never considered how to remove the Great Lord's shadow," Moridin said quietly. How long had he been outside? Osan'gar's smile grew even more sickly. "Al'Thor is not as wise as you. Tell them, Cyndane."

ðə lɪɾəl wʊmən dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp. baɪ feɪs ən fɔɹm ʃi wɑz ə lʌʃəs plʌm, ɹɛɾi fəɹ plʌkɪŋ, bʌɾ əɹ bɪɡ blu aɪz wɝ ɡleɪʃəl. ə pitʃ, pɝhæps. pitʃəz wɝ pɔɪzənəs, hɪɹ ən naʊ. "ju ɹikɔl ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl, aɪ səpoʊz." noʊ əmaʊn ʌv ɛfɝt kəd meɪk ðət loʊ, bɹɛθi vɔɪs ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp sʌltʃɹi, bʌt ʃi mænədʒ tə ɪndʒɛk sɑɹkæzəm. "luz θɝɪn əz tu ʌv ði æksɛs kiz, wʌn fəɹ itʃ. ən i noʊz ə wʊmən stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə juz ðə fimeɪl ə ðə pɛɹ. hi plænz tə juz ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl fəɹ ɪz did."

The little woman drew herself up. By face and form she was a luscious plum, ready for plucking, but her big blue eyes were glacial. A peach, perhaps. Peaches were poisonous, here and now. "You recall the Choedan Kal, I suppose." No amount of effort could make that low, breathy voice anything except sultry, but she managed to inject sarcasm. "Lews Therin has two of the access keys, one for each. And he knows a woman strong enough to use the female of the pair. He plans to use the Choedan Kal for his deed."

nɪɹli ɛvɹiwʌn bɪɡæn tə tɔk ət wʌns.

Nearly everyone began to talk at once.

"aɪ θɔt ðə kiz wɝ ɔl dɪstʃɹɔɪd!" ɝæŋɡɝ ɪkskleɪmd, sɝdʒɪŋ tə hɝ fit. hɝ aɪz wɝ waɪd wɪð fɪɹ. "hi kəd ʃæɾɝ ðə wɝl dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə juz ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl!"

"I thought the keys were all destroyed!" Aran'gar exclaimed, surging to her feet. Her eyes were wide with fear. "He could shatter the world just trying to use the Choedan Kal!"

"ɪf jə hæɾ ɛvɝ ɹɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ bɪsaɪdz ə hɪstɝi bʊk, jə wəd noʊ ðəɹ ɔlmoʊst ɪmpɑsəbəl tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ!" oʊsɑnɡɝ snɑɹəld ət hɝ. bʌɾ i wɑz tʌɡɪŋ əɾ ɪz kɑlɝ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ tu taɪt, ən ɪz aɪz simd ɹɛɾi tə fɔl aʊɾ ə hɪz feɪs. "haʊ kən ðɪs ɡɝl noʊ hiz ðɛm? haʊ?"

"If you had ever read anything besides a history book, you would know they're almost impossible to destroy!" Osan'gar snarled at her. But he was tugging at his collar as if it were too tight, and his eyes seemed ready to fall out of his face. "How can this girl know he has them? How?"

ɡɹeɪndəlz wɪnɛɡlæs hæd dʒɹɑp fɹəm əɹ hæn əz sun ðə wɝdz wɝ aʊɾ ə sɪndeɪnz maʊθ, baʊnsɪŋ ɛn oʊvɝ ɛn əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ. hɝ ɡaʊn tɝn əz kɹɪmzən əz fɹɛʃ blʌd, ən əɹ maʊθ twɪstəɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə vɑmət. "æn juv dʒʌs bɪn hoʊpɪŋ tə blʌndɝ ɪndə hɪm!" ʃi skɹimd ət dɪmɑndɝd. "hoʊpɪŋ sʌmwʌn wɪl faɪn ɪm fəɹ ju! ful! ful!"

Graendal's wineglass had dropped from her hand as soon the words were out of Cyndane's mouth, bouncing end over end across the floor. Her gown turned as crimson as fresh blood, and her mouth twisted as if she were going to vomit. "And you've just been hoping to blunder into him!" she screamed at Demandred. "Hoping someone will find him for you! Fool! Fool!"

dɪmɑndɝd θɔt ɡɹeɪndəl hæd bɪn ə tʌtʃ flæmbɔɪən ivən fəɹ hɝ. hi wəd weɪdʒɝ ði ənaʊnsmən hæd bɪn noʊ sɝpɹaɪz tə hɝ. ɪt simd ʃi bɔɹ wɑtʃɪŋ. hi sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

Demandred thought Graendal had been a touch flamboyant even for her. He would wager the announcement had been no surprise to her. It seemed she bore watching. He said nothing.

pʊɾɪŋ ə hæn oʊvɝ ɪz hɑɹt, fəɹ ɔl ðə wɝld laɪk ə lʌvɝ, mɔɹaɪɾɪn tɪltəɾ ʌp sɪndeɪnz tʃɪn ɑn ɪz fɪŋɡɝtɪps. ɹɪzɛnmənt bɝn ɪn əɹ aɪz, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs maɪɾ əv bɪn ə dɑlz əntʃeɪnʒɪŋ feɪs. ʃi sɝɾənli æksɛptɪɾ ɪz ətɛnʃənz laɪk ə plaɪəbəl dɑl. "sɪndeɪn noʊz mɛni θɪŋz," mɔɹaɪɾɪn sɛd sɔfli, "ænd ʃi tɛlz mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi noʊz. ɛvɹiθɪŋ." ðə taɪni wʊmənz ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ ɔltɝd, bʌt ʃi tʃɹɛmbəl vɪzəbli.

Putting a hand over his heart, for all the world like a lover, Moridin tilted up Cyndane's chin on his fingertips. Resentment burned in her eyes, but her face might have been a doll's unchanging face. She certainly accepted his attentions like a pliable doll. "Cyndane knows many things," Moridin said softly, "and she tells me everything she knows. Everything." The tiny woman's expression never altered, but she trembled visibly.

ʃi wɑz ə pʌzəl tə dɪmɑndɝd. ət fɝst i hæd θɔt ʃi wɑz lænfɝ ɹiɪnkɑɹneɪɾɪd. bɑɾiz fəɹ tʃɹænsməɡɹeɪʃən səpoʊzədli wɝ tʃoʊzən baɪ wʌt wɑz əveɪləbəl, jɛɾ oʊsɑnɡɝ ən ɝæŋɡɝ wɝ pɹuf ə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz kɹuəl sɛns ə hjumɝ. hi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ, əntɪl mɛsænə toʊld ɪm ðə ɡɝl wɑz wikɝ ðən lænfɝ. mɛsænə ən ðə ɹɛs θɔt ʃi wɑz ə ðɪs eɪdʒ. jɛt ʃi spoʊk ʌv ælθɹ əz luz θɝɪn, dʒʌst əz lænfɝ hæd, ən spoʊk ə ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl əz wʌn fəmɪljɝ wɪð ðə tɛɹɝ ðeɪ hæɾ ɪnspaɪɝd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə paʊɝ. oʊnli bɑlfaɪɝ hæd bɪn mɔɹ fɪɹd, ən oʊnli dʒʌst. əɹ hæd mɔɹaɪɾɪn tɔɾ əɹ fəɹ pɝpəsəz ə hɪz oʊn? ɪf i hæɾ ɛni ɹil pɝpəsəz. ðəɹ hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn taɪmz wən ðə mænz ækʃənz hæd bɪn ʃɪɹ mædnəs.

She was a puzzle to Demandred. At first he had thought she was Lanfear reincarnated. Bodies for transmigration supposedly were chosen by what was available, yet Osan'gar and Aran'gar were proof of the Great Lord's cruel sense of humor. He had been sure, until Mesaana told him the girl was weaker than Lanfear. Mesaana and the rest thought she was of this Age. Yet she spoke of al'Thor as Lews Therin, just as Lanfear had, and spoke of the Choedan Kal as one familiar with the terror they had inspired during the War of Power. Only balefire had been more feared, and only just. Or had Moridin taught her for purposes of his own? If he had any real purposes. There had always been times when the man's actions had been sheer madness.

"soʊ ɪt simz i mʌs bi kɪld æftɝ ɔl," dɪmɑndɝd sɛd. haɪɾɪŋ ɪz sæɾəsfækʃən wɑz nɑɾ izi. ɹænd ælθɹ əɹ luz θɝɪn tɛləmən, hi wəd ɹɛst iziɝ wən ðə fɛloʊ wɑz dɛd. "bɪfɔɹ i kən dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə wɝld, ən ʌs. wɪtʃ meɪks faɪndɪŋ ɪm ɔl ðə mɔɹ ɝdʒənt."

"So it seems he must be killed after all," Demandred said. Hiding his satisfaction was not easy. Rand al'Thor or Lews Therin Telamon, he would rest easier when the fellow was dead. "Before he can destroy the world, and us. Which makes finding him all the more urgent."

"kɪld?" mɔɹaɪɾɪn muvd ɪz hænz əz ðoʊ weɪɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. "ɪf ɪt kʌmz tə ðæt, jɛs," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "bʌt faɪndɪŋ ɪm ɪz noʊ pɹɑbləm. wən i tʌtʃəz ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl, jəl noʊ wɛɹ i ɪz. ən jəl ɡoʊ ðəɹ ən teɪk hɪm. əɹ kɪl hɪm, ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi. ðə nɛbli hæz spoʊkən."

"Killed?" Moridin moved his hands as though weighing something. "If it comes to that, yes," he said finally. "But finding him is no problem. When he touches the Choedan Kal, you will know where he is. And you will go there and take him. Or kill him, if necessary. The Nae'blis has spoken."

"æz ðə nɛbli kəmænz," sɪndeɪn sɛɾ iɡɝli, boʊɪŋ əɹ hɛd, ən ɛkoʊz ə hɝ ɹæn ɝaʊn ðə ɹum, ðoʊ ɝæŋɡɝ saʊndəd sʌlən, oʊsɑnɡɝ dɛspɹɪt, ən ɡɹeɪndəl ɑdli θɔtfəl.

"As the Nae'blis commands," Cyndane said eagerly, bowing her head, and echos of her ran around the room, though Aran'gar sounded sullen, Osan'gar desperate, and Graendal oddly thoughtful.

bɛndɪŋ ɪz nɛk hɝt dɪmɑndɝɾ əz mʌtʃ əz spikɪŋ ðoʊz wɝdz. soʊ ðeɪ wəd teɪk ælθɹ - waɪl i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə juz ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl, noʊ lɛs, hi ən səm wʊmən dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ɪnʌf ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə mɛl kɑntənəns! - bʌt ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ ɪndəkeɪʃən ðət mɔɹaɪɾɪn wəd bi wɪð ðɛm. əɹ ɪz twɪn pɛts, mɑɡiɾin ən sɪndeɪn. ðə mæn wɑz nɛbli fəɹ naʊ, bʌt pɝhæps mæɾɝz kəd bi ɝeɪnʒd soʊ hi dɪd nɑt ɡɛɾ ənʌðɝ bɑɾi ðə nɛks taɪm i daɪd. pɝhæps ɪt kəd bi ɝeɪnʒd sun.

Bending his neck hurt Demandred as much as speaking those words. So they would take al'Thor - while he was trying to use the Choedan Kal, no less, he and some woman drinking enough of the One Power to melt continents! - but there had been no indication that Moridin would be with them. Or his twin pets, Moghedien and Cyndane. The man was Nae'blis for now, but perhaps matters could be arranged so he did not get another body the next time he died. Perhaps it could be arranged soon.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹtin


CHAPTER 14

wʌɾ ə veɪl haɪdz


What a Veil Hides

ðə vɪktɝi ʌv kɪdʒɹɑn ɹoʊld ɑn lɔŋ si swɛlz, meɪkɪŋ ðə ɡɪldɪd læmps ɪn ðə stɝn kæbən swɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ ɡɪmbəlz, bʌt tuɑn sæt kɑmli əz ðə ɹeɪzɝ ɪn sɪlutʃəz ʃʊɹ hæn slɪɾ əkɹɔs əɹ skælp. θɹu ðə tɔl stɝn wɪndoʊz ʃi kəd si ʌðɝ ɡɹieɪtʃɪps kɹæʃɪŋ θɹu ðə ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin swɛlz ɪn spɹeɪz ʌv waɪt, hʌnʒɹədz ə ðɛm ɹoʊ ɑn ɹoʊ, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ tə ðə hɝaɪzən. fɔɹ taɪmz əz mɛni hæd bɪn lɛft ət tæntʃəkoʊ. ðə ɹaɪædʒɛl, ðoʊz u kʌm hoʊm. ðə kɔɝɪn, ðə ɹɪtɝn, hæd bɪɡʌn.

The Victory of Kidron rolled on long sea swells, making the gilded lamps in the stern cabin swing on their gimbals, but Tuon sat calmly as the razor in Selucia's sure hand slid across her scalp. Through the tall stern windows she could see other greatships crashing through the gray-green swells in sprays of white, hundreds of them row on row, stretching to the horizon. Four times as many had been left at Tanchico. The Rhyagelle, Those Who Come Home. The Corenne, the Return, had begun.

ə sɔɹɪŋ ælbətʃɹɑs sim tə bi fɑloʊɪŋ ðə kɪdʒɹɑn, ən oʊmən ə vɪktɝi ɪndid, ðoʊ ðə bɝdz lɔŋ wɪŋz wɝ blæk ɪnstɛɾ ʌv waɪt. ɪt mʌst stɪl min ðə seɪm θɪŋ. oʊmənz dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə loʊkeɪʃən. ən aʊl kɔlɪŋ ət dɔn mɛn ə dɛθ ən ɹeɪn wɪθaʊt klaʊdz ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪd vɪzəɾɝ wɛðɝ ɪn ɪmfɹəl əɹ nɔɹən ɹ.

A soaring albatross seemed to be following the Kidron, an omen of victory indeed, though the bird's long wings were black instead of white. It must still mean the same thing. Omens did not change according to location. An owl calling at dawn meant a death and rain without clouds an unexpected visitor whether in Imfaral or Noren M'Shar.

ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ɹɪtʃuəl wɪð əɹ dʒɹɛsɝz ɹeɪzɝ wɑz suðɪŋ, ən ʃi niɾəd ðət tədeɪ. læs naɪt, ʃi hæd ɡɪvən ə kəmæn ɪn æŋɡɝ. noʊ kəmænd ʃəd bi ɪʃuɾ ɪn æŋɡɝ. ʃi fɛlt ɔlmoʊst siməsiv, əz ɪf ʃi hæd lɔst ɑnɝ. hɝ bæləns wɑz dɪstɝbd, ən ðət boʊɾɪd əz ɪl fəɹ ðə ɹɪtɝn əz ə lɔs ə seɪaɪtɑɹ, ælbətʃɹɑs əɹ noʊ ælbətʃɹɑs.

The morning ritual with her dresser's razor was soothing, and she needed that today. Last night, she had given a command in anger. No command should be issued in anger. She felt almost sei'mosiev, as if she had lost honor. Her balance was disturbed, and that boded as ill for the Return as a loss of sei'taer, albatross or no albatross.

sɪlutʃə waɪpt əweɪ ðə læst ə ðə læðɝ wɪð ə wɔɹm dæmp klɔθ, ðən juzd ə dʒɹaɪ klɔθ, ən faɪnəli paʊɾɝd əɹ smuð skælp laɪtli wɪð ə bɹʌʃ. wən əɹ dʒɹɛsɝ stɛp bæk, tuɑn ɹoʊz ən lɛɾ əɹ ɪlæbɹətli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd blu sɪlk dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɡaʊn slaɪd tə ðə ɡoʊld-ænd-blu pæɾɝnd kɑɹpət. ɪnstənli ðə kul ɛɹ pɛbəld əɹ dɑɹk bɛɹ skɪn. fɔɹ ə hɝ tɛn meɪdz ɹoʊz ɡɹeɪsfəli fɹəm wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn nilɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔlz, klin-lɪmd ən kʌmli ɪn ðɛɹ fɪlmi waɪt ɹoʊbz. ɔl hæd bɪn pɝtʃəs fəɹ ðɛɹ əpɪɹəns əz mʌtʃ əz ðɛɹ skɪlz, ən ðeɪ wɝ vɛɹi skɪld. ðeɪ hæd bɪkʌm juz tə ðə moʊʃənz ə ðə ʃɪp dʊɹɪŋ ðə lɔŋ vɔɪədʒ fɹəm sintʃæn, ən ðeɪ skɝid tə fɛtʃ ðə ɡɑɹməns ðət hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn leɪɾ aʊɾ ətɑp ðə kɑɹv tʃɛsts ən bɹɪŋ əm tə sɪlutʃə. sɪlutʃə nɛvɝ əlaʊd ðə dækoʊvæl tə æktʃəli  dʒɹɛs hɝ, nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz stɑkɪŋz əɹ slɪpɝz.

Selucia wiped away the last of the lather with a warm damp cloth, then used a dry cloth, and finally powdered her smooth scalp lightly with a brush. When her dresser stepped back, Tuon rose and let her elaborately embroidered blue silk dressing gown slide to the gold-and-blue patterned carpet. Instantly the cool air pebbled her dark bare skin. Four of her ten maids rose gracefully from where they had been kneeling against the walls, clean-limbed and comely in their filmy white robes. All had been purchased for their appearance as much as their skills, and they were very skilled. They had become used to the motions of the ship during the long voyage from Seanchan, and they scurried to fetch the garments that had already been laid out atop the carved chests and bring them to Selucia. Selucia never allowed the da'covale to actually dress her, not so much as stockings or slippers.

wən ʃi sɛɾəld ə pliɾɪd ɡaʊn ðə kʌlɝ ʌv wɛl-eɪdʒd aɪvɝi oʊvɝ tuɑnz hɛd, ðə jʌŋɡɝ wʊmən kəd nɑt hɛlp kəmpɛɹɪŋ ðə tu ʌv əm ɪn ðə tɔl mɪɹɝ fæsən tə ði ɪnɝ wɔl. ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd sɪlutʃə pəzɛst ə steɪtli, kɹim-skɪn bjuɾi ən kul blu aɪz. ɛniwʌn maɪɾ əv teɪkən əɹ fəɹ wʌn ə ðə blʌd, ən ə haɪ ɹæŋk, ɹæðɝ ðən sɔɪhɪn, ɪf ðə lɛf saɪɾ ə hɝ hɛd hæd nɑt bɪn ʃeɪvd. ə noʊʃən ðət wʊɾə ʃɑk ðə wʊmən tə ðə kwɪk, ɪkspɹɛst əlaʊd. ðə vɛɹi aɪdiə ʌv ɛni stɛpɪŋ əbʌv əɹ əpɔɪntəd steɪʃən hɔɹəfaɪd sɪlutʃə. tuɑn nu ʃi hɝsɛlf wəd nɛvɝ əv sətʃ ə kəmændɪŋ pɹɛzəns. hɝ aɪz wɝ tu lɑɹdʒ, ən ə lɪkwəd bɹaʊn. wən ʃi fɝɡɑt tə kip ə stɝn mæsk, hɝ hɑɹt-ʃeɪp feɪs bɪlɔŋd ɑn ə mɪstʃəvəs tʃaɪld. ðə tɑp ə hɝ hɛd bɛɹli keɪm tə sɪlutʃəz aɪz, ən əɹ dʒɹɛsɝ wɑz nɑɾ ə tɔl wʊmən. tuɑn kəd ɹaɪd wɪð ðə bɛst, ʃi ɪksɛld ət ɹɛslɪŋ ən ðə jus ə suɾəbəl wɛpənz, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz hæd tə ɛksɝsaɪz əɹ maɪn tə ɪmpɹɛs. ʃi hæd tʃɹeɪn ðət tul əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi hæd tʃɹeɪn əɾ ɛvɹi ʌðɝ tælən kəmbaɪnd. ət lis ðə waɪd, woʊvən bɛlt ʌv ɡoʊld ɛmfəsaɪzd əɹ weɪst ɪnʌf ðət ʃi wəd nɑt bi teɪkən fəɹ ə bɔɪ ɪn ə dʒɹɛs. mɛn wɑtʃt wən sɪlutʃə pæs baɪ, ən tuɑn hæɾ oʊvɝhɝd səm mɝmɝ əbaʊɾ əɹ fʊl bɹɛsts. pɝhæps ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ə kəmændɪŋ pɹɛzəns, bʌɾ ɪt wʊɾə bɪn naɪs tə pəzɛs ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ bʊzəm.

When she settled a pleated gown the color of well-aged ivory over Tuon's head, the younger woman could not help comparing the two of them in the tall mirror fastened to the inner wall. Golden-haired Selucia possessed a stately, cream-skinned beauty and cool blue eyes. Anyone might have taken her for one of the Blood, and of high rank, rather than so'jhin, if the left side of her head had not been shaved. A notion that would have shocked the woman to the quick, expressed aloud. The very idea of any stepping above her appointed station horrified Selucia. Tuon knew she herself would never have such a commanding presence. Her eyes were too large, and a liquid brown. When she forgot to keep a stern mask, her heart-shaped face belonged on a mischievous child. The top of her head barely came to Selucia's eyes, and her dresser was not a tall woman. Tuon could ride with the best, she excelled at wrestling and the use of suitable weapons, but she had always had to exercise her mind to impress. She had trained that tool as hard as she had trained at every other talent combined. At least the wide, woven belt of gold emphasized her waist enough that she would not be taken for a boy in a dress. Men watched when Selucia passed by, and Tuon had overheard some murmur about her full breasts. Perhaps that had nothing to do with a commanding presence, but it would have been nice to possess a little more bosom.

"ðə laɪt bi əpɑn mi," sɪlutʃə mɝmɝd, saʊndɪŋ əmjuzd, əz ðə dækoʊvæl hɝid bæk tə nil əpɹaɪɾ əɡɛns ðə wɔlz. "juv dʌn ðəɾ ɛvɹi mɔɹnɪŋ sɪns ðə fɝs deɪ jəɹ hɛd wɑz ʃeɪvd. dʒju stɪl θɪŋk æftɝ θɹi jɪɹz ðəɾ əl liv ə pætʃ ə stʌbəl?"

"The Light be upon me," Selucia murmured, sounding amused, as the da'covale hurried back to kneel upright against the walls. "You've done that every morning since the first day your head was shaved. Do you still think after three years that I'll leave a patch of stubble?"

tuɑn ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi hæd ɹʌbd ə hæn əkɹɔs əɹ bɛɹ skælp. sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ stʌbəl, ʃi ədmɪɾəd tə hɝsɛlf ɹufəli. "ɪf jə dɪd," ʃi sɛd wɪð mɑk sɪvɛɹɪɾi, "aɪ wəɾ əv jə biɾən. ə ɹipeɪmən fəɹ ɔl ðə taɪmz jə juzd ə swɪtʃ ɑn mi."

Tuon realized that she had rubbed a hand across her bare scalp. Searching for stubble, she admitted to herself ruefully. "If you did," she said with mock severity, "I would have you beaten. A repayment for all the times you used a switch on me."

pleɪsɪŋ ə ɹoʊp ə ɹubiz ɝaʊn tuɑnz nɛk, sɪlutʃə læft. "ɪf jə peɪ mi bæk fəɹ ɔl ðæt, əl nɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə sɪt daʊn əɡɛn."

Placing a rope of rubies around Tuon's neck, Selucia laughed. "If you pay me back for all that, I'll never be able to sit down again."

tuɑn smaɪld. sɪlutʃəz mʌðɝ hæd ɡɪvən əɹ tə tuɑn fəɹ ə kɹeɪɾəl-ɡɪft, tə bi hɝ nɝsmeɪd, ən mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, hɝ ʃædoʊ, ə bɑɾiɡɑɹd noʊ wʌn nu əbaʊt. ðə fɝs twɛnti-faɪv jɪɹz ə sɪlutʃəz laɪf hæd bɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ fəɹ ðoʊz dʒɑbz, tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn sikɹət fəɹ ðə sɛkənd. ɑn tuɑnz sɪkstinθ neɪmɪŋ deɪ, wən əɹ hɛd wɑz fɝst ʃeɪvd, ʃi hæd meɪd ðə tʃɹədɪʃənəl ɡɪfs ə hɝ haʊs tə sɪlutʃə, ə smɔl ɪsteɪt fəɹ ðə kɛɹ ʃi hæd ʃoʊn, ə pɑɹɾən fəɹ ðə tʃæstaɪsməns ʃi hæd ɡɪvən, ə sæk ʌv wʌn hʌnʒɹəd ɡoʊldən θɹoʊnz fəɹ itʃ taɪm ʃi hæd niɾəd tə pʌnɪʃ əɹ tʃɑɹdʒ. ðə blʌɾ əsɛmbəl tə wɑtʃ əɹ pɹizɛntəɾ əz ən ədʌl fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm hæd bɪn ɪmpɹɛs baɪ ɔl ðoʊz sæks ə kɔɪn, mɔɹ ðən mɛni ʌv əm cʊɾə leɪd hæn ɑn ðɛmsɛlvz. ʃi hæd bɪn . . . ənɹuli . . . əz ə tʃaɪld, nɑt tə mɛnʃən hɛdstʃɹɔŋ. ən ðə læs tʃɹədɪʃənəl ɡɪft: ði ɔfɝ fəɹ sɪlutʃə tə tʃuz wɛɹ ʃi wəd bi əpɔɪntəd nɛkst. tuɑn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ ʃi əɹ ðə wɑtʃɪŋ kɹaʊd hæd bɪn mɔɹ əstɑnɪʃt wən ðə dɪɡnəfaɪd wʊmən tɝn əɹ bæk ɑn paʊɝ ən əθɔɹəɾi, ən æskt ɪnstɛd tə bi tuɑnz dʒɹɛsɝ, hɝ tʃif meɪd. ən əɹ ʃædoʊ stɪl, ʌv kɔɹs, ðoʊ ðət wɑz nɑt meɪd pʌblɪk. ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd bɪn dɪlaɪɾəd.

Tuon smiled. Selucia's mother had given her to Tuon for a cradle-gift, to be her nursemaid, and more important, her shadow, a bodyguard no one knew about. The first twenty-five years of Selucia's life had been training for those jobs, training in secret for the second. On Tuon's sixteenth naming day, when her head was first shaved, she had made the traditional gifts of her House to Selucia, a small estate for the care she had shown, a pardon for the chastisements she had given, a sack of one hundred golden thrones for each time she had needed to punish her charge. The Blood assembled to watch her presented as an adult for the first time had been impressed by all those sacks of coin, more than many of them could have laid hand on themselves. She had been . . . unruly . . . as a child, not to mention headstrong. And the last traditional gift: the offer for Selucia to choose where she would be appointed next. Tuon was not sure whether she or the watching crowd had been more astonished when the dignified woman turned her back on power and authority, and asked instead to be Tuon's dresser, her chief maid. And her shadow still, of course, though that was not made public. She herself had been delighted.

"pɝhæps ɪn smɔl doʊsəz, spɹɛɾ oʊvɝ sɪkstin jɪɹz," ʃi sɛd. kætʃɪŋ saɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə mɪɹɝ, ʃi hɛld əɹ smaɪl lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ stɪŋ ɪn əɹ wɝdz, ðən ɹipleɪst ɪt wɪð stɝnnəs. ʃi sɝɾənli fɛl mɔɹ əfɛkʃən fəɹ ðə wʊmən u hæd ɹeɪzd əɹ ðən fəɹ ðə mʌðɝ ʃi hæd sin oʊnli twaɪs ə jɪɹ bɪfɔɹ bɪkʌmɪŋ ən ədʌlt, əɹ ðə bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz ʃi hæd bɪn tɔt fɹəm əɹ fɝst stɛps tə bæɾəl fəɹ ðɛɹ mʌðɝz feɪvɝ. tu ʌv əm hæd daɪɾ ɪn ðoʊz stʃɹʌɡəlz, soʊ fɑɹ, ən θɹi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɝ. ə sɪstɝ ən ə bɹʌðɝ hæd bɪn meɪd dækoʊvæl ən hæd ðɛɹ neɪmz stʃɹɪkən fɹəm ðə ɹɛkɝdz əz fɝmli əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn dɪskʌvɝd ðeɪ kəd tʃænəl. hɝ pleɪs wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm sɪkjʊɹ ivən naʊ. ə sɪŋɡəl mɪsstɛp kəd si hɝ dɛd, əɹ wɝs, stʃɹɪpt ən soʊld ɑn ðə pʌblɪk blɑk. blɛsɪŋz ə ðə laɪt, wən ʃi smaɪld, ʃi stɪl lʊk sɪkstin! ət bɛst!

"Perhaps in small doses, spread over sixteen years," she said. Catching sight of herself in the mirror, she held her smile long enough to make sure there was no sting in her words, then replaced it with sternness. She certainly felt more affection for the woman who had raised her than for the mother she had seen only twice a year before becoming an adult, or the brothers and sisters she had been taught from her first steps to battle for their mother's favor. Two of them had died in those struggles, so far, and three had tried to kill her. A sister and a brother had been made da'covale and had their names stricken from the records as firmly as if it had been discovered they could channel. Her place was far from secure even now. A single misstep could see her dead, or worse, stripped and sold on the public block. Blessings of the Light, when she smiled, she still looked sixteen! At best!

tʃʌklɪŋ, sɪlutʃə tɝn tə teɪk ðə kloʊs-fɪɾɪŋ kæp ʌv ɡoʊldən leɪs fɹəm ɪts ɹɛd-lækɝd stæn ɑn ðə dʒɹɛsɪŋ teɪbəl. ðə spɑɹs leɪs wəɾ ɪkspoʊz moʊst ə hɝ ʃeɪvən skælp, ən mɑɹk əɹ wɪð ðə ɹeɪvən-ænd-ɹoʊzɪz. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz nɑt siməsiv, bʌt fəɹ ðə seɪk ə ðə kɔɝɪn, ʃi hæd tə ɹɪstɔɹ əɹ bæləns. ʃi kəɾ æsk ænæθ, hɝ soʊfiə, tə ədmɪnəstɝ ə pɛnəns, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz lɛs ðən tu jɪɹz sɪns nɛfɛɹiz ʌnɪkspɛktɪd dɛθ, ən ʃi stɪl wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli kʌmftəɹbəl wɪð əɹ ɹɪpleɪsmənt. sʌmθɪŋ toʊld əɹ ʃi mʌs də ðɪs ɑn əɹ oʊn. pɝhæps ʃi hæd sin ən oʊmən ʃi hæd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz kɑnʃəsli. æns wɝ nɑt laɪkli ɑn ə ʃɪp, bʌt sɛvɹəl sɔɹts ə biɾəl maɪt bi.

Chuckling, Selucia turned to take the close-fitting cap of golden lace from its red-lacquered stand on the dressing table. The sparse lace would expose most of her shaven scalp, and mark her with the Raven-and-Roses. Perhaps she was not sei'mosiev, but for the sake of the Corenne, she had to restore her balance. She could ask Anath, her Soe'feia, to administer a penance, but it was less than two years since Neferi's unexpected death, and she still was not entirely comfortable with her replacement. Something told her she must do this on her own. Perhaps she had seen an omen she had not recognized consciously. Ants were not likely on a ship, but several sorts of beetle might be.

"noʊ, sɪlutʃə," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "ə veɪl."

"No, Selucia," she said quietly. "A veil."

sɪlutʃəz maʊθ taɪɾənd ɪn dɪsəpɹuvəl, bʌt ʃi ɹipleɪs ðə kæp ɑn ɪts stæn saɪlənli. ɪn pɹaɪvət, əz naʊ, ʃi hæd laɪsəns tə fɹi hɝ tʌŋ, jɛt ʃi nu wʌt kəd bi spoʊkən ən wʌt nɑt. tuɑn hæɾ oʊnli ɛvɝ hæd tə hæv əɹ pʌnɪʃt twaɪs, ən laɪts tʃɹuθ, ʃi hæd ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz sɪlutʃə. wɝdləsli, hɝ dʒɹɛsɝ pɹədust ə lɔŋ ʃɪɹ veɪl, dʒɹeɪpɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ tuɑnz hɛɾ ən sɪkjʊɹɪŋ ɪt wɪð ə nɛɹoʊ bæn ʌv ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd sɛt wɪð ɹubiz. ivən mɔɹ tʃɹænspɛɹən ðən ðə dækoʊvælz ɹoʊbz, ðə veɪl dɪd nɑt haɪɾ əɹ feɪs əɾ ɔl. bʌɾ ɪt hɪd wʌt wɑz moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

Selucia's mouth tightened in disapproval, but she replaced the cap on its stand silently. In private, as now, she had license to free her tongue, yet she knew what could be spoken and what not. Tuon had only ever had to have her punished twice, and Light's truth, she had regretted it as much as Selucia. Wordlessly, her dresser produced a long sheer veil, draping it over Tuon's head and securing it with a narrow band of golden braid set with rubies. Even more transparent than the da'covale's robes, the veil did not hide her face at all. But it hid what was most important.

leɪɪŋ ə lɔŋ, ɡoʊld-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd blu keɪp ɑn tuɑnz ʃoʊldɝz, sɪlutʃə stɛp bæk ən baʊd dipli, ði ɛn ə hɝ ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd tʌtʃɪŋ ðə kɑɹpət. ðə nilɪŋ dækoʊvæl baʊd ðɛɹ feɪsəz tə ðə dɛk. pɹaɪvəsi wɑz əbaʊt tə ɛnd. tuɑn lɛf ðə kæbən əloʊn.

Laying a long, gold-embroidered blue cape on Tuon's shoulders, Selucia stepped back and bowed deeply, the end of her golden braid touching the carpet. The kneeling da'covale bowed their faces to the deck. Privacy was about to end. Tuon left the cabin alone.

ɪn ðə sɛkən kæbən stʊd sɪks ə hɝ sʌldəm, θɹi tə iðɝ saɪd, wɪð ðɛɹ tʃɑɹdʒəz nilɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm ɑn ðə waɪd, pɑlɪʃt plæŋks ə ðə dɛk. ðə sʌldəm stʃɹeɪɾənd wən ðeɪ sɔ hɝ, pɹaʊɾ əz ðə sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹɛd pænəlz ɑn ðɛɹ skɝts. ðə ɡɹeɪ-klæd deɪmeɪn nɛlt ɪɹɛkt, fʊl ə ðɛɹ oʊn pɹaɪd. ɪksɛp fəɹ pʊɹ lɪdʒjə, hu kɹaʊtʃt oʊvɝ əɹ niz ən tʃɹaɪd tə pɹɛs əɹ tɝsteɪn feɪs əɡɛns ðə dɛk. iənɛl, hoʊldɪŋ ðə ɹɛd-hɛɹd deɪmeɪnz liʃ, skaʊl daʊn ət hɝ.

In the second cabin stood six of her sul'dam, three to either side, with their charges kneeling in front of them on the wide, polished planks of the deck. The sul'dam straightened when they saw her, proud as the silver lightning in the red panels on their skirts. The gray-clad damane knelt erect, full of their own pride. Except for poor Lidya, who crouched over her knees and tried to press her tearstained face against the deck. Ianelle, holding the red-haired damane's leash, scowled down at her.

tuɑn saɪd. lɪdʒjə hæd bɪn ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ əɹ æŋɡɝ læs naɪt. noʊ, ʃi hæd kɑzd ɪt, bʌt tuɑn hɝsɛlf wɑz ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ əɹ oʊn ɪmoʊʃənz. ʃi hæd kəmændəd ðə deɪmeɪn tə ɹiɾ əɹ fɔɹtʃən, ən ʃi ʃəd nɑɾ əv ɔɹɾɝd əɹ keɪn kəz ʃi dɪslaɪkt wʌt ʃi hɝd.

Tuon sighed. Lidya had been responsible for her anger last night. No, she had caused it, but Tuon herself was responsible for her own emotions. She had commanded the damane to read her fortune, and she should not have ordered her caned because she disliked what she heard.

bɛndɪŋ, ʃi kʌp lɪdʒjəz tʃɪn, leɪɪŋ lɔŋ ɹɛd-ɪnæməl fɪŋɡɝneɪlz əɡɛns ðə deɪmeɪnz fɹɛkəl tʃik, ən dʒɹu hɝ ʌp tə sɪɾ ɑn əɹ hilz. wɪtʃ pɹədust ə wɪns ən ə fɹɛʃ sɛɾ ə tɪɹz ðət tuɑn kɛɹfəli waɪpt əweɪ wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əz ʃi pʊl ðə deɪmeɪn əpɹaɪɾ ɑn əɹ niz. "lɪdʒjə ɪz ə ɡʊd deɪmeɪn, iənɛl," ʃi sɛd. "peɪn əɹ wɛls wɪð tɪŋktʃɝ ə sɔɹfə ən ɡɪv əɹ laɪənhɑɹt fəɹ ðə peɪn əntɪl ðə wɛls ɑɹ ɡɔn. ən əntɪl ðeɪ ɑɹ ɡɔn, ʃiz tə hæv ə swit kʌstɝd wɪð ɛvɹi mil."

Bending, she cupped Lidya's chin, laying long red-enameled fingernails against the damane's freckled cheek, and drew her up to sit on her heels. Which produced a wince and a fresh set of tears that Tuon carefully wiped away with her fingers as she pulled the damane upright on her knees. "Lidya is a good damane, Ianelle," she said. "Paint her welts with tincture of sorfa and give her lionheart for the pain until the welts are gone. And until they are gone, she is to have a sweet custard with every meal."

"æz ðə haɪ leɪɾi kəmænz," iənɛl ɹɪplaɪd fɔɹməli, bʌt ʃi smaɪl slaɪtli. ɔl ðə sʌldəm wɝ fɑn ə lɪdʒjə, ən ʃi hæd nɑt laɪk pʌnɪʃɪŋ ðə deɪmeɪn. "ɪf ʃi ɡɛts fæt, əl teɪk əɹ fəɹ ɹʌnz, haɪ leɪɾi."

"As the High Lady commands," Ianelle replied formally, but she smiled slightly. All the sul'dam were fond of Lidya, and she had not liked punishing the damane. "If she gets fat, I will take her for runs, High Lady."

lɪdʒjə twɪstəɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɝaʊn tə kɪs tuɑnz pɑm ən mɝmɝd, "lɪdʒjəz mɪstʃɹəs ɪz kaɪnd. lɪdʒjə wɪl nɑt ɡɛt fæt."

Lidya twisted her head around to kiss Tuon's palm and murmured, "Lidya's mistress is kind. Lidya will not get fat."

meɪkɪŋ əɹ weɪ əlɔŋ ðə tu laɪnz, tuɑn spoʊk ə fju wɝdz tə itʃ sʌldəm ən pɛɾəd itʃ ə ðə deɪmeɪn. ðə sɪks ʃi hæd bɹɔt wɪð əɹ wɝ əɹ bɛst, ən ðeɪ bimd əɾ əɹ wɪð ə fɑndnəs ikwəl tə hɝz fəɹ ðɛm. ðeɪ hæd kəmpiɾɪd iɡɝli tə bi tʃoʊzən. plʌmp, jɛloʊ-hɛɹd dɑli ən dɑni, sɪstɝz u hɑɹdli niɾəd ə sʌldəmz dɝɛkʃən. tʃæəl, hɝ hɛɹ əz ɡɹeɪ əz əɹ aɪz, bʌt stɪl ðə moʊst ædʒəl ɪn əɹ spɪnɪŋ. sɪɹə, wɪð ɹɛd ɹɪbənz ɪn əɹ taɪtli kɝl blæk hɛɹ, ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst, ən pɹaʊɾ əz ə sʌldəm. taɪni maɪələn, ʃɔɹɾɝ ivən ðən tuɑn hɝsɛlf. maɪələn wɑz tuɑnz spɛʃəl pɹaɪɾ əmʌŋ ðə sɪks.

Making her way along the two lines, Tuon spoke a few words to each sul'dam and petted each of the damane. The six she had brought with her were her best, and they beamed at her with a fondness equal to hers for them. They had competed eagerly to be chosen. Plump, yellow-haired Dali and Dani, sisters who hardly needed a sul'dam's direction. Charral, her hair as gray as her eyes, but still the most agile in her spinning. Sera, with red ribbons in her tightly curled black hair, the strongest, and proud as a sul'dam. Tiny Mylen, shorter even than Tuon herself. Mylen was Tuon's special pride among the six.

mɛni hæd θɔɾ ɪɾ ɑd wən tuɑn tɛstəd fəɹ sʌldəm ɑn ɹitʃɪŋ ədʌlthʊd, ðoʊ nʌn kəd ɡeɪnseɪ hɝ, ðɛn. ɪksɛpt əɹ mʌðɝ, hu hæɾ əlaʊɾ ɪt baɪ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ saɪlənt. æktʃəli  bɪkʌmɪŋ ə sʌldəm wɑz ənθɪŋkəbəl, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ʃi faʊn əz mʌtʃ ɛndʒɔɪmən ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ deɪmeɪn əz ɪn tʃɹeɪnɪŋ hɔɹsəz, ən ʃi wɑz əz ɡʊɾ ət wʌn əz ði ʌðɝ. maɪələn wɑz ðə pɹuf ə ðæt. ðə peɪl lɪɾəl deɪmeɪn hæd bɪn hæf-dɛd wɪð ʃɑk ən fɪɹ, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə iɾ əɹ dʒɹɪŋk, wən tuɑn bɑɾ əɹ ɑn ðə dɑks ət ʃɑn kɪfɑɹ. ðə dɝsʌldəm ɔl hæd dɪspɛɹd, seɪɪŋ ʃi wəd nɑt laɪv lɔŋ, bʌt naʊ maɪələn smaɪld ʌp ət tuɑn ən lin fɔɹwɝd tə kɪs əɹ hæn bɪfɔɹ ʃi ivən ɹitʃt tə stʃɹoʊk ðə deɪmeɪnz dɑɹk hɛɹ. wʌns skɪn ən boʊnz, ʃi wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ ə tʃɹaɪfəl plʌmp. ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹibjukɪŋ hɝ, kætʃɹoʊnə, hu hɛld əɹ liʃ, lɛɾ ə smaɪl kɹis əɹ juʒəwəli stɝn blæk feɪs ən mɝmɝd ðət maɪələn wɑz ə pɝfək deɪmeɪn. ɪt wɑz tʃɹu, noʊ wʌn wəd bɪliv naʊ ðət wʌns ʃi hæd kɔl hɝsɛlf ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Many had thought it odd when Tuon tested for sul'dam on reaching adulthood, though none could gainsay her, then. Except her mother, who had allowed it by remaining silent. Actually becoming a sul'dam was unthinkable, of course, but she found as much enjoyment in training damane as in training horses, and she was as good at one as the other. Mylen was the proof of that. The pale little damane had been half-dead with shock and fear, refusing to eat or drink, when Tuon bought her on the docks at Shon Kifar. The der'sul'dam all had despaired, saying she would not live long, but now Mylen smiled up at Tuon and leaned forward to kiss her hand before she even reached to stroke the damane's dark hair. Once skin and bones, she was becoming a trifle plump. Instead of rebuking her, Catrona, who held her leash, let a smile crease her usually stern black face and murmured that Mylen was a perfect damane. It was true, no one would believe now that once she had called herself Aes Sedai.

bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ, tuɑn ɡeɪv ə fju ɔɹɾɝz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə deɪmeɪnz daɪəɾ ən ɛksɝsaɪz. ðə sʌldəm nu wʌt tə du, dʒʌs laɪk ði ʌðɝ twɛlv ɪn tuɑnz ɑntʊɹɑʒ, əɹ ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ɪn əɹ sɝvəs, bʌt ʃi bɪliv noʊ wʌn ʃəd bi əlaʊd tə oʊn deɪmeɪn ənlɛs ðeɪ tʊk ən æktɪv ɪntʃɹəst. ʃi nu ðə kwɝks ʌv ɛvɹi wʌn ə hɝz əz wɛl əz ʃi nu hɝ oʊn feɪs.

Before leaving, Tuon gave a few orders concerning the damane's diet and exercise. The sul'dam knew what to do, just like the other twelve in Tuon's entourage, or they would not have been in her service, but she believed no one should be allowed to own damane unless they took an active interest. She knew the quirks of every one of hers as well as she knew her own face.

ɪn ði aʊɾɝ kæbən, ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz, laɪnɪŋ ðə wɔlz ɪn ɑɹmɝ lækɝd blʌd ɹɛɾ ən nɪɹli blæk ɡɹin, stɪfən əɾ əɹ ɛntʃɹəns. ðəɾ ɪz, ðeɪ stɪfən ɪf stætʃuz kəd bi sɛd tə stɪfən. hɑɹd-feɪs mɛn, ðeɪ ən faɪv hʌnʒɹəd mɔɹ laɪk əm hæd bɪn tʃɑɹdʒ pɝsənəli wɪð tuɑnz seɪfti. ɛni əɹ ɔl wəd daɪ tə pɹətɛk hɝ. ðeɪ wəd daɪ ɪf ʃi dɪd. ɛvɹi mæn hæd vɑləntɪɹd, æsk tə bi ɪn əɹ ɡɑɹd. siɪŋ ðə veɪl, ɡɹɪzəl kæptən mjuzənʒ ɔɹɾɝd oʊnli tu tə əkʌmpəni hɝ ɑn dɛk, wɛɹ tu dʌzən oʊɡiɝ ɡɑɹɾənɝz ɪn ðə ɹɛd-ænd-ɡɹin meɪɾ ə laɪn tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə dɔɹweɪ, ɡɹeɪt blæk-tæsɛld æksiz əpɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm ən ɡɹɪm aɪz wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ ɛni deɪnʒɝ ivən hɪɹ. ðeɪ wəd nɑt daɪ ɪf ʃi dɪd, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ hæɾ æsk tə bi ɪn əɹ ɡɑɹd, ən ʃi wəd ɹɛst əɹ laɪf ɪn ɛni ʌv ðoʊz hjudʒ hænz wɪθaʊɾ ə kwɑm.

In the outer cabin, the Deathwatch Guards, lining the walls in armor lacquered blood red and nearly black green, stiffened at her entrance. That is, they stiffened if statues could be said to stiffen. Hard-faced men, they and five hundred more like them had been charged personally with Tuon's safety. Any or all would die to protect her. They would die if she did. Every man had volunteered, asked to be in her guard. Seeing the veil, grizzled Captain Musenge ordered only two to accompany her on deck, where two dozen Ogier Gardeners in the red-and-green made a line to either side of the doorway, great black-tasseled axes upright in front of them and grim eyes watching for any danger even here. They would not die if she did, but they also had asked to be in her guard, and she would rest her life in any of those huge hands without a qualm.

ðə ɹɪb seɪlz ɑn ðə kɪdʒɹɑnz θɹi tɔl mæsts wɝ tɔt wɪð ðə koʊld wɪn ðət dʒɹoʊv ðə vɛsəl təwɔɹd ðə læn ðət leɪ əhɛd, ə dɑɹk ʃɔɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf ðət ʃi kəd meɪk aʊt hɪlz ən hɛdlænz. mɛn ən wɪmən fɪl ðə dɛk, ɔl ə ðə blʌɾ ɑn ðə vɛsəl ɪn ðɛɹ faɪnəst sɪlks, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə wɪn ðət wɪp ðɛɹ kloʊks əz ðeɪ ɪɡnɔɹd ðə bɛɹfʊt mɛn ən wɪmən ə ðə ʃɪps kɹu hu dɑɹɾɪd bɪtwin ðɛm. səm ə ðə noʊbəlz wɝ mʌtʃ tu ɑstənteɪʃəs əbaʊɾ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə kɹu, əz ðoʊ ðeɪ kəd ɹʌn ðə ʃɪp waɪl nilɪŋ əɹ boʊɪŋ ɛvɹi tu peɪsɪz. pɹipɛɹd fəɹ pɹɑstʃɹeɪʃən, ðə blʌd meɪd slaɪt baʊz ɪnstɛd, wʌn ikwəl tə ənʌðɝ, wən ðeɪ sɔ hɝ veɪl. jʊɹəl, ðə ʃɑɹp-noʊz mæn ɛvɹiwʌn θɔt wɑz əɹ sɛkɹətɛɹi, wɛn tə wʌn ni. hi wɑz əɹ sɛkɹətɛɹi, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ hɝ hænd, kəmændɪŋ əɹ sikɝz. ðə məkʊə wʊmən flʌŋ hɝsɛlf daʊn pɹɑstʃɹeɪɾ ən kɪs ðə dɛk bɪfɔɹ ə fju kwaɪət wɝdz fɹəm jʊɹəl meɪɾ əɹ ɡɛt bæk tə hɝ fit blʌʃɪŋ ən smuðɪŋ əɹ pliɾɪd ɹɛd skɝts. tuɑn hæd bɪn ənsɝɾən əbaʊt teɪkɪŋ əɹ ɪndə sɝvəs, bæk ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ, bʌt ðə wʊmən hæd pliɾəd laɪk ə dækoʊvæl. ʃi heɪɾəd ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn əɹ boʊnz, fəɹ səm ɹizən, ən dɪspaɪt ðə ɹɪwɔɹdz ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɪvən fəɹ əɹ ɪkstʃɹimli væljəbəl ɪnfɝmeɪʃən, ʃi hoʊp tə də ðɛm mɔɹ ɪnʒɝi.

The ribbed sails on the Kidron's three tall masts were taut with the cold wind that drove the vessel toward the land that lay ahead, a dark shore near enough that she could make out hills and headlands. Men and women filled the deck, all of the Blood on the vessel in their finest silks, ignoring the wind that whipped their cloaks as they ignored the barefoot men and women of the ship's crew who darted between them. Some of the nobles were much too ostentatious about ignoring the crew, as though they could run the ship while kneeling or bowing every two paces. Prepared for prostration, the Blood made slight bows instead, one equal to another, when they saw her veil. Yuril, the sharp-nosed man everyone thought was her secretary, went to one knee. He was her secretary, of course, but also her Hand, commanding her Seekers. The Macura woman flung herself down prostrate and kissed the deck before a few quiet words from Yuril made her get back to her feet blushing and smoothing her pleated red skirts. Tuon had been uncertain about taking her into service, back in Tanchico, but the woman had pleaded like a da'covale. She hated Aes Sedai in her bones, for some reason, and despite the rewards already given for her extremely valuable information, she hoped to do them more injury.

boʊɪŋ əɹ hɛd tə ðə blʌd, tuɑn klaɪm tə ðə kɔɹɾɝdɛk fɑloʊd baɪ ðə tu dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz. ðə wɪn meɪd hænlɪŋ əɹ keɪp dɪfəkəlt, ən pɹɛst əɹ veɪl əɡɛnst əɹ feɪs wʌn moʊmənt, ðən fleɪld ɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd ðə nɛkst. ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ; ðət ʃi wɔɹ ɪt wɑz səfɪʃənt. hɝ pɝsənəl bænɝ, tu ɡoʊldən laɪənz hɑɹnəs tə ən eɪntʃənt wɔɹ-kɑɹt, flu ət ðə stɝn əbʌv ðə sɪks hɛlmsmɪn stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðə lɔŋ tɪlɝ. ðə ɹeɪvən-ænd-ɹoʊzɪz wʊɾə bɪn pækt əweɪ əz sun əz ðə fɝs kɹumən tə si hɝ veɪl kəd pæs ðə wɝd. kɪdʒɹɑnz kæptən, ə waɪd, wɛðɝd wʊmən wɪð waɪt hɛɹ ən ðə moʊst ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl ɡɹin aɪz, baʊɾ əz tuɑnz slɪpɝ tʌtʃt ðə kɔɹɾɝdɛk ðən ɪmiɾiətli ɹɪtɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə hɝ ʃɪp.

Bowing her head to the Blood, Tuon climbed to the quarterdeck followed by the two Deathwatch Guards. The wind made handling her cape difficult, and pressed her veil against her face one moment, then flailed it over her head the next. It did not matter; that she wore it was sufficient. Her personal banner, two golden lions harnessed to an ancient war-cart, flew at the stern above the six helmsmen struggling to control the long tiller. The Raven-and-Roses would have been packed away as soon as the first crewman to see her veil could pass the word. Kidron's captain, a wide, weathered woman with white hair and the most incredible green eyes, bowed as Tuon's slipper touched the quarterdeck then immediately returned her attention to her ship.

ænæθ wɑz stændɪŋ baɪ ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ, ɪn ʌnɹiliv blæk sɪlk, aʊtwɝdli ʌndɪstɝbd baɪ ðə tʃɪl wɪn ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝ læk ʌv ə kloʊk əɹ keɪp. ə slɛndɝ wʊmən, ʃi wʊɾə bɪn tɔl ivən fəɹ ə mæn. hɝ tʃɑɹkoʊl-dɑɹk feɪs wɑz bjuɾəfəl, bʌɾ əɹ lɑɹdʒ blæk aɪz sim tə pɪɹs laɪk ɔlz. tuɑnz soʊfiə, hɝ tʃɹuθspikɝ, neɪm baɪ ði ɛmpɹɛs, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, wən nɛfɛɹi daɪd. ə sɝpɹaɪz, wɪð nɛfɛɹiz lɛf hæn tʃɹeɪn ən ɹɛɾi tə ɹipleɪs hɝ, bʌt wən ði ɛmpɹɛs spoʊk fɹəm ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn, hɝ wɝd wɑz lɔ. jə sɝɾənli wɝ nɑt səpoʊz tə bi əfɹeɪɾ ə jəɹ soʊfiə, jɛt tuɑn wɑz, ə lɪɾəl. dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə wʊmən, ʃi ɡɹɪp ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ, ən hæd tə lusən əɹ hænz bɪfɔɹ ʃi bɹoʊk ə lækɝd neɪl. ðət wʊɾə mɛn vɛɹi bæd lʌk.

Anath was standing by the railing, in unrelieved black silk, outwardly undisturbed by the chill wind in spite of her lack of a cloak or cape. A slender woman, she would have been tall even for a man. Her charcoal-dark face was beautiful, but her large black eyes seemed to pierce like awls. Tuon's Soe'feia, her Truthspeaker, named by the Empress, might she live forever, when Neferi died. A surprise, with Neferi's Left Hand trained and ready to replace her, but when the Empress spoke from the Crystal Throne, her word was law. You certainly were not supposed to be afraid of your Soe'feia, yet Tuon was, a little. Joining the woman, she gripped the railing, and had to loosen her hands before she broke a lacquered nail. That would have meant very bad luck.

"soʊ," ænæθ sɛd, ðə wɝd laɪk ə neɪl dʒɹɪvən ɪndə tuɑnz skʌl. ðə tɔl wʊmən fɹaʊn daʊn ət hɝ, ən kəntɛmp leɪ θɪk ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "ju haɪd jəɹ feɪs - ɪn ə weɪ - ən naʊ jə ɑɹ dʒʌs ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑn. ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn stɪl noʊz u jə ɹɪli ɑɹ, ivən ɪf ðeɪ woʊn mɛnʃən ɪt. haʊ lɔŋ dʒju ɪntɛn kæɹiɪŋ ɑn ðɪs fɑɹs?" ænæθs fʊl lɪps snɪɹd, ən ʃi meɪɾ ə kɝt, dɪsmɪsɪv dʒɛstʃɝ wɪð wʌn slɪm hænd. "aɪ səpoʊz ðɪs ɪɾiəsi ɪz oʊvɝ hævɪŋ ðə deɪmeɪn keɪnd. jə ɑɹ ə ful tə θɪŋk jəɹ aɪz ɑɹ daʊnkæs baɪ ə lɪɾəl θɪŋ laɪk ðæt. wʌd ʃi seɪ tə meɪk jə æŋɡɹi? noʊ wʌn simz tə noʊ, ɪksɛp ðət jə θɹu ə tæntʃɹəm aɪm sɑɹi tə hæv mɪst."

"So," Anath said, the word like a nail driven into Tuon's skull. The tall woman frowned down at her, and contempt lay thick in her voice. "You hide your face - in a way - and now you are just the High Lady Tuon. Except that everyone still knows who you really are, even if they won't mention it. How long do you intend carrying on this farce?" Anath's full lips sneered, and she made a curt, dismissive gesture with one slim hand. "I suppose this idiocy is over having the damane caned. You are a fool to think your eyes are downcast by a little thing like that. What did she say to make you angry? No one seems to know, except that you threw a tantrum I am sorry to have missed."

tuɑn meɪɾ əɹ hænz bi stɪl ɑn ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ. ðeɪ wɑntəd tə tʃɹɛmbəl. ʃi fɔɹst əɹ feɪs tə meɪnteɪn ə stɝn əpɪɹəns. "aɪ wɪl wɛɹ ðə veɪl əntɪl ən oʊmən tɛlz mi ðə taɪm əz kʌm tə ɹimuv ɪt, ænæθ," ʃi sɛd, skulɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs tə kɑm. oʊnli lʌk hæd kɛpt ɛniwʌn fɹəm oʊvɝhɪɹɪŋ lɪdʒjəz kɹɪptɪk wɝdz. ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðət deɪmeɪn kəd fɔɹtɛl ðə fjutʃɝ, ən ɪf ɛni ʌv ðə blʌd hæd hɝd, ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl əv bɪn tʃæɾɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ hænz əbaʊɾ əɹ feɪt.

Tuon made her hands be still on the railing. They wanted to tremble. She forced her face to maintain a stern appearance. "I will wear the veil until an omen tells me the time has come to remove it, Anath," she said, schooling her voice to calm. Only luck had kept anyone from overhearing Lidya's cryptic words. Everyone knew that damane could foretell the future, and if any of the Blood had heard, they would all have been chattering behind their hands about her fate.

ænæθ læft ɹudli ən bɪɡæn tɛlɪŋ əɹ əɡɛn wʌɾ ə ful ʃi wɑz, ɪn ɡɹeɪɾɝ dɪteɪl ðɪs taɪm. mʌtʃ ɡɹeɪɾɝ dɪteɪl. ʃi dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə loʊɝ əɹ vɔɪs. kæptən teɪən wɑz stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz wɝ ɔlmoʊs fɔlɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ laɪn feɪs. tuɑn lɪsən ətɛntɪvli, ðoʊ hɝ tʃiks ɡɹu hɑɾɝ ən hɑɾɝ, əntɪl ʃi θɔɾ əɹ veɪl maɪt bɝst ɪndə fleɪm.

Anath laughed rudely and began telling her again what a fool she was, in greater detail this time. Much greater detail. She did not bother to lower her voice. Captain Tehan was staring straight ahead, but her eyes were almost falling out of her lined face. Tuon listened attentively, though her cheeks grew hotter and hotter, until she thought her veil might burst into flame.

mɛni ʌv ðə blʌd kɔl ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz soʊfiə, bʌt vɔɪsəz ə ðə blʌd wɝ sɔɪhɪn, ən nu ðeɪ kəd bi pʌnɪʃt ɪf ðɛɹ oʊnɝz wɝ dɪspliz baɪ wʌt ðeɪ sɛɾ ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ kɔl soʊfiə. eɪ spikɝ ə tʃɹuθ kəd nɑt bi kəmændəɾ əɹ koʊɝst əɹ pʌnɪʃt ɪn ɛni weɪ. eɪ tʃɹuθspikɝ wɑz ɹikwaɪɝd tə tɛl ðə stɑɹk tʃɹuθ wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt jə wɑntəd tə hɪɹ ɪt, ən tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðət jə hɝd. ðoʊz blʌɾ u kɔl ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz soʊfiə θɔt ðəɾ ɑlɡwɪn, ðə læs mæn tə sɪɾ ɑn ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn, ɔlmoʊst ə θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ, hæd bɪn ɪnseɪn kəz i lɛɾ ɪz soʊfiə lɪv ən kəntɪnju ɪn əɹ poʊst æftɝ ʃi slæpt ɪz feɪs bɪfɔɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ kɔɹt. ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðə tʃɹədɪʃənz ə hɝ fæmli ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðə ɡɑɡəl-aɪd kæptən dɪd. ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz' ɪkspɹɛʃənz nɛvɝ ɔltɝd bɪhaɪn ðə hæf-kənsilɪŋ tʃik-pisəz ə ðɛɹ hɛlməts. ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd.

Many of the Blood called their Voices Soe'feia, but Voices of the Blood were so'jhin, and knew they could be punished if their owners were displeased by what they said even if they were called Soe'feia. A Speaker of Truth could not be commanded or coerced or punished in any way. A Truthspeaker was required to tell the stark truth whether or not you wanted to hear it, and to make sure that you heard. Those Blood who called their Voices Soe'feia thought that Algwyn, the last man to sit on the Crystal Throne, almost a thousand years ago, had been insane because he let his Soe'feia live and continue in her post after she slapped his face before the entire court. They did not understand the traditions of her family any more than the goggle-eyed captain did. The Deathwatch Guards' expressions never altered behind the half-concealing cheek-pieces of their helmets. They understood.

"θæŋk ju, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt niɾ ə pɛnəns," ʃi sɛd pəlaɪtli wən ænæθ faɪnəli sist əɹ hɝæŋ.

"Thank you, but I do not need a penance," she said politely when Anath finally ceased her harangue.

wʌns, æftɝ ʃi kɝs nɛfɛɹi fəɹ daɪɪŋ baɪ sʌmθɪŋ əz stupəɾ əz ə fɔl daʊn stɛɹz, ʃi hæɾ æskt əɹ nu soʊfiə tə pɝfɔɹm ðət sɝvəs fəɹ hɝ. kɝsɪŋ ðə dɛd wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk jə siməsiv fəɹ mʌnθs. ðə wʊmən hæd bɪn ɔlmoʊs tɛndɝ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ɪn ən ɑd fæʃən, ðoʊ ʃi lɛft əɹ wipɪŋ fəɹ deɪz, əneɪbəl tə dɑn ivən ə ʃɪft. ðət wɑz nɑt waɪ ʃi ɹəfjuz ði ɔfɝ, ðoʊ; ə pɛnəns mʌs bi səvɪɹ əɹ ɪt wɑz jusləs ɪn ɹidʒɹɛsɪŋ bæləns. noʊ, ʃi wəd nɑt teɪk ði iziɝ weɪ kəz ʃi hæd meɪɾ əɹ dɪsɪʒən. ænd, ʃi hæd tə ədmɪt, kəz ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹɪzɪst əɹ soʊfiəz ædvaɪs. wɑntəd nɑt tə lɪsən tə hɝ əɾ ɔl. əz sɪlutʃə sɛd, ʃi ɔlweɪz hæd bɪn hɛdstʃɹɔŋ. ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə lɪsən tə jəɹ tʃɹuθspikɝ wɑz əbɑmənəbəl. pɝhæps ʃi ʃəɾ æksɛpt æftɝ ɔl, tə ɹɪdʒɹɛs ðət bæləns. θɹi lɔŋ ɡɹeɪ pɔɹpəsəz ɹoʊz bɪsaɪd ðə ʃɪp ən saʊndəd. θɹi, ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɹaɪz əɡɛn. hoʊl tə jəɹ tʃoʊzən kɔɹs.

Once, after she cursed Neferi for dying by something as stupid as a fall down stairs, she had asked her new Soe'feia to perform that service for her. Cursing the dead was enough to make you sei'mosiev for months. The woman had been almost tender about it, in an odd fashion, though she left her weeping for days, unable to don even a shift. That was not why she refused the offer, though; a penance must be severe or it was useless in redressing balance. No, she would not take the easier way because she had made her decision. And, she had to admit, because she wanted to resist her Soe'feia's advice. Wanted not to listen to her at all. As Selucia said, she always had been headstrong. Refusing to listen to your Truthspeaker was abominable. Perhaps she should accept after all, to redress that balance. Three long gray porpoises rose beside the ship and sounded. Three, and they did not rise again. Hold to your chosen course.

"wɛn wəɹ əʃɔɹ," ʃi sɛd, "ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ mʌs bi kəmɛndɪd." hoʊl tə jəɹ tʃoʊzən kɔɹs. "æn əɹ æmbɪʃən mʌs bi lʊkt ɪntu. ʃiz dʌn mɔɹ wɪð ðə fɔɹʌnɝz ðən ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, dʒɹimd ʌv, bʌt səksɛs ɑn sətʃ ə skeɪl ɔfən bɹidz æmbɪʃənz tə mætʃ."

"When we are ashore," she said, "the High Lady Suroth must be commended." Hold to your chosen course. "And her ambition must be looked into. She has done more with the Forerunners than the Empress, may she live forever, dreamed of, but success on such a scale often breeds ambitions to match."

pivd ət ðə tʃeɪnʒ ə sʌbʒɪkt, ænæθ dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, lɪps kəmpɹɛsɪŋ. hɝ aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd. "aɪ æm ʃʊɹ sjuɹɔθ əz oʊnli ðə bɛst ɪntʃɹəsts ə ði ɛmpaɪɝ fəɹ æmbɪʃən," ʃi sɛd kɝtli.

Peeved at the change of subject, Anath drew herself up, lips compressing. Her eyes glittered. "I am sure Suroth has only the best interests of the Empire for ambition," she said curtly.

tuɑn nɑɾəd. ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ əɾ ɔl. ðət sɔɹɾ ə ʃʊɹnəs kəd lid tə ðə taʊɝ ə ðə ɹeɪvənz ivən fəɹ hɝ. pɝhæps ɪspɛʃli fəɹ hɝ. "aɪ mʌs faɪn ə weɪ tə meɪk kɑntækt wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz sun əz pɑsəbəl. hi mʌs nil bɪfɔɹ ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn bɪfɔɹ tɑɹmən ɡdən, əɹ ɔl ɪz lɔst." ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən sɛd soʊ, klɪɹli.

Tuon nodded. She herself was not sure at all. That sort of sureness could lead to the Tower of the Ravens even for her. Perhaps especially for her. "I must find a way to make contact with the Dragon Reborn as soon as possible. He must kneel before the Crystal Throne before Tarmon Gai'don, or all is lost." The Prophecies of the Dragon said so, clearly.

ænæθs mud tʃeɪnʒd ɪn ə flæʃ. smaɪlɪŋ, ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn tuɑnz ʃoʊldɝ ɔlmoʊs pəzɛsɪvli. ðət wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tu fɑɹ, bʌt ʃi wɑz soʊfiə, ən ðə fil ʌv oʊnɝʃɪp maɪɾ əv bɪn oʊnli ɪn tuɑnz maɪnd. "ju mʌs bi kɛɹfəl," ænæθ pɝd. "ju mʌs nɑt lɛɾ ɪm lɝn haʊ deɪnʒɝəs jə ɑɹ tə hɪm əntɪl ɪts tu leɪt fəɹ ɪm tə ɪskeɪp."

Anath's mood changed in a flash. Smiling, she laid a hand on Tuon's shoulder almost possessively. That was going too far, but she was Soe'feia, and the feel of ownership might have been only in Tuon's mind. "You must be careful," Anath purred. "You must not let him learn how dangerous you are to him until it is too late for him to escape."

ʃi hæd mɔɹ ædvaɪs, bʌt tuɑn lɛɾ ɪt wɑʃ oʊvɝ hɝ. ʃi lɪsən ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ ʃi hæd nɑt hɝɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz bɪfɔɹ. əhɛɾ ə ðə ʃɪp ʃi kəd meɪk aʊt ðə maʊθ ʌv ə ɡɹeɪt hɑɹbɝ. ɛbu dɑɹ, fɹəm wɛɹ ðə kɔɝɪn wəd spɹɛd, əz ɪt wɑz spɹɛɾɪŋ fɹəm tæntʃəkoʊ. ðə θɔt ɡeɪv əɹ ə θɹɪl ə plɛʒɝ, ʌv əkɑmplɪʃmənt. bɪhaɪn əɹ veɪl, ʃi wɑz mɪɹli ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑn, ʌv hoʊ haɪɝ ɹæŋk ðən mɛni ʌðɝz ə ðə blʌd, bʌɾ ɪn əɹ hɑɹt, ɔlweɪz, ʃi wɑz tuɑn æθeɪɪm kɔɹ pɛndʒɹæɡ, dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz, ən ʃi hæd kʌm tə ɹikleɪm wʌt hæd bɪn stoʊlən fɹəm əɹ ænsɛstɝ.

She had more advice, but Tuon let it wash over her. She listened enough to hear, yet it was nothing she had not heard a hundred times before. Ahead of the ship she could make out the mouth of a great harbor. Ebou Dar, from where the Corenne would spread, as it was spreading from Tanchico. The thought gave her a thrill of pleasure, of accomplishment. Behind her veil, she was merely the High Lady Tuon, of ho higher rank than many others of the Blood, but in her heart, always, she was Tuon Athaem Kore Paendrag, Daughter of the Nine Moons, and she had come to reclaim what had been stolen from her ancestor.


tʃæptɝ fɪftin


CHAPTER 15

ɪn niɾ ʌv ə bɛlfndɝ


In Need of a Bellfounder

ðə bɑkslaɪk wæɡən ɹimaɪndəd mæt ə tɪŋkɝ wæɡənz i hæd sin, ə lɪɾəl haʊs ɑn wilz, ðoʊ ðɪs wʌn, fɪld wɪð kæbənəts ən wɝkbɛntʃɪz bɪlt ɪndə ðə wɔlz, wɑz nɑt meɪd fəɹ ə dwɛlɪŋ. ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ ɪz noʊz ət ði ɑd, ækɹɪd smɛlz ðət fɪl ði ɪntɪɹiɝ, hi ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli ɑn ɪz θɹi-lɛɡəd stul, ði oʊnli pleɪs fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə sɪt. hɪz bɹoʊkən lɛɡ ən ɹɪbz wɝ nɪɹ ɪnʌf hild, ən ðə kʌts ðəɾ i hæd sʌfɝd wən ðət hoʊl blʌɾi bɪldɪŋ fɛl ɑn ɪz hɛd, bʌt ði ɪnʒɝiz stɪl peɪn ɪm naʊ ən ðɛn. bɪsaɪdz, hi wɑz hoʊpɪŋ fəɹ sɪmpəθi. wɪmən lʌv tə ʃoʊ sɪmpəθi, ɪf jə pleɪɾ ɪɾ aʊt ɹaɪt. hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf stɑp twɪstɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ ɑn ɪz fɪŋɡɝ. lɛɾ ə wʊmən noʊ jə wɝ nɝvəs, ən ʃi pʊɾ əɹ oʊn kənstʃɹʌkʃən ɑn ɪt, ən sɪmpəθi wɛn ɹaɪɾ aʊt ðə wɪndoʊ.

The boxlike wagon reminded Mat of Tinker wagons he had seen, a little house on wheels, though this one, filled with cabinets and workbenches built into the walls, was not made for a dwelling. Wrinkling his nose at the odd, acrid smells that filled the interior, he shifted uncomfortably on his three-legged stool, the only place for anyone to sit. His broken leg and ribs were near enough healed, and the cuts that he had suffered when that whole bloody building fell on his head, but the injuries still pained him now and then. Besides, he was hoping for sympathy. Women loved to show sympathy, if you played it out right. He made himself stop twisting his long signet ring on his finger. Let a woman know you were nervous, and she put her own construction on it, and sympathy went right out the window.

"lɪsən, ɑlʌdʒɹə," hi sɛd, əsumɪŋ ɪz moʊst wɪnɪŋ smaɪl, "baɪ ðɪs taɪm jə mʌs noʊ ðə sintʃæn woʊn lʊk twaɪs ət faɪɹwɝks. ðoʊz deɪmeɪn də sʌmθɪŋ kɔl skaɪ laɪts ðət meɪks jəɹ bɛs faɪɹwɝks lʊk laɪk ə fju spɑɹks flaɪɪŋ ʌp ðə tʃɪmni, soʊ aɪ hɪɹ. noʊ əfɛns mɛnt."

"Listen, Aludra," he said, assuming his most winning smile, "by this time you must know the Seanchan won't look twice at fireworks. Those damane do something called Sky Lights that makes your best fireworks look like a few sparks flying up the chimney, so I hear. No offense meant."

"mi, aɪ hæv nɑt sin ðiz soʊ-kɔl skaɪ laɪts maɪsɛlf," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd dɪsmɪsɪvli ɪn əɹ stʃɹɔŋ tæɹɑbənɝ æksɛnt. hɝ hɛd wɑz bɛn oʊvɝ ə wʊɾən mɔɹɾɝ ðə saɪz ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ kɛɡ ɑn wʌn ə ðə wɝkbɛntʃɪz, ən dɪspaɪɾ ə waɪd blu ɹɪbən ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ dɑɹk weɪst-lɛŋθ hɛɹ lusli ət ðə neɪp ə hɝ nɛk, ɪt fɛl fɔɹwɝd tə haɪɾ əɹ feɪs. ðə lɔŋ waɪɾ eɪpɹən wɪð ɪts dɑɹk smʌdʒɪz dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə kənsil haʊ wɛl əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹin dʒɹɛs fɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ hɪps, bʌɾ i wɑz mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. wɛl, əz ɪntʃɹəstəd. ʃi wɑz ɡɹaɪndɪŋ əɾ ə kɔɹs blæk paʊɾɝ wɪð ə wʊɾən pɛsəl nɪɹli əz lɔŋ əz əɹ ɑɹm. ðə paʊɾɝ lʊkt ə lɪɾəl laɪk wʌɾ i hæd sin ɪnsaɪd faɪɹwɝks i hæd kʌɾ oʊpən, bʌɾ i stɪl dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt wɛn ɪndə ɪt. "ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt," ʃi wɛn ɑn, ʌnəwɛɹ ə hɪz skɹuɾəni, "aɪ wɪl nɑt ɡɪv jə ðə ɡɪl sikɹəts. jə mʌst ʌndɝstæn ðɪs, jɛs?"

"Me, I have not seen these so-called Sky Lights myself," she replied dismissively in her strong Taraboner accent. Her head was bent over a wooden mortar the size of a large keg on one of the workbenches, and despite a wide blue ribbon gathering her dark waist-length hair loosely at the nape of her neck, it fell forward to hide her face. The long white apron with its dark smudges did nothing to conceal how well her dark green dress fit over her hips, but he was more interested in what she was doing. Well, as interested. She was grinding at a coarse black powder with a wooden pestle nearly as long as her arm. The powder looked a little like what he had seen inside fireworks he had cut open, but he still did not know what went into it. "In any event," she went on, unaware of his scrutiny, "I will not give you the Guild secrets. You must understand this, yes?"

mæt wɪnst. hi hæd bɪn wɝkɪŋ ɑn əɹ fəɹ deɪz tə bɹɪŋ əɹ tə ðɪs pɔɪnt, ɛvɝ sɪns ə tʃæns vɪzət tə vɑlən lukəz tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊ ɹɪvil ðət ʃi wɑz hɪɹ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ən ɔl ðə waɪl i hæd dʒɹɛɾɪd ðət ʃi wəd mɛnʃən ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz' ɡɪld. "bʌt jə ɑɹən ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ ɛnimɔɹ, ɹɪmɛmbɝ? ðeɪ kɪkt . . . ɑ . . . jə sɛd jə lɛf ðə ɡɪld." nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm i kənsɪɾɝd ə smɔl ɹimaɪndɝ ðəɾ i hæd wʌns seɪvd əɹ fɹəm fɔɹ ɡɪl mɛmbɝz u wɑntəd tə kʌɾ əɹ θɹoʊt. ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk moʊst wɪmən fɔl ɑn jəɹ nɛk wɪð kɪsəz ən ɔfɝz ʌv wʌtɛvɝ jə wɑntəd. bʌt ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə noʊɾəbəl læk ə kɪsəz wən i æktʃəli  seɪv hɝ, soʊ ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli ʃi wəd bɪɡɪn naʊ. "ɛniweɪ," hi wɛn ɑn ɛɹəli, "ju doʊn əv tə wɝi əbaʊt ðə ɡɪld. juv bɪn meɪkɪŋ naɪtfloʊɝz fəɹ haʊ lɔŋ? ən noʊbɑdi hæz kʌm ɝaʊn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɑp ju. waɪ, əl weɪdʒɝ jə nɛvɝ si ənʌðɝ ɪluməneɪɾɝ."

Mat winced. He had been working on her for days to bring her to this point, ever since a chance visit to Valan Luca's traveling show revealed that she was here in Ebou Dar, and all the while he had dreaded that she would mention the Illuminators' Guild. "But you aren't an Illuminator anymore, remember? They kicked . . . ah . . . you said you left the Guild." Not for the first time he considered a small reminder that he had once saved her from four Guild members who wanted to cut her throat. That sort of thing was enough to make most women fall on your neck with kisses and offers of whatever you wanted. But there had been a notable lack of kisses when he actually saved her, so it was unlikely she would begin now. "Anyway," he went on airily, "you don't have to worry about the Guild. You've been making nightflowers for how long? And nobody has come around trying to stop you. Why, I'll wager you never see another Illuminator."

"wʌɾ əv jə hɝd?" ʃi æskt kwaɪətli, hɝ hɛd stɪl daʊn. ðə pɛsəlz ɹoʊteɪʃən sloʊɾ ɔlmoʊs tə ə stɑp. "tɛl mi."

"What have you heard?" she asked quietly, her head still down. The pestle's rotation slowed almost to a stop. "Tell me."

ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz skælp nɪɹli stʊɾ ɑn ɛnd. haʊ dɪd wɪmən də ðæt? haɪɾ ɛvɹi klu, ən ðeɪ stɪl wɛn stʃɹeɪt tə wʌt jə wɑntəd tə kənsil. "wʌt dʒju min? aɪ hɪɹ ðə seɪm ɡɑsəp jə du, aɪ səpoʊz. moʊsli əbaʊt ðə sintʃæn."

The hair on his scalp nearly stood on end. How did women do that? Hide every clue, and they still went straight to what you wanted to conceal. "What do you mean? I hear the same gossip you do, I suppose. Mostly about the Seanchan."

ʃi spʌn ɝaʊn soʊ fæs ðəɾ əɹ hɛɹ swʌŋ laɪk ə fleɪl, ən snætʃt ðə hɛvi pɛsəl ʌp ɪn boʊθ hænz, bɹændɪʃɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd. pɝhæps tɛn jɪɹz əɹ soʊ oʊldɝ ðən hi, ʃi hæd lɑɹdʒ dɑɹk aɪz ən ə smɔl plʌmp maʊθ ðət juʒəwəli simd ɹɛɾi tə bi kɪst. hi hæd θɔɾ əbaʊt kɪsɪŋ əɹ ə taɪm əɹ tu. moʊst wɪmən wɝ mɔɹ əmɛnəbəl æftɝ ə fju kɪsəz. naʊ, hɝ tiθ wɝ bɛɹd, ən ʃi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə baɪɾ ɔf ɪz noʊz. "tɛl mi!" ʃi kəmændəd.

She spun around so fast that her hair swung like a flail, and snatched the heavy pestle up in both hands, brandishing it overhead. Perhaps ten years or so older than he, she had large dark eyes and a small plump mouth that usually seemed ready to be kissed. He had thought about kissing her a time or two. Most women were more amenable after a few kisses. Now, her teeth were bared, and she looked ready to bite off his nose. "Tell me!" she commanded.

"aɪ wɑz pleɪɪŋ ət daɪs wɪð səm sintʃæn daʊn nɪɹ ðə dɑks," hi sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli, kipɪŋ ə kɛɹfəl aɪ ɑn ði əpɹeɪz pɛsəl. ə mæn maɪt blʌf ən blʌstɝ ən wɔk əweɪ ɪf ðə mæɾɝ wɑz nɑt sɪɹiəs, bʌɾ ə wʊmən kəd kɹæk jəɹ skʌl ɑn ə wɪm. ən ɪz hɪp wɑz eɪkɪŋ ən stɪf fɹəm sɪɾɪŋ tu lɔŋ. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ kwɪkli hi kəd muv fɹəm ðə stul. "aɪ dɪdnt wɑnə bi ðə wʌn tə tɛl ju, bʌt . . . ðə ɡɪl dʌzn ɪɡzɪst ɛnimɔɹ, ɑlʌdʒɹə. ðə tʃæptɝ haʊs ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ ɪz ɡɔn." ðət hæd bɪn ði oʊnli ɹil tʃæptɝ haʊs ɪn ðə ɡɪld. ðə wʌn ɪn kɛɹhin wɑz lɔŋ əbændənd naʊ, ən fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, ɪluməneɪɾɝz oʊnli tʃɹævəl tə pʊɾ ɑn dɪspleɪz fəɹ ɹulɝz ən noʊbəlz. "ðeɪ ɹəfjuz tə lɛt sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz ɪnsaɪd ðə kɑmpaʊnd, ən fɔt, tʃɹaɪd tə, wən ðeɪ bɹoʊk ɪn ɛniweɪ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt hæpənd - meɪbi ə soʊlʒɝ tʊk ə læntɝn wɛɹ i ʃʊdn əv - bʌt hæf ðə kɑmpaʊn ɪksploʊɾəd, əz aɪ ʌndɝstæn ɪt. pɹɑbli ɪɡzædʒɝeɪʃən. bʌt ðə sintʃæn bɪlivd wʌn ə ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən ðeɪ . . ." hi saɪd, ən tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs dʒɛntəl. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə tɛl əɹ ðɪs! bʌt ʃi wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, ðət blʌɾi klʌb pɔɪz tə splɪɾ ɪz skælp. "ɑlʌdʒɹə, ðə sintʃæn ɡæðɝɾ ʌp ɛvɹiwʌn lɛft əlaɪv ət ðə tʃæptɝ haʊs, ən səm ɪluməneɪɾɝz ðət hæd ɡɔn tə æmədɔɹ, ən ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn bɪtwin u ivən lʊk laɪk ən ɪluməneɪɾɝ, ən ðeɪ meɪɾ əm ɔl dækoʊvæl. ðət minz - "

"I was playing at dice with some Seanchan down near the docks," he said reluctantly, keeping a careful eye on the upraised pestle. A man might bluff and bluster and walk away if the matter was not serious, but a woman could crack your skull on a whim. And his hip was aching and stiff from sitting too long. He was not sure how quickly he could move from the stool. "I didn't want to be the one to tell you, but . . . The Guild doesn't exist anymore, Aludra. The chapter house in Tanchico is gone." That had been the only real chapter house in the Guild. The one in Cairhien was long abandoned now, and for the rest, Illuminators only traveled to put on displays for rulers and nobles. "They refused to let Seanchan soldiers inside the compound, and fought, tried to, when they broke in anyway. I don't know what happened - maybe a soldier took a lantern where he shouldn't have - but half the compound exploded, as I understand it. Probably exaggeration. But the Seanchan believed one of the Illuminators used the One Power, and they . . ." He sighed, and tried to make his voice gentle. Blood and ashes, he did not want to tell her this! But she was glaring at him, that bloody club poised to split his scalp. "Aludra, the Seanchan gathered up everyone left alive at the chapter house, and some Illuminators that had gone to Amador, and everybody in between who even looked like an Illuminator, and they made them all da'covale. That means - "

"aɪ noʊ wʌɾ ɪt minz!" ʃi sɛd fɪɹsli. swɪŋɪŋ bæk tə ðə bɪɡ mɔɹɾɝ, ʃi bɪɡæn paʊndɪŋ əweɪ wɪð ðə pɛsəl soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ i wɑz əfɹeɪd ðə θɪŋ maɪɾ ɪksploʊd, ɪf ðət paʊɾɝ ɹɪli wɑz wʌt wɛn ɪnsaɪd faɪɹwɝks. "fulz!" ʃi mʌɾɝd æŋɡɹəli, θʌmpɪŋ ðə pɛsəl laʊdli ɪn ðə mɔɹɾɝ. "ɡɹeɪt blaɪn fulz! wɪð ðə maɪɾi, jə mʌs bɛn jəɹ nɛk ə lɪɾəl ən wɔk ɑn, bʌt ðeɪ wəd nɑt si ɪt!" snɪfɪŋ, ʃi skɹʌbd əɾ əɹ tʃiks wɪð ðə bæk ə hɝ hænd. "ju ɑɹ ɹɔŋ, maɪ jʌŋ fɹɛnd. soʊ lɔŋ əz wʌn ɪluməneɪɾɝ lɪvz, ðə ɡɪld, ɪt laɪvz tu, ən mi, aɪ stɪl laɪv!" stɪl nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ʃi waɪpt əɹ tʃiks wɪð əɹ hæn əɡɛn. "ænd wʌt wəd jə də ɪf aɪ ɡeɪv jə ðə faɪɹwɝks? hɝl əm ət ðə sintʃæn fɹəm ðə kæɾəpʌlt, aɪ səpoʊz?" hɝ snɔɹt toʊld wʌt ʃi θɔɾ ə ðæt.

"I know what it means!" she said fiercely. Swinging back to the big mortar, she began pounding away with the pestle so hard that he was afraid the thing might explode, if that powder really was what went inside fireworks. "Fools!" she muttered angrily, thumping the pestle loudly in the mortar. "Great blind fools! With the mighty, you must bend your neck a little and walk on, but they would not see it!" Sniffing, she scrubbed at her cheeks with the back of her hand. "You are wrong, my young friend. So long as one Illuminator lives, the Guild, it lives too, and me, I still live!" Still not looking at him, she wiped her cheeks with her hand again. "And what would you do if I gave you the fireworks? Hurl them at the Seanchan from the catapult, I suppose?" Her snort told what she thought of that.

"ænd wʌts ɹɔŋ wɪð ði aɪdiə?" hi æsk dɪfɛnsɪvli. ə ɡʊd fil kæɾəpʌlt, ə skɔɹpiən, kəd θɹoʊ ə tɛn-paʊn stoʊn faɪv hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz, ən tɛn paʊnz ə faɪɹwɝks wəd də mɔɹ dæmədʒ ðən ɛni stoʊn. "ɛniweɪ, aɪ hæv ə bɛɾɝ aɪdiə. aɪ sɔ ðoʊz tubz jə jus tə tɔs naɪtfloʊɝz ɪndə ðə skaɪ. θɹi hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əɹ mɔɹ, jə sɛd. tɪp wʌn ɑn ɪts saɪd mɔɹ əɹ lɛs, ən əl bɛɾ ɪt kəd tɔs ə naɪtfloʊɝ ə θaʊzən peɪsɪz."

"And what's wrong with the idea?" he asked defensively. A good field catapult, a scorpion, could throw a ten-pound stone five hundred paces, and ten pounds of fireworks would do more damage than any stone. "Anyway, I have a better idea. I saw those tubes you use to toss nightflowers into the sky. Three hundred paces or more, you said. Tip one on its side more or less, and I'll bet it could toss a nightflower a thousand paces."

piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə mɔɹɾɝ, ʃi mʌɾɝd ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. "mi, aɪ tɔk tu mʌtʃ," hi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz, ən sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt pɹɪɾi aɪz ðət meɪd noʊ sɛns. hi hɝiɾ ɑn tə stɑp əɹ fɹəm stɑɹɾɪŋ ʌp əbaʊt ɡɪl sikɹəts əɡɛn. "ðoʊz tubz ɑɹ ə lɑt smɔlɝ ðən ə kæɾəpʌlt, ɑlʌdʒɹə. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ wɛl hɪɾən, ðə sintʃæn wəd nɛvɝ noʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ keɪm fɹʌm. jə kəd θɪŋk ʌv ɪɾ əz peɪɪŋ əm bæk fəɹ ðə tʃæptɝ haʊs."

Peering into the mortar, she muttered almost under her breath. "Me, I talk too much," he thought it was, and something about pretty eyes that made no sense. He hurried on to stop her from starting up about Guild secrets again. "Those tubes are a lot smaller than a catapult, Aludra. If they were well hidden, the Seanchan would never know where they came from. You could think of it as paying them back for the chapter house."

tɝnɪŋ əɹ hɛd, ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə lʊk ə ɹɪspɛkt. mɪŋɡəld wɪð sɝpɹaɪz, bʌɾ i mænədʒ tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðæt. hɝ aɪz wɝ ɹɛd-ɹɪmd, ən ðəɹ wɝ tɝsteɪnz ɑn əɹ tʃiks. meɪbi ɪf i pʊɾ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn əɹ . . . wɪmən juʒəwəli əpɹiʃieɪɾɪd ə lɪɾəl kʌmfɝɾɪŋ wən ðeɪ kɹaɪd.

Turning her head, she gave him a look of respect. Mingled with surprise, but he managed to ignore that. Her eyes were red-rimmed, and there were tearstains on her cheeks. Maybe if he put an arm around her . . . Women usually appreciated a little comforting when they cried.

bɪfɔɹ i kəɾ ivən ʃɪft ɪz weɪt, ʃi swʌŋ ðə pɛsəl bɪtwin ðɛm, pɔɪntɪŋ ɪɾ əɾ ɪm laɪk ə sɔɹd wɪð wʌn hænd. ðoʊz slɛndɝ ɑɹmz mʌs bi stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðeɪ lʊkt; ðə wʊɾən klʌb nɛvɝ weɪvɝd. laɪt, hi θɔt, ʃi kʊdn əv noʊn wʌɾ aɪ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə du!

Before he could even shift his weight, she swung the pestle between them, pointing it at him like a sword with one hand. Those slender arms must be stronger than they looked; the wooden club never wavered. Light, he thought, she couldn't have known what I was going to do!

"ðɪs ɪz nɑt bæd, fəɹ wʌn u oʊnli sɔ ðə lɑftɪŋ tubz ə fju deɪz əɡoʊ," ʃi sɛd, "bʌt mi, aɪ hæv θɔɾ əbaʊt ðɪs lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ju. aɪ hæd ɹizən." fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hɝ vɔɪs wɑz bɪɾɝ, bʌɾ ɪt smuðd aʊɾ əɡɛn, ən bɪkeɪm ə lɪɾəl əmjuzd. "aɪ wɪl sɛt jə ðə pʌzəl, sɪns jə ɑɹ soʊ klɛvɝ, noʊ?" ʃi sɛd, ɑɹtʃɪŋ ən aɪbɹaʊ. oʊ, ʃi dɛfənətli wɑz əmjuz baɪ sʌmθɪŋ! "ju tɛl mi wʌt juz aɪ maɪɾ əv fəɹ ə bɛlfndɝ, ən əl tɛl jə ɔl ə maɪ sikɹəts. ivən ðə wʌnz ðət wɪl meɪk jə blʌʃ, jɛs?"

"This is not bad, for one who only saw the lofting tubes a few days ago," she said, "but me, I have thought about this long before you. I had reason." For a moment, her voice was bitter, but it smoothed out again, and became a little amused. "I will set you the puzzle, since you are so clever, no?" she said, arching an eyebrow. Oh, she definitely was amused by something! "You tell me what use I might have for a bellfounder, and I will tell you all of my secrets. Even the ones that will make you blush, yes?"

naʊ, ðət dɪd saʊn ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. bʌt ðə faɪɹwɝks wɝ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ən aʊɝ snʌɡəlɪŋ wɪð hɝ. wʌt sikɹəts dɪd ʃi hæv ðət kəd meɪk ɪm blʌʃ? hi maɪt sɝpɹaɪz hɝ, ðɛɹ. nɑɾ ɔl ə ðoʊz ʌðɝ mɛnz mɛmɹiz ðət hæd bɪn stʌft ɪndə hɪz hɛd hæd tə də wɪð bæɾəlz. "ə bɛlmeɪkɝ," hi mjuzd, wɪθaʊɾ ə noʊʃən ʌv wɛɹ tə ɡoʊ fɹəm ðɛɹ. nʌn ə ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz ɡeɪv ivən ə hɪnt. "wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz . . . ə bɛlmeɪkɝ kəd . . . meɪbi . . ."

Now, that did sound interesting. But the fireworks were more important than an hour snuggling with her. What secrets did she have that could make him blush? He might surprise her, there. Not all of those other men's memories that had been stuffed into his head had to do with battles. "A bellmaker," he mused, without a notion of where to go from there. None of those old memories gave even a hint. "Well, I suppose . . . A bellmaker could . . . Maybe . . ."

"noʊ," ʃi sɛd, sʌɾənli bɹɪsk. "ju wɪl ɡoʊ, ən ɹɪtɝn ɪn tu əɹ θɹi deɪz. aɪ hæv ðə wɝk tə du, ən jə ɑɹ tu dɪstʃɹæktɪŋ wɪð ɔl ə jəɹ kwɛstʃənz ən widlɪŋ. noʊ; noʊ ɑɹɡjəməns! jəl ɡoʊ naʊ."

"No," she said, suddenly brisk. "You will go, and return in two or three days. I have the work to do, and you are too distracting with all of your questions and wheedling. No; no arguments! You will go now."

ɡlaʊɝɪŋ, hi ɹoʊz ən klæpt ɪz waɪd-bɹɪm blæk hæɾ ɑntu hɪz hɛd. widlɪŋ? widlɪŋ! blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz! hi hæd dʒɹɑpt ɪz kloʊk ɪn ə hip baɪ ðə dɔɹ ɑn ɛntɝɪŋ, ən i ɡɹʌntɪd sɔfli, bɛndɪŋ tə pɪk ɪɾ ʌp. hi hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðət stul moʊst ə ðə deɪ. bʌt meɪbi hi hæd meɪɾ ə lɪɾəl hɛdweɪ wɪð hɝ. ɪf i kəd sɑlv əɹ pʌzəl, ɛniweɪ. əlɑɹm bɛlz. ɡɔŋz tə saʊn ði aʊɝ. ɪt meɪd noʊ sɛns.

Glowering, he rose and clapped his wide-brimmed black hat onto his head. Wheedling? Wheedling! Blood and bloody ashes! He had dropped his cloak in a heap by the door on entering, and he grunted softly, bending to pick it up. He had been sitting on that stool most of the day. But maybe he had made a little headway with her. If he could solve her puzzle, anyway. Alarm bells. Gongs to sound the hour. It made no sense.

"aɪ maɪt θɪŋk ə kɪsɪŋ sətʃ ə smɑɹt jʌŋ mæn əz jə ɪf jə dɪd nɑt bɪlɔŋ tə ənʌðɝ," ʃi mɝmɝɾ ɪn dɪsaɪɾədli wɔɹm toʊnz. "ju hæv sətʃ ə pɹɪɾi bɑɾəm."

"I might think of kissing such a smart young man as you if you did not belong to another," she murmured in decidedly warm tones. "You have such a pretty bottom."

hi dʒɝkt ɪɹɛkt, kipɪŋ ɪz bæk tə hɝ. ðə hiɾ ɪn ɪz feɪs wɑz pjʊɹ aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ tə seɪ hi wɑz blʌʃɪŋ. hi kəd juʒəwəli mænədʒ tə fɝɡɛt wʌɾ i wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ənlɛs sʌmwʌn bɹɔɾ ɪɾ ʌp. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ən ɪnsəɾənt əɹ θɹi ɪn tævɝnz. waɪl i wɑz flæɾ ɑn ɪz bæk wɪð ɪz lɛɡ ɪn splɪns ən ɪz ɹɪbz stʃɹæpt ən bændədʒəz dʒʌst əbaʊɾ ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɛls, taɪlɪn hæd hɪɾən ɔl ə hɪz kloʊðz. hi hæd nɑt faʊnd wɛɹ, jɛt, bʌt ʃʊɹli ðeɪ wɝ hɪɾən, nɑt bɝnd. æftɝ ɔl, ʃi kəd nɑt min tə hoʊld ɑn tə hɪm fɝɛvɝ. ɔl ðət ɹɪmeɪn ə hɪz oʊn wɝ ɪz hæɾ ən ðə blæk sɪlk skɑɹf taɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk. ən ðə sɪlvɝi fɑkshɛd mədæljən, ʌv kɔɹs, hæŋɪŋ ɑn ə lɛðɝ kɔɹɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ʃɝt. ən ɪz naɪvz; hi ɹɪli wʊɾə fɛlt lɔst wɪθaʊt ðoʊz. wən i faɪnəli mænədʒ tə kɹɔl aʊɾ ə ðət blʌɾi bɛd, ðə blʌɾi wʊmən hæd hæd nu kloʊðz meɪd fəɹ hɪm, wɪð əɹ sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ wɑtʃɪŋ ðə blʌɾi simstʃɹəsəz mɛʒɝ ən fɪt hɪm! snoʊi leɪs əɾ ɪz ɹɪsts ɔlmoʊs hɪɾ ɪz blʌɾi hænz ənlɛs i wɑz kɛɹfəl, ən mɔɹ spɪl fɹəm ɪz nɛk ɔlmoʊs tə hɪz fleɪmɪŋ weɪst. taɪlɪn laɪk leɪs ɑn ə mæn. hɪz kloʊk wɑz ə bɹɪljən skɑɹlət, əz ɹɛɾ əz ɪz tu-taɪt bɹitʃɪz, ən ɛdʒd wɪð ɡoʊldən skɹɑlwɝk ən waɪt ɹoʊzɪz, ʌv ɔl blʌɾi θɪŋz. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ə waɪɾ oʊvəl ɑn ɪz lɛft ʃoʊldɝ wɪð haʊs mɪtsoʊbɑɹz ɡɹin sɔɹɾ ən æŋkɝ. hɪz koʊt wɑz blu ɪnʌf fəɹ ə tɪŋkɝ, wɝkt ɪn ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊl tɛɹən meɪzɪz əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst ən daʊn ðə slivz fəɹ ɡʊd mɛʒɝ. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk ɹɪkɔlɪŋ wʌɾ i hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə ɡoʊ θɹu tə kənvɪns taɪlɪn tə liv ɔf ðə pɝlz ən sæfaɪɝz ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌɾ ɛls ʃi hæd wɑntəd. ən ɪt wɑz ʃɔɹt, tə but. ɪndɪsənli ʃɔɹt! taɪlɪn laɪkt ɪz blʌɾi bɑɾəm, tu, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə maɪn u sɔ ɪt!

He jerked erect, keeping his back to her. The heat in his face was pure outrage, but she was sure to say he was blushing. He could usually manage to forget what he was wearing unless someone brought it up. There had been an incident or three in taverns. While he was flat on his back with his leg in splints and his ribs strapped and bandages just about everywhere else, Tylin had hidden all of his clothes. He had not found where, yet, but surely they were hidden, not burned. After all, she could not mean to hold on to him forever. All that remained of his own were his hat and the black silk scarf tied around his neck. And the silvery foxhead medallion, of course, hanging on a leather cord under his shirt. And his knives; he really would have felt lost without those. When he finally managed to crawl out of that bloody bed, the bloody woman had had new clothes made for him, with her sitting there watching the bloody seamstresses measure and fit him! Snowy lace at his wrists almost hid his bloody hands unless he was careful, and more spilled from his neck almost to his flaming waist. Tylin liked lace on a man. His cloak was a brilliant scarlet, as red as his too-tight breeches, and edged with golden scrollwork and white roses, of all bloody things. Not to mention a white oval on his left shoulder with House Mitsobar's green Sword and Anchor. His coat was blue enough for a Tinker, worked in red and gold Tairen mazes across the chest and down the sleeves for good measure. He did not like recalling what he had been forced to go through to convince Tylin to leave off the pearls and sapphires and the Light alone knew what else she had wanted. And it was short, to boot. Indecently short! Tylin liked his bloody bottom, too, and she did not seem to mind who saw it!

sɛɾəlɪŋ ðə kloʊk ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz - ɪt wɑz səm kʌvɝɪŋ, ət list - hi ɡɹæbd ɪz ʃoʊldɝ-haɪ wɔkɪŋ stæf fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt wɑz linɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ. hɪz hɪp ən lɛɡ wɝ gɑnə eɪk əntɪl i kəd wɔk ðə peɪn əweɪ. "ɪn tu əɹ θɹi deɪz, ðɛn," hi sɛd wɪð əz mʌtʃ dɪɡnəɾi əz i kəd mʌstɝ.

Settling the cloak around his shoulders - it was some covering, at least - he grabbed his shoulder-high walking staff from where it was leaning beside the door. His hip and leg were going to ache until he could walk the pain away. "In two or three days, then," he said with as much dignity as he could muster.

ɑlʌdʒɹə læf sɔfli. nɑt sɔfli ɪnʌf ðəɾ i kəd nɑt hɪɹ, ðoʊ. laɪt, bʌɾ ə wʊmən kəd də mɔɹ wɪð ə læf ðən ə dɑksaɪd bʊlɪbɔɪ wɪð ə stʃɹɪŋ ə kɝsɪz! ən dʒʌst əz dɪlɪbɝətli.

Aludra laughed softly. Not softly enough that he could not hear, though. Light, but a woman could do more with a laugh than a dockside bullyboy with a string of curses! And just as deliberately.

lɪmpɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə wæɡən, hi slæm ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ɪm əz sun əz i wɑz fɑɹ ɪnʌf daʊn ðə wʊɾən stɛps ðət wɝ fæsən tə ðə wæɡən bɛd. ði æftɝnun skaɪ wɑz dʒʌs laɪk ðə mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ hæd bɪn, ɡɹeɪ ən blʌstɝi, θætʃt wɪð sʌlən klaʊdz. ə ʃɑɹp wɪnd ɡʌstɪd fɪtfəli. ɔltɑɹə hæd noʊ tʃɹu wɪntɝ, bʌt wʌɾ ɪt dɪɾ əv wɑz ɪnʌf tə bi ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn wɪð. ɹæðɝ ðən snoʊ, ðəɹ wɝ aɪsi ɹeɪnz ən θʌndɝstɔɹmz ɹeɪsɪŋ ɪn ɔf ðə si, ən ɪn bɪtwin ɪt wɑz dæmp ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə koʊl sim hɑɹɾɝ. ðə ɡɹaʊn hæɾ ə sɑɾən fil ʌndɝ jəɹ buts ivən wən ɪt wɑz dʒɹaɪ. skaʊlɪŋ, hi hɑbəld əweɪ fɹəm ðə wæɡən.

Limping out of the wagon, he slammed the door behind him as soon as he was far enough down the wooden steps that were fastened to the wagon bed. The afternoon sky was just like the morning sky had been, gray and blustery, thatched with sullen clouds. A sharp wind gusted fitfully. Altara had no true winter, but what it did have was enough to be going on with. Rather than snow, there were icy rains and thunderstorms racing in off the sea, and in between it was damp enough to make the cold seem harder. The ground had a sodden feel under your boots even when it was dry. Scowling, he hobbled away from the wagon.

wɪmən! ɑlʌdʒɹə wɑz pɹɪɾi, ðoʊ. ən ʃi dɪd noʊ haʊ tə meɪk faɪɹwɝks. ə bɛlfndɝ? meɪbi hi kəd meɪk ɪɾ ə ʃɔɹt tu deɪz. soʊ lɔŋ əz ɑlʌdʒɹə dɪd nɑt stɑɹt tʃeɪsɪŋ hɪm. ə ɡʊd mɛni wɪmən sim tə bi duɪŋ ðæt, ʌv leɪt. hæd taɪlɪn tʃeɪnʒd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm, tə meɪk wɪmən pɝsu hɪm ðə weɪ ʃi hɝsɛlf dɪd? noʊ. ðət wɑz ɹɪdɪkjələs. ðə wɪn kɑɾ ɪz kloʊk, flɛɹɪŋ ɪt bɪhaɪn hɪm, bʌɾ i wɑz tu əbzɔɹb tə mæstɝ ɪt. ə pɛɹ ə slɛndɝ wɪmən - ækɹəbæts, hi θɔt - ɡeɪv ɪm slaɪ smaɪlz əz ðeɪ pæst, ən i smaɪld ən meɪɾ ɪz bɛs lɛɡ. taɪlɪn hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd hɪm. hi wɑz stɪl ðə seɪm mæn i hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn.

Women! Aludra was pretty, though. And she did know how to make fireworks. A bellfounder? Maybe he could make it a short two days. So long as Aludra did not start chasing him. A good many women seemed to be doing that, of late. Had Tylin changed something about him, to make women pursue him the way she herself did? No. That was ridiculous. The wind caught his cloak, flaring it behind him, but he was too absorbed to master it. A pair of slender women - acrobats, he thought - gave him sly smiles as they passed, and he smiled and made his best leg. Tylin had not changed him. He was still the same man he had always been.

lukəz ʃoʊ wɑz fɪfti taɪmz əz lɑɹdʒ əz wʌt tɑm hæd toʊld ɪm əbaʊt, meɪbi mɔɹ, ə spɹɔlɪŋ hɑdʒpɑdʒ ə tɛns ən wæɡənz ðə saɪz ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ vɪlədʒ. dɪspaɪt ðə wɛðɝ, ə nʌmbɝ ə pɝfɔɹmɝz wɝ pɹæktəsɪŋ wɛɹ i kəd si ðɛm. ə wʊmən ɪn ə floʊɪŋ waɪt blaʊs ən bɹitʃɪz əz taɪɾ əz ɪz swʌŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ ɑn ə sæɡɪŋ ɹoʊp slʌŋ bɪtwin tu tɔl poʊlz, ðən θɹu hɝsɛlf ɔf ən sʌmhaʊ kɑɾ əɹ fiɾ ɪn ðə ɹoʊp dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ʃi hɝɾəld tə ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪloʊ. ðən ʃi twɪstəd tə kætʃ ðə ɹoʊp wɪð əɹ hænz, pʊl hɝsɛlf bæk tə hɝ siɾ ən bɪɡæn ðə seɪm θɪŋ əɡɛn. nɑt fɑɹ ɔf, ə fɛloʊ wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ ɑn tɑp ʌv ən ɛɡ-ʃeɪpt wil ðət mʌst əv bɪn ə ɡʊd twɛnti fit lɔŋ, maʊntəɾ ɑn ə plætfɔɹm ðət pʊɾ ɪm haɪɝ əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd wən i dæʃt əkɹɔs ðə nɛɹoʊ ɛn ðən ðə wʊmən u wɑz gɑnə bɹeɪk əɹ ful nɛk sun. mæt aɪɾ ə bɛɹ-tʃɛstəd mæn u wɑz ɹoʊlɪŋ θɹi ʃaɪni bɔlz əlɔŋ ɪz ɑɹmz ən əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɝ tʌtʃɪŋ əm wɪð ɪz hænz. ðət wɑz ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ. hi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə mænədʒ ðət hɪmsɛlf. ət lis ðoʊz bɔlz wəd nɑt liv jə bliɾɪŋ ən bɹoʊkən. hi hæd hæɾ ɪnʌf ə ðət tə suɾ ɪm ə laɪftaɪm.

Luca's show was fifty times as large as what Thom had told him about, maybe more, a sprawling hodgepodge of tents and wagons the size of a large village. Despite the weather, a number of performers were practicing where he could see them. A woman in a flowing white blouse and breeches as tight as his swung back and forth on a sagging rope slung between two tall poles, then threw herself off and somehow caught her feet in the rope just before she hurtled to the ground below. Then she twisted to catch the rope with her hands, pulled herself back to her seat and began the same thing again. Not far off, a fellow was running on top of an egg-shaped wheel that must have been a good twenty feet long, mounted on a platform that put him higher above the ground when he dashed across the narrow end than the woman who was going to break her fool neck soon. Mat eyed a bare-chested man who was rolling three shiny balls along his arms and across his shoulders without ever touching them with his hands. That was interesting. He might be able to manage that himself. At least those balls would not leave you bleeding and broken. He had had enough of that to suit him a lifetime.

wʌt ɹɪli kɑɾ ɪz aɪz, haʊɛvɝ, wɝ ðə hɔɹslaɪnz. lɔŋ hɔɹslaɪnz, wɛɹ tu dʌzən mɛn bʌndəld əɡɛns ðə koʊld wɝ ʃʌvlɪŋ dʌŋ ɪndə bæɹoʊz. hʌnʒɹədz ə hɔɹsəz. səpoʊzədli, lukə hæd ɡɪvən ʃɛltɝ tə səm sintʃæn ænəməl tʃɹeɪnɝ, ən ɪz ɹɪwɔɹd hæd bɪn ə wɔɹənt, saɪn baɪ ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ hɝsɛlf, əlaʊɪŋ ɪm tə kip ɔl ə hɪz ænəməlz. mæts oʊn pɪps wɑz sɪkjʊɹ, seɪv fɹəm ðə lɑɾɝi ɔɹɾɝd baɪ sjuɹɔθ kəz i wɑz ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs steɪbəlz, bʌt ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə ɡɛldɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðoʊz steɪbəlz wɑz bɪɑn hɪm. taɪlɪn əz ɡʊɾ əz hæɾ ə liʃ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, ən ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ ɛni taɪm sun.

What really caught his eyes, however, were the horselines. Long horselines, where two dozen men bundled against the cold were shoveling dung into barrows. Hundreds of horses. Supposedly, Luca had given shelter to some Seanchan animal trainer, and his reward had been a warrant, signed by the High Lady Suroth herself, allowing him to keep all of his animals. Mat's own Pips was secure, saved from the lottery ordered by Suroth because he was in the Tarasin Palace stables, but getting the gelding out of those stables was beyond him. Tylin as good as had a leash around his neck, and she did not intend to let him go any time soon.

tɝnɪŋ əweɪ, hi kənsɪɾɝd hævɪŋ veɪnɪn stil səm ə ðə ʃoʊz hɔɹsəz ɪf ðə tɔks wɪð lukə wɛn bædli. fɹəm wʌt mæt nu ʌv veɪnɪn, ɪt wəd bi ən ivnɪŋ stʃɹoʊl fəɹ ði ənlaɪkli mæn. fæɾ əz i wɑz, veɪnɪn kəd stil, ən ɹaɪd, ɛni hɔɹs ɛvɝ foʊəld. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, mæt daʊɾɪd i hɪmsɛlf kəd sɪɾ ə sæɾəl fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ə maɪl. stɪl, ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tə kənsɪɾɝ. hi wɑz ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɛspɹɪt.

Turning away, he considered having Vanin steal some of the show's horses if the talks with Luca went badly. From what Mat knew of Vanin, it would be an evening stroll for the unlikely man. Fat as he was, Vanin could steal, and ride, any horse ever foaled. Unfortunately, Mat doubted he himself could sit a saddle for more than a mile. Still, it was something to consider. He was growing desperate.

lɪmpɪŋ əlɔŋ, aɪdli aɪɪŋ tʌmblɝz ən dʒʌɡəlɝz ən ækɹəbæts ət ðɛɹ pɹæktəs, hi wʌndɝd haʊ mæɾɝz hæd kʌm tə ðɪs pæs. blʌɾ ən æʃəz! hi wɑz tɑvɝən! hi wɑz səpoʊz tə ʃeɪp ðə wɝld ɝaʊn hɪm! bʌt hɪɹ i wɑz, stʌk ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, taɪlɪnz pɛɾ ən tɔɪ - ðə wʊmən hæd nɑɾ ivən lɛɾ ɪm hil kəmplitli bɪfɔɹ lipɪŋ ɑn ɪm əɡɛn laɪk ə dʌk ɑn ə biɾəl! - waɪl ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɑz hævɪŋ ə faɪn taɪm ʌv ɪt. wɪð ðoʊz kɪnswɪmən fɔnɪŋ əɾ əɹ hilz, laɪkli nɪneɪiv wɑz lɔɹɾɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn saɪt. wʌns ɛɡwin ɹilaɪz ðoʊz stɑɹk ɹeɪvɪŋ mæɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd neɪmd əɹ æmɪɝlɪn dɪd nɑt ɹɪli min ɪt, tælmɑnz ən ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd wɝ ɹɛɾi tə spɪɹəɾ əɹ əweɪ. laɪt, ɪleɪn maɪt bi wɛɹɪŋ ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn baɪ naʊ, ɪf i nu hɝ! ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn pɹɑbli wɝ lɑlɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə faɪɝ ɪn səm pæləs, swɪlɪŋ waɪn ən tɛlɪŋ dʒoʊks.

Limping along, idly eyeing tumblers and jugglers and acrobats at their practice, he wondered how matters had come to this pass. Blood and ashes! He was ta'veren! He was supposed to shape the world around him! But here he was, stuck in Ebou Dar, Tylin's pet and toy - the woman had not even let him heal completely before leaping on him again like a duck on a beetle! - while everyone else was having a fine time of it. With those Kinswomen fawning at her heels, likely Nynaeve was lording it over everyone in sight. Once Egwene realized those stark raving mad Aes Sedai who had named her Amyrlin did not really mean it, Talmanes and the Band of the Red Hand were ready to spirit her away. Light, Elayne might be wearing the Rose Crown by now, if he knew her! Rand and Perrin probably were lolling in front of a fire in some palace, swilling wine and telling jokes.

hi ɡɹɪməst ən ɹʌbd əɾ ɪz fɔɹhɛɾ əz ə feɪn ɹʌʃ ə kʌlɝz sim tə swɝl ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd. ðət hæpən leɪtli wɛnɛvɝ i θɔɾ əbaʊɾ iðɝ mæn. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ, ən i dɪd nɑt wɑnə noʊ. hi dʒʌst wɑntəɾ ɪt tə stɑp. ɪf oʊnli hi kəd ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ. ən teɪk ðə sikɹəɾ ə faɪɹwɝks wɪð hɪm, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ i wəd teɪk ɪskeɪp oʊvɝ ðə sikɹəɾ ɛni deɪ.

He grimaced and rubbed at his forehead as a faint rush of colors seemed to swirl inside his head. That happened lately whenever he thought about either man. He did not know why, and he did not want to know. He just wanted it to stop. If only he could get away from Ebou Dar. And take the secret of fireworks with him, of course, but he would take escape over the secret any day.

tɑm ən bɛslən wɝ stɪl wɛɹ i hæd lɛf ðɛm, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ wɪð lukə ɪn fɹʌn ə lukəz ɪlæbɹətli dɛkɝeɪɾəd wæɡən, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt dʒɔɪn əm ɪmiɾiətli. fəɹ səm ɹizən, lukə hæd teɪkən ən ɪnstən dɪslaɪk tə mæt kɔθən. mæt ɹɪtɝn ðə feɪvɝ, bʌt wɪð ɹizən. lukə hæɾ ə smʌɡ, sɛlf-sæɾəsfaɪd feɪs, ən ə weɪ ʌv smɝkɪŋ əɾ ɛni wʊmən ɪn saɪt. ən i sim tə θɪŋk ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪn ðə wɝld ɛndʒɔɪd lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. laɪt, ðə mæn wɑz mɛɹid!

Thom and Beslan were still where he had left them, drinking with Luca in front of Luca's elaborately decorated wagon, but he did not join them immediately. For some reason, Luca had taken an instant dislike to Mat Cauthon. Mat returned the favor, but with reason. Luca had a smug, self-satisfied face, and a way of smirking at any woman in sight. And he seemed to think every woman in the world enjoyed looking at him. Light, the man was married!

spɹɔld ɪn ə ɡɪldɪd tʃɛɹ i mʌst əv stoʊlən fɹəm ə pæləs, lukə wɑz læfɪŋ ən meɪkɪŋ ɪkspænsɪv, lɔɹdli dʒɛstʃɝz tə tɑm ən bɛslən, siɾəd ɑn bɛntʃɪz tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm. ɡoʊldən stɑɹz ən kɑməts kʌvɝd lukəz bɹɪljən ɹɛd koʊɾ ən kloʊk. eɪ tɪŋkɝ wəɾ əv blʌʃt! hɪz wæɡən wʊɾə meɪɾ ə tɪŋkɝ wip! mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ɑlʌdʒɹəz wɝk-wæɡən, ðə θɪŋ əpɪɹd tə hæv bɪn lækɝd! ðə feɪzəz ə ðə mun ɹɪpiɾɪd ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn sɪlvɝ ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn ðə wæɡən, ən ɡoʊldən stɑɹz ən kɑməts ɪn ɛvɹi saɪz kʌvɝd ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹɛd-ænd-blu sɝfəs. ɪn ðət sɛɾɪŋ, bɛslən lʊkt ɔlmoʊst ɔɹɾənɛɹi ɪn ə koʊɾ ən kloʊk wɝkt ɪn swupɪŋ bɝdz. tɑm, nʌklɪŋ waɪn fɹəm ɪz lɔŋ waɪt mʌstæʃɪz, sim pɑzəɾɪvli dʒɹæb ɪn pleɪn bɹɑnz-kʌlɝd wʊl ən ə dɑɹk kloʊk.

Sprawled in a gilded chair he must have stolen from a palace, Luca was laughing and making expansive, lordly gestures to Thom and Beslan, seated on benches to either side of him. Golden stars and comets covered Luca's brilliant red coat and cloak. A Tinker would have blushed! His wagon would have made a Tinker weep! Much larger than Aludra's work-wagon, the thing appeared to have been lacquered! The phases of the moon repeated themselves in silver all the way around the wagon, and golden stars and comets in every size covered the rest of the red-and-blue surface. In that setting, Beslan looked almost ordinary in a coat and cloak worked in swooping birds. Thom, knuckling wine from his long white mustaches, seemed positively drab in plain bronze-colored wool and a dark cloak.

wʌn pɝsən u ʃʊɾə bɪn ðəɹ wɑz nɑt, bʌɾ ə kwɪk ɡlæns ɝaʊn faʊn ə klʌstɝ ʌv wɪmən əɾ ə nɪɹbaɪ wæɡən. ðeɪ wɝ ɛvɹi eɪdʒ fɹəm ɪz oʊn ʌp tə ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ, bʌɾ ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm wɑz ɡɪɡəlɪŋ ət wʌt ðeɪ sɝaʊndəd. saɪɪŋ, mæt meɪɾ ɪz weɪ ðɛɹ.

One person who should have been there was not, but a quick glance around found a cluster of women at a nearby wagon. They were every age from his own up to graying hair, but every one of them was giggling at what they surrounded. Sighing, Mat made his way there.

"oʊ, aɪ dʒʌs kænɑt dɪsaɪd," keɪm ə bɔɪz paɪpɪŋ vɔɪs fɹəm ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə wɪmən. "wɛn aɪ lʊk ət ju, mɛɝitʃi, jəɹ aɪz ɑɹ ðə pɹɪɾiəst aɪ hæv ɛvɝ sin. bʌt wən aɪ lʊk ət ju, nilɪn, jʊɹz ɑɹ. jəɹ lɪps ɑɹ ɹaɪp tʃɛɹiz, ɡɪlɪn, ən jʊɹz meɪk mi wɑnə kɪs ðɛm, ɑdʒɹiə. ən jəɹ nɛk, dʒəmaɪn, ɡɹeɪsfəl əz ə swɑnz. . . ."

"Oh, I just cannot decide," came a boy's piping voice from the center of the women. "When I look at you, Merici, your eyes are the prettiest I have ever seen. But when I look at you, Neilyn, yours are. Your lips are ripe cherries, Gillin, and yours make me want to kiss them, Adria. And your neck, Jameine, graceful as a swan's. . . ."

swɑloʊɪŋ ən oʊθ, mæt kwɪkən ɪz peɪs əz mʌtʃ əz i kəɾ ən pʊʃt θɹu ðə wɪmən mʌɾɝɪŋ əpɑlədʒiz lɛft ən ɹaɪt. oʊlvɝ wɑz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðɛm, ə ʃɔɹt, peɪl bɔɪ pɑstʃɝɪŋ ən ɡɹɪnɪŋ ət wʌn wʊmən ðən ənʌðɝ. ðət tuθi ɡɹɪn əloʊn wɑz ɪnʌf ðəɾ ɛni ʌv əm maɪt dɪsaɪd tə slæp ɪz ɪɹz ɔf ɪn ə moʊmənt.

Swallowing an oath, Mat quickened his pace as much as he could and pushed through the women muttering apologies left and right. Olver was in the middle of them, a short, pale boy posturing and grinning at one woman then another. That toothy grin alone was enough that any of them might decide to slap his ears off in a moment.

"pliz fɝɡɪv hɪm," mæt mɝmɝd, teɪkɪŋ ðə bɔɪz hænd. "kʌm ɑn, oʊlvɝ; wɪv tə ɡɛt bæk tə ðə sɪɾi. stɑp weɪvɪŋ jəɹ kloʊk əbaʊt. hi dʌznt noʊ wʌt hiz seɪɪŋ, ɹɪli. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ i pɪks ʌp ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ."

"Please forgive him," Mat murmured, taking the boy's hand. "Come on, Olver; we have to get back to the city. Stop waving your cloak about. He doesn't know what he's saying, really. I don't know where he picks up that sort of thing."

lʌkəli, ðə wɪmən læft ən ɹʌfəld oʊlvɝz hɛɹ əz mæt lɛɾ ɪm əweɪ. səm mɝmɝd ðəɾ i wɑz ə swit bɔɪ, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz! wʌn slɪpt əɹ hæn ʌndɝ mæts kloʊk ən pɪntʃt ɪz bɑɾəm. wɪmən!

Luckily, the women laughed and ruffled Olver's hair as Mat led him away. Some murmured that he was a sweet boy, of all things! One slipped her hand under Mat's cloak and pinched his bottom. Women!

wʌns klɪɹ, hi skaʊld ət ðə bɔɪ tʃɹɪpɪŋ əlɔŋ hæpəli əɾ ɪz saɪd. oʊlvɝ hæd ɡɹoʊn sɪns mæt fɝs mɛt hɪm, bʌɾ i wɑz stɪl ʃɔɹt fəɹ ɪz jɪɹz. ən wɪð ðət waɪd maʊθ ən ɪɹz tə mætʃ, hi wəd nɛvɝ bi hænsəm. "ju kəd ɡɛt jɝsɛlf ɪn dip tʃɹʌbəl tɔkɪŋ tə wɪmən ðət weɪ," mæt toʊl hɪm. "wɪmən laɪk ə mæn tə bi kwaɪət, ən wɛl-mænɝd. ən ɹɪzɝvd. ɹɪzɝvd, ən meɪbi ə lɪɾəl ʃaɪ. kʌltəveɪt ðoʊz kwɑləɾiz, ən jəl də wɛl."

Once clear, he scowled at the boy tripping along happily at his side. Olver had grown since Mat first met him, but he was still short for his years. And with that wide mouth and ears to match, he would never be handsome. "You could get yourself in deep trouble talking to women that way," Mat told him. "Women like a man to be quiet, and well-mannered. And reserved. Reserved, and maybe a little shy. Cultivate those qualities, and you'll do well."

oʊlvɝ ɡeɪv ɪm ə ɡeɪpɪŋ, ɪnkɹɛdʒələs stɛɹ, ən mæt saɪd. ðə læd hæɾ ə fɪsfəl ʌv ʌŋkəlz lʊkɪŋ æftɝ hɪm, ən ɛvɹi wʌn ɪksɛp mæt hɪmsɛlf wɑz ə bæɾ ɪnfluəns.

Olver gave him a gaping, incredulous stare, and Mat sighed. The lad had a fistful of uncles looking after him, and every one except Mat himself was a bad influence.

tɑm ən bɛslən wɝ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪstɔɹ oʊlvɝz ɡɹɪn. pʊlɪŋ ɪz hæn fɹi, hi ɹæn əhɛd tə ðɛm læfɪŋ. tɑm wɑz titʃɪŋ ɪm haʊ tə dʒʌɡəl ən pleɪ ðə hɑɹp ən ðə flut, ən bɛslən wɑz titʃɪŋ ɪm haʊ tə juz ə sɔɹd. hɪz ʌðɝ "ʌŋkəlz" ɡeɪv ɪm ʌðɝ lɛsənz, ɪn ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbli vɛɹid sɛɾ ə skɪlz. mæt ɪntɛndəd tə stɑɹt titʃɪŋ ɪm tə juz ə kɔɹɾɝstæf, ən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz baʊ, wʌns i hæɾ ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ bæk. wʌt ðə bɔɪ wɑz lɝnɪŋ fɹəm tʃəl veɪnɪn, əɹ ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz, mæt dɪd nɑt wɑnə noʊ.

Thom and Beslan were enough to restore Olver's grin. Pulling his hand free, he ran ahead to them laughing. Thom was teaching him how to juggle and play the harp and the flute, and Beslan was teaching him how to use a sword. His other "uncles" gave him other lessons, in a remarkably varied set of skills. Mat intended to start teaching him to use a quarterstaff, and the Two Rivers bow, once he had his strength back. What the boy was learning from Chel Vanin, or the Redarms, Mat did not want to know.

lukə ɹoʊz fɹəm ɪz fænsi tʃɛɹ ət mæts əpɹoʊtʃ, hɪz fætʃəwəs smaɪl feɪɾɪŋ tə ə saʊɝ ɡɹɪmɑs. aɪɪŋ mæt ʌp ən daʊn, hi swɛp ðət ɹɪdɪkjələs kloʊk ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf wɪð ə waɪd flɝɪʃ ən ənaʊnst ɪn ə bumɪŋ vɔɪs, "aɪ æm ə bɪzi mæn. aɪ hæv mʌtʃ tə du. ɪt meɪ bi ðəɾ aɪ sun wɪl əv ði ɑnɝ ʌv ɡɛstɪŋ ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ fəɹ ə pɹaɪvət ʃoʊɪŋ." wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝɾ i stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ hoʊldɪŋ ði ɔɹneɪt kloʊk wɪð dʒʌst wʌn hænd, soʊ ɡʌsts ɹɪpəld ɪt bɪhaɪn ɪm laɪk ə bænɝ.

Luca rose from his fancy chair at Mat's approach, his fatuous smile fading to a sour grimace. Eyeing Mat up and down, he swept that ridiculous cloak around himself with a wide flourish and announced in a booming voice, "I am a busy man. I have much to do. It may be that I soon will have the honor of guesting the High Lady Suroth for a private showing." Without another word he strode away holding the ornate cloak with just one hand, so gusts rippled it behind him like a banner.

mæt ɡæðɝɾ ɪz oʊn wɪð boʊθ hænz. ə kloʊk wɑz fəɹ wɔɹmθ. hi hæd sin sjuɹɔθ ɪn ðə pæləs, ðoʊ nɛvɝ kloʊsli. əz kloʊsli əz i wɑntəd, ðoʊ. hi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən əɹ ɡɪvɪŋ ə moʊmən tə vɑlən lukəz ɡɹæn tʃɹævlɪŋ ʃoʊ ən mæɡnɪfəsən dɪspleɪ ʌv mɑɹvəlz ən wʌndɝz, əz ðə stʃɹimɝ stʃɹʌŋ bɪtwin tu tɔl poʊlz ət ði ɛntʃɹəns tə ðə ʃoʊ ənaʊnst ɪn ɹɛd lɛɾɝz ə peɪs haɪ. ɪf ʃi dɪd, laɪkli ʃi wəɾ it ðə laɪənz. əɹ fɹaɪɾən əm tə dɛθ.

Mat gathered his own with both hands. A cloak was for warmth. He had seen Suroth in the Palace, though never closely. As closely as he wanted, though. He could not imagine her giving a moment to Valan Luca's Grand Traveling Show and Magnificent Display of Marvels and Wonders, as the streamer strung between two tall poles at the entrance to the show announced in red letters a pace high. If she did, likely she would eat the lions. Or frighten them to death.

"hæz i əɡɹid jɛt, tɑm?" hi æskt kwaɪətli, fɹaʊnɪŋ æftɝ lukə.

"Has he agreed yet, Thom?" he asked quietly, frowning after Luca.

"wi kən tʃɹævəl wɪð ɪm wən i livz ɛbu dɑɹ," ðə wɛðɝd mæn ɹɪplaɪd. "fɔɹ ə pɹaɪs." hi snɔɹɾɪd, bloʊɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz, ən ɪɹɪɾəbli ɹeɪkt ə hæn θɹu hɪz waɪt hɛɹ. "wi ʃəɾ iɾ ən slip laɪk kɪŋz fəɹ wʌɾ i wɑns, bʌt noʊɪŋ hɪm, aɪ daʊt wi wɪl. hi dʌzn θɪŋk wəɹ kɹɪmənəlz, sɪns wɝ stɪl wɔkɪŋ fɹi, bʌɾ i noʊz wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm sʌmθɪŋ, əɹ wi wəd tʃɹævəl səm ʌðɝ weɪ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, hi dʌz nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə liv əntɪl spɹɪŋ ət ði ɝliəst."

"We can travel with him when he leaves Ebou Dar," the weathered man replied. "For a price." He snorted, blowing out his mustaches, and irritably raked a hand through his white hair. "We should eat and sleep like kings for what he wants, but knowing him, I doubt we will. He doesn't think we are criminals, since we're still walking free, but he knows we're running from something, or we would travel some other way. Unfortunately, he does not intend to leave until spring at the earliest."

mæt kənsɪɾɝd sɛvɹəl tʃɔɪs kɝsɪz. nɑɾ əntɪl spɹɪŋ. ðə laɪt nu wʌt taɪlɪn wʊɾə dʌn tə hɪm, wəɾ əv ɪm duɪŋ, baɪ spɹɪŋ. meɪbi veɪnɪn stilɪŋ hɔɹsəz wɑz nɑt sətʃ ə bæd noʊʃən. "ɡɪvz mi mɔɹ taɪm fəɹ daɪs," hi sɛd, əz ɪf ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. "ɪf i wɑns əz mʌtʃ əz jə seɪ, aɪ nid tə fæɾən maɪ pɝs. wʌn θɪŋ jə kən seɪ fəɹ ðə sintʃæn, ðeɪ doʊn sim tə maɪn luzɪŋ." hi tʃɹaɪd tə bi kɛɹfəl haʊ lɔŋ i lɛɾ ɪz lʌk ɹʌn, ən i hæd nɑt feɪst ɛni θɹɛts ə hævɪŋ ɪz θɹoʊt slɪt fəɹ tʃiɾɪŋ, ət list sɪns i hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə liv ðə pæləs ɑn ɪz oʊn fit. ət fɝst, hi hæd bɪlivd ɪt wɑz ɪz lʌk spɹɛɾɪŋ, əɹ pɝhæps biɪŋ tɑvɝən faɪnəli kʌmɪŋ ɪn fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ jusfəl.

Mat considered several choice curses. Not until spring. The Light knew what Tylin would have done to him, would have him doing, by spring. Maybe Vanin stealing horses was not such a bad notion. "Gives me more time for dice," he said, as if it did not matter. "If he wants as much as you say, I need to fatten my purse. One thing you can say for the Seanchan, they don't seem to mind losing." He tried to be careful how long he let his luck run, and he had not faced any threats of having his throat slit for cheating, at least since he had been able to leave the Palace on his own feet. At first, he had believed it was his luck spreading, or perhaps being ta'veren finally coming in for something useful.

bɛslən ɹəɡɑɹɾəd ɪm ɡɹeɪvli. ə dɑɹk slɛndɝ mæn ə lɪɾəl jʌŋɡɝ ðən mæt, hi hæd bɪn blaɪθli ɹeɪkɪʃ wən mæt fɝs mɛt hɪm, ɔlweɪz ɹɛɾi fəɹ ə ɹaʊn ə ðə tævɝnz, ɪspɛʃli ɪf ɪɾ ɛndəd wɪð wɪmən əɹ ə faɪt. sɪns ðə sintʃæn keɪm, hi hæd ɡɹoʊn mɔɹ sɪɹiəs, ðoʊ. tə hɪm, ðeɪ wɝ vɛɹi sɪɹiəs bɪznəs. "maɪ mʌðɝ woʊn bi plizd ɪf ʃi lɝnz aɪm hɛlpɪŋ əɹ pɹɪɾi liv ɛbu dɑɹ, mæt. ʃɪl mɛɹi mi tə sʌmwʌn wɪð ə skwɪn ən ə mʌstæʃ laɪk ə tæɹɑbənɝ fʊt soʊlʒɝ."

Beslan regarded him gravely. A dark slender man a little younger than Mat, he had been blithely rakish when Mat first met him, always ready for a round of the taverns, especially if it ended with women or a fight. Since the Seanchan came, he had grown more serious, though. To him, they were very serious business. "My mother won't be pleased if she learns I am helping her pretty leave Ebou Dar, Mat. She will marry me to someone with a squint and a mustache like a Taraboner foot soldier."

æftɝ ɔl ðɪs taɪm, mæt stɪl wɪnst. hi kəd nɛvɝ ɡɛt juz tə taɪlɪnz sʌn θɪŋkɪŋ wʌɾ ɪz mʌðɝ wɑz duɪŋ wɪð mæt wɑz ɔl ɹaɪt. wɛl, bɛslən dɪd bɪliv ʃi hæd bɪkʌm ə lɪɾəl tu pəzɛsɪv - dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl, maɪnd! - bʌt ðət wɑz ði oʊnli ɹizən i wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə hɛlp. bɛslən kleɪmd mæt wɑz wʌɾ ɪz mʌðɝ niɾəd tə teɪk əɹ maɪn ɔf ði əɡɹiməns ʃi hæd bɪn fɔɹst ɪndə baɪ ðə sintʃæn! səmtaɪmz, mæt wɪʃt i wɑz bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, wɛɹ ət lis jə nu haʊ ʌðɝ pipəl θɔt. səmtaɪmz i dɪd.

After all this time, Mat still winced. He could never get used to Tylin's son thinking what his mother was doing with Mat was all right. Well, Beslan did believe she had become a little too possessive - just a little, mind! - but that was the only reason he was willing to help. Beslan claimed Mat was what his mother needed to take her mind off the agreements she had been forced into by the Seanchan! Sometimes, Mat wished he was back in the Two Rivers, where at least you knew how other people thought. Sometimes he did.

"kæn wi ɹɪtɝn tə ðə pæləs naʊ?" oʊlvɝ sɛd, mɔɹ ə dɪmæn ðən ə kwɛstʃən. "aɪ hæv ə ɹɛɾɪŋ lɛsən wɪð ðə leɪɾi ɹaɪzɛl. ʃi lɛts mi ɹɛs maɪ hɛɾ ɑn əɹ bʊzəm waɪl ʃi ɹidz tə mi."

"Can we return to the Palace now?" Olver said, more a demand than a question. "I have a reading lesson with the Lady Riselle. She lets me rest my head on her bosom while she reads to me."

"ə noʊɾəbəl ətʃivmənt, oʊlvɝ," tɑm sɛd, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz tə haɪɾ ə smaɪl. linɪŋ kloʊsɝ tə ði ʌðɝ tu mɛn, hi pɪtʃt ɪz vɔɪs tə ɪskeɪp ðə bɔɪz ɪɹz. "ðə wʊmən meɪks mi pleɪ ðə hɑɹp fəɹ əɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɛts mi ɹɛs maɪ hɛɾ ɑn ðət mæɡnɪfəsən pɪloʊ."

"A notable achievement, Olver," Thom said, stroking his mustaches to hide a smile. Leaning closer to the other two men, he pitched his voice to escape the boy's ears. "The woman makes me play the harp for her before she lets me rest my head on that magnificent pillow."

"ɹaɪzɛl meɪks ɛvɹiwʌn ɛntɝteɪn əɹ fɝst," bɛslən tʃʌkəld ɪn ə noʊɪŋ weɪ, ən tɑm stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt.

"Riselle makes everyone entertain her first," Beslan chuckled in a knowing way, and Thom stared at him in astonishment.

mæt ɡɹoʊnd. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪz lɛɡ, ðɪs taɪm, əɹ ðə fæk ðəɾ ɛvɹi mæn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ sim tə bi tʃuzɪŋ ðə bʊzəm ðeɪ ɹɛstəd ðɛɹ hɛdz ɑn ɪksɛp fəɹ mæt kɔθən. ðoʊz blʌɾi daɪs hæd dʒʌst stɑɹɾəd tʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn. sʌmθɪŋ bæd wɑz kʌmɪŋ ɪz weɪ. sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi bæd.

Mat groaned. It was not his leg, this time, or the fact that every man in Ebou Dar seemed to be choosing the bosom they rested their heads on except for Mat Cauthon. Those bloody dice had just started tumbling in his head again. Something bad was coming his way. Something very bad.


tʃæptɝ sɪkstin


CHAPTER 16

ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪɾ ɪnkaʊntɝ


An Unexpected Encounter

ðə wɔk bæk tə ðə sɪɾi wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən tu maɪlz, əkɹɔs loʊ hɪlz ðət wɝk ði eɪk aʊɾ ə mæts lɛɡ ən pʊɾ ɪt bæk əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ tɑpt ə ɹaɪz ən sɔ ɛbu dɑɹ əhɛd, bɪhaɪn ɪts ɛkstʃɹævəɡənli θɪk, waɪt-plæstɝd wɔl ðət noʊ sidʒ kæɾəpʌlt hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə bɹeɪk daʊn. ðə sɪɾi wɪðɪn wɑz waɪt, tu, ðoʊ hɪɹ ən ðəɹ pɔɪntəd doʊmz bɔɹ θɪn stʃɹaɪps ə kʌlɝ. ðə waɪt-plæstɝd bɪldɪŋz, waɪt spaɪɹz ən taʊɝz, waɪt pæləsəz, ɡlimd ivən ɑn ə ɡɹeɪ wɪntɝ deɪ. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə taʊɝ ɛndəɾ ɪn ə dʒæɡd tɑp əɹ ə ɡæp ʃoʊd wɛɹ ə bɪldɪŋ hæd bɪn dɪstʃɹɔɪd, bʌɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðə sintʃæn kɑŋkwɛs hæɾ əkeɪʒən lɪɾəl dæmədʒ. ðeɪ hæd bɪn tu fæst, tu stʃɹɔŋ, ən ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə sɪɾi bɪfɔɹ mɔɹ ðən skæɾɝd ɹɪzɪstəns kəd fɔɹm.

The walk back to the city was better than two miles, across low hills that worked the ache out of Mat's leg and put it back again before they topped a rise and saw Ebou Dar ahead, behind its extravagantly thick, white-plastered wall that no siege catapult had ever been able to break down. The city within was white, too, though here and there pointed domes bore thin stripes of color. The white-plastered buildings, white spires and towers, white palaces, gleamed even on a gray winter day. Here and there a tower ended in a jagged top or a gap showed where a building had been destroyed, but in truth, the Seanchan conquest had occasioned little damage. They had been too fast, too strong, and in control of the city before more than scattered resistance could form.

sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, sətʃ tʃɹeɪɾ əz ðəɹ wɑz ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ hæd hɑɹdli fɔltɝd wɪð ðə sɪɾiz fɔl. ðə sintʃæn ɛnkɝɪdʒd ɪt, ðoʊ mɝtʃəns ən ʃɪp kæptənz ən kɹuz wɝ ɹikwaɪɝd tə teɪk ən oʊθ tə oʊbeɪ ðə fɔɹʌnɝz, əweɪt ðə ɹɪtɝn, ən sɝv ðoʊz u kʌm hoʊm. ɪn pɹæktəs, ðət mɛn lɑɹdʒli ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt jəɹ laɪf əz juʒəwəl, soʊ fju əbdʒɛktəd. ðə bɹɔd hɑɹbɝ wɑz mɔɹ kɹaʊɾəd wɪð ʃɪps ɛvɹi taɪm mæt lʊkt əɾ ɪt. ðɪs æftɝnun, ɪt simd i cʊɾə wɔk fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ pɹɑpɝ əkɹɔs tə ðə ɹæhəd, ə ɹʌf kɔɹɾɝ i wəd dʒʌst əz sun nɛvɝ ɹivɪzɪt. ɔfən ɪn ðə deɪz æftɝ i fɝs mænədʒ tə wɔk əɡɛn, hi hæd ɡɔn daʊn tə ðə dɑks tə stɛɹ. nɑɾ ət ðə vɛsəlz wɪð ɹɪb seɪlz əɹ ðə si foʊk ʃɪps ðət ðə sintʃæn wɝ ɹeɪ-ɹɪɡɪŋ ən mænɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ oʊn kɹuz, bʌɾ ət kɹæft flaɪɪŋ ðə ɡoʊldən biz ʌv ɪljən, əɹ ðə sɔɹɾ ən hæn ʌv ɑɹæd dumən, əɹ ðə kɹɛsəns ə tɛɹ. hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ dɪd. tədeɪ, hi bɛɹli ɡlæns təwɔɹd ðə hɑɹbɝ. ðoʊz daɪs spɪnɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd sim tə ɹɔɹ laɪk θʌndɝ. wʌtɛvɝ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən, hi vɛɹi mʌtʃ daʊɾɪd i wəd laɪk ɪt. hi sɛldəm dɪd, wən ðə daɪs ɡeɪv wɔɹnɪŋ.

Surprisingly, such trade as there was this time of year had hardly faltered with the city's fall. The Seanchan encouraged it, though merchants and ship captains and crews were required to take an oath to obey the Forerunners, await the Return, and serve Those Who Come Home. In practice, that meant largely going about your life as usual, so few objected. The broad harbor was more crowded with ships every time Mat looked at it. This afternoon, it seemed he could have walked from Ebou Dar proper across to the Rahad, a rough quarter he would just as soon never revisit. Often in the days after he first managed to walk again, he had gone down to the docks to stare. Not at the vessels with ribbed sails or the Sea Folk ships that the Seanchan were re-rigging and manning with their own crews, but at craft flying the Golden Bees of Illian, or the Sword and Hand of Arad Doman, or the Crescents of Tear. He no longer did. Today, he barely glanced toward the harbor. Those dice spinning in his head seemed to roar like thunder. Whatever was going to happen, he very much doubted he would like it. He seldom did, when the dice gave warning.

ðoʊ ə stɛɾi stʃɹim ə tʃɹæfɪk floʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾ ɑɹtʃt ɡeɪtweɪ, ən pipəl əfʊt sim tə bi skwizɪŋ θɹu tə ɡɛɾ ɪn, ə θɪk kɑləm ʌv wæɡənz ən ɑks-kɑɹts, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ bæk tə ðə ɹaɪz, wɑz weɪɾɪŋ tə ɛntɝ ən hɑɹdli muvɪŋ. ɛvɹiwʌn dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ ɑn ə hɔɹs wɑz sintʃæn, wɛðɝ wɪð skɪn əz dɑɹk əz wʌn ə ðə si foʊk əɹ peɪl əz ə kɛɹhinɪn, ən ðeɪ stʊɾ aʊt fəɹ mɔɹ ðən biɪŋ maʊntəd. səm ə ðə mɛn wɔɹ vəlumənəs tʃɹaʊzɝz ən ɑd, taɪt koʊts wɪð haɪ kɑlɝz ðət fɪt ðɛɹ nɛks snʌɡli ɹaɪt tə ðə tʃɪn ən ɹoʊz ə ʃaɪni mɛɾəl bʌɾənz daʊn ðə fɹʌnt, əɹ floʊɪŋ, ɪlæbɹətli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd koʊts ɔlmoʊst əz lɔŋ əz ə wʊmənz dʒɹɛs. ðeɪ wɝ ə ðə blʌd, əz wɝ ðə wɪmən ɪn stʃɹeɪnʒli kʌt ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛsəz ðət simd meɪɾ ə nɛɹoʊ plits, wɪð dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts kʌt tə ɪkspoʊz kʌlɝfli buɾɪd æŋkəlz ən waɪd slivz ðət hʌŋ tə ðɛɹ fiɾ ɪn ðə stɝəps. ə fju wɔɹ leɪs veɪlz ðət hɪɾ ɔl bʌt ðɛɹ aɪz, soʊ ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ nɑɾ ɪkspoʊz tə ðə loʊbɔɹn. moʊst ə ðə ɹaɪɾɝz baɪ fɑɹ, haʊɛvɝ, wɔɹ bɹaɪtli peɪntəɾ ɑɹmɝ ʌv oʊvɝlæpɪŋ pleɪts. səm ə ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ wɪmən, tu, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə tɛl wɪtʃ wɪð ðoʊz peɪntəd hɛlməts laɪk ðə hɛdz ə mɑnstʃɹəs ɪnsɛks. ət lis nʌn wɔɹ ðə blæk-ænd-ɹɛɾ ə ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd. ivən ʌðɝ sintʃæn sim nɝvəs ɝaʊn ðɛm, ən ðət wɑz ɪnʌf tə wɔɹn mæt tə wɔk waɪɾ ɝaʊn ðɛm.

Though a steady stream of traffic flowed out of the great arched gateway, and people afoot seemed to be squeezing through to get in, a thick column of wagons and ox-carts, stretching all the way back to the rise, was waiting to enter and hardly moving. Everyone departing on a horse was Seanchan, whether with skin as dark as one of the Sea Folk or pale as a Cairhienin, and they stood out for more than being mounted. Some of the men wore voluminous trousers and odd, tight coats with high collars that fit their necks snugly right to the chin and rows of shiny metal buttons down the front, or flowing, elaborately embroidered coats almost as long as a woman's dress. They were of the Blood, as were the women in strangely cut riding dresses that seemed made of narrow pleats, with divided skirts cut to expose colorfully booted ankles and wide sleeves that hung to their feet in the stirrups. A few wore lace veils that hid all but their eyes, so their faces were not exposed to the lowborn. Most of the riders by far, however, wore brightly painted armor of overlapping plates. Some of the soldiers were women, too, though there was no way to tell which with those painted helmets like the heads of monstrous insects. At least none wore the black-and-red of the Deathwatch Guard. Even other Seanchan seemed nervous around them, and that was enough to warn Mat to walk wide around them.

ɪn ɛni keɪs, nʌn ə ðə sintʃæn spɛɹd soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns fəɹ θɹi mɛn ən ə bɔɪ sloʊli wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə sɪɾi əlɔŋ ðə kɑləm ʌv weɪɾɪŋ kɑɹts ən wæɡənz. wɛl, ðə mɛn wɔk sloʊli. oʊlvɝ skɪpt. mæts lɛɡ wɑz sɛɾɪŋ ðɛɹ peɪs, bʌɾ i tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lɛt ði ʌðɝz si haʊ mʌtʃ i wɑz linɪŋ ɑn ɪz stæf. ðə daɪs juʒəwəli ənaʊnst ɪnsəɾənts i mænədʒ tə sɝvaɪv baɪ ðə skɪn ə hɪz tiθ, bæɾəlz, ə bɪldɪŋ dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɑn ɪz hɛd. taɪlɪn. hi dʒɹɛɾɪd wʌt wəd hæpən wən ðeɪ stɑp ðɪs taɪm.

In any case, none of the Seanchan spared so much as a glance for three men and a boy slowly walking toward the city along the column of waiting carts and wagons. Well, the men walked slowly. Olver skipped. Mat's leg was setting their pace, but he tried not to let the others see how much he was leaning on his staff. The dice usually announced incidents he managed to survive by the skin of his teeth, battles, a building dropping on his head. Tylin. He dreaded what would happen when they stopped this time.

nɪɹli ɔl ə ðə wæɡənz ən kɑɹts livɪŋ ðə sɪɾi hæd sintʃæn dʒɹaɪvɪŋ əɹ wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd, mɔɹ pleɪnli dʒɹɛs ðən ðoʊz ɑn hɔɹsəz, hɑɹdli pəkjuljɝ lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɔl, bʌt ðoʊz ɪn ðə weɪɾɪŋ laɪn wɝ mɔɹ laɪkli tə bɪlɔŋ tə ɛbu dɑɹi əɹ foʊk fɹəm ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ ɛɹiə, mɛn ɪn lɔŋ vɛsts, wɪmən wɪð ðɛɹ skɝts soʊn ʌp ɑn wʌn saɪd tə ɪkspoʊz ə stɑkɪnɡd lɛɡ əɹ kʌlɝfəl pɛɾikoʊts, ðɛɹ wæɡənz əz wɛl əz ðɛɹ kɑɹts pʊl baɪ ɑksən. aʊtləndɝz dɑɾəd ðə kɑləm, mɝtʃəns wɪð smɔl tʃɹeɪnz ə hɔɹs-dʒɹɔn wæɡənz. ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ tʃɹeɪɾ ɪn wɪntɝ hɪɹ ɪn ðə saʊθ ðən fɑɹðɝ nɔɹθ, wɛɹ mɝtʃəns hæd tə kəntɛnd wɪð snoʊ-kʌvɝd ɹoʊdz, ən ðeɪ keɪm fɹəm fɑɹ, səm ə ðɛm. ə staʊt dəmɑni wʊmən wɪð ə dɑɹk bjuɾi pætʃ ɑn əɹ kɑpɝ tʃik, ɹaɪɾɪŋ ðə lɛɾ ə fɔɹ wæɡənz, klʌtʃt əɹ flaʊɝd kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ ən skaʊld əɾ ə mæn faɪv wæɡənz əhɛɾ ə hɝ ɪn ðə laɪn, ə ɡɹisi-lʊkɪŋ fɛloʊ, haɪɾɪŋ lɔŋ θɪk mʌstæʃɪz bɪhaɪn ə tæɹɑbənɝ veɪl, bɪsaɪd ðə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝ. ə kəmpɛɾətɝ, noʊ daʊt. ə lin kændɔɹi wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ pɝl ɪn əɹ lɛft ɪɹ ən sɪlvɝ tʃeɪnz əkɹɔs əɹ tʃɛst sæɾ əɹ sæɾəl kɑmli, ɡlʌv hæn foʊldəɾ ɑn ðə pɑməl, meɪbi stɪl ʌnəwɛɹ ðəɾ əɹ ɡɹeɪ ɡɛldɪŋ ən əɹ wæɡən timz əlaɪk wəd bi pʊɾ ɪndə ðə lɑɾɝi wʌns ʃi wɑz ɪndə ðə sɪɾi. wʌn hɔɹs ɪn faɪv hæd bɪn teɪkən fɹəm loʊkəlz, ən soʊ əz nɑt tə dɪskɝɪdʒ tʃɹeɪd, wʌn ɪn tɛn fɹəm aʊtləndɝz. peɪd fɔɹ, tʃɹu, ən ə fɛɹ pɹaɪs ɪn ʌðɝ deɪz, bʌt nɑt nɪɹli wʌt ðə mɑɹkət wəd bɛɹ, ɡɪvən ðə dɪmænd. mæt ɔlweɪz noʊɾəst hɔɹsəz, ivən ɪf wɪð oʊnli hæf ɪz maɪn əɹ lɛs. ə fæt kɛɹhinɪn ɪn ə koʊɾ əz dʒɹæb əz ðoʊz ə hɪz wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ æŋɡɹəli əbaʊt ðə dɪleɪ ən lɛɾɪŋ ɪz faɪn beɪ mɛɹ dæns nɝvəsli. ə vɛɹi ɡʊd kənfɝmeɪʃən ɑn ðət mɛɹ. ʃi wəd ɡoʊ tə ən ɔfəsɝ, moʊs laɪkli. wʌt wɑz gɑnə hæpən wən ðə daɪs stɑpt?

Nearly all of the wagons and carts leaving the city had Seanchan driving or walking alongside, more plainly dressed than those on horses, hardly peculiar looking at all, but those in the waiting line were more likely to belong to Ebou Dari or folk from the surrounding area, men in long vests, women with their skirts sewn up on one side to expose a stockinged leg or colorful petticoats, their wagons as well as their carts pulled by oxen. Outlanders dotted the column, merchants with small trains of horse-drawn wagons. There was more trade in winter here in the south than farther north, where merchants had to contend with snow-covered roads, and they came from far, some of them. A stout Domani woman with a dark beauty patch on her copper cheek, riding the lead of four wagons, clutched her flowered cloak around her and scowled at a man five wagons ahead of her in the line, a greasy-looking fellow, hiding long thick mustaches behind a Taraboner veil, beside the wagon driver. A competitor, no doubt. A lean Kandori with a large pearl in her left ear and silver chains across her chest sat her saddle calmly, gloved hand folded on the pommel, maybe still unaware that her gray gelding and her wagon teams alike would be put into the lottery once she was into the city. One horse in five had been taken from locals, and so as not to discourage trade, one in ten from outlanders. Paid for, true, and a fair price in other days, but not nearly what the market would bear, given the demand. Mat always noticed horses, even if with only half his mind or less. A fat Cairhienin in a coat as drab as those of his wagon drivers was shouting angrily about the delay and letting his fine bay mare dance nervously. A very good conformation on that mare. She would go to an officer, most likely. What was going to happen when the dice stopped?

ðə waɪɾ ɑɹtʃt ɡeɪts ɪndə ðə sɪɾi hæd ðɛɹ ɡɑɹdz, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz laɪkli oʊnli ðə sintʃæn ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd əm əz sʌtʃ. sʌldəm ɪn ðɛɹ laɪtnɪŋ-pænəl blu dʒɹɛsəz θɹɛɾəd bæk ən fɔɹθ θɹu ðə stʃɹimz ə tʃɹæfɪk wɪð ɡɹeɪ-klæd deɪmeɪn ɑn sɪlvɝi æɾəm. dʒʌst wʌn ə ðoʊz pɛɹz wʊɾə bɪn səfɪʃən tə kwɛl ɛni dɪstɝbəns ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə fʊl-skeɪl əsɔlt, ən meɪbi ivən ðæt, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt ðə ɹil ɹizən fəɹ ðɛɹ pɹɛzəns. ɪn ðə fɝs deɪz æftɝ ɛbu dɑɹz fɔl, waɪl i wɑz stɪl kənfaɪn tə bɛd, ðeɪ hæd hɛɹɹoʊd ðə sɪɾi sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə wɪmən ðeɪ kɔl mɛɹəθdəmeɪn, ən naʊ ðeɪ meɪd ʃʊɹ nʌn kəɾ ɛntɝ. ðə sʌldəm itʃ kæɹiɾ ən ɛkstʃɹə liʃ kɔɪld ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ dʒʌst ɪn keɪs. pɛɹz pətʃɹoʊl ðə dɑks, tu, miɾɪŋ ɛvɹi ɝaɪvɪŋ ʃɪp ən boʊt.

The wide arched gates into the city had their guards, though it was likely only the Seanchan recognized them as such. Sul'dam in their lightning-paneled blue dresses threaded back and forth through the streams of traffic with gray-clad damane on silvery a'dam. Just one of those pairs would have been sufficient to quell any disturbance short of a full-scale assault, and maybe even that, but that was not the real reason for their presence. In the first days after Ebou Dar's fall, while he was still confined to bed, they had harrowed the city searching for the women they called Marath'damane, and now they made sure none could enter. The sul'dam each carried an extra leash coiled on her shoulder just in case. Pairs patrolled the docks, too, meeting every arriving ship and boat.

bɪsaɪd ðə waɪɾ ɑɹtʃt ɡeɪɾ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, ə lɔŋ plætfɔɹm dɪspleɪd, ɑn spaɪks twɛnti fiɾ əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ðə tɑɹd bʌt stɪl ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbəl hɛdz ʌv oʊvɝ ə dʌzən mɛn ən tu wɪmən u hæd fɔlən əfaʊl ə sintʃæn dʒʌstəs. əbʌv əm hʌŋ ðə sɪmbəl fəɹ ðət dʒʌstəs, ə hɛdzmənz slænt-ɛdʒd æks wɪð ðə hæft ɹæpt ɪn ən ɪntʃɹəkətli nɑɾɪd waɪt kɔɹd. ə plækɝd bɪloʊ itʃ hɛɾ ənaʊns ðə kɹaɪm ðət hæd pleɪst ɪt ðɛɹ, mɝɾɝ əɹ ɹeɪp, ɹɑbɝi wɪð vaɪələns, əsɔlt ɑn wʌn ə ðə blʌd. lɛsɝ əfɛnsɪz bɹɔt faɪnz əɹ flɑɡɪŋ, əɹ biɪŋ meɪd dækoʊvæl. ðə sintʃæn wɝ ivənhændɪɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt. nʌn ə ðə blʌd ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ ɑn dɪspleɪ - wʌn ə ðoʊz u ɝn ɛksəkjuʃən wəd bi sɛn bæk tə sintʃæn, əɹ stʃɹæŋɡəld wɪð ðə waɪt kɔɹd - bʌt θɹi ʌv ðoʊz hɛdz hæd bɪn ətætʃt tə sintʃæn, ən ðə weɪɾ ə ðɛɹ dʒʌstəs fɛl ɑn haɪ əz wɛl əz loʊ. tu plækɝdz mɑɹkt ɹɪbɛljən hʌŋ bɪloʊ ðə hɛdz ə ðə wʊmən u hæd bɪn mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ ən əɹ mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz.

Beside the wide arched gate into the city, a long platform displayed, on spikes twenty feet above the ground, the tarred but still recognizable heads of over a dozen men and two women who had fallen afoul of Seanchan justice. Above them hung the symbol for that justice, a headsman's slant-edged axe with the haft wrapped in an intricately knotted white cord. A placard below each head announced the crime that had placed it there, murder or rape, robbery with violence, assault on one of the Blood. Lesser offenses brought fines or flogging, or being made da'covale. The Seanchan were evenhanded about it. None of the Blood themselves were on display - one of those who earned execution would be sent back to Seanchan, or strangled with the white cord - but three of those heads had been attached to Seanchan, and the weight of their justice fell on high as well as low. Two placards marked rebellion hung below the heads of the woman who had been Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere and her Master of the Blades.

mæt hæd bɪn θɹu ðət ɡeɪɾ ɔfən ɪnʌf ðəɾ i bɛɹli noʊɾəst ðə dɪspleɪ, naʊ. oʊlvɝ skɪpt əlɔŋ sɪŋɪŋ ə ɹaɪmɪŋ sɔŋ. bɛslən ən tɑm wɔkt wɪð ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ, ən wʌns mæt kɑɾ ə sɑft "ɹɪski bɪznəs" fɹəm tɑm, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt. ðən ðeɪ wɝ ɪndə ðə lɔŋ, dɪm tʌnəl ðət kæɹid ðə ɹoʊd θɹu ðə wɔl, ən ðə ɹʌmbəl ʌv wæɡənz pæsɪŋ θɹu wʊɾə meɪd lɪsnɪŋ ɪmpɑsəbəl ivən hæɾ i wɑntəd tə. kipɪŋ kloʊs tə ðə saɪd, wɛl əweɪ fɹəm ðə wæɡən wilz, tɑm ən bɛslən fɔɹdʒd əhɛd tɔkɪŋ ɪn loʊ mɝmɝz, oʊlvɝ dɑɹɾɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm, bʌt wən mæt ɪmɝdʒd ɪndə deɪlaɪɾ əɡɛn, hi wɔkt ɪndə tɑmz bæk bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɔl ə ðɛm hæd stɑpt, hɑɹd bɪsaɪd ðə tʌnəlz maʊθ. ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə meɪkɪŋ ə kɑstɪk kɑmɛnt, hi sʌɾənli sɔ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ stɛɹɪŋ æt. pipəl əfʊt pʊʃɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə tʌnəl bɪhaɪn ɪm ʃʌvd əm əsaɪd, bʌɾ i dʒʌst stɛɹd, tu.

Mat had been through that gate often enough that he barely noticed the display, now. Olver skipped along singing a rhyming song. Beslan and Thom walked with their heads together, and once Mat caught a soft "risky business" from Thom, but he did not care what they were talking about. Then they were into the long, dim tunnel that carried the road through the wall, and the rumble of wagons passing through would have made listening impossible even had he wanted to. Keeping close to the side, well away from the wagon wheels, Thom and Beslan forged ahead talking in low murmurs, Olver darting after them, but when Mat emerged into daylight again, he walked into Thom's back before he realized that all of them had stopped, hard beside the tunnel's mouth. On the point of making a caustic comment, he suddenly saw what they were staring at. People afoot pushing out of the tunnel behind him shoved them aside, but he just stared, too.

ðə stʃɹits ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz fʊl ə pipəl, bʌt nɑt laɪk ðɪs, əz ðoʊ ə dæm hæd bɝst ən sɛn ə flʌɾ ə hjumænɪɾi ɪndə ðə sɪɾi. ðə θɹɔŋ pæk ðə stʃɹiɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm fɹəm wʌn saɪd tə ði ʌðɝ, sɝaʊndɪŋ pulz ə laɪvstɑk ðə laɪk ʌv wɪtʃ i hæd nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ, spɑɾəd waɪt kæɾəl wɪð lɔŋ ʌp-swɛp hɔɹnz, peɪl bɹaʊn ɡoʊts kʌvɝɾ ɪn faɪn hɛɹ ðət hʌŋ tə ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, ʃip wɪð fɔɹ hɔɹnz. ɛvɹi stʃɹiɾ i kəd si lʊkt əz dʒæmd. wæɡənz ən kɑɹts ɪntʃt θɹu ðə mæs wɛɹ ðeɪ muvd əɾ ɔl, ðə ʃaʊts ən kɝsɪz ə ðə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz ən kɑɹɾɝz ɔl bʌt dʒɹaʊn ɪn ðə bæbəl ə vɔɪsəz ən ðə nɔɪz ə ði ænəməlz. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt wɝdz, bʌɾ i kəd dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃ æksɛns. sloʊ, dʒɹɔlɪŋ sintʃæn æksɛns. səm ə ðɛm nʌdʒd ə neɪbɝ ən pɔɪntəɾ əɾ ɪm ɪn ɪz bɹaɪt kloʊðɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ ɡeɪpɪŋ ən pɔɪntɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ sin ən ɪn əɹ ə kʌtlɝz ʃɑp bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ i stɪl ɡɹaʊld ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ ən dʒɝkt ɪz hæt bɹɪm loʊ oʊvɝ ɪz aɪz.

The streets of Ebou Dar were always full of people, but not like this, as though a dam had burst and sent a flood of humanity into the city. The throng packed the street in front of him from one side to the other, surrounding pools of livestock the like of which he had never seen before, spotted white cattle with long up-swept horns, pale brown goats covered in fine hair that hung to the paving stones, sheep with four horns. Every street he could see looked as jammed. Wagons and carts inched through the mass where they moved at all, the shouts and curses of the wagon drivers and carters all but drowned in the babble of voices and the noise of the animals. He could not make out words, but he could distinguish accents. Slow, drawling Seanchan accents. Some of them nudged a neighbor and pointed at him in his bright clothing. They were gaping and pointing at everything, as if they had never seen an inn or a cutler's shop before, but he still growled under his breath and jerked his hat brim low over his eyes.

"ðə ɹɪtɝn," tɑm mʌɾɝd, ən ɪf mæt hæd nɑt bɪn ɹaɪɾ əɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ i wəd nɑɾ əv hɝd. "waɪl wi wɝ teɪkɪŋ əɹ iz wɪð lukə, ðə kɔɝɪn əz ɝaɪvd."

"The Return," Thom muttered, and if Mat had not been right at his shoulder he would not have heard. "While we were taking our ease with Luca, the Corenne has arrived."

mæt hæd bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðɪs ɹɪtɝn ðət ðə sintʃæn kɛpt ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn əbaʊɾ əz ən ɪnveɪʒən, ən ɑɹmi. wʌn ə ðə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz ʃaʊɾəd ən weɪvd əɹ lɔŋ-hændəld wɪp ət səm bɔɪz u hæd kɹɔld ʌp ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə wæɡən bɑks tə poʊk ət wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ɡɹeɪpvaɪnz ɪn wʊɾən tʌbz ə ɝθ. ənʌðɝ wæɡən hɛld ə lɔŋ pɹɪntɪŋ pɹɛs, ən stɪl ənʌðɝ, dʒʌs mænɪdʒɪŋ tə tɝn ɪndə ðə tʌnəl, kæɹid wʌt lʊk laɪk bɹuɝz' væts ən ə feɪn smɛl ə hɑps. kɹeɪts ə stʃɹeɪnʒli kʌlɝd tʃɪkənz ən dʌks ən ɡis dɛkɝeɪɾəd səm ə ðoʊz wæɡənz, nɑt bɝdz fəɹ seɪl, bʌɾ ə fɑɹmɝz stɑk. ɪt wɑz ən ɑɹmi ɔl ɹaɪt, oʊnli nɑt ðə sɔɹɾ i hæɾ ɪmædʒənd. ðɪs kaɪndə ɑɹmi wəd bi hɑɹɾɝ tə faɪt ðən soʊlʒɝz.

Mat had been thinking of this Return that the Seanchan kept going on about as an invasion, an army. One of the wagon drivers shouted and waved her long-handled whip at some boys who had crawled up on the side of the wagon box to poke at what appeared to be grapevines in wooden tubs of earth. Another wagon held a long printing press, and still another, just managing to turn into the tunnel, carried what looked like brewers' vats and a faint smell of hops. Crates of strangely colored chickens and ducks and geese decorated some of those wagons, not birds for sale, but a farmer's stock. It was an army all right, only not the sort he had imagined. This kind of army would be harder to fight than soldiers.

"stæb maɪ aɪz, wɪl əv tə weɪd tə ɡɛt ðoʊ ðɪs!" bɛslən ɡɹʌmbəld ɪn dɪsɡʌst, ɹaɪzɪŋ ɑn ɪz toʊz tə tʃɹaɪ piɹɪŋ fɑɹðɝ əhɛɾ oʊvɝ ðə kɹaʊd. "haʊ fɑɹ bɪfɔɹ wi faɪn ə klɪɹ stʃɹit?"

"Stab my eyes, we'll have to wade to get though this!" Beslan grumbled in disgust, rising on his toes to try peering farther ahead over the crowd. "How far before we find a clear street?"

mæt faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ wʌɾ i hæd nɑt ɹɪli sin wən ɪt wɑz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz aɪz, ðə hɑɹbɝ fʊl ə ʃɪps. fʊl ə ʃɪps. meɪbi tu əɹ θɹi taɪmz ðə vɛsəlz ðət hæd bɪn ðəɹ wən ðeɪ lɛft fəɹ lukəz kæmp ət fɝs laɪt, kwaɪɾ ə fju ʌv əm stɪl mənuvɝɪŋ ʌndɝ seɪl. wɪtʃ mɛn ðəɹ maɪt bi mɔɹ stɪl weɪɾɪŋ tə ɛntɝ ðə hɑɹbɝ. laɪt! haʊ mɛni cʊɾə dɪsɡɔɹdʒ ðɛɹ kɑɹɡoʊ sɪns mɔɹnɪŋ? haʊ mɛni ɹɪmeɪn tə bi ənloʊɾəd? laɪt, haʊ mɛni pipəl kəd bi kæɹiɾ ɑn ðət nʌmbɝ ə ʃɪps? ən waɪ hæd ðeɪ ɔl kʌm hɪɹ ɪnstɛɾ ə tæntʃəkoʊ? ə ʃɪvɝ ɹæn daʊn ɪz spaɪn. meɪbi ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ ɔl ə ðɛm.

Mat found himself remembering what he had not really seen when it was in front of his eyes, the harbor full of ships. Full of ships. Maybe two or three times the vessels that had been there when they left for Luca's camp at first light, quite a few of them still maneuvering under sail. Which meant there might be more still waiting to enter the harbor. Light! How many could have disgorged their cargo since morning? How many remained to be unloaded? Light, how many people could be carried on that number of ships? And why had they all come here instead of Tanchico? A shiver ran down his spine. Maybe this was not all of them.

"ju hæd bɛs tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn jəɹ weɪ baɪ bæk stʃɹits ən æliz," hi sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs soʊ ðeɪ kəd hɪɹ oʊvɝ ðə kækɑfəni. "ju woʊn ɹitʃ ðə pæləs bɪfɔɹ naɪt, ʌðɝwaɪz."

"You had best try to find your way by back streets and alleys," he said, raising his voice so they could hear over the cacophony. "You won't reach the Palace before night, otherwise."

bɛslən tɝn ə fɹaʊn ɑn hɪm. "ju ɑɹən ɹɪtɝnɪŋ wɪð ʌs? mæt, ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ tə baɪ pæsədʒ ɑn ə ʃɪp əɡɛn . . . jə noʊ ʃi woʊnt ɡoʊ izi ɑn jə ðɪs taɪm."

Beslan turned a frown on him. "You aren't returning with us? Mat, if you try to buy passage on a ship again . . . You know she won't go easy on you this time."

mæt mætʃt ðə kwinz sʌn skaʊl fəɹ skaʊl. "aɪ dʒʌst wɑnə wɔk ɝaʊn ə lɪɾəl," hi laɪd. əz sun əz i ɹɪtɝn tə ðə pæləs, taɪlɪn wəd stɑɹt kɑsəɾɪŋ ən pɛɾɪŋ hɪm. ɪt wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ðət bæd, ɹɪli - nɑt ɹɪli - ɪksɛp ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ u sɔ hɝ kɝɛs ɪz tʃiks ən wɪspɝ ɛndɪɹməns ɪn ɪz ɪɹ, ivən əɹ sʌn. bɪsaɪdz, wʌɾ ɪf ðə daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd stɑpt wən i ɹitʃt hɝ? pəzɛsɪv wɑz hɑɹdli ðə wɝd fəɹ taɪlɪn ðiz deɪz. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, ðə wʊmən maɪɾ əv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə mɛɹi hɪm! hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə mɛɹi, nɑt jɛt, bʌɾ i nu hu hi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə mɛɹi, ən ɪt wɑz nɑt taɪlɪn kwɪntɑɹə mɪtsoʊbɑɹ. oʊnli, wʌt kəɾ i də ɪf ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd dɪfɹənli?

Mat matched the Queen's son scowl for scowl. "I just want to walk around a little," he lied. As soon as he returned to the Palace, Tylin would start cosseting and petting him. It would not have been that bad, really - not really - except that she did not care who saw her caress his cheeks and whisper endearments in his ear, even her son. Besides, what if the dice in his head stopped when he reached her? Possessive was hardly the word for Tylin these days. Blood and ashes, the woman might have decided to marry him! He did not want to marry, not yet, but he knew who he was going to marry, and it was not Tylin Quintara Mitsobar. Only, what could he do if she decided differently?

sʌɾənli hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd tɑmz mɝmɝ ʌv "ɹɪski bɪznəs." hi nu tɑm, ən i nu bɛslən. oʊlvɝ wɑz ɡeɪpɪŋ ət ðə sintʃæn əz hɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛm. hi stɑɹɾəd tə dɑɹɾ əweɪ fəɹ ə kloʊsɝ lʊk, ən mæt sizd ɪz ʃoʊldɝ dʒʌst ɪn taɪm ən pʊʃt hɪm, pɹətɛstɪŋ, ɪndə tɑmz hænz. "teɪk ðə bɔɪ bæk tə ðə pæləs ən ɡɪv ɪm ɪz lɛsənz wən ɹaɪzɛl ɪz dʌn wɪð hɪm. ən fɝɡɛt wʌtɛvɝ mædnəs juv ɪn maɪnd. jə kəd pʊt jəɹ hɛdz ɑn dɪspleɪ aʊtsaɪd ðə ɡeɪt, ən taɪlɪnz, tu." ən ɪz oʊn. nɛvɝ lɛt ðət bi fɝɡɑɾən!

Suddenly he remembered Thom's murmur of "risky business." He knew Thom, and he knew Beslan. Olver was gaping at the Seanchan as hard as they themselves were at everything around them. He started to dart away for a closer look, and Mat seized his shoulder just in time and pushed him, protesting, into Thom's hands. "Take the boy back to the Palace and give him his lessons when Riselle is done with him. And forget whatever madness you have in mind. You could put your heads on display outside the gate, and Tylin's, too." And his own. Never let that be forgotten!

ðə tu mɛn stɛɹd bæk əɾ ɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ɪkspɹɛʃən, əz ɡʊɾ əz kənfɝmɪŋ ɪz səspɪʃənz.

The two men stared back at him without any expression, as good as confirming his suspicions.

"pɝhæps aɪ ʃəd wɔk wɪð ju," tɑm sɛɾ ət læst. "wi kəd tɔk. jəɹ ɹɪmɑɹkəbli lʌki, mæt, ən juv ə sɝɾən flɛɹ fɔɹ, ʃæl wi seɪ, ði ædvɛntʃɝəs?" bɛslən nɑɾəd. oʊlvɝ skwɝmd ɪn tɑmz ɡɹɪp, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɛɹ əɾ ɔl ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ pipəl ət wʌns ən ʌnkənsɝnd wɪð wʌɾ ɪz ɛldɝz wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt.

"Perhaps I should walk with you," Thom said at last. "We could talk. You're remarkably lucky, Mat, and you have a certain flair for, shall we say, the adventurous?" Beslan nodded. Olver squirmed in Thom's grip, trying to stare at all the strange people at once and unconcerned with what his elders were talking about.

mæt ɡɹʌntɪd saʊɝli. waɪ dɪd pipəl ɔlweɪz wɑn ɪm tə bi ə hɪɹoʊ? sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ wɑz gɑnə ɡɛɾ ɪm kɪld. "aɪ doʊnt nid tə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ. ðeɪ ɑɹ hɪɹ, bɛslən. ɪf jə kʊdn stɑp əm ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪn, ʃʊɹ əz mɔɹnɪŋ, jə woʊn bi eɪbəl tə pʊʃ əm aʊt. ɹænd wɪl dil wɪð ðɛm, ɪf ðə ɹumɝz ɑɹ ɛniθɪŋ tə ɡoʊ baɪ." əɡɛn, ðoʊz wɝlɪŋ kʌlɝz spʌn θɹu hɪz hɛd, ɔlmoʊst əbliɾɝeɪtɪŋ ðə saʊn ə ðə daɪs fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. "ju tʊk ðət blʌɾi oʊθ tə weɪɾ ɑn ðə ɹɪtɝn; wi ɔl dɪd." ɹəfjuzəl hæd mɛn biɪŋ pʊɾ ɪn tʃeɪnz ən sɛt tə wɝk ɑn ðə dɑks, əɹ klɪɹɪŋ ðə kənælz ɪn ðə ɹæhəd. wɪtʃ meɪɾ ɪt noʊ oʊθ əɾ ɔl, ɪn ɪz bʊk. "weɪɾ ɑn ɹænd." ðə kʌlɝz keɪm wʌns mɔɹ ən vænɪʃt. blʌɾ ən æʃəz! hi dʒʌs hæd tə stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt . . . əbaʊt sɝɾən pipəl. əɡɛn ðeɪ swɝld. "ɪt maɪt kʌm aʊt ɹaɪt jɛt, ɪf jə ɡɪv ɪt taɪm."

Mat grunted sourly. Why did people always want him to be a hero? Sooner or later that sort of thing was going to get him killed. "I don't need to talk about anything. They are here, Beslan. If you couldn't stop them getting in, sure as morning, you won't be able to push them out. Rand will deal with them, if the rumors are anything to go by." Again, those whirling colors spun through his head, almost obliterating the sound of the dice for an instant. "You took that bloody oath to wait on the Return; we all did." Refusal had meant being put in chains and set to work on the docks, or clearing the canals in the Rahad. Which made it no oath at all, in his book. "Wait on Rand." The colors came once more and vanished. Blood and ashes! He just had to stop thinking about . . . About certain people. Again they swirled. "It might come out right yet, if you give it time."

"ju doʊn ʌndɝstænd, mæt," bɛslən sɛd fɪɹsli. "mʌðɝ stɪl sɪts ɑn ðə θɹoʊn, ən sjuɹɔθ sɛz ʃɪl ɹul ɔl ʌv ɔltɑɹə, nɑt dʒʌst wʌt wi hoʊld ɝaʊn ɛbu dɑɹ, ən meɪbi mɔɹ bɪsaɪdz, bʌt mʌðɝ hæd tə laɪ daʊn ɑn əɹ feɪs ən swɛɹ fiəlti tə səm wʊmən ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. sjuɹɔθ sɛz aɪ ʃəd mɛɹi wʌn ə ðɛɹ blʌɾ ən ʃeɪv ðə saɪdz ə maɪ hɛd, ən mʌðɝ ɪz lɪsnɪŋ tə hɝ. sjuɹɔθ maɪt pɹitɛn ðeɪ ɑɹ ikwəlz, bʌt ʃiz tə lɪsən wən sjuɹɔθ spiks. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt sjuɹɔθ sɛz, ɛbu dɑɹ ɪzən ɹɪli aʊɝz ɛnimɔɹ, ən ðə ɹɛst woʊn bi iðɝ. meɪbi wi kæn pʊʃ əm aʊt baɪ fɔɹs ʌv ɑɹmz, bʌt wi kən meɪk ðə kʌntʃɹi tu hɑt tə hoʊl ðɛm. ðə waɪtkloʊks faʊn aʊt. æsk əm wʌt ðeɪ min baɪ 'ði ɔltɑɹən nun.' "

"You don't understand, Mat," Beslan said fiercely. "Mother still sits on the throne, and Suroth says she will rule all of Altara, not just what we hold around Ebou Dar, and maybe more besides, but mother had to lie down on her face and swear fealty to some woman on the other side of the Aryth Ocean. Suroth says I should marry one of their Blood and shave the sides of my head, and mother is listening to her. Suroth might pretend they are equals, but she has to listen when Suroth speaks. No matter what Suroth says, Ebou Dar isn't really ours anymore, and the rest won't be either. Maybe we can't push them out by force of arms, but we can make the country too hot to hold them. The Whitecloaks found out. Ask them what they mean by 'the Altaran Noon.' "

mæt kəd ɡɛs wɪθaʊɾ æskɪŋ ɛniwʌn. hi bɪɾ ɪz tʌŋ tə kip fɹəm pɔɪntɪŋ aʊt ðət ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ ðən ðəɹ hæd bɪn waɪtkloʊks ɪn ɔl ʌv ɔltɑɹə dʊɹɪŋ ðə waɪtkloʊk wɔɹ. ə stʃɹit fʊl ə sintʃæn wɑz noʊ pleɪs fəɹ ə flæpɪŋ tʌŋ, ivən ɪf moʊs dɪɾ əpɪɹ tə bi fɑɹmɝz ən kɹæftsfoʊk. "aɪ ʌndɝstæn jəɹ hɑt tə pʊt jəɹ hɛɾ ɑn ə spaɪk," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. əz kwaɪətli əz i kəɾ ən stɪl bi hɝɾ ɪn ðət dɪn ə vɔɪsəz ən kæɾəl loʊɪŋ ən ɡis hɔŋkɪŋ. "ju noʊ əbaʊt ðɛɹ lɪsənɝz. ðət fɛloʊ oʊvɝ ðəɹ u lʊks laɪk ə steɪbəlmən kəd bi wʌn, əɹ ðət skɪni wʊmən wɪð ðə bʌndəl ɑn əɹ bæk."

Mat could guess without asking anyone. He bit his tongue to keep from pointing out that there were more Seanchan soldiers in Ebou Dar than there had been Whitecloaks in all of Altara during the Whitecloak War. A street full of Seanchan was no place for a flapping tongue, even if most did appear to be farmers and craftsfolk. "I understand you're hot to put your head on a spike," he said quietly. As quietly as he could and still be heard in that din of voices and cattle lowing and geese honking. "You know about their Listeners. That fellow over there who looks like a stableman could be one, or that skinny woman with the bundle on her back."

bɛslən ɡlaʊɝd soʊ hɑɹɾ ət ðə pɛɹ mæt hæd pɔɪntəɾ aʊt ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɹɪli wɝ lɪsənɝz, ðeɪ maɪt ɹipɔɹɾ ɪm fəɹ ðəɾ əloʊn. "meɪbi jəl sɪŋ ə dɪfɹən sɔŋ wən ðeɪ ɹitʃ ændɝ," hi ɡɹaʊld, ən pʊʃt ɪz weɪ ɪndə ðə θɹɔŋ, ʃʌvɪŋ ɛniwʌn u ɡɑɾ ɪn ɪz weɪ. mæt wʊɾə bɪn ənsɝpɹaɪz tə si ə faɪt bɹeɪk aʊt. hi səspɛktəd ðət wɑz wʌt ðə mæn wɑz lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ.

Beslan glowered so hard at the pair Mat had pointed out that if they really were Listeners, they might report him for that alone. "Maybe you'll sing a different song when they reach Andor," he growled, and pushed his way into the throng, shoving anyone who got in his way. Mat would have been unsurprised to see a fight break out. He suspected that was what the man was looking for.

tɑm tɝn tə fɑloʊ wɪð oʊlvɝ, bʌt mæt kɑɾ ɪz sliv. "kul ɪz tɛmpɝ ɪf jə kæn, tɑm. ən kul jəɹ oʊn waɪl jəɹ əbaʊɾ ɪt. aɪ wəd θɪŋk baɪ ðɪs taɪm juɾ əv hæɾ ɪnʌf ə ʃeɪvɪŋ blaɪnd."

Thom turned to follow with Olver, but Mat caught his sleeve. "Cool his temper if you can, Thom. And cool your own while you're about it. I would think by this time you'd have had enough of shaving blind."

"maɪ hɛɾ ɪz kul ən aɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kul hɪz," tɑm sɛd dʒɹɪli. "hi kæn dʒʌst sɪt, ðoʊ; ɪts ɪz kʌntʃɹi." ə feɪn smaɪl kɹɔst ɪz lɛðɝi feɪs. "ju seɪ jə woʊn teɪk ɹɪsks, bʌt jə wɪl. ən wən jə du, jəl meɪk ɛniθɪŋ bɛslən ən aɪ maɪt tʃɹaɪ lʊk laɪk ən ivnɪŋ stʃɹoʊl ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾən. wɪð jə ɝaʊnd, ivən ðə bɑɹbɝ ɪz blaɪnd. kʌm əlɔŋ, bɔɪ," hi sɛd, swɪŋɪŋ oʊlvɝ ʌp ɑntu hɪz ʃoʊldɝz. "ɹaɪzɛl maɪt nɑt lɛt jə ɹɛs jəɹ hɛɾ ɪf jəɹ leɪt fəɹ jəɹ lɛsən."

"My head is cool and I'm trying to cool his," Thom said drily. "He can't just sit, though; it is his country." A faint smile crossed his leathery face. "You say you won't take risks, but you will. And when you do, you'll make anything Beslan and I might try look like an evening stroll in the garden. With you around, even the barber is blind. Come along, boy," he said, swinging Olver up onto his shoulders. "Riselle might not let you rest your head if you're late for your lesson."

mæt fɹaʊn æftɝ ɪm əz i stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ, meɪkɪŋ mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ pɹɑɡɹɛs wɪð oʊlvɝ stʃɹædlɪŋ ɪz nɛk ðən bɛslən hæd. wʌd tɑm min? hi nɛvɝ tʊk ɹɪsks ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ fɔɹst ɑn hɪm. nɛvɝ. hi ɡlæns kæʒəwəli təwɔɹd ðə skɪni wʊmən, ən ðə fɛloʊ wɪð dʌŋ ɑn ɪz buts. laɪt, ðeɪ kəd bi lɪsənɝz. ɛnibəɾi kəd bi. ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf tə sɛɾ ə pɹɪkəl bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, əz ɪf i wɝ biɪŋ wɑtʃt.

Mat frowned after him as he strode away, making much better progress with Olver straddling his neck than Beslan had. What did Thom mean? He never took risks unless they were forced on him. Never. He glanced casually toward the skinny woman, and the fellow with dung on his boots. Light, they could be Listeners. Anybody could be. It was enough to set a prickle between his shoulders, as if he were being watched.

hi ɪntʃt ə ɡʊdli dɪstəns əlɔŋ stʃɹits ðəɾ æktʃəli  ɡɹu θɪkɝ wɪð pipəl ən ænəməlz ən wæɡənz ðə nɪɹɝ i keɪm tə ðə dɑks. ðə stɔlz ɑn ðə bɹɪdʒəz oʊvɝ ðə kənælz hæd ðɛɹ ʃʌɾɝz daʊn, ðə stʃɹit pɛdlɝz hæd pɪkt ʌp ðɛɹ blæŋkəts, ən ðə tʌmblɝz ən dʒʌɡəlɝz ðət juʒəwəli ɛntɝteɪn əɾ ɛvɹi stʃɹit wʊɾə əv hæd noʊ ɹum tə pɝfɔɹm ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑt ɡɔn əweɪ, tu. ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni sintʃæn, ðət wɑz haʊ mɛni ðəɹ wɝ, ən meɪbi wʌn ɪn faɪv ə soʊlʒɝ, pleɪn ɪnʌf baɪ ðɛɹ hɑɹɾ aɪz ən ðə sɛɾ ə ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, soʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm fɑɹmɝ əɹ kɹæfsmən, ivən wən ðeɪ wɝ nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ɑɹmɝ. naʊ ən ðən ə ɡɹup sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn muvd əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹiɾ ɪn ə lɪɾəl ɛɾi ʌv klɪɹ speɪs, mɔɹ ivən ðən soʊlʒɝz ɡɑt. ɪt wɑz nɑt ɡɪvən aʊɾ ə fɪɹ, ət lis nɑt baɪ ðə sintʃæn. ðeɪ baʊd ɹɪspɛkfəli tə ðə wɪmən wɪð laɪtnɪŋ-mɑɹkt ɹɛd pænəlz ɑn ðə blu dʒɹɛsəz, ən smaɪld wɪð əpɹuvəl əz ðə pɛɹz pæs baɪ. bɛslən wɑz aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd. ðə sintʃæn wɝ gɑnə tə bi dʒɹɪvən ɔf baɪ ɛniwʌn ɪksɛpt ən ɑɹmi wɪð æʃəmən, laɪk ðə wʌn ɹumɝ sɛd hæd fɔɾ əm tə ði ist ə wik əɡoʊ. əɹ wʌn ɑɹmd wɪð ði ɪluməneɪɾɝz sikɹəts. wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt kəɾ ɑlʌdʒɹə wɑnt wɪð ə bɛlfndɝ?

He inched a goodly distance along streets that actually grew thicker with people and animals and wagons the nearer he came to the docks. The stalls on the bridges over the canals had their shutters down, the street peddlers had picked up their blankets, and the tumblers and jugglers that usually entertained at every street crossing would have had no room to perform if they had not gone away, too. There were too many Seanchan, that was how many there were, and maybe one in five a soldier, plain enough by their hard eyes and the set of their shoulders, so different from farmer or craftsman, even when they were not wearing armor. Now and then a group sul'dam and damane moved along the street in a little eddy of clear space, more even than soldiers got. It was not given out of fear, at least not by the Seanchan. They bowed respectfully to the women with lightning-marked red panels on the blue dresses, and smiled with approval as the pairs passed by. Beslan was out of his mind. The Seanchan were not going to be driven off by anyone except an army with Asha'man, like the one rumor said had fought them to the east a week ago. Or one armed with the Illuminator's secrets. What in the Light could Aludra want with a bellfounder?

hi tʊk peɪnz nɑt tə kʌm ɪn saɪɾ ə ðə dɑks. hi hæd lɝn ɪz lɛsən ɑn ðæt. wʌɾ i ɹɪli wɑntəd wɑz ə ɡeɪm ə daɪs, wʌn ðət wəd læst wɛl ɪndə ðə naɪt. pɹɛfɝəbli leɪɾ ɪnʌf ðət taɪlɪn wəd bi əslip wən i ɹɪtɝn tə ðə pæləs. ʃi hæd teɪkən əweɪ hɪz daɪs, kleɪmɪŋ ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪm ɡæmbəlɪŋ, ðoʊ ʃi dɪɾ ɪɾ æftɝ i tɔkt əɹ ɪndə weɪdʒɝɪŋ fɔɹfaɪts, waɪl i wɑz stɪl kənfaɪn tə bɛd. fɔɹtʃənətli, daɪs kəɾ ɔlweɪz bi faʊnd, ən wɪð ɪz lʌk, ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz bɛɾɝ tə juz ði ʌðɝ mɛnz daɪs ɛniweɪ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, wʌns i dɪskʌvɝd ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə peɪ ə fɔɹfɪɾ ə lɛɾɪŋ ɪm ɡoʊ - ðə wʊmən pɹitɛndəd nɑt tə noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt! - hi hæd juzd əm tə ɡɪv əɹ bæk ə bɪɾ ə hɝ oʊn mɛɾəsən. ə ɡɹeɪv mɪsteɪk, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ fʌn ɪt hæd bɪn ət ðə taɪm. sɪns ðə fɔɹfaɪts ɹæn aʊt, ʃi hæd bɪn twaɪs əz bæɾ əz bɪfɔɹ.

He took pains not to come in sight of the docks. He had learned his lesson on that. What he really wanted was a game of dice, one that would last well into the night. Preferably late enough that Tylin would be asleep when he returned to the Palace. She had taken away his dice, claiming she did not like him gambling, though she did it after he talked her into wagering forfeits, while he was still confined to bed. Fortunately, dice could always be found, and with his luck, it was always better to use the other men's dice anyway. Unfortunately, once he discovered she was not about to pay a forfeit of letting him go - the woman pretended not to know what he was talking about! - he had used them to give her back a bit of her own medicine. A grave mistake, however much fun it had been at the time. Since the forfeits ran out, she had been twice as bad as before.

ðə tævɝnz ən kɑmən ɹumz i ɛntɝd wɝ əz pækt əz ðə stʃɹits, ðoʊ, wɪð bɛɹli ɹum tə lɪft ə mʌɡ, mʌtʃ lɛs tɔs daɪs, fʊl ə sintʃæn læfɪŋ ən sɪŋɪŋ, ən ɡlʌm-feɪst ɛbu dɑɹi hu aɪd ðə sintʃæn ɪn sʌlən saɪləns. hi stɪl kwɪɹid ði ɪnkipɝz ən tæpstɝz ɑn ðə tʃæns ðeɪ maɪɾ əv ə kʌbi hoʊl i kəd ɹɛnt, bʌt wʌn ən ɔl ðeɪ ʃʊk ðɛɹ hɛdz. hi hæd nɑt ɹɪli ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ðəɹ hæd bɪn nʌθɪŋ əveɪləbəl ivən bɪfɔɹ ɔl ðə nu ɝaɪvəlz. stɪl, hi bɪɡæn tə fil əz ɡlumi əz ðə fɔɹən mɝtʃəns i sɔ piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðɛɹ waɪn ən wʌndɝɪŋ haʊ ðeɪ wɝ tə ɡɛt ðɛɹ ɡʊdz aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi wɪð noʊ hɔɹsəz. hi hæd ɡoʊl tə peɪ wʌtɛvɝ lukə wɑntəd, ən mɔɹ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl ɪn ə tʃɛst ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, ən i wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə tʃɹaɪ teɪkɪŋ ɪnʌf aʊɾ ɪn wʌn ɡoʊ, nɑɾ æftɝ pæləs sɝvəns hæd kæɹiɾ ɪm bæk fɹəm ðə dɑks laɪk ə stæɡ teɪkən ɪn hʌnt. ɔl i hæd bɪn duɪŋ ðən wɑz tɔkɪŋ tə ʃɪp kæptənz; ɪf taɪlɪn lɝnd, ən ʃi wʊd, ðəɾ i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə liv ðə pæləs wɪð mɔɹ ɡoʊl ðən i niɾəd fəɹ ən ivnɪŋ ʌv ɡæmbəlɪŋ . . . oʊ, noʊ! hi hæd tə hæv ə ɹum, ə ɡɛɹɪɾ ɪn səm ɪnz æɾɪk ðə saɪz ʌv ə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb, ɛniθɪŋ, wɛɹ i kəd haɪɾ əweɪ ɡoʊld ə lɪɾəl əɾ ə taɪm, əɹ i hæd tə hæv ə tʃæns wɪð ðə daɪs, wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ. lʌk əɹ noʊ lʌk, ðoʊ, hi ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz gɑnə faɪnd niðɝ tədeɪ. ən ðoʊz blʌɾi daɪs wɝ stɪl tʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd, tʌmbəlɪŋ.

The taverns and common rooms he entered were as packed as the streets, though, with barely room to lift a mug, much less toss dice, full of Seanchan laughing and singing, and glum-faced Ebou Dari who eyed the Seanchan in sullen silence. He still queried the innkeepers and tapsters on the chance they might have a cubby hole he could rent, but one and all they shook their heads. He had not really expected anything else. There had been nothing available even before all the new arrivals. Still, he began to feel as gloomy as the foreign merchants he saw peering into their wine and wondering how they were to get their goods out of the city with no horses. He had gold to pay whatever Luca wanted, and more, but it was all in a chest in the Tarasin Palace, and he was not about to try taking enough out in one go, not after Palace servants had carried him back from the docks like a stag taken in hunt. All he had been doing then was talking to ship captains; if Tylin learned, and she would, that he was trying to leave the Palace with more gold than he needed for an evening of gambling . . . Oh, no! He had to have a room, a garret in some inn's attic the size of a wardrobe, anything, where he could hide away gold a little at a time, or he had to have a chance with the dice, one or the other. Luck or no luck, though, he eventually realized that he was going to find neither today. And those bloody dice were still tumbling in his head, tumbling.

hi dɪd nɑt steɪ ɪn ɛni wʌn pleɪs lɔŋ, ən nɑt dʒʌs fəɹ ðə læk ʌv ə ɡeɪm əɹ ə ɹum. hɪz kʌlɝfəl kloʊðz, hɪz ʃeɪm-ə-tɪŋkɝ-fɔɹ-bɹaɪtnəs kloʊðz, dʒɹu aɪz. səm ə ðə sintʃæn θɔɾ i wɑz ðəɹ fəɹ ɛntɝteɪnmənt, ən tʃɹaɪd tə peɪ hɪm tə sɪŋ! hi ɔlmoʊs lɛt ðɛm, wʌns əɹ twaɪs, bʌt wʌns ðeɪ hɝd hɪm, ðeɪ wʊɾə dɪmændəd ðə mʌni bæk. səm ə ði ɛbu dɑɹi mɛn, wɪð lɔŋ kɝv naɪvz tʌk bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ bɛls ən ə bɛlɪfəl ʌv æŋɡɝ ðeɪ kəd nɑt teɪk aʊɾ ɑn ðə sintʃæn, θɔt tə teɪk ɪɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðə bəfun u lækt oʊnli ə peɪntəd feɪs tə lʊk laɪk ə noʊbəlz ful. mæt dʌk bæk ɪndə ðə kɹaʊɾəd stʃɹit wɛnɛvɝ i sɔ sətʃ fɛloʊz aɪɪŋ hɪm. hi hæd lɝn ðə hɑɹd weɪ ðəɾ i wɑz ɪn noʊ kəndɪʃən fəɹ ə faɪt jɛt, ən ɪz kɪlɝz hɛd ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp bɪsaɪd ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪt wəd də hɪm noʊ ɡʊɾ əɾ ɔl.

He did not stay in any one place long, and not just for the lack of a game or a room. His colorful clothes, his shame-a-Tinker-for-brightness clothes, drew eyes. Some of the Seanchan thought he was there for entertainment, and tried to pay him to sing! He almost let them, once or twice, but once they heard him, they would have demanded the money back. Some of the Ebou Dari men, with long curved knives tucked behind their belts and a bellyful of anger they could not take out on the Seanchan, thought to take it out on the buffoon who lacked only a painted face to look like a noble's fool. Mat ducked back into the crowded street whenever he saw such fellows eyeing him. He had learned the hard way that he was in no condition for a fight yet, and his killer's head going up beside the city gate would do him no good at all.

mæt tʊk ɹɛst wɛɹ i kəd faɪn ɪt, ɑn ən ɛmpti bæɹəl əbændən bɪsaɪd ðə maʊθ ʌv ən æliweɪ, ɑn ðə ɹɛɹ bɪɾ ə bɛntʃ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə tævɝn ðət hæd ɹum fəɹ wʌn mɔɹ, ɑn ə stoʊn stɛp əntɪl ðə bɪldɪŋz oʊnɝ keɪm aʊɾ ən nɑkt ɪz hæɾ ɔf wɪð ə swaɪp ə hɝ bɹum. hɪz bɛli wɑz kɪsɪŋ ɪz bækboʊn, hi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə fil ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz ɡeɪpɪŋ əɾ ɪz ɡɛɹɪʃ kloʊðz, ðə dæŋk koʊld wɑz sipɪŋ ɪndə hɪz boʊnz, ən ði oʊnli daɪs i wɑz gɑnə faɪnd wɝ ðoʊz stɪl θʌndɝɪŋ əweɪ ɪn ɪz hɛd laɪk hɔɹsəz hʊvz. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ðɪs laʊd bɪfɔɹ.

Mat took rest where he could find it, on an empty barrel abandoned beside the mouth of an alleyway, on the rare bit of bench in front of a tavern that had room for one more, on a stone step until the building's owner came out and knocked his hat off with a swipe of her broom. His belly was kissing his backbone, he was beginning to feel that everyone was gaping at his garish clothes, the dank cold was seeping into his bones, and the only dice he was going to find were those still thundering away in his head like horse's hooves. He did not think they had ever been this loud before.

"nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt bʌt tə ɡoʊ bæk ən bi ðə kwinz blʌɾi pɛt!" hi ɡɹaʊld, juzɪŋ ɪz stæf tə lɛvɝ hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɔf ə kɹækt wʊɾən kɹeɪt laɪɪŋ ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit. sɛvɹəl pæsɝzbi lʊkt əɾ ɪm əz ɪf ɪz feɪs wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi peɪntəd. hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm. bɪniθ ɪz noʊɾəs, ðeɪ wɝ. hi wɑz nɑt biɾɪŋ əm oʊvɝ ðə hɛd wɪð ɪz stæf əz ðeɪ dɪzɝvd, ɡɑəlɪŋ əɾ ə mæn ðət weɪ.

"Nothing for it but to go back and be the Queen's bloody pet!" he growled, using his staff to lever himself up off a cracked wooden crate lying at the side of the street. Several passersby looked at him as if his face were already painted. He ignored them. Beneath his notice, they were. He was not beating them over the head with his staff as they deserved, goggling at a man that way.

ðə stʃɹits ɹɪli wɝ əz fʊl əz ɝliɝ, hi ɹilaɪzd, ən ɪt wəd bi wɛl æftɝ naɪtfɔl bɪfɔɹ i ɡɑt bæk tə ðə pæləs ɪf i tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz weɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz. ʌv kɔɹs, taɪlɪn maɪt bi əslip baɪ ðɛn. meɪbi. hɪz stʌmək ɡɹaʊld, ɔlmoʊs laʊdli ɪnʌf tə dʒɹaʊn aʊt ðə daɪs. ʃi maɪɾ ɔɹɾɝ ðə kɪtʃənz nɑt tə fid hɪm, ɪf i wɑz tu leɪt.

The streets really were as full as earlier, he realized, and it would be well after nightfall before he got back to the Palace if he tried to make his way through the crowds. Of course, Tylin might be asleep by then. Maybe. His stomach growled, almost loudly enough to drown out the dice. She might order the kitchens not to feed him, if he was too late.

tɛn hɑɹd-wʌn peɪsɪz θɹu ðə pɹɛs, ən i tɝn daʊn ən æli, nɛɹoʊ ən dɑɹk. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. ðə waɪt plæstɝ ɑn ðə wɪndoʊləs wɔlz wɑz kɹækt ən fɔlɪŋ tə ɪkspoʊz ðə bɹɪk bɪniθ, ɔfən əz nɑt. ði ɛɹ wɑz ɹæŋk wɪð ðə fɛɾəd stɛntʃ ə dəkeɪ, ən i hoʊp ðət wʌt skwɪʃt ʌndɝ ɪz buts wɑz mʌɾ ivən wən ɪt ɡeɪv ɔf ə loʊðsəm oʊɾɝ. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ pipəl, iðɝ. hi kəd stɛp aʊt wɪð ə ɡʊd stʃɹaɪd. əɹ wʌt pæs fəɹ wʌn, tədeɪ. hi kəd hɑɹdli weɪt fəɹ ðə deɪ hi kəd wɔk ə fju maɪlz əɡɛn wɪθaʊt pæntɪŋ ən eɪkɪŋ ən niɾɪŋ tə lin ɑn ə stɪk. twɪstɪŋ æliz, moʊst soʊ nɛɹoʊ hɪz ʃoʊldɝz bɹʌʃt boʊθ saɪdz, kɹɪskɹɔs ðə sɪɾi ɪn ə meɪz ðət wɑz izi tə ɡɛt lɔst ɪn ɪf jə dɪd nɑt noʊ jəɹ weɪ. hi nɛvɝ tʊk ə ɹɔŋ tɝn, ivən wən ə nɛɹoʊ, kɹʊkəd pæsədʒ sʌɾənli fɔɹkt ɪndə θɹi əɹ ivən fɔɹ ðəɾ ɔl sim tə miændɝ ɪn ɹʌfli ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə ɡʊd mɛni taɪmz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ wən i niɾəd tə əvɔɪɾ aɪz, ən i nu ðiz æliz laɪk i nu hɪz oʊn hænd. ðoʊ, ɑdli ɪnʌf, hi stɪl hæd ðə filɪŋ i wɑz biɪŋ wɑtʃt. hi ɪkspɛktəd tə fil ðəɾ əz lɔŋ əz i hæd tə wɛɹ ðoʊz blʌɾi kloʊðz.

Ten hard-won paces through the press, and he turned down an alley, narrow and dark. There were no paving stones. The white plaster on the windowless walls was cracked and falling to expose the brick beneath, often as not. The air was rank with the fetid stench of decay, and he hoped that what squished under his boots was mud even when it gave off a loathsome odor. There were no people, either. He could step out with a good stride. Or what passed for one, today. He could hardly wait for the day he could walk a few miles again without panting and aching and needing to lean on a stick. Twisting alleys, most so narrow his shoulders brushed both sides, crisscrossed the city in a maze that was easy to get lost in if you did not know your way. He never took a wrong turn, even when a narrow, crooked passage suddenly forked into three or even four that all seemed to meander in roughly the same direction. There had been a good many times in Ebou Dar when he needed to avoid eyes, and he knew these alleys like he knew his own hand. Though, oddly enough, he still had the feeling he was being watched. He expected to feel that as long as he had to wear those bloody clothes.

ɪf i hæd tə stʃɹʌɡəl θɹu ə mæs ə pipəl ən ænəməlz fɹəm wʌn æli tə ənʌðɝ, ən əkeɪʒənəli ʃʌv ɪz weɪ əkɹɔs ə bɹɪdʒ ðət simd ə sɑləd wɔl ə hjumænɪɾi, hi wɑz stɪl ɔlmoʊs bæk tə ðə pæləs ɪn ðə taɪm ɪt wʊɾə teɪkən ɪm tə ɡoʊ θɹi stʃɹits ʌðɝwaɪz. hɝiɪŋ ɪndə ðə ʃæɾoʊd pæsədʒ bɪtwin ə wɛl-lɪt tævɝn ən ə ʃʌɾɝd lækɹwɛɹ ʃɑp, hi wʌndɝd wʌt ðə kɪtʃənz wəɾ əv ɹɛɾi. mɔɹ kəpeɪʃəs ðən moʊst, waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ θɹi ɪf ðeɪ wɝ fɹɛnli, ðɪs æli lɛɾ aʊɾ ɑntu ðə mɔl hɛɹə skwɛɹ ɔlmoʊst ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs. sjuɹɔθ wɑz lɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ, ən ðə kʊks hæd bɪn aʊtduɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz sɪns ʃi hæd hæd ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm flɑɡd æftɝ əɹ fɝs mil. ðəɹ maɪt bi ɔɪstɝz wɪð kɹim, ən pɝhæps ɡɪldɪd fɪʃ, ən skwɪd wɪð pɛpɝz. tɛn stʃɹaɪdz ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊz, hɪz fʊt keɪm daʊn ɑn sʌmθɪŋ ðət dɪd nɑt skwɪʃ, ən i wɛn daʊn ɪn ðə fɹizɪŋ mʌd wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt, twɪstɪŋ ət ðə læst ɪnstən soʊ hi dɪd nɑt læn ɑn ɪz bæd lɛɡ. aɪsi lɪkwəɾ ɪmiɾiətli soʊk θɹu hɪz koʊt. hi hoʊpt ɪt wɑz wɔɾɝ.

If he had to struggle through a mass of people and animals from one alley to another, and occasionally shove his way across a bridge that seemed a solid wall of humanity, he was still almost back to the Palace in the time it would have taken him to go three streets otherwise. Hurrying into the shadowed passage between a well-lit tavern and a shuttered lacquerware shop, he wondered what the kitchens would have ready. More capacious than most, wide enough for three if they were friendly, this alley let out onto the Mol Hara Square almost in front of the Tarasin Palace. Suroth was living there, and the cooks had been outdoing themselves since she had had the lot of them flogged after her first meal. There might be oysters with cream, and perhaps gilded fish, and squid with peppers. Ten strides into the shadows, his foot came down on something that did not squish, and he went down in the freezing mud with a grunt, twisting at the last instant so he did not land on his bad leg. Icy liquid immediately soaked through his coat. He hoped it was water.

hi ɡɹʌntɪɾ əɡɛn wən buts lændəɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðə fɛloʊ tɑpəld ɔf ə hɪm, kɝsɪŋ ən skɪɾɪŋ dipɝ ɪndə ði æli ɑn ðə mʌd, ən wɛn tə wʌn ni, dʒʌs mænɪdʒɪŋ tə kætʃ hɪmsɛlf əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ə ðə tævɝn ʃɔɹɾ ə fɔlɪŋ flæt hɪmsɛlf. mæts aɪz wɝ əkʌstəm tə ðə dɪm laɪt, ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə meɪk aʊɾ ə slɛndɝ, nɑndɪskɹɪp mæn. ə mæn wɪð wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ə lɑɹdʒ skɑɹ ɑn ɪz tʃik. nɑɾ ə mæn, ðoʊ. ə kɹitʃɝ i hæd sin ɹɪp aʊɾ ɪz fɹɛnz θɹoʊt wɪð wʌn bɛɹ hæn ən teɪk ə naɪf aʊɾ ʌv ɪts oʊn tʃɛst ən θɹoʊ ɪt bæk ət hɪm. ən ðə θɪŋ wʊɾə lændəd ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ɪn izi ɹitʃ, ɪf i hæd nɑt tʃɹɪpt. meɪbi ə lɪɾəl twɪst ə tɑvɝən ʃeɪpɪŋ hæd wɝkt ɪn ɪz feɪvɝ, θæŋk ðə laɪt! ɔl ðət flæʃt θɹu hɪz hɛɾ ɪn ðə taɪm ɪt tʊk ðə ɡoʊləm tə kætʃ ɪtsɛlf əɡɛns ðə wɔl ən tɝn ɪts hɛd tə ɡlɛɹ ət hɪm.

He grunted again when boots landed on his shoulder. The fellow toppled off of him, cursing and skidding deeper into the alley on the mud, and went to one knee, just managing to catch himself against the side of the tavern short of falling flat himself. Mat's eyes were accustomed to the dim light, enough for him to make out a slender, nondescript man. A man with what appeared to be a large scar on his cheek. Not a man, though. A creature he had seen rip out his friend's throat with one bare hand and take a knife out of its own chest and throw it back at him. And the thing would have landed right in front of him, in easy reach, if he had not tripped. Maybe a little twist of ta'veren shaping had worked in his favor, thank the Light! All that flashed through his head in the time it took the gholam to catch itself against the wall and turn its head to glare at him.

wɪð ən oʊθ, mæt snætʃt ɪz fɔlən wɔkɪŋ stæf ən ɔkwɝdli hɝld ɪɾ ət ðə kɹitʃɝ laɪk ə spɪɹ. əɾ ɪts lɛɡz, hoʊpɪŋ tə tæŋɡəl ðɛm, ɡeɪn ə moʊmənt. ðə θɪŋ floʊɾ əsaɪd laɪk wɔɾɝ, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə stæf, buts slaɪɾɪŋ ə lɪɾəl ɪn ðə mʌd, ðən θɹu ɪtsɛlf təwɔɹd mæt. ðə dɪleɪ hæd bɪn ɪnʌf, ðoʊ. əz sun əz ðə stæf lɛft ɪz hænd, mæt fʌmbəld ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz ʃɝt fəɹ ðə fɑkshɛd mədæljən, bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə lɛðɝ kɔɹɾ əz i snætʃt ðə mədæljən aʊt. ðə ɡoʊləm θɹu ɪtsɛlf ət hɪm, ən i swʌŋ ðə mədæljən dɛspɝətli. sɪlvɝ ðət hæd leɪn kul ɑn ɪz tʃɛs bɹʌʃt əkɹɔs ən aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt hænd wɪð ə hɪs laɪk beɪkən fɹaɪɪŋ ən ə smɛl ə bɝnɪŋ flɛʃ. fluəɾ əz kwɪksɪlvɝ, snɑɹlɪŋ, ðə θɪŋ tʃɹaɪd tə dɑdʒ baɪ ðə wɝlɪŋ mədæljən, tə siz səm pɑɹɾ ə mæt. wʌns ɪt leɪd hænz ɑn hɪm, hi wɑz əz ɡʊɾ əz dɛd. ɪt wəd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə tɔɪ wɪð ɪm ðɪs taɪm, əz ɪt hæɾ ɪn ðə ɹæhəd. fleɪlɪŋ kəntɪnjuəsli, hi kɑɾ ɪt wɪð ðə fɑkshɛɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, əkɹɔs ðə feɪs, itʃ taɪm wɪð ə hɪs ən stɛntʃ ə bɝnɪŋ əz ɪf i hæd stʃɹʌk wɪð ə hɑɾ aɪɝn. tiθ bɛɹd, ðə ɡoʊləm bækt əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪn ə kɹaʊtʃ ɑn ðə bɔlz ʌv ɪts fit, hænz klɔd, ɹɛɾi tə dʒʌmp ət ðə slaɪɾəst wiknəs.

With an oath, Mat snatched his fallen walking staff and awkwardly hurled it at the creature like a spear. At its legs, hoping to tangle them, gain a moment. The thing flowed aside like water, avoiding the staff, boots sliding a little in the mud, then threw itself toward Mat. The delay had been enough, though. As soon as the staff left his hand, Mat fumbled inside his shirt for the foxhead medallion, breaking the leather cord as he snatched the medallion out. The gholam threw itself at him, and he swung the medallion desperately. Silver that had lain cool on his chest brushed across an outstretched hand with a hiss like bacon frying and a smell of burning flesh. Fluid as quicksilver, snarling, the thing tried to dodge by the whirling medallion, to seize some part of Mat. Once it laid hands on him, he was as good as dead. It would not try to toy with him this time, as it had in the Rahad. Flailing continuously, he caught it with the foxhead on the other hand, across the face, each time with a hiss and stench of burning as if he had struck with a hot iron. Teeth bared, the gholam backed away, but in a crouch on the balls of its feet, hands clawed, ready to jump at the slightest weakness.

nɑt lɛɾɪŋ ðə spɪnɪŋ mədæljən sloʊ, mæt pʊʃt ənstɛɾəli tə hɪz fit, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə θɪŋ ðət lʊkt ə laɪk ə mæn. hi wɑns jə dɛɾ əz mʌtʃ əz i wɑns hɝ, ɪt hæd toʊld ɪm ɪn ðə ɹæhəd, smaɪlɪŋ. ɪt wɑz nɑt tɔkɪŋ əɹ smaɪlɪŋ naʊ. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ hu ðə "hɝ" wɑz, əɹ ðə "hi," bʌt ðə ɹɛst wɑz klɪɹ əz ɡʊd ɡlæs. ən hɪɹ i wɑz, bɛɹli eɪbəl tə steɪ ɑn ɪz fit. hɪz lɛɡ ən hɪp ætʃt laɪk faɪɝ, ən ɪz ɹɪbz. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə ʃoʊldɝ ðə ɡoʊləm hæd lændəɾ ɑn. hi hæd tə ɡɛt bæk tə ðə stʃɹit, bæk əmʌŋ pipəl. meɪbi ɪnʌf pipəl wəd dɪtɝ ðə θɪŋ. ə smɔl hoʊp, bʌt ði oʊnli hoʊp i kəd si. ðə stʃɹit wɑz nɑt fɑɹ. hi kəd hɪɹ ðə bæbəl ə vɔɪsəz, hɑɹdli sɔfən baɪ dɪstəns əɾ ɔl.

Not letting the spinning medallion slow, Mat pushed unsteadily to his feet, watching the thing that looked a like a man. He wants you dead as much as he wants her, it had told him in the Rahad, smiling. It was not talking or smiling now. He did not know who the "her" was, or the "he," but the rest was clear as good glass. And here he was, barely able to stay on his feet. His leg and hip ached like fire, and his ribs. Not to mention the shoulder the gholam had landed on. He had to get back to the street, back among people. Maybe enough people would deter the thing. A small hope, but the only hope he could see. The street was not far. He could hear the babble of voices, hardly softened by distance at all.

hi tʊk ə kɛɹfəl stɛp bækwɝd. hɪz but slɪɾ ɪn sʌmθɪŋ ðət ɡeɪv ɔf ə faʊl smɛl ən θɹu hɪm əɡɛns ðə tævɝnz wɔl. oʊnli fɹæntɪk swɪŋz ə ðə sɪlvɝ fɑkshɛd kɛp ðə ɡoʊləm bæk. ðoʊz vɔɪsəz ɪn ðə stʃɹit wɝ soʊ tæntəlaɪzɪŋli kloʊs. ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ɪn bɑɹsaɪn. bɑɹsaɪn wɑz lɔŋ dɛd, ən i wəd bi tu, sun.

He took a careful step backward. His boot slid in something that gave off a foul smell and threw him against the tavern's wall. Only frantic swings of the silver foxhead kept the gholam back. Those voices in the street were so tantalizingly close. They might as well have been in Barsine. Barsine was long dead, and he would be too, soon.

"hiz daʊn ðɪs æli!" ə mæn ʃaʊɾəd. "fɑloʊ mi! hɝi! hɪl ɡɛɾ əweɪ!"

"He's down this alley!" a man shouted. "Follow me! Hurry! He'll get away!"

mæt kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn ðə ɡoʊləm. ɪts ɡeɪz flɪkɝd bɪɑn hɪm, təwɔɹd ðə stʃɹit, ən ɪt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "aɪ æm ɔɹɾɝd tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs, seɪv baɪ ðoʊz aɪ hɑɹvəst," ɪt spæɾ ət hɪm, "soʊ jəl lɪv ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ. ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ."

Mat kept his eyes on the gholam. Its gaze flickered beyond him, toward the street, and it hesitated. "I am ordered to avoid notice, save by those I harvest," it spat at him, "so you will live a little longer. A little longer."

spɪnɪŋ, ɪt ɹæn daʊn ði æli, slɪpɪŋ ə lɪɾəl ɪn ðə mʌd, jɛt stɪl simɪŋ tə floʊ əz ɪt dɑdʒd ɝaʊn bɪhaɪn ðə tævɝn.

Spinning, it ran down the alley, slipping a little in the mud, yet still seeming to flow as it dodged around behind the tavern.

mæt ɹæn æftɝ ɪt. hi kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd waɪ, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪt hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɪm, wəd tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn, ən ɪz hækəlz wɝ stɪf. soʊ ɪt wɑz gɑnə kɪl ɪm ət lɛʒɝ, wɑz ɪt? ɪf ðə mədæljən kəd hɝɾ ɪt, meɪbi ðə mədæljən kəd kɪl ɪt.

Mat ran after it. He could not have said why, except that it had tried to kill him, would try again, and his hackles were stiff. So it was going to kill him at leisure, was it? If the medallion could hurt it, maybe the medallion could kill it.

ɹitʃɪŋ ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə tævɝn, hi sɔ ðə ɡoʊləm ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðəɾ ɪt ɡlæns bæk ən sɔ hɪm. əɡɛn, ðə θɪŋ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. ðə tævɝnz bæk dɔɹ stʊɾ ədʒɑɹ, lɛɾɪŋ aʊt ðə saʊnz ə ɹɛvəlɹi. ðə kɹitʃɝ stʌk ɪts hænz ɪndə ə hoʊl lɛf baɪ ə mɪsɪŋ bɹɪk ɪn ðə bæk wɔl ə ðə bɪldɪŋ ɑpəzət ðə tævɝn, ən mæt stɪfənd. ɪt hɑɹdli sim tə nid wɛpənz, bʌɾ ɪf ɪt hæd hɪɾən wʌn ɪn ðəɹ . . . hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i wəd sɝvaɪv feɪsɪŋ ðət θɪŋ wɪð ɛni sɔɹɾ ʌv wɛpən. hænz fɑloʊɾ ɑɹmz, ən ðən ðə ɡoʊləmz hɛd wɛn ɪndə ðə hoʊl. mæts dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt. ðə ɡoʊləmz tʃɛst slaɪðɝd θɹu, ɪts lɛɡz, ən ɪt wɑz ɡɔn. θɹu ən oʊpənɪŋ meɪbi ðə saɪz ə mæts tu hænz.

Reaching the corner of the tavern, he saw the gholam at the same time that it glanced back and saw him. Again, the thing hesitated for an instant. The tavern's back door stood ajar, letting out the sounds of revelry. The creature stuck its hands into a hole left by a missing brick in the back wall of the building opposite the tavern, and Mat stiffened. It hardly seemed to need weapons, but if it had hidden one in there . . . He did not think he would survive facing that thing with any sort of weapon. Hands followed arms, and then the gholam's head went into the hole. Mat's jaw dropped. The gholam's chest slithered through, its legs, and it was gone. Through an opening maybe the size of Mat's two hands.

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ hæv ɛvɝ sin ðə laɪk," sʌmwʌn sɛd kwaɪətli bɪsaɪd hɪm, ən mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ət ɹilaɪzɪŋ i wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əloʊn. ðə spikɝ wɑz ə stup-ʃoʊldɝd, waɪt-hɛɹɾ oʊl mæn wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ hʊk noʊz plæntəɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə sæd feɪs ən ə bʌndəl slʌŋ ɑn ɪz bæk. hi wɑz slaɪɾɪŋ ə vɛɹi lɔŋ dæɡɝ ɪndə ə ʃiθ bɪniθ ɪz koʊt.

"I don't think I have ever seen the like," someone said quietly beside him, and Mat gave a start at realizing he was no longer alone. The speaker was a stoop-shouldered, white-haired old man with a large hooked nose planted in the middle of a sad face and a bundle slung on his back. He was sliding a very long dagger into a sheath beneath his coat.

"aɪ hæv," mæt sɛd hɑloʊli. "ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ." səmtaɪmz bɪts ə hɪz oʊn mɛmɹi hi θɔt lɔs floʊɾəd ʌp aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ, ən ðət wʌn hæd dʒʌst sɝfɪst, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə ɡoʊləm. ɪt wɑz wʌn mɛmɹi hi wɪʃt hæd ɹɪmeɪn lɔst.

"I have," Mat said hollowly. "In Shadar Logoth." Sometimes bits of his own memory he thought lost floated up out of nowhere, and that one had just surfaced, watching the gholam. It was one memory he wished had remained lost.

"nɑt mɛni sɝvaɪv ə vɪzət ðɛɹ," ði oʊl mæn sɛd, piɹɪŋ ət hɪm. hɪz wɛðɝd feɪs lʊk fəmɪljɝ, sʌmhaʊ, bʌt mæt kəd nɑt pleɪs hɪm. "wʌtɛvɝ tʊk jə tə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ?"

"Not many survive a visit there," the old man said, peering at him. His weathered face looked familiar, somehow, but Mat could not place him. "Whatever took you to Shadar Logoth?"

"wɛɹ ɑɹ jəɹ fɹɛnz?" mæt sɛd. "ðə pipəl jə wɝ ʃaʊɾɪŋ tə?" ði æliweɪ hɛld oʊnli ðə tu ʌv ðɛm. ðə saʊnz fɹəm ðə stʃɹit kəntɪnjuɾ ʌnəbeɪɾɪd, ən ʌndɪstɝbd baɪ ɛni kɹaɪz əbaʊɾ ɛniwʌn ɡɛɾɪŋ əweɪ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt hɝi.

"Where are your friends?" Mat said. "The people you were shouting to?" The alleyway held only the two of them. The sounds from the street continued unabated, and undisturbed by any cries about anyone getting away if they did not hurry.

ði oʊl mæn ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪm nɑt sɝɾən ɛniwʌn aʊt ðəɹ ʌndɝstʊd wʌɾ aɪ wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ. ɪts hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf ʌndɝstændɪŋ ðɛm. ɛniweɪ, aɪ θɔɾ ɪt maɪt skɛɹ ɔf ðə fɛloʊ. siɪŋ ðæt, ðoʊ . . ." dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə hoʊl ɪn ðə wɔl, hi læf mɝθləsli, ʃoʊɪŋ ɡæps ɪn ɪz tiθ. "aɪ θɪŋk meɪbi jə ən aɪ boʊθ əv ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn lʌk."

The old man shrugged. "I'm not certain anyone out there understood what I was shouting. It's hard enough understanding them. Anyway, I thought it might scare off the fellow. Seeing that, though . . ." Gesturing toward the hole in the wall, he laughed mirthlessly, showing gaps in his teeth. "I think maybe you and I both have the Dark One's own luck."

mæt ɡɹɪməst. hi hæd hɝd ðət tu ɔfən əbaʊt hɪmsɛlf, ən i dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt. meɪnli kəz i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz nɑt tʃɹu. "meɪbi wi du," hi mʌɾɝd. "fɝɡɪv mi; aɪ ʃəɾ ɪntʃɹədus maɪsɛlf tə ðə mæn u seɪv maɪ nɛk. aɪm mæt kɔθən. ɑɹ jə nu-kʌm tə ɛbu dɑɹ?" ðət bʌndəl stʃɹæp tə ðə fɛloʊz bæk ɡeɪv ɪm ðə lʊk ʌv ə mæn ɑn ðə muv. "ju wɪl əv ə hɑɹd taɪm faɪndɪŋ ə pleɪs tə slip." hi tʊk kɛɹ wɪð ðə nɑɹl hæn ði ʌðɝ mæn pʊɾ ɪn hɪz. ɪt wɑz ɔl nɑbz, əz ɪf ɛvɹi boʊn hæd bɪn bɹoʊkən ət ðə seɪm taɪm ən hæd hil bædli. ɪt hæɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ ɡɹɪp, ðoʊ.

Mat grimaced. He had heard that too often about himself, and he did not like it. Mainly because he was not sure it was not true. "Maybe we do," he muttered. "Forgive me; I should introduce myself to the man who saved my neck. I'm Mat Cauthon. Are you new-come to Ebou Dar?" That bundle strapped to the fellow's back gave him the look of a man on the move. "You will have a hard time finding a place to sleep." He took care with the gnarled hand the other man put in his. It was all knobs, as if every bone had been broken at the same time and had healed badly. It had a strong grip, though.

"aɪ æm noʊl tʃɛɝɪn, mæt kɔθən. noʊ, aɪ hæv bɪn hɪɹ səm taɪm. bʌt maɪ pæləɾ ɪn ði æɾɪk ə ðə ɡoʊldən dʌks ɪz naʊ ɑkjəpaɪd baɪ ə fæɾ ɪliɑnɝ ɔɪl mɝtʃən u wɑz ɹstɪd fɹəm ɪz ɹum ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ ɪn feɪvɝ ʌv ə sintʃæn ɔfəsɝ. aɪ θɔɾ aɪd faɪn sʌmwɛɹ bæk ɪn ðɪs æli fəɹ tənaɪt." ɹʌbɪŋ ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz bɪɡ noʊz wɪð ə kɹʊkəd, nɑbi fɪŋɡɝ, hi tʃʌkəld əz ɪf slipɪŋ ɪn ən æli wɝ ə noʊ moʊmənt. "ɪt wɪl nɑt bi ðə fɝs taɪm aɪv slɛpt ɹʌf, ivən ɪn ə sɪɾi."

"I am Noal Charin, Mat Cauthon. No, I have been here some time. But my pallet in the attic of The Golden Ducks is now occupied by a fat Illianer oil merchant who was rousted from his room this morning in favor of a Seanchan officer. I thought I'd find somewhere back in this alley for tonight." Rubbing the side of his big nose with a crooked, knobby finger, he chuckled as if sleeping in an alley were of no moment. "It will not be the first time I've slept rough, even in a city."

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən də bɛɾɝ fəɹ jə ðən ðæt," mæt toʊl hɪm, bʌt ðə ɹɛst ʌv wʌɾ i hæd bɪn gɑnə seɪ daɪɾ ɑn ɪz tʌŋ. ðə daɪs wɝ stɪl spɪnɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd, hi ɹilaɪzd. hi hæd mænədʒ tə fɝɡɛɾ əm wɪð ðə ɡoʊləm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl hɪm, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ stɪl baʊnsɪŋ, stɪl weɪɾɪŋ tə lænd. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ wɔɹnɪŋ ə sʌmθɪŋ wɝs ðən ðə ɡoʊləm, hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə noʊ. oʊnli, hi wʊd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ ə ðæt. hi wʊd, wən ɪt wɑz tu leɪt.

"I think I can do better for you than that," Mat told him, but the rest of what he had been going to say died on his tongue. The dice were still spinning in his head, he realized. He had managed to forget them with the gholam trying to kill him, but they were still bouncing, still waiting to land. If they were warning of something worse than the gholam, he did not want to know. Only, he would. There was no doubt of that. He would, when it was too late.


tʃæptɝ sɛvəntin


CHAPTER 17

pɪŋk ɹɪbənz


Pink Ribbons

koʊld wɪnz ɡʌstɪd θɹu ðə mɔl hɛɹə, lɪftɪŋ mæts kloʊk ən θɹɛɾənɪŋ tə fɹiz ðə mʌd keɪkɪŋ ɪz kloʊðɪŋ əz i ən noʊl hɝiɾ aʊɾ ə ði æli. ðə sʌn sæɾ ɑn ðə ɹuftɑps, hæf-hɪɾən, ən ðə ʃædoʊz stʃɹɛtʃt lɔŋ. wɪð wʌn hæn fəɹ ɪz stæf ən ði ʌðɝ ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə bɹoʊkən kɔɹɾ ə ðə fɑkshɛd, stʌft ɪndə ə koʊt pɑkət wɛɹ i kəd snætʃ ɪɾ aʊɾ ɪf nid bi, hi hæd tə lɛɾ ɪz kloʊk ɡoʊ wɛɹ ɪt wʊd. hi ætʃt fɹəm hɛd tə fʊt, ðə daɪs ɹæɾəld wɔɹnɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz skʌl, ən i hɑɹdli noʊɾəst iðɝ θɪŋ. hi wɑz tu bɪzi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɑtʃ ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ət wʌns, ən wʌndɝɪŋ dʒʌs haʊ smɔl ə hoʊl ðət θɪŋ kəd ɡɛt θɹu. hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf ənizəli aɪɪŋ kɹæks bɪtwin ðə skwɛɹz peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. ðoʊ ɪt hɑɹdli sim laɪkli ðə θɪŋ wəd kʌm əɾ ɪm ɪn ði oʊpən.

Cold winds gusted through the Mol Hara, lifting Mat's cloak and threatening to freeze the mud caking his clothing as he and Noal hurried out of the alley. The sun sat on the rooftops, half-hidden, and the shadows stretched long. With one hand for his staff and the other gripping the broken cord of the foxhead, stuffed into a coat pocket where he could snatch it out if need be, he had to let his cloak go where it would. He ached from head to foot, the dice rattled warning inside his skull, and he hardly noticed either thing. He was too busy trying to watch every direction at once, and wondering just how small a hole that thing could get through. He found himself uneasily eyeing cracks between the square's paving stones. Though it hardly seemed likely the thing would come at him in the open.

ə hʌm kæɹid fɹəm sɝaʊndɪŋ stʃɹits, bʌt hɪɹ oʊnli ə slæt-ɹɪb dɔɡ muvd, ɹʌnɪŋ pæs ðə faʊnteɪn stætʃu ʌv lɔŋ-dɛd kwin nɑɹaɪn. səm sɛɾ əɹ ʌplɪftəd hæn pɔɪntəd tə ði oʊʃənz baʊnti ðət hæɾ ɛnɹɪtʃt ɛbu dɑɹ, ən səm ðəɾ ɪt pɔɪntəɾ ɪn wɔɹnɪŋ ə deɪnʒɝz. ʌðɝz sɛɾ əɹ səksɛsɝ hæd wɑntəd tə dʒɹɔ ətɛnʃən tə ðə fæk ðəɾ oʊnli wʌn ə ðə stætʃuz bɹɛsts wɑz ənkʌvɝd, pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ ðət nɑɹaɪn hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ə mɪɾəlɪŋ ɑnəsti.

A hum carried from surrounding streets, but here only a slat-ribbed dog moved, running past the fountained statue of long-dead Queen Nariene. Some said her uplifted hand pointed to the ocean's bounty that had enriched Ebou Dar, and some that it pointed in warning of dangers. Others said her successor had wanted to draw attention to the fact that only one of the statue's breasts was uncovered, proclaiming that Nariene had only been of middling honesty.

ɪn ʌðɝ deɪz ðə mɔl hɛɹə wʊɾə bɪn fʊl ə stʃɹoʊlɪŋ lʌvɝz ən lɪŋɡɝɪŋ stʃɹit vɛndɝz ən hoʊpfəl bɛɡɝz ət ðɪs aʊɝ ivən ɪn wɪntɝ, bʌt bɛɡɝz faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz snætʃt ɔf ðə stʃɹits ən pʊt tə wɝk, sɪns ðə sintʃæn keɪm, ən ðə ɹɛst steɪɾ əweɪ ivən ɪn deɪlaɪt. ðə ɹizən wɑz ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, ðət ɡɹeɪt maʊn ʌv waɪt doʊmz ən mɑɹbəl spaɪɹz ən ɹɔt-aɪɝn bælkəniz, ðə ɹɛzəɾəns ə taɪlɪn kwɪntɑɹə mɪtsoʊbɑɹ, baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə laɪt, kwin ʌv ɔltɑɹə - əɹ əz mʌtʃ ʌv ɔltɑɹə əz leɪ wɪðɪn ə fju deɪz' ɹaɪɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ - mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə fɔɹ wɪnz ən ɡɑɹɾiən ə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz. ænd, pɝhæps mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ðə ɹɛzəɾəns ə ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ səbəl mɛlʒɹəθ, kəmændɪŋ ðə fɔɹʌnɝz fəɹ ði ɛmpɹɛs ə ðə sintʃæn, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ. ə pəzɪʃən ə mʌtʃ ɡɹeɪɾɝ ɛmənəns ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ət ðə moʊmənt. taɪlɪnz ɡɹin-buɾɪd ɡɑɹdz stʊɾ əɾ ɛvɹi ɛntʃɹəns ɪn ðɛɹ bæɡi waɪt tʃɹaʊzɝz ən ɡɪldɪd bɹɛstpleɪts wɔɹn oʊvɝ ɡɹin koʊts, ən soʊ dɪd mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn ðoʊz ɪnsɛktəl hɛlməts wɪð ɑɹmɝ stʃɹaɪpt ɪn blu-ænd-jɛloʊ əɹ ɡɹin-ænd-waɪɾ əɹ ɛni ʌðɝ kɑmbəneɪʃən jə maɪt hæpən tə θɪŋk ʌv. ðə kwin ʌv ɔltɑɹə ɹikwaɪɝd sɪkjʊɹəɾi ən saɪləns fəɹ əɹ ɹɛst. əɹ ɹæðɝ, sjuɹɔθ sɛd ʃi dɪd, ən wʌt sjuɹɔθ sɛd taɪlɪn wɑntəd, taɪlɪn sun dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət ʃi dɪɾ ɪndid wɑnt.

In other days the Mol Hara would have been full of strolling lovers and lingering street vendors and hopeful beggars at this hour even in winter, but beggars found themselves snatched off the streets and put to work, since the Seanchan came, and the rest stayed away even in daylight. The reason was the Tarasin Palace, that great mound of white domes and marble spires and wrought-iron balconies, the residence of Tylin Quintara Mitsobar, by the Grace of the Light, Queen of Altara - or as much of Altara as lay within a few days' ride of Ebou Dar - Mistress of the Four Winds and Guardian of the Sea of Storms. And, perhaps more important, the residence of the High Lady Suroth Sabelle Meldarath, commanding the Forerunners for the Empress of the Seanchan, might she live forever. A position of much greater eminence in Ebou Dar, at the moment. Tylin's green-booted guards stood at every entrance in their baggy white trousers and gilded breastplates worn over green coats, and so did men and women in those insectile helmets with armor striped in blue-and-yellow or green-and-white or any other combination you might happen to think of. The Queen of Altara required security and silence for her rest. Or rather, Suroth said she did, and what Suroth said Tylin wanted, Tylin soon decided that she did indeed want.

æftɝ ə moʊməns kənsɪɾɝeɪʃən, mæt lɛd noʊl tə wʌn ə ðə steɪbliɑɹd ɡeɪts. ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ tʃæns ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ɪn ðəɹ ðən ɪf i juz ðə ɡɹæn mɑɹbəl stɛɹz ðət lɛd daʊn ɪndə ðə skwɛɹ. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ə mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ tʃæns ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ ɔl ðə mʌɾ ɔf ɪm bɪfɔɹ i hæd tə feɪs taɪlɪn. ʃi hæd meɪɾ əɹ dɪsplɛʒɝ mɑɹkədli noʊn ðə læs taɪm i keɪm bæk dɪʃɛvəld, æftɝ ə tævɝn bɹɔl.

After a moment's consideration, Mat led Noal to one of the stableyard gates. There was more chance of getting a stranger in there than if he used the grand marble stairs that led down into the square. Not to mention a much better chance of getting all the mud off him before he had to face Tylin. She had made her displeasure markedly known the last time he came back disheveled, after a tavern brawl.

ə hændfʊl ʌv ɛbu dɑɹi ɡɑɹdz stʊd tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ði oʊpən ɡeɪts wɪð hælbɝdz, ən ðə seɪm nʌmbɝ ə sintʃæn ɑn ði ʌðɝ wɪð tæsɛl spɪɹz, ɔl əz stɪf əz nɑɹaɪnz stætʃu.

A handful of Ebou Dari guards stood to one side of the open gates with halberds, and the same number of Seanchan on the other with tasseled spears, all as stiff as Nariene's statue.

"ðə laɪts blɛsɪŋ ɑn ɔl hɪɹ," mæt mɝmɝd pəlaɪtli tə ði ɛbu dɑɹi ɡɑɹdz. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz bɛs tə bi pəlaɪt tə ɛbu dɑɹi əntɪl jə wɝ ʃʊɹ ə ðɛm. æftɝwɝdz, tu, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ivən soʊ, ðeɪ wɝ mɔɹ . . . flɛksəbəl . . . ðən ðə sintʃæn.

"The Light's blessing on all here," Mat murmured politely to the Ebou Dari guards. It was always best to be polite to Ebou Dari until you were sure of them. Afterwards, too, for that matter. Even so, they were more . . . flexible . . . than the Seanchan.

"æn ɑn ju, maɪ lɔɹd," ðɛɹ stɑki ɔfəsɝ ɹɪplaɪd, æmbəlɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, ən mæt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɪm, sɝləvən sɑɹət, ə ɡʊd fɛloʊ, ɔlweɪz ɹɛɾi wɪð ə kwɪp ən pəzɛsɪŋ ə faɪn aɪ fəɹ hɔɹsəz. ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, sɝləvən tæp ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz pɔɪntəd hɛlmət wɪð ðə θɪn, ɡɪldɪd ɹɑɾ ə hɪz ɔfəs. "hæv jə bɪn ɪn ənʌðɝ faɪt, maɪ lɔɹd? ʃɪl ɡoʊ ʌp laɪk ə wɔɾɝspaʊt, wən ʃi siz ju."

"And on you, my Lord," their stocky officer replied, ambling forward, and Mat recognized him, Surlivan Sarat, a good fellow, always ready with a quip and possessing a fine eye for horses. Shaking his head, Surlivan tapped the side of his pointed helmet with the thin, gilded rod of his office. "Have you been in another fight, my Lord? She will go up like a waterspout, when she sees you."

skwɛɹɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə lin soʊ ɑbviəsli ɑn ɪz stæf, mæt bɹɪsəld. ɹɛɾi wɪð ə kwɪp? kʌm tə θɪŋk ɑn ɪt, ðə sʌn-dɑɹk mæn hæɾ ə tʌŋ laɪk ə ɹæsp. ən ɪz aɪ fəɹ hɔɹsəz wɑz nɑɾ ɔl ðət faɪn, iðɝ. "wɪl ðəɹ bi ɛni kwɛstʃənz ɪf maɪ fɹɛn hɪɹ bɛdz daʊn wɪð maɪ mɛn?" mæt æskt ɹʌfli. "ðɛɹ ʃʊdn bi. ðɛɹz ɹum fəɹ wʌn mɔɹ wɪð maɪ fɛloʊz." ɹum fəɹ mɔɹ ðən wʌn, tʃɹuθ bi toʊld. eɪt mɛn hæd daɪd soʊ fɑɹ, fəɹ fɑloʊɪŋ ɪm tə ɛbu dɑɹ.

Squaring his shoulders, and trying not to lean so obviously on his staff, Mat bristled. Ready with a quip? Come to think on it, the sun-dark man had a tongue like a rasp. And his eye for horses was not all that fine, either. "Will there be any questions if my friend here beds down with my men?" Mat asked roughly. "There shouldn't be. There's room for one more with my fellows." Room for more than one, truth be told. Eight men had died so far, for following him to Ebou Dar.

"nʌn fɹəm mi, maɪ lɔɹd," sɝləvən sɛd, ðoʊ hi aɪd ðə skɹɔni mæn ət mæts saɪɾ ən pɝst ɪz lɪps dʒudɪʃɪsli. noʊlz koʊɾ əpɪɹɾ ʌv ɡʊd kwɑləɾi, ðoʊ, ət list ɪn ðə dɪm laɪt, ən i dɪɾ əv ɪz leɪs, ən ɪn ə bɛɾɝ steɪt ðən mæts. pɝhæps ðət tɪp ðə bæləns. "ænd ʃi dʌznt nid tə noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, soʊ nʌn fɹəm hɝ, iðɝ."

"None from me, my Lord," Surlivan said, though he eyed the scrawny man at Mat's side and pursed his lips judiciously. Noal's coat appeared of good quality, though, at least in the dim light, and he did have his lace, and in a better state than Mat's. Perhaps that tipped the balance. "And she doesn't need to know everything, so none from her, either."

mæt skaʊld, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ɪntɛmpɝət wɝdz kəd pʊt hɪmsɛlf ən noʊl ɪn ðə sup kɛɾəl, θɹi ɑɹmɝd sintʃæn ɡæləpt ʌp tə ðə ɡeɪt, ən sɝləvən tɝn tə feɪs ðɛm.

Mat scowled, but before intemperate words could put himself and Noal in the soup kettle, three armored Seanchan galloped up to the gate, and Surlivan turned to face them.

"ju ən jəɹ leɪɾi waɪf lɪv ɪn ðə kwinz pæləs?" noʊl ɛnkwaɪɝd, stɑɹɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪt.

"You and your lady wife live in the Queen's Palace?" Noal enquired, starting toward the gate.

mæt pʊld ɪm bæk. "weɪɾ ɑn ðɛm," hi sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə sintʃæn. hɪz leɪɾi waɪf? blʌɾi wɪmən! blʌɾi daɪs ɪn ɪz blʌɾi hɛd!

Mat pulled him back. "Wait on them," he said, nodding toward the Seanchan. His lady wife? Bloody women! Bloody dice in his bloody head!

"aɪ hæv dɪspætʃɪz fəɹ ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ," wʌn ə ðə sintʃæn ənaʊnst, slæpɪŋ ə lɛðɝ sætʃəl hæŋɪŋ fɹəm wʌn ɑɹmɝd ʃoʊldɝ. hɝ hɛlmət bɔɹ ə sɪŋɡəl θɪn plum, mɑɹkɪŋ əɹ ə loʊ-ɹæŋkɪŋ ɔfəsɝ, jɛɾ əɹ hɔɹs wɑz ə tɔl dʌn ɡɛldɪŋ wɪð ə lʊk ə spid. ði ʌðɝ tu ænəməlz wɝ stɝɾi ɪnʌf, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə bi sɛd fəɹ əm bɪɑn ðæt.

"I have dispatches for the High Lady Suroth," one of the Seanchan announced, slapping a leather satchel hanging from one armored shoulder. Her helmet bore a single thin plume, marking her a low-ranking officer, yet her horse was a tall dun gelding with a look of speed. The other two animals were sturdy enough, but there was nothing to be said for them beyond that.

"ɛntɝ wɪð ðə blɛsɪŋz ə ðə laɪt," sɝləvən sɛd, boʊɪŋ slaɪtli.

"Enter with the blessings of the Light," Surlivan said, bowing slightly.

ðə sintʃæn wʊmənz baʊ fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl wɑz ə mɪɹɝ ə hɪz. "ðə blɛsɪŋz ə ðə laɪt bi ɑn jə ɔlsoʊ," ʃi dʒɹɔld, ən ðə θɹi ʌv əm klæɾɝd ɪndə ðə steɪbliɑɹd.

The Seanchan woman's bow from her saddle was a mirror of his. "The blessings of the Light be on you also," she drawled, and the three of them clattered into the stableyard.

"ɪɾ ɪz vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ," sɝləvən mjuzd, piɹɪŋ æftɝ ðə θɹi. "ðeɪ ɔlweɪz æsk pɝmɪʃən ʌv ʌs, nɑt ðɛm." hi flɪkt ɪz ɹɑd təwɔɹd ðə sintʃæn ɡɑɹdz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɡeɪts. ðeɪ hæd nɑt stɝɾ ən ɪntʃ fɹəm ðɛɹ ɹɪdʒəd stæns, əɹ ivən ɡlænst ət ði ɝaɪvəlz ðət mæt hæd noʊɾəst.

"It is very strange," Surlivan mused, peering after the three. "They always ask permission of us, not them." He flicked his rod toward the Seanchan guards on the other side of the gates. They had not stirred an inch from their rigid stance, or even glanced at the arrivals that Mat had noticed.

"ænd wʌt wəd ðeɪ də ɪf jə sɛd ðeɪ kʊdnt ɡoʊ ɪn?" noʊl æskt kwaɪətli, izɪŋ ðə bʌndəl ɑn ɪz bæk.

"And what would they do if you said they couldn't go in?" Noal asked quietly, easing the bundle on his back.

sɝləvən spʌn ɑn ɪz hil. "ɪɾ ɪz ɪnʌf ðəɾ aɪ hæv ɡɪvən oʊθ tə maɪ kwin," hi sɛɾ ɪn ən ɪkspɹɛʃənləs vɔɪs, "ænd ʃiz ɡɪvən hɝz . . . wɛɹ ʃiz ɡɪvən ɪt. ɡɪv jəɹ fɹɛn ə bɛd, maɪ lɔɹd. ən wɔɹn hɪm, ðəɹ ɑɹ θɪŋz bɛɾɝ lɛft ənsɛɾ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, kwɛstʃənz bɛɾɝ lɛft ʌnəskt."

Surlivan spun on his heel. "It is enough that I have given oath to my Queen," he said in an expressionless voice, "and she has given hers . . . where she has given it. Give your friend a bed, my Lord. And warn him, there are things better left unsaid in Ebou Dar, questions better left unasked."

noʊl lʊk bɪfʌɾəld ən bɪɡæn pɹətɛstɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz sɪmpli kjʊɹiəs, bʌt mæt ɪkstʃeɪnʒd fɝðɝ bɛnɪsənz ən kɝɾəsiz wɪð ði ɔltɑɹən ɔfəsɝ - əz kwɪkli əz i kʊd, tə bi ʃʊɹ - ən hʌsəld ɪz nu-faʊn əkweɪntəns θɹu ðə ɡeɪts, ɪkspleɪnɪŋ əbaʊt lɪsənɝz ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs. ðə mæn maɪɾ əv seɪvd ɪz haɪd fɹəm ðə ɡoʊləm, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt min i wəd lɛt ðə fɛloʊ hæn ɪɾ oʊvɝ tə ðə sintʃæn. ðeɪ hæd pipəl kɔl sikɝz, tu, ən fɹəm ðə lɪɾəl i hæd hɝd - ivən pipəl u spoʊk fɹili əbaʊt ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd lɑk ðɛɹ tiθ wən ɪt keɪm tə ðə sikɝz - fɹəm ðə lɪɾəl i hæd hɝd, sikɝz meɪd waɪtkloʊk kwɛstʃənɝz lʊk laɪk bɔɪz tɔɹməntɪŋ flaɪz, næsti bʌt hɑɹdli ɛniθɪŋ tə wɝi ə mæn.

Noal looked befuddled and began protesting that he was simply curious, but Mat exchanged further benisons and courtesies with the Altaran officer - as quickly as he could, to be sure - and hustled his new-found acquaintance through the gates, explaining about Listeners in a low voice. The man might have saved his hide from the gholam, but that did not mean he would let the fellow hand it over to the Seanchan. They had people called Seekers, too, and from the little he had heard - even people who spoke freely about the Deathwatch Guard locked their teeth when it came to the Seekers - from the little he had heard, Seekers made Whitecloak Questioners look like boys tormenting flies, nasty but hardly anything to worry a man.

"aɪ si," ði oʊl mæn sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ hædnt noʊn ðæt." hi saʊndəɾ ɪɹəteɪɾəd wɪð hɪmsɛlf. "ju mʌst spɛn ə ɡʊd dil ə taɪm wɪð ðə sintʃæn. dʒju noʊ ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ əz wɛl, ðɛn? aɪ mʌst seɪ, aɪ hæd noʊ aɪdiə jə hæd sətʃ haɪ kənɛkʃənz."

"I see," the old man said slowly. "I hadn't known that." He sounded irritated with himself. "You must spend a good deal of time with the Seanchan. Do you know the High Lady Suroth as well, then? I must say, I had no idea you had such high connections."

"aɪ spɛn taɪm wɪð soʊlʒɝz ɪn tævɝnz, wən aɪ kæn," mæt ɹɪplaɪd saʊɝli. wən taɪlɪn lɛt hɪm. laɪt, hi maɪɾ əz wɛl bi mɛɹid! "sjuɹɔθ dʌznt noʊ aɪm əlaɪv." ən i dɪvaʊtli hoʊpt ɪt ɹɪmeɪn ðət weɪ.

"I spend time with soldiers in taverns, when I can," Mat replied sourly. When Tylin let him. Light, he might as well be married! "Suroth doesn't know I'm alive." And he devoutly hoped it remained that way.

ðə θɹi sintʃæn wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi aʊɾ ə saɪt, ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz biɪŋ lɛɾ ɪndə ðə steɪbəlz, bʌt sɛvɹəl dʌzən sʌldəm wɝ ɡɪvɪŋ deɪmeɪn ðɛɹ ivnɪŋ ɛksɝsaɪz, wɔkɪŋ əm ɪn ə bɪɡ sɝkəl ɝaʊn ðə stoʊn-peɪv jɑɹd. nɪɹli hæf ðə ɡɹeɪ-klæd deɪmeɪn wɝ dɑɹk-skɪnd wɪmən, lækɪŋ ðə dʒuəlɹi ðeɪ hæd wɔɹn əz wɪndfɪndɝz. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ laɪk əm ɪn ðə pæləs ən ɛlswɛɹ; ðə sintʃæn hæd hæɾ ə ɹɪtʃ hɑɹvəs fɹəm si foʊk vɛsəlz ðət hæd feɪl tə ɪskeɪp. moʊst wɔɹ sʌlən ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən əɹ stoʊni feɪsəz, bʌt sɛvən əɹ eɪt stɛɹɾ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, lɔst ən kənfjuzd, dɪsbɪlivɪŋ stɪl. itʃ ə ðoʊz hæɾ ə sintʃæn-bɔɹn deɪmeɪn əɾ əɹ saɪd, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ hæn əɹ wɪð ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn hɝ, smaɪlɪŋ ən wɪspɝɪŋ tə hɝ ʌndɝ ði əpɹuvɪŋ aɪz ə ðə wɪmən u wɔɹ ðə bɹeɪslɪts ətætʃt tə ðɛɹ sɪlvɝi kɑlɝz. ə fju ʌv ðoʊz deɪzd wɪmən klʌtʃt ðə deɪmeɪn wɔkɪŋ wɪð əm əz ɪf hoʊldɪŋ tə laɪflaɪnz. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf tə meɪk mæt ʃɪvɝ, ɪf ɪz dæmp kloʊðz hæd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn duɪŋ ðə dʒɑb.

The three Seanchan were already out of sight, their horses being led into the stables, but several dozen sul'dam were giving damane their evening exercise, walking them in a big circle around the stone-paved yard. Nearly half the gray-clad damane were dark-skinned women, lacking the jewelry they had worn as Windfinders. There were more like them in the Palace and elsewhere; the Seanchan had had a rich harvest from Sea Folk vessels that had failed to escape. Most wore sullen resignation or stony faces, but seven or eight stared ahead of them, lost and confused, disbelieving still. Each of those had a Seanchan-born damane at her side, holding her hand or with an arm around her, smiling and whispering to her under the approving eyes of the women who wore the bracelets attached to their silvery collars. A few of those dazed women clutched the damane walking with them as if holding to lifelines. It would have been enough to make Mat shiver, if his damp clothes had not already been doing the job.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə hɝi noʊl əkɹɔs ðə jɑɹd, bʌt ðə sɝkəl bɹɔɾ ə deɪmeɪn u wɑz niðɝ sintʃæn nɔɹ æθɑn maɪɹ nɪɹ hɪm, lɪŋk tə ə plʌmp, ɡɹeɪɪŋ sʌldəm, ən ɑləv-skɪnd wʊmən u maɪɾ əv pæs fəɹ ɔltɑɹən ən sʌmwʌnz mʌðɝ. ə stɝn mʌðɝ wɪð ə pɑsəbli fɹækʃəs tʃaɪld, fɹəm ðə weɪ ʃi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əɹ tʃɑɹdʒ. tɛslɪn bɑɹədɑn hæd flɛʃt aʊɾ æftɝ ə mʌnθ ən ə hæf ɪn sintʃæn kæptɪvəɾi, jɛɾ əɹ eɪdʒləs feɪs stɪl lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi eɪt bɹaɪɹz θɹi milz ə deɪ. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ʃi wɔk plɑtʃədli ɑn əɹ liʃ ən oʊbeɪd ðə sʌldəmz mɝmɝd dɝɛkʃənz wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən, pɔzɪŋ tə baʊ vɛɹi dipli tə hɪm ən noʊl. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ðoʊ, hɝ dɑɹk aɪz flæʃt heɪtʃɹəɾ əɾ ɪm bɪfɔɹ ʃi ən ðə sʌldəm kəntɪnjud ðɛɹ sɝkəɾ ə ðə steɪbliɑɹd. plɑtʃədli, oʊbiɾiəntli. hi hæd sin deɪmeɪn ʌpɛndəɾ ən swɪtʃt tɪl ðeɪ haʊld ɪn ðɪs seɪm steɪbliɑɹd fəɹ meɪkɪŋ ɛni sɔɹɾ ə fʌs, tɛslɪn əmʌŋ ðɛm. ʃi hæd dʌn ɪm noʊ ɡʊd tɝnz, ən meɪbi ə fju bæd, bʌɾ i wəd nɑɾ əv wɪʃt ðɪs ɑn hɝ.

He tried to hurry Noal across the yard, but the circle brought a damane who was neither Seanchan nor Atha'an Miere near him, linked to a plump, graying sul'dam, an olive-skinned woman who might have passed for Altaran and someone's mother. A stern mother with a possibly fractious child, from the way she regarded her charge. Teslyn Baradon had fleshed out after a month and a half in Seanchan captivity, yet her ageless face still looked as if she ate briars three meals a day. On the other hand, she walked placidly on her leash and obeyed the sul'dam's murmured directions without hesitation, pausing to bow very deeply to him and Noal. For an instant, though, her dark eyes flashed hatred at him before she and the sul'dam continued their circuit of the stableyard. Placidly, obediently. He had seen damane upended and switched till they howled in this same stableyard for making any sort of fuss, Teslyn among them. She had done him no good turns, and maybe a few bad, but he would not have wished this on her.

"bɛɾɝ ðən biɪŋ dɛd, aɪ səpoʊz," hi mʌɾɝd, muvɪŋ ɑn. tɛslɪn wɑz ə hɑɹd wʊmən, laɪkli plɑɾɪŋ ɛvɹi moʊmən haʊ tə ɪskeɪp, jɛt hɑɹdnəs oʊnli tʊk jə soʊ fɑɹ. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps ən əɹ mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz hæd daɪɾ ɑn ðə steɪk wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɝ skɹimɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt hæd nɑt seɪv ðɛm.

"Better than being dead, I suppose," he muttered, moving on. Teslyn was a hard woman, likely plotting every moment how to escape, yet hardness only took you so far. The Mistress of the Ships and her Master of the Blades had died on the stake without ever screaming, but it had not saved them.

"du jə bɪliv ðæt?" noʊl æskt æbsənli, fʌmbəlɪŋ ɔkwɝdli wɪð ɪz bʌndəl əɡɛn. hɪz bɹoʊkən hænz hæd hændəl ðət naɪf wɛl ɪnʌf, bʌt ðeɪ sim klʌmzi əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls.

"Do you believe that?" Noal asked absently, fumbling awkwardly with his bundle again. His broken hands had handled that knife well enough, but they seemed clumsy at everything else.

mæt fɹaʊn ət hɪm. noʊ; hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i bɪlivd ɪt. ðoʊz sɪlvɝ æɾəm sim tu mʌtʃ laɪk ði ɪnvɪzəbəl kɑlɝ taɪlɪn hæɾ ɑn hɪm. ðən əɡɛn, taɪlɪn kəd tɪkəl ɪm ʌndɝ ðə tʃɪn ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz laɪf ɪf ɪt kɛpt ɪm ɔf ðə steɪk. laɪt, hi wɪʃt ðoʊz blʌɾi daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd wəd dʒʌst stɑp ən ɡɛɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝ wɪð! noʊ, ðət wɑz ə laɪ. sɪns i hæd faɪnəli ɹilaɪzd wʌt ðeɪ mɛnt, hi hæd nɛvɝ wɑntəd ðə daɪs tə stɑp.

Mat frowned at him. No; he was not sure he believed it. Those silver a'dam seemed too much like the invisible collar Tylin had on him. Then again, Tylin could tickle him under the chin the rest of his life if it kept him off the stake. Light, he wished those bloody dice in his head would just stop and get it over with! No, that was a lie. Since he had finally realized what they meant, he had never wanted the dice to stop.

ðə ɹum tʃəl veɪnɪn ən ðə sɝvaɪvɪŋ ɹɛdʒɹmz ʃɛɹd leɪ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə steɪbəlz, ə lɔŋ waɪt-plæstɝd tʃeɪmbɝ wɪð ə loʊ silɪŋ ən tu mɛni bɛdz fəɹ ðoʊz u ɹɪmeɪn əlaɪv. veɪnɪn, ə bɔldɪŋ suɾi hip, wɑz laɪɪŋ ɑn wʌn ɪn ɪz ʃɝtslivz, ən oʊpən bʊk pɹɑpt ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. mæt wɑz sɝpɹaɪz ðə mæn kəd ɹid. spɪɾɪŋ θɹu ə ɡæp ɪn ɪz tiθ, veɪnɪn aɪd mæts mʌd-smɪɹd kloʊðz. "ju bɪn faɪɾɪŋ əɡɛn?" hi æskt. "ʃi woʊn laɪk ðæt, aɪ ɹɛkən." hi dɪd nɑt ɹaɪz. wɪð ə fju stɑɹtlɪŋ ɪksɛpʃənz, veɪnɪn kənsɪɾɝd hɪmsɛlf əz ɡʊɾ əz ɛni lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi.

The room Chel Vanin and the surviving Redarms shared lay not far from the stables, a long white-plastered chamber with a low ceiling and too many beds for those who remained alive. Vanin, a balding suety heap, was lying on one in his shirtsleeves, an open book propped on his chest. Mat was surprised the man could read. Spitting through a gap in his teeth, Vanin eyed Mat's mud-smeared clothes. "You been fighting again?" he asked. "She won't like that, I reckon." He did not rise. With a few startling exceptions, Vanin considered himself as good as any lord or lady.

"tʃɹʌbəl, lɔɹd mæt?" hɑɹnən ɡɹaʊld, lipɪŋ tə hɪz fit. hi wɑz ə sɑləd mæn, fɪzɪkəli ən baɪ tɛmpɹəmənt, bʌɾ ɪz hɛvi dʒɔ klɛntʃt, twɪstɪŋ ðə hɔk kɹudli tætuɾ ɑn ɪz tʃik. "bɛɡɪŋ jəɹ pɑɹɾən, bʌt jəɹ ɪn noʊ kəndɪʃən fəɹ ɪt. tɛl əs wʌɾ i lʊks laɪk, ən wɪl sɔɹɾ ɪm aʊt fəɹ ju."

"Trouble, Lord Mat?" Harnan growled, leaping to his feet. He was a solid man, physically and by temperament, but his heavy jaw clenched, twisting the hawk crudely tattooed on his cheek. "Begging your pardon, but you're in no condition for it. Tell us what he looks like, and we'll sort him out for you."

ðə læs θɹi ɡæðɝd bɪhaɪn ɪm wɪð iɡɝ ɪkspɹɛʃənz, tu ɡɹæbɪŋ fəɹ ðɛɹ koʊts waɪl stɪl tʌkɪŋ ɪn ʃɝteɪlz. mɛtwɪn, ə bɔɪɪʃ-əpɪɹɪŋ kɛɹhinɪn u wɑz tɛn jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən mæt, ɪnstɛd pɪkt ʌp ɪz sɔɹd fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt wɑz pɹɑpt ət ðə fʊɾ ə hɪz bɛɾ ən izd ə lɪɾəl ə ðə bleɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə skæbɝd tə tʃɛk ði ɛdʒ. hi wɑz ðə bɛst ə ðɛm wɪð ə sɔɹd, vɛɹi ɡʊɾ ɪndid, ðoʊ ɡɔɹɾɝən keɪm kloʊs fəɹ ɔl i lʊkt ə blæksmɪθ. ɡɔɹɾɝən wɑz nɑt nɪɹli əz sloʊ əz ɪz θɪk ʃoʊldɝz meɪɾ ɪm əpɪɹ. ə dʌzən ɹɛdʒɹmz hæd fɑloʊd mæt kɔθən tə ɛbu dɑɹ, eɪɾ ə ðoʊz wɝ dɛd, ən ðə ɹɛst wɝ stʌk hɪɹ ɪn ðə pæləs wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd nɑt pɪntʃ ðə meɪdz, ɡɛɾ ɪndə ə faɪɾ oʊvɝ daɪs, ən dʒɹɪŋk tɪl ðeɪ fɛl ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz, əz ðeɪ cʊɾə steɪɪŋ əɾ ən ɪn ən noʊɪŋ ði ɪnkipɝ wəd si ðɛm kæɹiɾ ʌp tə ðɛɹ bɛdz, ðoʊ meɪbi wɪð ðɛɹ pɝsɪz ə lɪɾəl laɪɾɝ ðən ðeɪ hæd bɪn.

The last three gathered behind him with eager expressions, two grabbing for their coats while still tucking in shirttails. Metwyn, a boyish-appearing Cairhienin who was ten years older than Mat, instead picked up his sword from where it was propped at the foot of his bed and eased a little of the blade out of the scabbard to check the edge. He was the best of them with a sword, very good indeed, though Gorderan came close for all he looked a blacksmith. Gorderan was not nearly as slow as his thick shoulders made him appear. A dozen Redarms had followed Mat Cauthon to Ebou Dar, eight of those were dead, and the rest were stuck here in the Palace where they could not pinch the maids, get into a fight over dice, and drink till they fell on their faces, as they could have staying at an inn and knowing the innkeeper would see them carried up to their beds, though maybe with their purses a little lighter than they had been.

"noʊl hɪɹ kən tɛl jə wʌt hæpən bɛɾɝ ðən aɪ kæn," mæt ɹɪplaɪd, pʊʃɪŋ ɪz hæt bæk ɑn ɪz hɛd. "hil bi bɛɾɪŋ ɪn hɪɹ wɪð ju. hi seɪv maɪ laɪf tənaɪt."

"Noal here can tell you what happened better than I can," Mat replied, pushing his hat back on his head. "He'll be bedding in here with you. He saved my life tonight."

ðət bɹɔɾ ɛkskləmeɪʃənz ə ʃɑk, ən kɹaɪz ʌv æpɹəbeɪʃən fəɹ noʊl, nɑt tə mɛnʃən slæps ɑn ðə bæk ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs tɑpəl ði oʊl fɛloʊ. veɪnɪn wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə mɑɹk ɪz pleɪs ɪn ðə bʊk wɪð ə fæt fɪŋɡɝ ən sɪɾ ʌp ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz θɪn mætʃɹəs.

That brought exclamations of shock, and cries of approbation for Noal, not to mention slaps on the back that almost toppled the old fellow. Vanin went so far as to mark his place in the book with a fat finger and sit up on the side of his thin mattress.

sɛɾɪŋ ɪz bʌndəl daʊn ɑn ə veɪkən bɛd, noʊl toʊl ðə teɪl wɪð ɪlæbɹət dʒɛstʃɝz, pleɪɪŋ daʊn ɪz oʊn ɹoʊl ən ivən meɪkɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ə bɪɾ ʌv ə bəfun, slɪpɪŋ ɪn ðə mʌɾ ən ɡeɪpɪŋ ət ðə ɡoʊləm waɪl mæt fɔt laɪk ə tʃæmpiən. ðə mæn wɑz ə nætʃɹəl stɔɹitɛlɝ, əz ɡʊɾ əz ə ɡlimən fəɹ meɪkɪŋ jə si wʌɾ i dɪskɹaɪbd. hɑɹnən ən ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz læf dʒiniəli, noʊɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz əbaʊt, nɑt stilɪŋ ðɛɹ kæptənz θʌndɝ, ən əpɹuvɪŋ ʌv ɪt, bʌt læftɝ daɪd wən i keɪm tə mæts ətækɝ slɪpɪŋ əweɪ θɹu ə taɪni hoʊl ɪn ə wɔl. hi meɪd jə si ðæt, tu. veɪnɪn pʊt daʊn ɪz bʊk ən spæt θɹu hɪz tiθ əɡɛn. ðə ɡoʊləm hæd lɛf veɪnɪn ən hɑɹnən hæf-dɛɾ ɪn ðə ɹæhəd. hæf-dɛd kəz ɪt wɑz æftɝ ʌðɝ pɹeɪ.

Setting his bundle down on a vacant bed, Noal told the tale with elaborate gestures, playing down his own role and even making himself a bit of a buffoon, slipping in the mud and gaping at the gholam while Mat fought like a champion. The man was a natural storyteller, as good as a gleeman for making you see what he described. Harnan and the Redarms laughed genially, knowing what he was about, not stealing their captain's thunder, and approving of it, but laughter died when he came to Mat's attacker slipping away through a tiny hole in a wall. He made you see that, too. Vanin put down his book and spat through his teeth again. The gholam had left Vanin and Harnan half-dead in the Rahad. Half-dead because it was after other prey.

"ðə θɪŋ wɑns mi fəɹ səm ɹizən, ɪt simz," mæt sɛd laɪtli wən ði oʊl mæn fɪnɪʃt ən sæŋk ɑntu ðə bɛd wɪð ɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz, simɪŋli ɪɡzɔstəd. "ɪt pɹɑbli pleɪɾ ət daɪs wɪð mi səm taɪm aɪ doʊn ɹikɔl. nʌn ə jə hæz tə wɝi, əz lɔŋ əz jə doʊnt ɡɛt bɪtwin ɪɾ ən mi." hi ɡɹɪnd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ɪɾ ɔl ə dʒoʊk, bʌt noʊ wʌn soʊ mʌtʃ əz smaɪld. "ɪn ɛni keɪs, əl pɑɹsəl aʊt ɡoʊl tə jə ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. jəl bʊk pæsədʒ ɑn ðə fɝst ʃɪp livɪŋ fəɹ ɪljən, ən teɪk oʊlvɝ wɪð ju. tɑm ən dʒulɪn, tu, ɪf ðəl ɡoʊ." hi ɪmædʒən ðə θif-kætʃɝ wʊd, ɛniweɪ. "ænd nɹɪm ən ləpɪn, ʌv kɔɹs." hi hæd ɡɑɾən juz tə hævɪŋ ə pɛɹ ə sɝvɪŋ mɛn lʊk æftɝ hɪm, bʌɾ i hɑɹdli niɾəd əm hɪɹ. "tælmɑnz mʌs bi sʌmwɛɹ kloʊz tə keɪɛmlɪn baɪ ðɪs taɪm. jə ʃʊdn əv mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl faɪndɪŋ hɪm." wən ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn, hi wəd bi əloʊn wɪð taɪlɪn. laɪt, hi wəd ɹæðɝ feɪs ðə ɡoʊləm əɡɛn!

"The thing wants me for some reason, it seems," Mat said lightly when the old man finished and sank onto the bed with his belongings, seemingly exhausted. "It probably played at dice with me some time I don't recall. None of you has to worry, as long as you don't get between it and me." He grinned, trying to make it all a joke, but no one so much as smiled. "In any case, I'll parcel out gold to you in the morning. You'll book passage on the first ship leaving for Illian, and take Olver with you. Thom and Juilin, too, if they'll go." He imagined the thief-catcher would, anyway. "And Nerim and Lopin, of course." He had gotten used to having a pair of serving men look after him, but he hardly needed them here. "Talmanes must be somewhere close to Caemlyn by this time. You shouldn't have much trouble finding him." When they were gone, he would be alone with Tylin. Light, he would rather face the gholam again!

hɑɹnən ən ði ʌðɝ θɹi ɹɛdʒɹmz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks, fɝdʒɪn skɹætʃɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf i dɪd nɑt kwaɪɾ ʌndɝstænd. hi maɪt nɑt. ðə boʊni mæn wɑz ə ɡʊd soʊlʒɝ - nɑt ðə bɛst, maɪnd, bʌt ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf - jɛɾ i wɑz nɑt vɛɹi bɹaɪt wən ɪt keɪm tə ʌðɝ θɪŋz.

Harnan and the other three Redarms exchanged looks, Fergin scratching his head as if he did not quite understand. He might not. The bony man was a good soldier - not the best, mind, but good enough - yet he was not very bright when it came to other things.

"ðæt wʊdn bi ɹaɪt," hɑɹnən əlaʊd faɪnəli. "wʌn θɪŋ, lɔɹd tælmɑnzəɾ əv əɹ haɪdz ɪf wi keɪm bæk wɪθaʊt ju." ði ʌðɝ θɹi nɑɾəd. fɝdʒɪn kəɾ ʌndɝstæn ðæt.

"That wouldn't be right," Harnan allowed finally. "One thing, Lord Talmanes'd have our hides if we came back without you." The other three nodded. Fergin could understand that.

"æn ju, veɪnɪn?" mæt æskt.

"And you, Vanin?" Mat asked.

ðə fæt mæn ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪ teɪk ðət bɔɪ əweɪ fɹəm ɹaɪzɛl, ən hɪl ɡʌt mi laɪk ə tʃɹaʊt ðə fɝs taɪm aɪ ɡoʊ tə slip. aɪ wəd maɪsɛlf, ɪn ɪz buts. ɛniweɪ, aɪ ɡɑt taɪm tə ɹid, hɪɹ. doʊnt ɡɛt mʌtʃ tʃæns fəɹ ðət wɝkɪŋ əz ə fɛɹiɝ." ðət wɑz wʌn ə ði aɪtɪnɝən tʃɹeɪdz i kleɪm tə fɑloʊ. ði ʌðɝ wɑz steɪbəlmən. ɪn tʃɹuθ, hi wɑz ə hɔɹsɛθif ən poʊtʃɝ, ðə bɛst ɪn tu kʌntʃɹiz ən meɪbi mɔɹ.

The fat man shrugged. "I take that boy away from Riselle, and he'll gut me like a trout the first time I go to sleep. I would myself, in his boots. Anyway, I got time to read, here. Don't get much chance for that working as a farrier." That was one of the itinerant trades he claimed to follow. The other was stableman. In truth, he was a horsethief and poacher, the best in two countries and maybe more.

"jɔɹ ɔl mæd," mæt sɛd wɪð ə fɹaʊn. "dʒʌs kəz ɪt wɑns mi, dʌzn min ɪt woʊn kɪl jə ɪf jə ɡɛɾ ɪn ðə weɪ. ði ɔfɝ steɪz oʊpən. ɛniwʌn u kʌmz tə hɪz sɛnsɪz kən ɡoʊ."

"You're all mad," Mat said with a frown. "Just because it wants me, doesn't mean it won't kill you if you get in the way. The offer stays open. Anyone who comes to his senses can go."

"aɪ hæv sin jəɹ laɪk bɪfɔɹ," noʊl sɛd sʌɾənli. ðə stupt oʊl mæn wɑz ði ɪmədʒ ə hɑɹɾ eɪdʒ ən ɪɡzɔstʃən, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz wɝ bɹaɪɾ ən ʃɑɹp stʌɾiɪŋ mæt. "sʌm mɛn əv ən ɛɹ əbaʊɾ əm ðət meɪks ʌðɝ mɛn fɑloʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ lɛd. səm lɛd tə dɛvəsteɪʃən, ʌðɝz tə ɡlɔɹi. aɪ θɪŋk jəɹ neɪm meɪ ɡoʊ ɪndə ðə hɪstɝi bʊks."

"I have seen your like before," Noal said suddenly. The stooped old man was the image of hard age and exhaustion, but his eyes were bright and sharp studying Mat. "Some men have an air about them that makes other men follow where they lead. Some lead to devastation, others to glory. I think your name may go into the history books."

hɑɹnən lʊkt əz kənfjuzd əz fɝdʒɪn. veɪnɪn spæɾ ən leɪ bæk daʊn, oʊpənɪŋ ɪz bʊk.

Harnan looked as confused as Fergin. Vanin spat and lay back down, opening his book.

"ɪf ɔl maɪ lʌk ɡoʊz əweɪ, meɪbi," mæt mʌɾɝd. hi nu wʌɾ ɪt tʊk tə ɡɛɾ ɪndə ðə hɪstɝiz. ə mæn kəd ɡɛt kɪld, duɪŋ ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ.

"If all my luck goes away, maybe," Mat muttered. He knew what it took to get into the histories. A man could get killed, doing that sort of thing.

"bɛɾɝ klin ʌp bɪfɔɹ ʃi siz ju," fɝdʒɪn paɪpt ʌp sʌɾənli. "ɔl ðət mʌd wɪl pʊɾ ə bɝ ʌndɝ əɹ sæɾəl fəɹ ʃʊɹ."

"Better clean up before she sees you," Fergin piped up suddenly. "All that mud will put a burr under her saddle for sure."

snætʃɪŋ ɪz hæɾ ɔf æŋɡɹəli, mæt stɔkt aʊt wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd. wɛl, hi stɔkt əz wɛl əz i kʊd, hɑbəlɪŋ ɑn ə wɔkɪŋ stæf. bɪfɔɹ ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn hɪm, hi hɝd noʊl stɑɹɾɪŋ ə stɔɹi əbaʊt wʌn taɪm i seɪld ɑn ə si foʊk ʃɪp ən lɝn tə beɪð ɪn koʊl sɔlt wɔɾɝ. ət list, ðət wɑz haʊ ɪt bɪɡæn.

Snatching his hat off angrily, Mat stalked out without a word. Well, he stalked as well as he could, hobbling on a walking staff. Before the door closed behind him, he heard Noal starting a story about one time he sailed on a Sea Folk ship and learned to bathe in cold salt water. At least, that was how it began.

hi ɪntɛndəd tə ɡɛt hɪmsɛlf klin bɪfɔɹ taɪlɪn sɔ hɪm - hi dɪd - bʌɾ əz i lɪmp θɹu hɔlweɪz hʌŋ wɪð ðə flaʊɝd tæpəstʃɹiz ɛbu dɑɹi kɔl sʌmɝ-hæŋʒɪŋz, fəɹ ðə sizən ðeɪ ɪvoʊkt, fɔɹ sɝvɪŋ mɛn ɪn ðə pæləsəz ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt lɪvɝi ən noʊ fjuɝ ðən sɛvən meɪdz sədʒɛstəɾ i maɪt wɑnə beɪð ən tʃeɪnʒ ɪz kloʊðz bɪfɔɹ ðə kwin sɔ hɪm, ɔfɝɪŋ tə dʒɹɔ hɪm ə bæθ ən fɛtʃ klin ɡɑɹməns wɪθaʊɾ əɹ lɝnɪŋ ʌv ɪt. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm ən taɪlɪn, θæŋk ðə laɪt - noʊ wʌn bʌt taɪlɪn ən hɪmsɛlf nu ðə wɝs bɪts - bʌt ðeɪ nu tu blʌɾi mʌtʃ. wɝs, ðeɪ əpɹuvd, ɛvɹi læs fleɪmɪŋ sɝvən ɪn ðə hoʊl fleɪmɪŋ tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, taɪlɪn wɑz kwin ən kəd də əz ʃi plizd, soʊ fɑɹ əz ðeɪ wɝ kənsɝnd. fəɹ ənʌðɝ, hɝ tɛmpɝ hæd bɪn ɑn ə ɹeɪzɝz ɛdʒ sɪns ðə sintʃæn kæptʃɝd ðə sɪɾi, ən ɪf mæt kɔθən skɹʌbd ən bɹaɪɾ ɪn leɪs kɛpt əɹ fɹəm snæpɪŋ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ɔf fəɹ tʃɹaɪfəlz, ðən ðeɪ wəd skɹʌb bɪhaɪn ɪz ɪɹz ən ɹæp ɪm ɪn leɪs laɪk ə sʌndeɪ ɡɪft!

He intended to get himself clean before Tylin saw him - he did - but as he limped through hallways hung with the flowered tapestries Ebou Dari called summer-hangings, for the season they evoked, four serving men in the Palace's green-and-white livery and no fewer than seven maids suggested he might want to bathe and change his clothes before the Queen saw him, offering to draw him a bath and fetch clean garments without her learning of it. They did not know everything about him and Tylin, thank the Light - no one but Tylin and himself knew the worst bits - but they knew too bloody much. Worse, they approved, every last flaming servant in the whole flaming Tarasin Palace. For one thing, Tylin was Queen and could do as she pleased, so far as they were concerned. For another, her temper had been on a razor's edge since the Seanchan captured the city, and if Mat Cauthon scrubbed and bright in lace kept her from snapping their noses off for trifles, then they would scrub behind his ears and wrap him in lace like a Sunday gift!

"mʌd?" hi sɛd tə ə pɹɪɾi, smaɪlɪŋ meɪd spɹɛɾɪŋ əɹ skɝts ɪn ə kɝtsi. ðəɹ wɑz ə twɪŋkəl ɪn əɹ dɑɹk aɪz, ən ðə plʌnʒɪŋ nɛklaɪn ə hɝ bɑɾəs dɪspleɪɾ ə fɛɹ əmaʊn ə bʊzəm tə ɔlmoʊst ɹaɪvəl ɹaɪzɛlz. ɑn ənʌðɝ deɪ hi maɪɾ əv teɪkən ə lɪɾəl taɪm tə ɛndʒɔɪ lʊkɪŋ. "wʌt mʌd? aɪ doʊn si ɛni mʌd!" hɝ maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən, ən ʃi fɝɡɑt tə stʃɹeɪɾən, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm wɪð əɹ niz bɛn əz i hɑbəld əweɪ.

"Mud?" he said to a pretty, smiling maid spreading her skirts in a curtsy. There was a twinkle in her dark eyes, and the plunging neckline of her bodice displayed a fair amount of bosom to almost rival Riselle's. On another day he might have taken a little time to enjoy looking. "What mud? I don't see any mud!" Her mouth dropped open, and she forgot to straighten, staring at him with her knees bent as he hobbled away.

dʒulɪn sændɑɹ, ɹaʊndɪŋ ə kɔɹnɝ kwɪkli, nɪɹli wɔkt ɪndə hɪm. ðə tɛɹən θif-kætʃɝ lɛp bæk wɪð ə mʌfəld oʊθ, hɪz swɔɹði feɪs tɝnɪŋ ɡɹeɪ əntɪl i ɹilaɪzd u hæɾ ɔlmoʊst ɹʌn ɪm oʊvɝ. ðən i mʌɾɝd ən əpɑlədʒi ən stɑɹɾəd tə hɝi ɑn baɪ.

Juilin Sandar, rounding a corner quickly, nearly walked into him. The Tairen thief-catcher leaped back with a muffled oath, his swarthy face turning gray until he realized who had almost run him over. Then he muttered an apology and started to hurry on by.

"hæz tɑm ɡɑt jə mɪkst ɪndə hɪz fulɪʃnəs, dʒulɪn?" mæt sɛd. dʒulɪn ən tɑm ʃɛɹɾ ə ɹum dip ɪn ðə sɝvəns' kɔɹɾɝz, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɪkskjus fəɹ ɪm tə bi ʌp hɪɹ. ɪn ðət dɑɹk tɛɹən koʊt, flɛɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz but tɑps, dʒulɪn wəd stæn aʊɾ əmʌŋ ðə sɝvəns laɪk ə dʌk ɪn ə tʃɪkən kup. sjuɹɔθ wɑz stʃɹɪkt əbaʊt θɪŋz laɪk ðæt, stʃɹɪktɝ ðən taɪlɪn. ði oʊnli ɹizən fəɹ ɪt mæt kəd si wɑz wʌtɛvɝ tɑm ən bɛslən wɝ mɛɾəlɪŋ wɪð. "noʊ; doʊn bɑðɝ tɛlɪŋ mi. aɪv meɪɾ ən ɔfɝ tə hɑɹnən ən ði ʌðɝz, ən ɪts oʊpən tə ju, tu. ɪf jə wɑnə liv, əl ɡɪv jə ðə mʌni fəɹ ɪt."

"Has Thom got you mixed into his foolishness, Juilin?" Mat said. Juilin and Thom shared a room deep in the servants' quarters, and there was no excuse for him to be up here. In that dark Tairen coat, flaring over his boot tops, Juilin would stand out among the servants like a duck in a chicken coop. Suroth was strict about things like that, stricter than Tylin. The only reason for it Mat could see was whatever Thom and Beslan were meddling with. "No; don't bother telling me. I've made an offer to Harnan and the others, and it's open to you, too. If you want to leave, I'll give you the money for it."

æktʃəli , dʒulɪn dɪd nɑt lʊk ɹɛɾi tə tɛl ɪm ɛniθɪŋ. ðə θif-kætʃɝ tʌkt ɪz θʌmz bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt ən mɛt mæts ɡeɪz lɛvəli. "wʌt dɪd hɑɹnən ən ði ʌðɝz seɪ? ən wʌɾ ɪz tɑm duɪŋ ðət jə kɔl fulɪʃ? ðɪs ɪz wʌn sɛɾ ə ɹuftɑps i noʊz ɪz weɪ ɝaʊn bɛɾɝ ðən jə əɹ aɪ."

Actually, Juilin did not look ready to tell him anything. The thief-catcher tucked his thumbs behind his belt and met Mat's gaze levelly. "What did Harnan and the others say? And what is Thom doing that you call foolish? This is one set of rooftops he knows his way around better than you or I."

"ðə ɡoʊləm ɪz stɪl ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, dʒulɪn." tɑm nu ðət ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz wɑz wʌɾ i nu, ən i lʌv stɪkɪŋ ɪz noʊz ɪndə pɑlətɪks. "ðə θɪŋ tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mi, ɝliɝ ðɪs ivnɪŋ."

"The gholam is still in Ebou Dar, Juilin." Thom knew that the Game of Houses was what he knew, and he loved sticking his nose into politics. "The thing tried to kill me, earlier this evening."

dʒulɪn ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz ɪf i hæd bɪn hɪɾ ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə hɪz bɛli, ən skɹʌbd ə hæn θɹu hɪz ʃɔɹt blæk hɛɹ. "aɪ hæv ə ɹizən tə steɪ ə waɪl lɔŋɡɝ," hi sɛd, "ivən soʊ." hɪz ɛɹ tʃeɪnʒd slaɪtli, tə sʌmθɪŋ stʌbɝn ən dɪfɛnsɪv ən tɪŋd wɪð ɡɪlt. hi hæd nɛvɝ ʃoʊn ə ɹoʊvɪŋ aɪ ðət mæt hæd sin, bʌt wən ə mæn lʊk laɪk ðæt, ɪt kəɾ oʊnli min wʌn θɪŋ.

Juilin grunted as if he had been hit in the pit of his belly, and scrubbed a hand through his short black hair. "I have a reason to stay a while longer," he said, "even so." His air changed slightly, to something stubborn and defensive and tinged with guilt. He had never shown a roving eye that Mat had seen, but when a man looked like that, it could only mean one thing.

"teɪk əɹ wɪð ju," mæt sɛd. "æn ɪf ʃi woʊnt ɡoʊ, wɛl, jəl nɑt bi ɪn tɛɹ ən aʊɝ bɪfɔɹ juv ə wʊmən ɑn itʃ ni. ðæts ðə θɪŋ əbaʊt wɪmən, dʒulɪn. ɪf wʌn sɛz noʊ, ðɛɹz ɔlweɪz ənʌðɝ wɪl seɪ jɛs."

"Take her with you," Mat said. "And if she won't go, well, you'll not be in Tear an hour before you have a woman on each knee. That's the thing about women, Juilin. If one says no, there's always another will say yes."

ə sɝvɪŋ mæn hɝiɪŋ baɪ wɪð ən ɑɹmloʊɾ ə lɪnən taʊəlz stɛɹɾ ət mæts mʌɾinəs ɪn əmeɪzmənt, bʌt dʒulɪn θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ət hɪm, ən snætʃt ɪz θʌmz fɹi ʌv ɪz bɛlt ən ətɛmptəd tə ədɑpt ə mɔɹ hʌmbəl stæns. wɪθaʊt mʌtʃ səksɛs. tɑm maɪt slip wɪð ðə sɝvəns, jɛt fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ i hæd sʌmhaʊ meɪɾ ɪt sim tə bi hɪz oʊn tʃɔɪs, ən ɛksəntʃɹɪsəɾi, ən noʊ wʌn θɔɾ ɪɾ ɑd tə si hɪm ʌp hɪɹ, pɝhæps slɪpɪŋ ɪndə ɹaɪzɛlz ɹumz ðət hæd wʌns bɪn mæts. dʒulɪn hæd ɡɔn ɑn ət lɛŋθ əbaʊt biɪŋ ə θif-kætʃɝ - nɛvɝ ə θif-teɪkɝ - ən stɛɹd soʊ mɛni pɹɪkli lɔɹɾəlɪŋz ən kəmpleɪsən mɝtʃəns ɪn ði aɪ tə ʃoʊ hi wɑz əz ɡʊɾ əz ðeɪ ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə pæləs nu hu ən wʌɾ i wɑz. ən wɛɹ i wɑz səpoʊz tə bi, wɪtʃ wɑz bɛləstɛɹz.

A serving man hurrying by with an armload of linen towels stared at Mat's muddiness in amazement, but Juilin thought it was at him, and snatched his thumbs free of his belt and attempted to adopt a more humble stance. Without much success. Thom might sleep with the servants, yet from the beginning he had somehow made it seem to be his own choice, an eccentricity, and no one thought it odd to see him up here, perhaps slipping into Riselle's rooms that had once been Mat's. Juilin had gone on at length about being a thief-catcher - never a thief-taker - and stared so many prickly lordlings and complacent merchants in the eye to show he was as good as they that everyone in the Palace knew who and what he was. And where he was supposed to be, which was belowstairs.

"maɪ lɔɹɾ ɪz waɪz," hi sɛd, tu laʊdli, ən meɪkɪŋ ə stɪf, dʒɝki baʊ. "maɪ lɔɹd noʊz ɔl əbaʊt wɪmən. ɪf maɪ lɔɹd wɪl fɝɡɪv ə hʌmbəl mæn, aɪ mʌst ɹɪtɝn tə maɪ pleɪs." tɝnɪŋ tə ɡoʊ, hi spoʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, stɪl ɪn ə kæɹiɪŋ vɔɪs. "aɪ hɝd tədeɪ ðəɾ ɪf maɪ lɔɹd kʌmz bæk wʌn mɔɹ taɪm lʊkɪŋ laɪk hiz bɪn dʒɹæɡd ɪn ðə stʃɹit, ðə kwin ɪntɛnz teɪkɪŋ ə swɪtʃ tə maɪ lɔɹdz pɝsən."

"My Lord is wise," he said, too loudly, and making a stiff, jerky bow. "My Lord knows all about women. If my Lord will forgive a humble man, I must return to my place." Turning to go, he spoke over his shoulder, still in a carrying voice. "I heard today that if my Lord comes back one more time looking like he's been dragged in the street, the Queen intends taking a switch to my Lord's person."

ən ðət wɑz ðə stoʊn ðət bɹoʊk ðə wæɡən klin ɪn tu.

And that was the stone that broke the wagon clean in two.

flɪŋɪŋ oʊpən ðə dɔɹz ə taɪlɪnz əpɑɹtməns, mæt stʃɹoʊɾ ɪn, seɪld ɪz hæɾ əkɹɔs ðə wɪdθ ə ðə ɹum . . . ən stɑp dɛd, hɪz maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ i hæd plæn tə seɪ fɹoʊzən ɑn ɪz tʌŋ. hɪz hæt hɪt ðə kɑɹpəts ən ɹoʊld, hi dɪd nɑt si wɛɹ. ə ɡʌst ʌv wɪn ɹæɾəld ðə tɔl tʃɹɪpəl-ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz ðət lɛɾ aʊɾ ɑntu ə lɔŋ, skɹin bælkəni oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə mɔl hɛɹə.

Flinging open the doors of Tylin's apartments, Mat strode in, sailed his hat across the width of the room . . . And stopped dead, his mouth hanging open and everything he had planned to say frozen on his tongue. His hat hit the carpets and rolled, he did not see where. A gust of wind rattled the tall triple-arched windows that let out onto a long, screened balcony overlooking the Mol Hara.

taɪlɪn tɝn ɪn ə tʃɛɹ kɑɹv tə lʊk laɪk ɡɪldɪd bæmbu ən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm oʊvɝ əɹ ɡoʊldən waɪnkʌp. weɪvz ʌv ɡlɔsi blæk hɛɹ tʌtʃt wɪð ɡɹeɪ ət ðə tɛmpəlz fɹeɪmd ə bjuɾəfəl feɪs wɪð ði aɪz ʌv ə bɝɾ ə pɹeɪ, ən nɑt wʌn bɛs plizd ət ðə moʊmənt. ɪŋkɑnsəkwɛntʃəl θɪŋz sim tə lip ət hɪm. ʃi kɪkt əɹ kɹɔs lɛɡ slaɪtli, ɹɪpəlɪŋ leɪɝd ɡɹin ən waɪt pɛɾikoʊts. peɪl ɡɹin leɪs tʃɹɪm ði oʊvəl oʊpənɪŋ ɪn əɹ ɡaʊn ðət hæf ɪkspoʊzd əɹ fʊl bɹɛsts, wɛɹ ðə dʒuəl hɪlt ə hɝ mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf dæŋɡəld. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. sjuɹɔθ sæt feɪsɪŋ hɝ, fɹaʊnɪŋ ɪndə hɝ waɪnkʌp ən tæpɪŋ lɔŋ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ɑn ði ɑɹm ə hɝ tʃɛɹ, ə pɹɪɾi ɪnʌf wʊmən dɪspaɪɾ əɹ hɛɹ biɪŋ ʃeɪv tə ðət lɔŋ kɹɛst, ɪksɛp ðət ʃi meɪd taɪlɪn sim ə ɹæbət baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən. tu ʌv ðoʊz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ɑn itʃ hænd wɝ lækɝd blu. siɾəd əɾ əɹ saɪd wɑz ə lɪɾəl ɡɝl, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz, ɔlsoʊ ɪn ən ɪlæbɹətli flaʊɝd ɹoʊb oʊvɝ pliɾɪd waɪt skɝts, bʌt wɪð ə ʃɪɹ veɪl kʌvɝɪŋ əɹ ɪntaɪɝ hɛd - ɪt sim tə bi ʃeɪv kəmplitli! - ən wɛɹɪŋ ə fɔɹtʃən ɪn ɹubiz. ivən ɪn ə steɪɾ ə ʃɑk, hi noʊɾəst ɹubiz ən ɡoʊld. ə slɛndɝ wʊmən, nɪɹli əz dɑɹk əz əɹ stɑɹk blæk ɡaʊn ən tɔl ivən hæd ʃi bɪn il, stʊd bɪhaɪn ðə ɡɝlz tʃɛɹ wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ ən ɪl-kənsild ɪmpeɪʃəns. hɝ weɪvi blæk hɛɹ wɑz ʃɔɹt, bʌt nɑt ʃeɪvd əɾ ɔl, soʊ ʃi wɑz niðɝ ə ðə blʌd nɔɹ sɔɪhɪn. ɪmpɪɹiəsli bjuɾəfəl, ʃi pʊt taɪlɪn ən sjuɹɔθ boʊθ ɪn ðə ʃeɪd. hi noʊɾəst bjuɾəfəl wɪmən, tu, ivən wən i dɪd fil hɪɾ ɪn ðə hɛd wɪð ə hæmɝ.

Tylin turned in a chair carved to look like gilded bamboo and stared at him over her golden winecup. Waves of glossy black hair touched with gray at the temples framed a beautiful face with the eyes of a bird of prey, and not one best pleased at the moment. Inconsequential things seemed to leap at him. She kicked her crossed leg slightly, rippling layered green and white petticoats. Pale green lace trimmed the oval opening in her gown that half exposed her full breasts, where the jeweled hilt of her marriage knife dangled. She was not alone. Suroth sat facing her, frowning into her winecup and tapping long fingernails on the arm of her chair, a pretty enough woman despite her hair being shaved to that long crest, except that she made Tylin seem a rabbit by comparison. Two of those fingernails on each hand were lacquered blue. Seated at her side was a little girl, of all things, also in an elaborately flowered robe over pleated white skirts, but with a sheer veil covering her entire head - it seemed to be shaved completely! - and wearing a fortune in rubies. Even in a state of shock, he noticed rubies and gold. A slender woman, nearly as dark as her stark black gown and tall even had she been Aiel, stood behind the girl's chair with her arms folded and ill-concealed impatience. Her wavy black hair was short, but not shaved at all, so she was neither of the Blood nor so'jhin. Imperiously beautiful, she put Tylin and Suroth both in the shade. He noticed beautiful women, too, even when he did feel hit in the head with a hammer.

ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə pɹɛzəns ə sjuɹɔθ əɹ ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ðət dʒɝkt ɪm tə ə hɔlt, ðoʊ. ðə daɪs hæd stɑpt, lændɪŋ wɪð ə θʌndɝ ðət meɪɾ ɪz skʌl ɹɪŋ. ðət hæd nɛvɝ hæpən bɪfɔɹ. hi stʊd ðəɹ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən tə lip aʊɾ ə ðə fleɪmz ɪn ðə mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪs, əɹ ði ɝθ tə swɑloʊ ðə pæləs bɪniθ hɪm.

It was not the presence of Suroth or the strangers that jerked him to a halt, though. The dice had stopped, landing with a thunder that made his skull ring. That had never happened before. He stood there waiting for one of the Forsaken to leap out of the flames in the marble fireplace, or the earth to swallow the Palace beneath him.

"ju ɑɹən lɪsnɪŋ tə mi, pɪdʒən," taɪlɪn koʊuɾ ɪn deɪnʒɝəs toʊnz. "aɪ sɛd, teɪk jɝsɛlf daʊn tə ðə kɪtʃənz ən əv ə peɪstʃɹi əntɪl aɪ hæv taɪm fəɹ ju. hæv ə bæθ waɪl jəɹ əbaʊɾ ɪt." hɝ dɑɹk aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd. "wi wɪl dɪskʌs jəɹ mʌd leɪɾɝ."

"You aren't listening to me, pigeon," Tylin cooed in dangerous tones. "I said, take yourself down to the kitchens and have a pastry until I have time for you. Have a bath while you're about it." Her dark eyes glittered. "We will discuss your mud later."

ɪn ə deɪz, hi ɹæn ɪt θɹu əɡɛn ɪn ɪz hɛd. hi hæd wɔkt ɪndə ðə ɹum, ðə daɪs hæd stɑpt, ən . . . nʌθɪŋ hæd hæpənd. nʌθɪŋ!

In a daze, he ran it through again in his head. He had walked into the room, the dice had stopped, and . . . Nothing had happened. Nothing!

"ðɪs mæn əz bɪn sɛɾ əpɑn," ðə taɪni, veɪl fɪɡjɝ sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ. hɝ toʊn tɝn koʊld əz ðə wɪn aʊtsaɪd. "ju toʊl mi ðə stʃɹits wɝ seɪf, sjuɹɔθ! aɪm dɪsplizd."

"This man has been set upon," the tiny, veiled figure said, rising. Her tone turned cold as the wind outside. "You told me the streets were safe, Suroth! I am displeased."

sʌmθɪŋ hæd tə hæpən! ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ʃəd hæv! sʌmθɪŋ ɔlweɪz hæpənd wən ðə daɪs stɑpt.

Something had to happen! It already should have! Something always happened when the dice stopped.

"aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, tuɑn, ðə stʃɹits ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ ɑɹ əz seɪf əz ðə stʃɹits ə sindɑɹ ɪtsɛlf," sjuɹɔθ ɹɪplaɪd, ən ðət pʊl mæt aʊɾ ə hɪz stupɝ. ʃi saʊndəd . . . æŋkʃəs. sjuɹɔθ meɪɾ ʌðɝ pipəl æŋkʃəs.

"I assure you, Tuon, the streets of Ebou Dar are as safe as the streets of Seandar itself," Suroth replied, and that pulled Mat out of his stupor. She sounded . . . anxious. Suroth made other people anxious.

ə slɛndɝ, ɡɹeɪsfəl jʌŋ mæn ɪn ði ɔlmoʊs tʃɹænspɛɹən ɹoʊb ʌv ə dækoʊvæl əpɪɹɾ əɾ əɹ saɪd wɪð ə tɔl blu pɔɹsələn pɪtʃɝ, boʊɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ən saɪlənli ɔfɝɪŋ tə ɹiplɛnɪʃ əɹ waɪn. ən ɡɪvɪŋ mæt ənʌðɝ stɑɹt. hi hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd ɛniwʌn ɛls wɑz pɹɛzən ɪn ðə ɹum. ðə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd mæn ɪn ɪz ɪndisənt ɡɑɹmənt wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn, iðɝ. ə slɪm bʌt naɪsli ɹaʊndəd ɹɛd-hɛɹd wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ðə seɪm ʃɪɹ ɹoʊb wɑz nilɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ə teɪbəl ðət hɛl spaɪs bɑɾəlz ən mɔɹ faɪn si foʊk pɔɹsələn waɪn pɪtʃɝz ən ə smɔl ɡɪldɪd bɹæs bɹeɪziɝ wɪð ðə poʊkɝz niɾəd fəɹ hiɾɪŋ ðə waɪn, waɪl ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ nɝvəs-aɪd sɝvɪŋ wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt haʊs mɪtsoʊbɑɹ lɪvɝi stʊɾ ət ði ʌðɝ ɛnd. ən ɪn wʌn kɔɹnɝ, soʊ moʊʃənləs ðəɾ i stɪl ɔlmoʊs mɪs hɝ, jɛɾ ənʌðɝ sintʃæn, ə ʃɔɹt wʊmən wɪð hæf əɹ ɡoʊldən hɛd ʃeɪvd ən ə bʊzəm ðət maɪɾ aʊtmætʃ ɹaɪzɛlz ɪf əɹ dʒɹɛs ə ɹɛd-ænd-jɛloʊ pænəlz hæd nɑt kʌvɝɾ əɹ nɛk tə ðə tʃɪn. nɑt ðəɾ i hæɾ ɛni ɹil dɪzaɪɝ tə faɪn aʊt. sintʃæn wɝ vɛɹi tʌtʃi əbaʊt ðɛɹ sɔɪhɪn. taɪlɪn wɑz tʌtʃi əbaʊɾ ɛni wʊmən. ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn ə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən jʌŋɡɝ ðən ɪz ɡɹændmʌðɝ ɪn əɹ əpɑɹtməns sɪns i wɑz eɪbəl tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə bɛd.

A slender, graceful young man in the almost transparent robe of a da'covale appeared at her side with a tall blue porcelain pitcher, bowing his head and silently offering to replenish her wine. And giving Mat another start. He had not realized anyone else was present in the room. The yellow-haired man in his indecent garment was not the only one, either. A slim but nicely rounded red-haired woman wearing the same sheer robe was kneeling beside a table that held spice bottles and more fine Sea Folk porcelain wine pitchers and a small gilded brass brazier with the pokers needed for heating the wine, while a graying nervous-eyed serving woman wearing green-and-white House Mitsobar livery stood at the other end. And in one corner, so motionless that he still almost missed her, yet another Seanchan, a short woman with half her golden head shaved and a bosom that might outmatch Riselle's if her dress of red-and-yellow panels had not covered her neck to the chin. Not that he had any real desire to find out. Seanchan were very touchy about their so'jhin. Tylin was touchy about any woman. There had not been a serving woman younger than his grandmother in her apartments since he was able to get out of bed.

sjuɹɔθ lʊkt ət ðə ɡɹeɪsfəl mæn əz ðoʊ wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz, ðən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd wɝdləsli ən tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən bæk tə ðə tʃaɪld, tuɑn, hu weɪv ðə fɛloʊ əweɪ. ðə lɪvɹid sɝvɪŋ meɪd skɝid fɔɹwɝd tə teɪk ðə pɪtʃɝ fɹəm ɪm ən tʃɹaɪ tə ɹifɪl taɪlɪnz kʌp, bʌt ðə kwin meɪɾ ə vɛɹi smɔl dʒɛstʃɝ ðət sɛn əɹ bæk tə ðə wɔl. taɪlɪn wɑz sɪɾɪŋ vɛɹi, vɛɹi stɪl. lɪɾəl wʌndɝ ðət ʃi wɑntəd tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs ɪf ðɪs tuɑn fɹaɪɾənd sjuɹɔθ, əz ʃi pleɪnli dɪd.

Suroth looked at the graceful man as though wondering what he was, then shook her head wordlessly and turned her attention back to the child, Tuon, who waved the fellow away. The liveried serving maid scurried forward to take the pitcher from him and try to refill Tylin's cup, but the Queen made a very small gesture that sent her back to the wall. Tylin was sitting very, very still. Little wonder that she wanted to avoid notice if this Tuon frightened Suroth, as she plainly did.

"aɪ æm dɪsplizd, sjuɹɔθ," ðə ɡɝl sɛɾ əɡɛn, stɝnli fɹaʊnɪŋ daʊn ət ði ʌðɝ wʊmən. ivən stændɪŋ, ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv ɔl ðət fɑɹ daʊn tə stɛɹ ət ðə siɾəd haɪ leɪɾi. mæt səpoʊzd ʃi mʌs bi ə haɪ leɪɾi, tu, oʊnli haɪɝ ðən sjuɹɔθ. "ju hæv ɹəkʌvɝd mʌtʃ, ən ðət wɪl pliz ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, bʌt jəɹ ɪl-kənsɪɾɝd ətæk istwɝd wɑz ə dɪzæstɝ ðət mʌs nɑt bi ɹɪpiɾɪd. ən ɪf ðə stʃɹits ə ðɪs sɪɾi ɑɹ seɪf, haʊ kən i hæv bɪn sɛɾ əpɑn?"

"I am displeased, Suroth," the girl said again, sternly frowning down at the other woman. Even standing, she did not have all that far down to stare at the seated High Lady. Mat supposed she must be a High Lady, too, only Higher than Suroth. "You have recovered much, and that will please the Empress, may she live forever, but your ill-considered attack eastward was a disaster that must not be repeated. And if the streets of this city are safe, how can he have been set upon?"

sjuɹɔθs nʌkəlz wɝ waɪt fɹəm ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə tʃɛɹ ɑɹm, ən əɹ waɪnkʌp. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ət taɪlɪn əz ðoʊ ðə lɛktʃɝ wɝ əɹ fɔlt, ən taɪlɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ən əpɑlədʒɛɾɪk smaɪl ən baʊɾ əɹ hɛd. oʊ, blʌɾ ən æʃəz, hi wɑz gɑnə peɪ fəɹ ðæt!

Suroth's knuckles were white from gripping the chair arm, and her winecup. She glared at Tylin as though the lecture were her fault, and Tylin gave her an apologetic smile and bowed her head. Oh, blood and ashes, he was going to pay for that!

"aɪ fɛl daʊn, ðæts ɔl." hɪz vɔɪs maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn faɪɹwɝks fəɹ ðə weɪ hɛdz wɪpt ɝaʊnd. sjuɹɔθ ən tuɑn lʊkt ʃɑk ðəɾ i hæd spoʊkən. taɪlɪn lʊk laɪk ən iɡəl u wɑntəɾ əɹ ɹæbət fɹaɪd. "maɪ leɪɾiz," hi æɾəd, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt sim tə ɪmpɹuv ɛniθɪŋ.

"I fell down, that's all." His voice might as well have been fireworks for the way heads whipped around. Suroth and Tuon looked shocked that he had spoken. Tylin looked like an eagle who wanted her rabbit fried. "My Ladies," he added, but that did not seem to improve anything.

ðə tɔl wʊmən sʌɾənli ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən snætʃt ðə waɪnkʌp fɹəm tuɑnz hænd, θɹoʊɪŋ ɪɾ ɪndə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. spɑɹks ʃaʊɝɾ ʌp ðə tʃɪmni. ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən stɝɾ əz ɪf tə ɹɪtʃɹiv ðə kʌp bɪfɔɹ ɪt kəd bi dæmədʒ fɝðɝ, ðən səbsaɪɾɪd əɾ ə tʌtʃ fɹəm ðə sɔɪhɪn.

The tall woman suddenly reached out and snatched the winecup from Tuon's hand, throwing it into the fireplace. Sparks showered up the chimney. The serving woman stirred as if to retrieve the cup before it could be damaged further, then subsided at a touch from the so'jhin.

"ju ɑɹ biɪŋ fulɪʃ, tuɑn," ðə tɔl wʊmən sɛd, ən əɹ vɔɪs meɪd ðə ɡɝlz stɝnnəs sim læftɝ. ðə tu-fəmɪljɝ sintʃæn dʒɹɔl simd ɔlmoʊst æbsən ɪntaɪɝli. "sjuɹɔθ əz ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən hɪɹ wɛl ɪn əɹ kəntʃɹoʊl. wʌt hæpən tə ði is kən hæpən ɪn ɛni bæɾəl. jə mʌst stɑp weɪstɪŋ taɪm ɑn ɹɪdɪkjələs tʃɹaɪfəlz."

"You are being foolish, Tuon," the tall woman said, and her voice made the girl's sternness seem laughter. The too-familiar Seanchan drawl seemed almost absent entirely. "Suroth has the situation here well in her control. What happened to the east can happen in any battle. You must stop wasting time on ridiculous trifles."

sjuɹɔθ ɡeɪpt əɾ əɹ ɪn əstɑnɪʃmən fəɹ ən ɪnstən bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəɾ əsum ə fɹoʊzən mæsk. mæt dɪɾ ə lɪɾəl ɡeɪpɪŋ ɑn ɪz oʊn pɑɹt. jus ðət toʊn ə vɔɪs tə wʌn ə ðə blʌd, ən jə wɝ lʌki tə ɪskeɪp wɪð ə tʃɹɪp tə ðə flɑɡɪŋ poʊst!

Suroth gaped at her in astonishment for an instant before she could assume a frozen mask. Mat did a little gaping on his own part. Use that tone of voice to one of the Blood, and you were lucky to escape with a trip to the flogging post!

ʃɑkɪŋli, tuɑn ɪnklaɪn əɹ hɛd slaɪtli. "ju meɪ bi ɹaɪt, ænæθ," ʃi sɛd kɑmli, ən ivən wɪð ə tʌtʃ ə dɛfɝəns. "taɪm ən ði oʊmənz wɪl tɛl. bʌt ðə jʌŋ mæn pleɪnli ɪz laɪɪŋ. pɝhæps i fɪɹz taɪlɪnz æŋɡɝ. bʌɾ ɪz ɪnʒɝiz klɪɹli ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən i kəd səsteɪn fɔlɪŋ daʊn ənlɛs ðəɹ ɑɹ klɪfs ɪn ðə sɪɾi aɪ hæv nɑt sin."

Shockingly, Tuon inclined her head slightly. "You may be right, Anath," she said calmly, and even with a touch of deference. "Time and the omens will tell. But the young man plainly is lying. Perhaps he fears Tylin's anger. But his injuries clearly are more than he could sustain falling down unless there are cliffs in the city I have not seen."

soʊ hi fɪɹd taɪlɪnz æŋɡɝ, dɪd hi? wɛl, kʌm tə ðæt, hi dɪd, ə lɪɾəl. oʊnli ə lɪɾəl, maɪnd. bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ ɹimaɪndəɾ ʌv ɪt. linɪŋ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ-haɪ stæf, hi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf kʌmftəɹbəl. ðeɪ kəɾ æsk ə mæn tə sɪt, æftɝ ɔl. "aɪ wɑz hɝt ðə deɪ jəɹ lædz tʊk ðə sɪɾi," hi sɛd wɪð ɪz tʃikiəst ɡɹɪn. "jɔɹ lɑt wɝ flɪŋɪŋ ɝaʊn laɪtnɪŋ ən bɔlz ə faɪɝ sʌmθɪŋ fɪɹs. aɪm dʒʌst əbaʊt hild, ðoʊ, θæŋk jə fəɹ æskɪŋ." taɪlɪn bɛɹiɾ əɹ feɪs ɪn əɹ waɪnkʌp, ən stɪl mænədʒ tə ʃuɾ ɪm ə lʊk oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪm ðət pɹɑməst ɹɛtʃɹəbjuʃən leɪɾɝ.

So he feared Tylin's anger, did he? Well, come to that, he did, a little. Only a little, mind. But he did not like being reminded of it. Leaning on his shoulder-high staff, he tried to make himself comfortable. They could ask a man to sit, after all. "I was hurt the day your lads took the city," he said with his cheekiest grin. "Your lot were flinging around lightning and balls of fire something fierce. I'm just about healed, though, thank you for asking." Tylin buried her face in her winecup, and still managed to shoot him a look over the rim that promised retribution later.

tuɑnz skɝts ɹʌsəld əz ʃi kɹɔs ðə kɑɹpəts tə hɪm. ðə dɑɹk feɪs bɪhaɪn ðət ʃɪɹ veɪl maɪɾ əv bɪn pɹɪɾi, wɪθaʊt ði ɪkspɹɛʃən ʌv ə dʒʌdʒ pæsɪŋ sɛntəns ə dɛθ. ən wɪð ə disən hɛɾ ə hɛɹ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə bɔl peɪt. hɝ aɪz wɝ lɑɹdʒ ən lɪkwəd, bʌɾ ʌɾɝli ɪmpɝsənəl. ɔl ə hɝ lɔŋ fɪŋɡɝneɪlz wɝ lækɝd, hi noʊɾəst, ə bɹaɪt ɹɛd. hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðət sɪɡnəfaɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ. laɪt, ə mæn kəd lɪv ɪn lʌɡʒɝi fəɹ jɪɹz ɑn ðə pɹaɪs ə ðoʊz ɹubiz.

Tuon's skirts rustled as she crossed the carpets to him. The dark face behind that sheer veil might have been pretty, without the expression of a judge passing sentence of death. And with a decent head of hair instead of a bald pate. Her eyes were large and liquid, but utterly impersonal. All of her long fingernails were lacquered, he noticed, a bright red. He wondered whether that signified anything. Light, a man could live in luxury for years on the price of those rubies.

ʃi ɹitʃt ʌp wɪð wʌn hænd, pʊɾɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps ʌndɝ ɪz tʃɪn, ən i stɑɹɾəd tə dʒɝk bæk. əntɪl taɪlɪn ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm oʊvɝ tuɑnz hɛd, pɹɑməsɪŋ ɹɛtʃɹəbjuʃən hɪɹ ən naʊ, ɪf i dɪɾ ɛni sətʃ θɪŋ. ɡlaʊɝɪŋ, hi lɛt ðə ɡɝl ʃɪft ɪz hɛd fəɹ əɹ stʌɾi.

She reached up with one hand, putting her fingertips under his chin, and he started to jerk back. Until Tylin glared at him over Tuon's head, promising retribution here and now, if he did any such thing. Glowering, he let the girl shift his head for her study.

"ju fɔɾ ʌs?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "ju hæv swɔɹn ði oʊðz?"

"You fought us?" she demanded. "You have sworn the oaths?"

"aɪ swɔɹ," hi mʌɾɝd. "fɔɹ ði ʌðɝ, aɪ hæd noʊ tʃæns."

"I swore," he muttered. "For the other, I had no chance."

"soʊ jə wəd hæv," ʃi mɝmɝd. sɝkəlɪŋ ɪm sloʊli, ʃi kəntɪnjuɾ əɹ stʌɾi, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə leɪs əɾ ɪz ɹɪst, tʌtʃɪŋ ðə blæk sɪlk skɑɹf taɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, lɪftɪŋ ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz kloʊk tə ɪɡzæmɪn ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. hi ɛndʒjʊɹɾ ɪt, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə ʃɪft ɪz stæns, ɡlaʊɝɪŋ fɪt tə mætʃ taɪlɪn. laɪt, hi hæd bɑt hɔɹsəz wɪθaʊt soʊ θɝoʊ ən ɪɡzæməneɪʃən! nɛkst, ʃi wəd wɑnə lʊk əɾ ɪz tiθ!

"So you would have," she murmured. Circling him slowly, she continued her study, fingering the lace at his wrist, touching the black silk scarf tied around his neck, lifting the edge of his cloak to examine the embroidery. He endured it, refusing to shift his stance, glowering fit to match Tylin. Light, he had bought horses without so thorough an examination! Next, she would want to look at his teeth!

"ðə bɔɪ toʊl jə haʊ hi wɑz ɪnʒɝd," ænæθ sɛɾ ɪn fɹɔsti toʊnz ə kəmænd. "ɪf jə wɑn hɪm, ðən baɪ hɪm ən bi dʌn. ðə deɪ hæz bɪn lɔŋ, ən jə ʃəd bi ɪn jəɹ bɛd."

"The boy told you how he was injured," Anath said in frosty tones of command. "If you want him, then buy him and be done. The day has been long, and you should be in your bed."

tuɑn pɔzd, ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə lɔŋ sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ ɑn ɪz fɪŋɡɝ. ɪt hæd bɪn kɑɹvd əz ə tʃɹaɪ-pis, tə ʃoʊ ðə kɑɹvɝz skɪlz, ə ɹʌnɪŋ fɑks ən tu ɹeɪvənz ɪn flaɪt, ɔl sɝaʊndəd baɪ kɹɛsən munz, ən i hæd bɑɾ ɪt baɪ tʃæns, ðoʊ hi hæd kʌm tə laɪk ɪt. hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪt. stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ, ʃi stɛɹɾ ʌp əɾ ɪz feɪs. "ɡʊɾ ædvaɪs, ænæθ," ʃi sɛd. "haʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ hɪm, taɪlɪn? ɪf hiz ə feɪvɹɪt, neɪm jəɹ pɹaɪs, ən əl dʌbəl ɪt."

Tuon paused, examining the long signet ring on his finger. It had been carved as a try-piece, to show the carver's skills, a running fox and two ravens in flight, all surrounded by crescent moons, and he had bought it by chance, though he had come to like it. He wondered whether she wanted it. Straightening, she stared up at his face. "Good advice, Anath," she said. "How much for him, Tylin? If he is a favorite, name your price, and I will double it."

taɪlɪn tʃoʊkt ɑn əɹ waɪn ən bɪɡæn kɑfɪŋ. mæt ɔlmoʊs fɛl ɔf ɪz stæf. ðə ɡɝl wɑntəd tə baɪ hɪm? wɛl, ʃi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə hɔɹs fəɹ ɔl ði ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs.

Tylin choked on her wine and began coughing. Mat almost fell off his staff. The girl wanted to buy him? Well, she might as well have been looking at a horse for all the expression on her face.

"hi ɪz ə fɹi mæn, haɪ leɪɾi," taɪlɪn sɛɾ ənstɛɾəli wən ʃi kəd spik. "aɪ . . . aɪ kænɑt sɛl hɪm." mæt kəɾ əv læft, ɪf taɪlɪn dɪd nɑt saʊn əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip əɹ tiθ fɹəm tʃæɾɝɪŋ, ɪf blʌɾi tuɑn hæd nɑt dʒʌst æskt ɪz pɹaɪs. ə fɹi mæn! hɑ!

"He is a free man, High Lady," Tylin said unsteadily when she could speak. "I . . . I cannot sell him." Mat could have laughed, if Tylin did not sound as though she were trying to keep her teeth from chattering, if bloody Tuon had not just asked his price. A free man! Ha!

ðə ɡɝl tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ɪm əz ðoʊ dɪsmɪsɪŋ ɪm fɹəm əɹ maɪnd. "ju ɑɹ əfɹeɪd, taɪlɪn, ən ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, jə ʃəd nɑt bi." ɡlaɪɾɪŋ tə taɪlɪnz tʃɛɹ, ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ veɪl wɪð boʊθ hænz, bɛɹɪŋ ðə loʊɝ hæf ə hɝ feɪs, ən bɛn tə kɪs taɪlɪn laɪtli, wʌns ɑn itʃ aɪ ən wʌns ɑn ðə lɪps. taɪlɪn lʊkt əstaʊndɪd. "ju ɑɹ ə sɪstɝ tə mi, ən tə sjuɹɔθ," tuɑn sɛɾ ɪn ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli dʒɛntəl vɔɪs. "aɪ maɪsɛlf wɪl ɹaɪt jəɹ neɪm əz wʌn ə ðə blʌd. jəl bi ðə haɪ leɪɾi taɪlɪn əz wɛl əz kwin ʌv ɔltɑɹə, ən mɔɹ, əz wɑz pɹɑməs ju."

The girl turned away from him as though dismissing him from her mind. "You are afraid, Tylin, and under the Light, you should not be." Gliding to Tylin's chair, she lifted her veil with both hands, baring the lower half of her face, and bent to kiss Tylin lightly, once on each eye and once on the lips. Tylin looked astounded. "You are a sister to me, and to Suroth," Tuon said in a surprisingly gentle voice. "I myself will write your name as one of the Blood. You will be the High Lady Tylin as well as Queen of Altara, and more, as was promised you."

ænæθ snɔɹɾɪd, laʊdli.

Anath snorted, loudly.

"jɛs, ænæθ, aɪ noʊ," ðə ɡɝl saɪd, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ ən loʊɝɪŋ əɹ veɪl. "ðə deɪ hæz bɪn lɔŋ ən ɑɹdʒuəs, ən aɪm wɪɹi. bʌɾ əl ʃoʊ taɪlɪn wʌt lænz ɑɹ ɪn maɪn fəɹ hɝ, soʊ ʃɪl noʊ ən bi izi ɪn əɹ maɪnd. ðəɹ ɑɹ mæps ɪn maɪ tʃeɪmbɝz, taɪlɪn. jəl ɑnɝ mi baɪ əkʌmpəniɪŋ mi, ðɛɹ? aɪ hæv ɛksələn mæsaɪusɪz."

"Yes, Anath, I know," the girl sighed, straightening and lowering her veil. "The day has been long and arduous, and I am weary. But I will show Tylin what lands are in mind for her, so she will know and be easy in her mind. There are maps in my chambers, Tylin. You will honor me by accompanying me, there? I have excellent masseuses."

"ði ɑnɝ ɪz maɪn," taɪlɪn sɛd, saʊndɪŋ nɑɾ ɔl ðət mʌtʃ stɛɾiɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ.

"The honor is mine," Tylin said, sounding not all that much steadier than before.

əɾ ə dʒɛstʃɝ fɹəm ðə sɔɪhɪn, ðə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd mæn wɛn ɹʌnɪŋ tə oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ən nil hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ oʊpən, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ɔl ðə smuðɪŋ ən ədʒʌstɪŋ ə kloʊðz ðət wɪmən hæd tə də bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ, sintʃæn əɹ ɔltɑɹən əɹ fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ ɛls. ðoʊ, ðə ɹɛd-hɛɹd dækoʊvæl pɝfɔɹm ðə fʌŋkʃən fəɹ tuɑn ən sjuɹɔθ. mæt tʊk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə dʒɹɔ taɪlɪn ə lɪɾəl əsaɪd, fɑɹ ɪnʌf ðəɾ i wəd nɑt bi oʊvɝhɝd. ðə sɔɪhɪnz blu aɪz kɛp kʌmɪŋ bæk tə hɪm, hi ɹilaɪzd, bʌɾ ət lis tuɑn, æksɛptɪŋ ði ətɛnʃənz ə ðə slɛndɝ dækoʊvæl wʊmən, sim tə hæv fɝɡɑɾən i ɪɡzɪstəd.

At a gesture from the so'jhin, the yellow-haired man went running to open the door and kneel holding it open, but there was still all the smoothing and adjusting of clothes that women had to do before they would go anywhere, Seanchan or Altaran or from anywhere else. Though, the red-haired da'covale performed the function for Tuon and Suroth. Mat took the opportunity to draw Tylin a little aside, far enough that he would not be overheard. The so'jhin's blue eyes kept coming back to him, he realized, but at least Tuon, accepting the attentions of the slender da'covale woman, seemed to have forgotten he existed.

"aɪ dɪdn dʒʌs fɔl daʊn," hi toʊl taɪlɪn sɔfli. "ðə ɡoʊləm tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mi nɑt mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ən aʊɝ əɡoʊ. ɪt maɪt bi bɛst ɪf aɪ lɛft. ðət θɪŋ wɑns mi, ən ɪɾəl kɪl ɛnibəɾi nɪɹ mi, tu." ðə plæn hæd dʒʌst əkɝd tə hɪm, bʌɾ i θɔɾ ɪt hæɾ ə ɡʊd tʃæns ə səksɛs.

"I didn't just fall down," he told Tylin softly. "The gholam tried to kill me not much more than an hour ago. It might be best if I left. That thing wants me, and it'll kill anybody near me, too." The plan had just occurred to him, but he thought it had a good chance of success.

taɪlɪn snɪft. "hi - ɪt - ɪt kænɑɾ əv ju, paɪɡlɛt." ʃi dɝɛktəɾ ə lʊk ət tuɑn ðət maɪɾ əv meɪd ðə ɡɝl fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt taɪlɪn biɪŋ ə sɪstɝ hæd ʃi sin. "ænd niðɝ kən ʃi." ət list ʃi hæd sɛns ɪnʌf tə wɪspɝ.

Tylin sniffed. "He - it - it cannot have you, piglet." She directed a look at Tuon that might have made the girl forget about Tylin being a sister had she seen. "And neither can she." At least she had sense enough to whisper.

"hu ɪz ʃi?" hi æskt. wɛl, ɪt hæd nɛvɝ bɪn mɔɹ ðən ə tʃæns.

"Who is she?" he asked. Well, it had never been more than a chance.

"ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑn, ən jə noʊ əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ," taɪlɪn ɹɪplaɪd, dʒʌst əz kwaɪətli. "sjuɹɔθ dʒʌmps wən ʃi spiks, ən ʃi dʒʌmps wən ænæθ spiks, ðoʊ aɪ wəɾ ɔlmoʊst swɛɹ ðəɾ ænæθ ɪz səm sɔɹɾ ə sɝvənt. ðeɪ ɑɹ ə vɛɹi pəkjuljɝ pipəl, swiɾəlɪŋ." sʌɾənli ʃi fleɪk səm mʌd fɹəm ɪz tʃik wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. hi hæd nɔɹ ɹilaɪzd i hæd mʌɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs, tu. sʌɾənli, ði iɡəl wɑz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn əɹ aɪz. "du jə ɹikɔl ðə pɪŋk ɹɪbənz, swiɾəlɪŋ? wən aɪ kʌm bæk, wɪl si haʊ jə lʊk ɪn pɪŋk."

"The High Lady Tuon, and you know as much as I," Tylin replied, just as quietly. "Suroth jumps when she speaks, and she jumps when Anath speaks, though I would almost swear that Anath is some sort of servant. They are a very peculiar people, sweetling." Suddenly she flaked some mud from his cheek with one finger. He had nor realized he had mud on his face, too. Suddenly, the eagle was strong in her eyes. "Do you recall the pink ribbons, sweetling? When I come back, we'll see how you look in pink."

ʃi swɑn aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum wɪð tuɑn ən sjuɹɔθ, tʃɹeɪl baɪ ænæθ ən ðə sɔɪhɪn ən ðə dækoʊvæl, livɪŋ mæt wɪð ðə ɡɹændmʌðɝli sɝvɪŋ wʊmən u bɪɡæn tə klin ʌp ðə waɪn teɪbəl. hi sæŋk ɪndə wʌn ə ðə bæmbu kɑɹv tʃɛɹz ən ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ɪz hænz.

She swanned out of the room with Tuon and Suroth, trailed by Anath and the so'jhin and the da'covale, leaving Mat with the grandmotherly serving woman who began to clean up the wine table. He sank into one of the bamboo carved chairs and rested his head in his hands.

ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm, ðoʊz pɪŋk ɹɪbənz wʊɾə hæɾ ɪm ɡɪbɝɪŋ. hi nɛvɝ ʃʊɾə tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛɾ ɪz oʊn bæk wɪð hɝ. ivən ðə ɡoʊləm dɪd nɑɾ ɑkjəpaɪ mʌtʃ ə hɪz θɔts. ðə daɪs hæd stɑpt ən . . . wʌt? hi hæd kʌm feɪs-tə-feɪs, əɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf, wɪð θɹi pipəl i hæd nɑt mɛt bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðət kəd nɑt bi ɪt. meɪbi ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð taɪlɪn bɪkʌmɪŋ wʌn ə ðə blʌd. bʌɾ ɔlweɪz bɪfɔɹ, wən ðə daɪs stɑpt, sʌmθɪŋ hæd hæpən tə hɪm, pɝsənəli.

Any other time, those pink ribbons would have had him gibbering. He never should have tried to get his own back with her. Even the gholam did not occupy much of his thoughts. The dice had stopped and . . . What? He had come face-to-face, or near enough, with three people he had not met before, but that could not be it. Maybe it was something to do with Tylin becoming one of the Blood. But always before, when the dice stopped, something had happened to him, personally.

hi sæt ðəɹ wɝiɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪt waɪl ðə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən kɔld ɪn ʌðɝz tə kæɹi ɛvɹiθɪŋ əweɪ, sæt ðəɹ əntɪl taɪlɪn ɹɪtɝnd. ʃi hæd nɑt fɝɡɑɾən əbaʊt ðə pɪŋk ɹɪbənz, ən ðət meɪɾ ɪm fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls fəɹ kwaɪɾ ə lɔŋ taɪm.

He sat there worrying over it while the serving woman called in others to carry everything away, sat there until Tylin returned. She had not forgotten about the pink ribbons, and that made him forget about anything else for quite a long time.


tʃæptɝ eɪtin


CHAPTER 18

ən ɔfɝ


An Offer

ðə deɪz æftɝ ðə ɡoʊləm tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ɪm sɛɾəld ɪndə ɹɪðəmz ðəɾ ɪɹəteɪɾəd mæt noʊ ɛnd. ðə ɡɹeɪ skaɪ nɛvɝ ɔltɝd, ɪksɛp tə ɡɪv ɹeɪn əɹ nɑt.

The days after the gholam tried to kill him settled into rhythms that irritated Mat no end. The gray sky never altered, except to give rain or not.

ðəɹ wɑz tɔk ɪn ðə stʃɹits ʌv ə mæn biɪŋ kɪl baɪ ə wʊlf nɑt fɑɹ aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi, hɪz θɹoʊt ɹɪpt. noʊ wʌn wɑz wɝid, dʒʌs kjʊɹiəs; wʊlvz hæd nɑt bɪn sin kloʊs tə ɛbu dɑɹ ɪn jɪɹz. mæt wɝid. sɪɾi pipəl maɪt bɪliv ə wʊlf wəd kʌm ðət kloʊs tə sɪɾi wɔlz, bʌɾ i nu bɛɾɝ. ðə ɡoʊləm hæd nɑt ɡɔn əweɪ. hɑɹnən ən ði ʌðɝ ɹɛdʒɹmz stʌbɝnli ɹəfjuz tə liv, kleɪmɪŋ ðeɪ kəd wɑtʃ ɪz bæk, ən veɪnɪn ɹəfjuzd wɪθaʊt ɹizənz, ənlɛs ə mʌɾɝd kɑmɛn ðət mæt hæɾ ə ɡʊɾ aɪ fəɹ fæs hɔɹsəz wɑz səpoʊz tə bi wʌn. hi spæɾ æftɝ i sɛɾ ɪt, ðoʊ. ɹaɪzɛl, hɝ ɑləv feɪs pɹɪɾi ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə mæn swɑloʊ, hɝ bɪɡ dɑɹk aɪz noʊɪŋ ɪnʌf tə dʒɹaɪ hɪz tʌŋ, ɪnkwaɪɝɾ əbaʊɾ oʊlvɝz eɪdʒ, ən wən i sɛd kloʊs ɑn tɛn, ʃi lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd ən tæpt əɹ fʊl lɪps θɔtfəli, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi tʃeɪnʒd ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ðə bɔɪz lɛsənz, hi stɪl keɪm əweɪ fɹəm əm bʌbəlɪŋ ikwəli oʊvɝ əɹ bʊzəm ən ðə bʊks ʃi ɹɛd hɪm. mæt θɔɾ oʊlvɝ wəɾ ɔlmoʊst əv ɡɪvən ʌp ɪz naɪtli ɡeɪmz ə sneɪks ən fɑksəz fəɹ ɹaɪzɛl ən ðə bʊks. ən wən ðə læd ɹæn aʊɾ ə ðə ɹumz ðət wʌns hæd bɪn mæts, tɑm ɔfən slɪpt ɪn wɪð ɪz hɑɹp ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm. baɪ ɪtsɛlf ðət wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk mæt ɡɹaɪn ɪz tiθ, oʊnli ðət wɑz nɑt ðə hæf.

There was talk in the streets of a man being killed by a wolf not far outside the city, his throat ripped. No one was worried, just curious; wolves had not been seen close to Ebou Dar in years. Mat worried. City people might believe a wolf would come that close to city walls, but he knew better. The gholam had not gone away. Harnan and the other Redarms stubbornly refused to leave, claiming they could watch his back, and Vanin refused without reasons, unless a muttered comment that Mat had a good eye for fast horses was supposed to be one. He spat after he said it, though. Riselle, her olive face pretty enough to make a man swallow, her big dark eyes knowing enough to dry his tongue, inquired about Olver's age, and when he said close on ten, she looked surprised and tapped her full lips thoughtfully, but if she changed anything in the boy's lessons, he still came away from them bubbling equally over her bosom and the books she read him. Mat thought Olver would almost have given up his nightly games of Snakes and Foxes for Riselle and the books. And when the lad ran out of the rooms that once had been Mat's, Thom often slipped in with his harp under his arm. By itself that was enough to make Mat grind his teeth, only that was not the half.

tɑm ən bɛslən fɹikwənli wɛn aʊt təɡɛðɝ, nɑɾ ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ hɪm, ən wɝ ɡɔn fəɹ hæf ðə deɪ, əɹ hæf ðə naɪt. niðɝ wəd seɪ ə wɝd mɔɹ əbaʊt ðɛɹ skimz, ðoʊ tɑm hæd ðə ɡɹeɪs tə lʊk ɪmbɛɹəst. mæt hoʊp ðeɪ wɝ nɑt gɑnə ɡɛt pipəl kɪl fəɹ nʌθɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ ʃoʊd lɪɾəl ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ɪz əpɪnjənz. bɛslən ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə vɛɹi saɪɾ ə hɪm. dʒulɪn kəntɪnjud tə slɪp əbʌvstɛɹz ən wɑz sin baɪ sjuɹɔθ, wɪtʃ ɝn ɪm ə stʃɹæpɪŋ hʌŋ ʌp baɪ hɪz ɹɪsts fɹəm ə stɔlpoʊst ɪn ðə steɪbəlz. mæt sɔ hɪz wɛls tɛndəd baɪ veɪnɪn - ðə mæn kleɪm dɑktɝɪŋ mɛn wɑz ðə seɪm əz dɑktɝɪŋ hɔɹsəz - ən wɔɹn ɪm ɪt kəd bi wɝs nɛks taɪm, bʌt ðə ful wɑz bæk ɑn ði ʌpɝ flɔɹz ðət vɛɹi naɪt, stɪl wɪnsɪŋ fɹəm ðə weɪɾ ə hɪz ʃɝɾ ɑn ɪz bæk. ɪt hæd tə bi ə wʊmən, ðoʊ ðə θif-kætʃɝ ɹəfjuz tə seɪ. mæt səspɛktəd wʌn ə ðə sintʃæn noʊbəlwɪmən. wʌn ə ðə pæləs sɝvəns cʊɾə mɛɾ ɪm ɪn ɪz oʊn ɹum, wɪð tɑm aʊɾ ʌv ɪt soʊ mʌtʃ.

Thom and Beslan frequently went out together, not inviting him, and were gone for half the day, or half the night. Neither would say a word more about their schemes, though Thom had the grace to look embarrassed. Mat hoped they were not going to get people killed for nothing, but they showed little interest in his opinions. Beslan glared at the very sight of him. Juilin continued to slip abovestairs and was seen by Suroth, which earned him a strapping hung up by his wrists from a stallpost in the stables. Mat saw his welts tended by Vanin - the man claimed doctoring men was the same as doctoring horses - and warned him it could be worse next time, but the fool was back on the upper floors that very night, still wincing from the weight of his shirt on his back. It had to be a woman, though the thief-catcher refused to say. Mat suspected one of the Seanchan noblewomen. One of the Palace servants could have met him in his own room, with Thom out of it so much.

nɑt sjuɹɔθ əɹ tuɑn, tə bi ʃʊɹ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ði oʊnli sintʃæn haɪ blʌɾ ɪn ðə pæləs. moʊst ə ðə sintʃæn noʊbəlz ɹɛntəd ɹumz, əɹ mɔɹ ɔfən hoʊl haʊsəz, ɪn ðə sɪɾi, bʌt sɛvɹəl hæd kʌm wɪð sjuɹɔθ ən ə hændfʊl wɪð ðə ɡɝl, tu. mɔɹ ðən wʌn ə ðə wɪmən lʊkt ə plɛzən ɑɹmfəl ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðɛɹ kɹɛstəd hɛdz ən ðɛɹ weɪ ʌv stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ noʊzɪz əɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi wɪθaʊt ʃeɪv tɛmpəlz. ɪf ðeɪ noʊɾəst əm mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ dɪd ðə fɝnɪtʃɝ, ðət wɑz. ɪf ɪt simd ənlaɪkli ðət wʌn ə ðoʊz hɔɾi wɪmən wəd lʊk twaɪs əɾ ə mæn u slɛpt ɪn ðə sɝvəns kɔɹɾɝz, wɛl, ðə laɪt nu wɪmən hæd pəkjuljɝ teɪsts ɪn mɛn. hi hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs bʌt tə liv dʒulɪn əloʊn. huɛvɝ ðə wʊmən wɑz, ʃi maɪt ɡɛt ðə θif-kætʃɝ bɪhɛɾɪd jɛt, bʌt ðət sɔɹɾ ə fivɝ hæd tə bɝn ɪtsɛlf aʊt bɪfɔɹ ə mæn kəd θɪŋk stʃɹeɪt. wɪmən dɪd stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz tə ə mænz hɛd.

Not Suroth or Tuon, to be sure, but they were not the only Seanchan High Blood in the Palace. Most of the Seanchan nobles rented rooms, or more often whole houses, in the city, but several had come with Suroth and a handful with the girl, too. More than one of the women looked a pleasant armful in spite of their crested heads and their way of staring down their noses at everybody without shaved temples. If they noticed them more than they did the furniture, that was. If it seemed unlikely that one of those haughty women would look twice at a man who slept in the servant's quarters, well, the Light knew women had peculiar tastes in men. He had no choice but to leave Juilin alone. Whoever the woman was, she might get the thief-catcher beheaded yet, but that sort of fever had to burn itself out before a man could think straight. Women did strange things to a man's head.

ðə nuli ɝaɪvd ʃɪps dɪsɡɔɹdʒ pipəl ən ænəməlz ən kɑɹɡoʊ fəɹ deɪz ɑn ɛnd, ɪnʌf ðət ðə sɪɾiz mæsɪv wɔlz wʊɾə bɝs fɹəm ði ɪnsaɪd hæd ðeɪ ɔl steɪd, bʌt ðeɪ floʊd θɹu ðə sɪɾi ən aʊɾ ɪndə ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd wɪð ðɛɹ fæmliz ən ðɛɹ kɹæfs ən ðɛɹ laɪvstɑk, pɹipɛɹd tə pʊt daʊn ɹuts. soʊlʒɝz pæs θɹu ɪn θaʊzənz, tu, wɛl-ɔɹɾɝd ɪnfəntʃɹi ən kævəlɹi wɪð ðə flɛɹ ə vɛɾɝənz, muvɪŋ nɔɹθ ɪn bɹaɪt-kʌlɝɾ ɑɹmɝ, ən ist əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ. mæt ɡeɪv ʌp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kaʊn ðɛm. səmtaɪmz i sɔ stʃɹeɪnʒ kɹitʃɝz, ðoʊ moʊst ə ðoʊz wɝ ənloʊɾəd əbʌv ðə sɪɾi tə əvɔɪd ðə stʃɹits. tɔɹm laɪk θɹi-aɪd bɹɑnz-skeɪl kæts ðə saɪz ə hɔɹsəz, sɛndɪŋ moʊst ɹil hɔɹsəz ɝaʊn əm ɪndə ə fɹɛnzi dʒʌs baɪ ðɛɹ pɹɛzəns, ən kɔɹlm, laɪk hɛɹi wɪŋɡləs bɝdz əz tɔl əz ə mæn, tɔl ɪɹz twɪtʃɪŋ kɑnstənli ən lɔŋ biks simɪŋ tə jɝn fəɹ flɛʃ tə ɹɛnd, ən hjudʒ sɹɛɾɪt wɪð ðɛɹ lɔŋ noʊzɪz ən lɔŋɡɝ tʌsks. ɹeɪkən ən ðə lɑɹdʒɝ tɔɹeɪkən flu fɹəm ðɛɹ lændɪŋ saɪt bɪloʊ ðə ɹæhəd, hjudʒ lɪzɝdz spɹɛɾɪŋ wɪŋz laɪk bæts ən kæɹiɪŋ mɛn ɑn ðɛɹ bæks. ðə neɪmz wɝ izi ɪnʌf tə pɪk ʌp; ɛni sintʃæn soʊlʒɝ wɑz iɡɝ tə dɪskʌs ðə nəsɛsəɾi ʌv skaʊts ɑn ɹeɪkən ən ði əbɪləɾiz ə kɔɹlm ət tʃɹækɪŋ, wɛðɝ sɹɛɾɪt wɝ jusfəl fəɹ mɔɹ ðən muvɪŋ hɛvi loʊdz ən tɔɹm tu ɪntɛlədʒən tə tʃɹʌst. hi lɝn ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɪntʃɹəs fɹəm mɛn u wɑntəd wʌt moʊst soʊlʒɝz dɪd, ə dʒɹɪŋk ən ə wʊmən ən ə bɪɾ ʌv ə ɡæmbəl, nɑt nɛsəsɛɹəli ɪn ɛni ɡɪvən ɔɹɾɝ. ðoʊz soʊlʒɝz wɝ ɪndid vɛɾɝənz. sintʃæn wɑz ən ɛmpaɪɝ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ɔl ðə neɪʃənz bɪtwin ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən ən ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, ɔl ʌndɝ wʌn ɛmpɹɛs, bʌt wɪð ə hɪstɝi ʌv ɔlmoʊs kɑnstən ɹɪbɛljənz ən ɹivoʊls ðət kɛpt ɪts soʊlʒɝz' skɪlz kin. ðə fɑɹmɝz wəd bi hɑɹɾɝ tə dɪɡ aʊt.

The newly arrived ships disgorged people and animals and cargo for days on end, enough that the city's massive walls would have burst from the inside had they all stayed, but they flowed through the city and out into the countryside with their families and their crafts and their livestock, prepared to put down roots. Soldiers passed through in thousands, too, well-ordered infantry and cavalry with the flair of veterans, moving north in bright-colored armor, and east across the river. Mat gave up trying to count them. Sometimes he saw strange creatures, though most of those were unloaded above the city to avoid the streets. Torm like three-eyed bronze-scaled cats the size of horses, sending most real horses around them into a frenzy just by their presence, and corlm, like hairy wingless birds as tall as a man, tall ears twitching constantly and long beaks seeming to yearn for flesh to rend, and huge s'redit with their long noses and longer tusks. Raken and the larger to'raken flew from their landing site below the Rahad, huge lizards spreading wings like bats and carrying men on their backs. The names were easy enough to pick up; any Seanchan soldier was eager to discuss the necessity of scouts on raken and the abilities of corlm at tracking, whether s'redit were useful for more than moving heavy loads and torm too intelligent to trust. He learned a great deal of interest from men who wanted what most soldiers did, a drink and a woman and a bit of a gamble, not necessarily in any given order. Those soldiers were indeed veterans. Seanchan was an Empire larger than all the nations between the Aryth Ocean and the Spine of the World, all under one Empress, but with a history of almost constant rebellions and revolts that kept its soldiers' skills keen. The farmers would be harder to dig out.

nɑɾ ɔl ðə soʊlʒɝz lɛft, ʌv kɔɹs. ə stʃɹɔŋ ɡɛɹɪsən ɹɪmeɪnd, nɑɾ oʊnli sintʃæn, bʌt stil-veɪl tæɹɑbənɝ lænsɝz ən ɑmɑdɪʃən pɪkmɛn wɪð ðɛɹ bɹɛstpleɪts peɪntəd tə ɹɪzɛmbəl sintʃæn ɑɹmɝ. ən ɔltɑɹənz, tu, bɪsaɪdz taɪlɪnz haʊs ɑɹmmɪn. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə sintʃæn, ði ɔltɑɹənz fɹəm ɪnlænd, wɪð ɹɛd slæʃɪz kɹɪskɹɔsɪŋ ðɛɹ bɹɛstpleɪts, wɝ taɪlɪnz əz mʌtʃ əz ðə fɛloʊz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, wɪtʃ, stʃɹeɪnʒli, dɪd nɑt sim tə bɛs pliz hɝ. ɪt dɪd nɑt pliz ðə fɛloʊz fɹəm ɪnlæn vɛɹi mʌtʃ, iðɝ. ðeɪ ən ðə mɛn ɪn mɪtsoʊbɑɹz ɡɹin-ænd-waɪɾ aɪɾ itʃ ʌðɝ laɪk stʃɹeɪnʒ tɑmkæts ɪn ə smɔl ɹum. ðəɹ wɑz plɛnti ʌv ɡlɛɹɪŋ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn, tæɹɑbənɝz əɾ ɑmɑdɪʃənz, ɑmɑdɪʃənz əɾ ɔltɑɹənz, ən ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɹaʊnd, wɛl-eɪdʒd, lɔŋ-stændɪŋ ænəmɑsəɾiz bʌbəlɪŋ tə ðə sɝfəs, bʌt noʊ wʌn wɛn fɝðɝ ðən ʃeɪkən fɪsts ən ə fju kɝsɪz. faɪv hʌnʒɹəd mɛn ə ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz hæd kʌm ɔf ðə ʃɪps ən ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ fəɹ səm ɹizən. ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi sɔɹɾ ə kɹaɪm ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪn ɛni lɑɹdʒ sɪɾi hæd fɔlən ɔf dʒɹəmæɾɪkli ʌndɝ ðə sintʃæn, bʌt ðə ɡɑɹdz tʊk tə pətʃɹoʊlɪŋ ðə stʃɹits əz ɪf ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəd kʌtpɝsɪz, bʊlɪbɔɪz ən meɪbi fʊli ɑɹm bænz ə bɹɪɡænz tə spɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə peɪvmənt. ði ɔltɑɹənz ən ði ɑmɑdɪʃənz ən ðə tæɹɑbənɝz kɛp ðɛɹ tɛmpɝz ɹeɪn ɪn. noʊ wʌn bʌɾ ə ful ɑɹɡjud wɪð ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz, nɑt mɔɹ ðən wʌns. ən ənʌðɝ kəntɪnʒənt ə ðə ɡɑɹdz hæd teɪkən ʌp ɹɛzəɾəns ɪn ðə sɪɾi, tu, ə hʌnʒɹəd oʊɡiɝ, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz, ɪn ðə ɹɛd-ænd-blæk. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ pətʃɹoʊld wɪð ði ʌðɝz, ən səmtaɪmz ðeɪ wɑndɝɾ əbaʊt wɪð ðɛɹ lɔŋ-hændəld æksiz ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ əɾ ɔl laɪk mæts fɹɛn lɔɪəl. oʊ, ðeɪ hæd ðə seɪm waɪd noʊzɪz ən tʌftəɾ ɪɹz ən lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz ðət dʒɹup tə ðɛɹ tʃiks bɪsaɪɾ aɪz ðə saɪz ə tikəps, bʌt ðə ɡɑɹɾənɝz lʊkt əɾ ə mæn əz ðoʊ wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ i niɾəd pɹunɪŋ ʌv ə fju lɪmz. noʊbɑdi əɾ ɔl wɑz ful ɪnʌf tə ɑɹɡju ivən wʌns wɪð ðə ɡɑɹɾənɝz.

Not all the soldiers left, of course. A strong garrison remained, not only Seanchan, but steel-veiled Taraboner lancers and Amadician pikemen with their breastplates painted to resemble Seanchan armor. And Altarans, too, besides Tylin's House armsmen. According to the Seanchan, the Altarans from inland, with red slashes crisscrossing their breastplates, were Tylin's as much as the fellows guarding the Tarasin Palace, which, strangely, did not seem to best please her. It did not please the fellows from inland very much, either. They and the men in Mitsobar's green-and-white eyed each other like strange tomcats in a small room. There was plenty of glaring going on, Taraboners at Amadicians, Amadicians at Altarans, and the other way round, well-aged, long-standing animosities bubbling to the surface, but no one went further than shaken fists and a few curses. Five hundred men of the Deathwatch Guards had come off the ships and remained in Ebou Dar for some reason. The ordinary sort of crime expected in any large city had fallen off dramatically under the Seanchan, but the Guards took to patrolling the streets as if they expected cutpurses, bullyboys and maybe fully armed bands of brigands to spring out of the pavement. The Altarans and the Amadicians and the Taraboners kept their tempers reined in. No one but a fool argued with the Deathwatch Guards, not more than once. And another contingent of the Guards had taken up residence in the city, too, a hundred Ogier, of all things, in the red-and-black. Sometimes they patrolled with the others, and sometimes they wandered about with their long-handled axes on their shoulders. They were not at all like Mat's friend Loial. Oh, they had the same wide noses and tufted ears and long eyebrows that drooped to their cheeks beside eyes the size of teacups, but the Gardeners looked at a man as though wondering whether he needed pruning of a few limbs. Nobody at all was fool enough to argue even once with the Gardeners.

sintʃæn floʊɾ aʊt fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ, ən nuz floʊɾ ɪn. ivən wən ðeɪ hæd tə slip ɪn ði æɾɪk, mɝtʃəns pɹin ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹumz ʌv ɪnz, smoʊkɪŋ ðɛɹ paɪps ən tɛlɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ nu ðət noʊ wʌn ɛls dɪd. soʊ lɔŋ əz ðə tɛlɪŋ dɪd nɑɾ əfɛk ðɛɹ pɹɑfəts. ðə mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz kɛɹd lɪɾəl fəɹ pɹɑfəts ðeɪ wəd nɑt ʃɛɹ ən toʊld ɛvɹiθɪŋ, səm ʌv ɪt tʃɹu. simən spɹɛd teɪlz fəɹ ɛniwʌn u wəd baɪ ə mʌɡ ʌv eɪl, əɹ bɛɾɝ, hɑt spaɪst waɪn, ən wən ðeɪ hæd dʒɹʌŋk ɪnʌf, ðeɪ tɔkt ivən mɔɹ, ʌv pɔɹts ðeɪ hæd vɪzəɾəd, ən ɪvɛns ðeɪ hæd wɪtnəst, ən laɪkli dʒɹimz ðeɪ hæd hæɾ æftɝ ðə læs taɪm ðɛɹ hɛdz wɝ fʊl ə fjumz. stɪl, ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ðə wɝld aʊtsaɪɾ ɛbu dɑɹ wɑz siθɪŋ laɪk ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz. teɪlz ʌv il luɾɪŋ ən bɝnɪŋ keɪm fɹəm ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ən ɑɹmiz wɝ ɑn ðə muv ʌðɝ ðən ðə sintʃæn, ɑɹmiz ɪn tiɹ ən mʊɹændi, ɪn ɑɹæd dumən ən ændɝ, ɪn ɑmɑdɪʃiə, wɪtʃ wɑz nɑt jɛɾ ɪntaɪɝli ʌndɝ sintʃæn kəntʃɹoʊl, ən dʌzənz ʌv ɑɹmd ɡæðɝɪŋz tu smɔl tə bi kɔld ɑɹmiz ɪn ðə hɑɹtlæn ʌv ɔltɑɹə ɪtsɛlf. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə mɛn ɪn ɔltɑɹə ən ɑmɑdɪʃiə, noʊ wʌn ɹɪli simd ʃʊɹ u ɪntɛndəd tə faɪt hum, ən ðəɹ wɑz səm daʊɾ əbaʊɾ ɔltɑɹə. ɔltɑɹənz hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv teɪkɪŋ ædvæntɪdʒ ə tʃɹʌbəlz tə tʃɹaɪ peɪɪŋ ɔf ɡɹivənsəz əɡɛns ðɛɹ neɪbɝz.

Seanchan flowed out from Ebou Dar, and news flowed in. Even when they had to sleep in the attic, merchants preened in the common rooms of inns, smoking their pipes and telling what they knew that no one else did. So long as the telling did not affect their profits. The merchants' guards cared little for profits they would not share and told everything, some of it true. Seamen spread tales for anyone who would buy a mug of ale, or better, hot spiced wine, and when they had drunk enough, they talked even more, of ports they had visited, and events they had witnessed, and likely dreams they had had after the last time their heads were full of fumes. Still, it was clear the world outside Ebou Dar was seething like the Sea of Storms. Tales of Aiel looting and burning came from everywhere, and armies were on the move other than the Seanchan, armies in Tear and Murandy, in Arad Doman and Andor, in Amadicia, which was not yet entirely under Seanchan control, and dozens of armed gatherings too small to be called armies in the heartland of Altara itself. Except for the men in Altara and Amadicia, no one really seemed sure who intended to fight whom, and there was some doubt about Altara. Altarans had a way of taking advantage of troubles to try paying off grievances against their neighbors.

ðə nuz ðət ʃʊk ðə sɪɾi moʊst, ðoʊ, wɑz ə ɹænd. mæt tʃɹaɪɾ ɪz bɛs nɑt tə θɪŋk ə hɪm, əɹ pɛɹɪn, bʌɾ əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðoʊz ɑd swɝlz ə kʌlɝ ɪn ɪz hɛd wɑz dɪfəkəlt wən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz ɑn ɛvɹiwʌnz lɪps. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɑz dɛd, səm kleɪmd, mɝɾɝd baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, baɪ ðə hoʊl waɪt taʊɝ dɪsɛndɪŋ ɑn ɪm ət wʌns ɪn kɛɹhin, əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz ɪn ɪljən, əɹ tɛɹ. noʊ, ðeɪ hæd kɪdnæp hɪm, ən i wɑz hɛl pɹɪznɝ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. noʊ, hi hæd ɡɔn tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɑn ɪz oʊn ən swɔɹn fiəlti tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. ðə læst ɡeɪnd ɡɹeɪt kɹiɾəns kəz ə nʌmbɝ ə mɛn kleɪm tə hæv sin ə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən, saɪn baɪ ɪleɪɾə hɝsɛlf, ðəɾ ənaʊnst əz mʌtʃ. mæt hæɾ ɪz daʊts, əbaʊt ɹænd biɪŋ dɛɾ əɹ swɛɹɪŋ fiəlti, ət list. fəɹ səm ɑd ɹizən, hi fɛlt ʃʊɹ i wəd noʊ ɪf ɹænd daɪd, ən əz fəɹ ði ʌðɝ, hi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ðə mæn wəd pʊt hɪmsɛlf wɪðɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ vɑləntɛɹəli. dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əɹ noʊ dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, hi hæd tə hæv mɔɹ sɛns ðən ðæt.

The news that shook the city most, though, was of Rand. Mat tried his best not to think of him, or Perrin, but avoiding those odd swirls of color in his head was difficult when the Dragon Reborn was on everyone's lips. The Dragon Reborn was dead, some claimed, murdered by Aes Sedai, by the whole White Tower descending on him at once in Cairhien, or maybe it was in Illian, or Tear. No, they had kidnapped him, and he was held prisoner in the White Tower. No, he had gone to the White Tower on his own and sworn fealty to the Amyrlin Seat. The last gained great credence because a number of men claimed to have seen a proclamation, signed by Elaida herself, that announced as much. Mat had his doubts, about Rand being dead or swearing fealty, at least. For some odd reason, he felt sure he would know if Rand died, and as for the other, he did not believe the man would put himself within a hundred miles of the White Tower voluntarily. Dragon Reborn or no Dragon Reborn, he had to have more sense than that.

ðət nuz - ɔl ðə vɝʒənz ʌv ɪt - stɝd ðə sintʃæn ðə weɪ ə stɪk stɝz ən ænθip. haɪ-ɹæŋkɪŋ ɔfəsɝz stʃɹoʊd ðə hɔlz ə ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs əɾ ɛvɹi aʊɝ ə ðə deɪ ən naɪt, ðɛɹ ɑd, plum hɛlməts bɪniθ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz, ðɛɹ buts ɹɪŋɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ taɪlz, ðɛɹ feɪsəz sɛt. kɝiɝz ɹeɪst əweɪ fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ, ɑn hɔɹsəz ən ɑn tɔɹeɪkən. sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn bɪɡæn pətʃɹoʊlɪŋ ðə stʃɹits ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒʌst stændɪŋ ɡɑɹɾ ət ðə ɡeɪts, wʌns mɔɹ hʌntɪŋ fəɹ wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl. mæt kɛpt aʊɾ ə ði ɔfəsɝz' weɪ ən nɑɾəd pəlaɪtli tə ðə sʌldəm wən i pæst wʌn ɪn ðə stʃɹits. wʌtɛvɝ ɹændz sɪtʃueɪʃən wɑz, hi kəd də nʌθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. fɝst, hi hæd tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi.

That news - all the versions of it - stirred the Seanchan the way a stick stirs an antheap. High-ranking officers strode the halls of the Tarasin Palace at every hour of the day and night, their odd, plumed helmets beneath their arms, their boots ringing on the floor tiles, their faces set. Couriers raced away from Ebou Dar, on horses and on to'raken. Sul'dam and damane began patrolling the streets instead of just standing guard at the gates, once more hunting for women who could channel. Mat kept out of the officers' way and nodded politely to the sul'dam when he passed one in the streets. Whatever Rand's situation was, he could do nothing about it in Ebou Dar. First, he had to get out of the city.

ðə mɔɹnɪŋ æftɝ ðə ɡoʊləm tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɪm, mæt bɝn ɛvɹi læst wʌn ə ðə lɔŋ pɪŋk ɹɪbənz, ðə hoʊl ɡɹeɪt wɑɾ ə ðɛm, ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs əz sun əz taɪlɪn lɛft əɹ əpɑɹtməns. hi ɔlsoʊ bɝn ə pɪŋk koʊt ʃi hæd hæd meɪd fəɹ hɪm, tu pɛɹz ə pɪŋk bɹitʃɪz ən ə pɪŋk kloʊk. ə stɛntʃ ə bɝnɪŋ wʊl ən sɪlk fɪl ðə ɹumz, ən i oʊpən səm wɪndoʊz tə lɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt ɹɪli kɛɹ. hi fɛlt ə ɡɹeɪt ɹɪlif dʒɹɛsɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn bɹaɪt blu bɹitʃɪz ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɡɹin koʊt, ən ə blu kloʊk wɪð peɪnfəli ɔɹneɪt wɝkɪŋ. ivən ɔl ðə leɪs dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ hɪm. ət lis nʌn ʌv ɪt wɑz pɪŋk. hi nɛvɝ wɑntəd tə si ɛniθɪŋ ðət pɝtɪkjəlɝ kʌlɝ ɛvɝ əɡɛn!

The morning after the gholam tried to kill him, Mat burned every last one of the long pink ribbons, the whole great wad of them, in the fireplace as soon as Tylin left her apartments. He also burned a pink coat she had had made for him, two pairs of pink breeches and a pink cloak. A stench of burning wool and silk filled the rooms, and he opened some windows to let it out, but he did not really care. He felt a great relief dressing himself in bright blue breeches and embroidered green coat, and a blue cloak with painfully ornate working. Even all the lace did not bother him. At least none of it was pink. He never wanted to see anything that particular color ever again!

klæpɪŋ ɪz hæɾ ɑn ɪz hɛd, hi stʌmpt aʊɾ ə ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs wɪð ə ɹɪnud dɪtɝməneɪʃən tə faɪn ðət kʌbihoʊl tə stɔɹ wʌɾ i niɾəd fəɹ ɪz ɪskeɪp, ɪf i hæd tə vɪzəɾ ɛvɹi tævɝn, ɪn ən seɪlɝz' daɪv ɪn ðə sɪɾi tɛn taɪmz oʊvɝ. ivən ðoʊz ɪn ðə ɹæhəd. ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz! ɡɹeɪ ɡʌlz ən blæk-wɪŋ skɪmɝz swɝld ɪn lɛɾən skaɪ ðət pɹɑməs mɔɹ ɹeɪn, ən ən aɪsi wɪn kæɹiɪŋ ðə tæŋ ə sɔlt wɪpt əkɹɔs ðə mɔl hɛɹə, fleɪlɪŋ kloʊks əbaʊt. hi θʌmp ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz əz ðoʊ ɪntɛndɪŋ tə kɹæk ɛvɹi wʌn. laɪt, ɪf nid bi, hi wəd ɡoʊ wɪð lukə ɪn wʌɾ i wɔɹ. meɪbi lukə wəd lɛɾ ɪm wɝk ɪz weɪ əz ə bəfun! ðə mæn wəd pɹɑbli ɪnsɪst ɑn ɪt. ət lis ðət wəd kip ɪm kloʊs tə ɑlʌdʒɹə ən əɹ sikɹəts.

Clapping his hat on his head, he stumped out of the Tarasin Palace with a renewed determination to find that cubbyhole to store what he needed for his escape, if he had to visit every tavern, inn and sailors' dive in the city ten times over. Even those in the Rahad. A hundred times! Gray gulls and black-winged skimmers swirled in leaden sky that promised more rain, and an icy wind carrying the tang of salt whipped across the Mol Hara, flailing cloaks about. He thumped the paving stones as though intending to crack every one. Light, if need be, he would go with Luca in what he wore. Maybe Luca would let him work his way as a buffoon! The man would probably insist on it. At least that would keep him close to Aludra and her secrets.

hi stɔk ðə hoʊl wɪdθ ə ðə skwɛɹ bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə waɪd waɪt bɪldɪŋ i nu wɛl. ðə saɪn oʊvɝ ði ɑɹtʃt dɔɹ pɹoʊkleɪm ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən. ə tɔl fɛloʊ ɪn ɹɛd-ænd-blæk ɑɹmɝ stʃɹoʊɾ aʊt, θɹi θɪn blæk plumz ɑn ðə fɹʌn ə ðə hɛlməɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm, ən stʊd weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪz hɔɹs tə bi bɹɔɾ ɝaʊnd. ə blʌf-feɪs mæn wɪð ɡɹeɪ əɾ ɪz tɛmpəlz, hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət mæt, ən mæt əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ plɛzən ðə mæn maɪɾ əpɪɹ ɑn ðə sɝfəs, hi wɑz ə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹd, æftɝ ɔl, ən ə bænɝ-dʒɛnɝəl tə but. ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən, soʊ nɪɹ ðə pæləs, hæɾ ɛvɹi ɹum ɹɛntəd baɪ haɪ sintʃæn ɔfəsɝz, ən fəɹ ðət ɹizən i hæd nɑt bɪn bæk sɪns i wɑz eɪbəl tə wɔk əɡɛn. ɔɹɾənɛɹi sintʃæn soʊlʒɝz wɝ nɑt sətʃ bæd fɛloʊz, ɹɛɾi tə ɡæmbəl hæf ðə naɪɾ ən baɪ ə ɹaʊnd wən ɪt keɪm ðɛɹ tɝn, bʌt haɪ-ɹæŋkɪŋ ɔfəsɝz maɪɾ əz wɛl bi noʊbəlz. stɪl, hi hæd tə stɑɹt sʌmwɛɹ.

He stalked the whole width of the square before he realized that he was in front of a wide white building he knew well. The sign over the arched door proclaimed The Wandering Woman. A tall fellow in red-and-black armor strode out, three thin black plumes on the front of the helmet under his arm, and stood waiting for his horse to be brought around. A bluff-faced man with gray at his temples, he did not look at Mat, and Mat avoided looking at him. No matter how pleasant the man might appear on the surface, he was a Deathwatch Guard, after all, and a banner-general to boot. The Wandering Woman, so near the Palace, had every room rented by high Seanchan officers, and for that reason he had not been back since he was able to walk again. Ordinary Seanchan soldiers were not such bad fellows, ready to gamble half the night and buy a round when it came their turn, but high-ranking officers might as well be nobles. Still, he had to start somewhere.

ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, haɪ-silɪŋɡd ən wɛl-laɪɾəd baɪ læmps bɝnɪŋ ɑn ɔl ðə wɔlz dɪspaɪt ði ɝli aʊɝ. sɑləd ʃʌɾɝz kʌvɝd ðə tɔl ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz naʊ, fəɹ wɔɹmθ, ən faɪɝz kɹækəld ɪn boʊθ lɔŋ faɪɝpleɪsəz. ə feɪn heɪz ə paɪpsmoʊk fɪl ði ɛɹ, ən ðə smɛl ʌv ɡʊd kʊkɪŋ fɹəm ðə kɪtʃənz. tu wɪmən wɪð fluts ən ə fɛloʊ wɪð ə dʒɹʌm bɪtwin ɪz niz wɝ pleɪɪŋ ə kwɪk, ʃɹɪl ɛbu dɑɹi tun ðəɾ i nɑɾəd ɪn taɪm tə. nɑt soʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm wən i hæd steɪd ðɛɹ, soʊ fɑɹ əz ɪt wɛnt. bʌɾ ɔl ə ðə tʃɛɹz hɛl sintʃæn, naʊ, səm ɪn ɑɹmɝ, ʌðɝz ɪn lɔŋ, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd koʊts, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ, tɔkɪŋ, stʌɾiɪŋ mæps spɹɛɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəlz. ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən wɪð ðə fleɪm ʌv ə dɝsʌldəm ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ sim tə bi meɪkɪŋ ə ɹipɔɹɾ ət wʌn teɪbəl, ən əɾ ənʌðɝ ə skɪni sʌldəm wɪð ə ɹaʊnd-feɪs deɪmeɪn əɾ əɹ hilz əpɪɹd tə bi ɡɛɾɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz. ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə sintʃæn hæd ðə saɪdz ən bæks ə ðɛɹ hɛdz ʃeɪv soʊ ðeɪ sim tə bi wɛɹɪŋ boʊlz, wɪð ðə hɛɹ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ət ðə bæk lɛf lɔŋ ɪn ə sɔɹɾ ʌv waɪd teɪl ðət hʌŋ tə ðə ʃoʊldɝz ɑn mɛn ən ɔfən tə ðə weɪst ɑn wɪmən. ðoʊz wɝ sɪmpəl lɔɹdz ən leɪɾiz, nɑt haɪ ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt ðət hɑɹdli mæɾɝd. ə lɔɹd wɑz ə lɔɹd, ən bɪsaɪdz, ðə mɛn ən wɪmən gɑnə fɛtʃ ə sɝvɪŋ meɪd fəɹ mɔɹ dʒɹɪŋks hæd ðə smuð-tʃik dɪsdeɪnfəl lʊk ʌv ɔfəsɝz ðɛmsɛlvz, wɪtʃ mɛn ðə foʊk ðeɪ wɝ fɛtʃɪŋ fəɹ hæd ɹæŋk tə kɑz ə mæn tʃɹʌbəl. sɛvɹəl noʊɾəst ɪm ən fɹaʊnd, ən i ɔlmoʊs lɛft.

The common room was almost as he remembered, high-ceilinged and well-lighted by lamps burning on all the walls despite the early hour. Solid shutters covered the tall arched windows now, for warmth, and fires crackled in both long fireplaces. A faint haze of pipesmoke filled the air, and the smell of good cooking from the kitchens. Two women with flutes and a fellow with a drum between his knees were playing a quick, shrill Ebou Dari tune that he nodded in time to. Not so different from when he had stayed there, so far as it went. But all of the chairs held Seanchan, now, some in armor, others in long, embroidered coats, drinking, talking, studying maps spread out on the tables. A graying woman with the flame of a der'sul'dam embroidered on her shoulder seemed to be making a report at one table, and at another a skinny sul'dam with a round-faced damane at her heels appeared to be getting orders. A number of the Seanchan had the sides and backs of their heads shaved so they seemed to be wearing bowls, with the hair remaining at the back left long in a sort of wide tail that hung to the shoulders on men and often to the waist on women. Those were simple lords and ladies, not High anything, but that hardly mattered. A lord was a lord, and besides, the men and women going to fetch a serving maid for more drinks had the smooth-cheeked disdainful look of officers themselves, which meant the folk they were fetching for had rank to cause a man trouble. Several noticed him and frowned, and he almost left.

ðən i sɔ ði ɪnkipɝ kʌmɪŋ daʊn ðə ɹeɪləs stɛɹz ət ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum, ə steɪtli heɪzəl-aɪd wʊmən wɪð lɑɹdʒ ɡoʊldən hups ɪn əɹ ɪɹz ən ə lɪɾəl ɡɹeɪ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ. sɛɾəl ɑnən wɑz nɑɾ ɛbu dɑɹi, əɹ ivən ɔltɑɹən i səspɛktəd, bʌt ʃi wɔɹ ðə mɛɹɪdʒ-naɪf, hæŋɪŋ hɪlt-daʊn fɹəm ə sɪlvɝ kɑlɝ ɪndə ə dip nɛɹoʊ nɛklaɪn, ən ə lɔŋ kɝv bleɪɾ əɾ əɹ weɪst. ʃi nu hi wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ə lɔɹd, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ fɑɹ ʃi bɪlivd ɛni lɔŋɡɝ əɹ wʌt ɡʊɾ ɪt wəd də ɪf ʃi stɪl swɑloʊd ðə hoʊl fɑɹædɪəl. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi sɔ hɪm ət ðə seɪm ɪnstən ən smaɪld, ə fɹɛnli, wɛlkəmɪŋ smaɪl ðət meɪɾ əɹ feɪs ivən pɹɪɾiɝ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt bʌt tə ɡoʊ ən ɡɹiɾ əɹ ən æsk æftɝ əɹ hɛlθ, nɑt tu ɪlæbɹətli. hɝ mʌskjəlɝ hʌzbənd wɑz ə fɪʃɪŋ-boʊt kæptən wɪð mɔɹ dulɪŋ skɑɹz ðən mæt wɑntəd tə θɪŋk əbaʊt. stʃɹeɪɾ ɔf ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ əbaʊt nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn, ən tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, wɛðɝ i nu ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə kɪn. hi hæd hæd noʊ aɪdiə ʃi hæɾ ivən hɝɾ ə ðɛm.

Then he saw the innkeeper coming down the railless stairs at the back of the room, a stately hazel-eyed woman with large golden hoops in her ears and a little gray in her hair. Setalle Anan was not Ebou Dari, or even Altaran he suspected, but she wore the marriage-knife, hanging hilt-down from a silver collar into a deep narrow neckline, and a long curved blade at her waist. She knew he was supposed to be a lord, but he was not sure how far she believed any longer or what good it would do if she still swallowed the whole faradiddle. In any case, she saw him at the same instant and smiled, a friendly, welcoming smile that made her face even prettier. There was nothing for it but to go and greet her and ask after her health, not too elaborately. Her muscular husband was a fishing-boat captain with more dueling scars than Mat wanted to think about. Straight off she wanted to know about Nynaeve and Elayne, and to his surprise, whether he knew anything about the Kin. He had had no idea she had even heard of them.

"ðeɪ wɛnt wɪð nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn," hi wɪspɝd, kɔʃəsli kipɪŋ wɑtʃ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ sintʃæn wɑz peɪɪŋ əm ɛni maɪnd. hi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə seɪ tu mʌtʃ, bʌt tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə kɪn wɛɹ sintʃæn maɪt hɪɹ meɪd ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk pɹɪkəl. "soʊ fɑɹ əz aɪ noʊ, ðəɹ ɔl seɪf."

"They went with Nynaeve and Elayne," he whispered, cautiously keeping watch to make sure no Seanchan was paying them any mind. He did not intend to say too much, but talking about the Kin where Seanchan might hear made the back of his neck prickle. "So far as I know, they're all safe."

"ɡʊd. aɪ wəd bi peɪn hæɾ ɛni ʌv əm bɪn kɑlɝd." ðə ful wʊmən dɪd nɑɾ ivən loʊɝ əɹ vɔɪs!

"Good. I would be pained had any of them been collared." The fool woman did not even lower her voice!

"jɛs; ðæts ɡʊd," hi mʌɾɝd, ən hɝidli ɪkspleɪn ɪz nidz bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd stɑɹt ʃaʊɾɪŋ haʊ hæpi ʃi wɑz ðət wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl hæɾ ɪskeɪp ðə sintʃæn. hi wɑz hæpi, tu, dʒʌs nɑt hæpi ɪnʌf tə pʊt hɪmsɛlf ɪn tʃeɪnz fəɹ dʒɔɪ.

"Yes; that's good," he muttered, and hurriedly explained his needs before she could start shouting how happy she was that women who could channel had escaped the Seanchan. He was happy, too, just not happy enough to put himself in chains for joy.

ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd, ʃi siɾəd hɝsɛlf ɑn ðə stɛps ən pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ niz. hɝ dɑɹk ɡɹin skɝts, soʊn ʌp ɑn ðə lɛf saɪd, ʃoʊd ɹɛd pɛɾikoʊts. ɛbu dɑɹi ɹɪli dɪd sim tə nɑk tɪŋkɝz ɑn ðɛɹ hilz wən ɪt keɪm tə tʃuzɪŋ kʌlɝz. ðə bʌz ə sintʃæn vɔɪsəz fɔt wɪð ðə haɪ-pɪtʃt mjuzɪk ɔl ɝaʊn ðɛm, ən ʃi sæt ðəɹ lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm stɝnli. "ju doʊnt noʊ əɹ weɪz, ðəɾ ɪz ðə tʃɹʌbəl," ʃi sɛd. "pɹɪɾiz ɑɹ ən oʊld ən ɑnɝd kʌstəm ɪn ɔltɑɹə. mɛni ə jʌŋ mæn əɹ wʊmən əz ə faɪnəl flɪŋ əz ə pɹɪɾi, pæmpɝɾ ən ʃaʊɝd wɪð pɹɛzəns, bɪfɔɹ sɛɾəlɪŋ daʊn. bʌt jə si, ə pɹɪɾi livz wən ʃi tʃuzəz. taɪlɪn ʃʊdn bi tʃɹiɾɪŋ jə əz aɪ hɪɹ ʃi ɪz. stɪl," ʃi æɾəd dʒudɪʃɪsli, "aɪ mʌst seɪ ʃi dʒɹɛsəz jə wɛl." ʃi meɪɾ ə sɝkəlɪŋ moʊʃən wɪð wʌn hænd. "hoʊld aʊt jəɹ kloʊk ən tɝn ɝaʊn soʊ aɪ kən ɡɛɾ ə bɛɾɝ lʊk."

Shaking her head, she seated herself on the steps and put her hands on her knees. Her dark green skirts, sewn up on the left side, showed red petticoats. Ebou Dari really did seem to knock Tinkers on their heels when it came to choosing colors. The buzz of Seanchan voices fought with the high-pitched music all around them, and she sat there looking at him sternly. "You don't know our ways, that is the trouble," she said. "Pretties are an old and honored custom in Altara. Many a young man or woman has a final fling as a pretty, pampered and showered with presents, before settling down. But you see, a pretty leaves when she chooses. Tylin shouldn't be treating you as I hear she is. Still," she added judiciously, "I must say she dresses you well." She made a circling motion with one hand. "Hold out your cloak and turn around so I can get a better look."

mæt dʒɹu ə dip, kɑmɪŋ bɹɛθ. ən ðən θɹi mɔɹ. ðə kʌlɝ flʌɾɪŋ ɪz feɪs wɑz ʃɪɹ fjʊɹi. hi wɑz nɑt blʌʃɪŋ. sɝɾənli nɑt! laɪt, dɪd ðə hoʊl sɪɾi noʊ? "du juv ə speɪs aɪ kən juz əɹ doʊn ju?" hi dɪmændəɾ ɪn ə stʃɹæŋɡəl vɔɪs.

Mat drew a deep, calming breath. And then three more. The color flooding his face was sheer fury. He was not blushing. Certainly not! Light, did the whole city know? "Do you have a space I can use or don't you?" he demanded in a strangled voice.

ɪt tɝn aʊt ðət ʃi dɪd. hi kəd juz ə ʃɛlf ɪn əɹ sɛlɝ, wɪtʃ ʃi sɛd steɪd dʒɹaɪ jɪɹ ɹaʊnd, ən ðəɹ wɑz ðə smɔl hɑloʊ ʌndɝ ðə kɪtʃənz stoʊn flɔɹ wɛɹ i wʌns hæd kɛpt ɪz tʃɛst ʌv ɡoʊld. ɪt tɝn aʊt ðə ɹɛntəl pɹaɪs wɑz fəɹ ɪm tə hoʊld aʊɾ ɪz kloʊk ən tɝn ɝaʊn soʊ ʃi kəd ɡɛɾ ə bɛɾɝ lʊk. ʃi ɡɹɪn laɪk ə kæt! wʌn ə ðə sintʃæn, ə bʌzɝd-feɪst wʊmən ɪn ɹɛd-ænd-blu ɑɹmɝ, ɛndʒɔɪd ðə ʃoʊ soʊ mʌtʃ ðət ʃi tɔst ɪm ə fæt sɪlvɝ kɔɪn wɪð stʃɹeɪnʒ mɑɹkɪŋz, ə fɝbɪɾɪŋ wʊmənz feɪs ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ən səm sɔɹɾ ə hɛvi tʃɛɹ ɑn ði ʌðɝ.

It turned out that she did. He could use a shelf in her cellar, which she said stayed dry year round, and there was the small hollow under the kitchen's stone floor where he once had kept his chest of gold. It turned out the rental price was for him to hold out his cloak and turn around so she could get a better look. She grinned like a cat! One of the Seanchan, a buzzard-faced woman in red-and-blue armor, enjoyed the show so much that she tossed him a fat silver coin with strange markings, a forbidding woman's face on one side and some sort of heavy chair on the other.

stɪl, hi hæɾ ɪz pleɪs tə stɔɹ kloʊðz ən mʌni, ən wʌns i ɹɪtɝn tə ðə pæləs, tə taɪlɪnz əpɑɹtməns, hi faʊn aʊɾ i hæd kloʊðz tə stɔɹ ɪn ɪt.

Still, he had his place to store clothes and money, and once he returned to the Palace, to Tylin's apartments, he found out he had clothes to store in it.

"aɪ fɪɹ maɪ lɔɹdz ɡɑɹməns ɑɹ ɪn ə tɛɹəbəl steɪt," nɹɪm sɛd luɡʌbɹiəsli. ðə skɪni, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd kɛɹhinɪn wʊɾə bɪn əz doʊlɝəs ənaʊnsɪŋ ðə ɡɪft ʌv ə sæk ə faɪɝdʒɹɑps, ðoʊ. hɪz lɔŋ feɪs wɑz pɝpɛtʃuəli ɪn mɔɹnɪŋ. hi dɪd kip ən aɪ ɑn ðə dɔɹ əɡɛns taɪlɪnz ɹɪtɝn, haʊɛvɝ. "ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz kwaɪt fɪlθi, ən aɪm əfɹeɪd mɪldu hæz ɹuən sɛvɹəl ə maɪ lɔɹdz bɛs koʊts."

"I fear my Lord's garments are in a terrible state," Nerim said lugubriously. The skinny, gray-haired Cairhienin would have been as dolorous announcing the gift of a sack of firedrops, though. His long face was perpetually in mourning. He did keep an eye on the door against Tylin's return, however. "Everything is quite filthy, and I am afraid mildew has ruined several of my Lord's best coats."

"ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɪn ə kʌbɝd wɪð pɹɪns bɛslənz tʃaɪldhʊd tɔɪz, maɪ lɔɹd," ləpɪn læft, tʌɡɪŋ ət ðə ləpɛlz ʌv ə dɑɹk koʊt laɪk dʒulɪnz. ðə bɔldɪŋ mæn wɑz ðə ɹɪvɝs ə nɹɪm, staʊɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə boʊni, dɑɹk ɪnstɛɾ ə peɪl, hɪz ɹaʊn bɛli ɔlweɪz ʃeɪkɪŋ wɪð læftɝ. fəɹ ə taɪm æftɝ neɪlzinz dɛθ ɪt hæd simd i ɪntɛndəd tə kəmpit wɪð nɹɪm ət saɪɪŋ, ðə weɪ ðeɪ dɪɾ oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, bʌt ði ɪntɝvinɪŋ wiks hæd ɹəkʌvɝɾ ɪm tə hɪz nɔɹməl sɛlf. əz lɔŋ əz noʊ wʌn mɛnʃən ɪz fɔɹmɝ mæstɝ, ɛniweɪ. "ðeɪ ɑɹ dʌsti, ðoʊ, maɪ lɔɹd. aɪ daʊɾ ɛniwʌn əz bɪn ɪn ðət kʌbɝd sɪns ðə pɹɪns pʊɾ ɪz tɔɪ soʊlʒɝz əweɪ."

"They were all in a cupboard with Prince Beslan's childhood toys, my Lord," Lopin laughed, tugging at the lapels of a dark coat like Juilin's. The balding man was the reverse of Nerim, stout instead of bony, dark instead of pale, his round belly always shaking with laughter. For a time after Nalesean's death it had seemed he intended to compete with Nerim at sighing, the way they did over everything else, but the intervening weeks had recovered him to his normal self. As long as no one mentioned his former master, anyway. "They are dusty, though, my Lord. I doubt anyone has been in that cupboard since the Prince put his toy soldiers away."

filɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz lʌk wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ stʃɹɔŋ ət læst, mæt toʊld əm tə stɑɹt teɪkɪŋ ɪz kloʊðz əkɹɔs tə ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən ə fju pisəz əɾ ə taɪm, ən ə pɑkət fʊl ʌv ɡoʊld itʃ tʃɹɪp. hɪz blæk-hæftɪd spɪɹ, pɹɑpt ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ə taɪlɪnz bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ wɪð ɪz ənstʃɹʌŋ tu ɹɪvɝz baʊ, wəɾ əv tə weɪt fəɹ læst. ɡɛɾɪŋ ðəɾ aʊt maɪt bi əz dɪfəkəlt əz ɡɛɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf aʊt. hi kəɾ ɔlweɪz meɪk ə nu baʊ fəɹ hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt gɑnə əbændən ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ.

Feeling that his luck was running strong at last, Mat told them to start taking his clothes across to The Wandering Woman a few pieces at a time, and a pocket full of gold each trip. His black-hafted spear, propped in a corner of Tylin's bedchamber with his unstrung Two Rivers bow, would have to wait for last. Getting that out might be as difficult as getting himself out. He could always make a new bow for himself, but he was not going to abandon the ashandarei.

aɪ peɪd tu haɪ ə pɹaɪs fəɹ ðə blʌɾi θɪŋ tə liv ɪt, hi θɔt, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə skɑɹ hɪɾən bɪniθ ðə skɑɹf ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk. wʌn ə ðə fɝst, əmʌŋ tu mɛni. laɪt, ɪt wəd bi naɪs tə θɪŋk ðəɾ i hæd mɔɹ tə lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə ðən skɑɹz ən bæɾəlz i dɪd nɑt wɑnt. ən ə waɪf i dɪd nɑt wɑn əɹ ivən noʊ. ðəɹ hæd tə bi mɔɹ ðən ðæt. fɝs keɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ wɪð ə hoʊl haɪd, ðoʊ. ðəɾ əbʌv ɔl ɛls, fɝst.

I paid too high a price for the bloody thing to leave it, he thought, fingering the scar hidden beneath the scarf around his neck. One of the first, among too many. Light, it would be nice to think that he had more to look forward to than scars and battles he did not want. And a wife he did not want or even know. There had to be more than that. First came getting out of Ebou Dar with a whole hide, though. That above all else, first.

ləpɪn ən nɹɪm baʊd ðɛmsɛlvz aʊɾ ə hɪz pɹɛzəns wɪð ði ɪkwɪvələn ə tu fæt pɝsɪz spɹɛɾ əbaʊt ðɛɹ kloʊðɪŋ, soʊ əz nɑt tə kɹieɪɾ ɛni bʌlʒɪz, bʌt noʊ sunɝ hæd ðeɪ ɡɔn ðən taɪlɪn əpɪɹd, wɑntɪŋ tə noʊ waɪ hɪz bɑdaɪsɝvəns wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ðə hɔlz əz ðoʊ ɹeɪsɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ. ɪf i hæd bɪn filɪŋ suəsaɪɾəl i cʊɾə toʊld əɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɹeɪsɪŋ tə si hu wəd bi fɝs tə ɹitʃ ði ɪn wɪð ɪz ɡoʊld, əɹ meɪbi dʒʌs ðə fɝs tə stɑɹt klinɪŋ ɪz kloʊðz. ɪnstɛɾ i bɪzid hɪmsɛlf daɪvɝɾɪŋ hɝ, ən sun ɪnʌf ðət tʃeɪst ɛni ʌðɝ θɔts aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə ɡlɪmɝ ðəɾ ɪz lʌk hæd faɪnəli bɪɡʌn tə peɪ ɔf ət sʌmθɪŋ bɪsaɪdz ɡæmbəlɪŋ. ɔl ɪt niɾəd tə pʊt ðə kæp ɑn wəd bi fəɹ ɑlʌdʒɹə tə ɡɪv ɪm wʌɾ i wɑntəd bɪfɔɹ i lɛft. taɪlɪn pʊɾ əɹ maɪn tə wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, ən fəɹ ə taɪm i fɝɡɑt faɪɹwɝks ən ɑlʌdʒɹə ən ɪskeɪpɪŋ. fəɹ ə taɪm.

Lopin and Nerim bowed themselves out of his presence with the equivalent of two fat purses spread about their clothing, so as not to create any bulges, but no sooner had they gone than Tylin appeared, wanting to know why his bodyservants were running in the halls as though racing each other. If he had been feeling suicidal he could have told her they were racing to see who would be first to reach the inn with his gold, or maybe just the first to start cleaning his clothes. Instead he busied himself diverting her, and soon enough that chased any other thoughts out of his head, except for a glimmer that his luck had finally begun to pay off at something besides gambling. All it needed to put the cap on would be for Aludra to give him what he wanted before he left. Tylin put her mind to what she was doing, and for a time he forgot fireworks and Aludra and escaping. For a time.

æftɝ ə lɪɾəl sɝtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə sɪɾi, hi faɪnəli loʊkeɪɾəd ə bɛlfndɝ. ðəɹ wɝ ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ɡɔŋ-meɪkɝz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, bʌɾ oʊnli wʌn bɛlmeɪkɝ, wɪð ə faʊnʒɹi aʊtsaɪd ðə wɛstɝn wɔl. ðə bɛlmeɪkɝ, ə kədævɝəs, ɪmpeɪʃən fɛloʊ, swɛɾɪd ɪn ðə hiɾ ə hɪz hjudʒ aɪɝn fɝnəs. ðə swɛltɝɪŋ faʊnʒɹiz wʌn lɔŋ ɹum maɪɾ əv bɪn səm sɔɹɾ ə tɔɹtʃɝ tʃeɪmbɝ. hɔɪstɪŋ tʃeɪnz dæŋɡəl fɹəm ðə ɹæftɝz, ən sʌɾən fleɪmz ɡtəd fɹəm ðə fɝnəs, θɹoʊɪŋ flɪkɝɪŋ ʃædoʊz ən livɪŋ mæt hæf-blaɪnd. ən noʊ sunɝ wəɾ i blɪŋk əweɪ ði æftɝɪmɪdʒ ə ɹeɪdʒɪŋ faɪɝ ðən ənʌðɝ ɪɹʌpʃən wəd liv ɪm skwɪntɪŋ əɡɛn. wɝkmɪn dʒɹɪpɪŋ wɪð swɛt pɔɹd moʊltən bɹɑnz fɹəm ðə fɝnəsəz mɛltɪŋ pɑɾ ɪndə ə skwɛɹ moʊld, hæf əɡɛn əz tɔl əz ə mæn, ðət hæd bɪn lɛvɝɾ ɪndə pəzɪʃən ɑn ɹoʊlɝz. ʌðɝ ɡɹeɪt moʊlz laɪk ɪt stʊɾ ɝaʊn ðə stoʊn flɔɹ, əmɪɾ ə lɪɾɝ ə smɔlɝ moʊlz ɪn vɛɹiəs saɪzəz.

After a little searching through the city, he finally located a bellfounder. There were a number of gong-makers in Ebou Dar, but only one bellmaker, with a foundry outside the western wall. The bellmaker, a cadaverous, impatient fellow, sweated in the heat of his huge iron furnace. The sweltering foundry's one long room might have been some sort of torture chamber. Hoisting chains dangled from the rafters, and sudden flames gouted from the furnace, throwing flickering shadows and leaving Mat half-blind. And no sooner would he blink away the afterimage of raging fire than another eruption would leave him squinting again. Workmen dripping with sweat poured molten bronze from the furnace's melting pot into a square mold, half again as tall as a man, that had been levered into position on rollers. Other great molds like it stood around the stone floor, amid a litter of smaller molds in various sizes.

"maɪ lɔɹɾ ɪz pliz tə dʒɛst." mæstɝ sutoʊmə fɔɹst ə tʃʌkəl, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt lʊk əmjuzd, wɪð ɪz dæmp blæk hɛɹ hæŋɪŋ daʊn ən klɪŋɪŋ tə hɪz feɪs. hɪz tʃʌkəl saʊndəɾ əz hɑloʊ əz ɪz tʃiks, ən i kɛpt ʃuɾɪŋ fɹaʊnz əɾ ɪz wɝkmɪn əz ðoʊ səspɛktɪŋ ðeɪ wəd laɪ daʊn ən ɡoʊ tə slip ɪf i dɪd nɑt meɪnteɪn ə kloʊs wɑtʃ ɑn ðɛm. ə dɛd mæn kəd nɑɾ əv slɛpt ɪn ðət hit. mæts ʃɝt stʌk tə hɪm dæmpli, ən i wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə swɛɾ ɪz koʊt θɹu ɪn pætʃəz. "aɪ noʊ nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɪluməneɪɾɝz, maɪ lɔɹd, ən aɪ wɪʃ tə noʊ nʌθɪŋ. jusləs fɹɪpɝiz, faɪɹwɝks. nɑt laɪk bɛlz. ɪf maɪ lɔɹd wɪl ɪkskjuz mi? aɪm vɛɹi bɪzi. ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ əz kəmɪʃən θɝtin bɛlz fəɹ ə vɪktɝi sɛt, ðə lɑɹdʒəs bɛlz ɛvɝ kæst ɛniwɛɹ. ən kælwɪn sutoʊmə wɪl kæs ðɛm!" ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə vɪktɝi oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn sɪɾi dɪd nɑt sim tə bɑðɝ sutoʊmə ɪn ðə list. ðə læst wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪm ɡɹɪn ən ɹʌb ɪz boʊni hænz təɡɛðɝ.

"My Lord is pleased to jest." Master Sutoma forced a chuckle, but he did not look amused, with his damp black hair hanging down and clinging to his face. His chuckle sounded as hollow as his cheeks, and he kept shooting frowns at his workmen as though suspecting they would lie down and go to sleep if he did not maintain a close watch on them. A dead man could not have slept in that heat. Mat's shirt stuck to him damply, and he was beginning to sweat his coat through in patches. "I know nothing of Illuminators, my Lord, and I wish to know nothing. Useless fripperies, fireworks. Not like bells. If my Lord will excuse me? I am very busy. The High Lady Suroth has commissioned thirteen bells for a victory set, the largest bells ever cast anywhere. And Calwyn Sutoma will cast them!" That it was a victory over his own city did not seem to bother Sutoma in the least. The last was enough to make him grin and rub his bony hands together.

mæt ətɛmptəd tə meɪk ɑlʌdʒɹə ɹɪlɛnt, bʌt ðə wʊmən maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn kæs bɹɑnz hɝsɛlf. wɛl, ʃi wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbli sɑftɝ ðən bɹɑnz wʌns ʃi faɪnəli lɛɾ ɪm pʊɾ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn hɝ, jɛt kɪsəz ðət lɛft əɹ tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə slækən əɹ ɹizɑlv.

Mat attempted to make Aludra relent, but the woman might as well have been cast bronze herself. Well, she was considerably softer than bronze once she finally let him put an arm around her, yet kisses that left her trembling did nothing to slacken her resolve.

"mi, aɪ də nɑt bɪliv ɪn tɛlɪŋ ə mæn mɔɹ ðən i nidz tə noʊ," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθləsli, sɪɾɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ɑn ə pæɾəd bɛntʃ ɪn əɹ wæɡən. ʃi əlaʊd noʊ mɔɹ ðən kɪsəz, bʌt ʃi wɑz vɛɹi ɪnθuziæstɪk əbaʊt ðoʊz. ðə θɪn biɾɪd bɹeɪdz ʃi hæd teɪkən tə wɛɹɪŋ əɡɛn wɝ ə tæŋɡəl. "mɛn ɡɑsəp, jɛs? tʃæɾɝ, tʃæɾɝ, tʃæɾɝ, ən jə jʊɹsɛlvz doʊnt noʊ wʌt jəl seɪ nɛkst. bɪsaɪdz, meɪbi aɪ hæv meɪd jə ðə pʌzəl dʒʌs tə meɪk jə ɹɪtɝn, jɛs?" ən ʃi sɛɾ əbaʊt fɝðɝ dɪsɹeɪɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ, ən ɪz əz wɛl.

"Me, I do not believe in telling a man more than he needs to know," she said breathlessly, sitting beside him on a padded bench in her wagon. She allowed no more than kisses, but she was very enthusiastic about those. The thin beaded braids she had taken to wearing again were a tangle. "Men gossip, yes? Chatter, chatter, chatter, and you yourselves don't know what you will say next. Besides, maybe I have made you the puzzle just to make you return, yes?" And she set about further disarraying her hair, and his as well.

ʃi pʊɾ ʌp noʊ mɔɹ naɪtfloʊɝz, ðoʊ, nɑɾ æftɝ i toʊld əɹ əbaʊt ðə tʃæptɝ haʊs ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ. hi tʃɹaɪd tu mɔɹ vɪzəts tə mæstɝ sutoʊmə, bʌɾ ɑn ðə sɛkənd, ðə bɛlmeɪkɝ hæd ðə dɔɹz bɑɹɾ əɡɛns hɪm. hi wɑz kæstɪŋ ðə lɑɹdʒəs bɛlz ɛvɝ meɪd, ən noʊ fulɪʃ fɔɹənɝ wɪð fulɪʃ kwɛstʃənz wəd bi əlaʊd tə ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð ðæt.

She put up no more nightflowers, though, not after he told her about the chapter house in Tanchico. He tried two more visits to Master Sutoma, but on the second, the bellmaker had the doors barred against him. He was casting the largest bells ever made, and no foolish foreigner with foolish questions would be allowed to interfere with that.

taɪlɪn bɪɡæn lækɝɪŋ ðə fɝs tu fɪŋɡɝneɪlz ɑn itʃ hænd ɡɹin, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt ʃeɪv ðə saɪdz ə hɝ hɛd. ʃi wʊd, ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ʃi toʊl hɪm, pʊlɪŋ əɹ floʊɪŋ hɛɹ bæk wɪð əɹ hænz tə stʌɾi hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə ɡɪlt-fɹeɪmd mɪɹɝ ɑn ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ wɔl, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə bɪkʌm juz tə ði aɪdiə fɝst. ʃi wɑz meɪkɪŋ əɹ əkɑmədeɪʃənz wɪð ðə sintʃæn, ən i kəd nɑt fɔlt əɹ fəɹ ɪt, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni dɑɹk skaʊlz bɛslən ɡeɪv ɪz mʌðɝ.

Tylin began lacquering the first two fingernails on each hand green, though she did not shave the sides of her head. She would, eventually, she told him, pulling her flowing hair back with her hands to study herself in the gilt-framed mirror on the bedchamber wall, but she wanted to become used to the idea first. She was making her accommodations with the Seanchan, and he could not fault her for it, no matter how many dark scowls Beslan gave his mother.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ ʃi kəd səspɛkt ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɑlʌdʒɹə, bʌt ðə deɪ æftɝ i fɝs kɪs ði ɪluməneɪɾɝ, ðə ɡɹændmʌðɝli meɪdz dɪsəpɪɹd fɹəm əɹ tʃeɪmbɝz, ɹipleɪs baɪ wɪmən waɪt-hɛɹɾ ən waɪzənd. taɪlɪn bɪɡæn stɪkɪŋ əɹ kɝv bɛl naɪf ɪndə wʌn ə ðə bɪdpoʊsts ət naɪt, kloʊs tə hænd, ən mjuzɪŋ əlaʊɾ ɪn ɪz hɪɹɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ hi wəd lʊk ɪn ə dækoʊvælz ʃɪɹ ɹoʊbz. ɪn fækt, naɪt wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli taɪm ʃi stʌk əɹ naɪf ɪn ðə bɪdpoʊst. ɡɹɪnɪŋ sɝvɪŋ wɪmən stɑɹɾəd dɪlɪvɝɪŋ sʌmənzɪz tə taɪlɪnz ɹumz baɪ sɪmpli tɛlɪŋ ɪm ðət ʃi hæd stæb ðə bɪdpoʊst, ən i stɑɹɾəd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əvɔɪɾ ɛni wʊmən ɪn lɪvɝi hi sɔ wɪð ə smaɪl ɑn əɹ feɪs. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɾ i dɪslaɪk biɪŋ bɛɾəd baɪ taɪlɪn, əsaɪd fɹəm ðə fækt ʃi wɑz ə kwin, əz snuɾi əz ɛni ʌðɝ noʊbəlwʊmən. ən ðə fæk ðət ʃi meɪɾ ɪm fil laɪk ə maʊs ðət hæd bɪn meɪɾ ə pɛt baɪ ə kæt. bʌt ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli soʊ mɛni aʊɝz ə deɪlaɪt, ɪf mɔɹ ðən i wɑz juz tə bæk hoʊm ɪn wɪntɝ, ən fəɹ ə bɪɾ i hæd tə wʌndɝ wɛðɝ ʃi mɛn tə kənsum ɔl ə ðɛm.

There was no way she could suspect anything about Aludra, but the day after he first kissed the Illuminator, the grandmotherly maids disappeared from her chambers, replaced by women white-haired and wizened. Tylin began sticking her curved belt knife into one of the bedposts at night, close to hand, and musing aloud in his hearing about how he would look in a da'covale's sheer robes. In fact, night was not the only time she stuck her knife in the bedpost. Grinning serving women started delivering summonses to Tylin's rooms by simply telling him that she had stabbed the bedpost, and he started trying to avoid any woman in livery he saw with a smile on her face. It was not that he disliked being bedded by Tylin, aside from the fact she was a queen, as snooty as any other noblewoman. And the fact that she made him feel like a mouse that had been made a pet by a cat. But there were only so many hours of daylight, if more than he was used to back home in winter, and for a bit he had to wonder whether she meant to consume all of them.

lʌkəli, taɪlɪn bɪɡæn spɛndɪŋ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ taɪm wɪð sjuɹɔθ ən tuɑn. hɝ əkɑmədeɪʃənz sim tə hæv ɛmbɹeɪs fɹɛndʃɪp, wɪð tuɑn ət list. noʊ wʌn kəd bi fɹɛnz wɪð sjuɹɔθ. taɪlɪn sim tə hæv ədɑptəd ðə ɡɝl, əɹ ðə ɡɝl hæɾ ədɑptəd hɝ. taɪlɪn toʊld ɪm lɪɾəl ʌv wʌt ðeɪ tɔkt əbaʊɾ ɪksɛpt ɪn ðə skɛtʃiəst aʊtlaɪnz, ən ɔfən nɑɾ ivən ðæt, bʌt ðeɪ klɑzəɾɪd ðɛmsɛlvz əloʊn fəɹ aʊɝz, ən swɛpt əlɔŋ ðə pæləs kɔɹɪɾɝz kənvɝsɪŋ kwaɪətli, əɹ səmtaɪmz læfɪŋ. fɹikwənli ænæθ əɹ sɪlutʃə, tuɑnz ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd sɔɪhɪn, tʃɹeɪld əlɔŋ bɪhaɪnd, ən naʊ ən ðən ə pɛɹ ə hɑɹd-aɪd dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz.

Luckily, Tylin began spending more and more time with Suroth and Tuon. Her accommodations seemed to have embraced friendship, with Tuon at least. No one could be friends with Suroth. Tylin seemed to have adopted the girl, or the girl had adopted her. Tylin told him little of what they talked about except in the sketchiest outlines, and often not even that, but they closeted themselves alone for hours, and swept along the Palace corridors conversing quietly, or sometimes laughing. Frequently Anath or Selucia, Tuon's golden-haired so'jhin, trailed along behind, and now and then a pair of hard-eyed Deathwatch Guards.

hi stɪl kəd nɑt fɪɡjɝ aʊt ðə ɹileɪʃənʃɪp bɪtwin sjuɹɔθ, tuɑn ən ænæθ. ɑn ðə sɝfəs, sjuɹɔθ ən tuɑn bɪheɪvd əz ikwəlz, kɔlɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ baɪ neɪm, læfɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝz dʒɛsts. tuɑn sɝɾənli nɛvɝ ɡeɪv sjuɹɔθ ɛni ɔɹɾɝ, ət lis nɑɾ ɪn ɪz hɪɹɪŋ, bʌt sjuɹɔθ sim tə teɪk tuɑnz sədʒɛstʃənz əz ɔɹɾɝz. ænæθ, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, bædʒɝd ðə ɡɝl ənmɝsɪfəli wɪð ɹeɪzɝ-ʃɑɹp kɹɪɾɪsɪzəmz, kɔlɪŋ əɹ ə ful ən wɝs.

He still could not figure out the relationship between Suroth, Tuon and Anath. On the surface, Suroth and Tuon behaved as equals, calling each other by name, laughing at one another's jests. Tuon certainly never gave Suroth any order, at least not in his hearing, but Suroth seemed to take Tuon's suggestions as orders. Anath, on the other hand, badgered the girl unmercifully with razor-sharp criticisms, calling her a fool and worse.

"ðɪs ɪz ðə wɝst sɔɹɾ ə stupɪɾɪti, ɡɝl," hi hɝɾ əɹ seɪ koʊldli wʌn mɪddeɪ ɪn ðə hɔlz. taɪlɪn hæd nɑt sɛn əɹ kɹud sʌmənz - jɛt - ən i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə snik aʊt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kʊd, slɪpɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz ən pikɪŋ ɝaʊn kɔɹnɝz. hi hæɾ ə vɪzət tə sutoʊmə plænd, ən ənʌðɝ tə ɑlʌdʒɹə. ðə θɹi sintʃæn wɪmən - fɔɹ, kaʊntɪŋ sɪlutʃə, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ sɔ ɪt ðət weɪ - wɝ klʌstɝd dʒʌst ɝaʊn ðə nɛks tɝnɪŋ. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ən aɪ aʊt fəɹ sɝvɪŋ wɪmən wɛɹɪŋ ə smaɪl, hi weɪɾəd ɪmpeɪʃənli fəɹ əm tə muv. wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾ ɪm blʌndɝɪŋ baɪ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt. "ə teɪst ə ðə stʃɹæp wɪl sɛt jə ɹaɪt, ən klɪɹ jəɹ hɛɾ ə nɑnsɛns," ðə tɔl wʊmən wɛn ɑn ɪn ə vɔɪs laɪk aɪs. "æsk fəɹ ɪɾ ən bi dʌn."

"This is the worst sort of stupidity, girl," he heard her say coldly one midday in the halls. Tylin had not sent her crude summons - yet - and he was trying to sneak out before she could, slipping along the walls and peeking around corners. He had a visit to Sutoma planned, and another to Aludra. The three Seanchan women - four, counting Selucia, but he did not think they saw it that way - were clustered just around the next turning. Trying to keep an eye out for serving women wearing a smile, he waited impatiently for them to move. Whatever they were talking about, they would not appreciate him blundering by in the middle of it. "A taste of the strap will set you right, and clear your head of nonsense," the tall woman went on in a voice like ice. "Ask for it and be done."

mæt wɝkt ə fɪŋɡɝ ɪn ɪz ɪɹ, ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi mʌst əv mɪʃɝd. sɪlutʃə, stændɪŋ plɑtʃədli wɪð əɹ hænz foʊldəɾ əɾ əɹ weɪst, sɝɾənli nɛvɝ tɝn ə hɛɹ.

Mat worked a finger in his ear, and shook his head. He must have misheard. Selucia, standing placidly with her hands folded at her waist, certainly never turned a hair.

sjuɹɔθ ɡæspt, ðoʊ. "ʃʊɹli jəl pʌnɪʃ əɹ fəɹ ðɪs!" ʃi dʒɹɔld æŋɡɹəli, ɡlɛɹɪŋ hoʊlz θɹu ænæθ. əɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə. sjuɹɔθ maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ə tʃɛɹ fəɹ ɔl ðə noʊɾəs ðə tɔl wʊmən ɡeɪv hɝ.

Suroth gasped, though. "Surely you will punish her for this!" she drawled angrily, glaring holes through Anath. Or trying to. Suroth might as well have been a chair for all the notice the tall woman gave her.

"ju də nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, sjuɹɔθ." tuɑnz saɪ stɝd ðə veɪl kʌvɝɪŋ əɹ feɪs. kʌvɝɪŋ bʌt nɑt kənsilɪŋ. ʃi lʊkt . . . ɹɪzaɪnd. hi hæd bɪn ʃɑk tə lɝn ʃi wɑz oʊnli ə fju jɪɹz jʌŋɡɝ ðən hi. hi wʊɾə sɛd mɔɹ laɪk tɛn. wɛl, sɪks əɹ sɛvən. "ði oʊmənz seɪ ʌðɝwaɪz, ænæθ," ðə ɡɝl sɛd kɑmli, ən nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ɪn æŋɡɝ. ʃi wɑz sɪmpli steɪɾɪŋ fæks. "bi əʃʊɹd, əl tɛl jə ɪf ðeɪ tʃeɪnʒ."

"You do not understand, Suroth." Tuon's sigh stirred the veil covering her face. Covering but not concealing. She looked . . . resigned. He had been shocked to learn she was only a few years younger than he. He would have said more like ten. Well, six or seven. "The omens say otherwise, Anath," the girl said calmly, and not at all in anger. She was simply stating facts. "Be assured, I will tell you if they change."

sʌmwʌn tæpt ɪm ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ, ən i lʊk bæk ɪndə ðə feɪs ʌv ə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ə bɹɔd ɡɹɪn. wɛl, hi hæd nɑt ɹɪli bɪn ðəɾ æŋkʃəs tə ɡoʊ aʊt ɹaɪɾ əweɪ.

Someone tapped him on the shoulder, and he looked back into the face of a serving woman wearing a broad grin. Well, he had not really been that anxious to go out right away.

tuɑn tʃɹʌbəl hɪm. oʊ, wən ðeɪ pæst ɪn ðə hɔlweɪz, hi meɪɾ ɪz bɛs lɛɡ pəlaɪtli, ən ɪn ɹɪtɝn ʃi ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪm əz kəmplitli əz sjuɹɔθ əɹ ænæθ dɪd, bʌɾ ɪt bɪɡæn tə sim tə hɪm ðət ðeɪ pæst ɪn ðə hɔlweɪz ə lɪɾəl tu ɔfən.

Tuon troubled him. Oh, when they passed in the hallways, he made his best leg politely, and in return she ignored him as completely as Suroth or Anath did, but it began to seem to him that they passed in the hallways a little too often.

wʌn æftɝnun, hi wɔkt ɪndə taɪlɪnz əpɑɹtməns, hævɪŋ tʃɛkt ən faʊn aʊt ðət taɪlɪn wɑz ʃʌɾ ʌp wɪð sjuɹɔθ ɑn səm bɪznəs əɹ ʌðɝ, ən ɪn ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ, hi faʊn tuɑn ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ɪz æʃhændʒɹeɪ. hi fɹoʊz ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə wɝdz ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ kɑɹvd ɪndə ðə blæk ʃæft. ə ɹeɪvən ɪn səm stɪl dɑɹkɝ mɛɾəl wɑz ɪnleɪɾ əɾ itʃ ɛn ə ðə laɪn ə skɹɪpt, ən ə pɛɹ ə ðɛm ɪnɡɹeɪvd ɑn ðə slaɪtli kɝv bleɪd. ɹeɪvənz wɝ ən ɪmpɪɹiəl sɪdʒəl, tə ðə sintʃæn. nɑt bɹiðɪŋ, hi tʃɹaɪd tə muv bækwɝdz wɪθaʊt meɪkɪŋ ə saʊnd.

One afternoon, he walked into Tylin's apartments, having checked and found out that Tylin was shut up with Suroth on some business or other, and in the bedchamber, he found Tuon examining his ashandarei. He froze at the sight of her fingering the words in the Old Tongue carved into the black shaft. A raven in some still darker metal was inlaid at each end of the line of script, and a pair of them engraved on the slightly curved blade. Ravens were an Imperial sigil, to the Seanchan. Not breathing, he tried to move backwards without making a sound.

ðət veɪl feɪs swɪvɛl təwɔɹd hɪm. ə pɹɪɾi feɪs, ɹɪli, ɪt maɪɾ ivən əv bɪn bjuɾəfəl ɪf ʃi ɛvɝ stɑp lʊkɪŋ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə baɪɾ ɔf ə maʊθfʊl ʌv wʊd. hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ θɔt ʃi lʊk laɪk ə bɔɪ - ðoʊz taɪt waɪd bɛls ʃi ɔlweɪz wɔɹ meɪd ʃʊɹ jə noʊɾəst wʌt kɝvz ðəɹ wɝ - bʌt ʃi wɑz ðə nɛks θɪŋ tə ɪt. hi sɛldəm sɔ ə ɡɹoʊn wʊmən jʌŋɡɝ ðən ɪz ɡɹændmʌðɝ ðəɾ i dɪd nɑɾ ət lis θɪŋk aɪdli ʌv wʌɾ ɪt wəd bi laɪk dænsɪŋ wɪð hɝ, meɪbi kɪsɪŋ hɝ, ivən ðoʊz snuɾi sintʃæn blʌd, bʌt nɛvɝ ə ɡlɪmɝ ə ðət kɹɔst ɪz maɪnd wɪð tuɑn. ə wʊmən hæd tə hæv sʌmθɪŋ tə pʊɾ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊnd, əɹ wʌt wɑz ðə pɔɪnt?

That veiled face swivelled toward him. A pretty face, really, it might even have been beautiful if she ever stopped looking as though she was about to bite off a mouthful of wood. He no longer thought she looked like a boy - those tight wide belts she always wore made sure you noticed what curves there were - but she was the next thing to it. He seldom saw a grown woman younger than his grandmother that he did not at least think idly of what it would be like dancing with her, maybe kissing her, even those snooty Seanchan Blood, but never a glimmer of that crossed his mind with Tuon. A woman had to have something to put an arm around, or what was the point?

"aɪ doʊn si taɪlɪn oʊnɪŋ ə θɪŋ laɪk ðɪs," ʃi dʒɹɔl kuli, sɛɾɪŋ ðə lɔŋ-bleɪɾɪd spɪɹ bæk nɛks tə hɪz baʊ, "soʊ ɪt mʌs bi jʊɹz. wʌɾ ɪz ɪt? haʊ dɪd jə kʌm tə pəzɛs ɪt?" ðoʊz koʊl dɪmænz fəɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən sɛɾ ɪz dʒɔ. ðə blʌɾi wʊmən cʊɾə bɪn ɔɹɾɝɪŋ ə sɝvənt. laɪt, əz fɑɹ əz i wɑz əwɛɹ, ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən noʊ hɪz neɪm! taɪlɪn sɛd ʃi hæd nɛvɝ æskt əbaʊɾ ɪm əɹ mɛnʃən ɪm sɪns ði ɔfɝ ə pɝtʃəs.

"I don't see Tylin owning a thing like this," she drawled coolly, setting the long-bladed spear back next to his bow, "so it must be yours. What is it? How did you come to possess it?" Those cold demands for information set his jaw. The bloody woman could have been ordering a servant. Light, as far as he was aware, she did not even know his name! Tylin said she had never asked about him or mentioned him since the offer of purchase.

"ɪts kɔld ə spɪɹ, maɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛd, ɹɪzɪstɪŋ ði ɝdʒ tə lin əɡɛns ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm ən tʌk ɪz θʌmz bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt. ʃi wɑz sintʃæn blʌd, æftɝ ɔl. "aɪ bɑɾ ɪt."

"It's called a spear, my Lady," he said, resisting the urge to lean against the doorframe and tuck his thumbs behind his belt. She was Seanchan Blood, after all. "I bought it."

"aɪ wɪl ɡɪv jə tɛn taɪmz ðə pɹaɪs jə peɪd," ʃi sɛd. "neɪm ɪt."

"I will give you ten times the price you paid," she said. "Name it."

hi ɔlmoʊs læft. hi wɑntəd tə, ən nɑt fəɹ plɛʒɝ, ðət wɑz sɝɾən ʃʊɹ. noʊ wəd jə θɪŋk ə sɛlɪŋ, dʒʌst əl baɪ ɪɾ ən hɪɹ ɪz wʌɾ əl peɪ. "ðə pɹaɪs wɑznt ɡoʊld, maɪ leɪɾi." ɪnvoʊlʌntɝɪli, hɪz hænd wɛn tə ðə blæk skɑɹf tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɪt stɪl hɪd ðə ɹɪdʒ skɑɹ ðəɾ ɪnsɝkəld ɪz nɛk. "oʊnli ə ful wəd peɪ ɪt wʌn taɪm, lɛɾ əloʊn tɛn."

He almost laughed. He wanted to, and not for pleasure, that was certain sure. No would you think of selling, just I will buy it and here is what I will pay. "The price wasn't gold, my Lady." Involuntarily, his hand went to the black scarf to make sure it still hid the ridged scar that encircled his neck. "Only a fool would pay it one time, let alone ten."

ʃi stʌɾid ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən ənɹiɾəbəl noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ʃɪɹ əɹ veɪl. ən ðɛn, hi maɪɾ əz wɛl əv vænɪʃt. ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd pæst ɪm əz ðoʊ hi wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðəɹ ən swɛpt aʊɾ ə ði əpɑɹtməns.

She studied him for a moment, her expression unreadable no matter how sheer her veil. And then, he might as well have vanished. She glided past him as though he were no longer there and swept out of the apartments.

ðət wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli taɪm i ɪnkaʊntɝɾ əɹ əloʊn. ʌv kɔɹs, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz fɑloʊd baɪ ænæθ əɹ sɪlutʃə, əɹ ɡɑɹdz, jɛɾ ɪt sim tə hɪm ðət ɹæðɝ tu ɔfən i wəd dɪsaɪd tə ɡoʊ bæk fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ən tɝn tə faɪn əɹ baɪ hɝsɛlf, lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, əɹ i maɪt liv ə ɹum sʌɾənli ən faɪn əɹ aʊtsaɪd ðə dɔɹ. mɔɹ ðən wʌns i lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ livɪŋ ðə pæləs ən sɔ hɝ veɪl feɪs piɹɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə wɪndoʊ. tʃɹu, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ə stɛɹɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt. ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm ən ɡlaɪɾɪd əweɪ əz ðoʊ hi hæd sis tə ɪɡzɪst, pɪɹd fɹəm ə wɪndoʊ ən tɝn bæk ɪndə ðə ɹum əz sun əz i sɔ hɝ. hi wɑz ə stænd-læmp ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ, ə peɪvɪŋ stoʊn ɪn ðə mɔl hɛɹə. ɪt bɪɡæn tə meɪk ɪm nɝvəs, ðoʊ. æftɝ ɔl, ðə wʊmən hæɾ ɔfɝd tə baɪ hɪm. ə θɪŋ laɪk ðət hæɾ ə tɛndənsi tə meɪk ə mæn nɝvəs baɪ ɪts oʊn sɛlf.

That was not the only time he encountered her alone. Of course, she was not always followed by Anath or Selucia, or guards, yet it seemed to him that rather too often he would decide to go back for something and turn to find her by herself, looking at him, or he might leave a room suddenly and find her outside the door. More than once he looked over his shoulder leaving the Palace and saw her veiled face peering out of a window. True, there was nothing of staring about it. She looked at him and glided away as though he had ceased to exist, peered from a window and turned back into the room as soon as he saw her. He was a stand-lamp in the corridor, a paving stone in the Mol Hara. It began to make him nervous, though. After all, the woman had offered to buy him. A thing like that had a tendency to make a man nervous by its own self.

ivən tuɑn kəd nɑt tʃɹuli əpsɛɾ ɪz wɛlɪŋ sɛns ðət θɪŋz wɝ faɪnəli kʌmɪŋ ɹaɪt, ðoʊ. ðə ɡoʊləm dɪd nɑt ɹɪtɝn, ən i bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk meɪbi ɪt hæd ɡɔn ɑn ən iziɝ "hɑɹvəst." ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, hi wɑz steɪɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm dɑɹk ən loʊnli pleɪsəz wɛɹ ɪt maɪɾ əv ə tʃæns ət hɪm. hɪz mədæljən wɑz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl fəɹ wʌɾ ɪt dɪd, bʌɾ ə ɡʊd kɹaʊd wɑz bɛɾɝ. ɑn ɪz leɪɾəst vɪzət tə ɑlʌdʒɹə ʃi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs lɛt sʌmθɪŋ slɪp - hi wɑz sɝɾən ʌv ɪt - bɪfɔɹ kʌmɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf ən heɪstəli bʌndəlɪŋ ɪm aʊɾ ə hɝ wæɡən. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ə wʊmən wəd nɑt tɛl jə ɪf jə kɪst əɹ ɪnʌf. hi steɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən, tə əvɔɪd ɹaʊzɪŋ taɪlɪnz səspɪʃənz, bʌt nɹɪm ən ləpɪn stɛlθəli tʃɹænsfɝɾ ɪz ɹil kloʊðɪŋ tə ði ɪnz sɛlɝ. bɪt baɪ bɪt, hæf ðə kɑntɛns ə ði aɪɝn-baʊn tʃɛst ʌndɝ taɪlɪnz bɛd tʃɹævəld əkɹɔs ðə mɔl hɛɹə tə ðə hɪɾən hɑloʊ bɪniθ ði ɪnz kɪtʃən.

Even Tuon could not truly upset his welling sense that things were finally coming right, though. The gholam did not return, and he began to think maybe it had gone on an easier "harvest." In any event, he was staying away from dark and lonely places where it might have a chance at him. His medallion was all very well for what it did, but a good crowd was better. On his latest visit to Aludra she had almost let something slip - he was certain of it - before coming to herself and hastily bundling him out of her wagon. There was nothing a woman would not tell you if you kissed her enough. He stayed away from The Wandering Woman, to avoid rousing Tylin's suspicions, but Nerim and Lopin stealthily transferred his real clothing to the inn's cellar. Bit by bit, half the contents of the iron-bound chest under Tylin's bed traveled across the Mol Hara to the hidden hollow beneath the inn's kitchen.

ðət hɑloʊ ʌndɝ ðə kɪtʃən flɔɹ bɪɡæn tə tʃɹʌbəl hɪm, ðoʊ. ɪt hæd bɪn ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ haɪɾɪŋ ðə tʃɛst. ə mæn kəd bɹeɪk tʃɪzəlz ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪndə ðæt. hi hæd bɪn lɪvɪŋ əpstɛɹz ət ði ɪn ðɛn, tu. naʊ ðə ɡoʊld wəd bi dʒʌst spɪld ɪndə ðə hoʊl æftɝ sɛɾəl klɪɹd ðə kɪtʃən. wʌɾ ɪf sʌmwʌn bɪɡæn tə wʌndɝ waɪ ʃi tʃeɪst ɛvɹibɑɾi aʊt wən ləpɪn ən nɹɪm keɪm? ɛnibəɾi əɾ ɔl kəd lɪft ʌp ðət flɔɹstoʊn, ɪf ðeɪ nu wɛɹ tə lʊk. hi hæd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. æftɝwɝdz, lɔŋ æftɝwɝdz, hi wəd wʌndɝ waɪ ðə blʌɾi daɪs hæd nɑt wɔɹn hɪm.

That hollow under the kitchen floor began to trouble him, though. It had been good enough for hiding the chest. A man could break chisels getting into that. He had been living upstairs at the inn then, too. Now the gold would be just spilled into the hole after Setalle cleared the kitchen. What if someone began to wonder why she chased everybody out when Lopin and Nerim came? Anybody at all could lift up that floorstone, if they knew where to look. He had to make sure for himself. Afterwards, long afterwards, he would wonder why the bloody dice had not warned him.


tʃæptɝ naɪntin


CHAPTER 19

θɹi wɪmən


Three Women

ðə wɪnd wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə nɔɹθ wɪð ðə sʌn nɑt jɛt fʊli əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən, wɪtʃ ðə loʊkəlz sɛɾ ɔlweɪz mɛn ɹeɪn, ən ə skaɪ fʊl ə klaʊdz sɝɾənli θɹɛɾənd əz i meɪɾ ɪz weɪ əkɹɔs ðə mɔl hɛɹə. ðə pɝtɪkjəlɝ mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum ə ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən hæd tʃeɪnʒd, ðəɹ wɝ noʊ sʌldəm əɹ deɪmeɪn ðɪs taɪm, bʌt ðə pleɪs wɑz stɪl fʊl ə sintʃæn ən paɪpsmoʊk, ðoʊ ðə mjuzɪʃənz hæd nɑt jɛɾ əpɪɹd. moʊst ə ðə pipəl ɪn ðə ɹum wɝ bɹɛkfæstɪŋ, səmtaɪmz aɪɪŋ ðə boʊlz ənsɝteɪnli əz ɪf ənʃʊɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ biɪŋ æsk tə it - hi fɛl ðət weɪ hɪmsɛlf əbaʊt ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ waɪt pɔɹədʒ ɛbu dɑɹi laɪk fəɹ bɹɛkfəst - bʌt nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz ɪntɛn ɑn fud. θɹi mɛn ən ə wʊmən ɪn ðoʊz lɔŋ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɹoʊbz wɝ pleɪɪŋ kɑɹdz ən smoʊkɪŋ paɪps ət wʌn teɪbəl, ɔl wɪð ðɛɹ hɛdz ʃeɪvd ɪn ðə fæʃən ə lɛsɝ noʊbəlz. ðə ɡoʊl kɔɪnz ɑn ðɛɹ teɪbəl kɑt mæts ətɛnʃən fəɹ ə moʊmənt; ðeɪ wɝ pleɪɪŋ fəɹ haɪ steɪks. ðə lɑɹdʒəst stæks ə kɔɪnz sæɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə taɪni blæk-hɛɹd mæn, əz dɑɹk əz ænæθ, hu ɡɹɪnd wʊlfɪʃli əɾ ɪz əpoʊnəns ɝaʊn ðə vɛɹi lɔŋ stɛm ʌv ə sɪlvɝ-maʊntəd paɪp. mæt hæɾ ɪz oʊn ɡoʊld, ðoʊ, ən ɪz lʌk ət kɑɹdz hæd nɛvɝ bɪn əz ɡʊɾ əz ət daɪs.

The wind was out of the north with the sun not yet fully above the horizon, which the locals said always meant rain, and a sky full of clouds certainly threatened as he made his way across the Mol Hara. The particular men and women in the common room of The Wandering Woman had changed, there were no sul'dam or damane this time, but the place was still full of Seanchan and pipesmoke, though the musicians had not yet appeared. Most of the people in the room were breakfasting, sometimes eyeing the bowls uncertainly as if unsure what they were being asked to eat - he felt that way himself about the strange white porridge Ebou Dari liked for breakfast - but not everyone was intent on food. Three men and a woman in those long embroidered robes were playing cards and smoking pipes at one table, all with their heads shaved in the fashion of lesser nobles. The gold coins on their table caught Mat's attention for a moment; they were playing for high stakes. The largest stacks of coins sat in front of a tiny black-haired man, as dark as Anath, who grinned wolfishly at his opponents around the very long stem of a silver-mounted pipe. Mat had his own gold, though, and his luck at cards had never been as good as at dice.

mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən, haʊɛvɝ, hæd ɡɔn aʊɾ ɑn səm ɛɹən əɹ ʌðɝ waɪl ɪt wɑz stɪl dɑɹk, soʊ hɝ dɔɾɝ mɛɹə sɛd, livɪŋ mɛɹə hɝsɛlf ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ. ə plizɪŋli plʌmp jʌŋ wʊmən wɪð bɪɡ pɹɪɾi aɪz ðə seɪm heɪzəl ʃeɪɾ əz əɹ mʌðɝz, ʃi wɔɹ əɹ skɝts soʊn ʌp tə mɪd-θaɪ ɑn ðə lɛf saɪd, sʌmθɪŋ mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən wəd nɑɾ əv əlaʊd wən i wɑz steɪɪŋ ðɛɹ. mɛɹə wɑz nɑt bɛs pliz tə si hɪm, fɹaʊnɪŋ əz sun əz i əpɹoʊtʃt hɝ. tu mɛn hæd daɪd baɪ hɪz hæn ɪn ði ɪn wən i wɑz steɪɪŋ ðɛɹ; θivz u wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə splɪɾ ɪz skʌl, tə bi ʃʊɹ, bʌt ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ dɪd nɑt hæpən ət ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən. ʃi hæd meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ ʃi wɑz hæpi tə si ðə bæk ə hɪm wən i muvd aʊt.

Mistress Anan, however, had gone out on some errand or other while it was still dark, so her daughter Marah said, leaving Marah herself in charge. A pleasingly plump young woman with big pretty eyes the same hazel shade as her mother's, she wore her skirts sewn up to mid-thigh on the left side, something Mistress Anan would not have allowed when he was staying there. Marah was not best pleased to see him, frowning as soon as he approached her. Two men had died by his hand in the inn when he was staying there; thieves who were trying to split his skull, to be sure, but that sort of thing did not happen at The Wandering Woman. She had made it clear she was happy to see the back of him when he moved out.

mɛɹə wɑz hɑɹdli ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn wʌɾ i wɑntəd naʊ, iðɝ, ən i kəd nɑt ɹɪli ɪkspleɪn. oʊnli mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən nu wʌt wɑz hɪɾən ɪn ðə kɪtʃən, soʊ hi dɪvaʊtli hoʊpt, ən i sɝɾənli wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə bliɾ aʊt ði ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum. soʊ hi meɪɾ ʌp ə teɪl əbaʊt mɪsɪŋ ðə dɪʃəz ðə kʊk tɝn aʊt, ən aɪɪŋ ðət bleɪɾəntli soʊn skɝt, hi slɪpt ɪn ði ɪmpləkeɪʃən ðəɾ i hæd mɪs lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ ivən mɔɹ. hi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ pɛɾɪkoʊt wɑz skændələs wən ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ wɔkt ɝaʊnd ʃoʊɪŋ hæf əɹ bʊzəm, bʌɾ ɪf mɛɹə wɑz filɪŋ ɹeɪkɪʃ, meɪbi ə fju blændɪʃməns maɪɾ iz ɪz pæθ. hi ɡeɪv əɹ ɪz vɛɹi bɛst smaɪl.

Marah was hardly interested in what he wanted now, either, and he could not really explain. Only Mistress Anan knew what was hidden in the kitchen, so he devoutly hoped, and he certainly was not about to bleat out the information in the common room. So he made up a tale about missing the dishes the cook turned out, and eyeing that blatantly sewn skirt, he slipped in the implication that he had missed looking at her even more. He could not understand why exposing a little more petticoat was scandalous when every woman in Ebou Dar walked around showing half her bosom, but if Marah was feeling rakish, maybe a few blandishments might ease his path. He gave her his very best smile.

ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm hæf ən ɪɹ ɪn ɹɪtɝn, mɛɹə sizd ə pæsɪŋ sɝvɪŋ meɪd, ə smoʊki-aɪd kæɾ ʌv ə wʊmən i nu wɛl. "ɛɹ kæptən julənz kʌp ɪz ɔlmoʊst ɛmpti, kɛɹə," mɛɹə sɛɾ æŋɡɹəli. "ju ɑɹ səpoʊz tə kip ɪt fʊl! ɪf jə kæn də jəɹ dʒɑb, ɡɝl, ðəɹ ɑɹ plɛnti ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ u wɪl!" kɛɹə, sɛvɹəl jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən mɛɹə, meɪɾ əɹ ə mɑkɪŋ kɝtsi. ən skaʊld ət mæt. bɪfɔɹ kɛɹə kəd stʃɹeɪɾən əɹ niz əɡɛn, mɛɹə tɝn tə ɡɹæb ə bɔɪ hu wɑz wɔkɪŋ baɪ kɛɹfəli bælənsɪŋ ə tʃɹeɪ paɪld wɪð dɝɾi dɪʃəz. "stɑp lɑliɡæɡɡɪŋ, ɹɑs!" ʃi snæpt. "ðɛɹ ɪz wɝk tə bi dʌn. də ɪt, əɹ əl teɪk jə aʊt tə ðə steɪbəlz, ən jəl nɑt laɪk ðæt, aɪ tɛl ju!"

Giving him half an ear in return, Marah seized a passing serving maid, a smoky-eyed cat of a woman he knew well. "Air Captain Yulan's cup is almost empty, Caira," Marah said angrily. "You are supposed to keep it full! If you can't do your job, girl, there are plenty in Ebou Dar who will!" Caira, several years older than Marah, made her a mocking curtsy. And scowled at Mat. Before Caira could straighten her knees again, Marah turned to grab a boy who was walking by carefully balancing a tray piled with dirty dishes. "Stop lollygagging, Ross!" she snapped. "There is work to be done. Do it, or I'll take you out to the stables, and you will not like that, I tell you!"

mɛɹəz jʌŋɡəs bɹʌðɝ ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɝ. "aɪ kænt weɪt tɪl spɹɪŋ, wən aɪ kən wɝk ɑn ðə boʊts əɡɛn," hi mʌɾɝd sʌlənli. "juv bɪn ɪn ə bæd skɪn ɛvɝ sɪns fɹiɛl ɡɑt mɛɹid, dʒʌs kəz ʃiz jʌŋɡɝ ðən jə ən jə hævən bɪn æsk jɛt."

Marah's youngest brother glared at her. "I can't wait till spring, when I can work on the boats again," he muttered sullenly. "You've been in a bad skin ever since Frielle got married, just because she's younger than you and you haven't been asked yet."

ʃi dɝɛktəɾ ə kʌf əɾ ɪz hɛd ðəɾ i izəli ɪluɾɪd, ðoʊ ðə stækt kʌps ən pleɪts ɹæɾəld ən nɪɹli fɛl. "waɪ nɑt dʒʌs pɪn ʌp jəɹ pɛɾikoʊts ət ðə fɪʃɪŋ dɑks?" hi ʃaʊɾəd, dɑɹɾɪŋ ɔf bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd slæp əɾ ɪm əɡɛn.

She directed a cuff at his head that he easily eluded, though the stacked cups and plates rattled and nearly fell. "Why not just pin up your petticoats at the fishing docks?" he shouted, darting off before she could slap at him again.

mæt saɪɾ əz ʃi faɪnəli tɝn əɹ fʊl ətɛnʃən tə hɪm. pɪnɪŋ ʌp pɛɾikoʊts wɑz ə nu wʌn ɑn hɪm, bʌt fɹəm mɛɹəz feɪs, hi kəd ɡɛs. stim ʃʊɾə bɪn dʒɛɾɪŋ fɹəm əɹ ɪɹz. "ɪf jə wɑnə it, jə mʌs kʌm bæk leɪɾɝ. əɹ jə kən weɪt, ɪf jə laɪk. aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ jə kən bi sɝvd."

Mat sighed as she finally turned her full attention to him. Pinning up petticoats was a new one on him, but from Marah's face, he could guess. Steam should have been jetting from her ears. "If you want to eat, you must come back later. Or you can wait, if you like. I don't know how long before you can be served."

hɝ smaɪl wɑz məlɪʃəs. noʊ wʌn wəd tʃuz tə weɪɾ ɪn ðət kɑmən ɹum. ɛvɹi sit wɑz teɪkən baɪ ə sintʃæn, ən ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ sintʃæn stændɪŋ, ɪnʌf ðət ði eɪpɹən meɪdz wɝ fɔɹs tə wiv ðɛɹ weɪ kɛɹfəli, hoʊldɪŋ tʃɹeɪz ə fuɾ ən dʒɹɪŋk əlɔft. kɛɹə wɑz fɪlɪŋ ðə dɑɹk lɪɾəl mænz kʌp ən ɔfɝɪŋ ɪm ðə sɔɹɾ ə sʌltʃɹi smaɪlz ʃi hæd wʌns ɔfɝd mæt. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ ʃi hæd saʊɝɾ ɑn hɪm, bʌɾ i hæɾ əz mɛni wɪmən ɪn ɪz laɪf əz i kəd hændəl ət ðə moʊmənt. wʌt wɑz ən ɛɹ kæptən, ɛniweɪ? hi wəɾ əv tə faɪn aʊt. leɪɾɝ.

Her smile was malicious. No one would choose to wait in that common room. Every seat was taken by a Seanchan, and there were more Seanchan standing, enough that the aproned maids were forced to weave their way carefully, holding trays of food and drink aloft. Caira was filling the dark little man's cup and offering him the sort of sultry smiles she had once offered Mat. He did not know why she had soured on him, but he had as many women in his life as he could handle at the moment. What was an Air Captain, anyway? He would have to find out. Later.

"aɪ wɪl weɪɾ ɪn ðə kɪtʃən," hi toʊl mɛɹə. "aɪ wɑnə tɛl inɪd haʊ mʌtʃ aɪ ɛndʒɔɪɾ əɹ kʊkɪŋ."

"I will wait in the kitchen," he told Marah. "I want to tell Enid how much I enjoyed her cooking."

ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə pɹoʊtɛst, bʌɾ ə sintʃæn wʊmən ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs dɪmændɪŋ waɪn. ɡɹɪm-aɪɾ ɪn blu-ænd-ɡɹin ɑɹmɝ, wɪð ə hɛlmət kæɹiɪŋ tu plumz ʌndɝ əɹ ɑɹm, ʃi wɑntəɾ əɹ stɝəp kʌp ɹaɪt ðɛn. ɔl ə ðə meɪdz simd ɑkjəpaɪd, soʊ mɛɹə ɡɹɪməst əɾ ɪm wʌn læs taɪm ən wɛn skɝiɪŋ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sɛɾ əɹ feɪs ɪn ə plɛzən smaɪl. ən nɑt ɡɛɾɪŋ fɑɹ wɪð ɪt. hoʊldɪŋ ɪz wɔkɪŋ stæf waɪd, mæt flɝɪʃt ə baʊ tə hɝ ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ bæk.

She started to protest, but a Seanchan woman raised her voice demanding wine. Grim-eyed in blue-and-green armor, with a helmet carrying two plumes under her arm, she wanted her stirrup cup right then. All of the maids seemed occupied, so Marah grimaced at him one last time and went scurrying, trying to set her face in a pleasant smile. And not getting far with it. Holding his walking staff wide, Mat flourished a bow to her retreating back.

ðə ɡʊd smɛlz ðət hæd mɪŋɡəld wɪð swit paɪpsmoʊk ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum pɝmieɪɾɪd ðə kɪtʃən, ɹoʊstɪŋ fɪʃ, beɪkɪŋ bɹɛd, mits sɪzəlɪŋ ɑn ðə spɪts. ðə ɹum wɑz hɑt fɹəm ði aɪɝn stoʊvz ən ði ʌvənz ən ðə faɪɝ ɪn ðə lɔŋ bɹɪk faɪɝpleɪs, ən sɪks swɛɾɪŋ wɪmən ən θɹi pɑtbɔɪz wɝ dæʃɪŋ əbaʊɾ ʌndɝ ði ɔɹɾɝz ə ðə tʃif kʊk. wɛɹɪŋ ə snoʊi waɪɾ eɪpɹən əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə tɑbɝɾ ʌv ɔfəs ən wildɪŋ ə lɔŋ-hændəld wʊɾən spun tə ɹeɪn oʊvɝ əɹ doʊmeɪn, inɪd wɑz ðə ɹaʊndəst wʊmən mæt hæɾ ivən sin. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i cʊɾə ɡɑɾən ɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn əɹ hæɾ i wɑntəd tə. ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪm ɹaɪɾ əweɪ, ən ə slaɪ ɡɹɪn splɪɾ əɹ waɪɾ ɑləv feɪs.

The good smells that had mingled with sweet pipesmoke in the common room permeated the kitchen, roasting fish, baking bread, meats sizzling on the spits. The room was hot from the iron stoves and the ovens and the fire in the long brick fireplace, and six sweating women and three potboys were dashing about under the orders of the chief cook. Wearing a snowy white apron as if it were a tabard of office and wielding a long-handled wooden spoon to reign over her domain, Enid was the roundest woman Mat had even seen. He did not think he could have gotten his arms around her had he wanted to. She recognized him right away, and a sly grin split her wide olive face.

"soʊ, jə faʊn aʊɾ aɪ wɑz ɹaɪt," ʃi sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ ðə spun ət hɪm. "ju skwiz ðə ɹɔŋ mɛlən, ən ɪt tɝn aʊt ðə mɛlən wɑz ə laɪənfɪʃ ɪn dɪsɡaɪz ən jə wɝ dʒʌst ə plʌmp ɡɹʌntɝ." θɹoʊɪŋ bæk əɹ hɛd, ʃi kækəld wɪð læftɝ.

"So, you found out I was right," she said, pointing the spoon at him. "You squeezed the wrong melon, and it turned out the melon was a lionfish in disguise and you were just a plump grunter." Throwing back her head, she cackled with laughter.

mæt fɔɹst ə ɡɹɪn. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz! ɛvɹibɑɾi ɹɪli dɪd noʊ! aɪ hæv tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðɪs blʌɾi sɪɾi, hi θɔt ɡɹɪmli, əɹ əl hɪɹ əm blʌɾi læfɪŋ ət mi ðə ɹɛst ə maɪ laɪf!

Mat forced a grin. Blood and bloody ashes! Everybody really did know! I have to get out of this bloody city, he thought grimly, or I'll hear them bloody laughing at me the rest of my life!

sʌɾənli hɪz fɪɹz əbaʊt ðə ɡoʊl bɪɡæn tə sim fulɪʃ. ðə ɡɹeɪ flɔɹstoʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə stoʊvz əpɪɹd fɝmli ɪn pleɪs, noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ ɪn ðə kɪtʃən. jə hæd tə noʊ ðə tʃɹɪk ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə lɪft ɪt. ləpɪn ən nɹɪm wʊɾə toʊld ɪm ɪf soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə sɪŋɡəl kɔɪn hæd vænɪʃt bɪtwin ðɛɹ vɪzəts. mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən laɪkli wʊɾə tʃɹæk daʊn ən skɪn ðə kʌlpɹɪɾ ɪf ɛniwʌn tʃɹaɪd θivɪŋ ɪn əɹ ɪn. hi maɪɾ əz wɛl bi ɑn ɪz weɪ. meɪbi ɑlʌdʒɹəz wɪlpaʊɝ wəd bi wikɝ ət ðɪs aʊɝ. meɪbi ʃi wəd ɡɪv ɪm bɹɛkfəst. hi hæd slɪpt aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ tə it.

Suddenly his fears about the gold began to seem foolish. The gray floorstone in front of the stoves appeared firmly in place, no different from any other in the kitchen. You had to know the trick in order to lift it. Lopin and Nerim would have told him if so much as a single coin had vanished between their visits. Mistress Anan likely would have tracked down and skinned the culprit if anyone tried thieving in her inn. He might as well be on his way. Maybe Aludra's willpower would be weaker at this hour. Maybe she would give him breakfast. He had slipped out of the Palace without waiting to eat.

soʊ əz nɑt ɹaʊs kjʊɹiɑsəɾi əbaʊɾ ɪz vɪzət, hi dɪd tɛl inɪd haʊ mʌtʃ i hæɾ ɛndʒɔɪɾ əɹ ɡɪldɪd fɪʃ, haʊ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ðət sɝvd ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, wɪθaʊt hævɪŋ tə ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾ ivən ə wɪskɝ. inɪd wɑz ə mɑɹvəl. ðə wʊmən pɑzəɾɪvli bimd, ən tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, lɪftəd wʌn aʊɾ ə ði ʌvən ɑntu ə plæɾɝ dʒʌs fəɹ hɪm. sʌmbɑɾi ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum kəd dʒʌst weɪt, ʃi toʊl hɪm, sɛɾɪŋ ðə plæɾɝ ət ði ɛn ə ðə kɪtʃənz lɔŋ wɝk-teɪbəl. ə weɪv ə hɝ spun bɹɔɾ ə staʊt pɑtbɔɪ wɪð ə stul.

So as not rouse curiosity about his visit, he did tell Enid how much he had enjoyed her gilded fish, how it was better than that served in the Tarasin Palace, without having to exaggerate even a whisker. Enid was a marvel. The woman positively beamed, and to his surprise, lifted one out of the oven onto a platter just for him. Somebody in the common room could just wait, she told him, setting the platter at the end of the kitchen's long work-table. A wave of her spoon brought a stout potboy with a stool.

lʊkɪŋ ət ðə ɡoʊldən-kɹʌstɪd flætfɪʃ, hi fɛlt ɪz maʊθ wɔɾɝɪŋ. ɑlʌdʒɹə laɪkli wəd bi noʊ wikɝ naʊ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm. ən ɪf ʃi wɑz əpsɛɾ oʊvɝ biɪŋ dɪstɝb soʊ ɝli, ʃi maɪt nɑt ɡɪv ɪm bɹɛkfəst. hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld laʊdli. hæŋɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ɑn ə pɛɡ bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ tə ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ ən pɹɑpɪŋ ɪz wɔkɪŋ stæf bɪniθ, hi tʌkt ɪz hæɾ ʌndɝ ðə stul ən tɝn bæk ɪz leɪs tə kip ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə plæɾɝ.

Looking at the golden-crusted flatfish, he felt his mouth watering. Aludra likely would be no weaker now than any other time. And if she was upset over being disturbed so early, she might not give him breakfast. His stomach rumbled loudly. Hanging his cloak on a peg beside the door to the stableyard and propping his walking staff beneath, he tucked his hat under the stool and turned back his lace to keep it out of the platter.

baɪ ðə taɪm mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən keɪm ɪn θɹu ðə dɔɹ tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd, swɪŋɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɔf ən ʃeɪkɪŋ ɹeɪn ɑntu ðə flɔɹ, lɪɾəl ɹɪmeɪn bɪɑn ə tæŋi teɪst ɑn ɪz tʌŋ ən faɪn waɪt boʊnz ɑn ðə plæɾɝ. hi hæd lɝn tə ɛndʒɔɪ ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ɑd θɪŋz sɪns kʌmɪŋ tə ɛbu dɑɹ, bʌɾ i lɛf ði aɪz stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm. ðə θɪŋz wɝ ɑn ðə seɪm saɪɾ ə ðə fɪʃəz hɛd!

By the time Mistress Anan came in through the door to the stableyard, swinging her cloak off and shaking rain onto the floor, little remained beyond a tangy taste on his tongue and fine white bones on the platter. He had learned to enjoy a number of odd things since coming to Ebou Dar, but he left the eyes staring up at him. The things were on the same side of the fish's head!

ənʌðɝ wʊmən slɪpt ɪn bɪhaɪn mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən əz i dæbd ɪz maʊθ wɪð ə lɪnən næpkɪn. ʃi kloʊz ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn əɹ kwɪkli, ən kɛpt əɹ dæmp kloʊk ɑn wɪð ðə hʊd pʊld wɛl ʌp. ɹaɪzɪŋ, hi kɑɾ ə ɡlɪmps ə ðə feɪs ɪnsaɪd ðət hʊɾ ən nɪɹli nɑkt ɪz stul oʊvɝ. hi θɔɾ i kʌvɝd wɛl, ðoʊ, meɪkɪŋ ə lɛɡ tə ðə wɪmən, bʌɾ ɪz hɛd wɑz spɪnɪŋ.

Another woman slipped in behind Mistress Anan as he dabbed his mouth with a linen napkin. She closed the door behind her quickly, and kept her damp cloak on with the hood pulled well up. Rising, he caught a glimpse of the face inside that hood and nearly knocked his stool over. He thought he covered well, though, making a leg to the women, but his head was spinning.

"ɪɾ ɪz wɛl jə ɑɹ hɪɹ, maɪ lɔɹd," mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən sɛd bɹɪskli, hændɪŋ əɹ kloʊk tə ə pɑtbɔɪ. "aɪ wʊɾə sɛn fəɹ ju, ʌðɝwaɪz. inɪd, klɪɹ ðə kɪtʃən, pliz, ən wɑtʃ ðə dɔɹ. aɪ nid tə spik wɪð ðə jʌŋ lɔɹɾ əloʊn."

"It is well you are here, my Lord," Mistress Anan said briskly, handing her cloak to a potboy. "I would have sent for you, otherwise. Enid, clear the kitchen, please, and watch the door. I need to speak with the young lord alone."

ðə kʊk bɹɪskli hɝɾɪd ði ʌndɝ-kʊks ən pɑtbɔɪz aʊɾ ɪndə ðə steɪbliɑɹd, ən dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ mʌɾɝd kəmpleɪns əbaʊt ðə ɹeɪn ən weɪlz əbaʊt ðə fud bɝnɪŋ, ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ðeɪ wɝ əz əkʌstəm tə ðɪs əz inɪd. ʃi hɝsɛlf dɪd nɑɾ ivən ɡlæns ət mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ən əɹ kəmpænjən əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ θɹu ðə dɔɹ ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum wɪð əɹ lɔŋ spun hɛld ʌp laɪk ə sɔɹd.

The cook briskly herded the under-cooks and potboys out into the stableyard, and despite their muttered complaints about the rain and wails about the food burning, it was clear they were as accustomed to this as Enid. She herself did not even glance at Mistress Anan and her companion again before hurrying through the door into the common room with her long spoon held up like a sword.

"wʌɾ ə sɝpɹaɪz," dʒoʊlin mɑzə sɛd, tɔsɪŋ əɹ hʊd bæk. hɝ dɑɹk wʊlən dʒɹɛs, wɪð ə dip nɛklaɪn ɪn ðə loʊkəl staɪl, fɪt lusli ən lʊkt wɔɹn ən fɹeɪd. jə wəd nɛvɝ əv θɔɾ ɪt fɹəm əɹ kɛɹfɹi æɾətud, ðoʊ. "wɛn mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən toʊl mi ʃi nu ə mæn u maɪt teɪk mi wɪð ɪm wən i lɛft ɛbu dɑɹ, aɪ nɛvɝ ɡɛst ɪt wɑz ju." pɹɪɾi ən bɹaʊn-aɪd, ʃi hæɾ ə smaɪl ɔlmoʊst əz wɔɹm əz kɛɹəz. ən ən eɪdʒləs feɪs ðət skɹimd ɛɛs sədaɪ. wɪð dʌzənz ə sintʃæn dʒʌs ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ə dɔɹ ɡɑɹɾəd baɪ ə kʊk wɪð ə spun.

"What a surprise," Joline Maza said, tossing her hood back. Her dark woolen dress, with a deep neckline in the local style, fit loosely and looked worn and frayed. You would never have thought it from her carefree attitude, though. "When Mistress Anan told me she knew a man who might take me with him when he left Ebou Dar, I never guessed it was you." Pretty and brown-eyed, she had a smile almost as warm as Caira's. And an ageless face that screamed Aes Sedai. With dozens of Seanchan just the other side of a door guarded by a cook with a spoon.

ɹimuvɪŋ əɹ kloʊk, dʒoʊlin tɝn tə hæŋ ɪɾ ɑn wʌn ə ðə pɛɡz, ən mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən meɪɾ ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd saʊn ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt. "ðæɾ ɪzən seɪf jɛt, dʒoʊlin," ʃi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ mɔɹ əz ɪf tɔkɪŋ tə wʌn ə hɝ dɔɾɝz ðən tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. "əntɪl aɪ hæv jə seɪfli - "

Removing her cloak, Joline turned to hang it on one of the pegs, and Mistress Anan made an irritated sound in her throat. "That isn't safe yet, Joline," she said, sounding more as if talking to one of her daughters than to an Aes Sedai. "Until I have you safely - "

sʌɾənli ə kəmoʊʃən ɹoʊz ət ðə dɔɹ tə ðə kɑmən ɹum, inɪd pɹətɛstɪŋ ɪn ə ʃaʊt ðət noʊ wʌn kəɾ ɛntɝ, ən ə vɔɪs ɔlmoʊst əz laʊd, ɪn sintʃæn æksɛns, dɪmændɪŋ ðət ʃi muv əsaɪd.

Suddenly a commotion rose at the door to the common room, Enid protesting in a shout that no one could enter, and a voice almost as loud, in Seanchan accents, demanding that she move aside.

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə pɹoʊɾɛsts ə hɪz lɛɡ, mæt muv fæstɝ ðən i θɔɾ i ɛvɝ hæɾ ɪn ɪz laɪf, ɡɹæbɪŋ dʒoʊlin baɪ ðə weɪst ən plʌŋkɪŋ hɪmsɛlf daʊn ɑn ðə bɛntʃ baɪ ðə dɔɹ tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn ɪz læp. hʌɡɪŋ əɹ kloʊs, hi pɹitɛndəd tə bi kɪsɪŋ hɝ. ɪt wɑz ə ful weɪ tə tʃɹaɪ haɪɾɪŋ əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ ɔl i kəd θɪŋk ə ʃɔɹɾ ə θɹoʊɪŋ əɹ kloʊk oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd. ʃi ɡæspt ɪndɪɡnənli, bʌt fɪɹ waɪɾənd əɹ aɪz wən ʃi faɪnəli hɝd ðə sintʃæn vɔɪs, ən ʃi sneɪkt əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ɪm ɪn ə flæʃ. pɹeɪɪŋ fəɹ ɪz lʌk tə hoʊld, hi wɑtʃt ðə dɔɹ oʊpən.

Ignoring the protests of his leg, Mat moved faster than he thought he ever had in his life, grabbing Joline by the waist and plunking himself down on the bench by the door to the stableyard with the Aes Sedai on his lap. Hugging her close, he pretended to be kissing her. It was a fool way to try hiding her face, but all he could think of short of throwing her cloak over her head. She gasped indignantly, but fear widened her eyes when she finally heard the Seanchan voice, and she snaked her arms around him in a flash. Praying for his luck to hold, he watched the door open.

stɪl pɹətɛstɪŋ laʊdli, inɪd bækt ɪndə ðə kɪtʃən θʌmpɪŋ əweɪ wɪð əɹ spun ət ðə sɔɪhɪn wɪð ə wɛt kloʊk hæŋɪŋ daʊn ɪz bæk u wɑz pʊʃɪŋ əɹ əhɛɾ ə hɪm. ə hɛvisɛt skaʊlɪŋ mæn wɪð ə stʌb ʌv ə bɹeɪd ðət dɪd nɑɾ ivən kʌm kloʊs tə ɹitʃɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, hi fɛndɪɾ ɔf moʊst ə hɝ bloʊz wɪð ɪz fɹi hæn ən sim tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə fju hi kəd nɑt. hi wɑz ðə fɝst sɔɪhɪn mæt hæd sin wɪð ə bɪɹd, ən ɪt ɡeɪv ɪm ə lɑpsaɪɾɪd lʊk, ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ðə ɹaɪt saɪɾ ə hɪz tʃɪn ən ʌp ðə lɛf tə stɑp dɛɾ ət ðə mɪɾəl ə hɪz ɪɹ. ə tɔl wʊmən wɪð ʃɑɹp blu aɪz ɪn ə peɪl stɝn feɪs fɑloʊd hɪm, flɪŋɪŋ bæk ən ɪlæbɹətli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd blu kloʊk, hɛld əɾ əɹ θɹoʊt baɪ ə lɑɹdʒ sɪlvɝ pɪn ʃeɪp laɪk ə sɔɹd, tə ɹɪvil ə pliɾɪd dʒɹɛs ʌv ə pəlɝ blu. hɝ ʃɔɹt dɑɹk hɛɹ wɑz kʌɾ ɪn ðə boʊl, ðə ɹɛst ʃeɪvd ɔf ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn əbʌv əɹ ɪɹz. stɪl, ʃi wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ə sʌldəm wɪð ə deɪmeɪn. ə lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ. ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðə bæɾəl wɑz lɔst, inɪd bækt əweɪ fɹəm ðə mæn, bʌt baɪ ðə weɪ ʃi ɡɹɪpt əɹ spun ən ɡlɛɹd, ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə lip ɑn ɪm əɡɛn ɪn ə hɑɹtbiɾ ɪf mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ɡeɪv ðə wɝd.

Still protesting loudly, Enid backed into the kitchen thumping away with her spoon at the so'jhin with a wet cloak hanging down his back who was pushing her ahead of him. A heavyset scowling man with a stub of a braid that did not even come close to reaching his shoulder, he fended off most of her blows with his free hand and seemed to ignore the few he could not. He was the first so'jhin Mat had seen with a beard, and it gave him a lopsided look, running down the right side of his chin and up the left to stop dead at the middle of his ear. A tall woman with sharp blue eyes in a pale stern face followed him, flinging back an elaborately embroidered blue cloak, held at her throat by a large silver pin shaped like a sword, to reveal a pleated dress of a paler blue. Her short dark hair was cut in the bowl, the rest shaved off all the way around above her ears. Still, she was better than a sul'dam with a damane. A little better. Realizing the battle was lost, Enid backed away from the man, but by the way she gripped her spoon and glared, she was ready to leap on him again in a heartbeat if Mistress Anan gave the word.

"ə fɛloʊ aʊt fɹʌn dɪd seɪ hi dɪd si ði ɪnkipɝ ɡoʊɪŋ ɹaʊn ðə bæk," ðə sɔɪhɪn ənaʊnst. hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət sɛɾəl, bʌɾ aɪɪŋ inɪd wɛɹəli. "ɪf jə bi sɛɾəl ɑnən, ðən noʊ ðɪs də bi kæptən ə ðə ɡɹin leɪɾi ɛdʒiənɪn tæmɝəθ, ən ʃi də hæv ən ɔɹɾɝ fəɹ ɹumz saɪn baɪ ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ səbəl mɛlʒɹəθ hɝsɛlf." hɪz toʊn ɔltɝd, bɪkʌmɪŋ lɛs ə pɹənaʊnsmən ən mɔɹ ðə vɔɪs ʌv ə mæn wɑntɪŋ əkɑmədeɪʃənz. "jɔɹ bɛst ɹumz, maɪnd, wɪð ə ɡʊd bɛd, ə vju ʌv ðə skwɛɹ aʊt ðɛɹ, ən ə faɪɝpleɪs ðət noʊ dʌz smoʊk."

"A fellow out front did say he did see the innkeeper going round the back," the so'jhin announced. He was looking at Setalle, but eyeing Enid warily. "If you be Setalle Anan, then know this do be Captain of the Green Lady Egeanin Tamarath, and she do have an order for rooms signed by the High Lady Suroth Sabelle Meldarath herself." His tone altered, becoming less a pronouncement and more the voice of a man wanting accommodations. "Your best rooms, mind, with a good bed, a view of the square out there, and a fireplace that no does smoke."

mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən ðə mæn spoʊk, ən dʒoʊlin, pɝhæps θɪŋkɪŋ sʌmwʌn wɑz kʌmɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛm, moʊn əɡɛnst ɪz maʊθ ɪn fɪɹ. hɝ aɪz ʃoʊn wɪð ənʃt tɪɹz, ən ʃi tʃɹɛmbəld ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz. ðə leɪɾi ɛdʒiənɪn tæmɝəθ ɡlænst ət ðə bɛntʃ wən dʒoʊlin moʊnd, ðən ɡɹɪməst ɪn dɪsɡʌst ən tɝn soʊ ʃi kəɾ əvɔɪd siɪŋ ðə pɛɹ. ɪt wɑz ðə mæn u ɪntʃɹiɡd mæt, ðoʊ. haʊ ɪn ðə laɪt dɪɾ ən ɪliɑnɝ kʌm tə bi sɔɪhɪn? ən ðə fɛloʊ lʊk fəmɪljɝ, sʌmhaʊ. laɪkli ənʌðɝ ə ðoʊz θaʊzənz ə lɔŋ-dɛd feɪsəz i kəd nɑt hɛlp ɹɪkɔlɪŋ.

Mat gave a start when the man spoke, and Joline, perhaps thinking someone was coming toward them, moaned against his mouth in fear. Her eyes shone with unshed tears, and she trembled in his arms. The Lady Egeanin Tamarath glanced at the bench when Joline moaned, then grimaced in disgust and turned so she could avoid seeing the pair. It was the man who intrigued Mat, though. How in the Light did an Illianer come to be so'jhin? And the fellow looked familiar, somehow. Likely another of those thousands of long-dead faces he could not help recalling.

"aɪ æm sɛɾəl ɑnən, ən maɪ bɛst ɹumz ɑɹ ɑkjəpaɪd baɪ kæptən ə ði ɛɹ lɔɹɾ ɑbɑldɑɹ julən," mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən sɛd kɑmli, ʌnɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪd baɪ sɔɪhɪn əɹ blʌd. ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts. "maɪ sɛkənd-bɛst ɹumz ɑɹ ɑkjəpaɪd baɪ bænɝ-dʒɛnɝəl fɹɪk kɛɹid. ʌv ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ ə kæptən ə ðə ɡɹin aʊtʃɹæŋks ðɛm, bʌɾ iðɝ weɪ, jəl əv tə sɔɹɾ aʊt fəɹ jʊɹsɛlvz u steɪz ən u hæz tə ɡoʊ ɛlswɛɹ. aɪ hæv ə fɝm pɑləsi ʌv nɑɾ ɪkspɛlɪŋ ɛni sintʃæn ɡɛst. soʊ lɔŋ əz i peɪz ɪz ɹɛnt."

"I am Setalle Anan, and my best rooms are occupied by Captain of the Air Lord Abaldar Yulan," Mistress Anan said calmly, unintimidated by so'jhin or Blood. She folded her arms beneath her breasts. "My second-best rooms are occupied by Banner-General Furyk Karede. Of the Deathwatch Guards. I don't know whether a Captain of the Green outranks them, but either way, you will have to sort out for yourselves who stays and who has to go elsewhere. I have a firm policy of not expelling any Seanchan guest. So long as he pays his rent."

mæt tɛnst, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ði ɪksploʊʒən - sjuɹɔθ wəɾ əv əɹ flɑɡd fəɹ hæf ðæt! - bʌɾ ɛdʒiənɪn smaɪld. "ɪts ə plɛʒɝ tə dil wɪð sʌmwʌn u hæz ə lɪɾəl nɝv," ʃi dʒɹɔld. "aɪ θɪŋk wɪl ɡɛɾ ɑn dʒʌs faɪn, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən. soʊ lɔŋ əz jə doʊn teɪk nɝv tu fɑɹ. kæptən ɡɪvz ði ɔɹɾɝz, ən kɹu oʊbeɪz, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ meɪɾ ɛniwʌn kɹɔl ɑn maɪ dɛk." mæt fɹaʊnd. dɛk. ə ʃɪps dɛk. waɪ dɪd ðət tʌɡ ət sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd? ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz wɝ ə nusəns, səmtaɪmz.

Mat tensed, waiting for the explosion - Suroth would have her flogged for half that! - but Egeanin smiled. "It's a pleasure to deal with someone who has a little nerve," she drawled. "I think we'll get on just fine, Mistress Anan. So long as you don't take nerve too far. Captain gives the orders, and crew obeys, but I never made anyone crawl on my deck." Mat frowned. Deck. A ship's deck. Why did that tug at something in his head? Those old memories were a nuisance, sometimes.

mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən nɑɾəd, nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ əɹ dɑɹk aɪz fɹəm ðə sintʃænz blu. "æz jə seɪ, maɪ leɪɾi. bʌɾ aɪ hoʊp jəl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən ɪz maɪ ʃɪp." lʌkəli fəɹ hɝ, ðə sintʃæn wʊmən hæɾ ə sɛns ə hjumɝ. ʃi læft.

Mistress Anan nodded, never taking her dark eyes from the Seanchan's blue. "As you say, my Lady. But I hope you will remember that The Wandering Woman is my ship." Luckily for her, the Seanchan woman had a sense of humor. She laughed.

"ðɛn jə bi kæptən ə jəɹ ʃɪp," ʃi tʃʌkəld, "æn əl bi kæptən ə ðə ɡoʊld." wʌtɛvɝ ðət mɛnt. wɪð ə saɪ, ɛdʒiənɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "laɪts tʃɹuθ, aɪ doʊn aʊtʃɹæŋk mɛni hɪɹ, aɪ səspɛkt, bʌt sjuɹɔθ wɑns mi kloʊs ət hænd, soʊ səm muv daʊn, ən sʌmbɑɾi muvz aʊɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ wɑnə dʌbəl ʌp." sʌɾənli ʃi fɹaʊnd, hæf ɡlænsɪŋ təwɔɹd mæt ən dʒoʊlin, ən əɹ lɪp kɝld ɪn dɪsteɪst. "aɪ tʃɹʌs jə doʊn lɛt ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ɡoʊ ɑn ɛvɹiwɛɹ, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən?"

"Then you be captain of your ship," she chuckled, "and I will be Captain of the Gold." Whatever that meant. With a sigh, Egeanin shook her head. "Light's truth, I don't outrank many here, I suspect, but Suroth wants me close at hand, so some move down, and somebody moves out unless they want to double up." Suddenly she frowned, half glancing toward Mat and Joline, and her lip curled in distaste. "I trust you don't let that sort of thing go on everywhere, Mistress Anan?"

"aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, jəl nɛvɝ si ðə laɪk əɡɛn ʌndɝ maɪ ɹuf," ði ɪnkipɝ ɹɪplaɪd smuðli.

"I assure you, you will never see the like again under my roof," the innkeeper replied smoothly.

ðə sɔɪhɪn wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ ət mæt ən ðə wʊmən ɑn ɪz læp, tu, ən ɛdʒiənɪn hæd tə tʌɡ əɾ ɪz koʊtsliv bɪfɔɹ i ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən fɑloʊɾ əɹ bæk ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum. mæt ɡɹʌntɪd kəntɛmptʃwəsli. ðə fɛloʊ kəd pɹitɛn tə bi aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ laɪk ɪz mɪstʃɹəs ɔl i wɑntəd; mæt hæd hɝɾ əbaʊt fɛstəvəlz ɪn ɪljən, ðoʊ, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɔlmoʊst əz bæɾ əz fɛstəvəlz ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ wən ɪt keɪm tə pipəl ɹʌnɪŋ ɝaʊn hæf-kloʊðd əɹ lɛs. noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən dækoʊvæl, əɹ ðoʊz ʃeɪ dænsɝz ðə soʊlʒɝz wɛn ɑn əbaʊt.

The so'jhin was frowning at Mat and the woman on his lap, too, and Egeanin had to tug at his coatsleeve before he gave a start and followed her back into the common room. Mat grunted contemptuously. The fellow could pretend to be outraged like his mistress all he wanted; Mat had heard about festivals in Illian, though, and they were almost as bad as festivals in Ebou Dar when it came to people running around half-clothed or less. No better than da'covale, or those shea dancers the soldiers went on about.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə iz dʒoʊlin fɹəm ɪz læp wən ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn ðə pɛɹ, bʌt ʃi klʌŋ tə hɪm ən bɛɹiɾ əɹ feɪs ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, wipɪŋ sɔfli. inɪd hivd ə ɡɹeɪt saɪ ən sæɡd əɡɛns ðə wɝkteɪbəl əz ðoʊ hɝ boʊnz hæd sɔfənd. ivən mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən əpɪɹd ʃeɪkən. ʃi dʒɹɑpt ɑntu ðə stul mæt hæd veɪkeɪɾəd ən pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn əɹ hænz. oʊnli fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðoʊ, ən ðən ʃi wɑz bæk ɑn əɹ fit.

He tried to ease Joline from his lap when the door swung shut behind the pair, but she clung to him and buried her face on his shoulder, weeping softly. Enid heaved a great sigh and sagged against the worktable as though her bones had softened. Even Mistress Anan appeared shaken. She dropped onto the stool Mat had vacated and put her head in her hands. Only for a moment, though, and then she was back on her feet.

"kaʊn tə fɪfti ən ðən ɡɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn aʊɾ ə ðə ɹeɪn, inɪd," ʃi sɛd bɹɪskli. noʊ wʌn wʊɾə noʊn ðət ʃi hæd bɪn tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ ə moʊmən ɝliɝ. ɡæðɝɪŋ dʒoʊlinz kloʊk fɹəm ɪts pɛɡ, ʃi tʊk ə lɔŋ splɪntɝ fɹəm ə bɑks ɑn ðə mæntəlpis ən bɛn tə laɪɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə faɪɝ bɪniθ ðə spɪts. "aɪ wɪl bi ɪn ðə sɛlɝ ɪf jə nid mi, bʌɾ ɪf ɛniwʌn æsks, jə doʊnt noʊ wɛɹ aɪ æm. əntɪl aɪ seɪ ʌðɝwaɪz, noʊ wʌn bʌt jə əɹ aɪ ɡoʊz daʊn ðɛɹ." inɪd nɑɾəd əz ðoʊ ðɪs wɑz nʌθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi. "bɹɪŋ hɝ," ði ɪnkipɝ toʊl mæt, "æn doʊn dɔɾəl. kæɹi hɝ ɪf jə mʌst."

"Count to fifty and then get everyone in out of the rain, Enid," she said briskly. No one would have known that she had been trembling a moment earlier. Gathering Joline's cloak from its peg, she took a long splinter from a box on the mantelpiece and bent to light it in the fire beneath the spits. "I will be in the cellar if you need me, but if anyone asks, you don't know where I am. Until I say otherwise, no one but you or I goes down there." Enid nodded as though this was nothing out of the ordinary. "Bring her," the innkeeper told Mat, "and don't dawdle. Carry her if you must."

hi dɪɾ əv tə kæɹi hɝ. stɪl wipɪŋ ɔlmoʊst saʊnləsli, dʒoʊlin wəd nɑt lusən əɹ hoʊld ɑn ɪm əɹ ivən lɪft əɹ hɛd fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ʃi wɑz nɑt hɛvi, θæŋk ðə laɪt, jɛɾ ivən soʊ, ə dʌl eɪk bɪɡæn ɪn ɪz lɛɡ əz i fɑloʊd mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən tə ðə sɛlɝ dɔɹ wɪð ɪz bɝɾən. hi maɪɾ əv ɛndʒɔɪɾ ɪɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə θɹɑbɪŋ, ɪf mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən hæd nɑt teɪkən əɹ taɪm əbaʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ.

He did have to carry her. Still weeping almost soundlessly, Joline would not loosen her hold on him or even lift her head from his shoulder. She was not heavy, thank the Light, yet even so, a dull ache began in his leg as he followed Mistress Anan to the cellar door with his burden. He might have enjoyed it in spite of the throbbing, if Mistress Anan had not taken her time about everything.

əz ðoʊ ðəɹ wɝ noʊ sintʃæn wɪðɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz ʃi lɪɾ ə læmp ɑn ə ʃɛlf bɪsaɪd ðə hɛvi dɔɹ ən kɛɹfəli blu aʊt ðə splɪntɝ bɪfɔɹ ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ ðə tɔl ɡlæs mæntəl, ðən leɪd ðə smoʊkɪŋ splɪntɝ ɑn ə smɔl tɪn tʃɹeɪ. ənhɝidli pɹədusɪŋ ə lɔŋ ki fɹəm əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ, ʃi əndɪd ði aɪɝn lɑk ænd, faɪnəli, moʊʃən ɪm tə ɡoʊ θɹu. ðə stɛɹz bɪɑnd wɝ waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə bɹɪŋ ʌp ə bæɹəl, jɛt stip, vænɪʃɪŋ ɪndə dɑɹknəs. hi oʊbeɪd, bʌt weɪɾəd ɑn ðə sɛkən stɛp waɪl ʃi dʒɹu ðə dɔɹ ʃʌɾ ən ɹeɪ-lɑkt ɪt, weɪɾəd fəɹ əɹ tə teɪk ðə lɛd wɪð ðə læmp hɛl haɪ. ðə læs θɪŋ i niɾəd wɑz ə tʌmbəl.

As though there were no Seanchan within a hundred miles she lit a lamp on a shelf beside the heavy door and carefully blew out the splinter before replacing the tall glass mantle, then laid the smoking splinter on a small tin tray. Unhurriedly producing a long key from her belt pouch, she undid the iron lock and, finally, motioned him to go through. The stairs beyond were wide enough to bring up a barrel, yet steep, vanishing into darkness. He obeyed, but waited on the second step while she drew the door shut and re-locked it, waited for her to take the lead with the lamp held high. The last thing he needed was a tumble.

"du jə də ðɪs ɔfən?" hi æskt, ʃɪftɪŋ dʒoʊlin. ʃi hæd stɑpt əɹ kɹaɪɪŋ, bʌt ʃi stɪl hɛl taɪt tə hɪm, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. "aɪ min, haɪɾɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"Do you do this often?" he asked, shifting Joline. She had stopped her crying, but she still held tight to him, trembling. "I mean, hiding Aes Sedai?"

"aɪ hɝd wɪspɝz ðəɹ wɑz ə sɪstɝ stɪl ɪn ðə sɪɾi," mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ɹɪplaɪd, "æn aɪ mænədʒ tə faɪn əɹ bɪfɔɹ ðə sintʃæn dɪd. aɪ kʊdn liv ə sɪstɝ tə ðɛm." ʃi ɡlɛɹd bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, dɛɹɪŋ ɪm tə seɪ dɪfɹənt. hi wɑntəd tə, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt meɪk ðə wɝdz kʌm. hi səpoʊzd i wʊɾə hɛlpt ɛniwʌn ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə sintʃæn, ɪf i kʊd, ən i oʊɾ ə dɛt tə dʒoʊlin mɑzə.

"I heard whispers there was a sister still in the city," Mistress Anan replied, "and I managed to find her before the Seanchan did. I couldn't leave a sister to them." She glared back over her shoulder, daring him to say different. He wanted to, but he could not make the words come. He supposed he would have helped anyone get away from the Seanchan, if he could, and he owed a debt to Joline Maza.

ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən wɑz ə wɛl-stɑkt ɪn, ən ðə dɑɹk sɛlɝ wɑz lɑɹdʒ. aɪlz stʃɹɛtʃt bɪtwin bæɹəlz ʌv waɪn ən eɪl stækt ɑn ðɛɹ saɪdz, haɪ, slæɾɪd bɪnz ə pəteɪɾoʊz ən tɝnəps ðət stʊɾ ʌp ɔf ðə stoʊn flɔɹ, ɹoʊz ə tɔl ʃɛlvz hoʊldɪŋ sæks ə dʒɹaɪd binz ən piz ən pɛpɝz, maʊnz ʌv wʊɾən kɹeɪts hoʊldɪŋ ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌt. ðəɹ əpɪɹd tə bi lɪɾəl dʌst, bʌt ði ɛɹ hæd ðə dʒɹaɪ smɛl kɑmən tə saʊn stɔɹɹumz.

The Wandering Woman was a well-stocked inn, and the dark cellar was large. Aisles stretched between barrels of wine and ale stacked on their sides, high, slatted bins of potatoes and turnips that stood up off the stone floor, rows of tall shelves holding sacks of dried beans and peas and peppers, mounds of wooden crates holding the Light alone knew what. There appeared to be little dust, but the air had the dry smell common to sound storerooms.

hi spɑɾəd ɪz kloʊðz, nitli foʊldəɾ ɑn ə klɪɹd ʃɛlf - ənlɛs sʌmwʌn ɛls wɑz stɔɹɪŋ ɡɑɹməns daʊn ðəɹ - bʌɾ i hæd noʊ tʃæns tə lʊk ət ðɛm. mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən lɛd ðə weɪ tə ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə sɛlɝ, wɛɹ i sɛt dʒoʊlin daʊn ɑn ən ʌptɝn kɛɡ. hi hæd tə pɹaɪ hɝ ɑɹmz fɹi ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə liv əɹ hʌɾəld ðɛɹ. snaɪvəlɪŋ, ʃi pʊld ə hæŋkɝtʃɪf fɹəm əɹ sliv ən dæbd ət ɹɛd-ɹɪmd aɪz. wɪð əɹ feɪs blɑtʃi, ʃi wɑz hɑɹdli ði ɪmədʒ ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, nɛvɝ maɪn əɹ wɔɹn dʒɹɛs.

He spotted his clothes, neatly folded on a cleared shelf - unless someone else was storing garments down there - but he had no chance to look at them. Mistress Anan led the way to the far end of the cellar, where he set Joline down on an upturned keg. He had to pry her arms free in order to leave her huddled there. Sniveling, she pulled a handkerchief from her sleeve and dabbed at red-rimmed eyes. With her face blotchy, she was hardly the image of an Aes Sedai, never mind her worn dress.

"hɝ nɝv ɪz bɹoʊkən," mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən sɛd, pʊɾɪŋ ðə læmp ɑn ə bæɹəl ðəɾ ɔlsoʊ stʊɾ ɑn ɛnd, ðə bʌŋ ɪn ɪts ɛnd ɡɔn. sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ ɛmpti bæɹəlz stʊɾ əbaʊt ðə flɔɹ wɛɹ ʌðɝz hæd bɪn ɹimuvd, əweɪɾɪŋ ɹɪtɝn tə ðə bɹuɝ. ɪt wɑz əz kloʊz tə ə klɪɹ speɪs əz i hæd sin ɪn ðə sɛlɝ. "ʃiz bɪn haɪɾɪŋ ɛvɝ sɪns ðə sintʃæn keɪm. ðə læs fju deɪz, hɝ wɔɹɾɝz əv hæd tə muv əɹ sɛvɹəl taɪmz wən sintʃæn dɪsaɪɾɪd tə sɝtʃ ə bɪldɪŋ ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒʌs ðə stʃɹits. ɪnʌf tə bɹeɪk ɛniwʌnz nɝv, aɪ səpoʊz. aɪ daʊt ðəl tʃɹaɪ tə sɝtʃ hɪɹ, ðoʊ."

"Her nerve is broken," Mistress Anan said, putting the lamp on a barrel that also stood on end, the bung in its end gone. Several other empty barrels stood about the floor where others had been removed, awaiting return to the brewer. It was as close to a clear space as he had seen in the cellar. "She's been hiding ever since the Seanchan came. The last few days, her Warders have had to move her several times when Seanchan decided to search a building instead of just the streets. Enough to break anyone's nerve, I suppose. I doubt they will try to search here, though."

θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɔl ðoʊz ɔfəsɝz əpstɛɹz, mæt hæd tə kənsid ʃi wɑz pɹɑbli ɹaɪt. stɪl, hi wɑz ɡlæɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪm teɪkɪŋ ðə ɹɪsk. skwɑɾɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə dʒoʊlin, hi ɡɹʌntɪɾ əɾ ə stæb ə peɪn ʌp ɪz lɛɡ. "aɪ wɪl hɛlp jə ɪf aɪ kæn," hi sɛd. haʊ, hi kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ðət dɛt. "dʒʌs bi ɡlæd jə wɝ lʌki ɪnʌf tə dɑdʒ əm ɔl ðɪs taɪm. tɛslɪn wɑzn soʊ lʌki."

Thinking of all those officers upstairs, Mat had to concede she was probably right. Still, he was glad it was not him taking the risk. Squatting in front of Joline, he grunted at a stab of pain up his leg. "I will help you if I can," he said. How, he could not have said, but there was that debt. "Just be glad you were lucky enough to dodge them all this time. Teslyn wasn't so lucky."

snætʃɪŋ ðə hæŋkɝtʃɪf fɹəm əɹ aɪz, dʒoʊlin ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "lʌk?" ʃi spæɾ æŋɡɹəli. ɪt ʃi hæd bɪn ʌðɝ ðən ɛɛs sədaɪ, hi wʊɾə sɛd ʃi wɑz sʌlən, stɪkɪŋ əɹ loʊɝ lɪp aʊt ðət weɪ. "aɪ kəɾ əv ɪskeɪpt! ɪt wɑz ɔl kənfjuʒən ðə fɝs deɪ, əz aɪ ʌndɝstænd. bʌɾ aɪ wɑz ʌnkɑnʃəs. fɛn ən blɹɪk bɛɹli mænədʒ tə kæɹi mi aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs bɪfɔɹ ðə sintʃæn swɔɹmd oʊvɝ ɪt, ən tu mɛn kæɹiɪŋ ə lɪmp wʊmən ətʃɹæktəd tu mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən fəɹ əm tə ɡɛɾ ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪts bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ sɪkjʊɹd. aɪm ɡlæd tɛslɪn wɑz kɑt! ɡlæd! ʃi ɡeɪv mi sʌmθɪŋ; aɪm ʃʊɹ ʃi dɪd! ðəɾ ɪz waɪ fɛn ən blɹɪk kʊdnt weɪk mi, waɪ aɪ hæv bɪn slipɪŋ ɪn steɪbəlz ən haɪɾɪŋ ɪn æliz, əfɹeɪd ðoʊz mɑnstɝz wəd faɪn mi. ɪt sɝvz əɹ ɹaɪt!"

Snatching the handkerchief from her eyes, Joline glared at him. "Luck?" she spat angrily. It she had been other than Aes Sedai, he would have said she was sullen, sticking her lower lip out that way. "I could have escaped! It was all confusion the first day, as I understand. But I was unconscious. Fen and Blaeric barely managed to carry me out of the Palace before the Seanchan swarmed over it, and two men carrying a limp woman attracted too much attention for them to get anywhere near the city gates before they were secured. I am glad Teslyn was caught! Glad! She gave me something; I am sure she did! That is why Fen and Blaeric couldn't wake me, why I have been sleeping in stables and hiding in alleys, afraid those monsters would find me. It serves her right!"

mæt blɪŋkt ət ðə taɪɹeɪd. hi daʊɾɪd i hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝd soʊ mʌtʃ pjʊɹ vɛnəm ɪn ə vɔɪs bɪfɔɹ, ivən ɪn ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz. mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən fɹaʊn ət dʒoʊlin, ən əɹ hæn twɪtʃt.

Mat blinked at the tirade. He doubted he had ever heard so much pure venom in a voice before, even in those old memories. Mistress Anan frowned at Joline, and her hand twitched.

"ɛniweɪ, əl hɛlp jə əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ kæn," hi sɛd hɝidli, ɹaɪzɪŋ soʊ hi kəd muv bɪtwin ðə tu wɪmən. hi wəd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt pæs mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən tə slæp dʒoʊlin, ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən dʒoʊlin lʊkt ɪn noʊ mud tə kənsɪɾɝ ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv ə deɪmeɪn biɪŋ əpstɛɹz tə fil wʌtɛvɝ ʃi dɪɾ ɪn ɹitælieɪʃən. ɪt wɑz ə sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ; ðə kɹieɪɾɝ meɪd wɪmən soʊ mɛn wəd nɑt faɪn laɪf tu izi. haʊ ɪn ðə laɪt wɑz i tə ɡɛɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ? "aɪm ɪn dɛt tə ju."

"Anyway, I'll help you as much as I can," he said hurriedly, rising so he could move between the two women. He would not put it past Mistress Anan to slap Joline, Aes Sedai or no Aes Sedai, and Joline looked in no mood to consider the possibility of a damane being upstairs to feel whatever she did in retaliation. It was a simple truth; the Creator made women so men would not find life too easy. How in the Light was he to get an Aes Sedai out of Ebou Dar? "I'm in debt to you."

ə taɪni fɹaʊn ɹɪŋkəl dʒoʊlinz bɹaʊ. "ɪn dɛt?"

A tiny frown wrinkled Joline's brow. "In debt?"

"ðə noʊɾ æskɪŋ mi tə wɔɹn nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn," hi sɛd sloʊli. hi lɪkt ɪz lɪps ən æɾəd, "ðə wʌn jə lɛft ɑn maɪ pɪloʊ."

"The note asking me to warn Nynaeve and Elayne," he said slowly. He licked his lips and added, "The one you left on my pillow."

ʃi flɪkt ə hæn dɪsmɪsɪvli, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz, foʊkəst ɑn ɪz feɪs, nɛvɝ blɪŋkt. "ɔl dɛts bɪtwin əs ɑɹ sɛɾəld ðə deɪ jə hɛlp mi ɡɛɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi wɔlz, mæstɝ kɔθən," ʃi sɛd, ɪn toʊnz əz ɹiɡəl əz ə kwin ɑn əɹ θɹoʊn.

She flicked a hand dismissively, but her eyes, focused on his face, never blinked. "All debts between us are settled the day you help me get outside the city walls, Master Cauthon," she said, in tones as regal as a queen on her throne.

mæt swɑloʊd hɑɹd. ðə noʊt hæd bɪn stʌk ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkət sʌmhaʊ, nɑt lɛft ɑn ɪz pɪloʊ. ən ðət mɛn i wɑz mɪsteɪkən əbaʊɾ u hi oʊd ðə dɛt tə.

Mat swallowed hard. The note had been stuck into his coat pocket somehow, not left on his pillow. And that meant he was mistaken about who he owed the debt to.

hi meɪɾ ɪz liv wɪθaʊt kɔlɪŋ dʒoʊlin ɑn əɹ laɪ - ə laɪ ivən ɪf oʊnli baɪ lɛɾɪŋ ɪz mɪsteɪk pæs - ən i lɛft wɪθaʊt tɛlɪŋ mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən, iðɝ. ɪt wɑz ɪz pɹɑbləm. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm fil sɪk. hi wɪʃt i hæd nɛvɝ faʊn aʊt.

He made his leave without calling Joline on her lie - a lie even if only by letting his mistake pass - and he left without telling Mistress Anan, either. It was his problem. It made him feel sick. He wished he had never found out.

bæk ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, hi wɛn stʃɹeɪt tə taɪlɪnz əpɑɹtməns ən spɹɛɾ ɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ ə tʃɛɹ tə dʒɹaɪ. ə paʊndɪŋ ɹeɪn biɾ əɡɛns ðə wɪndoʊz. pʊɾɪŋ ɪz hæɾ ətɑp wʌn ə ðə kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd wɔɹdʒɹoʊbz, hi taʊəld ɪz feɪs ən hænz dʒɹaɪ ən kənsɪɾɝd tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪz koʊt. ðə ɹeɪn hæd soʊk θɹu hɪz kloʊk ɪn ə fju pleɪsəz. hɪz koʊt wɑz dæmp hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ. dæmp. laɪt!

Back in the Tarasin Palace, he went straight to Tylin's apartments and spread his cloak over a chair to dry. A pounding rain beat against the windows. Putting his hat atop one of the carved and gilded wardrobes, he toweled his face and hands dry and considered changing his coat. The rain had soaked through his cloak in a few places. His coat was damp here and there. Damp. Light!

ɡɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn dɪsɡʌst, hi wɑɾəd ʌp ðə stʃɹaɪp taʊəl ən θɹu ɪɾ ɑn ðə bɛd. hi wɑz dɪleɪɪŋ, ivən hoʊpɪŋ - ə lɪɾəl - ðət taɪlɪn maɪt wɔk ɪn ən stæb ðə bɪdpoʊst, soʊ hi kəd pʊɾ ɔf wʌɾ i hæd tə du. wʌɾ i hæd tə du. dʒoʊlin hæd lɛft ɪm wɪð noʊ tʃɔɪs.

Growling in disgust, he wadded up the striped towel and threw it on the bed. He was delaying, even hoping - a little - that Tylin might walk in and stab the bedpost, so he could put off what he had to do. What he had to do. Joline had left him with no choice.

ðə pæləs wɑz leɪɾ aʊt sɪmpli, ɪf jə kɛɹd tə lʊk əɾ ɪt ðət weɪ. sɝvəns lɪvd ɑn ðə loʊəs lɛvəl, wɛɹ ðə kɪtʃənz wɝ, ən səm ɪn ðə sɛlɝz. ðə nɛks flɔɹ ʌp kənteɪn ðə speɪʃəs pʌblɪk ɹumz ən ðə kɹæmp stʌɾiz ə ðə klɝks, ən ðə θɝɾ əpɑɹtməns fəɹ lɛs feɪvɝd ɡɛsts, moʊst ɑkjəpaɪd naʊ baɪ sintʃæn blʌd. ðə haɪəs flɔɹ hɛl taɪlɪnz əpɑɹtməns, ən ɹumz fəɹ mɔɹ feɪvɝd ɡɛsts, laɪk sjuɹɔθ ən tuɑn ən ə fju ʌðɝz. ɪksɛpt, ivən pæləsəz hæɾ æɾɪks, ʌv ə sɔɹt.

The Palace was laid out simply, if you cared to look at it that way. Servants lived on the lowest level, where the kitchens were, and some in the cellars. The next floor up contained the spacious public rooms and the cramped studies of the clerks, and the third apartments for less favored guests, most occupied now by Seanchan Blood. The highest floor held Tylin's apartments, and rooms for more favored guests, like Suroth and Tuon and a few others. Except, even palaces had attics, of a sort.

pɔzɪŋ ət ðə fʊɾ ʌv ə flaɪɾ ə stɛɹz hɪɾən ɝaʊn ən ɪnɑkjuəs kɔɹnɝ wɛɹ ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi noʊɾəst, mæt dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp sloʊli. ðə hjudʒ wɪndoʊləs ɹum ət ðə tɑp ə ðə stɛɹz, loʊ-silɪŋ ən flɔɹd wɪð ɹʌf plæŋks, hæd bɪn klɪɹɾ ʌv wʌtɛvɝ ɪt hɛl bɪfɔɹ ðə sintʃæn, ən ðə speɪs fɪld wɪð ə ɡɹɪɾ ə taɪni wʊɾən ɹumz, itʃ wɪð ɪts oʊn kloʊz dɔɹ. pleɪn aɪɝn stænd-læmps lɪt ðə nɛɹoʊ hɔlz bɪtwin. ðə ɹeɪn biɾɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðə ɹuf taɪlz wɑz laʊd hɪɹ, dʒʌst oʊvɝhɛd. hi pɔzd əɡɛn ɑn ðə tɑp stɛp, ən oʊnli bɹiðd əɡɛn wən i ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i kəd hɪɹ noʊ fʊtstɛps. ə wʊmən wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ ɪn wʌn ə ðə taɪni ɹumz, bʌt noʊ sʌldəm wɑz gɑnə əpɪɹ ən dɪmæn tə noʊ wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ ðɛɹ. laɪkli ðeɪ wəd lɝn i hæd bɪn, bʌt nɑɾ əntɪl æftɝ i faʊn aʊt wʌɾ i niɾəd, ɪf i wɑz kwɪk.

Pausing at the foot of a flight of stairs hidden around an innocuous corner where they would not be noticed, Mat drew a deep breath before going up slowly. The huge windowless room at the top of the stairs, low-ceiling and floored with rough planks, had been cleared of whatever it held before the Seanchan, and the space filled with a grid of tiny wooden rooms, each with its own closed door. Plain iron stand-lamps lit the narrow halls between. The rain beating down on the roof tiles was loud here, just overhead. He paused again on the top step, and only breathed again when he realized that he could hear no footsteps. A woman was crying in one of the tiny rooms, but no sul'dam was going to appear and demand to know what he was doing there. Likely they would learn he had been, but not until after he found out what he needed, if he was quick.

hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ ɹum wɑz hɝz, wɑz ðə tʃɹʌbəl. hi wɔk tə ðə fɝst ən oʊpən ðə dɔɹ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə pik ɪn. ən æθɑn maɪɹ wʊmən ɪn ə ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə nɛɹoʊ bɛd, hænz foʊldəɾ ɪn əɹ læp. ðə bɛɾ ən ə wɑʃstænd wɪð boʊl ən pɪtʃɝ ən ə taɪni mɪɹɝ tʊk ʌp moʊst ə ðə ɹum. sɛvɹəl ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛsəz hʌŋ fɹəm pɛɡz ɑn ðə wɔl. ðə sɛɡmɛntɪd sɪlvɝ liʃ ʌv ən æɾəm ɹæn ɪn ən ɑɹk fɹəm ðə sɪlvɝ kɑlɝ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk tə ə sɪlvɝ bɹeɪslət lupt oʊvɝ ə hʊk sɛɾ ɪn ðə wɔl. ʃi kəd ɹitʃ ɛni pɑɹɾ ə ðə taɪni ɹum. ðə smɔl hoʊlz wɛɹ əɹ ɪɹɪŋz ən noʊz ɹɪŋ hæd bɪn hæd nɑt jɛt hæd taɪm tə hil. ðeɪ lʊk laɪk wunz. wən ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd, hɝ hɛd keɪm ʌp wɪð ə fɪɹfəl ɪkspɹɛʃən ðət feɪɾəd ɪndə spɛkjəleɪʃən. ən meɪbi hoʊp.

He did not know which room was hers, was the trouble. He walked to the first and opened the door long enough to peek in. An Atha'an Miere woman in a gray dress was sitting on the side of a narrow bed, hands folded in her lap. The bed and a washstand with bowl and pitcher and a tiny mirror took up most of the room. Several gray dresses hung from pegs on the wall. The segmented silver leash of an a'dam ran in an arc from the silver collar around her neck to a silver bracelet looped over a hook set in the wall. She could reach any part of the tiny room. The small holes where her earrings and nose ring had been had not yet had time to heal. They looked like wounds. When the door opened, her head came up with a fearful expression that faded into speculation. And maybe hope.

hi kloʊz ðə dɔɹ wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ə wɝd. aɪ kæn seɪv ɔl ə ðɛm, hi θɔt hɑɹʃli. aɪ kænt! laɪt, bʌɾ i heɪɾəd ðɪs.

He closed the door without saying a word. I can't save all of them, he thought harshly. I can't! Light, but he hated this.

ðə nɛks dɔɹz ɹɪvild aɪdɛntɪkəl ɹumz ən θɹi mɔɹ si foʊk wɪmən, wʌn ə ðɛm wipɪŋ laʊdli ɑn əɹ bɛd, ən ðən ə slipɪŋ jɛloʊ-hɛɹd wʊmən, ɔl wɪð ðɛɹ æɾəm lusli stʃɹɛtʃt tə hʊks. hi iz ðət dɔɹ ʃʌɾ əz ðoʊ hi wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪltʃ wʌn ə mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹz paɪz ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ əɹ noʊz. meɪbi ðə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd wʊmən wɑz nɑt sintʃæn, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə teɪk ðə tʃæns. ə dʌzən dɔɹz leɪɾɝ, hi ɛksheɪl hɛvəli ɪn ɹɪlif ən slɪpt ɪnsaɪd, pʊlɪŋ ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɪm.

The next doors revealed identical rooms and three more Sea Folk women, one of them weeping loudly on her bed, and then a sleeping yellow-haired woman, all with their a'dam loosely stretched to hooks. He eased that door shut as though he were trying to filch one of Mistress al'Vere's pies right under her nose. Maybe the yellow-haired woman was not Seanchan, but he was not about to take the chance. A dozen doors later, he exhaled heavily in relief and slipped inside, pulling the door shut behind him.

tɛslɪn bɑɹədɑn leɪ ɑn ðə bɛd, hɝ feɪs pɪloʊɾ ɑn əɹ hænz. oʊnli hɝ dɑɹk aɪz muvd, stæbɪŋ ət hɪm. ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ, dʒʌs lʊkt əɾ ɪm əz ðoʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɔɹ hoʊlz ɪn ɪz skʌl.

Teslyn Baradon lay on the bed, her face pillowed on her hands. Only her dark eyes moved, stabbing at him. She said nothing, just looked at him as though trying to bore holes in his skull.

"ju pʊɾ ə noʊɾ ɪn maɪ koʊt pɑkət," hi sɛd sɔfli. ðə wɔlz wɝ θɪn; hi kəd stɪl hɪɹ ðə wipɪŋ wʊmən. "waɪ?"

"You put a note in my coat pocket," he said softly. The walls were thin; he could still hear the weeping woman. "Why?"

"ɪleɪɾə dʌz wɑn ðoʊz ɡɝlz əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi ɛvɝ wɑntəd ðə stæf ən stoʊl," tɛslɪn sɛd sɪmpli, wɪθaʊt muvɪŋ. hɝ vɔɪs stɪl hæɾ ə hɑɹʃnəs tə ɪt, bʌt lɛs ðən i ɹɪkɔld. "ɪspɛʃli ɪleɪn. aɪ dɪd wɪʃ tə . . . ɪnkənvinjəns . . . ɪleɪɾə, ɪf aɪ kʊd. lɛɾ əɹ wɪsəl fəɹ ðɛm." ʃi ɡeɪv ə sɑf læf tɪŋd wɪð bɪɾɝnəs. "aɪ dɪɾ ivən doʊs dʒoʊlin wɪð fɔkɹut, soʊ ʃi kəd noʊ ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð ðoʊz ɡɝlz. ən lʊk wʌɾ ɪt dɪd ɡɛt mi. dʒoʊlin dɪɾ ɪskeɪp, ən aɪ . . ." hɝ aɪz muvd əɡɛn, tə ðə sɪlvɝ bɹeɪslət hæŋɪŋ ɑn ðə hʊk.

"Elaida does want those girls as much as she ever wanted the staff and stole," Teslyn said simply, without moving. Her voice still had a harshness to it, but less than he recalled. "Especially Elayne. I did wish to . . . inconvenience . . . Elaida, if I could. Let her whistle for them." She gave a soft laugh tinged with bitterness. "I did even dose Joline with forkroot, so she could no interfere with those girls. And look what it did get me. Joline did escape, and I . . ." Her eyes moved again, to the silver bracelet hanging on the hook.

saɪɪŋ, mæt lin əɡɛns ðə wɔl bɪsaɪd ðə dʒɹɛsəz hæŋɪŋ ɑn pɛɡz. ʃi nu wʌt hæd bɪn ɪn ðə noʊt, ə wɔɹnɪŋ fəɹ ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv. laɪt, bʌɾ i hæd hoʊpt ʃi wəd nɑt, ðət sʌmwʌn ɛls hæd pʊt ðə blʌɾi θɪŋ ɪn ɪz pɑkət. ɪt hæd nɑt dʌn ɛni ɡʊd, ɛniweɪ. ðeɪ boʊθ nu ɪleɪɾə wɑz æftɝ ðɛm. ðə noʊt hæd tʃeɪnʒd nʌθɪŋ! ðə wʊmən hæd nɑt ɹɪli bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hɛlp ðɛm, ɛniweɪ, dʒʌs tə . . . ɪnkənvinjəns . . . ɪleɪɾə. hi kəd wɔk əweɪ wɪð ə klin kɑnʃəns. blʌɾ ən æʃəz! hi ʃəd nɛvɝ æktʃəli  hæv spoʊkən tə hɝ. naʊ ðəɾ i hæɾ æktʃəli  ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wɝdz wɪð əɹ . . .

Sighing, Mat leaned against the wall beside the dresses hanging on pegs. She knew what had been in the note, a warning for Elayne and Nynaeve. Light, but he had hoped she would not, that someone else had put the bloody thing in his pocket. It had not done any good, anyway. They both knew Elaida was after them. The note had changed nothing! The woman had not really been trying to help them, anyway, just to . . . inconvenience . . . Elaida. He could walk away with a clean conscience. Blood and ashes! He should never actually have spoken to her. Now that he had actually exchanged words with her . . .

"aɪl tʃɹaɪ tə hɛlp jə ɪskeɪp, ɪf aɪ kæn," hi sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli.

"I'll try to help you escape, if I can," he said reluctantly.

ʃi ɹɪmeɪn stɪl ɑn ðə bɛd. niðɝ əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən nɔɹ əɹ toʊn ə vɔɪs tʃeɪnʒd. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪkspleɪnɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ sɪmpəl ən ənɪmpɔɹɾənt. "ivən ɪf jə kən ɹimuv ðə kɑlɝ, əl noʊ ɡɛt vɛɹi fɑɹ, pɝhæps noʊ ivən aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs. ən ɪf aɪ du, noʊ wʊmən u kən tʃænəl kən wɔk θɹu ðə sɪɾi ɡeɪts ənlɛs ʃi dʌz wɛɹ ən æɾəm. aɪ hæv stʊd ɡɑɹd ðəɹ maɪsɛlf, ən aɪ də noʊ."

She remained still on the bed. Neither her expression nor her tone of voice changed. She might have been explaining something simple and unimportant. "Even if you can remove the collar, I will no get very far, perhaps no even out of the Palace. And if I do, no woman who can channel can walk through the city gates unless she does wear an a'dam. I have stood guard there myself, and I do know."

"aɪl fɪɡjɝ aʊt sʌmθɪŋ," hi mʌɾɝd, ɹeɪkɪŋ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. fɪɡjɝ aʊt sʌmθɪŋ? wʌt? "laɪt, jə doʊn ivən saʊn əz ɪf jə wɑnə ɪskeɪp."

"I'll figure out something," he muttered, raking his fingers through his hair. Figure out something? What? "Light, you don't even sound as if you want to escape."

"ju də bi sɪɹiəs," ʃi wɪspɝd, soʊ loʊ hi nɪɹli dɪd nɑt hɪɹ. "aɪ dɪd θɪŋk jə oʊnli dɪd kʌm tə tɔn mi." sloʊli ʃi sæt, swɪŋɪŋ əɹ fit daʊn tə ðə flɔɹ. hɝ aɪz lætʃt ɑn tə hɪz ɪntɛnli, ən əɹ vɔɪs tʊk ɑn ə loʊ ɝdʒənsi. "du aɪ wɑnə ɪskeɪp? wən aɪ də sʌmθɪŋ ðət dʌz pliz ðɛm, ðə sʌldəm də ɡɪmi swits. aɪ də faɪn maɪsɛlf lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə ðoʊz ɹɪwɔɹdz." bɹɛθi hɔɹɝ kɹɛpt ɪndə hɝ vɔɪs. "nɑt fəɹ laɪkɪŋ ə swits, bʌt kəz aɪ hæv pliz ðə sʌldəm." ə sɪŋɡəl tɛɹ tʃɹɪkəl fɹəm əɹ aɪ. ʃi ɪnheɪl dipli. "ɪf jə də hɛlp mi ɪskeɪp, əl də ɛniθɪŋ jə æsk ə mi ðət dʌz nɑɾ ɛnkʌmpəs tʃɹizən tə ðə waɪt - " hɝ tiθ snæpt ʃʌt, ən ʃi sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt, stɛɹɪŋ ɹaɪt θɹu hɪm. əbɹʌpli, ʃi nɑɾəd tə hɝsɛlf. "hɛlp mi ɪskeɪp, ən əl də ɛniθɪŋ jə æsk ə mi," ʃi sɛd.

"You do be serious," she whispered, so low he nearly did not hear. "I did think you only did come to taunt me." Slowly she sat, swinging her feet down to the floor. Her eyes latched on to his intently, and her voice took on a low urgency. "Do I want to escape? When I do something that does please them, the sul'dam do give me sweets. I do find myself looking forward to those rewards." Breathy horror crept into her voice. "Not for liking of sweets, but because I have pleased the sul'dam." A single tear trickled from her eye. She inhaled deeply. "If you do help me escape, I will do anything you ask of me that does not encompass treason to the White - " Her teeth snapped shut, and she sat up straight, staring right through him. Abruptly, she nodded to herself. "Help me escape, and I will do anything you ask of me," she said.

"aɪ wɪl də wʌɾ aɪ kæn," hi toʊl hɝ. "aɪ mʌs θɪŋk ʌv ə weɪ."

"I will do what I can," he told her. "I must think of a way."

ʃi nɑɾəd əz ðoʊ hi hæd pɹɑməst ən ɪskeɪp baɪ naɪtfɔl. "ðɛɹ də bi ənʌðɝ sɪstɝ hɛl pɹɪznɝ hɪɹ ɪn ðə pæləs. idɛzinə æziɾɪn. ʃi mʌs kʌm wɪð ʌs."

She nodded as though he had promised an escape by nightfall. "There do be another sister held prisoner here in the Palace. Edesina Azzedin. She must come with us."

"wʌn ʌðɝ?" mæt sɛd. "aɪ θɔɾ aɪd sin θɹi əɹ fɔɹ, kaʊntɪŋ ju. ɛniweɪ, aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ aɪ kən ɡɛt jə aʊt, mʌtʃ lɛs - "

"One other?" Mat said. "I thought I'd seen three or four, counting you. Anyway, I'm not sure I can get you out, much less - "

"ði ʌðɝz də bi . . . tʃeɪnʒd." tɛslɪnz maʊθ taɪɾənd. "ɡɪsɪn ən maɪələn - aɪ dɪd noʊ hɝ əz ʃɛɝeɪn kæminɛl, bʌt ʃi də ænsɝ oʊnli tə maɪələn, naʊ - ðoʊz tu wəd bɪtʃɹeɪ ʌs. idɛzinə də stɪl bi hɝsɛlf. əl noʊ liv əɹ bɪhaɪnd, ivən ɪf ʃi də bi ə ɹɛbəl."

"The others do be . . . changed." Teslyn's mouth tightened. "Guisin and Mylen - I did know her as Sheraine Caminelle, but she do answer only to Mylen, now - those two would betray us. Edesina do still be herself. I will no leave her behind, even if she do be a rebel."

"naʊ, lʊk," mæt sɛd wɪð ə smaɪl, suðɪŋli, "aɪ sɛɾ əl tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛt jə aʊt, bʌɾ aɪ kæn si ɛni weɪ tə ɡɛt tu ʌv jə - "

"Now, look," Mat said with a smile, soothingly, "I said I will try to get you out, but I can't see any way to get two of you - "

"ɪt də bi bɛst ɪf jə ɡoʊ naʊ," ʃi bɹoʊk ɪn əɡɛn. "mɛn ɑɹ noʊ əlaʊɾ ʌp hɪɹ, ən ɪn ɛni keɪs, jəl ɹaʊs səspɪʃənz ɪf jə də bi faʊnd." fɹaʊnɪŋ ət hɪm, ʃi snɪft. "ɪt wəd hɛlp ɪf jə dɪd nɑt dʒɹɛs soʊ flæmbɔɪənli. tɛn dʒɹʌŋkən tɪŋkɝz kəd noʊ ətʃɹækt əz mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən əz jə du. ɡoʊ, naʊ. kwɪkli. ɡoʊ!"

"It do be best if you go now," she broke in again. "Men are no allowed up here, and in any case, you will rouse suspicions if you do be found." Frowning at him, she sniffed. "It would help if you did not dress so flamboyantly. Ten drunken Tinkers could no attract as much attention as you do. Go, now. Quickly. Go!"

hi wɛnt, mæɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. dʒʌs laɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɔfɝ tə hɛlp hɝ, ən ðə nɛks θɪŋ jə nu, ʃi hæd jə skeɪlɪŋ ə ʃɪɹ klɪf ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt tə bɹeɪk fɪfti pipəl aʊɾ ʌv ə dʌnʒən baɪ jɝsɛlf. ðət hæd bɪn ənʌðɝ mæn, ə lɔŋ taɪm dɛd, bʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪt, ən ɪt fɪt. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz! hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə ɹɛskju wʌn ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ʃi hæɾ ɪm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɛskju tu!

He went, mattering to himself. Just like an Aes Sedai. Offer to help her, and the next thing you knew, she had you scaling a sheer cliff in the middle of the night to break fifty people out of a dungeon by yourself. That had been another man, a long time dead, but he remembered it, and it fit. Blood and bloody ashes! He did not know how to rescue one Aes Sedai, and she had him trying to rescue two!

hi stɔkt ɝaʊn ði ɪnɑkjuəs kɔɹnɝ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə stɛɹz ən ɔlmoʊst wɔkt ɪndə tuɑn.

He stalked around the innocuous corner at the foot of the stairs and almost walked into Tuon.

"deɪmeɪn kɛnəlz ɑɹ fɔɹbɪɾən tə mɛn," ʃi sɛd, piɹɪŋ ʌp əɾ ɪm koʊldli θɹu hɝ veɪl. "ju kəd bi pʌnɪʃt dʒʌs fəɹ ɛntɝɪŋ."

"Damane kennels are forbidden to men," she said, peering up at him coldly through her veil. "You could be punished just for entering."

"aɪ wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə wɪndfɪndɝ, haɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛd heɪstəli, meɪkɪŋ ə lɛɡ ən θɪŋkɪŋ əz fæst əz i ɛvɝ hæɾ ɪn ɪz laɪf. "ʃi dɪd mi ə feɪvɝ wʌns, ən aɪ θɔt ʃi maɪt laɪk sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm ðə kɪtʃənz. səm peɪstʃɹiz, əɹ ðə laɪk. aɪ dɪdn si hɝ, ðoʊ. aɪ səpoʊz ʃi wɑzn kɑt wən . . ." hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf, stɛɹɪŋ. ðə stɝn dʒudɪʃəl mæsk ðə ɡɝl ɔlweɪz wɔɹ fəɹ ə feɪs hæd mɛltəɾ ɪndə ə smaɪl. ʃi ɹɪli wɑz bjuɾəfəl.

"I was looking for a Windfinder, High Lady," he said hastily, making a leg and thinking as fast as he ever had in his life. "She did me a favor once, and I thought she might like something from the kitchens. Some pastries, or the like. I didn't see her, though. I suppose she wasn't caught when . . ." He trailed off, staring. The stern judicial mask the girl always wore for a face had melted into a smile. She really was beautiful.

"ðæɾ ɪz vɛɹi kaɪndə ju," ʃi sɛd. "ɪts ɡʊd tə noʊ jə ɑɹ kaɪn tə deɪmeɪn. bʌt jə mʌs bi kɛɹfəl. ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛn u æktʃəli  teɪk deɪmeɪn tə ðɛɹ bɛdz." hɝ fʊl maʊθ twɪstəɾ ɪn dɪsɡʌst. "ju wəd nɑt wɑn ɛniwʌn tə θɪŋk jə ɑɹ pɝvɝɾɪd." ðət səvɪɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən sɛɾəld ɑn əɹ feɪs əɡɛn. ɔl pɹɪznɝz wəd bi ɛksəkjuɾəd ɪmiɾiətli.

"That is very kind of you," she said. "It's good to know you are kind to damane. But you must be careful. There are men who actually take damane to their beds." Her full mouth twisted in disgust. "You would not want anyone to think you are perverted." That severe expression settled on her face again. All prisoners would be executed immediately.

"θæŋk jə fəɹ ðə wɔɹnɪŋ, haɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛd, ə lɪɾəl ənstɛɾəli. wʌt kaɪndə mæn wɑntəd tə bɛɾ ə wʊmən u wɑz ɑn ə liʃ?

"Thank you for the warning, High Lady," he said, a little unsteadily. What kind of man wanted to bed a woman who was on a leash?

hi dɪsəpɪɹd ðɛn, əz fɑɹ əz ʃi wɑz kənsɝnd. ʃi dʒʌst ɡlaɪɾɪd əweɪ daʊn ðə hɔl əz ɪf ʃi sɔ noʊ wʌn. fəɹ wʌns, ðoʊ, ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑn dɪd nɑt kənsɝn ɪm əɾ ɔl. hi hæɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə sɛlɝ ə ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən ən tu wɛɹɪŋ deɪmeɪn liʃɪz u ɔl ɪkspɛktəd mæt blʌɾi kɔθən tə seɪv ðɛɹ nɛks. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ tɛslɪn wəɾ ɪnfɔɹm ðɪs idɛzinə ɔl əbaʊɾ ɪɾ əz sun əz ʃi wɑz eɪbəl. θɹi wɪmən u maɪt stɑɹt ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃən ɪf i feɪl tə wɑft əm tə seɪfti sun ɪnʌf. wɪmən laɪk tə tɔk, ən wən ðeɪ tɔkt ɪnʌf, ðeɪ lɛt slɪp θɪŋz bɛɾɝ lɛft ənspoʊkən. ɪmpeɪʃənt wɪmən tɔkt ivən mɔɹ ðən ðə ɹɛst. hi kəd nɑt fil ðə daɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ i kəɾ ɔlmoʊs hɪɹ ə klɑk tɪkɪŋ. ən ði aʊɝ maɪt bi stʃɹʌk baɪ ə hɛdzmənz æks. bæɾəlz i kəd plæn ɪn ɪz slip, bʌt ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz dɪd nɑt sim mʌtʃ hɛlp hɪɹ. hi niɾəd ə skimɝ, sʌmwʌn juz tə plɑɾɪŋ ən kɹʊkəd weɪz ə θɪŋkɪŋ. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə meɪk tɑm sɪt daʊn ən tɔk. ən dʒulɪn.

He disappeared then, as far as she was concerned. She just glided away down the hall as if she saw no one. For once, though, the High Lady Tuon did not concern him at all. He had an Aes Sedai hiding in the cellar of The Wandering Woman and two wearing damane leashes who all expected Mat bloody Cauthon to save their necks. He was sure Teslyn would inform this Edesina all about it as soon as she was able. Three women who might start getting impatient if he failed to waft them to safety soon enough. Women liked to talk, and when they talked enough, they let slip things better left unspoken. Impatient women talked even more than the rest. He could not feel the dice in his head, but he could almost hear a clock ticking. And the hour might be struck by a headsman's axe. Battles he could plan in his sleep, but those old memories did not seem much help here. He needed a schemer, someone used to plotting and crooked ways of thinking. It was time to make Thom sit down and talk. And Juilin.

sɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn sɝtʃ ʌv iðɝ, hi ʌnkɑnʃəsli bɪɡæn hʌmɪŋ "aɪm daʊn ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə wɛl." wɛl, hi wɑz, ən naɪt wɑz fɔlɪŋ ən ðə ɹeɪn wɛl ən tʃɹuli kʌmɪŋ daʊn. əz ɔfən hæpənd, ənʌðɝ neɪm dʒɹɪftəɾ ʌp aʊɾ ə ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz, ə sɔŋ ə ðə kɔɹɾ ə tɑkeɪɾoʊ, ɪn fɑɹɑʃɛl, kɹʌʃt ə θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ ən mɔɹ baɪ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. ði ɪntɝvinɪŋ jɪɹz hæd meɪd ɹɪmɑɹkəbli lɪɾəl tʃeɪnʒ ɪn ðə tun ɪtsɛlf, ðoʊ. ðɛn, ɪt hæd bɪn kɔld "ðə læst stæn ət mændənhɹ." iðɝ weɪ, ɪt fɪt tu blʌɾi wɛl.

Setting out in search of either, he unconsciously began humming "I'm Down at the Bottom of the Well." Well, he was, and night was falling and the rain well and truly coming down. As often happened, another name drifted up out of those old memories, a song of the Court of Takedo, in Farashelle, crushed a thousand years ago and more by Artur Hawkwing. The intervening years had made remarkably little change in the tune itself, though. Then, it had been called "The Last Stand at Mandenhar." Either way, it fit too bloody well.


tʃæptɝ twɛnti


CHAPTER 20

kwɛstʃənz ə tʃɹizən


Questions of Treason

klaɪmɪŋ tə ðə kɹæmp kɛnəlz ət ðə vɛɹi tɑp ə ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, bɛθəmən hɛld əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɔɹd kɛɹfəli. səmtaɪmz ði ɪŋk dʒɑɹz kɔɹk keɪm lus, ən ɪŋk spɑts wɝ dɪfəkəl tə ɹimuv fɹəm kloʊðɪŋ. ʃi kɛp hɝsɛlf əz pɹəzɛntəbəl əɾ ɔl taɪmz əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn kɔl tə əpɪɹ bɪfɔɹ wʌn ə ðə haɪ blʌd. ʃi dɪd nɑt tɔk tə ɹɛnə, hu hæd ði ɪnspɛkʃən duɾi wɪð əɹ tədeɪ, əz ðeɪ wɔkt ʌp ðə stɛɹz. ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə bi duɪŋ ən əsaɪn tæsk, nɑt tʃæɾɝɪŋ aɪdli. ðət wɑz pɑɹɾ ə hɝ ɹizən. wɛɹ ʌðɝz dʒɑkeɪd tə bi kəmplit wɪð ðɛɹ feɪvɹɪt deɪmeɪn, ən ɡɑɡəld ət ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ saɪts ə ðɪs lænd, ən spɛkjəleɪɾəd ɑn ðə ɹɪwɔɹdz tə bi ɡeɪn hɪɹ, ʃi foʊkəst ɑn əɹ duɾiz, æskɪŋ fəɹ ðə moʊs dɪfəkəl mɛɹəθdəmeɪn tə teɪm tə ði æɾəm, wɝkɪŋ twaɪs əz hɑɹɾ ən twaɪs əz lɔŋ əz ɛniwʌn ɛls.

Climbing to the cramped kennels at the very top of the Tarasin Palace, Bethamin held her writing board carefully. Sometimes the ink jar's cork came loose, and ink spots were difficult to remove from clothing. She kept herself as presentable at all times as if she had been called to appear before one of the High Blood. She did not talk to Renna, who had the inspection duty with her today, as they walked up the stairs. They were supposed to be doing an assigned task, not chattering idly. That was part of her reason. Where others jockeyed to be complete with their favorite damane, and goggled at the strange sights of this land, and speculated on the rewards to be gained here, she focused on her duties, asking for the most difficult marath'damane to tame to the a'dam, working twice as hard and twice as long as anyone else.

ðə ɹeɪn hæd stɑpt, faɪnəli, livɪŋ ðə kɛnəlz ɪn saɪləns. ðə deɪmeɪn wəd ɡɛt səm ɛksɝsaɪz ət list, tədeɪ - moʊst ɡɹu sʌlki ɪf kənfaɪn tə ðə kɛnəlz tu lɔŋ, ən ðiz meɪkʃɪf kɛnəlz wɝ dɪsaɪɾədli kənfaɪnɪŋ - bʌt ɹɪɡɹɛɾəbli, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əsaɪn tə wɔkɪŋ tədeɪ. ɹɛnə nɛvɝ wɑz, ðoʊ wʌns ʃi hæd bɪn sjuɹɔθs bɛs tʃɹeɪnɝ, ən wɛl ɹɪspɛktɪd. ə lɪɾəl hɑɹʃ, səmtaɪmz, bʌt haɪli skɪld. wʌns, ɛvɹiwʌn hæd sɛd ʃi wəd sun bi meɪd dɝsʌldəm ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝ juθ. mæɾɝz hæd tʃeɪnʒd. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz mɔɹ sʌldəm ðən deɪmeɪn, jɛt noʊ wʌn kəd ɹikɔl ɹɛnə biɪŋ kəmplit sɪns fɑlm, hɝ əɹ sɛɾə, hum sjuɹɔθ hæd teɪkən ɪndə pɝsənəl sɝvəs æftɝ fɑlm. bɛθəmən ɛndʒɔɪd ɡɑsəpɪŋ oʊvɝ waɪn əbaʊt ðə blʌɾ ən ðoʊz u sɝvd əm əz mʌtʃ əz ɛniwʌn ɛls, jɛt ʃi nɛvɝ vɛntʃɝɾ ɛni əpɪnjən wən ðə tɔk tɝn tə ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə. ʃi θɔɾ ə ðɛm ɔfən, ðoʊ.

The rain had stopped, finally, leaving the kennels in silence. The damane would get some exercise at least, today - most grew sulky if confined to the kennels too long, and these makeshift kennels were decidedly confining - but regrettably, she was not assigned to walking today. Renna never was, though once she had been Suroth's best trainer, and well respected. A little harsh, sometimes, but highly skilled. Once, everyone had said she would soon be made der'sul'dam in spite of her youth. Matters had changed. There were always more sul'dam than damane, yet no one could recall Renna being complete since Falme, her or Seta, whom Suroth had taken into personal service after Falme. Bethamin enjoyed gossiping over wine about the Blood and those who served them as much as anyone else, yet she never ventured any opinion when the talk turned to Renna and Seta. She thought of them often, though.

"ju stɑɹɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ɹɛnə," ʃi ɔɹɾɝd. "wɛl? dʒju wɑnə bi ɹipɔɹɾəd tə ɛsən fəɹ leɪzinəs jɛɾ əɡɛn?"

"You start on the other side, Renna," she ordered. "Well? Do you want to be reported to Essonde for laziness yet again?"

bɪfɔɹ fɑlm, ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ wʊmən hæd bɪn nɪɹli oʊvɝpaʊɹɪŋ ɪn əɹ sɛlf-əʃʊɹəns, bʌɾ ə mʌsəl twɪtʃt ɪn əɹ peɪl tʃik, ən ʃi ɡeɪv bɛθəmən ə sɪkli, əbsikwiəs smaɪl bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ ɪndə ðə kɛnəlz wɔɹən ə nɛɹoʊ pæsədʒəz pæɾɪŋ əɾ əɹ lɔŋ hɛɹ əz ðoʊ əfɹeɪɾ ɪt maɪt bi dɪsɔɹɾɝd. ɛvɹiwʌn ɪksɛpt ɹɛnəz kloʊsəs fɹɛnz bʊliɾ əɹ ət list ə lɪɾəl, ɹipeɪɪŋ əɹ fɔɹmɝ lɔfti pɹaɪd. tə də ʌðɝwaɪz wɑz tə mɑɹk jɝsɛlf aʊt, sʌmθɪŋ bɛθəmən əvɔɪɾəd ɪksɛpt ɪn kɛɹfəli tʃoʊzən weɪz. hɝ oʊn sikɹəts wɝ bɛɹiɾ əz dipli əz ʃi kəd bɛɹi ðɛm, ən ʃi hɛl saɪlən əbaʊt ðə sikɹəts noʊ wʌn nu ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ʌv, bʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə fɪks ɪn ɛvɹiwʌnz maɪn ðət bɛθəmən zimi wɑz ði ɪmədʒ ə ðə pɝfək sʌldəm. æbsəlut pɝfɛkʃən wɑz wʌt ʃi stʃɹoʊv fɔɹ, ɪn hɝsɛlf ən ɪn ðə deɪmeɪn ʃi tʃɹeɪnd.

Before Falme, the shorter woman had been nearly overpowering in her self-assurance, but a muscle twitched in her pale cheek, and she gave Bethamin a sickly, obsequious smile before hurrying into the kennel's warren of narrow passages patting at her long hair as though afraid it might be disordered. Everyone except Renna's closest friends bullied her at least a little, repaying her former lofty pride. To do otherwise was to mark yourself out, something Bethamin avoided except in carefully chosen ways. Her own secrets were buried as deeply as she could bury them, and she held silent about the secrets no one knew she was aware of, but she wanted to fix in everyone's mind that Bethamin Zeami was the image of the perfect sul'dam. Absolute perfection was what she strove for, in herself and in the damane she trained.

ʃi sɛɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ ɪnspɛkʃən bɹɪskli ən ɪfɪʃənli, tʃɛkɪŋ ðət ðə deɪmeɪn hæd kɛp ðɛmsɛlvz ən ðɛɹ ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl kɛnəlz nit, meɪkɪŋ ə ʃɔɹt noʊteɪʃən ɪn əɹ nit hæn ɑn ðə tɑp peɪdʒ pɪn tə ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɔɹd wən wʌn hæd feɪl tə, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt dɔɾəl, ɪksɛp tə ɡɪv aʊt hɑɹd kændiz tə ə fju hu wɝ duɪŋ pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli wɛl ɪn ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. moʊst ə ðoʊz ʃi hæd bɪn kəmplit wɪð ɡɹiɾəd əɹ ɛntʃɹəns wɪð smaɪlz ivən əz ðeɪ nɛlt. wɛðɝ fɹəm ði ɛmpaɪɝ əɹ fɹəm ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði oʊʃən, ðeɪ nu ʃi wɑz fɝm jɛt fɛɹ. ʌðɝz dɪd nɑt smaɪl. fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, ði æθɑn maɪɹ deɪmeɪn mɛɾ əɹ wɪð stoʊni feɪsəz əz dɑɹk əz əɹ oʊn, əɹ sʌlən æŋɡɝ ðeɪ sim tə bɪliv ðeɪ wɝ kənsilɪŋ.

She set about her inspection briskly and efficiently, checking that the damane had kept themselves and their individual kennels neat, making a short notation in her neat hand on the top page pinned to the writing board when one had failed to, and she did not dawdle, except to give out hard candies to a few who were doing particularly well in the training. Most of those she had been complete with greeted her entrance with smiles even as they knelt. Whether from the Empire or from this side of the ocean, they knew she was firm yet fair. Others did not smile. For the most part, the Atha'an Miere damane met her with stony faces as dark as her own, or sullen anger they seemed to believe they were concealing.

ʃi dɪd nɑt mɑɹk ðɛɹ æŋɡɝ daʊn fəɹ pʌnɪʃmənt, əz səm wəd hæv. ðeɪ stɪl θɔt ðeɪ wɝ ɹɪzɪstɪŋ, bʌɾ ənsimli dɪmænz fəɹ ðə ɹɪtɝn ə ðɛɹ ɡɛɹɪʃ dʒuəlɹi ɔlɹɛɾi wɝ ə θɪŋ ə ðə pæst, ən ðeɪ nɛlt ən spoʊk pɹɑpɝli. ə nu neɪm wɑz ə jusfəl tul wɪð ðə moʊs dɪfəkəl keɪsəz, kɹieɪɾɪŋ ə bɹeɪk wɪð wʌt wɑz dʌn ən ɡɔn, ən ðeɪ ænsɝd tə ðɛɹz, haʊɛvɝ ɹɪlʌktənli. ɹɪlʌktəns wəd feɪd, əlɔŋ wɪð skaʊlz, ən ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðeɪ wəd hɑɹdli ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðeɪ ɛvɝ hæɾ ʌðɝ neɪmz. ɪt wɑz ə fəmɪljɝ pæɾɝn, ən ənfeɪlɪŋ əz sʌnɹaɪz. səm æksɛptɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli, ən səm wɛn ɪndə ʃɑk ət lɝnɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ. ɔlweɪz ðəɹ wɝ ə hændfʊl u ɡeɪv ɡɹaʊnd ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli oʊvɝ mʌnθs, waɪl wɪð ʌðɝz, wʌn deɪ ɪt wɑz ʃɹik pɹoʊɾɛsts ðəɾ ə tɛɹəbəl mɪsteɪk hæd bɪn meɪd, ðət ðeɪ kəd nɛvɝ əv feɪl ðə tɛsts, ən ðə nɛks deɪ keɪm æksɛptəns ən kɑm. ðə dɪteɪlz dɪfɝɾ ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði oʊʃən, bʌt hɪɹ əɹ ɪn ði ɛmpaɪɝ, ði ɛn ɹɪzʌlt ɹɪmeɪn ðə seɪm.

She did not mark their anger down for punishment, as some would have. They still thought they were resisting, but unseemly demands for the return of their garish jewelry already were a thing of the past, and they knelt and spoke properly. A new name was a useful tool with the most difficult cases, creating a break with what was done and gone, and they answered to theirs, however reluctantly. Reluctance would fade, along with scowls, and eventually they would hardly remember they ever had other names. It was a familiar pattern, and unfailing as sunrise. Some accepted immediately, and some went into shock at learning what they were. Always there were a handful who gave ground grudgingly over months, while with others, one day it was shrieked protests that a terrible mistake had been made, that they could never have failed the tests, and the next day came acceptance and calm. The details differed on this side of the ocean, but here or in the Empire, the end result remained the same.

fəɹ tu ʌv ðə deɪmeɪn ʃi meɪd noʊts ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð nitnəs. zʊʃi, ən æθɑn maɪɹ deɪmeɪn ivən tɔlɝ ðən ʃi hɝsɛlf, wɑz sɝɾənli mɑɹk fəɹ ə swɪtʃɪŋ. hɝ dʒɹɛs wɑz ɹʌmpəld, hɝ hɛɹ ʌnkoʊmd, hɝ bɛɾ ənmeɪd. bʌɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz swoʊlən fɹəm kɹaɪɪŋ, ən noʊ sunɝ hæd ʃi nɛl ðən ə nu sɛɾ ə sɑbz ɹæk hɝ, tɪɹz stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn əɹ tʃiks. ðə ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛs ðət hæd bɪn fɪɾəd ɑn əɹ soʊ kɛɹfəli naʊ hʌŋ lusli, ən ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn plʌmp tə bɪɡɪn wɪð. bɛθəmən hæd neɪm zʊʃi hɝsɛlf, ən ʃi fɛlt ə spɛʃəl kənsɝn. ənklɪpɪŋ ðə stil-nɪb pɛn, ʃi dɪpt ɪɾ ən ɹoʊɾ ə sədʒɛstʃən ðət zʊʃi bi muv fɹəm ðə pæləs tə sʌmwɛɹ ʃi kəd bi kɛpt ɪn ə dʌbəl kɛnəl wɪð ə deɪmeɪn fɹəm ði ɛmpaɪɝ, pɹɛfɝəbli wʌn ɪkspɪɹiənst ɪn bɪkʌmɪŋ hɑɹt-fɹɛnz wɪð nuli kɑlɝd deɪmeɪn. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ðəɾ ɔlweɪz pʊɾ ən ɛn tə tɛɹz.

For two of the damane she made notes that had nothing to do with neatness. Zushi, an Atha'an Miere damane even taller than she herself, was certainly marked for a switching. Her dress was rumpled, her hair uncombed, her bed unmade. But her face was swollen from crying, and no sooner had she knelt than a new set of sobs racked her, tears streaming down her cheeks. The gray dress that had been fitted on her so carefully now hung loosely, and she had not been plump to begin with. Bethamin had named Zushi herself, and she felt a special concern. Unclipping the steel-nibbed pen, she dipped it and wrote a suggestion that Zushi be moved from the Palace to somewhere she could be kept in a double kennel with a damane from the Empire, preferably one experienced in becoming heart-friends with newly collared damane. Sooner or later, that always put an end to tears.

ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ sjuɹɔθ wəɾ əlaʊ ɪt, ðoʊ. sjuɹɔθ hæd kleɪm ðiz deɪmeɪn fəɹ ði ɛmpɹɛs, ʌv kɔɹs - ɛniwʌn u oʊn ə tɛnθ soʊ mɛni pɝsənəli wəd bi səspɛktəɾ ə plɑɾɪŋ ɹɪbɛljən, əɹ ivən əkjuzd aʊtʃɹaɪt - jɛt ʃi bɪheɪvd əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ əɹ oʊn pɹɑpɝɾi. ɪf sjuɹɔθ dɪsəlaʊd, səm ʌðɝ weɪ wəɾ əv tə bi faʊnd. bɛθəmən ɹəfjuz tə luz ə deɪmeɪn tə dɪspɑndənsi. ʃi ɹəfjuz tə luz ə deɪmeɪn fəɹ ɛni ɹizən! ðə sɛkən tə ɹəsiv ə spɛʃəl kɑmɛnt wɑz tɛsi, ən ʃi ɪkspɛktəd noʊ əbdʒɛkʃənz ðɛɹ.

She was not sure Suroth would allow it, though. Suroth had claimed these damane for the Empress, of course - anyone who owned a tenth so many personally would be suspected of plotting rebellion, or even accused outright - yet she behaved as though they were her own property. If Suroth disallowed, some other way would have to be found. Bethamin refused to lose a damane to despondency. She refused to lose a damane for any reason! The second to receive a special comment was Tessi, and she expected no objections there.

ði ɪliɑnɝ deɪmeɪn nɛlt ɡɹeɪsfəli, hænz foʊldəɾ əɾ əɹ weɪst, əz sun əz bɛθəmən oʊpən ðə dɔɹ. hɝ bɛd wɑz meɪd, hɝ ɛkstʃɹə ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛsəz hʌŋ nitli ɑn ðɛɹ pɛɡz, hɝ bɹʌʃ ən koʊm wɝ leɪɾ aʊt pɹɪsaɪsli ɑn əɹ wɑʃstænd, ən ðə flɔɹ hæd bɪn swɛpt. bɛθəmən ɪkspɛktəd noʊ lɛs. tɛsi hæd bɪn nit fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. ʃi wɑz flɛʃɪŋ aʊt naɪsli naʊ ðət ʃi hæd lɝn tə klin əɹ pleɪt. ʌðɝ ðən tʃɹits, deɪmeɪnz daɪɪts wɝ ɹɛɡjəleɪɾəd stʃɹɪkli; ən ənhɛlθi deɪmeɪn wɑz ə weɪst. tɛsi wəd nɛvɝ bi dɛkt ɪn ɹɪbənz ən ɛntɝɾ ɪn ðə kɑmpətɪʃənz fəɹ ðə pɹɪɾiəst deɪmeɪn, ðoʊ. hɝ feɪs sim pɝpɛtʃuəli æŋɡɹi ivən ɪn ɹipoʊz. bʌt tədeɪ ʃi wɔɹ ə slaɪt smaɪl ðət bɛθəmən wɑz ʃʊɹ hæd bɪn ɪn pleɪs bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɛntɝd. tɛsi wɑz nɑt wʌn ʃi ɪkspɛktəd smaɪlz fɹʌm, nɑt jɛt.

The Illianer damane knelt gracefully, hands folded at her waist, as soon as Bethamin opened the door. Her bed was made, her extra gray dresses hung neatly on their pegs, her brush and comb were laid out precisely on her washstand, and the floor had been swept. Bethamin expected no less. Tessi had been neat from the start. She was fleshing out nicely now that she had learned to clean her plate. Other than treats, damane's diets were regulated strictly; an unhealthy damane was a waste. Tessi would never be decked in ribbons and entered in the competitions for the prettiest damane, though. Her face seemed perpetually angry even in repose. But today she wore a slight smile that Bethamin was sure had been in place before she entered. Tessi was not one she expected smiles from, not yet.

"haʊ ɪz maɪ lɪɾəl tɛsi filɪŋ tədeɪ?" ʃi æskt.

"How is my little Tessi feeling today?" she asked.

"tɛsi də fil vɛɹi wɛl," ðə deɪmeɪn ɹɪplaɪd smuðli. ɔlweɪz bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd hæd tə stʃɹʌɡəl tə spik pɹɑpɝli, ən hæɾ ɝn əɹ leɪɾəst swɪtʃɪŋ fəɹ aʊtʃɹaɪt ɹəfjuzəl oʊnli jɛstɝdeɪ.

"Tessi do feel very well," the damane replied smoothly. Always before she had had to struggle to speak properly, and had earned her latest switching for outright refusal only yesterday.

fɪŋɡɝɪŋ əɹ tʃɪn θɔtfəli, bɛθəmən stʌɾid ðə nilɪŋ deɪmeɪn. ʃi wɑz səspɪʃəs ʌv ɛni deɪmeɪn u hæd kɔl hɝsɛlf ɛɛs sədaɪ. hɪstɝi fæsəneɪɾəd hɝ, ən ʃi hæɾ ivən ɹɛd tʃɹænzleɪʃənz fɹəm ðə mɪɹiəɾ ə læŋɡwədʒəz ðət hæɾ ɪɡzɪstəd bɪfɔɹ ðə kənsɑlədeɪʃən bɪɡæn. ðoʊz eɪntʃən ɹulɝz ɹɛvəld ɪn ðɛɹ mɝɾɝəs, kəpɹɪʃəs ɹul, ən dɪlaɪɾəd ɪn sɛɾɪŋ daʊn haʊ ðeɪ keɪm tə paʊɝ ən haʊ ðeɪ kɹʌʃt neɪbɝɪŋ steɪts ən ʌndɝmaɪn ʌðɝ ɹulɝz. moʊs hæd daɪd baɪ əsæsəneɪʃən, ɔfən ət ðə hænz ə ðɛɹ oʊn ɛɹz əɹ fɑloʊɝz. ʃi nu vɛɹi wɛl wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ laɪk.

Fingering her chin thoughtfully, Bethamin studied the kneeling damane. She was suspicious of any damane who had called herself Aes Sedai. History fascinated her, and she had even read translations from the myriad of languages that had existed before the Consolidation began. Those ancient rulers reveled in their murderous, capricious rule, and delighted in setting down how they came to power and how they crushed neighboring states and undermined other rulers. Most had died by assassination, often at the hands of their own heirs or followers. She knew very well what Aes Sedai were like.

"tɛsi ɪz ə ɡʊd deɪmeɪn," ʃi mɝmɝd wɔɹmli, teɪkɪŋ wʌn ə ðə hɑɹd kændiz fɹəm ðə twɪst ə peɪpɝ ɪn əɹ bɛl paʊtʃ. tɛsi lin fɔɹwɝd tə ɹəsiv ɪɾ ən kɪs əɹ hæn ɪn θæŋks, bʌt ðə smaɪl slɪpt ə lɪɾəl, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz bæk baɪ ðə taɪm ʃi stʌf ðə ɹɛd kændi ɪndə hɝ maʊθ. soʊ. ɪt wɑz laɪk ðæt, wɑz ɪt? pɹitɛndɪŋ tə æksɛpt ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə lʌl ðə sʌldəm wɑz nɑɾ ənnoʊn, bʌt ɡɪvən wʌt tɛsi hæd bɪn, vɛɹi laɪkli ʃi wɑz plɑɾɪŋ ɪskeɪp əz wɛl.

"Tessi is a good damane," she murmured warmly, taking one of the hard candies from the twist of paper in her belt pouch. Tessi leaned forward to receive it and kiss her hand in thanks, but the smile slipped a little, though it was back by the time she stuffed the red candy into her mouth. So. It was like that, was it? Pretending to accept in order to lull the sul'dam was not unknown, but given what Tessi had been, very likely she was plotting escape as well.

bæk aʊɾ ɪn ðə nɛɹoʊ hɔlweɪ, bɛθəmən ɹoʊɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ sədʒɛstʃən ðət tɛsiz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ bi ɹidʌbəld, əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ pʌnɪʃməns, ən əɹ ɹɪwɔɹdz bi meɪd spɝæɾɪk, soʊ ʃi kəd nɛvɝ bi ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ivən pɝfɛkʃən wəɾ ɝn soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə pæɾ ɑn ðə hɛd. ɪt wɑz ə hɑɹʃ mɛθəd, wʌn ʃi nɔɹməli əvɔɪɾəd, bʌt fəɹ səm ɹizən ɪt tɝn ivən ðə moʊst ɹɪkælsɪtʃɹən mɛɹəθdəmeɪn ɪndə ə sʌpəl deɪmeɪn ɪn ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbli ʃɔɹt taɪm. ɪɾ ɔlsoʊ pɹədus ðə mikəst ə deɪmeɪn. ʃi dɪslaɪk bɹeɪkɪŋ ə deɪmeɪnz spɪɹət, jɛt tɛsi niɾəd tə bi bɹoʊkən tə ði æɾəm soʊ ʃi kəd fɝɡɛt ðə pæst. ʃi wəd bi hæpiɝ fəɹ ɪt, ɪn ði ɛnd.

Back out in the narrow hallway, Bethamin wrote a strong suggestion that Tessi's training be redoubled, along with her punishments, and her rewards be made sporadic, so she could never be sure that even perfection would earn so much as a pat on the head. It was a harsh method, one she normally avoided, but for some reason it turned even the most recalcitrant marath'damane into a supple damane in a remarkably short time. It also produced the meekest of damane. She disliked breaking a damane's spirit, yet Tessi needed to be broken to the a'dam so she could forget the past. She would be happier for it, in the end.

fɪnɪʃɪŋ əhɛɾ ə ɹɛnə, bɛθəmən weɪɾəd ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə stɛɹz əntɪl ði ʌðɝ sʌldəm keɪm daʊn. "teɪk ðɪs tə ɛsənd wən jə teɪk jʊɹz," ʃi sɛd, θɹʌstɪŋ əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɔɹɾ ət ɹɛnə bɪfɔɹ ʃi klɪɹd ðə faɪnəl stɛp. ʌnsɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ɹɛnə æksɛptɪd ðə tæsk əz mikli əz ʃi hæɾ æksɛptɪd ði ɝliɝ ɔɹɾɝ, ən hɝiɾ əweɪ aɪɪŋ ði ɛkstʃɹə ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɔɹɾ əz ðoʊ wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ðə peɪdʒəz hɛld ə ɹipɔɹɾ ɑn hɝ. ʃi wɑz ə vɛɹi dɪfɹənt wʊmən ðən ʃi hæd bɪn bɪfɔɹ fɑlm.

Finishing ahead of Renna, Bethamin waited at the foot of the stairs until the other sul'dam came down. "Take this to Essonde when you take yours," she said, thrusting her writing board at Renna before she cleared the final step. Unsurprisingly, Renna accepted the task as meekly as she had accepted the earlier order, and hurried away eyeing the extra writing board as though wondering whether the pages held a report on her. She was a very different woman than she had been before Falme.

fɛtʃɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ən livɪŋ ðə pæləs, bɛθəmən ɪntɛndəd tə ɹɪtɝn tə ði ɪn wɛɹ ʃi wɑz fɔɹs tə ʃɛɹ ə bɛd wɪð tu ʌðɝ sʌldəm, bʌɾ oʊnli lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə teɪk səm kɔɪn fɹəm əɹ lɑkbɑks. ði ɪnspɛkʃən hæd bɪn əɹ oʊnli duɾi tədeɪ, ən ðə ɹɛst ə ði aʊɝz wɝ əɹ oʊn. fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ, ɪnstɛɾ ə sikɪŋ ɛkstʃɹə əsaɪnməns, ʃi wəd spɛn əm baɪɪŋ suvənɪɹz. pɝhæps wʌn ə ðoʊz naɪvz ðə loʊkəl wɪmən wɔɹ ət ðɛɹ nɛks, ɪf ʃi kəd faɪnd wʌn wɪθaʊt ðə dʒɛmz ðeɪ sim tə laɪk ɑn ðə hɪlt. ən lækɹwɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs; ðət wɑz əz ɡʊd hɪɹ əz ɛni ɪn ði ɛmpaɪɝ, ən ðə dɪzaɪnz wɝ soʊ . . . fɔɹən. ɪt wəd bi suðɪŋ tə ʃɑp. ʃi niɾəd suðɪŋ.

Fetching her cloak and leaving the Palace, Bethamin intended to return to the inn where she was forced to share a bed with two other sul'dam, but only long enough to take some coin from her lockbox. The inspection had been her only duty today, and the rest of the hours were her own. For a change, instead of seeking extra assignments, she would spend them buying souvenirs. Perhaps one of those knives the local women wore at their necks, if she could find one without the gems they seemed to like on the hilt. And lacquerware, of course; that was as good here as any in the Empire, and the designs were so . . . foreign. It would be soothing to shop. She needed soothing.

ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ə ðə mɔl hɛɹə stɪl ɡlɪsən dæmpli fɹəm ðə mɔɹnɪŋz ɹeɪn, ən ə plɛzən tæŋ ə sɔl fɪl ði ɛɹ, ɹimaɪndɪŋ əɹ ə ðə vɪlədʒ ɑn ðə si ʌv liaɪ wɛɹ ʃi hæd bɪn bɔɹn, ðoʊ ðə fɹizɪŋ koʊl meɪɾ əɹ klʌtʃ əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf. ɪt hæd nɛvɝ bɪn koʊld ɪn əbunaɪ, ən ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪkʌm əkʌstəm tə ɪt noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ fɑɹ ʃi hæd tʃɹævəld. θɔts ə hoʊm wɝ noʊ kʌmfɝt, naʊ, ðoʊ. əz ʃi meɪɾ əɹ weɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊɾəd stʃɹits, ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə fɪld əɹ hɛd tə ði ɪkstɛn ðət ʃi bʌmpt ɪndə pipəl ən wʌns ɔlmoʊst wɔkt ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə mɝtʃəns tʃɹeɪn ʌv wæɡənz livɪŋ ðə sɪɾi. ə ʃaʊt fɹəm ə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝ kɑɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən, ən ʃi lɛp bæk dʒʌst ɪn taɪm. ðə wæɡən ɹʌmbəld əkɹɔs ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz wɛɹ ʃi wʊɾə bɪn stændɪŋ, ən ðə wʊmən wildɪŋ ðə wɪp dɪd nɑɾ ivən ɡlæns ət hɝ. ðiz fɔɹənɝz hæd noʊ aɪdiə ʌv ðə ɹɪspɛk du ə sʌldəm.

The paving stones of the Mol Hara still glistened damply from the morning's rain, and a pleasant tang of salt filled the air, reminding her of the village on the Sea of L'Heye where she had been born, though the freezing cold made her clutch her cloak around herself. It had never been cold in Abunai, and she had never become accustomed to it no matter how far she had traveled. Thoughts of home were no comfort, now, though. As she made her way through the crowded streets, Renna and Seta filled her head to the extent that she bumped into people and once almost walked right in front of a merchant's train of wagons leaving the city. A shout from a wagon driver caught her attention, and she leaped back just in time. The wagon rumbled across the paving stones where she would have been standing, and the woman wielding the whip did not even glance at her. These foreigners had no idea of the respect due a sul'dam.

ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə. ɛvɹiwʌn u hæd bɪn ət fɑlm hæd mɛmɹiz ðeɪ wɑntəd tə fɝɡɛt, mɛmɹiz ðeɪ wəd nɑt tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪksɛpt wən ðeɪ dʒɹæŋk tu mʌtʃ. ʃi dɪd, tu, oʊnli hɝz wɝ nɑɾ əbaʊt ðə ʃɑk ə bæɾəlɪŋ hæf-ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɡoʊsts aʊɾ ə lɛdʒənd, əɹ ðə hɔɹɝ ə dɪfit, əɹ mæd vɪʒənz ɪn ðə skaɪ. haʊ ɔfən hæd ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɔn əpstɛɹz ðət deɪ? ɪf oʊnli ʃi hæd nɑt wʌndɝd haʊ tuli wɑz duɪŋ, ðə deɪmeɪn u hæd ðə mɑɹvələs skɪl wɪð mɛɾəlz. bʌt ʃi hæd lʊkt ɪndə tuliz kɛnəl. ən ʃi hæd sin ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə fɹæntəkəli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹimuv æɾəm fɹəm itʃ ʌðɝz nɛks, ʃɹikɪŋ wɪð ðə peɪn, weɪvɝɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ niz fɹəm ðə nɔziə, ən stɪl fʌmbəlɪŋ ət ðə kɑlɝz. vɑmət steɪn ðə fɹʌns ə ðɛɹ dʒɹɛsəz. ɪn ðɛɹ fɹɛnzi ðeɪ hæd nɑt noʊɾəst əɹ bækɪŋ əweɪ, hɔɹɝ-stʃɹɪkən.

Renna and Seta. Everyone who had been at Falme had memories they wanted to forget, memories they would not talk about except when they drank too much. She did, too, only hers were not about the shock of battling half-recognized ghosts out of legend, or the horror of defeat, or mad visions in the sky. How often had she wished she had not gone upstairs that day? If only she had not wondered how Tuli was doing, the damane who had the marvelous skill with metals. But she had looked into Tuli's kennel. And she had seen Renna and Seta frantically trying to remove a'dam from each other's necks, shrieking with the pain, wavering on their knees from the nausea, and still fumbling at the collars. Vomit stained the fronts of their dresses. In their frenzy they had not noticed her backing away, horror-stricken.

nɑt sɪmpli hɔɹɝ ət siɪŋ tu sʌldəm ɹɪvild əz mɛɹəθdəmeɪn, bʌɾ əɹ oʊn sʌɾən pɝsənəl tɛɹɝ. ɔfən ʃi θɔt ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si deɪmeɪnz wivz, ən ʃi kəɾ ɔlweɪz sɛns ə deɪmeɪnz pɹɛzəns ən noʊ haʊ stʃɹɔŋ ʃi wɑz. mɛni sʌldəm kʊd; ɛvɹiwʌn nu ɪt keɪm fɹəm lɔŋ ɪkspɪɹiəns ət hænlɪŋ ði æɾəm. jɛt ðə saɪɾ ə ðət dɛspɹɪt pɛɹ ɹaʊzd ənwɔntɪd θɔts, pʊɾɪŋ ə dɪfɹən ən fɹaɪɾənɪŋ kəmplɛkʃən ɑn wʌt ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz æksɛptɪd. dɪd ʃi ɔlmoʊst si ðə wivz, əɹ dɪd ʃi ɹɪli si? səmtaɪmz ʃi θɔt ʃi fɛl ðə tʃænəlɪŋ, tu. ivən sʌldəm hæd tə ʌndɝɡoʊ ðə jɪɹli tɛstɪŋ, əntɪl ðɛɹ twɛnti-fɪfθ neɪmɪŋ deɪ, ən ʃi hæd pæs baɪ feɪlɪŋ ɛvɹi taɪm. oʊnli . . . ðəɹ wəd bi ə nu tɛstɪŋ æftɝ ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə wɝ dɪskʌvɝd, ə nu tɛstɪŋ tə faɪn ðə mɛɹəθdəmeɪn u sʌmhaʊ hæɾ ɪveɪɾɪd ðə fɝst. ði ɛmpaɪɝ ɪtsɛlf maɪt tʃɹɛmbəl bɪfɔɹ sətʃ ə bloʊ. ən wɪð ði ɪmədʒ ə ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə bɝn ɪndə hɝ bɹeɪn, ʃi hæd noʊn wɪð toʊɾəl sɝɾənti ðəɾ æftɝ ðoʊz tɛsts, bɛθəmən zimi wəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bi ə ɹɪspɛktɪd sɪɾəzən. ɪnstɛd, ə deɪmeɪn kɔl bɛθəmən wəd sɝv ði ɛmpaɪɝ.

Not simply horror at seeing two sul'dam revealed as marath'damane, but her own sudden personal terror. Often she thought she could almost see damane's weaves, and she could always sense a damane's presence and know how strong she was. Many sul'dam could; everyone knew it came from long experience at handling the a'dam. Yet the sight of that desperate pair roused unwanted thoughts, putting a different and frightening complexion on what she had always accepted. Did she almost see the weaves, or did she really see? Sometimes she thought she felt the channeling, too. Even sul'dam had to undergo the yearly testing, until their twenty-fifth naming day, and she had passed by failing every time. Only . . . There would be a new testing after Renna and Seta were discovered, a new testing to find the marath'damane who somehow had evaded the first. The Empire itself might tremble before such a blow. And with the image of Renna and Seta burned into her brain, she had known with total certainty that after those tests, Bethamin Zeami would no longer be a respected citizen. Instead, a damane called Bethamin would serve the Empire.

ðə ʃeɪm kɝɾəld ɪn əɹ stɪl. ʃi hæd pleɪs pɝsənəl fɪɹz əhɛɾ ə ðə nidz ə ði ɛmpaɪɝ, əhɛɾ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi nu tə bi ɹaɪɾ ən tʃɹu ən ɡʊd. bæɾəl keɪm tə fɑlm, ən naɪtmɛɹ, bʌt ʃi hæd nɑt ɹʌʃt tə kəmplit hɝsɛlf wɪð ə deɪmeɪn ən dʒɔɪn ðə bæɾəl laɪn. ɪnstɛd, ʃi hæd juz ðə kənfjuʒən tə sɪkjʊɹ ə hɔɹs ən fli, tə ɹʌn əz hɑɹɾ ən əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kʊd.

The shame curdled in her still. She had placed personal fears ahead of the needs of the Empire, ahead of everything she knew to be right and true and good. Battle came to Falme, and nightmare, but she had not rushed to complete herself with a damane and join the battle line. Instead, she had used the confusion to secure a horse and flee, to run as hard and as far as she could.

ʃi ɹilaɪzd ʃi hæd stɑpt, stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ə simstʃɹɪsəz ʃɑp wɪndoʊ wɪθaʊt ɹɪli siɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɑn dɪspleɪ ɪnsaɪd. nɑt ðət ʃi wɑntəd tə si. ðə blu dʒɹɛs wɪð ɪts laɪtnɪŋ-mɑɹkt ɹɛd pænəlz wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn ʃi hæd θɔɾ ʌv wɛɹɪŋ ɪn jɪɹz. ən ʃi sɝɾənli wəd nɑt wɛɹ sʌmθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪkspoʊzd əɹ soʊ ɪndɪsənli. skɝts swɝlɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ æŋkəlz, ʃi wɔkt ɑn, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt ʃeɪk ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə fɹəm əɹ θɔts, əɹ sjuɹɔθ.

She realized she had stopped, staring into a seamstress's shop window without really seeing what was on display inside. Not that she wanted to see. The blue dress with its lightning-marked red panels was the only one she had thought of wearing in years. And she certainly would not wear something that exposed her so indecently. Skirts swirling about her ankles, she walked on, but she could not shake Renna and Seta from her thoughts, or Suroth.

ɑbviəsli ælwɪn hæd faʊn ðə kɑlɝd pɛɹ ə sʌldəm ən ɹipɔɹɾəd əm tə sjuɹɔθ. ən sjuɹɔθ hæd ʃɛltɝd ði ɛmpaɪɝ baɪ pɹətɛktɪŋ ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə, deɪnʒɝəs əz ðət wɑz. wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ sʌɾənli bɪɡæn tʃænəlɪŋ? bɛɾɝ pɝhæps fəɹ ði ɛmpaɪɝ ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɝeɪnʒd ðɛɹ dɛθs, ðoʊ kɪlɪŋ ə sʌldəm wɑz mɝɾɝ ivən fəɹ ðə haɪ blʌd. tu səspɪʃəs dɛθs əmʌŋ ðə sʌldəm wəd sɝɾənli hæv bɹɔɾ ɪn sikɝz. soʊ ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə wɝ fɹi, ɪf ɪt kəd bi kɔl ðət wən ðeɪ wɝ nɛvɝ əlaʊd tə bi kəmplit. ælwɪn hæd dʌn əɹ duɾi, ən bɪn ɑnɝd baɪ bɪkʌmɪŋ sjuɹɔθs vɔɪs. sjuɹɔθ hæd dʌn əɹ duɾi əz wɛl, haʊɛvɝ dɪsteɪsfəl. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nu tɛstɪŋ. hɝ oʊn flaɪt hæd bɪn fəɹ nʌθɪŋ. ən ɪf ʃi hæd ɹɪmeɪnd, ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv ɛndəɾ ʌp ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ, ə naɪtmɛɹ ʃi wɑntəd tə fɝɡɛɾ ivən mɔɹ ðən ʃi dɪd fɑlm.

Obviously Alwhin had found the collared pair of sul'dam and reported them to Suroth. And Suroth had sheltered the Empire by protecting Renna and Seta, dangerous as that was. What if they suddenly began channeling? Better perhaps for the Empire if she had arranged their deaths, though killing a sul'dam was murder even for the High Blood. Two suspicious deaths among the sul'dam would certainly have brought in Seekers. So Renna and Seta were free, if it could be called that when they were never allowed to be complete. Alwhin had done her duty, and been honored by becoming Suroth's Voice. Suroth had done her duty as well, however distasteful. There was no new testing. Her own flight had been for nothing. And if she had remained, she would not have ended up in Tanchico, a nightmare she wanted to forget even more than she did Falme.

ə skwɑɾ ə ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz mɑɹtʃt baɪ, ɹisplɛndən ɪn ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ, ən bɛθəmən pɔz tə wɑtʃ əm pæs. ðeɪ lɛft ə weɪk θɹu ðə kɹaʊd laɪk ə ɡɹieɪtʃɪp ʌndɝ fʊl seɪl. ðəɹ wəd bi dʒɔɪ ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ɪn ðə lænd, wən tuɑn faɪnəli ɹɪvil hɝsɛlf, ən sɛləbɹeɪʃənz əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd dʒʌst ɝaɪvd. ʃi fɛlt ə ɡɪlti plɛʒɝ ət θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz soʊ, əz wən ʃi hæd dʌn sʌmθɪŋ fɔɹbɪɾən əz ə tʃaɪld, ðoʊ ʌv kɔɹs, əntɪl tuɑn ɹimuvd əɹ veɪl, ʃi wɑz mɪɹli ðə haɪ leɪɾi tuɑn, noʊ haɪɝ ðən sjuɹɔθ. ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz tʃɹæmpt ɑn, dɛɾəkeɪtəd hɑɹɾ ən soʊl tə ɛmpɹɛs ən ɛmpaɪɝ, ən bɛθəmən wɛn ɪn ði ɑpəzət dɝɛkʃən. əpɹoʊpɹiɪtli, sɪns ʃi wɑz dɛɾəkeɪtəd hɑɹɾ ən soʊl tə pɹəzɝvɪŋ əɹ oʊn fɹiɾəm.

A squad of the Deathwatch Guards marched by, resplendent in their armor, and Bethamin paused to watch them pass. They left a wake through the crowd like a greatship under full sail. There would be joy in the city, in the land, when Tuon finally revealed herself, and celebrations as though she had just arrived. She felt a guilty pleasure at thinking of the Daughter of the Nine Moons so, as when she had done something forbidden as a child, though of course, until Tuon removed her veil, she was merely the High Lady Tuon, no higher than Suroth. The Deathwatch Guards tramped on, dedicated heart and soul to Empress and Empire, and Bethamin went in the opposite direction. Appropriately, since she was dedicated heart and soul to preserving her own freedom.

ðə ɡoʊldən swɑnz ə hɛvən wɑz ə ɡɹænd neɪm fəɹ ə taɪni ɪn skwiz bɪtwin ə pʌblɪk steɪbəl ən ə lækɹwɛɹ ʃɑp. ðə lækɹwɛɹ ʃɑp wɑz fʊl ə mɪlətɛɹi ɔfəsɝz baɪɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðə ʃɑp kənteɪnd, ðə steɪbəl wɑz fʊl ə hɔɹsəz pɝtʃəst ɪn ðə lɑɾɝi ən nɑt jɛɾ əsaɪnd, ən ðə ɡoʊldən swɑnz wɑz fʊl ə sʌldəm. pækt wɪð ðɛm, ɪn fækt, ət list wʌns naɪt keɪm. bɛθəmən wɑz lʌki tə hæv oʊnli tu bɛdmeɪts. ɔɹɾɝd tə əkɑmədeɪɾ əz mɛni əz ʃi kʊd, ði ɪnkipɝ pʊʃt fɔɹ ən faɪv ɪndə ə bɛd wən ʃi θɔt ðeɪ wəd fɪt. stɪl, ðə bɛɾɪŋ wɑz klin ən ðə fud kwaɪt ɡʊd, ɪf pəkjuljɝ. ən ɡɪvən ðət ði ɔltɝnəɾɪv wɑz laɪkli ə heɪlɔft, ʃi wɑz ɡlæd tə ʃɛɹ.

The Golden Swans of Heaven was a grand name for a tiny inn squeezed between a public stable and a lacquerware shop. The lacquerware shop was full of military officers buying everything the shop contained, the stable was full of horses purchased in the lottery and not yet assigned, and The Golden Swans was full of sul'dam. Packed with them, in fact, at least once night came. Bethamin was lucky to have only two bedmates. Ordered to accommodate as many as she could, the innkeeper pushed four and five into a bed when she thought they would fit. Still, the bedding was clean and the food quite good, if peculiar. And given that the alternative was likely a hayloft, she was glad to share.

ət ðɪs aʊɝ, ðə ɹaʊn teɪbəlz ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum wɝ ɛmpti. səm ə ðə sʌldəm lɪvɪŋ ðəɹ ʃʊɹli hæd duɾiz, ən ðə ɹɛst sɪmpli wɑntəd tə əvɔɪd ði ɪnkipɝ. ɑɹmz foʊldəd, fɹaʊnɪŋ, dɑɹnɛlə ʃɔɝən wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ sɛvɹəl sɝvɪŋ wɪmən swip ðə ɡɹin-taɪl flɔɹ ɪndʌstʃɹiəsli. ə skɪni wʊmən wɪð ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ wɔɹn ɹoʊld ɑn ðə neɪp ə hɝ nɛk ən ə lɔŋ dʒɔ ðət ɡeɪv əɹ ə bəlɪdʒɝən əpɪɹəns, ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn ə dɝsʌldəm ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪdɪkjələs naɪf ʃi wɔɹ, ɪts hɪl stʌɾɪd wɪð tʃip ɹɛɾ ən waɪt dʒɛmz. səpoʊzədli ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən wɝ fɹi, bʌt ðeɪ dʒʌmp laɪk pɹɑpɝɾi wɛnɛvɝ ði ɪnkipɝ spoʊk.

At this hour, the round tables in the common room were empty. Some of the sul'dam living there surely had duties, and the rest simply wanted to avoid the innkeeper. Arms folded, frowning, Darnella Shoran was watching several serving women sweep the green-tiled floor industriously. A skinny woman with gray hair worn rolled on the nape of her neck and a long jaw that gave her a belligerent appearance, she might have been a der'sul'dam in spite of the ridiculous knife she wore, its hilt studded with cheap red and white gems. Supposedly the serving women were free, but they jumped like property whenever the innkeeper spoke.

bɛθəmən dʒʌmp slaɪtli hɝsɛlf wən ðə wʊmən ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn hɝ. "ju ɑɹ əwɛɹ ə maɪ ɹulz kənsɝnɪŋ mɛn, mɪstʃɹəs zimi?" ʃi dɪmændəd. æftɝ ɔl ðɪs taɪm, ðə sloʊ weɪ ðiz pipəl tɔk stɪl saʊndəɾ ɑd. "aɪv hɝɾ əbaʊt jəɹ fɔɹən weɪz, ən ɪf ðəɾ ɪz haʊ jə ɑɹ, ɪts jəɹ bɪznəs, bʌt nɑɾ ʌndɝ maɪ ɹuf. ɪf jə wɑnə mit wɪð mɛn, jəl də ɪɾ ɛlswɛɹ!"

Bethamin jumped slightly herself when the woman rounded on her. "You are aware of my rules concerning men, Mistress Zeami?" she demanded. After all this time, the slow way these people talked still sounded odd. "I've heard about your foreign ways, and if that is how you are, it is your business, but not under my roof. If you want to meet with men, you will do it elsewhere!"

"aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, aɪ hæv nɑt bɪn miɾɪŋ mɛn hɪɹ əɹ ɛniwɛɹ ɛls, mɪstʃɹəs ʃɔɝən."

"I assure you, I have not been meeting men here or anywhere else, Mistress Shoran."

ði ɪnkipɝ fɹaʊn əɾ əɹ ɪn səspɪʃən. "wɛl, hi keɪm ɝaʊn æskɪŋ fəɹ jə baɪ neɪm. ə pɹɪɾi, jɛloʊ-hɛɹd mæn. nɑɾ ə bɔɪ, bʌt nɑt vɛɹi oʊld, iðɝ. wʌn ə jəɹ lɑt, dʒɹæɡɪŋ ɪz wɝdz aʊt soʊ jə kəd hɑɹdli ʌndɝstæn hɪm."

The innkeeper frowned at her in suspicion. "Well, he came around asking for you by name. A pretty, yellow-haired man. Not a boy, but not very old, either. One of your lot, dragging his words out so you could hardly understand him."

meɪkɪŋ əɹ toʊn pleɪkeɪɾɪŋ, bɛθəmən dɪɾ əɹ bɛs tə kənvɪns ðə wʊmən ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ ɛniwʌn u mɛt ðət dɪskɹɪpʃən, ən ðət ʃi hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ mɛn wɪð əɹ duɾiz. boʊθ wɝ tʃɹu, jɛt ʃi wʊɾə laɪɾ ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi. ðə ɡoʊldən swɑnz hæd nɑt bɪn kɑməndɪɹd, ən θɹi ɪn ə bɛd wɑz mʌtʃ pɹɛfɝəbəl tə ə heɪlɔft. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə faɪn aʊt wɛðɝ ðə wʊmən maɪt laɪk səm smɔl ɡɪft wən ʃi wɛnt ʃɑpɪŋ, bʌt ðə wʊmən æktʃəli  simd əfɛndəd wən ʃi sədʒɛstəɾ ə naɪf wɪð mɔɹ kʌlɝfəl dʒɛmz. ʃi hæd nɑt mɛn ɛniθɪŋ ɪkspɛnsɪv, nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ə bɹaɪb - nɑt ɹɪli - jɛt mɪstʃɹəs ʃɔɝən sim tə teɪk ɪt soʊ, hʌfɪŋ ən fɹaʊnɪŋ ɪndɪɡnənli. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi səksiɾəd ɪn tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ðə wʊmənz maɪn baɪ ə hɛɹ. fəɹ səm ɹizən, ði ɪnkipɝ sim tə bɪliv ðeɪ spɛn ɔl ðɛɹ fɹi aʊɝz ɛnɡeɪdʒd ɪn dəbɔtʃɝi. ʃi wɑz stɪl fɹaʊnɪŋ wən bɛθəmən stɑɹɾəd ʌp ðə ɹeɪləs stɛɹz ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə kɑmən ɹum pɹitɛndɪŋ ðət ʃi hæd nɑɾ ə θɔɾ ɪn əɹ maɪn bɪɑnd ʃɑpɪŋ.

Making her tone placating, Bethamin did her best to convince the woman that she did not know anyone who met that description, and that she had no time for men with her duties. Both were true, yet she would have lied if necessary. The Golden Swans had not been commandeered, and three in a bed was much preferable to a hayloft. She tried to find out whether the woman might like some small gift when she went shopping, but the woman actually seemed offended when she suggested a knife with more colorful gems. She had not meant anything expensive, nothing in the way of a bribe - not really - yet Mistress Shoran seemed to take it so, huffing and frowning indignantly. In any case, she was not sure she succeeded in changing the woman's mind by a hair. For some reason, the innkeeper seemed to believe they spent all their free hours engaged in debauchery. She was still frowning when Bethamin started up the railless stairs at the side of the common room pretending that she had not a thought in her mind beyond shopping.

ðə mænz aɪdɛntəɾi dɪd kənsɝn hɝ, ðoʊ. ʃi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə dɪskɹɪpʃən. ɪn ɔl laɪklihʊd, hi hæd kʌm əbaʊɾ əɹ ɪnkwaɪɝiz, bʌɾ ɪf ðət wɑz ðə keɪs, ɪf i hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə tʃɹeɪs əɹ hɪɹ, ðən ʃi hæd bɪn ɪnsəfɪʃənli dɪskɹit. pɝhæps deɪnʒɝəsli soʊ. stɪl, ʃi hoʊpt i keɪm bæk. ʃi niɾəd tə noʊ. ʃi niɾəd tə!

The man's identity did concern her, though. She certainly did not recognize the description. In all likelihood, he had come about her inquiries, but if that was the case, if he had been able to trace her here, then she had been insufficiently discreet. Perhaps dangerously so. Still, she hoped he came back. She needed to know. She needed to!

oʊpənɪŋ ðə dɔɹ tə hɝ ɹum, ʃi fɹoʊz. ɪmpɑsəbli, hɝ aɪɝn lɑkbɑks sæɾ ɑn ðə bɛd wɪð ɪts lɪd θɹoʊn oʊpən. ðət wɑz ə vɛɹi ɡʊd lɑk, ən ði oʊnli ki leɪ ət ðə bɑɾəm ə hɝ bɛl paʊtʃ. ðə θif wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, ən ɑdli, hi wɑz θʌmɪŋ θɹu hɝ daɪɝi! haʊ ɪn ðə laɪt hæd ðə mæn ɡɑɾən pæs mɪstʃɹəs ʃɔɝənz sɝveɪləns?

Opening the door to her room, she froze. Impossibly, her iron lockbox sat on the bed with its lid thrown open. That was a very good lock, and the only key lay at the bottom of her belt pouch. The thief was still there, and oddly, he was thumbing through her diary! How in the Light had the man gotten past Mistress Shoran's surveillance?

pɝæləsəs læstəɾ oʊnli ən ɪnstənt. snætʃɪŋ əɹ bɛl naɪf fɹəm ɪts ʃiθ, ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə skɹim fəɹ hɛlp.

Paralysis lasted only an instant. Snatching her belt knife from its sheath, she opened her mouth to scream for help.

ðə fɛloʊz ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd, ən i niðɝ tʃɹaɪd tə ɹʌn nɔɹ tə ətæk hɝ. hi dʒʌs tʊk sʌmθɪŋ smɔl fɹəm ɪz paʊtʃ ən hɛld ɪɾ ʌp wɛɹ ʃi kəd si ɪt, ən əɹ bɹɛθ tɝn tə liɾ ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt. nʌmbli ʃi fʌmbəld əɹ naɪf bæk ɪndə ɪts skæbɝɾ ən hɛld aʊɾ əɹ hænz tə ʃoʊ hɪm ʃi hɛl noʊ wɛpən ən wɑz nɑɾ ətɛmptɪŋ tə ɹitʃ wʌn. bɪtwin ɪz fɪŋɡɝz wɑz ə ɡoʊld-ɛdʒd aɪvɝi plæk, ɪnɡɹeɪvd wɪð ə ɹeɪvən ən ə taʊɝ. sʌɾənli ʃi ɹɪli sɔ ðə mæn, jɛloʊ-hɛɹɾ ən ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz. pɝhæps i wɑz pɹɪɾi, əz mɪstʃɹəs ʃɔɝən hæd sɛd, bʌɾ oʊnli ə mædwʊmən wəd θɪŋk ʌv ə sikɝ fəɹ tʃɹuθ ɪn ðət fæʃən. θæŋk ðə laɪt ʃi hæd nɑt ɹəkɔɹɾəd ɛniθɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs ɪn əɹ daɪɝi. bʌɾ i mʌs noʊ. hi hæɾ æsk fəɹ əɹ baɪ neɪm. oʊ, laɪt, hi mʌs noʊ!

The fellow's expression never changed, and he neither tried to run nor to attack her. He just took something small from his pouch and held it up where she could see it, and her breath turned to lead in her throat. Numbly she fumbled her knife back into its scabbard and held out her hands to show him she held no weapon and was not attempting to reach one. Between his fingers was a gold-edged ivory plaque, engraved with a raven and a tower. Suddenly she really saw the man, yellow-haired and in his middle years. Perhaps he was pretty, as Mistress Shoran had said, but only a madwoman would think of a Seeker for Truth in that fashion. Thank the Light she had not recorded anything dangerous in her diary. But he must know. He had asked for her by name. Oh, Light, he must know!

"kloʊz ðə dɔɹ," hi sɛd kwaɪətli, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ ðə plæk tə hɪz paʊtʃ, ən ʃi oʊbeɪd. ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹʌn. ʃi wɑntəd tə plid fəɹ mɝsi. bʌɾ i wɑz ə sikɝ, soʊ ʃi stʊd ðɛɹ, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, hi dʒɹɑpt əɹ daɪɝi bæk ɪndə ðə lɑkbɑks ən dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə ɹumz sɪŋɡəl tʃɛɹ. "sɪt. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ jə tə bi ənkʌmftəɹbəl."

"Close the door," he said quietly, returning the plaque to his pouch, and she obeyed. She wanted to run. She wanted to plead for mercy. But he was a Seeker, so she stood there, trembling. To her surprise, he dropped her diary back into the lockbox and gestured to the room's single chair. "Sit. There is no need for you to be uncomfortable."

sloʊli, ʃi hʌŋ ʌp əɹ kloʊk ən sɛɾəld ɑntu ðə tʃɛɹ, fəɹ wʌns nɑt kɛɹɪŋ haʊ ənkʌmftəɹbəl ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ læɾɝlaɪk bæk wɑz. ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə haɪɾ əɹ ʃɪvɝz. ivən wʌn ə ðə blʌd, ivən wʌn ə ðə haɪ blʌd, maɪt, kweɪk ət biɪŋ kwɛstʃən baɪ ə sikɝ. ʃi hæɾ ə smɔl hoʊp. hi hæd nɑt sɪmpli ɔɹɾɝd əɹ tə əkʌmpəni hɪm. pɝhæps i dɪd nɑt noʊ æftɝ ɔl.

Slowly, she hung up her cloak and settled onto the chair, for once not caring how uncomfortable the strange ladderlike back was. She did not try to hide her shivers. Even one of the Blood, even one of the High Blood, might, quake at being questioned by a Seeker. She had a small hope. He had not simply ordered her to accompany him. Perhaps he did not know after all.

"ju hæv bɪn æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz əbaʊɾ ə ʃɪp kæptən neɪmd ɛdʒiənɪn sɑɹnə," hi sɛd. "waɪ?"

"You have been asking questions about a ship captain named Egeanin Sarna," he said. "Why?"

hoʊp fɔltɝd wɪð ə θʌd ʃi kəd fil ɪn əɹ tʃɛst. "aɪ wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ən oʊl fɹɛnd," ʃi kweɪvɝd. ðə bɛs laɪz ɔlweɪz kənteɪn əz mʌtʃ tʃɹuθ əz pɑsəbəl. "wi wɝ ət fɑlm təɡɛðɝ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ ʃi sɝvaɪvd." laɪɪŋ tə ə sikɝ wɑz tʃɹizən, bʌt ʃi hæd kəmɪɾəd əɹ fɝs tʃɹizən ɪn dɛzɝɾɪŋ dʊɹɪŋ ðə bæɾəl ət fɑlm.

Hope faltered with a thud she could feel in her chest. "I was looking for an old friend," she quavered. The best lies always contained as much truth as possible. "We were at Falme together. I don't know whether she survived." Lying to a Seeker was treason, but she had committed her first treason in deserting during the battle at Falme.

"ʃi lɪvz," hi sɛd kɝtli. hi sæt daʊn ɑn ði ɛn ə ðə bɛd wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz fɹəm hɝ. ðeɪ wɝ blu, ən meɪɾ əɹ wɑn əɹ kloʊk bæk. "ʃi ɪz ə hɪɹoʊ, ə kæptən ə ðə ɡɹin, ən ðə leɪɾi ɛdʒiənɪn tæmɝəθ, naʊ. hɝ ɹɪwɔɹd fɹəm ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ. ʃiz ɔlsoʊ hɪɹ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ. jəl ɹɪnu jəɹ fɹɛndʃɪp wɪð hɝ. ən ɹipɔɹt tə mi hu ʃi siz, wɛɹ ʃi ɡoʊz, wʌt ʃi sɛz. ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

"She lives," he said curtly. He sat down on the end of the bed without taking his eyes from her. They were blue, and made her want her cloak back. "She is a hero, a Captain of the Green, and the Lady Egeanin Tamarath, now. Her reward from the High Lady Suroth. She is also here in Ebou Dar. You will renew your friendship with her. And report to me who she sees, where she goes, what she says. Everything."

bɛθəmən klæmpt əɹ dʒɔz tə kip fɹəm læfɪŋ hɪstɛɹɪkli. hi wɑz æftɝ ɛdʒiənɪn, nɑt hɝ. ðə laɪt bi pɹeɪzd! ðə laɪt bi pɹeɪzd ɪn ɔl ɪts ɪnfənət mɝsi! ʃi hæɾ oʊnli wɑntəd tə noʊ ɪf ðə wʊmən stɪl lɪvd, ɪf ʃi hæd tə teɪk pɹikɔʃənz. ɛdʒiənɪn hæd fɹiɾ əɹ wʌns, jɛɾ ɪn ðə tɛn jɪɹz bɛθəmən hæd noʊn əɹ bɪfɔɹ ðæt, ʃi hæd bɪn ə mɑɾəl ə duɾi. ɪt hæɾ ɔlweɪz sim pɑsəbəl ʃi wəd ɹɪpɛn ðət wʌn æbɝeɪʃən noʊ mæɾɝ ðə kɑs tə hɝsɛlf, bʌt, wʌndɝ ʌv wʌndɝz, ʃi hæd nɑt. ən ðə sikɝ wɑz æftɝ hɝ, nɑt . . . ! pɑsəbɪləɾiz ɹɪɹɾ ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, sɝɾəntiz, ən ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɑntəd tə læf. ɪnstɛd, ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps.

Bethamin clamped her jaws to keep from laughing hysterically. He was after Egeanin, not her. The Light be praised! The Light be praised in all its infinite mercy! She had only wanted to know if the woman still lived, if she had to take precautions. Egeanin had freed her once, yet in the ten years Bethamin had known her before that, she had been a model of duty. It had always seemed possible she would repent that one aberration no matter the cost to herself, but, wonder of wonders, she had not. And the Seeker was after her, not . . . ! Possibilities reared up in front of her, certainties, and she no longer wanted to laugh. Instead, she licked her lips.

"haʊ . . . ? haʊ kən aɪ ɹɪnu əɹ fɹɛndʃɪp?" ɪt hæd nɛvɝ bɪn fɹɛndʃɪp ɛniweɪ, mɪɹli əkweɪntəns, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tu leɪt tə seɪ ðət naʊ. "ju tɛl mi ʃiz bɪn ɹeɪz tə ðə blʌd. ɛni oʊvɝtʃɝ mʌs kʌm fɹəm hɝ." fɪɹ ɛmboʊldən hɝ. ən pænɪkt əɹ əz ɪt hæɾ ət fɑlm. "waɪ dʒju nid mi tə bi jəɹ lɪsənɝ? jə kən teɪk əɹ fəɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋ ɛni taɪm jə dɪsaɪd tə." ʃi bɪt ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɝ tʃik tə stɪl əɹ tʌŋ. laɪt, ʃi wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ lɛs ðən ʃi wɑntəɾ ɪm tə də ðæt. sikɝz wɝ ðə sikɹət hæn ə ði ɛmpɹɛs, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ; ɪn ði ɛmpɹɛsəz neɪm, hi kəd pʊɾ ivən sjuɹɔθ tə ðə kwɛstʃən, əɹ tuɑn hɝsɛlf. tʃɹu, hi wəd daɪ hɔɹəbli ɪf ɪt tɝn aʊɾ i hæd bɪn ɪn ɛɹɝ, bʌt ðə ɹɪsk wɑz smɔl wɪð ɛdʒiənɪn. ʃi wɑz oʊnli ʌv ðə loʊ blʌd. ɪf i pʊɾ ɛdʒiənɪn tə ðə kwɛstʃən . . .

"How . . . ? How can I renew our friendship?" It had never been friendship anyway, merely acquaintance, but it was too late to say that now. "You tell me she's been raised to the Blood. Any overture must come from her." Fear emboldened her. And panicked her as it had at Falme. "Why do you need me to be your Listener? You can take her for questioning any time you decide to." She bit the inside of her cheek to still her tongue. Light, she wanted nothing less than she wanted him to do that. Seekers were the secret hand of the Empress, might she live forever; in the Empress's name, he could put even Suroth to the question, or Tuon herself. True, he would die horribly if it turned out he had been in error, but the risk was small with Egeanin. She was only of the low Blood. If he put Egeanin to the question . . .

tə hɝ ʃɑk, ɹæðɝ ðən sɪmpli tɛlɪŋ əɹ tə oʊbeɪ, hi sæt stʌɾiɪŋ hɝ. "aɪ wɪl ɪkspleɪn sɝɾən θɪŋz," hi sɛd, ən ðət wɑz ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ ʃɑk. sikɝz nɛvɝ ɪkspleɪnd, soʊ ʃi hæd hɝd. "ju ɑɹ noʊ jus tə mi, əɹ ði ɛmpaɪɝ, ənlɛs jə sɝvaɪv, ən jəl nɑt sɝvaɪv ɪf jə feɪl tə ʌndɝstænd wʌt jə feɪs. ɪf jə ɹɪvil ə wɝɾ ʌv wʌɾ aɪ tɛl jə tə ɛniwʌn, jəl dʒɹim ə ðə taʊɝ ə ðə ɹeɪvənz əz ə ɹɛspɪt fɹəm wɛɹ jəl faɪn jɝsɛlf. lɪsən, ən lɝn. ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz sɛn tə tæntʃəkoʊ bɪfɔɹ ðə sɪɾi fɛl tə ʌs, əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz əz pɑɹɾ ə ði ɛfɝt tə faɪn sʌldəm u hæd bɪn lɛf bɪhaɪn ət fɑlm. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ʃi faʊnd nʌn, ðoʊ ʌðɝz dɪd, laɪk ðoʊz u eɪɾəd jəɹ oʊn ɹɪtɝn. ɪnstɛd, ɛdʒiənɪn mɝɾɝd ðə sʌldəm ʃi faʊnd. aɪ pʊt ðə tʃɑɹdʒ tə hɝ maɪsɛlf, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ dɪnaɪɪŋ ɪt. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən ʃoʊ aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ, əɹ ivən ɪndɪɡneɪʃən. əz bæd, ʃi kənsɔɹɾɪd ɪn sikɹət wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ." hi sɛd ðə neɪm flætli, nɑt wɪð ðə nɔɹməl dɪsɡʌs bʌt ɹæðɝ laɪk ən ækjəzeɪʃən. "wɛn ʃi dɪpɑɹɾəd tæntʃəkoʊ, ʃi wɑz tʃɹævlɪŋ ɑn ə ʃɪp kəmændəd baɪ ə mæn neɪm beɪl doʊmən. hi meɪd səm dɪstɝbəns ət hævɪŋ ɪz ʃɪp bɔɹɾəd ən wɑz meɪd pɹɑpɝɾi. ʃi bɑɾ ɪm ən ɪmiɾiətli meɪɾ ɪm sɔɪhɪn, soʊ pleɪnli hiz ə səm ɪmpɔɹɾəns tə hɝ. ɪntɝɛstɪŋli, ʃi hæd bɹɔt ðə seɪm mæn tə ðə haɪ lɔɹd tʃɹɑk ɪn fɑlm. doʊmən ɛnɡeɪdʒ ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ɹəɡɑɹd tə ði ɪkstɛn ðət ðə fɛloʊ wɑz ɔfən ɪnvaɪɾəd tə kənvɝs wɪð hɪm." hi ɡɹɪməst. "du juv waɪn? əɹ bɹændi?"

To her shock, rather than simply telling her to obey, he sat studying her. "I will explain certain things," he said, and that was a greater shock. Seekers never explained, so she had heard. "You are no use to me, or the Empire, unless you survive, and you will not survive if you fail to understand what you face. If you reveal a word of what I tell you to anyone, you will dream of the Tower of the Ravens as a respite from where you will find yourself. Listen, and learn. Egeanin was sent to Tanchico before the city fell to us, among other things as part of the effort to find sul'dam who had been left behind at Falme. Strangely, she found none, though others did, like those who aided your own return. Instead, Egeanin murdered the sul'dam she found. I put the charge to her myself, and she did not bother denying it. She did not even show outrage, or even indignation. As bad, she consorted in secret with Aes Sedai." He said the name flatly, not with the normal disgust but rather like an accusation. "When she departed Tanchico, she was traveling on a ship commanded by a man named Bayle Domon. He made some disturbance at having his ship boarded and was made property. She bought him and immediately made him so'jhin, so plainly he is of some importance to her. Interestingly, she had brought the same man to the High Lord Turak in Falme. Domon engaged the High Lord's regard to the extent that the fellow was often invited to converse with him." He grimaced. "Do you have wine? Or brandy?"

bɛθəmən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. "aɪoʊnə hæz ə flæsk ə ðə loʊkəl bɹændi, aɪ θɪŋk. ɪts ə ɹʌf dʒɹɪŋk. . . ."

Bethamin gave a start. "Iona has a flask of the local brandy, I think. It's a rough drink. . . ."

hi ɔɹɾɝd əɹ tə pɔɹ ɪm ə kʌp ɛniweɪ, ən ʃi oʊbeɪd hɝidli. ʃi wɑntəd tə kip ɪm tɔkɪŋ, ɛniθɪŋ tə dɪleɪ ði ɪnɛvəɾəbəl. ʃi nu fəɹ ə fæk ðəɾ ɛdʒiənɪn hæd nɑt bɪn kɪlɪŋ sʌldəm, jɛɾ əɹ pɹuf wəd kəndɛm əɹ tə ʃɛɹ ɹɛnə ən sɛɾəz saʊɝ feɪt. ɪf ʃi wɑz lʌki. ɪf ðɪs sikɝ sɔ hɪz duɾi tə ði ɛmpaɪɝ əz sjuɹɔθ hæd. hi pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə pjuɾɝ kʌp, swɝlɪŋ ðə dɑɹk æpəl bɹændi waɪl ʃi tʊk əɹ siɾ əɡɛn.

He ordered her to pour him a cup anyway, and she obeyed hurriedly. She wanted to keep him talking, anything to delay the inevitable. She knew for a fact that Egeanin had not been killing sul'dam, yet her proof would condemn her to share Renna and Seta's sour fate. If she was lucky. If this Seeker saw his duty to the Empire as Suroth had. He peered into the pewter cup, swirling the dark apple brandy while she took her seat again.

"ðə haɪ lɔɹd tʃɹɑk wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt mæn," hi mɝmɝd. "pɝhæps wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ði ɛmpaɪɝ əz ɛvɝ sin. ə pɪɾi hɪz sɔɪhɪn dɪsaɪɾɪd tə fɑloʊ hɪm ɪndə dɛθ. ɑnɝəbəl ə ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪt meɪks ɪɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl tə bi ʃʊɹ doʊmən wɑz ɪn ðə bæn ðət mɝɾɝd ðə haɪ lɔɹd." bɛθəmən flɪntʃt. səmtaɪmz ðə blʌd daɪɾ ət wʌn ənʌðɝz hænz, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðə wɝd mɝɾɝ wɑz nɛvɝ mɛnʃənd. ðə sikɝ kəntɪnjud, stɪl piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɪz kʌp wɪθaʊt dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ. "ðə haɪ lɔɹd hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd mi tə wɑtʃ sjuɹɔθ. hi səspɛktəd ʃi wɑz ə deɪnʒɝ tə ði ɛmpaɪɝ ɪtsɛlf. hɪz oʊn wɝdz. ən wɪð ɪz dɛθ, ʃi mænədʒ tə ɡeɪn kəmæn ə ðə fɔɹʌnɝz. aɪ hæv noʊ ɛvəɾəns ðət ʃi ɔɹɾɝd ɪz dɛθ, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz mʌtʃ ðəɾ ɪz sədʒɛstɪv. sjuɹɔθ bɹɔɾ ə deɪmeɪn tə fɑlm, ə jʌŋ wʊmən u wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ," əɡɛn, ðə neɪm wɑz flæɾ ən hɑɹd, "æn u sʌmhaʊ ɪskeɪp ðə vɛɹi deɪ ðət tʃɹɑk daɪd. sjuɹɔθ ɔlsoʊ hæz ə deɪmeɪn ɪn əɹ ɑntʊɹɑʒ u wɑz wʌns ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃiz nɛvɝ bɪn sin ʌnkɑlɹd, bʌt . . ." hi ʃɹʌɡd, əz ðoʊ ðət wɝ ə θɪŋ ə noʊ moʊmənt. bɛθəmənz aɪz pɑpt. hu wəɾ ʌnkɑlɝ ə deɪmeɪn? ə wɛl-tʃɹeɪn deɪmeɪn wɑz ə tʃɹiɾ ən ə dʒɔɪ, bʌɾ əz wɛl ənliʃ ə dʒɹʌŋkən ɡɹoʊm! "ɪt simz vɛɹi laɪkli ʃiz ə mɛɹəθdəmeɪn hɪɾən əmʌŋ əɹ pɹɑpɝɾi, tu," hi wɛn ɑn, dʒʌst əz ɪf i wɝ nɑt lɪstɪŋ kɹaɪmz lɪɾəl loʊɝ ðən tʃɹizən. "aɪ bɪliv sjuɹɔθ ɡeɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ fəɹ sʌldəm u mænədʒ tə ɹitʃ tæntʃəkoʊ tə bi kɪld, pɝhæps ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə haɪɾ ɛdʒiənɪnz miɾɪŋz wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. jə sʌldəm ɔlweɪz seɪ jə kən tɛl ə mɛɹəθdəmeɪn ət saɪt, kɝɛkt?"

"The High Lord Turak was a great man," he murmured. "Perhaps one of the greatest the Empire has ever seen. A pity his so'jhin decided to follow him into death. Honorable of them, but it makes it impossible to be sure Domon was in the band that murdered the High Lord." Bethamin flinched. Sometimes the Blood died at one another's hands, of course, but the word murder was never mentioned. The Seeker continued, still peering into his cup without drinking. "The High Lord had ordered me to watch Suroth. He suspected she was a danger to the Empire itself. His own words. And with his death, she managed to gain command of the Forerunners. I have no evidence that she ordered his death, but there is much that is suggestive. Suroth brought a damane to Falme, a young woman who was Aes Sedai," again, the name was flat and hard, "and who somehow escaped the very day that Turak died. Suroth also has a damane in her entourage who was once Aes Sedai. She has never been seen uncollared, but . . ." He shrugged, as though that were a thing of no moment. Bethamin's eyes popped. Who would uncollar a damane? A well-trained damane was a treat and a joy, but as well unleash a drunken grolm! "It seems very likely she has a marath'damane hidden among her property, too," he went on, just as if he were not listing crimes little lower than treason. "I believe Suroth gave the order for sul'dam who managed to reach Tanchico to be killed, perhaps in order to hide Egeanin's meetings with Aes Sedai. You sul'dam always say you can tell a marath'damane at sight, correct?"

hi lʊkt ʌp sʌɾənli, ən sʌmhaʊ ʃi mænədʒ tə mit ðoʊz fɹoʊzən aɪz wɪð ə smaɪl. hɪz feɪs cʊɾə bɪlɔŋ tə ɛni mæn, bʌt ðoʊz aɪz . . . ʃi wɑz ɡlæd tə bi siɾəd. hɝ niz wɝ ʃeɪkɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ɪt dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ θɹu hɝ skɝts. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt kwaɪt ðəɾ izi, aɪm əfɹeɪd." ʃi ɔlmoʊst səksiɾəd ɪn kipɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs stɛɾi. "ju . . . ʃʊɹli jə noʊ ɪnʌf tə tʃɑɹdʒ sjuɹɔθ wɪð ðə haɪ lɔɹd tʃɹɑks ɛm-ɛm-mɝɾɝ." ɪf i tʊk sjuɹɔθ, ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ nid tə ɪnvɑlv hɝ, əɹ ɛdʒiənɪn.

He looked up suddenly, and somehow she managed to meet those frozen eyes with a smile. His face could have belonged to any man, but those eyes . . . She was glad to be seated. Her knees were shaking so hard she was surprised it did not show through her skirts. "It is not quite that easy, I'm afraid." She almost succeeded in keeping her voice steady. "You . . . Surely you know enough to charge Suroth with the High Lord Turak's m-m-murder." If he took Suroth, there would be no need to involve her, or Egeanin.

"tʃɹɑk wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt mæn, bʌt maɪ duɾi ɪz tə ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, ən θɹu hɝ, tə ði ɛmpaɪɝ." hi dʒɹæŋk ðə bɹændi daʊn ɪn wʌn lɔŋ swɑloʊ, ən ɪz feɪs bɪkeɪm əz hɑɹɾ əz ɪz vɔɪs. "tʃɹɑks dɛθ ɪz dʌs bɪsaɪd ðə deɪnʒɝ feɪsɪŋ ði ɛmpaɪɝ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðiz lænz sik paʊɝ ɪn ði ɛmpaɪɝ, ə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə deɪz ə keɪɑs ən mɝɾɝ wən noʊ mæn kəd kloʊz ɪz aɪz ət naɪt noʊɪŋ i wəd weɪk, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ eɪɾəd baɪ ə vɛnəməs wɝm ə tʃɹɛtʃɝi bɔɹɪŋ fɹəm wɪðɪn. sjuɹɔθ meɪ nɑɾ ivən bi ðət wɝmz hɛd. fəɹ ði ɛmpaɪɝz seɪk, aɪ dɛɹ nɑt teɪk əɹ əntɪl aɪ kən kɪl ðə hoʊl wɝm. ɛdʒiənɪn ɪz ə θɹɛɾ aɪ kən fɑloʊ tə ðə wɝm, ən jə ɑɹ ə θɹɛd tə ɛdʒiənɪn. soʊ jəl ɹɪnu jəɹ fɹɛndʃɪp wɪð hɝ, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt teɪks. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi?"

"Turak was a great man, but my duty is to the Empress, may she live forever, and through her, to the Empire." He drank the brandy down in one long swallow, and his face became as hard as his voice. "Turak's death is dust beside the danger facing the Empire. The Aes Sedai of these lands seek power in the Empire, a return to the days of chaos and murder when no man could close his eyes at night knowing he would wake, and they are aided by a venomous worm of treachery boring from within. Suroth may not even be that worm's head. For the Empire's sake, I dare not take her until I can kill the whole worm. Egeanin is a thread I can follow to the worm, and you are a thread to Egeanin. So you will renew your friendship with her, whatever it takes. Do you understand me?"

"aɪ ʌndɝstænd, ən əl oʊbeɪ." hɝ vɔɪs ʃʊk, bʌt wʌɾ ɛls kəd ʃi seɪ? ðə laɪt seɪv hɝ, wʌɾ ɛls kəd ʃi seɪ?

"I understand, and I will obey." Her voice shook, but what else could she say? The Light save her, what else could she say?


tʃæptɝ twɛntiwʌn


CHAPTER 21

eɪ mæɾɝ ə pɹɑpɝɾi


A Matter of Property

ɛdʒiənɪn leɪ ɑn əɹ bæk ɑn ðə bɛd wɪð əɹ hænz ɹeɪzd, pɑmz təwɔɹd ðə silɪŋ ən fɪŋɡɝz spɹɛd. hɝ peɪl blu skɝts meɪɾ ə fæn əkɹɔs əɹ lɛɡz, ən ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə laɪ vɛɹi stɪl soʊ əz nɑt tə ɹɪŋkəl ðə nɛɹoʊ plits tu mʌtʃ. ðə weɪ dʒɹɛsəz kənfaɪn muvmənt, ðeɪ mʌs bi ən ɪnvɛnʃən ə ðə dɑɹk lɔɹd. laɪɪŋ ðɛɹ, ʃi stʌɾid fɪŋɡɝneɪlz tu lɔŋ fəɹ əɹ tə leɪ hænz ɑn ə laɪn wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ ət lis hæf. nɑt ðət ʃi hæd pɝsənəli hændəld laɪnz ɪn kwaɪɾ ə fju jɪɹz, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ɹɛɾi ən eɪbəl tə, ət nid.

Egeanin lay on her back on the bed with her hands raised, palms toward the ceiling and fingers spread. Her pale blue skirts made a fan across her legs, and she tried to lie very still so as not to wrinkle the narrow pleats too much. The way dresses confined movement, they must be an invention of the Dark Lord. Lying there, she studied fingernails too long for her to lay hands on a line without breaking at least half. Not that she had personally handled lines in quite a few years, but she had always been ready and able to, at need.

". . . pleɪn fulhɛɾədnəs!" beɪl ɡɹaʊld, poʊkɪŋ ət ðə bleɪzɪŋ lɔɡz ɪn ðə bɹɪk faɪɝpleɪs. "fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi, sihɔk kəd seɪl nɪɹɝ ðə wɪnd, ən fæstɝ, ðən ɛni sintʃæn ʃɪp ɛvɝ meɪd. ðəɹ dɪd bi skwɔlz əhɛd, tu, ən . . ." ʃi lɪsən oʊnli ɪnʌf tə noʊ hi hæd stɑpt ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ əbaʊt ðə ɹum ən teɪkən ʌp ðə seɪm oʊld ɑɹɡjəmənt. ðə dɑɹk-pænəl tʃeɪmbɝ wɑz nɑt ðə bɛst ət ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən, əɹ ivən kloʊs, jɛɾ ɪt mɛɾ ɪz ɹɪkwaɪɹməns ɛksɛptɪŋ ðə vju. ðə tu wɪndoʊz lʊkt aʊɾ ɑn ðə steɪbliɑɹd. eɪ kæptən ə ðə ɡɹin ɹæŋkt wɪð ə bænɝ-dʒɛnɝəl, bʌɾ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, moʊst ə ðoʊz ʃi aʊtʃɹæŋkt wɝ eɪdz əɹ sɛkɹətɛɹiz tə sinjɝ ɔfəsɝz ə ði ɛvɝ vɪktɔɹiəs ɑɹmi. əmʌŋ ði ɑɹmi əz ət si, biɪŋ ə ðə blʌɾ æɾəd lɪɾəl ənlɛs ɪt wɑz ðə haɪ blʌd.

". . . plain foolheadedness!" Bayle growled, poking at the blazing logs in the brick fireplace. "Fortune prick me, Seahawk could sail nearer the wind, and faster, than any Seanchan ship ever made. There did be squalls ahead, too, and . . ." She listened only enough to know he had stopped grumbling about the room and taken up the same old argument. The dark-paneled chamber was not the best at The Wandering Woman, or even close, yet it met his requirements excepting the view. The two windows looked out on the stableyard. A Captain of the Green ranked with a banner-general, but in this place, most of those she outranked were aides or secretaries to senior officers of the Ever Victorious Army. Among the army as at sea, being of the Blood added little unless it was the High Blood.

ðə si-ɡɹin lækɝ ɑn ðə neɪlz ə hɝ lɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝz spɑɹkəld. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz hoʊp tə ɹaɪz, ɪvɛntʃəwəli pɝhæps tə kæptən ə ðə ɡoʊld, kəmændɪŋ flits, əz əɹ mʌðɝ hæd. əz ə ɡɝl, ʃi hæɾ ivən dʒɹimd ə biɪŋ neɪm ðə hæn ə ði ɛmpɹɛs ət si dʒʌs laɪk əɹ mʌðɝ, tə stæn ət ðə lɛf hæn ə ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn, sɔɪhɪn tə ði ɛmpɹɛs hɝsɛlf, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, əlaʊd tə spik dɝɛkli tə hɝ. jʌŋ wɪmən hæd fulɪʃ dʒɹimz. ən ʃi hæd tə ədmɪt ðət wʌns tʃoʊzən fəɹ ðə fɔɹʌnɝz, ʃi kənsɪɾɝd ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv ə nu neɪm. nɑt hoʊpɪŋ fəɹ ɪt, sɝɾənli - ðət wʊɾə bɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ əbʌv hɝsɛlf - jɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn hæd noʊn ðə ɹəkʌvɝi ʌv ðə stoʊlən lænz wəd min nu ədɪʃənz tə ðə blʌd. naʊ ʃi wɑz kæptən ə ðə ɡɹin, tɛn jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ ʃi ʃʊɾə hæɾ ɛni hoʊp ʌv ɪt, ən stʊɾ ɑn ðə sloʊps ə ðət stip maʊntən ðət ɹoʊz θɹu ðə klaʊdz tə ðə səblaɪm pɪnəkəl ə ði ɛmpɹɛs, maɪt ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ.

The sea-green lacquer on the nails of her little fingers sparkled. She had always hoped to rise, eventually perhaps to Captain of the Gold, commanding fleets, as her mother had. As a girl, she had even dreamed of being named the Hand of the Empress at Sea just like her mother, to stand at the left hand of the Crystal Throne, so'jhin to the Empress herself, might she live forever, allowed to speak directly to her. Young women had foolish dreams. And she had to admit that once chosen for the Forerunners, she considered the possibility of a new name. Not hoping for it, certainly - that would have been getting above herself - yet everyone had known the recovery of the stolen lands would mean new additions to the Blood. Now she was Captain of the Green, ten years before she should have had any hope of it, and stood on the slopes of that steep mountain that rose through the clouds to the sublime pinnacle of the Empress, might she live forever.

ʃi daʊɾɪd ʃi wəd bi ɡɪvən kəmæn ʌv wʌn ɡɹieɪtʃɪp, haʊɛvɝ, mʌtʃ lɛs ə skwɑdʒɹən. sjuɹɔθ kleɪm tə æksɛpt əɹ stɔɹi, bʌɾ ɪf soʊ, waɪ hæd ʃi bɪn lɛf sɪɾɪŋ ət kæntʃɹɪn? waɪ, wən ɔɹɾɝz faɪnəli keɪm, wɝ ðeɪ tə ɹipɔɹt hɪɹ ən nɑt tə ə ʃɪp? ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli soʊ mɛni kəmænz əveɪləbəl, ivən fəɹ ə kæptən ə ðə ɡɹin. ɪt maɪt bi ðæt. ʃi maɪɾ əv bɪn tʃoʊzən fəɹ ə pəzɪʃən nɪɹ sjuɹɔθ, ðoʊ hɝ ɔɹɾɝz sɛɾ oʊnli ðət ʃi wɑz tə tʃɹævəl tə ɛbu dɑɹ baɪ ðə fɝst əveɪləbəl minz ən əweɪt fɝðɝ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. meɪbi. ðə haɪ blʌd maɪt spik tə ðə loʊ wɪθaʊt ði ɪntɝvɛntʃən ʌv ə vɔɪs, bʌɾ ɪt sim tə hɝ ðət sjuɹɔθ hæd fɝɡɑɾən əɹ əz sun əz ʃi wɑz dɪsmɪst æftɝ ɹəsivɪŋ əɹ ɹɪwɔɹdz. wɪtʃ ɔlsoʊ maɪt min sjuɹɔθ wɑz səspɪʃəs. ɑɹɡjəməns ðət ɹæn ɪn sɝkəlz. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi kəd lɪv ɑn siwɑɾɝ ɪf ðət sikɝ hæd ɡɪvən oʊvɝ ɪz səspɪʃənz. hi hæd noʊ mɔɹ, əɹ ʃi wəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bi ɪn ə dʌnʒən ʃɹikɪŋ, jɛɾ ɪf i wɑz ɪn ðə sɪɾi, tu, hi wəd bi wɑtʃɪŋ hɝ, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ wʌn mɪsstɛp. hi kəd nɑt ʃɛd soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə sɪŋɡəl dʒɹɑp ə hɝ blʌd, naʊ, bʌt ðə sikɝz wɝ ɪkspɪɹiənst ət dilɪŋ wɪð ðət maɪnɝ dɪfəkəlti. soʊ lɔŋ əz i lɛft ɪt tə wɑtʃɪŋ, ðoʊ, hi kəd stɛɹ əɾ əɹ əntɪl ɪz aɪz ʃɹɪvəld. ʃi hæɾ ə steɪbəl dɛk ʌndɝ əɹ fit, naʊ, ən fɹəm hɪɹ ɑn ʃi wəd teɪk ɡɹeɪt kɛɹ haʊ ʃi stɛpt. kæptən ə ðə ɡoʊl maɪt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bi pɑsəbəl, jɛt ɹɪtaɪɹɪŋ əz kæptən ə ðə ɡɹin wɑz ɑnɝəbəl.

She doubted she would be given command of one greatship, however, much less a squadron. Suroth claimed to accept her story, but if so, why had she been left sitting at Cantorin? Why, when orders finally came, were they to report here and not to a ship? Of course, there were only so many commands available, even for a Captain of the Green. It might be that. She might have been chosen for a position near Suroth, though her orders said only that she was to travel to Ebou Dar by the first available means and await further instructions. Maybe. The High Blood might speak to the low without the intervention of a Voice, but it seemed to her that Suroth had forgotten her as soon as she was dismissed after receiving her rewards. Which also might mean Suroth was suspicious. Arguments that ran in circles. In any case, she could live on seawater if that Seeker had given over his suspicions. He had no more, or she would already be in a dungeon shrieking, yet if he was in the city, too, he would be watching her, waiting for one misstep. He could not shed so much as a single drop of her blood, now, but the Seekers were experienced at dealing with that minor difficulty. So long as he left it to watching, though, he could stare at her until his eyes shriveled. She had a stable deck under her feet, now, and from here on she would take great care how she stepped. Captain of the Gold might no longer be possible, yet retiring as Captain of the Green was honorable.

"wɛl?" beɪl dɪmændəd. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ðæt?"

"Well?" Bayle demanded. "What about that?"

waɪɾ ən sɑləɾ ən stʃɹɔŋ, dʒʌs ðə sɔɹɾ ə mæn ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz feɪvɝd, hi wɑz stændɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə bɛɾ ɪn ɪz ʃɝtslivz, ə fɹaʊn ɑn ɪz feɪs ən ɪz fɪsts ɑn ɪz hɪps. nɑɾ ə poʊz ə sɔɪhɪn ʃəd teɪk wɪð ɪz mɪstʃɹəs. wɪð ə saɪ, ʃi lɛɾ əɹ hænz dʒɹɑp ɑntu hɝ stʌmək. beɪl dʒʌst wəd nɑt lɝn haʊ ə sɔɪhɪn wɑz səpoʊz tə bɪheɪv. hi tʊk ɪɾ ɔl əz ə dʒoʊk, əɹ pleɪ, əz ðoʊ nʌn ʌv ɪt wɝ ɹil. səmtaɪmz i ivən sɛɾ i wɑntəd tə bi hɝ vɔɪs, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɔfən ʃi ɪkspleɪnd ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə ðə haɪ blʌd. wʌns, ʃi hæd hæɾ ɪm biɾən, ən æftɝwɝdz i hæd ɹəfjuz tə slip ɪn ðə seɪm bɛd wɪð əɹ əntɪl ʃi əpɑlədʒaɪzd. əpɑlədʒaɪzd!

Wide and solid and strong, just the sort of man she had always favored, he was standing beside the bed in his shirtsleeves, a frown on his face and his fists on his hips. Not a pose a so'jhin should take with his mistress. With a sigh, she let her hands drop onto her stomach. Bayle just would not learn how a so'jhin was supposed to behave. He took it all as a joke, or play, as though none of it were real. Sometimes he even said he wanted to be her Voice, no matter how often she explained she was not of the High Blood. Once, she had had him beaten, and afterwards he had refused to sleep in the same bed with her until she apologized. Apologized!

heɪstəli, ʃi ɹæn θɹu wʌt ʃi hæd hæf-hɝɾ ə hɪz ɡɹoʊlɪŋ. jɛs; stɪl ðə seɪm ɑɹɡjəməns æftɝ ɔl ðɪs taɪm. nʌθɪŋ nu. swɪŋɪŋ əɹ lɛɡz oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə bɛd, ʃi sæɾ ʌp ən tɪk pɔɪns ɔf ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ʃi hæd dʌn ɪt soʊ ɔfən, ʃi kəd dɪlɪvɝ əm baɪ ɹoʊt. "hæd jə tʃɹaɪd tə ɹʌn, ðə deɪmeɪn ɑn ði ʌðɝ ʃɪp wʊɾə snæp jəɹ mæsts laɪk twɪɡz. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə tʃæns stɑp, beɪl, ən jə noʊ ɪt; ðɛɹ fɝs heɪl wɑz ə dɪmæn tə noʊ wɛðɝ jə wɝ sihɔk. baɪ bɹɪŋɪŋ jə ɪndə ðə wɪn ən ənaʊnsɪŋ wi wɝ ɑn əɹ weɪ tə kæntʃɹɪn wɪð ə ɡɪft fəɹ ði ɛmpɹɛs, meɪ ʃi laɪv fɝɛvɝ, aɪ əleɪd ðɛɹ səspɪʃənz. ɛniθɪŋ ɛls - ɛniθɪŋ! - ən wi wəɾ ɔl əv bɪn tʃeɪn ɪn ðə hoʊld ən soʊld əz sun əz wi ɹitʃt kæntʃɹɪn. aɪ daʊt wiɾ əv bɪn lʌki ɪnʌf tə feɪs ðə hɛdzmən ɪnstɛd." ʃi hɛld ʌp əɹ θʌm. "æn læst, ɪf jə hæd kɛp kɑm əz aɪ toʊl jə tə, jə wəd nɑɾ əv ɡɔn tə ðə blɑk, iðɝ. jə kɑs mi ə ɡɹeɪt dil!" sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ wɪmən ɪn kæntʃɹɪn əpɛɹənli hæɾ əɹ seɪm teɪst ɪn mɛn. ðeɪ hæd pʊʃt ðə bɪɾɪŋ ʌp ɛkstʃɹævəɡənli.

Hastily, she ran through what she had half-heard of his growling. Yes; still the same arguments after all this time. Nothing new. Swinging her legs over the side of the bed, she sat up and ticked points off on her fingers. She had done it so often, she could deliver them by rote. "Had you tried to run, the damane on the other ship would have snapped your masts like twigs. It was not a chance stop, Bayle, and you know it; their first hail was a demand to know whether you were Seahawk. By bringing you into the wind and announcing we were on our way to Cantorin with a gift for the Empress, may she live forever, I allayed their suspicions. Anything else - anything! - and we would all have been chained in the hold and sold as soon as we reached Cantorin. I doubt we'd have been lucky enough to face the headsman instead." She held up her thumb. "And last, if you had kept calm as I told you to, you would not have gone to the block, either. You cost me a great deal!" Several other women in Cantorin apparently had her same taste in men. They had pushed the bidding up extravagantly.

stʌbɝn mæn ðəɾ i wɑz, hi skaʊld ən skɹʌbd əɾ ɪz ʃɔɹt bɪɹɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. "aɪ də stɪl seɪ wi cʊɾə dʒɹɑpt ɪɾ ɔl oʊvɝ ðə saɪd," hi mʌɾɝd. "ðæt sikɝ hæd noʊ pɹuf aɪ dɪɾ əv ɪɾ əbɔɹd."

Stubborn man that he was, he scowled and scrubbed at his short beard irritably. "I do still say we could have dropped it all over the side," he muttered. "That Seeker had no proof I did have it aboard."

"sikɝz də noʊ nid pɹuf," ʃi sɛd, mɑkɪŋ ɪz æksɛnt. "sikɝz də faɪn pɹuf, ən ðə faɪndɪŋ də bi peɪnfəl." ɪf i wɑz ɹədus tə bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp wʌɾ ivən i hæd kənsiɾɪd lɔŋ sɪns, meɪbi ʃi wɑz faɪnəli nɪɹɪŋ ði ɛn ə ðə hoʊl θɪŋ. "ɪn ɛni keɪs, beɪl, juv ɔlɹɛɾi ədmɪɾəd ðəɹ ɪz noʊ hɑɹm ɪn sjuɹɔθ hævɪŋ ðət kɑlɝ ən bɹeɪslɪts. ðeɪ kæn bi pʊɾ ɑn ɪm ənlɛs sʌmwʌn ɡɛts kloʊs ɪnʌf, ən aɪv hɝd nʌθɪŋ ðət sədʒɛsts ɛniwʌn əz əɹ wɪl." ʃi ɹɪfɹeɪn fɹəm æɾɪŋ ðəɾ ɪt wəd nɑt mæɾɝ ɪf sʌmwʌn dɪd. beɪl wɑz nɑt ɹɪli fəmɪljɝ wɪð ivən ðə vɝʒənz ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz ðeɪ hæɾ ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə wɝl si, bʌɾ i wɑz æɾəmənt ðət nʌn mɛnʃən ðə nəsɛsəɾi ʌv ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn nilɪŋ tə ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn. ɪt maɪt pɹuv nɛsəsɛɹi fəɹ ɪm tə bi fɪɾəd wɪð ðɪs meɪl æɾəm, bʌt beɪl wəd nɛvɝ si ɪt. "wʌɾ ɪz dʌn ɪz dʌn, beɪl. ɪf ðə laɪt ʃaɪnz ɑn ʌs, wɪl lɪv lɔŋ ɪn ðə sɝvəs ə ði ɛmpaɪɝ. naʊ, jə noʊ ðɪs sɪɾi, soʊ jə seɪ. wʌɾ ɪz ðəɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ tə si əɹ du?"

"Seekers do no need proof," she said, mocking his accent. "Seekers do find proof, and the finding do be painful." If he was reduced to bringing up what even he had conceded long since, maybe she was finally nearing the end of the whole thing. "In any case, Bayle, you have already admitted there is no harm in Suroth having that collar and bracelets. They can't be put on him unless someone gets close enough, and I've heard nothing that suggests anyone has or will." She refrained from adding that it would not matter if someone did. Bayle was not really familiar with even the versions of the Prophecies they had on this side of the World Sea, but he was adamant that none mentioned the necessity of the Dragon Reborn kneeling to the Crystal Throne. It might prove necessary for him to be fitted with this male a'dam, but Bayle would never see it. "What is done is done, Bayle. If the Light shines on us, we will live long in the service of the Empire. Now, you know this city, so you say. What is there interesting to see or do?"

"ðɛɹ ɔlweɪz də bi fɛstəvəlz ə səm sɔɹt," hi sɛd sloʊli, ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli. hi nɛvɝ laɪkt ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp ɪz ɑɹɡjəmənt, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ fjuɾəl. "sʌm meɪ bi tə jəɹ teɪst. səm nɑt, aɪ də θɪŋk. jə də bi . . . pɪki." wʌɾ i min baɪ ðæt? sʌɾənli hi ɡɹɪnd. "wi kəd faɪn ə waɪz wʊmən. ðeɪ də hɪɹ mɛɹɪdʒ vaʊz, hɪɹ." hi ɹæn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz əkɹɔs ðə ʃeɪvən saɪɾ ə hɪz skælp, ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪz aɪz ʌpwɝɾ əz ðoʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si ɪt. "ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf aɪ də ɹikɔl ðə lɛktʃɝ jə dɪd ɡɪmi ɑn ðə 'ɹaɪts ən pɹɪvlədʒəz' ʌv maɪ pəzɪʃən, sɔɪhɪn kən oʊnli mɛɹi ʌðɝ sɔɪhɪn, soʊ jə də nid tə fɹi mi, fɝst. fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi, jə də noʊ hæv ə fʊɾ ə ðoʊz pɹɑməst ɪsteɪts, jɛt. aɪ kən teɪk ʌp maɪ oʊl tʃɹeɪɾ ən ɡɪv jə ən ɪsteɪt sun ɪnʌf."

"There always do be festivals of some sort," he said slowly, grudgingly. He never liked giving up his argument, no matter how futile. "Some may be to your taste. Some not, I do think. You do be . . . picky." What did he mean by that? Suddenly he grinned. "We could find a Wise Woman. They do hear marriage vows, here." He ran his fingers across the shaven side of his scalp, rolling his eyes upward as though trying to see it. "Of course, if I do recall the lecture you did give me on the 'rights and privileges' of my position, so'jhin can only marry other so'jhin, so you do need to free me, first. Fortune prick me, you do no have a foot of those promised estates, yet. I can take up my old trade and give you an estate soon enough."

hɝ maʊθ fɛl oʊpən. ðɪs wɑz nɑt sʌmθɪŋ oʊld. ðɪs wɑz vɛɹi, vɛɹi nu. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz pɹaɪɾɪd hɝsɛlf ɑn biɪŋ lɛvəl-hɛɾəd. ʃi hæd ɹɪzən tə kəmæn baɪ skɪl ən dɛɹɪŋ, ə vɛɾɝən ə si bæɾəlz ən stɔɹmz ən ʃɪpɹɪk. ən ɹaɪt ðət moʊmənt ʃi fɛlt laɪk ə fɝst-vɔɪədʒ fɪŋɡɝlɪŋ lʊkɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ðə meɪn pik, pænɪkt ən dɪzi, wɪð ðə hoʊl wɝl spɪnɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ ən ə simɪŋli ɪnɛvəɾəbəl fɔl tə ðə si fɪlɪŋ əɹ aɪz.

Her mouth fell open. This was not something old. This was very, very new. She had always prided herself on being level-headed. She had risen to command by skill and daring, a veteran of sea battles and storms and shipwreck. And right that moment she felt like a first-voyage fingerling looking down from the main peak, panicked and dizzy, with the whole world spinning around her and a seemingly inevitable fall to the sea filling her eyes.

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑt soʊ sɪmpəl," ʃi sɛd, sɝdʒɪŋ tə hɝ fit soʊ hi wɑz fɔɹs tə stɛp bæk. laɪts tʃɹuθ, ʃi heɪɾəd saʊndɪŋ bɹɛθləs! "mænumɪʃən ɹikwaɪɝz mi tə pɹəvaɪd fəɹ jəɹ laɪvlihʊɾ əz ə fɹi mæn, tə si jə kən səpɔɹt jɝsɛlf." laɪt! wɝdz flʌɾɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn ə ɹʌʃ wɝ əz bæɾ əz biɪŋ bɹɛθləs. ʃi ɪmædʒən hɝsɛlf ɑn ə dɛk. ɪt hɛlpt, ə lɪɾəl. "ɪn jəɹ keɪs, ðət minz baɪɪŋ ə ʃɪp, aɪ səpoʊz," ʃi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ənɹʌfəld, ət list, "æn əz jə ɹimaɪndəd mi, aɪ hæv noʊ ɪsteɪts jɛt. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ kəd nɑɾ əlaʊ jə tə ɹɪtɝn tə smʌɡəlɪŋ, ən jə noʊ ɪt." ðət mʌtʃ wɑz sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ, ən ðə ɹɛs nɑt ɹɪli ə laɪ. hɝ jɪɹz ət si hæd bɪn pɹɑfəɾəbəl, ən ɪf ðə ɡoʊld ʃi kəd kɔl ɑn wɑz smɔl ɡlinɪŋz tə wʌn ə ðə blʌd, ʃi kəd baɪ ə ʃɪp, soʊ lɔŋ əz i dɪd nɑt wɑn ə ɡɹieɪtʃɪp, bʌt ʃi hæd nɑɾ æktʃəli  dɪnaɪd biɪŋ eɪbəl tə əfɔɹd wʌn.

"It is not so simple," she said, surging to her feet so he was forced to step back. Light's truth, she hated sounding breathless! "Manumission requires me to provide for your livelihood as a free man, to see you can support yourself." Light! Words flooding out in a rush were as bad as being breathless. She imagined herself on a deck. It helped, a little. "In your case, that means buying a ship, I suppose," she said, sounding unruffled, at least, "and as you reminded me, I have no estates yet. Besides, I could not allow you to return to smuggling, and you know it." That much was simple truth, and the rest not really a lie. Her years at sea had been profitable, and if the gold she could call on was small gleanings to one of the Blood, she could buy a ship, so long as he did not want a greatship, but she had not actually denied being able to afford one.

hi spɹɛɾ ɪz ɑɹmz, ənʌðɝ θɪŋ i wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə du, ən æftɝ ə moʊmənt ʃi leɪɾ əɹ tʃik əɡɛnst ɪz bɹɔd ʃoʊldɝ ən lɛɾ ɪm ɪnfoʊl hɝ. "ɪt wɪl bi wɛl, læs," hi mɝmɝd dʒɛnli. "sʌmhaʊ, ɪɾəl bi wɛl."

He spread his arms, another thing he was not supposed to do, and after a moment she laid her cheek against his broad shoulder and let him enfold her. "It will be well, lass," he murmured gently. "Somehow, it will be well."

"ju mʌs nɑt kɔl mi 'læs,' beɪl," ʃi tʃaɪɾɪd, stɛɹɪŋ bɪɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ təwɔɹd ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ɪt wəd nɑt sim tə kʌm ɪndə foʊkəs. bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ tæntʃəkoʊ ʃi hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə mɛɹi hɪm, wʌn ə ðoʊz laɪtnɪŋ dɪsɪʒənz ðət hæd meɪɾ əɹ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən. smʌɡəlɝ i maɪt bi, bʌt ʃi cʊɾə pʊɾ ə stɑp tə ðæt, ən i wɑz stɛdfæst, stʃɹɔŋ ən ɪntɛlədʒənt, ə sifɛɹɝ. ðət læs hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ə nəsɛsəɾi, tə hɝ. oʊnli, ʃi hæd nɑt noʊn ɪz kʌstəmz. səm pleɪsəz ɪn ði ɛmpaɪɝ, mɛn dɪd ði æskɪŋ, ən wɝ æktʃəli  əfɛndəɾ ɪf ə wʊmən ivən sədʒɛstəd. ʃi nu nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɛntaɪsɪŋ ə mæn, iðɝ. hɝ fju lʌvɝz hæɾ ɔl bɪn mɛn ʌv ikwəl ɹæŋk, mɛn ʃi kəɾ əpɹoʊtʃ oʊpənli ən bɪd fɛɹwɛl wən wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ ə ðɛm wɑz ɔɹɾɝd tə ənʌðɝ ʃɪp əɹ pɹəmoʊɾəd. ən naʊ hi wɑz sɔɪhɪn. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð bɛɾɪŋ jəɹ oʊn sɔɪhɪn, ʌv kɔɹs, soʊ lɔŋ əz jə dɪd nɑt flɔn ðə fækt. hi wəd meɪk ʌp ə pæləɾ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɛɾ əz juʒəwəl, ivən ɪf i nɛvɝ slɛpt ɑn ɪt. bʌt fɹiɪŋ ə sɔɪhɪn, kæstɪŋ ɪm ɔf fɹəm ðə ɹaɪts ən pɹɪvlədʒəz beɪl snɪɹɾ æt, wɑz ðə haɪɾ ə kɹulti. noʊ, ʃi wɑz laɪɪŋ baɪ əvɔɪɾəns əɡɛn, ən wɝs, laɪɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. ʃi wɑntəd hoʊlhɑɹɾɪdli tə mɛɹi ðə mæn beɪl doʊmən. ʃi wɑz bɪɾɝli ənʃʊɹ ʃi kəd bɹɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə mɛɹi mænumɪɾɪd pɹɑpɝɾi.

"You must not call me 'lass,' Bayle," she chided, staring beyond his shoulder toward the fireplace. It would not seem to come into focus. Before leaving Tanchico she had decided to marry him, one of those lightning decisions that had made her reputation. Smuggler he might be, but she could have put a stop to that, and he was steadfast, strong and intelligent, a seafarer. That last had always been a necessity, to her. Only, she had not known his customs. Some places in the Empire, men did the asking, and were actually offended if a woman even suggested. She knew nothing of enticing a man, either. Her few lovers had all been men of equal rank, men she could approach openly and bid farewell when one or the other of them was ordered to another ship or promoted. And now he was so'jhin. There was nothing wrong with bedding your own so'jhin, of course, so long as you did not flaunt the fact. He would make up a pallet at the foot of the bed as usual, even if he never slept on it. But freeing a so'jhin, casting him off from the rights and privileges Bayle sneered at, was the height of cruelty. No, she was lying by avoidance again, and worse, lying to herself. She wanted wholeheartedly to marry the man Bayle Domon. She was bitterly unsure she could bring herself to marry manumitted property.

"æz maɪ leɪɾi də kəmænd, soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə blaɪð mɑkɝi ʌv fɔɹmæləɾi.

"As my Lady do command, so shall it be," he said in a blithe mockery of formality.

ʃi pʌntʃt ɪm ʌndɝ ðə ɹɪbz. nɑt hɑɹd. dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪm ɡɹʌnt. hi hæd tə lɝn! ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə si ðə saɪts ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ʃi dʒʌst wɑntəd tə steɪ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz, ɹæpt ɪn beɪlz ɑɹmz, nɑt niɾɪŋ tə meɪk dɪsɪʒənz, steɪ ɹaɪt wɛɹ ðeɪ stʊd fɝɛvɝ.

She punched him under the ribs. Not hard. Just enough to make him grunt. He had to learn! She did not want to see the sights of Ebou Dar any longer. She just wanted to stay where she was, wrapped in Bayle's arms, not needing to make decisions, stay right where they stood forever.

ə ʃɑɹp nɑk saʊndəɾ ət ðə dɔɹ, ən ʃi pʊʃt ɪm əweɪ. ət list i nu ɪnʌf nɑt tə pɹoʊtɛs ðæt. waɪl i tʌɡd ɑn ɪz koʊt, ʃi ʃʊk aʊt ðə plits ə hɝ dʒɹɛs ən ətɛmptəd tə smuð əweɪ ðə ɹɪŋkəlz fɹəm laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə bɛd. ðəɹ sim tə bi ə ɡʊd mɛni, dɪspaɪt haʊ stɪl ʃi hæd bɪn. ðɪs nɑk maɪt bi ə sʌmənz fɹəm sjuɹɔθ əɹ ə meɪd siɪŋ wɛðɝ ʃi niɾəd ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt huɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, ʃi wɑz nɑt gɑnə lɛɾ ɛniwʌn si hɝ lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ɹoʊlɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɑn ðə dɛk.

A sharp knock sounded at the door, and she pushed him away. At least he knew enough not to protest that. While he tugged on his coat, she shook out the pleats of her dress and attempted to smooth away the wrinkles from lying on the bed. There seemed to be a good many, despite how still she had been. This knock might be a summons from Suroth or a maid seeing whether she needed anything, but whoever it was, she was not going to let anyone see her looking as if she had been rolling about on the deck.

ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp ðə jusləs ətɛmpt, ʃi weɪɾəd əntɪl beɪl hæd bʌɾənd hɪmsɛlf ʌp ən ədɑptəd ði æɾətud i θɔt pɹɑpɝ fəɹ ə sɔɪhɪn - laɪk ə kæptən ɑn ɪz kɔɹɾɝdɛk ɹɛɾi tə ʃaʊɾ ɔɹɾɝz, ʃi θɔt, saɪɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf - ðən bɑɹkt, "kʌm!" ðə wʊmən u oʊpən ðə dɔɹ wɑz ðə læst ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə si.

Giving up the useless attempt, she waited until Bayle had buttoned himself up and adopted the attitude he thought proper for a so'jhin - Like a captain on his quarterdeck ready to shout orders, she thought, sighing to herself - then barked, "Come!" The woman who opened the door was the last she expected to see.

bɛθəmən aɪɾ əɹ hɛzɪɾəntli bɪfɔɹ dɑɹɾɪŋ ɪn ən kloʊzɪŋ ðə dɔɹ sɔfli bɪhaɪn hɝ. ðə sʌldəm tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðən nɛlt, hoʊldɪŋ hɝsɛlf stɪfli əpɹaɪt. hɝ dɑɹk blu dʒɹɛs wɪð ɪts laɪtnɪŋ-wɝkt ɹɛd pænəlz lʊk fɹɛʃli klin ən aɪɝnd. ðə ʃɑɹp kɑntʃɹæs tə hɝ oʊn dɪʃəvəlmən ɪɹəteɪɾəd ɛdʒiənɪn. "maɪ leɪɾi," bɛθəmən bɪɡæn ənsɝteɪnli, ðən swɑloʊd. "maɪ leɪɾi, aɪ bɛɡ ə wɝd wɪð ju." ɡlænsɪŋ ət beɪl, ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps. "ɪn pɹaɪvət, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ju, maɪ leɪɾi?"

Bethamin eyed her hesitantly before darting in and closing the door softly behind her. The sul'dam took a deep breath, then knelt, holding herself stiffly upright. Her dark blue dress with its lightning-worked red panels looked freshly cleaned and ironed. The sharp contrast to her own dishevelment irritated Egeanin. "My Lady," Bethamin began uncertainly, then swallowed. "My Lady, I beg a word with you." Glancing at Bayle, she licked her lips. "In private, if it pleases you, my Lady?"

ðə læs taɪm ɛdʒiənɪn hæd sin ðɪs wʊmən wɑz ɪn ə beɪsmən ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ, wən ʃi ɹimuvd ən æɾəm fɹəm bɛθəmən ən toʊld əɹ tə ɡoʊ. ðət wʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf fəɹ blækmeɪl ɪf ʃi wɝ ə ðə haɪ blʌd! wɪθaʊt daʊt ðə tʃɑɹdʒ wəd bi ðə seɪm əz fəɹ fɹiɪŋ ə deɪmeɪn. tʃɹizən. ɪksɛp ðət bɛθəmən kəd nɑt ɹɪvil ɪt wɪθaʊt kəndɛmɪŋ hɝsɛlf, tu.

The last time Egeanin had seen this woman was in a basement in Tanchico, when she removed an a'dam from Bethamin and told her to go. That would have been enough for blackmail if she were of the High Blood! Without doubt the charge would be the same as for freeing a damane. Treason. Except that Bethamin could not reveal it without condemning herself, too.

"hi kən hɪɹ ɛniθɪŋ juv tə seɪ, bɛθəmən," ʃi sɛd kɑmli. ʃi wɑz ɪn ʃoʊl wɔɾɝz, ən ðət wɑz noʊ pleɪs fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛp kɑm. "wʌt dʒju wɑnt?"

"He can hear anything you have to say, Bethamin," she said calmly. She was in shoal waters, and that was no place for anything except calm. "What do you want?"

bɛθəmən ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ niz ən weɪstəd mɔɹ taɪm wɪð lɪp lɪkɪŋ. ðɛn, sʌɾənli, wɝdz keɪm aʊɾ ɪn ə ɹʌʃ. "eɪ sikɝ keɪm tə mi ən ɔɹɾɝd mi tə ɹɪzum əɹ . . . əɹ əkweɪntəns ən ɹipɔɹɾ ɑn jə tə hɪm." əz ɪf tə stɑp hɝsɛlf bæbəlɪŋ, ʃi kɑɾ əɹ ʌndɝlɪp ɪn əɹ tiθ ən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɛdʒiənɪn. hɝ dɑɹk aɪz wɝ dɛspɹɪɾ ən pliɾɪŋ, dʒʌst əz ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɪn ðət tæntʃəkoʊ beɪsmənt.

Bethamin shifted on her knees and wasted more time with lip licking. Then, suddenly, words came out in a rush. "A Seeker came to me and ordered me to resume our . . . our acquaintance and report on you to him." As if to stop herself babbling, she caught her underlip in her teeth and stared at Egeanin. Her dark eyes were desperate and pleading, just as they had been in that Tanchico basement.

ɛdʒiənɪn mɛɾ əɹ ɡeɪz kuli. ʃoʊl wɔɾɝz, ən ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪd ɡeɪl. hɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ ɔɹɾɝz tə ɛbu dɑɹ sʌɾənli wɝ ɪkspleɪnd. ʃi dɪd nɑt niɾ ə dɪskɹɪpʃən tə noʊ ɪt mʌs bi ðə seɪm mæn. nɔɹ dɪd ʃi nid tə æsk waɪ bɛθəmən wɑz kəmɪɾɪŋ tʃɹizən baɪ bɪtʃɹeɪɪŋ ðə sikɝ. ɪf i dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪz səspɪʃənz wɝ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə teɪk əɹ fəɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋ, ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɛdʒiənɪn wəd tɛl ɪm ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi nu, ɪnkluɾɪŋ əbaʊɾ ə sɝɾən beɪsmənt, ən bɛθəmən wəd sun faɪn hɝsɛlf wʌns mɔɹ wɛɹɪŋ ən æɾəm. ðə wʊmənz oʊnli hoʊp wɑz tə hɛlp ɛdʒiənɪn ɪveɪd hɪm.

Egeanin met her gaze coolly. Shoal waters, and an unexpected gale. Her strange orders to Ebou Dar suddenly were explained. She did not need a description to know it must be the same man. Nor did she need to ask why Bethamin was committing treason by betraying the Seeker. If he decided his suspicions were strong enough to take her for questioning, eventually Egeanin would tell him everything she knew, including about a certain basement, and Bethamin would soon find herself once more wearing an a'dam. The woman's only hope was to help Egeanin evade him.

"ɹaɪz," ʃi sɛd. "hæv ə sit." lʌkəli, ðəɹ wɝ tu tʃɛɹz, ðoʊ niðɝ əpɪɹd kʌmftəɹbəl. "beɪl, aɪ θɪŋk ðəɹ ɪz bɹændi ɪn ðət flæsk ɑn ðə dʒɹɔɝd tʃɛst."

"Rise," she said. "Have a seat." Luckily, there were two chairs, though neither appeared comfortable. "Bayle, I think there is brandy in that flask on the drawered chest."

bɛθəmən wɑz soʊ ʃeɪki ðəɾ ɛdʒiənɪn hæd tə hɛlp əɹ ʌp ən ɡaɪɾ əɹ tə ə tʃɛɹ. beɪl bɹɔt wɝk sɪlvɝ kʌps hoʊldɪŋ ə lɪɾəl bɹændi ən ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə baʊ ən pɹɛzən ɛdʒiənɪnz fɝst, bʌt wən i ɹɪtɝn tə ðə tʃɛst, ʃi sɔ hi hæd pɔɹd fəɹ hɪmsɛlf, əz wɛl. hi stʊd ðɛɹ, kʌp ɪn hænd, wɑtʃɪŋ əm əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ðə moʊs nætʃɹəl θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld. bɛθəmən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm pɑp-aɪd.

Bethamin was so shaky that Egeanin had to help her up and guide her to a chair. Bayle brought worked silver cups holding a little brandy and remembered to bow and present Egeanin's first, but when he returned to the chest, she saw he had poured for himself, as well. He stood there, cup in hand, watching them as if it were the most natural thing in the world. Bethamin stared at him pop-eyed.

"ju θɪŋk jə ɑɹ pɔɪzd oʊvɝ ði ɪmpəlɪŋ steɪk," ɛdʒiənɪn sɛd, ən ðə sʌldəm flɪntʃt, hɝ fɹaɪɾənd ɡeɪz dʒɝkɪŋ bæk tə ɛdʒiənɪnz feɪs. "ju ɑɹ ɹɔŋ, bɛθəmən. ði oʊnli ɹil kɹaɪm aɪ hæv kəmɪɾəd wɑz fɹiɪŋ ju." nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli tʃɹu, bʌɾ ɪn ði ɛnd, æftɝ ɔl, ʃi hæd pleɪs ðə meɪl æɾəm ɪn sjuɹɔθs hænz hɝsɛlf. ən tɔkɪŋ wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz nɑɾ ə kɹaɪm. ðə sikɝ maɪt səspɛkt - hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə lɪsən əɾ ə dɔɹ ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ - bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ə sʌldəm, tʃɑɹdʒd wɪð kætʃɪŋ mɛɹəθdəmeɪn. ət wɝs ðət mɛn ə ɹɛpɹəmænd. "soʊ lɔŋ əz i dʌzn lɝn əbaʊt ðæt, hiz noʊ ɹizən tə ɝɛs mi. ɪf i wɑns tə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ seɪ, əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls əbaʊt mi, tɛl hɪm. dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ ɪf i dʌz dɪsaɪd tə ɝɛs mi, əl ɡɪv ɪm jəɹ neɪm." ə ɹimaɪndɝ kəɾ oʊnli ɡɑɹɾ əɡɛns bɛθəmən sʌɾənli θɪŋkɪŋ ʃi sɔ ə seɪf weɪ aʊt, livɪŋ əɹ bɪhaɪnd. "hi woʊn əv tə meɪk mi skɹim wʌns."

"You think you are poised over the impaling stake," Egeanin said, and the sul'dam flinched, her frightened gaze jerking back to Egeanin's face. "You are wrong, Bethamin. The only real crime I have committed was freeing you." Not precisely true, but in the end, after all, she had placed the male a'dam in Suroth's hands herself. And talking with Aes Sedai was not a crime. The Seeker might suspect - he had tried to listen at a door in Tanchico - but she was not a sul'dam, charged with catching marath'damane. At worst that meant a reprimand. "So long as he doesn't learn about that, he has no reason to arrest me. If he wants to know what I say, or anything else about me, tell him. Just remember that if he does decide to arrest me, I will give him your name." A reminder could only guard against Bethamin suddenly thinking she saw a safe way out, leaving her behind. "He won't have to make me scream once."

tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, ðə sʌldəm bɪɡæn tə læf hɪstɛɹɪkli. əntɪl ɛdʒiənɪn lin fɔɹwɝɾ ən slæp hɝ, ɛniweɪ.

To her surprise, the sul'dam began to laugh hysterically. Until Egeanin leaned forward and slapped her, anyway.

ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ tʃik sʌlənli, bɛθəmən sɛd, "hi noʊz nɪɹ ɪnʌf ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə beɪsmənt, maɪ leɪɾi." ən ʃi bɪɡæn tə dɪskɹaɪb ə fæntæstɪkəl wɛb ə tʃɹizən kənɛktɪŋ ɛdʒiənɪn ən beɪl ən sjuɹɔθ ən meɪbi ivən tuɑn hɝsɛlf wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən mɛɹəθdəmeɪn, ən deɪmeɪn u hæd bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Rubbing her cheek sullenly, Bethamin said, "He knows near enough everything except the basement, my Lady." And she began to describe a fantastical web of treason connecting Egeanin and Bayle and Suroth and maybe even Tuon herself with Aes Sedai, and marath'damane, and damane who had been Aes Sedai.

bɛθəmənz vɔɪs bɪɡæn tə ɡɹoʊ pænɪki əz ʃi dɑɹɾɪd fɹəm wʌn ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl tʃɑɹdʒ tə ənʌðɝ, ən bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ, ɛdʒiənɪn bɪɡæn sɪpɪŋ bɹændi. dʒʌst sɪps. ʃi wɑz kɑm. ʃi wɑz ɪn kəmæn ə hɝsɛlf. ʃi wɑz . . . ðɪs wɑz bɪɑnd ʃoʊl wɔɾɝz. ʃi wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ kloʊz ɑn ə li ʃɔɹ, ən soʊulblɪndɝ hɪmsɛlf ɹoʊd ðət ɡeɪl, kʌmɪŋ tə stil əɹ aɪz. æftɝ lɪsnɪŋ fəɹ ə taɪm wɪð ɪz oʊn aɪz ɡɹoʊɪŋ waɪɾɝ ən waɪɾɝ, beɪl dʒɹæŋk daʊn ə bɹɪmfəl kʌp ə ðə dɑɹk ɹɔ lɪkɝ ɪn wʌn ɡoʊ. ʃi wɑz ɹɪliv tə si hɪz ʃɑk, ən ɡɪlti ət filɪŋ ɹɪlivd. ʃi wəd nɑt bɪliv ɪm ə mɝɾɝɝ. bɪsaɪdz, hi wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊd juzɪŋ ɪz hænz bʌɾ oʊnli fɛɹ əɾ ə sɔɹd; wɪð wɛpənz əɹ bɛɹ-hændəd, ðə haɪ lɔɹd tʃɹɑk wʊɾə ɡʌɾɪd beɪl laɪk ə kɑɹp. hɝ oʊnli ɪkskjus fəɹ ivən kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ɪt wɑz ðəɾ i hæd bɪn wɪð tu ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ. ðə hoʊl θɪŋ wɑz nɑnsɛns. ɪt hæd tə bi! ðoʊz tu ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd nɑt bɪn pɑɹɾ ʌv ɛni plɑt, dʒʌst ə tʃæns miɾɪŋ. laɪts tʃɹuθ, ðeɪ hæd bɪn lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ɡɝlz, ən nɪɹ ɪnəsəns ət ðæt, tu sɔfθɑɹɾɪd tə æksɛpt əɹ sədʒɛstʃən ðeɪ kʌt ðə sikɝz θɹoʊt wən ðeɪ hæd ðə tʃæns. ə pɪɾi, ðæt. ðeɪ hæd hændəɾ əɹ ðə meɪl æɾəm. aɪs kɹɛp daʊn əɹ spaɪn. ɪf ðə sikɝ ɛvɝ lɝnd ʃi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd dɪspoʊzɪŋ ə ði æɾəm ðə weɪ ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ sədʒɛstəd, ɪf ɛniwʌn lɝnd, ʃi wəd bi dʒʌdʒd əz ɡɪlti ʌv tʃɹizən əz ɪf ʃi hæd səksiɾəd ɪn dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪɾ ɪndə ði oʊʃənz dɛpθs. ɑɹ jə nɑt? ʃi dɪmændəɾ ə hɝsɛlf. ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə stil əɹ aɪz.

Bethamin's voice began to grow panicky as she darted from one incredible charge to another, and before long, Egeanin began sipping brandy. Just sips. She was calm. She was in command of herself. She was . . . This was beyond shoal waters. She was riding close on a lee shore, and Soulblinder himself rode that gale, coming to steal her eyes. After listening for a time with his own eyes growing wider and wider, Bayle drank down a brimful cup of the dark raw liquor in one go. She was relieved to see his shock, and guilty at feeling relieved. She would not believe him a murderer. Besides, he was very good using his hands but only fair at a sword; with weapons or bare-handed, the High Lord Turak would have gutted Bayle like a carp. Her only excuse for even considering it was that he had been with two Aes Sedai in Tanchico. The whole thing was nonsense. It had to be! Those two Aes Sedai had not been part of any plot, just a chance meeting. Light's truth, they had been little more than girls, and near innocents at that, too softhearted to accept her suggestion they cut the Seeker's throat when they had the chance. A pity, that. They had handed her the male a'dam. Ice crept down her spine. If the Seeker ever learned she had intended disposing of the a'dam the way those Aes Sedai suggested, if anyone learned, she would be judged as guilty of treason as if she had succeeded in dropping it into the ocean's depths. Are you not? she demanded of herself. The Dark One was coming to steal her eyes.

tɪɹz stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn əɹ feɪs, bɛθəmən klʌtʃt əɹ kʌp tə hɝ bɹɛsts əz ðoʊ hʌɡɪŋ hɝsɛlf. ɪf ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip fɹəm ʃeɪkɪŋ, ʃi feɪl mɪzɝəbli. tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, ʃi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɛdʒiənɪn, əɹ pɝhæps ət sʌmθɪŋ bɪɑn hɝ. sʌmθɪŋ hɔɹəfaɪɪŋ. ðə faɪɝ hæd nɑt wɔɹm ðə ɹum vɛɹi fɑɹ jɛt, bʌt swɛt wɑz biɾɪd ɑn bɛθəmənz feɪs. ". . . ən ɪf i lɝnz əbaʊt ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə," ʃi bæbəld, "hi wɪl noʊ fəɹ ʃʊɹ! hɪl kʌm æftɝ mi, ən ði ʌðɝ sʌldəm! juv tə stɑp hɪm! ɪf i teɪks mi, əl ɡɪv ɪm jəɹ neɪm! aɪ wɪl!" əbɹʌpli ʃi tɪltəd lɪftəd ðə kʌp tə hɝ maʊθ ənstɛɾəli ən ɡʌlp ðə kɑntɛns, tʃoʊkɪŋ ən kɑfɪŋ, ðən θɹʌst ɪɾ aʊt təwɔɹd beɪl fəɹ mɔɹ. hi dɪd nɑt muv. hi lʊk pɑliækst.

Tears streaming down her face, Bethamin clutched her cup to her breasts as though hugging herself. If she was trying to keep from shaking, she failed miserably. Trembling, she stared at Egeanin, or perhaps at something beyond her. Something horrifying. The fire had not warmed the room very far yet, but sweat was beaded on Bethamin's face. ". . . and if he learns about Renna and Seta," she babbled, "he will know for sure! He'll come after me, and the other sul'dam! You have to stop him! If he takes me, I'll give him your name! I will!" Abruptly she tilted lifted the cup to her mouth unsteadily and gulped the contents, choking and coughing, then thrust it out toward Bayle for more. He did not move. He looked poleaxed.

"hu ɑɹ ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə?" ɛdʒiənɪn æskt. ʃi wɑz əz fɹaɪɾənd əz ðə sʌldəm, bʌɾ əz ɔlweɪz, ʃi kɛpt əɹ fɪɹ hɑɹd-ɹift. "wʌt kən ðə sikɝ lɝn əbaʊt ðɛm?" bɛθəmənz aɪz slɪɾ əweɪ, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə mit hɝz, ən əbɹʌpli ʃi nu. "ðeɪ ɑɹ sʌldəm, ɑɹən ðeɪ, bɛθəmən? ən ðeɪ wɝ kɑlɝd, tu, dʒʌs laɪk ju."

"Who are Renna and Seta?" Egeanin asked. She was as frightened as the sul'dam, but as always, she kept her fear hard-reefed. "What can the Seeker learn about them?" Bethamin's eyes slid away, refusing to meet hers, and abruptly she knew. "They are sul'dam, aren't they, Bethamin? And they were collared, too, just like you."

"ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn sjuɹɔθs sɝvəs," ðə wʊmən wɪmpɝd. "ðeɪ ɑɹ nɛvɝ əlaʊd tə bi kəmplit, ðoʊ. sjuɹɔθ noʊz."

"They are in Suroth's service," the woman whimpered. "They are never allowed to be complete, though. Suroth knows."

ɛdʒiənɪn ɹʌbd əɾ əɹ aɪz wɛɹəli. pɝhæps ðəɹ wɑz ə kənspɪɹəsi, æftɝ ɔl. əɹ sjuɹɔθ maɪt bi haɪɾɪŋ wʌt ðə pɛɹ wɝ tə pɹətɛk ði ɛmpaɪɝ. ði ɛmpaɪɝ dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn sʌldəm; ɪts stʃɹɛŋkθ wɑz bɪlt ɑn ðɛm. ðə nuz ðət sʌldəm wɝ wɪmən u kəd lɝn tə tʃænəl maɪt ʃæɾɝ ði ɛmpaɪɝ tə ɪts kɔɹ. ɪt hæd ʃʊɹli ʃeɪkən hɝ. meɪbi ʃæɾɝd hɝ. ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd nɑt fɹid bɛθəmən aʊɾ ə duɾi. soʊ mɛni θɪŋz hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ. ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɪliv ðəɾ ɛni wʊmən u kəd tʃænəl dɪzɝv tə bi kɑlɝd. kɹɪmənəlz, sɝɾənli, ən meɪbi ðoʊz u ɹəfjuzd oʊðz tə ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn, ən . . . ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ. wʌns, hɝ laɪf hæd bɪn meɪɾ ʌp ə ɹɑk-sɑləd sɝɾəntiz, laɪk ɡaɪɾɪŋ stɑɹz ðət nɛvɝ feɪld. ʃi wɑntəɾ əɹ oʊld laɪf bæk. ʃi wɑntəɾ ə fju sɝɾəntiz.

Egeanin rubbed at her eyes wearily. Perhaps there was a conspiracy, after all. Or Suroth might be hiding what the pair were to protect the Empire. The Empire depended on sul'dam; its strength was built on them. The news that sul'dam were women who could learn to channel might shatter the Empire to its core. It had surely shaken her. Maybe shattered her. She herself had not freed Bethamin out of duty. So many things had changed in Tanchico. She no longer believed that any woman who could channel deserved to be collared. Criminals, certainly, and maybe those who refused oaths to the Crystal Throne, and . . . She did not know. Once, her life had been made up of rock-solid certainties, like guiding stars that never failed. She wanted her old life back. She wanted a few certainties.

"aɪ θɔt," bɛθəmən bɪɡæn. ʃi wəɾ əv noʊ lɪps lɛft ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑp lɪkɪŋ ðɛm. "maɪ leɪɾi, ɪf ðə sikɝ . . . sʌfɝz ən æksəɾənt . . . pɝhæps ðə deɪnʒɝ wəd pæs wɪð hɪm." laɪt, ðə wʊmən bɪlivd ɪn ðɪs ɪntʃɹiɡ əɡɛns ðə kɹɪstəl θɹoʊn, ən ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə lɛɾ ɪt pæs tə seɪv əɹ oʊn skɪn!

"I thought," Bethamin began. She would have no lips left if she did not stop licking them. "My Lady, if the Seeker . . . suffers an accident . . . perhaps the danger would pass with him." Light, the woman believed in this intrigue against the Crystal Throne, and she was ready to let it pass to save her own skin!

ɛdʒiənɪn ɹoʊz, ən ðə sʌldəm hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs bʌt tə fɑloʊ. "aɪ wɪl θɪŋk ɑn ɪt, bɛθəmən. jəl kʌm tə si mi ɛvɹi deɪ jə ɑɹ fɹi. ðə sikɝ wɪl ɪkspɛkt ɪt. əntɪl aɪ meɪk maɪ dɪsɪʒən, jəl də nʌθɪŋ. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi? nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛp jəɹ duɾiz ən wʌɾ aɪ tɛl ju." bɛθəmən ʌndɝstʊd. ʃi wɑz soʊ ɹɪliv ðət sʌmwʌn ɛls wɑz dilɪŋ wɪð ðə deɪnʒɝ ðət ʃi nɛlt əɡɛn ən kɪst ɛdʒiənɪnz hænd.

Egeanin rose, and the sul'dam had no choice but to follow. "I will think on it, Bethamin. You will come to see me every day you are free. The Seeker will expect it. Until I make my decision, you will do nothing. Do you understand me? Nothing except your duties and what I tell you." Bethamin understood. She was so relieved that someone else was dealing with the danger that she knelt again and kissed Egeanin's hand.

ɔl bʌt bʌndəlɪŋ ðə wʊmən aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, ɛdʒiənɪn kloʊz ðə dɔɹ, ðən hɝld əɹ kʌp ət ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ɪt hɪt ðə bɹɪks ən baʊnst ɔf, ɹoʊlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə smɔl ɹʌɡ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ɪt wɑz dɛntɪd. hɝ fɑðɝ hæd ɡɪvən əɹ ðət sɛɾ ə kʌps wən ʃi ɡeɪn əɹ fɝs kəmænd. ɔl ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ sim tə hæv litʃt aʊɾ ə hɝ. ðə sikɝ hæd nɪɾəd munbimz ən hæpənstæns ɪndə ə stʃɹæŋɡəlɪŋ kɔɹd fəɹ əɹ nɛk. ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑt neɪm pɹɑpɝɾi ɪnstɛd. ʃi ʃʌɾɝəd ət ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi. wʌtɛvɝ ʃi dɪd, ðə sikɝ hæɾ əɹ tʃɹæpt.

All but bundling the woman out of the room, Egeanin closed the door, then hurled her cup at the fireplace. It hit the bricks and bounced off, rolling across the small rug on the floor. It was dented. Her father had given her that set of cups when she gained her first command. All the strength seemed to have leached out of her. The Seeker had knitted moonbeams and happenstance into a strangling cord for her neck. If she was not named property instead. She shuddered at the possibility. Whatever she did, the Seeker had her trapped.

"aɪ kən kɪl hɪm." beɪl flɛkst ɪz hænz, bɹɔd laɪk ðə ɹɛst ə hɪm. "hi bi ə skɪni mæn, əz aɪ ɹikɔl. juz tə ɛvɹiwʌn oʊbeɪɪŋ ɪz wɝd. hɪl noʊ bi ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɛniwʌn tə snæp ɪz nɛk."

"I can kill him." Bayle flexed his hands, broad like the rest of him. "He be a skinny man, as I recall. Used to everyone obeying his word. He will no be expecting anyone to snap his neck."

"jul nɛvɝ faɪn ɪm tə kɪl, beɪl. hi woʊn miɾ əɹ ɪn ðə seɪm pleɪs twaɪs, ən ivən ɪf jə fɑloʊɾ əɹ deɪ ən naɪt, hi maɪt wɛl bi ɪn dɪsɡaɪz. jə kænɑt kɪl ɛvɹi mæn ʃi spiks tə."

"You'll never find him to kill, Bayle. He won't meet her in the same place twice, and even if you followed her day and night, he might well be in disguise. You cannot kill every man she speaks to."

stɪfənɪŋ əɹ spaɪn, ʃi mɑɹtʃt tə ðə teɪbəl wɛɹ əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dɛsk sæɾ ən flɪpt oʊpən ðə lɪd. ðə weɪv-kɑɹvd ɹaɪɾɪŋ dɛsk, wɪð ɪts sɪlvɝ-maʊntəd ɡlæs ɪŋkpɑɾ ən sɪlvɝ sæn dʒɑɹ, hæd bɪn əɹ mʌðɝz ɡɪft ət ðət fɝs kəmænd. ðə nitli stækt ʃits ə faɪn peɪpɝ bɔɹ əɹ nuli ɡɹæntəd sɪdʒəl, ə sɔɹɾ ən ə faʊld æŋkɝ. "aɪ wɪl ɹaɪɾ aʊt jəɹ mænumɪʃən," ʃi sɛd, dɪpɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝ pɛn, "ænd ɡɪv jə ɪnʌf kɔɪn tə baɪ pæsədʒ." ðə pɛn ɡlaɪɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə peɪdʒ. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə ɡʊd hænd. lɔɡ ɛntʃɹiz hæd tə bi lɛɡəbəl. "nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə baɪ ə ʃɪp, aɪ fɪɹ, bʌɾ ɪt mʌs du. jəl dɪpɑɹɾ ɑn ðə fɝst əveɪləbəl ʃɪp. ʃeɪv ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ hɛd, ən jə ʃəɾ əv noʊ tʃɹʌbəl. ɪts stɪl ə ʃɑk, siɪŋ bɔl mɛn nɑt wɛɹɪŋ wɪɡz, bʌt soʊ fɑɹ noʊ wʌn simz tə - " ʃi ɡæspt əz beɪl slɪd ðə peɪdʒ ɹaɪɾ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ əɹ pɛn.

Stiffening her spine, she marched to the table where her writing desk sat and flipped open the lid. The wave-carved writing desk, with its silver-mounted glass inkpot and silver sand jar, had been her mother's gift at that first command. The neatly stacked sheets of fine paper bore her newly granted sigil, a sword and a fouled anchor. "I will write out your manumission," she said, dipping the silver pen, "and give you enough coin to buy passage." The pen glided across the page. She had always had a good hand. Log entries had to be legible. "Not enough to buy a ship, I fear, but it must do. You will depart on the first available ship. Shave the rest of your head, and you should have no trouble. It's still a shock, seeing bald men not wearing wigs, but so far no one seems to - " She gasped as Bayle slid the page right out from under her pen.

"ɪf jə də fɹi mi, jə kən noʊ ɡɪmi ɔɹɾɝz," hi sɛd. "bɪsaɪdz, jə mʌst ɛnʃʊɹ aɪ kən səpɔɹt maɪsɛlf ɪf jə də fɹi mi." hi stʌk ðə peɪdʒ ɪndə ðə faɪɝ ən wɑtʃt waɪl ɪt blækən ən kɝld. "ə ʃɪp, jə dɪd seɪ, ən əl hoʊl jə tə ɪt."

"If you do free me, you can no give me orders," he said. "Besides, you must ensure I can support myself if you do free me." He stuck the page into the fire and watched while it blackened and curled. "A ship, you did say, and I will hold you to it."

"lɪsən wɛl ən hɪɹ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn əɹ bɛs kɔɹɾɝdɛk vɔɪs, bʌɾ ɪt meɪd noʊ ɪmpɹɛʃən ɑn hɪm. ɪt hæd tə bi ðə kɝs dʒɹɛs.

"Listen well and hear," she said in her best quarterdeck voice, but it made no impression on him. It had to be the cursed dress.

"ju də niɾ ə kɹu," hi sɛd ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ hɝ, "æn aɪ kən faɪn jə wʌn, ivən hɪɹ."

"You do need a crew," he said right over her, "and I can find you one, even here."

"wʌt ɡʊd wɪl ə kɹu də mi? aɪ doʊn əv ə ʃɪp. ɪf aɪ dɪd, wɛɹ kəɾ aɪ seɪl ðət ðə sikɝ kʊdn faɪn mi?"

"What good will a crew do me? I don't have a ship. If I did, where could I sail that the Seeker couldn't find me?"

beɪl ʃɹʌɡd əz ðoʊ ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. "ə kɹu, fɝst. aɪ dɪd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðət jʌŋ fɛloʊ ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz, ðə wʌn wɪð ðə læs ɑn ɪz ni. stɑp ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. ðəɹ bi noʊ hɑɹm tə ə lɪɾəl kɪsɪŋ."

Bayle shrugged as though that was not important. "A crew, first. I did recognize that young fellow in the kitchens, the one with the lass on his knee. Stop grimacing. There be no harm to a little kissing."

ʃi dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp, pɹipɛɹd tə sɛɾ ɪm fɝmli tə ɹaɪts. ʃi wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ, nɑt ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, ðət pɛɹ hæd bɪn ɡɹoʊpɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn pʌblɪk laɪk ænəməlz, ən i wɑz əɹ pɹɑpɝɾi! hi kəd nɑt spik tə hɝ ðɪs weɪ!

She drew herself up, prepared to set him firmly to rights. She was frowning, not grimacing, that pair had been groping at one another in public like animals, and he was her property! He could not speak to her this way!

"hɪz neɪm bi mæt kɔθən," beɪl wɛn ɑn ivən əz ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. "baɪ hɪz kloʊðz, hiz kʌm ʌp ɪn ðə wɝld, ən fɑɹ. ðə fɝs taɪm aɪ dɪd si hɪm, hi dɪd bi ɪn ə fɑɹmɝz koʊt, ɪskeɪpɪŋ tʃɹɑləks ɪn ə pleɪs ivən tʃɹɑləks bi əfɹeɪɾ ʌv. ðə læs taɪm, hæf ðə taʊn ʌv waɪtbɹɪdʒ dɪd bi bɝnɪŋ, kloʊs ɪnʌf tə, ən ə mɹdʒɹɑl dɪd bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl ɪm ən ɪz fɹɛnz. aɪ dɪd noʊ si fəɹ maɪsɛlf, bʌɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls bi mɔɹ ðən aɪ kən bɪliv. ɛni mæn u kən sɝvaɪv tʃɹɑləks ən mɹdʒɹɑl də bi jusfəl, aɪ θɪŋk. ɪspɛʃli naʊ."

"His name be Mat Cauthon," Bayle went on even as she opened her mouth. "By his clothes, he has come up in the world, and far. The first time I did see him, he did be in a farmer's coat, escaping Trollocs in a place even Trollocs be afraid of. The last time, half the town of Whitebridge did be burning, close enough to, and a Myrddraal did be trying to kill him and his friends. I did no see for myself, but anything else be more than I can believe. Any man who can survive Trollocs and Myrddraal do be useful, I think. Especially now."

"sʌmdeɪ," ʃi ɡɹaʊld, "aɪ æm gɑnə hæv tə si səm ə ðiz tʃɹɑləks ən mɹdʒɹɑl jə ɡoʊ ɑn əbaʊt." ðə θɪŋz kəd nɑt bi hæf əz fɪɹsəm əz i dɪskɹaɪbd.

"Someday," she growled, "I am going to have to see some of these Trollocs and Myrddraal you go on about." The things could not be half as fearsome as he described.

hi ɡɹɪn ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi nu wʌt ʃi θɔɾ əbaʊt ðiz soʊ-kɔld ʃæɾoʊzpɔn. "bɛɾɝ stɪl, jʌŋ mæstɝ kɔθən dɪɾ əv kəmpænjənz ɑn maɪ ʃɪp. ɡʊd mɛn fəɹ ðɪs sɪtʃueɪʃən, tu. wʌn, jə də noʊ. tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn."

He grinned and shook his head. He knew what she thought about these so-called Shadowspawn. "Better still, young Master Cauthon did have companions on my ship. Good men for this situation, too. One, you do know. Thom Merrilin."

ɛdʒiənɪnz bɹɛθ kɑt. mɛɹɪlɪn wɑz ə klɛvɝ oʊl mæn. ə deɪnʒɝəs oʊl mæn. ən i hæd bɪn wɪð ðoʊz tu ɛɛs sədaɪ wən ʃi mɛt beɪl. "beɪl, ɪz ðəɹ ə kənspɪɹəsi? tɛl mi. pliz?" noʊ wʌn sɛd pliz tə pɹɑpɝɾi, nɑɾ ivən tə sɔɪhɪn. nɑɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ wɑntəd sʌmθɪŋ bædli, ɛniweɪ.

Egeanin's breath caught. Merrilin was a clever old man. A dangerous old man. And he had been with those two Aes Sedai when she met Bayle. "Bayle, is there a conspiracy? Tell me. Please?" No one said please to property, not even to so'jhin. Not unless they wanted something badly, anyway.

ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn, hi lin ə hæn ɑn ðə stoʊn mæntəlpis ən fɹaʊn ɪndə ðə fleɪmz. "ɛɛs sədaɪ də plɑt ðə weɪ fɪʃ swɪm. ðeɪ kəd skim wɪð sjuɹɔθ, bʌt ðə kwɛstʃən də bi, kəd ʃi skim wɪð ðɛm? aɪ dɪd si hɝ lʊk ət deɪmeɪn, laɪk ðeɪ dɪd bi meɪnʒi dɑɡz wɪð fliz ən kætʃɪŋ dɪzizəz. kəd ʃi ivən tɔk tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ?" hi lʊkt ʌp, ən ɪz aɪz wɝ klɪɹ ən oʊpən, haɪɾɪŋ nʌθɪŋ. "aɪ də tɛl ðɪs fəɹ tʃɹu. ɑn maɪ ɡɹændmʌðɝz ɡɹeɪv, aɪ də noʊ ʌv noʊ plɑt. bʌt dɪɾ aɪ noʊ ʌv tɛn, aɪ stɪl wɪl noʊ lɛt ðət sikɝ əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls hɑɹm ju, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt də teɪk." ɪt wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ɛni lɔɪəl sɔɪhɪn maɪt seɪ. wɛl, noʊ sɔɪhɪn ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv wʊɾə bɪn soʊ stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝd, bʌt ðə sɛntəməns wɝ ðə seɪm. oʊnli, ʃi nu hi dɪd nɑt min ɪt ðət weɪ, kəd nɛvɝ min ɪt ðət weɪ.

Shaking his head again, he leaned a hand on the stone mantelpiece and frowned into the flames. "Aes Sedai do plot the way fish swim. They could scheme with Suroth, but the question do be, could she scheme with them? I did see her look at damane, like they did be mangy dogs with fleas and catching diseases. Could she even talk to an Aes Sedai?" He looked up, and his eyes were clear and open, hiding nothing. "I do tell this for true. On my grandmother's grave, I do know of no plot. But did I know of ten, I still will no let that Seeker or anyone else harm you, whatever it do take." It was the sort of thing any loyal so'jhin might say. Well, no so'jhin she had ever heard of would have been so straightforward, but the sentiments were the same. Only, she knew he did not mean it that way, could never mean it that way.

"θæŋk ju, beɪl." ə stɛɾi vɔɪs wɑz ə nəsɛsəɾi fəɹ kəmænd, bʌt ʃi wɑz pɹaʊd ðət hɝz wɑz stɛɾi naʊ. "faɪn ðɪs mæstɝ kɔθən, ən tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn, ɪf jə kæn. pɝhæps sʌmθɪŋ kən bi dʌn."

"Thank you, Bayle." A steady voice was a necessity for command, but she was proud that hers was steady now. "Find this Master Cauthon, and Thom Merrilin, if you can. Perhaps something can be done."

hi feɪl tə baʊ bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ əɹ pɹɛzəns, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən kənsɪɾɝ ʌpbɹeɪɾɪŋ hɪm. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə lɛt ðə sikɝ teɪk hɝ, iðɝ. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt tʊk tə stɑp hɪm. ðət wɑz ə dɪsɪʒən ʃi hæd ɹitʃt bɪfɔɹ ʃi fɹid bɛθəmən. ʃi fɪl ðə dɛntɪd kʌp tə ðə bɹɪm wɪð bɹændi, minɪŋ tə ɡɛt soʊ dʒɹʌŋk ʃi kəd nɑt θɪŋk, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd ʃi sæt piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɑɹk lɪkwəd wɪθaʊt tʌtʃɪŋ ə dʒɹɑp. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt tʊk. laɪt, ʃi wɑz noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən bɛθəmən! bʌt noʊɪŋ ɪt tʃeɪnʒd nʌθɪŋ. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt tʊk.

He failed to bow before leaving her presence, but she did not even consider upbraiding him. She did not intend to let the Seeker take her, either. Whatever it took to stop him. That was a decision she had reached before she freed Bethamin. She filled the dented cup to the brim with brandy, meaning to get so drunk she could not think, but instead she sat peering into the dark liquid without touching a drop. Whatever it took. Light, she was no better than Bethamin! But knowing it changed nothing. Whatever it took.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiɾu


CHAPTER 22

aʊɾ ə θɪn ɛɹ


Out of Thin Air

ði æmhɑɹə mɑɹkət wɑz wʌn ə θɹi ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ wɛɹ fɔɹənɝz wɝ əlaʊd tə tʃɹeɪd, bʌt dɪspaɪt ðə neɪm, ðə hjudʒ skwɛɹ hæd nʌθɪŋ ə ðə lʊk ʌv ə mɑɹkət, noʊ mɑɹkət stɔlz əɹ dɪspleɪz ə mɝtʃəndaɪz. ə fju maʊntəd ɹaɪɾɝz, ə hændfʊl ə kloʊz sɪdæn tʃɛɹz kæɹid baɪ bɹaɪtli lɪvɹid bɛɹɝz ən ði əkeɪʒənəl koʊtʃ wɪð ɪts wɪndoʊ kɝɾənz dʒɹɔn meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ ðoʊ ə spɑɹs jɛt bʌsəlɪŋ kɹaʊd ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn sin ɪn ɛni lɑɹdʒ sɪɾi. moʊst wɝ wɛl ɹæpt ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks əɡɛns ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wɪnz bloʊɪŋ ɪn ɔf ðə leɪk ðət sɝaʊndəd ðə sɪɾi, ən ɪt wɑz ðə koʊl ðət meɪɾ əm hɝi mɔɹ ðən ɛni ɝdʒən bɪznəs. ɝaʊn ðə skwɛɹ, əz ət ðə sɪɾiz ʌðɝ tu stʃɹeɪnʒɝz' mɑɹkəts, ðə tɔl stoʊn haʊsəz ə bæŋkɝz ɹʌbd ʃoʊldɝz wɪð sleɪt-ɹuf stoʊn ɪnz wɛɹ ðə fɔɹən mɝtʃəns steɪɾ ən blɑki wɪndoʊləs stoʊn wɛɹhaʊzɪz wɛɹ ðɛɹ ɡʊdz wɝ stɔɹd, ɔl dʒʌmbəld ɪn əmʌŋ stoʊn steɪbəlz ən stoʊn-wɔld wæɡən jɑɹdz. fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ wɑz ə sɪɾi ʌv stoʊn wɔlz ən sleɪt ɹufs. ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ, ði ɪnz wɝ ə kɔɹɾɝ fʊl ət bɛst, ən ðə wɛɹhaʊzɪz ən wæɡən jɑɹdz ɛmptiɝ ðən ðæt. kʌm spɹɪŋ ən ðə fʊl ɹɪvaɪvəl ə tʃɹeɪd, ðoʊ, mɝtʃəns wəd peɪ tʃɹɪpəl fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ speɪs ðeɪ kəd faɪnd.

The Amhara Market was one of three in Far Madding where foreigners were allowed to trade, but despite the name, the huge square had nothing of the look of a market, no market stalls or displays of merchandise. A few mounted riders, a handful of closed sedan chairs carried by brightly liveried bearers and the occasional coach with its window curtains drawn made their way though a sparse yet bustling crowd that might have been seen in any large city. Most were well wrapped in their cloaks against the morning winds blowing in off the lake that surrounded the city, and it was the cold that made them hurry more than any urgent business. Around the square, as at the city's other two Strangers' Markets, the tall stone houses of bankers rubbed shoulders with slate-roofed stone inns where the foreign merchants stayed and blocky windowless stone warehouses where their goods were stored, all jumbled in among stone stables and stone-walled wagon yards. Far Madding was a city of stone walls and slate roofs. This time of year, the inns were a quarter full at best, and the warehouses and wagon yards emptier than that. Come spring and the full revival of trade, though, merchants would pay triple for whatever space they could find.

ə ɹaʊn mɑɹbəl pɛɾəstəl ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə skwɛɹ hɛld ə stætʃu ʌv seɪviən æmhɑɹə, tu spænz tɔl ən pɹaʊɾ ɪn fɝ-tʃɹɪmd ɹoʊbz ə mɑɹbəl, wɪð ɪlæbɹət mɑɹbəl tʃeɪnz ʌv ɔfəs ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. hɝ mɑɹbəl feɪs wɑz stɝn bɪniθ ðə fɝs kaʊnsəlz dʒuəl mɑɹbəl daɪədɛm, ən əɹ ɹaɪt hæn fɝmli ɡɹɪp ðə hɪlt ʌv ə mɑɹbəl sɔɹd, ɪts pɔɪn ɹɛstɪŋ bɪtwin əɹ slɪpɝd fit, waɪl əɹ ɹeɪz lɛf hæn eɪmd ə wɔɹnɪŋ mɑɹbəl fɪŋɡɝ təwɔɹd ðə tiɹ ɡeɪt, səm θɹi-kɔɹɾɝz ʌv ə maɪl əweɪ. fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn mɝtʃəns fɹəm tiɹ ən ɪljən ən keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt ðə haɪ kaʊnsəl wɑz ɛvɝ wɛɹi ʌv fɔɹənɝz ən ðɛɹ kɝʌptɪŋ aʊtlænd weɪz. wʌn ə ðə stil-kæp stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz, ɪn ə lɛðɝ koʊt soʊn wɪð oʊvɝlæpɪŋ skwɛɹ mɛɾəl pleɪts ən ə ɡoʊldən hæn ɑn ðə lɛft ʃoʊldɝ, stʊd bɪloʊ ðə stætʃu juzɪŋ ə lɔŋ lɪmbɝ poʊl tə fɹaɪɾən əweɪ blæk-wɪŋd ɡɹeɪ pɪdʒənz. seɪviən æmhɑɹə wɑz wʌn ə ðə θɹi moʊst ɹɪvɪɹd wɪmən ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋz hɪstɝi, ðoʊ nʌn wɑz noʊn vɛɹi fɑɹ bɪɑn ðə leɪks ʃɔɹz. tu mɛn fɹəm ðə sɪɾi wɝ mɛnʃən ɪn ɛvɹi hɪstɝi ʌv ðə wɝld, ðoʊ ɪt hæd bɪn kɔld ɹɛn mədɔɹ wən wʌn wɑz bɔɹn ən fɛl mɔɹinə fəɹ ði ʌðɝ, bʌt fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ dɪɾ ɪts fɝvən bɛs tə fɝɡɛt ɹɑoʊlɪn dɑɹksbeɪn ən jʊɹiən stoʊnboʊ. ɪn ə ɹil weɪ, ðoʊz tu mɛn wɝ waɪ ɹænd wɑz ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ.

A round marble pedestal in the center of the square held a statue of Savion Amhara, two spans tall and proud in fur-trimmed robes of marble, with elaborate marble chains of office around her neck. Her marble face was stern beneath the First Counsel's jeweled marble diadem, and her right hand firmly gripped the hilt of a marble sword, its point resting between her slippered feet, while her raised left hand aimed a warning marble finger toward the Tear Gate, some three-quarters of a mile away. Far Madding depended on merchants from Tear and Illian and Caemlyn, but the High Council was ever wary of foreigners and their corrupting outland ways. One of the steel-capped Street Guards, in a leather coat sewn with overlapping square metal plates and a Golden Hand on the left shoulder, stood below the statue using a long limber pole to frighten away black-winged gray pigeons. Savion Amhara was one of the three most revered women in Far Madding's history, though none was known very far beyond the lake's shores. Two men from the city were mentioned in every history of the world, though it had been called Aren Mador when one was born and Fel Moreina for the other, but Far Madding did its fervent best to forget Raolin Darksbane and Yurian Stonebow. In a real way, those two men were why Rand was in Far Madding.

ə fju pipəl ɪn ði æmhɑɹə ɡlænst əɾ ɪm əz i pæst, jɛt noʊbɑdi ɡlæns twaɪs. ðəɾ i wɑz fɹəm ɔf wɑz pleɪn ɪnʌf, wɪð ɪz blu aɪz ən ɪz hɛɹ kʌɾ ət ðə ʃoʊldɝ. mɛn hɪɹ wɔɹ ɪt səmtaɪmz hæŋɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə weɪst, iðɝ taɪɾ ət ðə neɪp ə ðə nɛk əɹ hɛld wɪð ə klɪp. hɪz pleɪn bɹaʊn wʊlənz wɝ nɑndɪskɹɪpt, ðoʊ, noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ə mɑɾɝətli səksɛsfəl mɝtʃən maɪt wɛɹ, ən i wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn kloʊɑkləs ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə leɪk wɪnz. moʊst ə ði ʌðɝz wɝ fɔɹk-bɪɹɾəd kændɔɹi əɹ ɝæfɛlɪn wɪð bɛl bɹeɪdz, əɹ hɔk-noʊz sɑldəiənz, mɛn ən wɪmən u faʊn ðɪs wɛðɝ maɪl kəmpɛɹd tə bɔɹɾɝlənd wɪntɝ, bʌt nʌθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm sɛɾ i wɑz nɑɾ ə bɔɹɾɝləndɝ, tu. fəɹ ɪz pɑɹt, hi sɪmpli ɹəfjuz tə lɛt ðə koʊl tʌtʃ hɪm, ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪɾ əz i maɪɾ əv ə flaɪ bʌzɪŋ. ə kloʊk maɪt ɡɛɾ ɪn ɪz weɪ, ɪf i faʊn ɪz tʃæns tə ækt.

A few people in the Amhara glanced at him as he passed, yet nobody glanced twice. That he was from off was plain enough, with his blue eyes and his hair cut at the shoulder. Men here wore it sometimes hanging all the way to the waist, either tied at the nape of the neck or held with a clip. His plain brown woolens were nondescript, though, no better than a moderately successful merchant might wear, and he was not the only one cloakless in spite of the lake winds. Most of the others were fork-bearded Kandori or Arafellin with belled braids, or hawk-nosed Saldaeans, men and women who found this weather mild compared to Borderland winter, but nothing about him said he was not a Borderlander, too. For his part, he simply refused to let the cold touch him, ignored it as he might have a fly buzzing. A cloak might get in his way, if he found his chance to act.

fəɹ wʌns, ivən ɪz haɪt dɪd nɑɾ ətʃɹæk noʊɾəs. ðəɹ wɝ ə ɡʊd mɛni vɛɹi tɔl mɛn ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, fju ʌv əm neɪɾɪvz. mənəl ɹɑtʃeɪd hɪmsɛlf wɑz oʊnli ə hænd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɹænd, ɪf ðæt. ɹænd steɪd wɛl bɪhaɪn ðə mæn, lɛɾɪŋ pipəl ən sɪdæn tʃɛɹz sɪf bɪtwin əm ən səmtaɪmz ivən haɪɾ ɪz kwɔɹi. wɪð ɪz hɛɹ daɪd blæk baɪ ɝbz nɪneɪiv hæd pɹəvaɪɾəd, hi daʊɾɪd ðət ðə ɹɛnəɡeɪɾ æʃəmən wəd noʊɾəs ɪm ivən ɪf ðə mæn tɝn ɝaʊnd. fəɹ ɪz pɑɹt, hi wɑz nɑt wɝiɾ əbaʊt luzɪŋ ɹɑtʃeɪd. moʊst ə ðə loʊkəl mɛn wɔɹ dʌl kʌlɝz, wɪð bɹaɪɾɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi əbaʊt ðə tʃɛst ən ʃoʊldɝz ən pɝhæps ə dʒuəl hɛɹ klɪp fəɹ ðə mɔɹ pɹɑspɝəs, waɪl ði aʊtlæn mɝtʃəns feɪvɝd soʊbɝ ʌnpɹitɛnʃəs kloʊðz, soʊ əz nɑt tə sim oʊvɝli wɛlθi, ən ðɛɹ ɡɑɹdz ən dʒɹaɪvɝz bʌndəl ðɛmsɛlvz ɪn ɹʌf wʊlənz. ɹɑtʃeɪdz bɹaɪt ɹɛd sɪlk koʊt stʊɾ aʊt. hi stʃɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ laɪk ə kɪŋ, wʌn hæn ɹɛstɪŋ laɪtli ɑn ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd, ə fɝ-ɛdʒ kloʊk bɪloʊɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪm ɪn ðə wɪnd. hi wɑz ə ful. ðət flæpɪŋ kloʊk ən ðə sɔɹɾ əlaɪk dʒɹu aɪz. hɪz wækst ən kɝl mʌstæʃɪz neɪmd ɪm ə mʊɹændiən, hu ʃəd bi ʃɪvɝɪŋ laɪk ɛni nɔɹməl hjumən biɪŋ, ən ðət sɔɹd . . . ə pjʊɹ bʊl ɡus ful.

For once, even his height did not attract notice. There were a good many very tall men in Far Madding, few of them natives. Manel Rochaid himself was only a hand shorter than Rand, if that. Rand stayed well behind the man, letting people and sedan chairs sift between them and sometimes even hide his quarry. With his hair dyed black by herbs Nynaeve had provided, he doubted that the renegade Asha'man would notice him even if the man turned around. For his part, he was not worried about losing Rochaid. Most of the local men wore dull colors, with brighter embroidery about the chest and shoulders and perhaps a jeweled hair clip for the more prosperous, while the outland merchants favored sober unpretentious clothes, so as not to seem overly wealthy, and their guards and drivers bundled themselves in rough woolens. Rochaid's bright red silk coat stood out. He strode across the square like a king, one hand resting lightly on the hilt of his sword, a fur-edged cloak billowing behind him in the wind. He was a fool. That flapping cloak and the sword alike drew eyes. His waxed and curled mustaches named him a Murandian, who should be shivering like any normal human being, and that sword . . . A pure bull goose fool.

jə ɑɹ ðə ful, kʌmɪŋ tə ðɪs pleɪs, luz θɝɪn pæntɪd waɪldli ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd. mædnəs! mædnəs! wɪv tə ɡɛɾ aʊt! wɪv tə!

You are the fool, coming to this place, Lews Therin panted wildly inside his head. Madness! Madness! We have to get out! We have to!

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə vɔɪs, ɹænd pʊld ɪz snʌɡ ɡlʌvz taɪɾɝ ən kɛpt ə stɛɾi peɪs æftɝ ɹɑtʃeɪd. ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz ɪn ðə skwɛɹ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ðə mæn. fɔɹənɝz wɝ kənsɪɾɝd tʃɹʌbəlmeɪkɝz ən hɑthɛdz, ən mʊɹændiənz hæɾ ə pɹɪkli ɹɛpjəteɪʃən. ə fɔɹənɝ kæɹiɪŋ ə sɔɹɾ ɔlweɪz ətʃɹæktəd ðə ɡɑɹdz' ətɛnʃən. ɹænd wɑz ɡlæɾ i hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə liv ɪz ət ði ɪn wɪð mɪn. ʃi nɛsəld ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd mɔɹ stʃɹɔŋli ðən ɪleɪn əɹ eɪvinhə, əɹ ɑlɑnə. hi wɑz oʊnli veɪɡli əwɛɹ ə ði ʌðɝz. mɪn simd əlaɪv ɪnsaɪd hɪm.

Ignoring the voice, Rand pulled his snug gloves tighter and kept a steady pace after Rochaid. A number of the Street Guards in the square were watching the man. Foreigners were considered troublemakers and hotheads, and Murandians had a prickly reputation. A foreigner carrying a sword always attracted the Guards' attention. Rand was glad he had decided to leave his at the inn with Min. She nestled in the back of his head more strongly than Elayne or Aviendha, or Alanna. He was only vaguely aware of the others. Min seemed alive inside him.

əz ɹɑtʃeɪd lɛf ði æmhɑɹə, hɛɾɪŋ dipɝ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, flaɪts ə pɪdʒənz spɹæŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə ɹuftɑps, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə meɪkɪŋ ði ʊnɛɹəŋ swups ðət nɔɹməli wʊɾə teɪkən əm ɪndə ðə skaɪ, bɝdz kɹæʃt ɪndə wʌn ənʌðɝ ən səm tʌmbəl flʌɾɝɪŋ tə ðə peɪvmənt. pipəl ɡeɪpt, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz u hæd bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ ɹɑtʃeɪd soʊ ɪntɛnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ. ðə mæn dɪd nɑt lʊk bæk, bʌɾ ɪt wəd nɑɾ əv mæɾɝd hæɾ i sin. hi nu ɹænd wɑz ɪn ðə sɪɾi wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ði ɪfɛks ʌv ə tɑvɝən, əɹ i wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn ðɛɹ.

As Rochaid left the Amhara, heading deeper into the city, flights of pigeons sprang up from the rooftops, but instead of making the unerring swoops that normally would have taken them into the sky, birds crashed into one another and some tumbled fluttering to the pavement. People gaped, including the Street Guards who had been watching Rochaid so intently a moment before. The man did not look back, but it would not have mattered had he seen. He knew Rand was in the city without seeing the effects of a ta'veren, or he would not have been there.

fɑloʊɪŋ ɹɑtʃeɪɾ ɑntu ðə stʃɹiɾ ə dʒɔɪ, ɹɪli tu bɹɔd stʃɹeɪt stʃɹits sɛpɝeɪɾəd baɪ ə mɛʒɝd ɹoʊ ʌv lifləs ɡɹeɪ-bɑɹk tʃɹiz, ɹænd smaɪld. ɹɑtʃeɪɾ ən ɪz fɹɛnz pɹɑbli θɔt ðɛmsɛlvz vɛɹi klɛvɝ. pɝhæps ðeɪ hæd faʊn ðə mæp ə ðə nɔɹðɝn pleɪnz ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ ɹipleɪst ʌpsaɪd daʊn ɪn ðə ɹæks ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ, əɹ ðə bʊk ɑn sɪɾiz ə ðə saʊθ mɪʃhɪlvd ɪn ðə laɪbɹɛɹi ʌv ði ɛɛzdeɪʃɝ pæləs ɪn tʃeɪkɪn, əɹ wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ hɪns i hæd lɛf bɪhaɪnd. smɔl mɪsteɪks ə mæn ɪn ə hɝi maɪt meɪk, bʌɾ ɛni tu əɹ θɹi təɡɛðɝ peɪntəɾ ən æɹoʊ pɔɪntɪŋ tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. ɹɑtʃeɪɾ ən ði ʌðɝz hæd bɪn kwɪk tə si ɪt, kwɪkɝ ðən i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd, əɹ ɛls ðeɪ hæd hæd hɛlp tə pɔɪn ɪɾ aʊt. iðɝ weɪ, ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ.

Following Rochaid onto the Street of Joy, really two broad straight streets separated by a measured row of leafless gray-barked trees, Rand smiled. Rochaid and his friends probably thought themselves very clever. Perhaps they had found the map of the northern Plains of Maredo replaced upside down in the racks in the Stone of Tear, or the book on cities of the south misshelved in the library of the Aesdaishar Palace in Chachin, or one of the other hints he had left behind. Small mistakes a man in a hurry might make, but any two or three together painted an arrow pointing to Far Madding. Rochaid and the others had been quick to see it, quicker than he had expected, or else they had had help to point it out. Either way, it did not matter.

hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ waɪ ðə mʊɹændiən hæd kʌm əhɛɾ ə ði ʌðɝz, bʌɾ i nu ðeɪ wəd kʌm, tɔɹvəl ən dæʃivə, dʒɛdwɪn ən kɪsmən, tə tʃɹaɪ fɪnɪʃɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ hæd bʌŋɡəld ɪn kɛɹhin. ə pɪɾi nʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən wəd bi ful ɪnʌf tə kʌm æftɝ ɪm hɪɹ. ðeɪ wəd dʒʌst sɛn ði ʌðɝz. hi wɑntəd tə kɪl ɹɑtʃeɪd bɪfɔɹ ðə ɹɛst ɝaɪvd, ɪf i kʊd. ivən hɪɹ, wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɑn ən ikwəl fʊɾɪŋ, ɪt wəd bi bɛs tə kʌt daʊn ði ɑdz. tu deɪz ɹɑtʃeɪd hæd bɪn ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, oʊpənli æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz əbaʊɾ ə tɔl ɹɛd-hɛɹd mæn, swæɡɝɪŋ əbaʊɾ əz ɪf i hæd nɑɾ ə wɝi ɪn ðə wɝld. ðə mæn hæd sin ɛni nʌmbɝ u mɔɹ əɹ lɛs mɛɾ ɪz dɪskɹɪpʃən, bʌɾ i stɪl θɔɾ i wɑz ðə hʌntɝ, nɑt ðə hʌntəd.

He was not sure why the Murandian had come ahead of the others, but he knew they would come, Torval and Dashiva, Gedwyn and Kisman, to try finishing what they had bungled in Cairhien. A pity none of the Forsaken would be fool enough to come after him here. They would just send the others. He wanted to kill Rochaid before the rest arrived, if he could. Even here, where they were all on an equal footing, it would be best to cut down the odds. Two days Rochaid had been in Far Madding, openly asking questions about a tall red-haired man, swaggering about as if he had not a worry in the world. The man had seen any number who more or less met his description, but he still thought he was the hunter, not the hunted.

juv bɹɔɾ əs hɪɹ tə daɪ! luz θɝɪn moʊnd. biɪŋ hɪɹ ɪz əz bæɾ əz dɛθ!

You've brought us here to die! Lews Therin moaned. Being here is as bad as death!

ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. hi əɡɹid wɪð ðə vɔɪs əbaʊt ðət læst. hi wəd bi əz ɡlæɾ əz luz θɝɪn tə liv. bʌt səmtaɪmz ði oʊnli tʃɔɪs wɑz bɪtwin bæɾ ən wɝs. ɹɑtʃeɪd wɑz əhɛɾ ə hɪm, ɔlmoʊst wɪðɪn ɹitʃ. ðət wɑz ɔl ðət mæɾɝd naʊ.

Rand shrugged uncomfortably. He agreed with the voice about that last. He would be as glad as Lews Therin to leave. But sometimes the only choice was between bad and worse. Rochaid was ahead of him, almost within reach. That was all that mattered now.

ðə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn ʃɑps ən ɪnz əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹiɾ ə dʒɔɪ tʃeɪnʒd ðə fɑɹðɝ ɹænd wɛn fɹəm ði æmhɑɹə mɑɹkət. sɪlvɝsmɪθs ɹipleɪs kʌtlɝz, ən ðən ɡoʊlsmɪθs ɹipleɪst sɪlvɝsmɪθs. simstʃɹəsəz ən teɪlɝz dɪspleɪɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd sɪlks ən bɹoʊkeɪdz ɪnstɛɾ ʌv wʊlənz. ðə koʊtʃɪz ðət ɹʌmbəld oʊvɝ ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz naʊ hæd sɪɡəlz lækɝɾ ɑn ðə dɔɹz ən timz ə fɔɹ əɹ sɪks mætʃt fəɹ saɪz ən kʌlɝ, ən mɔɹ ɹaɪɾɝz wɝ maʊntəɾ ɑn pɹaɪm tɛɹən blʌdstɑk əɹ ænəməlz əz ɡʊd. sɪdæn tʃɛɹz bɔɹn baɪ tʃɹɑɾɪŋ bɛɹɝz bɪkeɪm ɔlmoʊst əz kɑmən əz pipəl əfʊt, ænd, əfʊt, ʃɑpkipɝz ɪn koʊts əɹ dʒɹɛsəz hɛvəli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɝaʊn ðə tʃɛst ən ʃoʊldɝz wɝ aʊtnʌmbɝd baɪ foʊk ɪn lɪvɝi əz bɹaɪɾ əz ðəɾ ə ðə tʃɛɹ-bɛɹɝz. ɔfən əz nɑt, bɪts ə kʌlɝd ɡlæs naʊ dɛkɝeɪɾəd mɛnz hɛɹ klɪps, əɹ əkeɪʒənəli pɝlz əɹ ɹɪtʃɝ dʒɛmz, ðoʊ fju mɛn wɔk huz waɪvz kəɾ əfɔɹd dʒɛmz. oʊnli ðə koʊld wɪnd wɑz ðə seɪm, ðəɾ ən ðə stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz pətʃɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn θɹiz, aɪz əlɝt fəɹ tʃɹʌbəl. ðəɹ wɝ nɑt soʊ mɛni əz ɪn ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz' mɑɹkəts, jɛɾ əz sun əz wʌn pətʃɹoʊl stʃɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ənʌðɝ əpɪɹd, ən wɛɹɛvɝ ə stʃɹit waɪɾɝ ðən ən æliweɪ mɛt ðə stʃɹiɾ ə dʒɔɪ, ə stoʊn wɑtʃstæn stʊd wɪð tu ɡɑɹdzmɪn weɪɾɪŋ ət ðə fʊɾ ɪn keɪs ðə mæn ətɑp spɑɾəd tʃɹʌbəl. ðə pis wɑz kɛpt ɹɪɡɝəsli ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ.

The gray stone shops and inns along the Street of Joy changed the farther Rand went from the Amhara Market. Silversmiths replaced cutlers, and then goldsmiths replaced silversmiths. Seamstresses and tailors displayed embroidered silks and brocades instead of woolens. The coaches that rumbled over the paving stones now had sigils lacquered on the doors and teams of four or six matched for size and color, and more riders were mounted on prime Tairen bloodstock or animals as good. Sedan chairs borne by trotting bearers became almost as common as people afoot, and, afoot, shopkeepers in coats or dresses heavily embroidered around the chest and shoulders were outnumbered by folk in livery as bright as that of the chair-bearers. Often as not, bits of colored glass now decorated men's hair clips, or occasionally pearls or richer gems, though few men walked whose wives could afford gems. Only the cold wind was the same, that and the Street Guards patrolling in threes, eyes alert for trouble. There were not so many as in the Strangers' Markets, yet as soon as one patrol strode out of sight another appeared, and wherever a street wider than an alleyway met the Street of Joy, a stone watchstand stood with two Guardsmen waiting at the foot in case the man atop spotted trouble. The peace was kept rigorously in Far Madding.

ɹænd fɹaʊn əz ɹɑtʃeɪd kɛpt ɑn əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit. kəɾ i bi hɛɾəd fəɹ ðə kaʊnsəlz' plɑzə, ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ði aɪlənd? ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ðəɹ bʌt ðə hɔl ə ðə kaʊnsəlz, mɑnjəməns fɹəm mɔɹ ðən faɪv hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ɝliɝ, wən fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ hæd bɪn ðə kæpəɾəl ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ, ən ðə kaʊntɪŋhaʊsɪz ə ðə sɪɾiz wɛlθiəst wɪmən. ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, ə wɛlθi mæn wɑz wʌn huz waɪf ɡeɪv ɪm ə dʒɛnɝəs əlaʊəns əɹ ə wɪɾoʊɝ u hæd bɪn pɹəvaɪɾəd fɔɹ. meɪbi ɹɑtʃeɪd wɑz miɾɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. bʌɾ ɪf soʊ, waɪ hæd ðə mæn weɪɾəd?

Rand frowned as Rochaid kept on along the street. Could he be headed for the Counsels' Plaza, in the middle of the island? There was nothing there but the Hall of the Counsels, monuments from more than five hundred years earlier, when Far Madding had been the capital of Maredo, and the countinghouses of the city's wealthiest women. In Far Madding, a wealthy man was one whose wife gave him a generous allowance or a widower who had been provided for. Maybe Rochaid was meeting Darkfriends. But if so, why had the man waited?

sʌɾənli ə weɪv ə dɪzinəs hɪt hɪm, ə mɝki feɪs fɪlɪŋ ɪz vɪʒən fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ən i stæɡɝɾ əɡɛnst ə pæsɝbaɪ. tɔlɝ ðən ɹænd hɪmsɛlf, ɪn bɹaɪt ɡɹin lɪvɝi, ðə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd mæn ʃɪftəd ðə lɑɹdʒ bæskəɾ i wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ən fɛndɪd ɹænd ɔf dʒɛnli. ə lɔŋ, pʌkɝd skɑɹ ɹæn daʊn ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz sʌn-dɑɹk feɪs. boʊɪŋ ɪz hɛd, hi mɝmɝɾ ən əpɑlədʒi ən hɝiɾ ɑn.

Suddenly a wave of dizziness hit him, a murky face filling his vision for an instant, and he staggered against a passerby. Taller than Rand himself, in bright green livery, the yellow-haired man shifted the large basket he was carrying and fended Rand off gently. A long, puckered scar ran down the side of his sun-dark face. Bowing his head, he murmured an apology and hurried on.

ɹaɪɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf, ɹænd ɡɹaʊld ə kɝs ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ.

Righting himself, Rand growled a curse under his breath.

jə dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ əm ɔlɹɛɾi, luz θɝɪn wɪspɝɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd. naʊ juv sʌmwʌn ɛls tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ, ən nɑt bɪfɹtaɪm. haʊ mɛni wɪl wi θɹi kɪl bɪfɔɹ ði ɛnd, aɪ wʌndɝ.

You destroyed them already, Lews Therin whispered in his head. Now you have someone else to destroy, and not beforetime. How many will we three kill before the end, I wonder.

ʃʌɾ ʌp! ɹænd θɔt fɪɹsli, bʌt kækəlɪŋ, dɝɪsɪv læftɝ ænsɝd hɪm. ɪt wɑz nɑt ði ɪnkaʊntɝ wɪð ən ilmən ðəɾ ʌpsɛt hɪm. hi hæd sin mɛni sɪns kʌmɪŋ tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. fəɹ səm ɹizən, hʌnʒɹədz ə ði il u flɛɾ æftɝ lɝnɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ ə ðɛɹ hɪstɝi hæɾ ɛndəɾ ʌp ðɛɹ, ətɛmptɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif wən ðeɪ hæd noʊ mɔɹ aɪdiə ʌv wʌt ðəɾ ɪnteɪld ɪksɛp ðət ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə bi laɪflɔŋ ɡeɪʃeɪn. hi wɑz nɑɾ ivən wɝiɾ əbaʊt ðə dɪzinəs, əɹ huz feɪs ɪt wɑz ðəɾ i hæf sɔ wən ɪt stʃɹʌk. əhɛɾ ə hɪm, ə koʊtʃ dʒɹɔn baɪ sɪks ɡɹeɪz klæɾɝd θɹu ðə stʃɹim ə sɪdæn tʃɛɹz ən hɝiɪŋ foʊk ɪn lɪvɝi, ən mɛn ən wɪmən dɑɹɾɪŋ ɪn ən aʊɾ ə ðə ʃɑps, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ʌv ə ɹɛd koʊt. hi smækt ə ɡlʌv fɪst ɪndə hɪz pɑm ɪn ɪɹɪteɪʃən.

Shut up! Rand thought fiercely, but cackling, derisive laughter answered him. It was not the encounter with an Aielman that upset him. He had seen many since coming to Far Madding. For some reason, hundreds of the Aiel who fled after learning the truth of their history had ended up there, attempting to follow the Way of the Leaf when they had no more idea of what that entailed except that they were supposed to be lifelong gai'shain. He was not even worried about the dizziness, or whose face it was that he half saw when it struck. Ahead of him, a coach drawn by six grays clattered through the stream of sedan chairs and hurrying folk in livery, and men and women darting in and out of the shops, but there was no sign of a red coat. He smacked a gloved fist into his palm in irritation.

ɡoʊɪŋ əhɛd blaɪnli wɑz ɪɾiɑtɪk. hi maɪt ɹʌn ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ðə mæn, əɹ ət lis bi sin. soʊ fɑɹ, ɹɑtʃeɪd θɔt ɹænd dɪd nɑt noʊ hi wɑz ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ən ædvæntɪdʒ tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə skwɑndɝ. hi nu wɛɹ ɹɑtʃeɪd hæɾ ɪz ɹumz, wʌn ə ði ɪnz ðət keɪɾɝd tə fɔɹən mɛn. hi kəd lɔɪɾɝ aʊtsaɪd təmɑɹoʊ ən weɪt fəɹ ənʌðɝ tʃæns. ði ʌðɝz maɪɾ ɝaɪv ɪn ðə naɪt, tu. hi θɔɾ i kəd kɪl ɛni tu təɡɛðɝ, əɹ meɪbi ivən ɔl faɪv, bʌɾ ɪt kəd nɑt bi dʌn kwaɪətli. hi wəd teɪk ɪnʒɝiz əɡɛns faɪv, ən ət bɛst, hi wəɾ əv tə əbændən ɪz sɔɹd, wɪtʃ i wɑz ɹɪlʌktən tə du. ɪt wɑz ə ɡɪft fɹəm eɪvinhə. ət wɝst . . .

Going ahead blindly was idiotic. He might run right into the man, or at least be seen. So far, Rochaid thought Rand did not know he was in the city, an advantage too important to squander. He knew where Rochaid had his rooms, one of the inns that catered to foreign men. He could loiter outside tomorrow and wait for another chance. The others might arrive in the night, too. He thought he could kill any two together, or maybe even all five, but it could not be done quietly. He would take injuries against five, and at best, he would have to abandon his sword, which he was reluctant to do. It was a gift from Aviendha. At worst . . .

ə flɪkɝ ə fɝ-tʃɹɪm kloʊk kɑɾ ɪz aɪ, flʌɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪn əz ɪt vænɪʃt ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ əhɛd, ən i ɹæn təwɔɹɾ ɪt. ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn ət ðə wɑtʃstæn ðəɹ stʃɹeɪɾənd, ðə mæn ət ðə tɑp teɪkɪŋ ɪz ɹæɾəl fɹəm ɪz bɛlt. wʌn ə ðoʊz ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə stæn hɛftəɾ ɪz lɔŋ kʌdʒəl, waɪl ði ʌðɝ lɪftəɾ ə kætʃpoʊl fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt hæd lin əɡɛns ðə wɑtʃstænz stɛps. ðə fɔɹkt ɛnd wɑz fæʃən tə kætʃ ən hoʊld ən ɑɹm əɹ ə lɛɡ əɹ ə nɛk, ən ðə poʊl ɪtsɛlf wɑz bɛltəd wɪð aɪɝn, pɹuf əɡɛnst ɛni sɔɹɾ əɹ æks. ðeɪ wɑtʃt ɪm kloʊsli, wɪð hɑɹɾ aɪz.

A flicker of fur-trimmed cloak caught his eye, fluttering in the wind as it vanished around a corner ahead, and he ran toward it. The Guardsmen at the watchstand there straightened, the man at the top taking his rattle from his belt. One of those at the bottom of the stand hefted his long cudgel, while the other lifted a catchpole from where it had leaned against the watchstand's steps. The forked end was fashioned to catch and hold an arm or a leg or a neck, and the pole itself was belted with iron, proof against any sword or axe. They watched him closely, with hard eyes.

hi nɑɾəd tə ðɛm ən smaɪld, ðən ɑstənteɪʃəsli pɪɹd daʊn ðə saɪd stʃɹit, sɝtʃɪŋ ðə kɹaʊd ðɛɹ. nɑɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ θif, dʒʌst ə mæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kætʃ ʌp tə sʌmwʌn. ðə kʌdʒəl wɛn bæk ɑntu ɪts bɛl hʊk, ðə kætʃpoʊl ɹɪtɝn tə ðə stɛps. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn əɡɛn. əhɛd, hi ɡɑɾ ə ɡlɪmps ə ðə kloʊk, ən meɪbi ə ɹɛd koʊt, əz ðə wɛɹɝ tɝn ɑntu ənʌðɝ stʃɹit.

He nodded to them and smiled, then ostentatiously peered down the side street, searching the crowd there. Not a running thief, just a man trying to catch up to someone. The cudgel went back onto its belt hook, the catchpole returned to the steps. He did not look at the Guardsmen again. Ahead, he got a glimpse of the cloak, and maybe a red coat, as the wearer turned onto another street.

ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz hæn əz ɪf tə heɪl sʌmbɑɾi, ɹænd spɛɾ æftɝ ðə mæn, dɑdʒɪŋ bɪtwin pipəl ən stʃɹit pɛdlɝz' bæɹoʊz. hɔkɝz dɪspleɪɪŋ pɪnz əɹ niɾəlz əɹ koʊmz ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪz tʃɹaɪd tə kætʃ ɪz ətɛnʃən, əɹ ɛniwʌnz, wɪð ðɛɹ kɹaɪz. fju pipəl hɪɹ wɔɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, ən ə sɪmpəl kɔɹd taɪɪŋ ə mænz hɛɹ wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ kɑmən ðən ivən ðə pleɪnəs klɪp. ðiz stʃɹits wɝ kɹæmpt ət bɛst, ən kɹʊkəd, ə hæphæzɝd meɪz wɛɹ tʃip ɪnz ən nɛɹoʊ stoʊn əpɑɹtmən bɪldɪŋz ə θɹi ən fɔɹ stɔɹiz taʊɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə ʃɑps ə bʊtʃɝz ən kændəlmeɪkɝz ən bɑɹbɝz, tɪnsmɪθs ən pɑɾɝz ən kupɝz. koʊtʃɪz wəd nɑɾ əv fɪɾ əlɔŋ ðiz stʃɹits, ən ðəɹ wɝ noʊ sɪdæn tʃɛɹz, iðɝ, noʊ ɹaɪɾɝz, ən oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə lɪvɹid sɝvəns, kæɹiɪŋ bæskəts ɑn ɛɹənz bʌt stʃɹoʊlɪŋ ən lʊkɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ noʊzɪz əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɝaʊn əm ɪksɛp ðə stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz. ðɛɹ pətʃɹoʊlz ən wɑtʃstænz wɝ pɹɛzən ivən hɪɹ.

Raising his hand as if to hail somebody, Rand sped after the man, dodging between people and street peddlers' barrows. Hawkers displaying pins or needles or combs on their trays tried to catch his attention, or anyone's, with their cries. Few people here wore embroidery, and a simple cord tying a man's hair was much more common than even the plainest clip. These streets were cramped at best, and crooked, a haphazard maze where cheap inns and narrow stone apartment buildings of three and four stories towered over the shops of butchers and candlemakers and barbers, tinsmiths and potters and coopers. Coaches would not have fit along these streets, and there were no sedan chairs, either, no riders, and only a handful of liveried servants, carrying baskets on errands but strolling and looking down their noses at everyone around them except the Street Guards. Their patrols and watchstands were present even here.

ət læst i ɡɑt nɪɹ ɪnʌf fəɹ ət klɪɹ vju ʌv ðə mæn i wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ. ɹɑtʃeɪd hæd faɪnəli ʃoʊn ɪnʌf sɛns tə pʊl ɪz kloʊk əbaʊt hɪm, haɪɾɪŋ ɪz ɹɛd koʊɾ ən ɪz jusləs sɔɹd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ daʊɾ ə hu hi wɑz. ɪn tʃɹuθ, hi sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs ɔltəɡɛðɝ naʊ, slɪŋkɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit wɪð ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bɹʌʃɪŋ ðə ʃoʊpfɹʌns. əbɹʌpli hi lʊkt ɝaʊn fɝɾɪvli, ðən dɑɹɾɪd ɪndə ən æli bɪtwin ə taɪni bæskətwivɝz ʃɑp ən ən ɪn wɪð ə saɪn soʊ dɝɾi ðə neɪm wɑz kəmplitli əbskjʊɹd. ɹænd ɔlmoʊst ɡɹɪnd, ən weɪstəd noʊ taɪm hɝiɪŋ æftɝ hɪm. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz əɹ wɑtʃstænz ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋz æliweɪz.

At last he got near enough for at clear view of the man he was following. Rochaid had finally shown enough sense to pull his cloak about him, hiding his red coat and his useless sword, but there was no doubt of who he was. In truth, he seemed to be trying to avoid notice altogether now, slinking along the side of the street with his shoulder brushing the shopfronts. Abruptly he looked around furtively, then darted into an alley between a tiny basketweaver's shop and an inn with a sign so dirty the name was completely obscured. Rand almost grinned, and wasted no time hurrying after him. There were no Street Guards or watchstands in Far Madding's alleyways.

ðoʊz æliz wɝ ivən mɔɹ kɹʊkəd ðən ðə stʃɹits ɹænd hæd dʒʌs lɛft, meɪkɪŋ ə wɔɹən ə ðɛɹ oʊn θɹu ði ɪntɪɹiɝ ʌv ɛvɹi blɑk ə ðə sɪɾi, ən ɹɑtʃeɪd wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi aʊɾ ə saɪt, bʌt ɹænd kəd hɪɹ ɪz buts paʊndɪŋ ɑn ðə dæmp stoʊni dɝt. ðə saʊn baʊnst ən mʌltəplaɪd bɪtwin ðə wɪndoʊləs stoʊn wɔlz əntɪl i kəd hɑɹdli tɛl wɛɹ ɪt wɑz kʌmɪŋ fɹʌm, bʌɾ i fɑloʊd, ɹʌnɪŋ əlɔŋ pæsədʒəz bɛɹli waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ tu mɛn əbɹɛst. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ fɹɛnli. waɪ hæd ɹɑtʃeɪd kʌm ɪndə ðɪs meɪz? wɛɹɛvɝ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ, hi wɑntəd tə bi ðəɹ kwɪkli. bʌɾ i kəd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə juz ði æliz tə ɡɛt fɹəm wʌn pleɪs tə ənʌðɝ.

Those alleys were even more crooked than the streets Rand had just left, making a warren of their own through the interior of every block of the city, and Rochaid was already out of sight, but Rand could hear his boots pounding on the damp stony dirt. The sound bounced and multiplied between the windowless stone walls until he could hardly tell where it was coming from, but he followed, running along passages barely wide enough for two men abreast. If they were friendly. Why had Rochaid come into this maze? Wherever he was going, he wanted to be there quickly. But he could not know how to use the alleys to get from one place to another.

əbɹʌpli ɹænd ɹilaɪz ði oʊnli buts i wɑz hɪɹɪŋ wɝ ɪz oʊn ən stɑp dɛd. saɪləns. fɹəm wɛɹ i stʊd, hi kəd si θɹi mɔɹ nɛɹoʊ æliz splɪɾɪŋ ɔf fɹəm ðə wʌn i stʊɾ ɪn. bɛɹli bɹiðɪŋ, hi stʃɹeɪn ɪz ɪɹz. saɪləns. ɔlmoʊst, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tɝn bæk. ən ðən i hɝɾ ə dɪstən klæɾɝ fɹəm ðə nɪɹəst æli maʊθ, əz ðoʊ sʌmwʌn hæɾ æksədɛntəli kɪkt ə ɹɑk əɡɛnst ə stoʊn wɔl ɪn pæsɪŋ. bɛs tə kɪl ðə mæn ən bi dʌn.

Abruptly Rand realized the only boots he was hearing were his own and stopped dead. Silence. From where he stood, he could see three more narrow alleys splitting off from the one he stood in. Barely breathing, he strained his ears. Silence. Almost, he decided to turn back. And then he heard a distant clatter from the nearest alley mouth, as though someone had accidentally kicked a rock against a stone wall in passing. Best to kill the man and be done.

ɹænd tɝn ðə kɔɹnɝ ɪn tə ði æli, ən faʊn ɹɑtʃeɪd weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɪm.

Rand turned the corner in to the alley, and found Rochaid waiting for him.

ðə mʊɹændiən hæɾ ɪz kloʊk θɹoʊn bæk əɡɛn, ən boʊθ hænz ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. ðə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ pis-bɑnd woʊv hɪlt ən skæbɝɾ ɪnsaɪɾ ə nɛɾ ə faɪn waɪɝ. hi wɔɹ ə smɔl, noʊɪŋ smaɪl. "ju wɝ əz izi tə beɪɾ əz ə pɪdʒən," hi sɛd, bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə dʒɹɔ hɪz sɔɹd. ðə waɪɝz hæd bɪn kʌt, ðən fɪkst soʊ ðeɪ stɪl əpɪɹd sɑləd tə ə kæʒəwəl ɡlæns. "ɹʌn, ɪf jə wɑnt."

The Murandian had his cloak thrown back again, and both hands on his sword hilt. The Far Madding peace-bond wove hilt and scabbard inside a net of fine wire. He wore a small, knowing smile. "You were as easy to bait as a pigeon," he said, beginning to draw his sword. The wires had been cut, then fixed so they still appeared solid to a casual glance. "Run, if you want."

ɹænd dɪd nɑt ɹʌn. ɪnstɛd, hi stɛp fɔɹwɝd, slæmɪŋ ɪz lɛf hæn daʊn ɑn ði ɛn ə ɹɑtʃeɪdz sɔɹd hɪlt, tʃɹæpɪŋ ðə bleɪd stɪl hæf ɪn ɪts skæbɝd. sɝpɹaɪz waɪɾənd ðə mænz aɪz, jɛɾ i stɪl dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðət pɔzɪŋ tə ɡloʊt hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi kɪl hɪm. hi muv bæk, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt ɹum tə kəmpliɾ ɪz dʒɹɔ, bʌt ɹænd fɑloʊd smuðli, kipɪŋ ðə sɔɹd tʃɹæpt, ən pɪvəɾəd fɹəm ðə hɪps, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ foʊldəd nʌkəlz hɑɹɾ ɪndə ɹɑtʃeɪdz θɹoʊt. kɑɹɾələdʒ kɹæk laʊdli, ən ðə ɹɛnəɡeɪd fɝɡɑɾ əbaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɪl ɛniwʌn. stæɡɝɪŋ bækwɝdz, waɪd-aɪɾ ən stɛɹɪŋ, hi klæp boʊθ hænz tə hɪz θɹoʊɾ ən dɛspɝətli tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl ɛɹ θɹu hɪz ɹuənd wɪnpəp.

Rand did not run. Instead, he stepped forward, slamming his left hand down on the end of Rochaid's sword hilt, trapping the blade still half in its scabbard. Surprise widened the man's eyes, yet he still did not realize that pausing to gloat had already killed him. He moved back, trying to get room to complete his draw, but Rand followed smoothly, keeping the sword trapped, and pivoted from the hips, driving folded knuckles hard into Rochaid's throat. Cartilage cracked loudly, and the renegade forgot about trying to kill anyone. Staggering backwards, wide-eyed and staring, he clapped both hands to his throat and desperately tried to pull air through his ruined windpipe.

ɹænd wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡɪnɪŋ ðə kɪlɪŋ stʃɹoʊk, bɪniθ ðə bɹɛstboʊn, wən ə wɪspɝ ə saʊn keɪm tə hɪm fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, ən sʌɾənli ɹɑtʃeɪdz tɔntɪŋ tʊk ɑn nu minɪŋ. bækhilɪŋ ɹɑtʃeɪd, ɹænd lɛt hɪmsɛlf fɔl tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ətɑp ðə mæn. hɑɹd-swʌŋ mɛɾəl klæŋd əɡɛnst ə stoʊn wɔl, ən ə mæn kɝst. ɡɹæbɪŋ ɹɑtʃeɪdz sɔɹd, ɹænd lɛt ðə moʊʃən ə fɔlɪŋ tɝn ɪndə ə ɹoʊl, pʊlɪŋ ðə bleɪd klɪɹ əz i tʌmbəld oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn ʃoʊldɝ. ɹɑtʃeɪd ɡeɪv ə ʃɹɪl, ɡɝɡəlɪŋ skɹim əz ɹænd keɪm ʌp ɪn ə kɹaʊtʃ feɪsɪŋ bæk ðə weɪ hi hæd kʌm.

Rand was already beginning the killing stroke, beneath the breastbone, when a whisper of sound came to him from behind, and suddenly Rochaid's taunting took on new meaning. Backheeling Rochaid, Rand let himself fall to the ground atop the man. Hard-swung metal clanged against a stone wall, and a man cursed. Grabbing Rochaid's sword, Rand let the motion of falling turn into a roll, pulling the blade clear as he tumbled over his own shoulder. Rochaid gave a shrill, gurgling scream as Rand came up in a crouch facing back the way he had come.

ɹeɪfɑɹ kɪsmən stʊd ɡeɪpɪŋ daʊn ət ɹɑtʃeɪd, ðə bleɪɾ i hæd mɛn tə stæb θɹu ɹænd ɪnstɛd dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ɹɑtʃeɪdz tʃɛst. blʌd bʌbəld ɑn ðə mʊɹændiənz lɪps, ən i dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊn ən blʌɾid ɪz hænz ɑn ðə ʃɑɹp stil əz ðoʊ hi kəd pʊʃ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪm. ʌv oʊnli ævɝɪdʒ haɪt, ən peɪl fəɹ ə tɛɹən, kɪsmən wɔɹ kloʊðz əz pleɪn əz ɹændz ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə sɔɹd bɛlt. haɪɾɪŋ ðət bɪniθ ɪz kloʊk, hi cʊɾə ɡɔn ɛniwɛɹ ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ wɪθaʊt biɪŋ noʊɾəst.

Raefar Kisman stood gaping down at Rochaid, the blade he had meant to stab through Rand instead driven into Rochaid's chest. Blood bubbled on the Murandian's lips, and he dug his heels into the ground and bloodied his hands on the sharp steel as though he could push it out of him. Of only average height, and pale for a Tairen, Kisman wore clothes as plain as Rand's except for the sword belt. Hiding that beneath his cloak, he could have gone anywhere in Far Madding without being noticed.

hɪz dɪsmeɪ læstəɾ oʊnli ən ɪnstənt. əz ɹænd ɹoʊz, sɔɹd ɹɛɾi ɪn boʊθ hænz, kɪsmən dʒɝkt ɪz oʊn bleɪd fɹi ən dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ ɪz θɹæʃɪŋ əkɑmpləs əɡɛn. hi wɑtʃt ɹænd, ən ɪz hænz ʃɪftəd nɝvəsli ɑn ðə lɔŋ hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd. noʊ daʊɾ i wɑz wʌn ə ðoʊz soʊ pɹaʊɾ ə biɪŋ eɪbəl tə juz ðə paʊɝ əz ə wɛpən ðəɾ i hæd dɪsdeɪn ɹɪli lɝnɪŋ ðə sɔɹd. ɹænd hæd nɑt dɪsdeɪnd. ɹɑtʃeɪd ɡeɪv ə læs twɪtʃ ən wɑz stɪl, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə skaɪ.

His dismay lasted only an instant. As Rand rose, sword ready in both hands, Kisman jerked his own blade free and did not look at his thrashing accomplice again. He watched Rand, and his hands shifted nervously on the long hilt of his sword. No doubt he was one of those so proud of being able to use the Power as a weapon that he had disdained really learning the sword. Rand had not disdained. Rochaid gave a last twitch and was still, staring up at the sky.

"taɪm tə daɪ," ɹænd sɛd kwaɪətli, bʌɾ əz i stɑɹɾəd fɔɹwɝd, ə ɹæɾəl saʊndəd sʌmwɛɹ bɪhaɪn ðə tɛɹən, ən ɪnsɛsən tʃæɾɝɪŋ, ən ðən ənʌðɝ. ðə stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz.

"Time to die," Rand said quietly, but as he started forward, a rattle sounded somewhere behind the Tairen, an incessant chattering, and then another. The Street Guards.

"ðeɪl teɪk əs boʊθ," kɪsmən bɹiðd, saʊndɪŋ fɹæntɪk. "ɪf ðeɪ faɪn əs stændɪŋ oʊvɝ ə kɔɹps, ðəl hæŋ əs boʊθ! jə noʊ ðeɪ wɪl!"

"They'll take us both," Kisman breathed, sounding frantic. "If they find us standing over a corpse, they'll hang us both! You know they will!"

hi wɑz ɹaɪt, ət list ɪn pɑɹt. ɪf ðə ɡɑɹdz faʊn əm ðɛɹ, ðeɪ wəd boʊθ bi hɔld ɔf tə ðə sɛlz bɪniθ ðə hɔl ə ðə kaʊnsəlz. mɔɹ ɹæɾəlz tʃæɾɝd, kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ. ðə ɡɑɹdz mʌst əv noʊɾəst θɹi mɛn dʌkɪŋ wʌn baɪ wʌn ɪndə ðə seɪm æli. pɝhæps ðeɪ hæɾ ivən sin kɪsmənz sɔɹd. ɹɪlʌktənli, ɹænd nɑɾəd.

He was right, at least in part. If the Guards found them there, they would both be hauled off to the cells beneath the Hall of the Counsels. More rattles chattered, coming closer. The Guards must have noticed three men ducking one by one into the same alley. Perhaps they had even seen Kisman's sword. Reluctantly, Rand nodded.

ðə tɛɹən bækt əweɪ kɔʃəsli, ən wən i sɔ ɹænd meɪkɪŋ noʊ muv tə fɑloʊ, hi ʃiðd ɪz bleɪɾ ən ɹæn waɪldli, dɑɹk kloʊk flɛɹɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

The Tairen backed away cautiously, and when he saw Rand making no move to follow, he sheathed his blade and ran wildly, dark cloak flaring behind him.

ɹænd θɹu hɪz bɑɹoʊd sɔɹd daʊn ətɑp ɹɑtʃeɪdz bɑɾi ən ɹæn ði ʌðɝ weɪ. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɹæɾəlz ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən jɛt. wɪð lʌk, hi kəd bi aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stʃɹits, blɛndɪŋ ɪndə ðə kɹaʊdz, bɪfɔɹ i wɑz sin. hi hæɾ ʌðɝ fɪɹz ðən ðə nus. stʃɹɪpɪŋ ɔf ɪz ɡlʌvz, ʃoʊɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡənz ðət mɑɹkt ɪz ɑɹmz, wəd bi ɪnʌf tə pɹɪvɛn ɪz hæŋɪŋ, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ. bʌt ðə kaʊnsəlz hæd pɹoʊkleɪm ðɛɹ æksɛptəns ə ðəɾ ɑd dɪkɹi ɪleɪɾə hæɾ ɪʃud. wʌns i wɑz ɪn ə sɛl, hi wəd ɹɪmeɪn ðəɹ əntɪl ðə waɪt taʊɝ sɛn fəɹ hɪm. soʊ hi ɹæn əz hɑɹɾ əz i kʊd.

Rand threw his borrowed sword down atop Rochaid's body and ran the other way. There were no rattles in that direction yet. With luck, he could be out into the streets, blending into the crowds, before he was seen. He had other fears than the noose. Stripping off his gloves, showing the Dragons that marked his arms, would be enough to prevent his hanging, he was sure. But the Counsels had proclaimed their acceptance of that odd decree Elaida had issued. Once he was in a cell, he would remain there until the White Tower sent for him. So he ran as hard as he could.

mɛltɪŋ ɪndə ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn ðə stʃɹit, kɪsmən hivd ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif əz θɹi stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz ɹæn ɪndə ði æli hi hæd dʒʌst ɪmɝdʒ fɹʌm. hoʊldɪŋ ɪz kloʊk kloʊs tə haɪɾ ɪz skæbɑɹɾɪd sɔɹd, hi muvd wɪð ðə floʊ ʌv tʃɹæfɪk, noʊ fæstɝ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls ən sloʊɝ ðən sʌm. nʌθɪŋ tə dʒɹɔ ə ɡɑɹdzmænz aɪ. ə pɛɹ ə ðɛm pæst wɪð ə tʃɹʌs pɹɪznɝ stʌft ɪndə ə lɑɹdʒ sæk slʌŋ fɹəm ə kɔɹɾɝstæf kæɹiɾ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. oʊnli ðə mænz hɛd stʌk aʊt, hɪz aɪz waɪld ən dɑɹɾɪŋ. kɪsmən ʃʌɾɝəd. bɝn ɪz aɪz, ðət cʊɾə bɪn hɪm! hɪm!

Melting into the crowd in the street, Kisman heaved a sigh of relief as three Street Guards ran into the alley he had just emerged from. Holding his cloak close to hide his scabbarded sword, he moved with the flow of traffic, no faster than anyone else and slower than some. Nothing to draw a Guardsman's eye. A pair of them passed with a trussed prisoner stuffed into a large sack slung from a quarterstaff carried on their shoulders. Only the man's head stuck out, his eyes wild and darting. Kisman shuddered. Burn his eyes, that could have been him! Him!

hi hæd bɪn ə ful tə lɛt ɹɑtʃeɪd tɔk ɪm ɪndə ðɪs ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs. ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə weɪɾ əntɪl ɛvɹiwʌn hæɾ ɝaɪvd, slɪpɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi wʌn baɪ wʌn tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs. ɹɑtʃeɪd hæd wɑntəd ðə ɡlɔɹi ʌv biɪŋ ðə wʌn tə kɪl ælθɹ; ðə mʊɹændiən hæd bɝnd wɪð ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə pɹuv hɪmsɛlf ə bɛɾɝ mæn ðən ælθɹ. naʊ hi wɑz dɛɾ ʌv ɪt, ən vɛɹi nɪɹli ɹeɪfɑɹ kɪsmən wɪð hɪm, ən ðət meɪd kɪsmən fjʊɹiəs. hi wɑntəd paʊɝ mɔɹ ðən ɡlɔɹi, pɝhæps tə ɹul tiɹ fɹəm ðə stoʊn. pɝhæps mɔɹ. hi wɑntəd tə lɪv fɝɛvɝ. ðoʊz θɪŋz hæd bɪn pɹɑməst; ðeɪ wɝ ɪz du. pɑɹɾ ə hɪz æŋɡɝ wɑz kəz i wɑz ənʃʊɹ ðeɪ æktʃəli  wɝ səpoʊz tə kɪl ælθɹ. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd nu hi wɑntəd tə - hi wəd nɑt slip saʊnli əntɪl ðə mæn wɑz dɛɾ ən bɛɹid! - ən jɛt . . .

He had been a fool to let Rochaid talk him into this in the first place. They were supposed to wait until everyone had arrived, slipping into the city one by one to avoid notice. Rochaid had wanted the glory of being the one to kill al'Thor; the Murandian had burned with the desire to prove himself a better man than al'Thor. Now he was dead of it, and very nearly Raefar Kisman with him, and that made Kisman furious. He wanted power more than glory, perhaps to rule Tear from the Stone. Perhaps more. He wanted to live forever. Those things had been promised; they were his due. Part of his anger was because he was unsure they actually were supposed to kill al'Thor. The Great Lord knew he wanted to - he would not sleep soundly until the man was dead and buried! - and yet . . .

"kɪl hɪm," ðə l hæɾ ɔɹɾɝd bɪfɔɹ sɛndɪŋ əm tə kɛɹhin, bʌɾ i hæd bɪn əz dɪspliz ðət ðeɪ wɝ faʊn aʊɾ əz ðət ðeɪ hæd feɪld. fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ wɑz tə bi ðɛɹ læs tʃæns; hi hæd meɪd ðəɾ əz pleɪn əz pɑlɪʃt bɹæs. dæʃivə hæd sɪmpli vænɪʃt. kɪsmən dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ i hæd ɹʌn əɹ ðə l hæd kɪl hɪm, ən i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ.

"Kill him," the M'Hael had ordered before sending them to Cairhien, but he had been as displeased that they were found out as that they had failed. Far Madding was to be their last chance; he had made that as plain as polished brass. Dashiva had simply vanished. Kisman did not know whether he had run or the M'Hael had killed him, and he did not care.

"kɪl hɪm," dɪmɑndɝd hæd kəmændəd leɪɾɝ, bʌɾ i hæɾ æɾəd ðəɾ ɪt wəd bi bɛɾɝ ðeɪ daɪd ðən lɛt ðɛmsɛlvz bi dɪskʌvɝɾ əɡɛn. baɪ ɛniwʌn, ivən ðə l, əz ɪf i dɪd nɑt noʊ ʌv teɪmz ɔɹɾɝ.

"Kill him," Demandred had commanded later, but he had added that it would be better they died than let themselves be discovered again. By anyone, even the M'Hael, as if he did not know of Taim's order.

ən leɪɾɝ stɪl, mɔɹaɪɾɪn hæd sɛd, "kɪl ɪm ɪf jə mʌst, bʌɾ əbʌv ɔl, bɹɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ɪz pəzɛʃən tə mi. ðət wɪl ɹɪdim jəɹ pɹiviəs tʃɹænzɡɹɛʃənz." ðə mæn sɛɾ i wɑz wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, ən noʊ wʌn wɑz mæɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðət kleɪm ənlɛs ɪt wɑz tʃɹu, jɛɾ i sim tə θɪŋk ælθɹz bɪlɔŋɪŋz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ɪz dɛθ, ðə kɪlɪŋ ɪnsɪdɛntəl ən nɑt ɹɪli nɛsəsɛɹi.

And later still, Moridin had said, "Kill him if you must, but above all, bring everything in his possession to me. That will redeem your previous transgressions." The man said he was one of the Chosen, and no one was mad enough to make that claim unless it was true, yet he seemed to think al'Thor's belongings more important than his death, the killing incidental and not really necessary.

ðoʊz tu wɝ ði oʊnli tʃoʊzən kɪsmən hæd mɛt, bʌt ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪz hɛd hɝt. ðeɪ wɝ wɝs ðən kɛɹhinɪn. hi səspɛktəd ðət wʌt ðeɪ lɛft ənsɛd kəd kɪl ə mæn kwɪkɝ ðən ə saɪn ɔɹɾɝ fɹəm ə haɪ lɔɹd. wɛl, wʌns tɔɹvəl ən dʒɛdwɪn ɝaɪvd, ðeɪ kəd wɝk aʊt -  əbɹʌpli sʌmθɪŋ stʌŋ ɪz ɹaɪɾ ɑɹm, ən i stɛɹd daʊn ɪn kɑnstɝneɪʃən ət ðə blʌdsteɪn spɹɛɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz kloʊk. ɪt dɪd nɑt fil laɪk ə dip kʌt, ən noʊ kʌtpɝs wʊɾə slæʃt ɪz fɔɹɑɹm.

Those two were the only Chosen Kisman had met, but they made his head hurt. They were worse than Cairhienin. He suspected that what they left unsaid could kill a man quicker than a signed order from a High Lord. Well, once Torval and Gedwyn arrived, they could work out -  Abruptly something stung his right arm, and he stared down in consternation at the bloodstain spreading on his cloak. It did not feel like a deep cut, and no cutpurse would have slashed his forearm.

"hi bɪlɔŋz tə mi," ə mæn wɪspɝd bɪhaɪn hɪm, bʌt wən i tɝnd, ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn ðə stʃɹit, ɔl ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs. ðə fju hu noʊɾəst ðə dɑɹk steɪn ɑn ɪz kloʊk lʊkt əweɪ kwɪkli. ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə bi əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð ivən ðə smɔləs vaɪələns. ðeɪ wɝ ɡʊɾ əɾ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑnə si.

"He belongs to me," a man whispered behind him, but when he turned, there was only the crowd in the street, all going about their business. The few who noticed the dark stain on his cloak looked away quickly. In this place, no one wanted to be associated with even the smallest violence. They were good at ignoring what they did not want to see.

ðə waʊn θɹɑbd, bɝnɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ɪt hæɾ ət fɝst. ɹilisɪŋ ɪz kloʊk tə ðə wɪnd, kɪsmən pɹɛst ɪz lɛf hæn oʊvɝ ðə blʌɾi slæʃ ɪn ɪz sliv. hɪz ɑɹm fɛl swoʊlən tə hɪz tʌtʃ, ən hɑt. sʌɾənli hi stɛɹɾ ɪn hɔɹɝ əɾ ɪz ɹaɪt hænd, stɛɹɾ əz ɪt tɝn əz blæk ən bloʊɾɪd əz ə wik-oʊl kɔɹps.

The wound throbbed, burning more than it had at first. Releasing his cloak to the wind, Kisman pressed his left hand over the bloody slash in his sleeve. His arm felt swollen to his touch, and hot. Suddenly he stared in horror at his right hand, stared as it turned as black and bloated as a week-old corpse.

fɹæntəkəli hi bɪɡæn tə ɹʌn, pʊʃɪŋ pipəl aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ, nɑkɪŋ əm daʊn. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ tə hɪm, haʊ ɪt hæd bɪn dʌn, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ə ðə ɹɪzʌlt. ənlɛs i kəd ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi, bɪɑn ðə leɪk, ʌp ɪndə ðə hɪlz. hi hæɾ ə tʃæns, ðɛn. ə hɔɹs. hi niɾəd ə hɔɹs! hi hæd tə hæv ə tʃæns. hi hæd bɪn pɹɑməst i wəd lɪv fɝɛvɝ! ɔl i kəd si wɝ pipəl əfʊt, ən ðeɪ wɝ skæɾɝɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪz tʃɑɹdʒ. hi θɔɾ i hɝd ɡɑɹdzmɪnz ɹæɾəlz, bʌɾ ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ðə blʌd paʊndɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ dɑɹk. hɪz feɪs hɪt sʌmθɪŋ hɑɹd, ən i nu hi hæd fɔlən. hɪz læs θɔt wɑz ðət wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə pʌnɪʃ hɪm, bʌt fəɹ wʌt, hi kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd.

Frantically he began to run, pushing people out of his way, knocking them down. He did not know what was happening to him, how it had been done, but he was sure of the result. Unless he could get out of the city, beyond the lake, up into the hills. He had a chance, then. A horse. He needed a horse! He had to have a chance. He had been promised he would live forever! All he could see were people afoot, and they were scattering before his charge. He thought he heard Guardsmen's rattles, but it might have been the blood pounding in his ears. Everything was going dark. His face hit something hard, and he knew he had fallen. His last thought was that one of the Chosen had decided to punish him, but for what, he could not have said.

oʊnli ə fju mɛn wɝ sɪɾɪŋ ət ðə ɹaʊn teɪbəlz ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum ə ðə kɹaʊn ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ wən ɹænd wɔkt ɪn. dɪspaɪt ðə ɡɹænd neɪm, ɪt wɑz ə mɑɾəst ɪn, wɪð tu dʌzən ɹumz ɑn tu flɔɹz əbʌv. ðə plæstɝd wɔlz ə ðə kɑmən ɹum wɝ peɪntəd jɛloʊ, ən ðə mɛn sɝvɪŋ teɪbəl hɪɹ wɔɹ lɔŋ jɛloʊ eɪpɹənz. ə stoʊn faɪɝpleɪs əɾ iðɝ ɛn ə ðə ɹum ɡeɪv ɪɾ ə mɑɹkt wɔɹmθ æftɝ aʊtsaɪd. ðə ʃʌɾɝz wɝ boʊltəd, bʌt læmps hʌŋ ɑn ðə wɔlz tʊk ði ɛdʒ ɔf ðə dɪmnəs. ðə smɛlz dʒɹɪftɪŋ fɹəm ðə kɪtʃənz pɹɑməst ə teɪsti mɪddeɪ mil ə fɪʃ fɹəm ðə leɪk. ɹænd wəd bi sɑɹi tə mɪs ðæt. ðə kʊks ət ðə kɹaʊn ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ wɝ vɛɹi ɡʊd.

Only a few men were sitting at the round tables in the common room of The Crown of Maredo when Rand walked in. Despite the grand name, it was a modest inn, with two dozen rooms on two floors above. The plastered walls of the common room were painted yellow, and the men serving table here wore long yellow aprons. A stone fireplace at either end of the room gave it a marked warmth after outside. The shutters were bolted, but lamps hung on the walls took the edge off the dimness. The smells drifting from the kitchens promised a tasty midday meal of fish from the lake. Rand would be sorry to miss that. The cooks at The Crown of Maredo were very good.

hi sɔ læn əɾ ə teɪbəl baɪ hɪmsɛlf əɡɛns ðə wɔl. ðə bɹeɪɾɪd lɛðɝ kɔɹd ðət hɛld lænz hɛɹ bæk dʒɹu saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlænsɪz fɹəm səm ə ði ʌðɝ mɛn, bʌɾ i ɹəfjuz tə ɡɪv ʌp wɛɹɪŋ ðə hædɔɹi ivən fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl. hi mɛt ɹændz ɡeɪz, ən wən ɹænd nɑɾəd təwɔɹd ðə stɛɹz ət ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum, hi dɪd nɑt weɪs taɪm wɪð kwɛstʃənɪŋ lʊks; hi dʒʌst sɛt daʊn ɪz waɪnkʌp ən ɹoʊz, stɑɹɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə stɛɹz. ivən wɪð dʒʌst ə smɔl naɪf əɾ ɪz bɛlt, hi lʊk deɪnʒɝəs, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə bi dʌn əbaʊt ðæt, iðɝ. sɛvɹəl mɛn ət ðə teɪbəlz ɡlænst ɹændz weɪ, bʌt fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðeɪ lʊkt əweɪ hɝidli wən i mɛt ðɛɹ aɪz.

He saw Lan at a table by himself against the wall. The braided leather cord that held Lan's hair back drew sidelong glances from some of the other men, but he refused to give up wearing the hadori even for a little while. He met Rand's gaze, and when Rand nodded toward the stairs at the back of the room, he did not waste time with questioning looks; he just set down his winecup and rose, starting for the stairs. Even with just a small knife at his belt, he looked dangerous, but there was nothing to be done about that, either. Several men at the tables glanced Rand's way, but for some reason, they looked away hurriedly when he met their eyes.

nɪɹ ðə kɪtʃən, ət ðə dɔɹ tə ðə wɪmənz ɹum, ɹænd stɑpt. mɛn wɝ nɑɾ əlaʊɾ ɪn ðɛɹ. əsaɪd fɹəm ə fju flaʊɝz peɪntəɾ ɑn ðə jɛloʊ wɔlz, ðə wɪmənz ɹum wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ fænsiɝ ðən ðə kɑmən ɹum, ðoʊ ðə stænd-læmps wɝ peɪntəd jɛloʊ, tu, ən ðə feɪsɪŋz ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ðə jɛloʊ eɪpɹənz wɔɹn baɪ ðə wɪmən u sɝv teɪbəl hɪɹ wɝ noʊ dɪfɹən ðən ðoʊz wɔɹn baɪ ðə mɛn ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum. mɪstʃɹəs nælhɛɹə, ðə slɪm, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹɾ ɪnkipɝ, wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ət ðə seɪm teɪbəl əz mɪn, nɪneɪiv ən əliviə, ɔl ə ðɛm tʃæɾɪŋ ən læfɪŋ oʊvɝ ti.

Near the kitchen, at the door to the Women's Room, Rand stopped. Men were not allowed in there. Aside from a few flowers painted on the yellow walls, the Women's Room was not much fancier than the common room, though the stand-lamps were painted yellow, too, and the facings of the fireplace. The yellow aprons worn by the women who served table here were no different than those worn by the men in the common room. Mistress Nalhera, the slim, gray-haired innkeeper, was sitting at the same table as Min, Nynaeve and Alivia, all of them chatting and laughing over tea.

ɹændz dʒɔ taɪɾənd ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə fɔɹmɝ deɪmeɪn. nɪneɪiv kleɪm ðə wʊmən hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn kʌmɪŋ əlɔŋ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɛniwʌn kəd "ɪnsɪst" ɑn ɛniθɪŋ wɪð nɪneɪiv. ʃi wɑntəɾ əliviə əlɔŋ fəɹ səm sikɹət ɹizən. ʃi hæd bɪn bɪheɪvɪŋ mɪstɪɹiəsli, əz ðoʊ wɝkɪŋ əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kəɾ ət biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɛvɝ sɪns i wɛn bæk fəɹ əɹ æftɝ livɪŋ ɪleɪn. ɔl θɹi wɪmən hæɾ ədɑptəd haɪ-nɛk fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ dʒɹɛsəz, hɛvəli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð flaʊɝz ən bɝdz ɑn ðə bɑɾəs ən ʃoʊldɝz ən ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðɛɹ tʃɪnz, ðoʊ səmtaɪmz nɪneɪiv ɡɹʌmbəld oʊvɝ ðɛm. noʊ daʊt ʃi wʊɾə pɹəfɝd staʊt tu ɹɪvɝz wʊlənz tə ðə faɪnɝ mətɪɹiəl ʃi faʊn hɪɹ. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ɪf ðə ɹɛd dɑɾ ə ðə kɪsən ɑn əɹ fɔɹhɛd wɝ nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə dʒɹɔ ɛvɹi aɪ, ʃi hæd dɛk hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ɪn dʒuəlɹi əz ðoʊ ətɛndɪŋ ə ɹɔɪəl ɑɾiəns, ə slɪm ɡoʊldən bɛlt ən ə lɔŋ nɛkləs ən ɛni nʌmbɝ ə bɹeɪslɪts, ɔl bʌt wʌn sɛt wɪð bɹaɪt blu sæfaɪɝz ən pɑlɪʃt ɡɹin stoʊnz i dɪd nɑt noʊ, ən ɛvɹi fɪŋɡɝ ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hæn hæɾ ə ɹɪŋ tə mætʃ. hɝ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ wɑz tʌkt əweɪ sʌmwɛɹ, soʊ əz nɑt tə ətʃɹækt ətɛnʃən, bʌt ðə ɹɛs dʒɹu tɛn taɪmz əz mʌtʃ. mɛni pipəl wəd nɑɾ əv noʊn ən ɛɛs sədaɪz ɹɪŋ ət saɪt, bʌɾ ɛniwʌn kəd si mʌni ɪn ðoʊz dʒɛmz.

Rand's jaw tightened at the sight of the former damane. Nynaeve claimed the woman had insisted on coming along, but he did not believe anyone could "insist" on anything with Nynaeve. She wanted Alivia along for some secret reason. She had been behaving mysteriously, as though working as hard as she could at being Aes Sedai, ever since he went back for her after leaving Elayne. All three women had adopted high-necked Far Madding dresses, heavily embroidered with flowers and birds on the bodice and shoulders and right up to their chins, though sometimes Nynaeve grumbled over them. No doubt she would have preferred stout Two Rivers woolens to the finer material she found here. On the other hand, if the red dot of the ki'sain on her forehead were not enough to draw every eye, she had decked herself out in jewelry as though attending a royal audience, a slim golden belt and a long necklace and any number of bracelets, all but one set with bright blue sapphires and polished green stones he did not know, and every finger on her right hand had a ring to match. Her Great Serpent ring was tucked away somewhere, so as not to attract attention, but the rest drew ten times as much. Many people would not have known an Aes Sedai's ring at sight, but anyone could see money in those gems.

ɹænd klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən bɛnt, hɪz hɛd. "waɪf, aɪ nid tə spik wɪð jə əpstɛɹz," hi sɛd, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ət ðə læs moʊmən tə æd, "ɪf ɪt plizɪz ju." hi kəd nɑt meɪk ɪt mɔɹ ɝdʒən ðən ðæt, nɑɾ ən meɪnteɪn ðə pɹəpɹaɪəɾiz, bʌɾ i hoʊp ðeɪ dɪd nɑt lɪŋɡɝ. ðeɪ maɪt, ɪf oʊnli tə dɛmənstʃɹeɪt fəɹ ði ɪnkipɝ ðət ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ əɾ ɪz bɛk ən kɔl. fəɹ səm ɹizən, pipəl ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ æktʃəli  sim tə bɪliv ðət wɪmən fɹəm ɔf dʒʌmpt wən mɛn toʊld əm tə!

Rand cleared his throat and bent, his head. "Wife, I need to speak with you upstairs," he said, remembering at the last moment to add, "if it pleases you." He could not make it more urgent than that, not and maintain the proprieties, but he hoped they did not linger. They might, if only to demonstrate for the innkeeper that they were not at his beck and call. For some reason, people in Far Madding actually seemed to believe that women from off jumped when men told them to!

mɪn twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ tə ɡɹɪn ət hɪm, ðə weɪ ʃi dɪɾ ɛvɹi taɪm i kɔld əɹ waɪf. ðə fil ə hɝ ɪn ɪz hɛd wɑz wɔɹmθ ən dɪlaɪt, sʌɾənli spɑɹklɪŋ wɪð əmjuzmənt. ʃi faʊn ðɛɹ sɪtʃueɪʃən ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ vɛɹi əmjuzɪŋ. linɪŋ təwɔɹd mɪstʃɹəs nælhɛɹə wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz fɹəm hɪm, ʃi sɛd sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs ðət meɪd ði oʊldɝ wʊmən kækəl wɪð læftɝ ən ɡeɪv nɪneɪiv ə peɪn ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Min twisted around in her chair to grin at him, the way she did every time he called her wife. The feel of her in his head was warmth and delight, suddenly sparkling with amusement. She found their situation in Far Madding very amusing. Leaning toward Mistress Nalhera without taking her eyes from him, she said something in a low voice that made the older woman cackle with laughter and gave Nynaeve a pained expression.

əliviə stʊɾ ʌp, lʊkɪŋ nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðə səbdud wʊmən i veɪɡli ɹɪmɛmbɝd hændɪŋ oʊvɝ tə teɪm. ɔl ðoʊz kæptʃɝd sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn hæd bɪn ə bɝɾən i wɑz ɡlæd tə bi fɹi ʌv, noʊ mɔɹ. ðəɹ wɝ θɹɛdz ʌv waɪɾ ɪn əɹ ɡoʊldən hɛɹ ən faɪn laɪnz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ aɪz, bʌt ðoʊz aɪz wɝ fɪɹs naʊ. "wɛl?" ʃi dʒɹɔld, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn ət nɪneɪiv, bʌt sʌmhaʊ ʃi meɪd ðə wɝd boʊθ ə kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm ən ə kəmænd.

Alivia stood up, looking nothing like the subdued woman he vaguely remembered handing over to Taim. All those captured sul'dam and damane had been a burden he was glad to be free of, no more. There were threads of white in her golden hair and fine lines at the corners of her eyes, but those eyes were fierce now. "Well?" she drawled, staring down at Nynaeve, but somehow she made the word both a criticism and a command.

nɪneɪiv ɡlɛɹɾ ʌp ət ðə wʊmən ən tʊk əɹ swit taɪm ɪn stændɪŋ ən smuðɪŋ əɹ skɝts, bʌɾ ət list ʃi stʊd.

Nynaeve glared up at the woman and took her sweet time in standing and smoothing her skirts, but at least she stood.

ɹænd weɪɾəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɪfɔɹ ɹʌʃɪŋ əpstɛɹz. læn wɑz weɪɾɪŋ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə stɛɹz, dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ə ðə kɑmən ɹum bɪloʊ. kwaɪətli, ɹænd ɡeɪv ə bɛɹ-boʊnz əkaʊn ʌv wʌt hæd hæpənd. lænz stoʊni feɪs nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Rand waited no longer before rushing upstairs. Lan was waiting at the head of the stairs, just out of sight of the common room below. Quietly, Rand gave a bare-bones account of what had happened. Lan's stony face never changed expression.

"æt list wʌn ə ðɛm ɪz dʌn," hi sɛd, tɝnɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɹum i ʃɛɹd wɪð nɪneɪiv. "aɪl ɡɛɾ əɹ θɪŋz ɹɛɾi."

"At least one of them is done," he said, turning toward the room he shared with Nynaeve. "I'll get our things ready."

ɹænd wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə ɹum i ən mɪn ʃɛɹd, hɝidli pʊlɪŋ ðɛɹ kloʊðz aʊɾ ə ðə tɔl wɔɹdʒɹoʊb ən stʌfɪŋ əm ɛni weɪ ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ ɪndə wʌn ə ðə wɪkɝ pæk hæmpɝz, wən ʃi faɪnəli ɛntɝd ðə ɹum. fɑloʊd baɪ nɪneɪiv ən əliviə.

Rand was already in the room he and Min shared, hurriedly pulling their clothes out of the tall wardrobe and stuffing them any way they would go into one of the wicker pack hampers, when she finally entered the room. Followed by Nynaeve and Alivia.

"laɪt, jəl ɹuən əɹ θɪŋz ðət weɪ," mɪn ɪkskleɪmd, ʃoʊldɝɪŋ ɪm əweɪ fɹəm ðə hæmpɝ. ʃi bɪɡæn ɹimuvɪŋ ɡɑɹməns ən foʊldɪŋ əm nitli ɑn ðə bɛd bɪsaɪɾ ɪz pis-bɑndəd sɔɹd. "waɪ ɑɹ wi pækɪŋ?" ʃi æskt, bʌt ɡeɪv ɪm noʊ tʃæns tə ænsɝ. "mɪstʃɹəs nælhɛɹə sɛz jə wʊdn bi soʊ sʌlki ɪf aɪ swɪtʃt jə ɛvɹi mɔɹnɪŋ," ʃi læft, ʃeɪkɪŋ aʊt wʌn ə ðə koʊts ʃi dɪd nɑt wɛɹ hɪɹ. hi hæd toʊld əɹ i wəd baɪ hɝ nu, bʌt ʃi ɹəfjuz tə liv ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd koʊts ən bɹitʃɪz bɪhaɪnd. "aɪ toʊld əɹ aɪd kənsɪɾɝ ɪt. ʃi laɪks læn vɛɹi mʌtʃ." sʌɾənli ʃi pɪtʃt əɹ vɔɪs haɪ ɪn ɪməteɪʃən ə ði ɪnkipɝ. "ə nit, maɪld-mænɝd mæn ɪz mʌtʃ tə bi pɹəfɝɾ oʊvɝ ə pɹɪɾi feɪs, aɪ ɔlweɪz seɪ."

"Light, you'll ruin our things that way," Min exclaimed, shouldering him away from the hamper. She began removing garments and folding them neatly on the bed beside his peace-bonded sword. "Why are we packing?" she asked, but gave him no chance to answer. "Mistress Nalhera says you wouldn't be so sulky if I switched you every morning," she laughed, shaking out one of the coats she did not wear here. He had told her he would buy her new, but she refused to leave the embroidered coats and breeches behind. "I told her I'd consider it. She likes Lan very much." Suddenly she pitched her voice high in imitation of the innkeeper. "A neat, mild-mannered man is much to be preferred over a pretty face, I always say."

nɪneɪiv snɔɹɾɪd. "hu wɑns ə mæn ʃi kən meɪk dʒʌmp θɹu hups wɛnɛvɝ ʃi laɪks?" ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, ən mɪnz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən. ðət wɑz ɪɡzækli wʌt nɪneɪiv dɪd tə læn, ən haʊ ðə mæn pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɹænd kəɾ ʌndɝstænd.

Nynaeve snorted. "Who wants a man she can make jump through hoops whenever she likes?" Rand stared at her, and Min's mouth fell open. That was exactly what Nynaeve did to Lan, and how the man put up with it was more than Rand could understand.

"ju θɪŋk əbaʊt mɛn tu mʌtʃ, nɪneɪiv," əliviə dʒɹɔld. nɪneɪiv fɹaʊn bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə seɪɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ, ʃi dʒʌst stʊd ðəɹ fɪŋɡɝɪŋ wʌn ə hɝ bɹeɪslɪts, ə pəkjuljɝ pis wɪð flæt ɡoʊldən tʃeɪnz stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ daʊn ðə bæk ə hɝ lɛf hæn tə ɹɪŋz ɑn ɔl fɔɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ði oʊldɝ wʊmən ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ əz ðoʊ dɪsəpɔɪntɪɾ ət nɑt ɡɛɾɪŋ ə ɹaɪz.

"You think about men too much, Nynaeve," Alivia drawled. Nynaeve frowned but instead of saying anything, she just stood there fingering one of her bracelets, a peculiar piece with flat golden chains stretching down the back of her left hand to rings on all four fingers. The older woman shook her head as though disappointed at not getting a rise.

"aɪm pækɪŋ kəz wɪv tə ɡoʊ, ən bi kwɪk əbaʊɾ ɪt," ɹænd sɛd heɪstəli. nɪneɪiv maɪt bi kwaɪət fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ɑɾ əz ðət wɑz, bʌɾ ɪf əɹ feɪs ɡɑɾ ɛni dɑɹkɝ ʃi wəd bi jæŋkɪŋ əɹ bɹeɪɾ ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ tɪl noʊ wʌn kəd ɡɛɾ ə wɝɾ ɪn ɛdʒwaɪz fəɹ aʊɝz.

"I'm packing because we have to go, and be quick about it," Rand said hastily. Nynaeve might be quiet for the moment, odd as that was, but if her face got any darker she would be yanking her braid and shouting till no one could get a word in edgewise for hours.

bɪfɔɹ i fɪnɪʃt ðə seɪm əkaʊn i hæd ɡɪvən læn, mɪn stɑp foʊldɪŋ θɪŋz ən stɑɹɾəd ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ əɹ bʊks ɪn ðə sɛkən hæmpɝ, hɝidli ɪnʌf ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt pæɾ əm wɪð kloʊks ðə weɪ ʃi juʒəwəli dɪd. ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən stʊd stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ sin ɪm bɪfɔɹ. ɪn keɪs ðeɪ wɝ nɑt biɪŋ əz kwɪk tə si əz mɪn, hi ɪmpeɪʃənli æɾəd, "ɹɑtʃeɪɾ ən kɪsmən æmbʊʃt mi. ðeɪ nu aɪ wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ. kɪsmən ɡɑɾ əweɪ. ɪf i noʊz ðɪs ɪn, hi ən dæʃivə ən dʒɛdwɪn ən tɔɹvəl maɪɾ ɔl tɝn ʌp hɪɹ, meɪbi ɪn tu əɹ θɹi deɪz, əɹ meɪbi ɪn ən aʊɝ əɹ soʊ."

Before he finished the same account he had given Lan, Min stopped folding things and started replacing her books in the second hamper, hurriedly enough that she did not pad them with cloaks the way she usually did. The other two women stood staring at him as though they had never seen him before. In case they were not being as quick to see as Min, he impatiently added, "Rochaid and Kisman ambushed me. They knew I was following. Kisman got away. If he knows this inn, he and Dashiva and Gedwyn and Torval might all turn up here, maybe in two or three days, or maybe in an hour or so."

"aɪ æm nɑt blaɪnd," nɪneɪiv sɛd, stɪl stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ hiɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs; wɑz ʃi pɹətɛstɪŋ dʒʌs fəɹ ðə fɔɹm ʌv ɪt? "ɪf jə wɑnə hɝi, hɛlp mɪn ɪnstɛɾ ə stændɪŋ ɝaʊn laɪk ə wʊlhɛd." ʃi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ, ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ.

"I am not blind," Nynaeve said, still staring at him. There was no heat in her voice; was she protesting just for the form of it? "If you want to hurry, help Min instead of standing around like a woolhead." She stared at him a moment longer, and shook her head before leaving.

əliviə pɔzd ɪn ði ækt ə fɑloʊɪŋ, ən ɡlɛɹɾ ət ɹænd. noʊ, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ səbduɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. "ju kəd ɡɛt jɝsɛlf kɪld laɪk ðæt," ʃi sɛd dɪsəpɹuvɪŋli. "ju hæv tu mʌtʃ tə də tə ɡɛt kɪl jɛt. jə mʌs lɛɾ əs hɛlp."

Alivia paused in the act of following, and glared at Rand. No, there was nothing subdued about her any longer. "You could get yourself killed like that," she said disapprovingly. "You have too much to do to get killed yet. You must let us help."

hi fɹaʊn ət ðə dɔɹ kloʊzɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. "hæv jə hæɾ ɛni vjuɪŋz əbaʊt hɝ, mɪn?"

He frowned at the door closing behind her. "Have you had any viewings about her, Min?"

"ɔl ðə taɪm, bʌt nɑt ðə kaɪn jə min, nʌθɪŋ aɪ ʌndɝstænd." ʃi ɹɪŋkəld əɹ noʊz ət wʌn ə ðə bʊks ən sɛɾ ɪɾ əsaɪd. smɔl tʃæns ʃi wəɾ əbændən ə sɪŋɡəl vɑljum ə hɝ nɑt-soʊ-smɔl laɪbɹɛɹi. əndaʊɾɪdli ʃi mɛn tə kæɹi ðət wʌn, ən ɹɛɾ ɪɾ ət ðə fɝst ɑpɝtunəɾi. ʃi spɛn aʊɝz wɪð əɹ noʊz ɪn ðoʊz bʊks. "ɹænd," ʃi sɛd sloʊli, "ju dɪɾ ɔl ðæt, kɪld wʌn mæn ən feɪst ənʌðɝ, ən . . . ɹænd, aɪ dɪdn fil ɛniθɪŋ. ɪn ðə bɑnd, aɪ min. noʊ fɪɹ, noʊ æŋɡɝ. nɑɾ ivən kənsɝn! nʌθɪŋ."

"All the time, but not the kind you mean, nothing I understand." She wrinkled her nose at one of the books and set it aside. Small chance she would abandon a single volume of her not-so-small library. Undoubtedly she meant to carry that one, and read it at the first opportunity. She spent hours with her nose in those books. "Rand," she said slowly, "you did all that, killed one man and faced another, and . . . Rand, I didn't feel anything. In the bond, I mean. No fear, no anger. Not even concern! Nothing."

"aɪ wɑzn æŋɡɹi wɪð hɪm." ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, hi bɪɡæn ʃʌvɪŋ kloʊðz ɪndə ðə hæmpɝ əɡɛn. "hi dʒʌs niɾəd kɪlɪŋ, ðæts ɔl. ən waɪ wəɾ aɪ bi əfɹeɪd?"

"I wasn't angry with him." Shaking his head, he began shoving clothes into the hamper again. "He just needed killing, that's all. And why would I be afraid?"

"oʊ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə smɔl vɔɪs. "aɪ si." ʃi bɛn bæk tə ðə bʊks. ðə bɑn hæd ɡɔn vɛɹi stɪl, əz ɪf ʃi wɝ dip ɪn θɔt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə tʃɹʌbəl θɹɛd wɝmɪŋ ðoʊ ðə stɪlnəs.

"Oh," she said in a small voice. "I see." She bent back to the books. The bond had gone very still, as if she were deep in thought, but there was a troubled thread worming though the stillness.

"mɪn, aɪ pɹɑməs aɪ woʊn lɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ hæpən tə ju." hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ i kəd kip ðət pɹɑməs, bʌɾ i ɪntɛndəd tə tʃɹaɪ.

"Min, I promise I won't let anything happen to you." He did not know whether he could keep that promise, but he intended to try.

ʃi smaɪld ət hɪm, ɔlmoʊs læfɪŋ. laɪt, ʃi wɑz bjuɾəfəl. "aɪ noʊ ðæt, ɹænd. ən aɪ woʊn lɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ hæpən tə ju." lʌv floʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə bɑn laɪk ðə bleɪz ʌv ə nundeɪ sʌn. "əliviəz ɹaɪt, ðoʊ. jə də hæv tə lɛɾ əs hɛlp sʌmhaʊ. ɪf jə dɪskɹaɪb ðiz fɛloʊz wɛl ɪnʌf, meɪbi wi kən æsk kwɛstʃənz. jə sɝɾənli kæn sɝtʃ ðə hoʊl sɪɾi əloʊn."

She smiled at him, almost laughing. Light, she was beautiful. "I know that, Rand. And I won't let anything happen to you." Love flowed along the bond like the blaze of a noonday sun. "Alivia's right, though. You do have to let us help somehow. If you describe these fellows well enough, maybe we can ask questions. You certainly can't search the whole city alone."

wəɹ dɛd mɛn, luz θɝɪn mɝmɝd. dɛd mɛn ʃəd bi kwaɪəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪvz, bʌt ðeɪ nɛvɝ ɑɹ.

We are dead men, Lews Therin murmured. Dead men should be quiet in their graves, but they never are.

ɹænd bɛɹli hɝd ðə vɔɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd. sʌɾənli hi nu hi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə dɪskɹaɪb kɪsmən ən ði ʌðɝz. hi kəd dʒɹɔ ðɛm soʊ wɛl ðəɾ ɛniwʌn wəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə feɪsəz. ɪksɛpt, hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə dʒɹɔ ɪn ɪz laɪf. luz θɝɪn kʊd, ðoʊ. ðət ʃʊɾə fɹaɪɾənd hɪm. ɪt ʃəd hæv.

Rand barely heard the voice in his head. Suddenly he knew he did not have to describe Kisman and the others. He could draw them so well that anyone would recognize the faces. Except, he had never been able to draw in his life. Lews Therin could, though. That should have frightened him. It should have.

ɪsəm peɪs ðə ɹum, stʌɾiɪŋ baɪ ði ɛvɝ-pɹɛzən laɪɾ ə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd. ðə bɛd lɪnənz ʃɪftəd fɹəm ɹʌmpəl tə nitli meɪd bɪtwin wʌn ɡlæns ən ðə nɛkst. ðə kʌvɝlət tʃeɪnʒd fɹəm flaʊɝd tə pleɪn dɑɹk ɹɛd tə kwɪltɪd. ði ɪfɛmɝəl ɔlweɪz tʃeɪnʒd hɪɹ, ən i bɛɹli noʊɾəst ɛnimɔɹ. hi kəd nɑt juz tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd ðə weɪ ðə tʃoʊzən kʊd, bʌt hɪɹ wɑz wɛɹ i fɛl moʊs fɹi. hɪɹ, hi kəd bi hu hi wɑntəd tə bi. hi tʃʌkəld ət ðə θɔt.

Isam paced the room, studying by the ever-present light of Tel'aran'rhiod. The bed linens shifted from rumpled to neatly made between one glance and the next. The coverlet changed from flowered to plain dark red to quilted. The ephemeral always changed here, and he barely noticed anymore. He could not use Tel'aran'rhiod the way the Chosen could, but here was where he felt most free. Here, he could be who he wanted to be. He chuckled at the thought.

stɑpɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə bɛd, hi kɛɹfəli ənʃiðd ðə tu pɔɪzən dæɡɝz ən stɛpt aʊɾ ə ði ənsin wɝld ɪndə ðə weɪkɪŋ. əz i dɪd, hi bɪkeɪm luk. ɪt simd əpɹoʊpɹiət.

Stopping beside the bed, he carefully unsheathed the two poisoned daggers and stepped out of the Unseen World into the waking. As he did, he became Luc. It seemed appropriate.

ðə ɹum wɑz dɑɹk ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld, bʌt ðə sɪŋɡəl wɪndoʊ lɛɾ ɪn səfɪʃən munlaɪt fəɹ luk tə meɪk aʊt ðə maʊndɪd ʃeɪps ə tu pipəl laɪɪŋ əslip bɪniθ ðɛɹ blæŋkəts. wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən i dʒɹoʊv ə bleɪɾ ɪndə itʃ. ðeɪ woʊk wɪð smɔl kɹaɪz, bʌɾ i pʊl ðə bleɪdz fɹi ən dʒɹoʊv əm ɪn əɡɛn ən əɡɛn. wɪð ðə pɔɪzən, ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli iðɝ wʊɾə hæd ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ tə ʃaʊt laʊdli ɪnʌf tə bi hɝɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə ɹum, bʌɾ i wɑntəd tə meɪk ðɪs kɪl ɪz oʊn ɪn ə weɪ ðət pɔɪzən kəd nɑt ɡɹænt. sun ðeɪ stɑp twɪtʃɪŋ wən i θɹʌst ə bleɪd bɪtwin ɹɪbz.

The room was dark in the waking world, but the single window let in sufficient moonlight for Luc to make out the mounded shapes of two people lying asleep beneath their blankets. Without hesitation he drove a blade into each. They woke with small cries, but he pulled the blades free and drove them in again and again. With the poison, it was unlikely either would have had the strength to shout loudly enough to be heard outside the room, but he wanted to make this kill his own in a way that poison could not grant. Soon they stopped twitching when he thrust a blade between ribs.

waɪpɪŋ ðə dæɡɝz klin ɑn ðə kʌvɝlət, hi ɹiʃiðd əm wɪð əz mʌtʃ kɛɹ əz i hæd dʒɹɔn ðɛm. hi hæd bɪn ɡɪvən mɛni ɡɪfs, bʌɾ ɪmjunəɾi tə pɔɪzən, əɹ ɛni ʌðɝ wɛpən, wɑz nɑɾ əmʌŋ ðɛm. ðən i tʊk ə ʃɔɹt kændəl fɹəm ɪz pɑkəɾ ən blu əweɪ ɪnʌf æʃ fɹəm ðə bæŋkt koʊlz ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs tə laɪt ðə wɪk. hi ɔlweɪz laɪk tə si ðə pipəl i kɪld, æftɝ ɪf i kəd nɑt dʊɹɪŋ. hi hæɾ ɪspɛʃli ɛndʒɔɪd ðoʊz tu ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə stoʊn ə tɛɹ. ði ɪnkɹədulɪɾi ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz wən i əpɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə θɪn ɛɹ, ðə hɔɹɝ wən ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd i hæd nɑt kʌm tə seɪv ðɛm, wɝ tʃɹɛʒɝd mɛmɹiz. ðət hæd bɪn ɪsəm, nɑt hɪm, bʌt ðə mɛmɹiz wɝ nʌn ðə lɛs pɹaɪz fəɹ ðæt. niðɝ ə ðɛm ɡɑt tə kɪl ən ɛɛs sədaɪ vɛɹi ɔfən.

Wiping the daggers clean on the coverlet, he resheathed them with as much care as he had drawn them. He had been given many gifts, but immunity to poison, or any other weapon, was not among them. Then he took a short candle from his pocket and blew away enough ash from the banked coals in the fireplace to light the wick. He always liked to see the people he killed, after if he could not during. He had especially enjoyed those two Aes Sedai in the Stone of Tear. The incredulity on their faces when he appeared out of thin air, the horror when they realized he had not come to save them, were treasured memories. That had been Isam, not him, but the memories were none the less prized for that. Neither of them got to kill an Aes Sedai very often.

fəɹ ə moʊmən i stʌɾid ðə feɪsəz ə ðə mæn ən wʊmən ɑn ðə bɛd, ðən pɪntʃt aʊt ðə kændəlz fleɪm ən ɹɪtɝn ðə kændəl tə hɪz pɑkət bɪfɔɹ stɛpɪŋ bæk ɪndə tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd.

For a moment he studied the faces of the man and woman on the bed, then pinched out the candle's flame and returned the candle to his pocket before stepping back into Tel'aran'rhiod.

hɪz peɪtʃɹən ə ðə moʊmənt wɑz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɪm. ə mæn, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ə ðət mʌtʃ, bʌt luk kəd nɑt lʊk ət hɪm. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪt wɑz wɪð ðoʊz slaɪmi ɡɹeɪ mɛn, hum jə dʒʌs dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs. hi hæd kɪld wʌn ə ðɛm, wʌns, ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪtsɛlf. ðeɪ fɛl koʊld ən ɛmpti tə ðə tʌtʃ. ɪt hæd bɪn laɪk kɪlɪŋ ə kɔɹps. noʊ, ðɪs mæn hæd dʌn sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ soʊ luks aɪz slɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɪm laɪk wɔɾɝ slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɡlæs. ivən sin ət ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ði aɪ, hi wɑz ə blɝ.

His patron of the moment was waiting for him. A man, he was sure of that much, but Luc could not look at him. It was not as it was with those slimy Gray Men, whom you just did not notice. He had killed one of them, once, in the White Tower itself. They felt cold and empty to the touch. It had been like killing a corpse. No, this man had done something with the Power so Luc's eyes slid away from him like water sliding down glass. Even seen at the corner of the eye, he was a blur.

"ðə pɛɹ slipɪŋ ɪn ðɪs ɹum wɪl slip fɝɛvɝ," luk sɛd, "bʌt ðə mæn wɑz bɔld, ðə wʊmən ɡɹeɪ."

"The pair sleeping in this room will sleep forever," Luc said, "but the man was bald, the woman gray."

"ə pɪɾi," ðə mæn sɛd, ən ðə vɔɪs sim tə mɛlt ɪn luks ɪɹz. hi wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪɾ ɪf i hɝɾ ɪt wɪθaʊt ðə dɪsɡaɪz. ðə mæn hæd tə bi wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən. fju seɪv ðə tʃoʊzən nu haʊ tə ɹitʃ hɪm, ən nʌn ə ðə mɛn əmʌŋ ðoʊz fju kəd tʃænəl, əɹ wʊɾə dɛɹd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kəmæn hɪm. hɪz sɝvəsəz wɝ ɔlweɪz bɛɡd, ɪksɛp baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd hɪmsɛlf, ən mɔɹ ɹisənli baɪ ðə tʃoʊzən, bʌt nʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən luk hæd mɛt hæɾ ɛvɝ teɪkən sətʃ pɹikɔʃənz əz ðɪs.

"A pity," the man said, and the voice seemed to melt in Luc's ears. He would not be able to recognize it if he heard it without the disguise. The man had to be one of the Chosen. Few save the Chosen knew how to reach him, and none of the men among those few could channel, or would have dared trying to command him. His services were always begged, except by the Great Lord himself, and more recently by the Chosen, but none of the Chosen Luc had met had ever taken such precautions as this.

"du jə wɑn mi tə tʃɹaɪ əɡɛn?" luk æskt.

"Do you want me to try again?" Luc asked.

"pɝhæps. wən aɪ tɛl ju. nɑt bɪfɔɹ. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, nɑɾ ə wɝɾ ə ðɪs tə ɛniwʌn."

"Perhaps. When I tell you. Not before. Remember, not a word of this to anyone."

"æz jə kəmænd," luk ɹɪplaɪd, boʊɪŋ, bʌt ðə mæn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi meɪkɪŋ ə ɡeɪtweɪ, ə hoʊl ðəɾ oʊpən ɪndə ə snoʊi fɔɹəst ɡleɪd. hi wɑz ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ luk stʃɹeɪɾənd.

"As you command," Luc replied, bowing, but the man was already making a gateway, a hole that opened into a snowy forest glade. He was gone before Luc straightened.

ɪt ɹɪli wɑz ə pɪɾi. hi hæd ɹæðɝ lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə kɪlɪŋ ɪz nɛfju ən ðə wɛnk. bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz taɪm tə pæs, hʌntɪŋ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə plɛʒɝ. hi bɪkeɪm ɪsəm. ɪsəm laɪkt kɪlɪŋ wʊlvz ivən mɔɹ ðən luk dɪd.

It really was a pity. He had rather looked forward to killing his nephew and the wench. But if there was time to pass, hunting was always a pleasure. He became Isam. Isam liked killing wolves even more than Luc did.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiθɹi


CHAPTER 23

tə luz ðə sʌn


To Lose the Sun

tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊl ði ʌnfəmɪljɝ wʊlən kloʊk taɪtli ɝaʊn əɹ wɪð wʌn hænd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə fɔl aʊɾ ə ði ivən mɔɹ ʌnfəmɪljɝ sæɾəl, ʃələn ɔkwɝdli hild əɹ hɔɹs fɔɹwɝɾ ən fɑloʊd hɑɹɪn ən əɹ sɔɹdmæstɝ moʊd θɹu ðə hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ ðət lɛd fɹəm ə steɪbliɑɹɾ ɪn ðə sʌn pæləs tə . . . ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛɹ, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ oʊpən ɛɹiə - ə klɪɹɪŋ, wɑz ɪt kɔld? ʃi θɔt ðət wɑz ɹaɪt - ə klɪɹɪŋ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ə ɹeɪkɝz dɛk, əmʌŋ stʌntɪd tʃɹiz speɪst aʊɾ ɑn hɪlz. ðə paɪnz, ði oʊnli tʃɹiz əmʌŋ əm ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd, wɝ tu smɔl ən twɪstəd fəɹ ɛni jus bʌt tɑɹ ən tɝpəntaɪn. moʊst ə ðə ɹɛst ʃoʊd bɛɹ ɡɹeɪ bɹæntʃəz ðət meɪɾ əɹ θɪŋk ə boʊnz. ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sʌn sæt dʒʌst əbʌv ðə tʃɹitɑps, ən ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ðə koʊl simd mɔɹ bɪɾɝ hɪɹ ðən ɪt hæɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʃi hæd lɛf bɪhaɪnd. ʃi hoʊp ðə hɔɹs dɪd nɑt mɪsstɛp ən tʌmbəl əɹ daʊn ɑntu ðə ɹɑks ðət stʌk ʌp wɛɹɛvɝ pætʃəz ə snoʊ dɪd nɑt kʌvɝ ðə ɹɑɾɪŋ livz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ʃi dɪstʃɹʌstəd hɔɹsəz. ənlaɪk ʃɪps, ænəməlz hæd maɪnz ə ðɛɹ oʊn. ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹɛtʃɝəs θɪŋz tə klaɪm ɑn tɑp ʌv. ən hɔɹsəz hæd tiθ. wɛnɛvɝ əɹ maʊnt ʃoʊd hɪz, soʊ nɪɹ tə hɝ lɛɡz, ʃi flɪntʃt ən pæɾəd ɪz nɛk ən meɪd suðɪŋ saʊnz. ət list, ʃi hoʊp ðə bis faʊn əm suðɪŋ.

Trying to hold the unfamiliar woolen cloak tightly around her with one hand, trying not to fall out of the even more unfamiliar saddle, Shalon awkwardly heeled her horse forward and followed Harine and her Swordmaster Moad through the hole in the air that led from a stableyard in the Sun Palace to . . . She was not sure where, except that it was a long open area - a clearing, was it called? she thought that was right - a clearing larger than a raker's deck, among stunted trees spaced out on hills. The pines, the only trees among them she recognized, were too small and twisted for any use but tar and turpentine. Most of the rest showed bare gray branches that made her think of bones. The morning sun sat just above the treetops, and if anything, the cold seemed more bitter here than it had in the city she had left behind. She hoped the horse did not misstep and tumble her down onto the rocks that stuck up wherever patches of snow did not cover the rotting leaves on the ground. She distrusted horses. Unlike ships, animals had minds of their own. They were treacherous things to climb on top of. And horses had teeth. Whenever her mount showed his, so near to her legs, she flinched and patted his neck and made soothing sounds. At least, she hoped the beast found them soothing.

kædzueɪn hɝsɛlf, ɡɑɹbd ɪn ʌnɹiliv dɑɹk ɡɹin, sæɾ izəli ɑn ə tɔl hɔɹs wɪð ə blæk meɪn ən teɪl, meɪnteɪnɪŋ ðə wiv ðət meɪd ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. hɔɹsəz dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ hɝ. nʌθɪŋ bɑðɝd hɝ. ə sʌɾən bɹiz stɝd ðə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ kloʊk spɹɛɾ oʊvɝ ðə bæk ɛn ə hɝ maʊnt, bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ə filɪŋ ðə koʊld əɾ ɔl. ðə ɡoʊldən hɛɹ ɔɹnəməns dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ bʌn swʌŋ əz ʃi tɝn əɹ hɛd tə wɑtʃ ʃələn ən əɹ kəmpænjənz. ʃi wɑz ə hænsəm wʊmən, bʌt nɑt wʌn jə wəd noʊɾəs twaɪs ɪn ə kɹaʊɾ ɪksɛp ðəɾ əɹ smuð feɪs dɪd nɑt mætʃ əɹ hɛɹ. wʌns jə keɪm tə noʊ hɝ, ɪt wɑz tu leɪt.

Cadsuane herself, garbed in unrelieved dark green, sat easily on a tall horse with a black mane and tail, maintaining the weave that made the gateway. Horses did not bother her. Nothing bothered her. A sudden breeze stirred the dark gray cloak spread over the back end of her mount, but she gave no sign of feeling the cold at all. The golden hair ornaments dangling around her dark gray bun swung as she turned her head to watch Shalon and her companions. She was a handsome woman, but not one you would notice twice in a crowd except that her smooth face did not match her hair. Once you came to know her, it was too late.

ʃələn wʊɾə ɡɪvən mʌtʃ tə si haʊ ðət wiv wɑz dʌn, ivən ɪf ɪt hæd mɛn biɪŋ nɪɹ kædzueɪn, bʌt ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn əlaʊɾ ɪndə ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ əntɪl ðə ɡeɪtweɪ wɑz kəmplit, ən siɪŋ ə seɪl spɹɛɾ ɑn ðə jɑɹdɑɹm dɪd nɑt titʃ jə haʊ tə sɛɾ ə seɪl mʌtʃ lɛs meɪk wʌn. ɔl ʃi nu wɑz ðə neɪm. ɹaɪɾɪŋ pæst, ʃi əvɔɪɾəd miɾɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɡeɪz, bʌt ʃi fɛlt ɪt. ðə wʊmənz aɪz meɪɾ əɹ toʊz kɝl, sikɪŋ ə fʊɾɪŋ ðə stɝəps kəd nɑt ɡɪv. ʃi kəd si noʊ weɪ tə ɪskeɪp, jɛt ʃi hoʊp tə faɪnd wʌn θɹu stʌɾiɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðət ʃi nu vɛɹi lɪɾəl əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾəli wɪlɪŋ tə ədmɪt - ʃi hæd nɛvɝ mɛt wʌn bɪfɔɹ seɪlɪŋ tə kɛɹhin, ən θɔɾ əbaʊɾ əm oʊnli tə pɹeɪz ðə laɪt ðət ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn tʃoʊzən tə bɪkʌm wʌn - bʌt ðəɹ wɝ kɝəns əmʌŋ kædzueɪnz kəmpænjənz, dip bɪniθ ðə sɝfəs. dip, stʃɹɔŋ kɝəns kəɾ ɔltɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət simd əpɛɹən ɑn ðə sɝfəs.

Shalon would have given much to see how that weave was done, even if it had meant being near Cadsuane, but she had not been allowed into the stableyard until the gateway was complete, and seeing a sail spread on the yardarm did not teach you how to set a sail much less make one. All she knew was the name. Riding past, she avoided meeting the Aes Sedai's gaze, but she felt it. The woman's eyes made her toes curl, seeking a footing the stirrups could not give. She could see no way to escape, yet she hoped to find one through studying the Aes Sedai. That she knew very little about Aes Sedai, she was readily willing to admit - she had never met one before sailing to Cairhien, and thought about them only to praise the Light that she had not been chosen to become one - but there were currents among Cadsuane's companions, deep beneath the surface. Deep, strong currents could alter everything that seemed apparent on the surface.

ðə fɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd kʌm θɹu ɹaɪɾ æftɝ kædzueɪn wɝ weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ət wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə . . . klɪɹɪŋ . . . wɪð θɹi wɔɹɾɝz. ət list, ʃələn wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɪvɑn wɑz ðə faɪɝi ɑlɑnəz wɔɹɾɝ, ən toʊmɑs wɑz staʊt lɪɾəl vɛɹɪnz, bʌt ʃi ɔlsoʊ wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd sin ðə vɛɹi jʌŋ mæn u steɪd soʊ kloʊs tə plʌmp deɪdʒiənz saɪd wɛɹɪŋ ən æʃəmənz blæk koʊt. ʃʊɹli hi kəd nɑt bi ə wɔɹɾɝ. kəd hi? ɛbən wɑz dʒʌst ə bɔɪ. jɛt wən ðə wʊmən ɡeɪzd ət hɪm, hɝ juʒəwəl pʌft-ʌp pɹaɪd sim tə swɛl fɝðɝ. kʌmaɪɹə, ə plɛzənt-lʊkɪŋ wʊmən wɪð blu aɪz ðət kəd tɝn ɪndə naɪvz wən sʌmθɪŋ ɪntʃɹəstəd hɝ, sæɾ əɹ sæɾəl ə lɪɾəl tə wʌn saɪd, stʌɾiɪŋ jʌŋ ɛbən soʊ ʃɑɹpli ɪt wɑz ə wʌndɝ i wɑz nɑt laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn flɛnst.

The four Aes Sedai who had come through right after Cadsuane were waiting on their horses at one side of the . . . clearing . . . with three Warders. At least, Shalon was sure that Ihvon was the fiery Alanna's Warder, and Tomas was stout little Verin's, but she also was sure she had seen the very young man who stayed so close to plump Daigian's side wearing an Asha'man's black coat. Surely he could not be a Warder. Could he? Eben was just a boy. Yet when the woman gazed at him, her usual puffed-up pride seemed to swell further. Kumira, a pleasant-looking woman with blue eyes that could turn into knives when something interested her, sat her saddle a little to one side, studying young Eben so sharply it was a wonder he was not lying on the ground flensed.

"aɪ wɪl nɑt pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðɪs mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ," hɑɹɪn ɡɹʌmbəld, θʌmpɪŋ əɹ mɛɹ wɪð əɹ bɛɹ hilz tə kip ɪt muvɪŋ. hɝ bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd jɛloʊ sɪlks dɪd nɑt hɛlp əɹ kip ə ɡʊd siɾ ɪn ðə sæɾəl ɛni mɔɹ ðən dɪd ʃələnz blu. ʃi sweɪɾ ən slɪd wɪð ði ænəməlz muvməns, ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tɑpəlɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊn əɾ ɛvɹi stɛp. ðə bɹiz ɡʌstɪɾ əɡɛn, flɪpɪŋ ðə dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɛnz ə hɝ sæʃ əbaʊt, meɪkɪŋ əɹ kloʊk bɪloʊ, bʌt ʃi dɪsdeɪn tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðə ɡɑɹmənt. kloʊks wɝ nɑt mʌtʃ juzd ɪn ðə ʃɪps; ðeɪ ɡɑɾ ɪn ðə weɪ, ən kəd tæŋɡəl jəɹ ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz wən jə niɾəd əm fəɹ sɝvaɪvəl. moʊd hæd ɹəfjuzd wʌn, tʃɹʌstɪŋ tə ðə kwɪltɪd blu koʊɾ i wɔɹ ɪn ðə koʊldəst siz. nɛsun bihɑɹə, ɔl ɪn bɹɑnz wʊl, ɹoʊd θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si ɛvɹiθɪŋ ət wʌns, ən ðən ɛlzə pɛnfəl, hu wɔɹ ə sʌlən ɪkspɹɛʃən fəɹ səm ɹizən ən klʌtʃt əɹ fɝ-laɪnd ɡɹin kloʊk taɪt. nʌn ə ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ sim tə bɑðɝ mʌtʃ wɪð ʃɛltɝɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz fɹəm ðə koʊld.

"I will not put up with this much longer," Harine grumbled, thumping her mare with her bare heels to keep it moving. Her brocaded yellow silks did not help her keep a good seat in the saddle any more than did Shalon's blue. She swayed and slid with the animal's movements, on the point of toppling to the ground at every step. The breeze gusted again, flipping the dangling ends of her sash about, making her cloak billow, but she disdained to control the garment. Cloaks were not much used in the ships; they got in the way, and could tangle your arms and legs when you needed them for survival. Moad had refused one, trusting to the quilted blue coat he wore in the coldest seas. Nesune Bihara, all in bronze wool, rode through the gateway looking around as if trying to see everything at once, and then Elza Penfel, who wore a sullen expression for some reason and clutched her fur-lined green cloak tight. None of the other Aes Sedai seemed to bother much with sheltering themselves from the cold.

"aɪ meɪ bi eɪbəl tə si ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ, ʃi sɛz," hɑɹɪn mʌɾɝd, pʊlɪŋ əɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz əntɪl ðə mɛɹ tɝn təwɔɹd ðə saɪɾ ə ðə klɪɹɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm wɛɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ɡæðɝɪŋ. "meɪ! ən ʃi ɔfɝz ðɪs tʃæns əz ðoʊ ɡɹæntɪŋ ə pɹɪvlədʒ." hɑɹɪn dɪd nɑt nid tə ɡɪv ə neɪm; wən hɑɹɪn sɛd "ʃi" ðət weɪ, laɪk ə dʒɛlifɪʃəz stɪŋ, ðəɹ kəɾ oʊnli bi wʌn wʊmən ʃi mɛnt. "aɪ hæv ðə ɹaɪt, bɑɹɡən fəɹ ən əɡɹid! ʃi dɪnaɪz mi ði əɡɹiɾ ɑntʊɹɑʒ! aɪ mʌs liv maɪ seɪlməstʃɹəs bɪhaɪnd, ən maɪ ətɛndəns!" ɛɹiən bɹoʊlɛoʊz əpɪɹd θɹu ði oʊpənɪŋ, əz ɪntɛn əz ɪf ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn ə bæɾəl, fɑloʊd baɪ bɛldaɪn nɪɹæm, hu dɪd nɑɾ ivən lʊk laɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. boʊθ wɔɹ ɡɹin, ɛɹiən kəmplitli, bɛldaɪn ɪn slæʃɪz ɪn əɹ slivz ən skɝts. dɪd ðət min sʌmθɪŋ? laɪkli nɑt. "æm aɪ tə əpɹoʊtʃ ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ laɪk ə dɛkɡɝl tʌtʃɪŋ maɪ hɑɹt tə ə seɪlməstʃɹəs?" wən sɛvɹəl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ təɡɛðɝ, jə kəd si ðə smuð-feɪst eɪɡləsnəs klɪɹli, soʊ jə kəd nɑt seɪ wɛðɝ ɛni wʌn wɑz twɛnti əɹ twaɪs ðəɾ ivən ɪf əɹ hɛɹ wɑz waɪt, ən bɛldaɪn sɪmpli lʊkt ə ɡɝl ə twɛnti. ən ðət toʊl noʊ mɔɹ ðən dɪɾ əɹ skɝts. "æm aɪ tə ɛɹ maɪ oʊn bɛɾɪŋ ən wɑʃ maɪ oʊn lɪnənz? ʃi tɝnz pɹoʊɾəkɑl stʃɹeɪɾ ɪndə ðə wɪnd! əl nɑɾ əlaʊ ɪt! noʊ mɔɹ!" ðiz wɝ oʊl kəmpleɪns, vɔɪst ə dʌzən taɪmz sɪns læs naɪt, wən kædzueɪn leɪd daʊn əɹ kəndɪʃənz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tə əkʌmpəni hɝ. ðoʊz kəndɪʃənz hæd bɪn stʃɹɪkt, bʌt hɑɹɪn hæd hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs seɪv tə æksid, wɪtʃ oʊnli æɾəd tə ðə bɪɾɝnəs.

"I may be able to see the Coramoor, she says," Harine muttered, pulling at her reins until the mare turned toward the side of the clearing away from where the Aes Sedai were gathering. "May! And she offers this chance as though granting a privilege." Harine did not need to give a name; when Harine said "she" that way, like a jellyfish's sting, there could only be one woman she meant. "I have the right, bargained for and agreed! She denies me the agreed entourage! I must leave my Sailmistress behind, and my attendants!" Erian Boroleos appeared through the opening, as intent as if she expected to find a battle, followed by Beldeine Nyram, who did not even look like an Aes Sedai. Both wore green, Erian completely, Beldeine in slashes in her sleeves and skirts. Did that mean something? Likely not. "Am I to approach the Coramoor like a deckgirl touching my heart to a Sailmistress?" When several Aes Sedai were together, you could see the smooth-faced agelessness clearly, so you could not say whether any one was twenty or twice that even if her hair was white, and Beldeine simply looked a girl of twenty. And that told no more than did her skirts. "Am I to air my own bedding and wash my own linens? She turns protocol straight into the wind! I will not allow it! No more!" These were old complaints, voiced a dozen times since last night, when Cadsuane laid down her conditions if they were to accompany her. Those conditions had been strict, but Harine had had no choice save to accede, which only added to the bitterness.

ʃələn lɪsənd wɪð hæf ən ɪɹ, nɑɾɪŋ ən mɝmɝɪŋ ði əpɹoʊpɹiət ɹɪspɑnsɪz. əɡɹimənt, ʌv kɔɹs. hɝ sɪstɝ ɪkspɛktəɾ əɡɹimənt. moʊst ə hɝ ətɛnʃən wɑz ɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. sɝəptɪʃəsli. moʊd dɪd nɑt pɹitɛn tə lɪsən, bʌt ðɛn, hi wɑz hɑɹɪnz sɔɹdmæstɝ. hɑɹɪn maɪt bi taɪɾ əz ə wɛt nɑt wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, jɛt ʃi ɡeɪv moʊd soʊ mʌtʃ liweɪ ɛniwʌn maɪɾ əv θɔt ðə hɑɹd-aɪd, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn wɑz əɹ lʌvɝ, ɪspɛʃli sɪns boʊθ wɝ wɪɾoʊd. ət list, ðeɪ maɪt θɪŋk ɪɾ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ hɑɹɪn. hɑɹɪn wəd nɛvɝ teɪk ə lʌvɝ u stʊd loʊɝ ðən ʃi, ən naʊ, ʌv kɔɹs, ðət mɛnt ʃi kəd teɪk nʌn. ɪn ɛni keɪs, wʌns ðeɪ stɑp ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz nɪɹ ðə tʃɹiz, moʊd lin ən ɛlboʊ ɑn ðə tɔl pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl, ɹɛstəɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə lɔŋ, kɑɹvd aɪvɝi hɪlt ə ðə sɔɹd θɹʌs bɪhaɪn ɪz ɡɹin sæʃ, ən oʊpənli stʌɾid ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə mɛn wɪð ðɛm. wɛɹ hæɾ i lɝn tə ɹaɪɾ ə hɔɹs? hi æktʃəli  lʊkt . . . kʌmftəɹbəl. ɛniwʌn kəd tɛl ɪz ɹæŋk əɾ ə ɡlæns, fɹəm ɪz eɪɾ ɪɹɪŋz ə ðə hɛviəst weɪɾ ən ðə nɑɾɪŋ ə hɪz sæʃ, ivən ɪf i wɑz nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ɪz sɔɹɾ ən mætʃɪŋ dæɡɝ. dɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv noʊ weɪ tə də ðə seɪm? kəd ðeɪ tʃɹuli bi soʊ dɪsɔɹɡənaɪzd? səpoʊzədli ðə waɪt taʊɝ wɑz laɪk səm məkænɪkəl kəntʃɹaɪvəns ðət ɡɹaʊn ʌp θɹoʊnz ən ɹiʃeɪpt əm tə ɪts wɪl. ʌv kɔɹs, ðə məʃinɝi dɪd sim tə bi bɹoʊkən, naʊ.

Shalon listened with half an ear, nodding and murmuring the appropriate responses. Agreement, of course. Her sister expected agreement. Most of her attention was on the Aes Sedai. Surreptitiously. Moad did not pretend to listen, but then, he was Harine's Swordmaster. Harine might be tight as a wet knot with everyone else, yet she gave Moad so much leeway anyone might have thought the hard-eyed, gray-haired man was her lover, especially since both were widowed. At least, they might think it if they did not know Harine. Harine would never take a lover who stood lower than she, and now, of course, that meant she could take none. In any case, once they stopped their horses near the trees, Moad leaned an elbow on the tall pommel of his saddle, rested a hand on the long, carved ivory hilt of the sword thrust behind his green sash, and openly studied the Aes Sedai and the men with them. Where had he learned to ride a horse? He actually looked . . . comfortable. Anyone could tell his rank at a glance, from his eight earrings of the heaviest weight and the knotting of his sash, even if he was not wearing his sword and matching dagger. Did Aes Sedai have no way to do the same? Could they truly be so disorganized? Supposedly the White Tower was like some mechanical contrivance that ground up thrones and reshaped them to its will. Of course, the machinery did seem to be broken, now.

"aɪ sɛd, wɛɹ əz ʃi bɹɔɾ ʌs, ʃələn?"

"I said, where has she brought us, Shalon?"

hɑɹɪnz vɔɪs, laɪk ən aɪsi ɹeɪzɝ, dʒɹeɪn ðə blʌd fɹəm ʃələnz feɪs. sɝvɪŋ ʌndɝ ə jʌŋɡɝ sɪblɪŋ wɑz ɔlweɪz dɪfəkəlt, bʌt hɑɹɪn meɪɾ ɪt mɔɹ soʊ. ɪn pɹaɪvət ʃi wɑz bɪɑn kul, ən ɪn pʌblɪk ʃi wɑz keɪpəbəl ə hævɪŋ ə seɪlməstʃɹəs hʌŋ ʌp baɪ ði æŋkəlz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ə wɪndfɪndɝ. ən sɪns ðət jʌŋ ʃɔɹbaʊnd wʊmən, mɪn, hæd toʊld əɹ ʃi wəd bi mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps wʌn deɪ, ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn ɛvɝ ʃɑɹpɝ. stɛɹɪŋ hɑɹd-aɪɾ ət ʃələn, ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ ɡoʊldən sɛnt-bɑks əz ɪf tə kʌvɝ ən ənplɛzən oʊɾɝ, ðoʊ ðə koʊl kɪld ɔl ðə pɝfjum.

Harine's voice, like an icy razor, drained the blood from Shalon's face. Serving under a younger sibling was always difficult, but Harine made it more so. In private she was beyond cool, and in public she was capable of having a Sailmistress hung up by the ankles, not to mention a Windfinder. And since that young shorebound woman, Min, had told her she would be Mistress of the Ships one day, she had grown ever sharper. Staring hard-eyed at Shalon, she raised her golden scent-box as if to cover an unpleasant odor, though the cold killed all the perfume.

hɝidli ʃələn lʊkt ɪndə ðə skaɪ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒʌdʒ ðə sʌn. ʃi wɪʃt əɹ sɛkstənt wɝ nɑt lɑkt əweɪ ɑn waɪt spɹeɪ - ðə ʃɔɹbaʊnd wɝ nɛvɝ əlaʊd tə si ə sɛkstənt, mʌtʃ lɛs si wʌn biɪŋ juzd - bʌt ʃi wɑz ənsɝɾən ɪt wʊɾə dʌn əɹ ɛni ɡʊd. ðiz tʃɹiz maɪt bi ʃɔɹt, bʌt ʃi stɪl kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ ə hɝaɪzən. kloʊs ɑn tə ðə nɔɹθ, ðə hɪlz ɹoʊz ɪndə maʊntənz ðət slæntəd nɔɹθis tə saʊθwɛst. ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ haʊ haɪ ʃi wɑz. ðəɹ wɑz fɑɹ tu mʌtʃ ʌp ən daʊn əbaʊt lændsaɪd tə sut hɝ. ivən soʊ, ɛni wɪndfɪndɝ nu haʊ tə meɪk ɹʌf əpɹɑksəmeɪʃənz. ən wən hɑɹɪn dɪmændəɾ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən, ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə ɹəsiv ɪt.

Hurriedly Shalon looked into the sky, trying to judge the sun. She wished her sextant were not locked away on White Spray - the shorebound were never allowed to see a sextant, much less see one being used - but she was uncertain it would have done her any good. These trees might be short, but she still could not make out a horizon. Close on to the north, the hills rose into mountains that slanted northeast to southwest. She could not say how high she was. There was far too much up and down about landside to suit her. Even so, any Windfinder knew how to make rough approximations. And when Harine demanded information, she expected to receive it.

"aɪ kən oʊnli ɡɛs, weɪvməstʃɹəs," ʃi sɛd. hɑɹɪnz dʒɔ taɪɾənd, bʌt noʊ wɪndfɪndɝ wəd pɹizɛn ə ɡɛs əz ə fɝm pəzɪʃən. "aɪ bɪliv wəɹ θɹi əɹ fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd liɡz saʊθ ə kɛɹhin. mɔɹ, aɪ kænɑt seɪ." ɛni fɝst-deɪ əpɹɛntəs juzɪŋ ə stʃɹɪŋ-stɪk u ɡeɪv ə fɪks ðət lus wʊɾə bɪn bɛn oʊvɝ fəɹ ðə dɛkmæstɝz stɑɹɾɝ, bʌt ðə wɝdz tʃɪld ʃələnz tʌŋ əz ʃi hɝd wʌt ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ. ə hʌnʒɹəd liɡz oʊvɝ ðə fʊl tɝn ʌv ə deɪ wɑz ɡʊd seɪlɪŋ fəɹ ə ɹeɪkɝ. moʊd pɝst ɪz lɪps θɔtfəli.

"I can only guess, Wavemistress," she said. Harine's jaw tightened, but no Windfinder would present a guess as a firm position. "I believe we are three or four hundred leagues south of Cairhien. More, I cannot say." Any first-day apprentice using a string-stick who gave a fix that loose would have been bent over for the deckmaster's starter, but the words chilled Shalon's tongue as she heard what she was saying. A hundred leagues over the full turn of a day was good sailing for a raker. Moad pursed his lips thoughtfully.

hɑɹɪn nɑɾəd sloʊli, lʊkɪŋ ɹaɪt θɹu ʃələn əz ðoʊ ʃi kəd si ɹeɪkɝz ʌndɝ fʊl seɪl ɡlaɪɾɪŋ θɹu hoʊlz woʊvən ɪn ði ɛɹ wɪð ðə paʊɝ. ðə siz tʃɹuli wəd bi ðɛɹz, ðɛn. ɡɪvɪŋ hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ʃi lin təwɔɹd ʃələn, hɝ aɪz kætʃɪŋ ʃələnz laɪk hʊks. "ju mʌs lɝn ðɪs, wʌtɛvɝ ðə kɑst. tɛl əɹ jəl spaɪ ɑn mi ɪf ʃi titʃəz ju. ɪf jə kənvɪns hɝ, ʃi maɪt, ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ. əɹ ət lis jə meɪ ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz tə lɝn ɪt."

Harine nodded slowly, looking right through Shalon as though she could see rakers under full sail gliding through holes woven in the air with the Power. The seas truly would be theirs, then. Giving herself a shake, she leaned toward Shalon, her eyes catching Shalon's like hooks. "You must learn this, whatever the cost. Tell her you will spy on me if she teaches you. If you convince her, she might, the Light willing. Or at least you may get close enough to one of the others to learn it."

ʃələn lɪkt əɹ lɪps. ʃi hoʊp hɑɹɪn hæd nɑt sin əɹ dʒɝk. "aɪ ɹəfjuzd əɹ bɪfɔɹ, weɪvməstʃɹəs." ʃi hæd niɾəd səm ɛkspləneɪʃən ʌv waɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd hɛld əɹ fəɹ ə wik, ən ə vɝʒən ə ðə tʃɹuθ hæd sim seɪfəst. hɑɹɪn nu ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɪksɛp ðə sikɹət vɛɹɪn hæd wɪŋkəld aʊt. ɪksɛp ðət ʃələn hæɾ əɡɹid tə kædzueɪnz dɪmænz ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə haɪd ðət sikɹət. ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə laɪt bi əpɑn hɝ, ʃi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd eɪlɪl, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn soʊ loʊnli ðət ʃi seɪl tu fɑɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi nu ɪt. wɪð hɑɹɪn, ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ivnɪŋ tɔks oʊvɝ hʌnid waɪn tə sɑfən ðə lɔŋ mʌnθs pɑɹɾəd fɹəm əɹ hʌzbən mɪʃl. ət bɛst, mɛni mɔɹ mʌnθs wəd pæs bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd laɪ ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz. "wɪð ɹɪspɛkt, waɪ ʃəd ʃi bɪliv mi naʊ?"

Shalon licked her lips. She hoped Harine had not seen her jerk. "I refused her before, Wavemistress." She had needed some explanation of why the Aes Sedai had held her for a week, and a version of the truth had seemed safest. Harine knew everything. Except the secret Verin had winkled out. Except that Shalon had agreed to Cadsuane's demands in order to hide that secret. The Grace of the Light be upon her, she regretted Ailil, but she had been so lonely that she sailed too far before she knew it. With Harine, there were no evening talks over honeyed wine to soften the long months parted from her husband Mishael. At best, many more months would pass before she could lie in his arms. "With respect, why should she believe me now?"

"bɪkɔz jə wɑn ðə lɝnɪŋ." hɑɹɪn tʃɑp ði ɛɹ wɪð wʌn hænd. "ðə ʃɔɹbaʊn ɔlweɪz bɪliv ɡɹid. jəl əv tə tɛl səm θɪŋz, ʌv kɔɹs, tə pɹuv jɝsɛlf. əl dɪsaɪd wʌɾ itʃ deɪ. pɝhæps aɪ kən stɪɹ əɹ wɛɹ aɪ wɪʃ."

"Because you want the learning." Harine chopped the air with one hand. "The shorebound always believe greed. You will have to tell some things, of course, to prove yourself. I will decide what each day. Perhaps I can steer her where I wish."

hɑɹd fɪŋɡɝz sim tə dɪɡ ɪndə ʃələnz skælp. ʃi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə tɛl kædzueɪn əz lɪɾəl əz ʃi kəd ɡɛt baɪ wɪð, ən əz sɛldəm, əntɪl ʃi faʊn ə weɪ fɹi ʌv hɝ. ɪf ʃi hæd tə tɔk wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛvɹi deɪ, ən wɝs, laɪ tə hɝ aʊtʃɹaɪt, ðə wʊmən wəd pɹaɪ aʊt mɔɹ ðən ʃələn wɑntəd. mɔɹ ðən hɑɹɪn wɑntəd. mʌtʃ mɔɹ. ɪt wɑz əz sɝɾən əz sʌnɹaɪz. "fɝɡɪv mi, weɪvməstʃɹəs," ʃi sɛd wɪð ɛvɹi aʊns ə dɛfɝəns ʃi kəd faɪnd, "bʌɾ ɪf aɪ meɪ bi əlaʊd tə seɪ soʊ - "

Hard fingers seemed to dig into Shalon's scalp. She had intended to tell Cadsuane as little as she could get by with, and as seldom, until she found a way free of her. If she had to talk with the Aes Sedai every day, and worse, lie to her outright, the woman would pry out more than Shalon wanted. More than Harine wanted. Much more. It was as certain as sunrise. "Forgive me, Wavemistress," she said with every ounce of deference she could find, "but if I may be allowed to say so - "

ʃi kʌɾ ɔf əz sɝin nɛmdɑl ɹoʊɾ ʌp ən ɹeɪn tə ə hɔl bɪfɔɹ ðɛm. ðə læst ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɔɹɾɝz hæd kʌm θɹu, ən kædzueɪn hæd lɛt ðə ɡeɪtweɪ vænɪʃ. kɔɹəl, ə θɪn wʊmən ɪf pɹɪɾi, wɑz læfɪŋ ən tɔsɪŋ əɹ meɪn ə blæk hɛɹ əz ʃi spoʊk tə kʌmaɪɹə. mɛɹaɪs, ə tɔl wʊmən wɪð aɪz blɝ ðən kʌmaɪɹəz ən ə mɔɹ ðən hænsəm feɪs ðət wɑz stɝn ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ivən hɑɹɪn pɔz, wɑz juzɪŋ ʃɑɹp dʒɛstʃɝz tə dɝɛk ðə fɔɹ mɛn liɾɪŋ pækhɔɹsɪz. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɑz ɡæðɝɪŋ ɹeɪnz. ɪt sim ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɛɾi tə liv ðə klɪɹɪŋ.

She cut off as Sarene Nemdahl rode up and reined to a halt before them. The last of the Aes Sedai and Warders had come through, and Cadsuane had let the gateway vanish. Corele, a thin woman if pretty, was laughing and tossing her mane of black hair as she spoke to Kumira. Merise, a tall woman with eyes bluer than Kumira's and a more than handsome face that was stern enough to give even Harine pause, was using sharp gestures to direct the four men leading packhorses. Everyone else was gathering reins. It seemed they were all getting ready to leave the clearing.

sɝin wɑz lʌvli, ðoʊ ði æbsəns ə dʒuəlɹi lɛsən əɹ lʊks, ʌv kɔɹs, əz dɪd ðə pleɪn waɪt dʒɹɛs ʃi wɔɹ. ðə ʃɔɹbaʊn sim tə hæv noʊ dʒɔɪ ʌv kʌlɝ əɾ ɔl. ivən əɹ dɑɹk kloʊk wɑz laɪnd wɪð waɪt fɝ. "kædzueɪn, ʃiz æskt . . . ɪnstʃɹʌktəd . . . mi tə bi jəɹ ətɛndənt, weɪvməstʃɹəs," ʃi sɛd, ɪnklaɪnɪŋ əɹ hɛd ɹɪspɛkfəli. "aɪ wɪl ænsɝ jəɹ kwɛstʃənz, tə ði ɪkstɛn ðəɾ aɪ kæn, ən hɛlp jə wɪð ðə kʌstəmz, əz wɛl əz aɪ noʊ ðɛm. aɪ ɹilaɪz jə maɪt fil dɪskʌmfɝɾ ət biɪŋ wɪð mi, bʌt wən kædzueɪn kəmænz, wi mʌst oʊbeɪ."

Sarene was lovely, though the absence of jewelry lessened her looks, of course, as did the plain white dress she wore. The shorebound seemed to have no joy of color at all. Even her dark cloak was lined with white fur. "Cadsuane, she has asked . . . instructed . . . me to be your attendant, Wavemistress," she said, inclining her head respectfully. "I will answer your questions, to the extent that I can, and help you with the customs, as well as I know them. I realize you might feel discomfort at being with me, but when Cadsuane commands, we must obey."

ʃələn smaɪld. ʃi daʊɾɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nu ðəɾ ɪn ðə ʃɪps, ən ətɛndənt wɑz wʌt ðə ʃɔɹbaʊnd wəd kɔl ə sɝvənt. hɑɹɪn wəd pɹɑbli læf ən dɪmæn tə noʊ wɛðɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd klin lɪnənz pɹɑpɝli. ɪt wəd bi ɡʊd tə hæv əɹ ɪn ə ɡʊd mud.

Shalon smiled. She doubted the Aes Sedai knew that in the ships, an attendant was what the shorebound would call a servant. Harine would probably laugh and demand to know whether the Aes Sedai could clean linens properly. It would be good to have her in a good mood.

ɹæðɝ ðən læfɪŋ, ðoʊ, hɑɹɪn stɪfən ɪn əɹ sæɾəl əz ðoʊ hɝ bækboʊn hæd bɪkʌm ə meɪnməst, ən əɹ aɪz pɑpt. "aɪ fil noʊ dɪskʌmfɝt!" ʃi snæpt. "aɪ sɪmpli pɹəfɝ tə . . . tə pʊɾ ɛni kwɛstʃənz tə sʌmwʌn ɛls . . . tə kædzueɪn. jɛs. tə kædzueɪn. ən aɪ sɝɾənli də nɑɾ əv tə oʊbeɪ hɝ əɹ ɛniwʌn! nɑɾ ɛniwʌn! ɪksɛp ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps!" ʃələn fɹaʊnd; ɪt wɑz ənlaɪk əɹ sɪstɝ tə saʊn skæɾɝ-wɪtɪd. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hɑɹɪn kəntɪnjuɾ ɪn ə fɝmɝ toʊn, ðoʊ ɪn ə weɪ, dʒʌst əz ɑdli əz bɪfɔɹ. "aɪ spik fəɹ ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ən aɪ dɪmæn du ɹɪspɛkt! aɪ dɪmæn ɪt, dʒju hɪɹ mi? də ju?"

Rather than laughing, though, Harine stiffened in her saddle as though her backbone had become a mainmast, and her eyes popped. "I feel no discomfort!" she snapped. "I simply prefer to . . . to put any questions to someone else . . . to Cadsuane. Yes. To Cadsuane. And I certainly do not have to obey her or anyone! Not anyone! Except the Mistress of the Ships!" Shalon frowned; it was unlike her sister to sound scatter-witted. Drawing a deep breath, Harine continued in a firmer tone, though in a way, just as oddly as before. "I speak for the Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere, and I demand due respect! I demand it, do you hear me? Do you?"

"aɪ kən æsk əɹ tə neɪm sʌmwʌn ɛls," sɝin sɛd daʊtfəli, əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt əɹ æskɪŋ wəd tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ. "ju mʌst ʌndɝstæn ðət ʃi ɡeɪv mi kwaɪt spəsɪfɪk ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz ðət deɪ. bʌɾ aɪ ʃəd nɑɾ əv lɔs maɪ tɛmpɝ. ðəɾ ɪz ə feɪlɪŋ ə maɪn. tɛmpɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪz lɑdʒɪk."

"I can ask her to name someone else," Sarene said doubtfully, as if she did not expect her asking would change anything. "You must understand that she gave me quite specific instructions that day. But I should not have lost my temper. That is a failing of mine. Temper destroys logic."

"aɪ ʌndɝstæn oʊbeɪɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz," hɑɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɪn ðə sæɾəl. ʃi lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə lɔntʃ hɝsɛlf ət sɝinz θɹoʊt. "aɪ əpɹuv ʌv oʊbeɪɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz!" ʃi vɛɹi nɪɹli snɑɹəld. "haʊɛvɝ, ɔɹɾɝz ðəɾ əv bɪn kæɹiɾ aʊt kən bi fɝɡɑɾən. ðeɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ nid bi spoʊkən ʌv. dʒju ʌndɝstæn mi?" ʃələn stɛɹd saɪdweɪz ət hɝ. wʌt wɑz ʃi tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt? wʌɾ ɔɹɾɝz hæd sɝin kæɹiɾ aʊt, ən waɪ dɪd hɑɹɪn wɑn əm fɝɡɑɾən? moʊd meɪd noʊ pɹiɾəns ə haɪɾɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪzd aɪbɹaʊz. hɑɹɪn wɑz əwɛɹ ə hɪz skɹuɾəni, ət list, ən əɹ feɪs bɪkeɪm ə θʌndɝhɛd.

"I understand obeying orders," Harine growled, crouching in the saddle. She looked ready to launch herself at Sarene's throat. "I approve of obeying orders!" she very nearly snarled. "However, orders that have been carried out can be forgotten. They no longer need be spoken of. Do you understand me?" Shalon stared sideways at her. What was she talking about? What orders had Sarene carried out, and why did Harine want them forgotten? Moad made no pretence of hiding his raised eyebrows. Harine was aware of his scrutiny, at least, and her face became a thunderhead.

sɝin sim nɑt tə noʊɾəs. "aɪ də nɑt si haʊ wʌn kən dɪlɪbɝətli fɝɡɛt," ʃi sɛd sloʊli, ə smɔl fɹaʊn kɹisɪŋ əɹ fɔɹhɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ səpoʊz jə min ðət wi ʃəd pɹitɛn tə. ɪz ðəɾ ɪt?" ðə biɾɪd bɹeɪdz dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm əɹ kaʊl klɪk təɡɛðɝ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ət ðɪs fulɪʃnəs. "vɛɹi wɛl. əl ænsɝ jəɹ kwɛstʃənz əz wɛl əz aɪ kæn. wʌt dʒju wɪʃ tə noʊ?" hɑɹɪn saɪd laʊdli. ʃələn maɪɾ əv teɪkən ɪt fəɹ ɪmpeɪʃəns, bʌt ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ɹɪlif. ɹɪlif!

Sarene seemed not to notice. "I do not see how one can deliberately forget," she said slowly, a small frown creasing her forehead, "but I suppose you mean that we should pretend to. Is that it?" The beaded braids dangling from her cowl clicked together as she shook her head at this foolishness. "Very well. I will answer your questions as well as I can. What do you wish to know?" Harine sighed loudly. Shalon might have taken it for impatience, but she thought it was relief. Relief!

ɹɪlivd əɹ nɑt, hɑɹɪn bɪkeɪm əɹ nɔɹməl sɛlf əɡɛn, sɛlf-pəzɛst ən kəmændɪŋ, miɾɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɡeɪz əz ðoʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk əɹ dʒɹɑp əɹ aɪz. "ju kən tɛl mi wɛɹ wəɹ ən wɛɹ wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ," ʃi dɪmændəd.

Relieved or not, Harine became her normal self again, self-possessed and commanding, meeting the Aes Sedai's gaze as though trying to make her drop her eyes. "You can tell me where we are and where we are going," she demanded.

"wi ɑɹ ɪn ðə hɪlz ə kintɑɹə," kædzueɪn sɛd, əpɪɹɪŋ bɪfɔɹ əm sʌɾənli, hɝ maʊn ɹɪɹɪŋ ən pɔɪŋ ði ɛɹ, flɪŋɪŋ snoʊ, "ænd wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ." nɑɾ oʊnli dɪd ʃi steɪ ɪn ðə sæɾəl, ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən sim tə noʊɾəs ði ænəməlz hivɪŋ!

"We are in the Hills of Kintara," Cadsuane said, appearing before them suddenly, her mount rearing and pawing the air, flinging snow, "and we are going to Far Madding." Not only did she stay in the saddle, she did not even seem to notice the animal's heaving!

"ɪz ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ ɪn ðɪs fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ?"

"Is the Coramoor in this Far Madding?"

"peɪʃəns ɪz ə vɝtʃu, aɪm toʊld, weɪvməstʃɹəs." dɪspaɪt kædzueɪnz jus ə hɑɹɪnz pɹɑpɝ taɪɾəl, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹɪspɛkt ɪn əɹ mænɝ. fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt. "ju wɪl ɹaɪd wɪð mi. kip ʌp ən tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə fɔl ɔf. ɪt wəd bi ənplɛzənt, ɪf aɪ hæd tə hæv jə kæɹid laɪk sæks ʌv ɡɹeɪn. wʌns wi ɹitʃ ðə sɪɾi, kip saɪlən ənlɛs aɪ tɛl jə tə spik. aɪ woʊn əv jə kɹieɪɾɪŋ pɹɑbləmz θɹu ɪɡnɝəns. jəl lɛt sɝin ɡaɪd ju. ʃiz əɹ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz."

"Patience is a virtue, I am told, Wavemistress." Despite Cadsuane's use of Harine's proper title, there was no respect in her manner. Far from it. "You will ride with me. Keep up and try not to fall off. It would be unpleasant, if I had to have you carried like sacks of grain. Once we reach the city, keep silent unless I tell you to speak. I won't have you creating problems through ignorance. You will let Sarene guide you. She has her instructions."

ʃələn ɪkspɛktəɾ ən aʊtbɝst ə ɹeɪdʒ, bʌt hɑɹɪn hɛld əɹ tʌŋ, ðoʊ wɪð ɑbviəs ɛfɝt. wʌns kædzueɪn tɝn əweɪ, hɑɹɪn dɪd mʌɾɝ æŋɡɹəli ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, bʌt ʃi klæmpt əɹ tiθ taɪt wən sɝinz hɔɹs muvd. pleɪnli, hɝ mʌɾɝz wɝ nɑt tə bi oʊvɝhɝd baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Shalon expected an outburst of rage, but Harine held her tongue, though with obvious effort. Once Cadsuane turned away, Harine did mutter angrily under her breath, but she clamped her teeth tight when Sarene's horse moved. Plainly, her mutters were not to be overheard by Aes Sedai.

ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð kædzueɪn, ɪt tɝn aʊt, mɛn ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ, saʊθwɝd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. ɑlɑnə ən vɛɹɪn æktʃəli  ɹoʊd bɪsaɪd ðə wʊmən, bʌt wʌn lʊk fɹəm əɹ wən hɑɹɪn ətɛmptəd tə dʒɔɪn əm meɪd klɪɹ ðət noʊ wʌn ɛls wɑz wɛlkəm. wʌns əɡɛn ði ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪksploʊʒən dɪd nɑt kʌm. ɪnstɛd, hɑɹɪn fɹaʊn ət sɝin fəɹ səm ɹizən, ðən dʒɝkt əɹ maʊn ɝaʊn tə teɪk pəzɪʃən bɪtwin ʃələn ən moʊd. ʃi dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ æskɪŋ ɛni fɝðɝ kwɛstʃənz ə sɝin, ɑn ʃələnz ʌðɝ saɪd, oʊnli ɡlaʊɝɾ ət ðə bæks ə ðə wɪmən əhɛd. ɪf ʃələn hæd nɑt noʊn hɑɹɪn bɛɾɝ, wʊɾə əv sɛd ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ sʌlk ðən æŋɡɝ ɪn ðət ɡlɛɹ.

Riding with Cadsuane, it turned out, meant riding behind her, southward through the trees. Alanna and Verin actually rode beside the woman, but one look from her when Harine attempted to join them made clear that no one else was welcome. Once again the expected explosion did not come. Instead, Harine frowned at Sarene for some reason, then jerked her mount around to take position between Shalon and Moad. She did not bother asking any further questions of Sarene, on Shalon's other side, only glowered at the backs of the women ahead. If Shalon had not known Harine better, she would have said there was more sulk than anger in that glare.

fəɹ əɹ pɑɹt, ʃələn wɑz ɡlæd tə ɹaɪɾ ɪn saɪləns. ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə hɔɹs wɑz dɪfəkəlt ɪnʌf wɪθaʊt hævɪŋ tə tɔk ət ðə seɪm taɪm. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi sʌɾənli nu waɪ hɑɹɪn wɑz bɪheɪvɪŋ ɪn sətʃ ə pəkjuljɝ fæʃən. hɑɹɪn mʌs bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə smuð ðə wɔɾɝz wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪt hæd tə bi ðæt. hɑɹɪn nɛvɝ kəntʃɹoʊld əɹ tɛmpɝ wɪθaʊt ɡɹeɪt nid. ðə stʃɹeɪn ə kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ ɪt naʊ mʌst əv əɹ bɔɪlɪŋ ɪnsaɪd. ən ɪf əɹ ɛfɝts dɪd nɑɾ ɛn əz ʃi wɑntəd, ʃi wəd bɔɪl ʃələn. θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðət meɪd ʃələnz hɛɾ eɪk. ðə laɪt hɛlp ən ɡaɪd hɝ, ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ tə əvɔɪd spaɪɪŋ ɑn əɹ sɪstɝ wɪθaʊt faɪndɪŋ əɹ tʃik-tʃeɪn stʃɹɪpt ʌv ɑnɝz ən hɝsɛlf əsaɪn tə ə skaʊ ʌndɝ ə seɪlməstʃɹəs bɹuɾɪŋ oʊvɝ waɪ ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪzən haɪɝ ən ɹɛɾi tə teɪk aʊɾ əɹ ɡɹivənsəz ɑn ɛvɹiwʌn ɝaʊn hɝ. ikwəli əz bæd, mɪʃl maɪt dɪklɛɹ ðɛɹ mɛɹɪdʒ vaʊz bɹoʊkən. ðəɹ dʒʌs hæd tə bi ə weɪ.

For her part, Shalon was glad to ride in silence. Riding a horse was difficult enough without having to talk at the same time. Besides, she suddenly knew why Harine was behaving in such a peculiar fashion. Harine must be trying to smooth the waters with the Aes Sedai. It had to be that. Harine never controlled her temper without great need. The strain of controlling it now must have her boiling inside. And if her efforts did not end as she wanted, she would boil Shalon. Thinking about that made Shalon's head ache. The Light help and guide her, there had to be a way to avoid spying on her sister without finding her cheek-chain stripped of honors and herself assigned to a scow under a Sailmistress brooding over why she had never risen higher and ready to take out her grievances on everyone around her. Equally as bad, Mishael might declare their marriage vows broken. There just had to be a way.

səmtaɪmz ʃi twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə lʊk ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə lɝn fɹəm ðə wɪmən ɪn fɹʌnt, sɝɾənli. ɛvɹi soʊ ɔfən kædzueɪn ən vɛɹɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wɝdz, bʌt linɪŋ kloʊs tə wʌn ənʌðɝ ən spikɪŋ tu sɔfli tə bi oʊvɝhɝd. ɑlɑnə əpɪɹɾ ɪntɛn ɑn wʌtɛvɝ leɪ əhɛd, hɝ aɪz ɔlweɪz lʊkɪŋ saʊθ. tu əɹ θɹi taɪmz ʃi kwɪkən əɹ hɔɹsəz peɪs fəɹ ə fju stɛps bɪfɔɹ kædzueɪn bɹɔɾ əɹ bæk wɪð ə kwaɪət wɝd ðəɾ ɑlɑnə oʊbeɪd ɹɪlʌktənli, wɪð hɑt-aɪd stɛɹ əɹ sʌlən ɡɹɪmɑs. kædzueɪn ən vɛɹɪn əpɪɹd səlɪsəɾəs ə ðə wʊmən, kædzueɪn pæɾɪŋ əɹ ɑɹm ɪn ɔlmoʊs ðə weɪ ʃələn pæɾəd əɹ maʊns nɛk ən vɛɹɪn bimɪŋ ət hɝ, əz ðoʊ ɑlɑnə wɝ ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ fɹəm ən ɪlnəs. wɪtʃ toʊld ʃələn nʌθɪŋ. soʊ ʃi θɔɾ əbaʊt ði ʌðɝz.

Sometimes she twisted around in her saddle to look at the Aes Sedai riding behind her. There was nothing to learn from the women in front, certainly. Every so often Cadsuane and Verin exchanged words, but leaning close to one another and speaking too softly to be overheard. Alanna appeared intent on whatever lay ahead, her eyes always looking south. Two or three times she quickened her horse's pace for a few steps before Cadsuane brought her back with a quiet word that Alanna obeyed reluctantly, with hot-eyed stare or sullen grimace. Cadsuane and Verin appeared solicitous of the woman, Cadsuane patting her arm in almost the way Shalon patted her mount's neck and Verin beaming at her, as though Alanna were recovering from an illness. Which told Shalon nothing. So she thought about the others.

jə dɪd nɑt ɹaɪz ɪn ðə ʃɪps dʒʌs θɹu jəɹ əbɪləɾi tə wiv ðə wɪnz əɹ pɹɪdɪk ðə wɛðɝ əɹ fɪks ə pəzɪʃən. jə niɾəd tə ɹid ði ɪntɛn ðət leɪ bɪtwin ðə wɝdz ə jəɹ ɔɹɾɝz, tə ɪntɝpɹət smɔl dʒɛstʃɝz ən feɪʃəl ɪkspɹɛʃənz; jə hæd tə noʊɾəs u dɪfɝd tə hum, ivən sʌɾəli, fəɹ kɝədʒ ən əbɪləɾi əloʊn tʊk jə oʊnli soʊ haɪ.

You did not rise in the ships just through your ability to Weave the Winds or predict the weather or fix a position. You needed to read the intent that lay between the words of your orders, to interpret small gestures and facial expressions; you had to notice who deferred to whom, even subtly, for courage and ability alone took you only so high.

fɔɹ ə ðɛm, nɛsun ən ɛɹiən, bɛldaɪn ən ɛlzə, ɹoʊɾ ɪn ə klʌstɝ nɑt fɑɹ bɪhaɪn hɝ, ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ɹɪli təɡɛðɝ, oʊnli ɑkjəpaɪɪŋ ðə seɪm speɪs. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt tɔk əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, əɹ lʊk ət wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə laɪk wʌn ənʌðɝ vɛɹi mʌtʃ. ɪn əɹ maɪnd, ʃələn hæɾ əm ɪn ðə seɪm boʊt wɪð sɝin. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɹitɛndəd ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɔl wʌn ʌndɝ kædzueɪn, jɛt ðət wɑz pleɪnli əntʃɹu. mɛɹaɪs, kɔɹəl, kʌmaɪɹə ən deɪdʒiən kɹuɾ ənʌðɝ boʊt, kəmændəd baɪ kædzueɪn. səmtaɪmz ɑlɑnə simd ɪn wʌn boʊt, səmtaɪmz ði ʌðɝ, waɪl vɛɹɪn əpɪɹd tə bi ɪn səm weɪ ʌv kædzueɪnz boʊt bʌt nɑɾ ɪn ɪt. swɪmɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd, pɝhæps, wɪð kædzueɪn hoʊldɪŋ əɹ hænd. ɪf ðət wɑz nɑt stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪnʌf, ðəɹ wɑz ðə mæɾɝ ə dɛfɝəns.

Four of them, Nesune and Erian, Beldeine and Elza, rode in a cluster not far behind her, though they were not really together, only occupying the same space. They did not talk among themselves, or look at one another. They did not seem to like one another very much. In her mind, Shalon had them in the same boat with Sarene. The Aes Sedai pretended that they were all one under Cadsuane, yet that was plainly untrue. Merise, Corele, Kumira and Daigian crewed another boat, commanded by Cadsuane. Sometimes Alanna seemed in one boat, sometimes the other, while Verin appeared to be in some way of Cadsuane's boat but not in it. Swimming alongside, perhaps, with Cadsuane holding her hand. If that was not strange enough, there was the matter of deference.

ɑdli, ɪt sim ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ væljud stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ əbʌv ɪkspɪɹiəns əɹ skɪl. ðeɪ ɹæŋk ðɛmsɛlvz baɪ stʃɹɛŋkθ, laɪk dɛkmən skwɑbəlɪŋ ɪn ʃɔɹɪzaɪd tævɝnz. ɔl dɪfɝd tə kædzueɪn, ʌv kɔɹs, jɛt ðəɹ wɝ ɑɾətiz əmʌŋ ðə ɹɛst. baɪ ðɛɹ oʊn haɪɝɑɹki, səm ɪn nɛsunz boʊt wɝ ɪn ə pəzɪʃən tə ɪkspɛk dɛfɝəns fɹəm səm ɪn kædzueɪnz, bʌɾ ɔlðoʊ ðoʊz ɪn kædzueɪnz boʊɾ u ʃəd dɪfɝ dɪd soʊ, ðeɪ dɪd soʊ əz ðoʊ tə ə supɪɹiɝ u hæd kəmɪɾəd ə ɡɹivəs kɹaɪm noʊn tə ɔl. baɪ ðət haɪɝɑɹki, nɛsun stʊd haɪɝ ðən ɛni seɪv kædzueɪn ən mɛɹaɪs, jɛt ʃi feɪs deɪdʒiən, hu stʊɾ ət ðə vɛɹi bɑɾəm, əz ɪf wɪlfəli dɪfaɪən oʊvɝ kəmɪɾɪŋ ðət kɹaɪm, ən soʊ dɪd ði ʌðɝz ɪn əɹ boʊt. ɪt wɑz ɔl vɛɹi dɪskɹit, ə slaɪtli lɪftəd tʃɪn, ə smɔl ɑɹtʃ ə ði aɪbɹaʊ, ə twɪst ə ðə lɪps, bʌɾ ɑbviəs tə ən aɪ tʃɹeɪn klaɪmɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃɪps. pɝhæps ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɪn ɪt ðət wəd hɛlp hɝ, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi hæd tə pɪk oʊkəm, ði oʊnli weɪ wɑz tə faɪn ə θɹɛɾ ən pʊl.

Oddly, it seemed that Aes Sedai valued strength in the Power above experience or skill. They ranked themselves by strength, like deckmen squabbling in shoreside taverns. All deferred to Cadsuane, of course, yet there were oddities among the rest. By their own hierarchy, some in Nesune's boat were in a position to expect deference from some in Cadsuane's, but although those in Cadsuane's boat who should defer did so, they did so as though to a superior who had committed a grievous crime known to all. By that hierarchy, Nesune stood higher than any save Cadsuane and Merise, yet she faced Daigian, who stood at the very bottom, as if willfully defiant over committing that crime, and so did the others in her boat. It was all very discreet, a slightly lifted chin, a small arch of the eyebrow, a twist of the lips, but obvious to an eye trained climbing in the ships. Perhaps there was nothing in it that would help her, but if she had to pick oakum, the only way was to find a thread and pull.

ðə wɪn bɪɡæn tə pɪk ʌp; ɡʌsts flæɾənd əɹ kloʊk əɡɛnst əɹ bæk ən meɪɾ ɪt flæp ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ əhɛɾ ə hɝ. ʃi wɑz hɑɹdli əwɛɹ ʌv ɪt.

The wind began to pick up; gusts flattened her cloak against her back and made it flap on either side ahead of her. She was hardly aware of it.

ðə wɔɹɾɝz maɪt bi ənʌðɝ θɹɛd. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ət ðə vɛɹi ɹɪɹ, hɪɾən baɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪnd nɛsun ən ði ʌðɝ θɹi. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃələn hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðəɾ əmʌŋ twɛlv ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðəɹ wəd bi mɔɹ ðən sɛvən wɔɹɾɝz. ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz səpoʊz tə hæv wʌn, ɪf nɑt mɔɹ. ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. ɪksɛp ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, ʌv kɔɹs. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ɪɡnɝən ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ.

The Warders might be another thread. They were all at the very rear, hidden by the Aes Sedai riding behind Nesune and the other three. In truth, Shalon had expected that among twelve Aes Sedai, there would be more than seven Warders. Every Aes Sedai was supposed to have one, if not more. She shook her head irritably. Except the Red Ajah, of course. She was not entirely ignorant of Aes Sedai.

ɛniweɪ, ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz nɑt haʊ mɛni wɔɹɾɝz, bʌt wɛðɝ ðeɪ ɔl wɝ wɔɹɾɝz. ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ʃi hæd sin ɡɹɪzəld oʊl deɪmɝ ən ðə soʊ-pɹɪɾi dʒɑhɹ ɪn blæk koʊts, tu, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ sʌɾənli tʊk ʌp wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ət ðə taɪm, ʃi hæd bɪn ənwɪlɪŋ tə lʊk tu kloʊsli ət ðə blækoʊts, ən ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi hæd bɪn hæf-blaɪnd wɪð ðə deɪnti eɪlɪl əz wɛl, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ. ən wʌtɛvɝ ðə keɪs wɪð ɛbən, ʃi wɑz ɔlmoʊst sɝɾən ði ʌðɝ tu wɝ wɔɹɾɝz, naʊ. ɔlmoʊst. dʒɑhɹ dʒʌmpt əz fæst əz nɛθən əɹ bæsɑn wən mɛɹaɪs pɔɪntəd, ən fɹəm ðə weɪ kɔɹəl smaɪld ət deɪmɝ, hi wɑz iðɝ əɹ wɔɹɾɝ əɹ əɹ bɛdwɹmɝ, ən ʃələn kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən ə wʊmən laɪk kɔɹəl teɪkɪŋ ə nɪɹli bɔld oʊl mæn wɪð ə lɪmp ɪndə hɝ bɛd. ʃi maɪt noʊ lɪɾəl əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ bɑndɪŋ mɛn u kəd tʃænəl wɑz nɑɾ ən æksɛptɪd pɹæktəs. ɪf ʃi kəd pɹuv ðeɪ hæd dʌn soʊ, pɝhæps ðət wɑz ə naɪf ʃɑɹp ɪnʌf tə kʌt hɝsɛlf fɹi fɹəm kædzueɪn.

Anyway, the question was not how many Warders, but whether they all were Warders. She was certain she had seen grizzled old Damer and the so-pretty Jahar in black coats, too, before they suddenly took up with the Aes Sedai. At the time, she had been unwilling to look too closely at the blackcoats, and in truth, she had been half-blind with the dainty Ailil as well, but she was sure. And whatever the case with Eben, she was almost certain the other two were Warders, now. Almost. Jahar jumped as fast as Nethan or Bassane when Merise pointed, and from the way Corele smiled at Damer, he was either her Warder or her bedwarmer, and Shalon could not imagine a woman like Corele taking a nearly bald old man with a limp into her bed. She might know little about Aes Sedai, but she was sure bonding men who could channel was not an accepted practice. If she could prove they had done so, perhaps that was a knife sharp enough to cut herself free from Cadsuane.

"ðə mɛn, ðeɪ kən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ tʃænəl naʊ," sɝin mɝmɝd.

"The men, they can no longer channel now," Sarene murmured.

ʃələn stʃɹeɪɾənd hɝsɛlf ɝaʊn ɪn ðə sæɾəl soʊ kwɪkli ðət ʃi hæd tə ɡɹæb əɹ hɔɹsəz meɪn wɪð boʊθ hænz tə kip fɹəm fɔlɪŋ ɔf. ðə wɪn blu hɝ kloʊk oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd, ən ʃi hæd tə faɪt ðət daʊn bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd sɪɾ ʌp. ðeɪ wɝ kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz əbʌv ə waɪd ɹoʊd ðət kɝv saʊθwɝɾ aʊɾ ə ðə hɪlz tə ə leɪk pɝhæps ə maɪl ɔf, ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə flæt læn kʌvɝd wɪð bɹaʊn ɡɹæs, ə si ʌv bɹaʊn stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ tə ðə hɝaɪzən. ðə leɪk, bɔɹɾɝd əlɔŋ ðə wɛst wɪð ə nɛɹoʊ wɑʃ ə ɹidz, wɑz ə pɪɾəfəl ɪkskjus fəɹ ə bɑɾi ʌv wɔɾɝ, noʊ mɔɹ ðən tɛn maɪlz lɔŋ ət moʊst ən lɛs ðən ðət waɪd. ə fɛɹ-saɪzd aɪlən kɹaʊtʃt ɪn ðə mɪɾəl, sɝaʊndəd baɪ haɪ, taʊɝ-stʌɾɪd wɔlz əz fɑɹ əz ʃi kəd si, ən kʌvɝd baɪ ə sɪɾi. ʃi tʊk ɔl ðəɾ ɪn əɾ ə ɡlæns, hɝ aɪz fæsənɪŋ ɑn sɝin. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ðə wʊmən hæd bɪn ɹiɾɪŋ əɹ maɪnd. "waɪ kən ðeɪ nɑt tʃænəl?" ʃi æskt. "dɪd jə . . . ? hæv jə . . . dʒɛntəld . . . ðɛm?" ʃi θɔt ðət wɑz ðə ɹaɪt wɝd, bʌt ðət wɑz səpoʊz tə kɪl ðə mæn. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz səpoʊzd ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ən ɑd weɪ tə sɑfən ɛksəkjuʃən fəɹ səm ənnoʊn ɹizən.

Shalon straightened herself around in the saddle so quickly that she had to grab her horse's mane with both hands to keep from falling off. The wind blew her cloak over her head, and she had to fight that down before she could sit up. They were coming out of the trees above a wide road that curved southward out of the hills to a lake perhaps a mile off, on the edge of flat land covered with brown grass, a sea of brown stretching to the horizon. The lake, bordered along the west with a narrow wash of reeds, was a pitiful excuse for a body of water, no more than ten miles long at most and less than that wide. A fair-sized island crouched in the middle, surrounded by high, tower-studded walls as far as she could see, and covered by a city. She took all that in at a glance, her eyes fastening on Sarene. It was almost as if the woman had been reading her mind. "Why can they not channel?" she asked. "Did you . . . ? Have you . . . gentled . . . them?" She thought that was the right word, but that was supposed to kill the man. She had always supposed it was just an odd way to soften execution for some unknown reason.

sɝin blɪŋkt, ən ʃələn ɹilaɪz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪn spikɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi stʌɾid ʃələn əz ðeɪ fɑloʊd kædzueɪn daʊn ðə sloʊp, ðən tɝn əɹ ɡeɪz bæk tə ðə sɪɾi ɑn ði aɪlənd. "ju noʊɾəs θɪŋz, ʃələn. ɪt wəd bi bɛst ɪf jə kip wʌt juv noʊɾəst əbaʊt ðə mɛn tə jɝsɛlf."

Sarene blinked, and Shalon realized the Aes Sedai had been speaking to herself. For a moment she studied Shalon as they followed Cadsuane down the slope, then turned her gaze back to the city on the island. "You notice things, Shalon. It would be best if you keep what you have noticed about the men to yourself."

"sʌtʃ əz əm biɪŋ wɔɹɾɝz?" ʃələn sɛd kwaɪətli. "ɪz ðət waɪ jə kəd bɑn ðɛm? kəz jə dʒɛntəl ðɛm?" ʃi hoʊp tə dʒɑɹ səm ædmɪʃən lus, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ mɪɹli ɡlænst ət hɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt spik əɡɛn əntɪl ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə hɪl ən tɝn ɑntu ðə ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn kædzueɪn. ðə ɹoʊd wɑz waɪd, ðə dɝt pæk hɑɹd baɪ mʌtʃ tʃɹæfɪk, bʌt ðeɪ hæɾ ɪt tə ðɛmsɛlvz.

"Such as them being Warders?" Shalon said quietly. "Is that why you could bond them? Because you gentled them?" She hoped to jar some admission loose, but the Aes Sedai merely glanced at her. She did not speak again until they had reached the bottom of the hill and turned onto the road behind Cadsuane. The road was wide, the dirt packed hard by much traffic, but they had it to themselves.

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ə sikɹət," sɝin sɛɾ ət læst, ən nɑt vɛɹi wɪlɪŋli fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə sikɹət, "bʌt niðɝ ɪz ɪt wɛl noʊn. wi də nɑt spik ə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ ɔfən, ɪksɛp fəɹ sɪstɝz bɔɹn ðɛɹ, ən ivən ðeɪ sɛldəm vɪzət. stɪl, jə ʃəd noʊ bɪfɔɹ jə ɛntɝ. ðə sɪɾi pəzɛsəz ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. əɹ pɝhæps ɪts θɹi tɛɹæŋɡɹil. noʊ wʌn noʊz. ðeɪ - əɹ ɪt - kænɑt bi stʌɾid ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ kən bi ɹimuvd. ðeɪ mʌst əv bɪn meɪd dʊɹɪŋ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, wən fɪɹ ə mædmən tʃænəlɪŋ ðə paʊɝ wɑz ðə mæɾɝ ʌv ɛvɹi deɪ. bʌt tə peɪ sətʃ ə pɹaɪs fəɹ ðə seɪfti." ðə biɾɪd bɹeɪdz dæŋɡəlɪŋ ɑntu hɝ tʃɛst ɹæɾəld təɡɛðɝ əz ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif. "ðiz tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ðeɪ dupləkeɪɾ ə stɛɾɪŋ. ɪn ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt weɪz ət list, aɪ fɪɹ, ðoʊ aɪ səpoʊz ən oʊɡiɝ wəd nɑt θɪŋk soʊ." ʃi ɡeɪv ə doʊlfəl saɪ.

"It is not exactly a secret," Sarene said at last, and not very willingly for something that was not a secret, "but neither is it well known. We do not speak of Far Madding often, except for sisters born there, and even they seldom visit. Still, you should know before you enter. The city possesses a ter'angreal. Or perhaps it is three ter'angreal. No one knows. They - or it - cannot be studied any more than they can be removed. They must have been made during the Breaking, when fear of madmen channeling the Power was the matter of every day. But to pay such a price for the safety." The beaded braids dangling onto her chest rattled together as she shook her head in disbelief. "These ter'angreal, they duplicate a stedding. In the important ways at least, I fear, though I suppose an Ogier would not think so." She gave a doleful sigh.

ʃələn ɡeɪpt ət hɝ, ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd kənfjuz lʊks wɪð hɑɹɪn ən moʊd. waɪ wəd feɪbəlz fɹaɪɾən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ? hɑɹɪn oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, ðən moʊʃən fəɹ ʃələn tə æsk ði ɑbviəs kwɛstʃən. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz tə meɪk fɹɛnz wɪð sɝin tə hɛlp smuð əɹ kɔɹs, tu? ʃələnz hɛd ɹɪli dɪɾ eɪk. bʌt ʃi wɑz kjʊɹiəs, tu.

Shalon gaped at her, and exchanged confused looks with Harine and Moad. Why would fables frighten an Aes Sedai? Harine opened her mouth, then motioned for Shalon to ask the obvious question. Perhaps she was to make friends with Sarene to help smooth her course, too? Shalon's head really did ache. But she was curious, too.

"wʌt weɪz ɑɹ ðoʊz?" ʃi æskt kɛɹfəli. dɪd ðə wʊmən ɹɪli bɪliv ɪn pipəl faɪv spænz tɔl u sæŋ tə tʃɹiz? ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ æksiz, tu. hɪɹ kʌm ði æɛlfɪn tə stil ɔl jəɹ bɹɛd; hɪɹ kʌm ði oʊɡiɝ tə tʃɑp ɔf jəɹ hɛd. laɪt, ʃi hæd nɑt hɝd ðət sɪns hɑɹɪn wɑz stɪl ɪn liɾɪŋ stʃɹɪŋz. wɪð ðɛɹ mʌðɝ ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃɪps, ʃi hæd bɪn tʃɑɹdʒd wɪð ɹeɪzɪŋ hɑɹɪn əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ oʊn fɝs tʃaɪld.

"What ways are those?" she asked carefully. Did the woman really believe in people five spans tall who sang to trees? There was something about axes, too. Here come the Aelfinn to steal all your bread; here come the Ogier to chop off your head. Light, she had not heard that since Harine was still in leading strings. With their mother rising in the ships, she had been charged with raising Harine along with her own first child.

sɝinz aɪz waɪɾənd ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "ju tʃɹuli də nɑt noʊ?" hɝ ɡeɪz wɛn bæk tə ði aɪlən sɪɾi əhɛd. baɪ hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən, ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə ɛntɝ ðə bɪlʒz. "ɪnsaɪd ðə stɛɾɪŋ, jə kænɑt tʃænəl. jə kænɑɾ ivən fil ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. noʊ wiv meɪɾ aʊtsaɪd kən əfɛkt wʌɾ ɪz ɪnsaɪd, nɑt ðət ðət mæɾɝz. ɪn tʃɹuθ, hɪɹ ðəɹ ɑɹ tu stɛɾɪŋ, wʌn wɪðɪn ði ʌðɝ. ðə lɑɹdʒɝ əfɛks mɛn, bʌt wɪl ɛntɝ ðə smɔlɝ bɪfɔɹ wi ɹitʃ ðə bɹɪdʒ."

Sarene's eyes widened in surprise. "You truly do not know?" Her gaze went back to the island city ahead. By her expression, she was about to enter the bilges. "Inside the stedding, you cannot channel. You cannot even feel the True Source. No weave made outside can affect what is inside, not that that matters. In truth, here there are two stedding, one within the other. The larger affects men, but we will enter the smaller before we reach the bridge."

"ju wɪl nɑt bi eɪbəl tə tʃænəl ɪn ðɛɹ?" hɑɹɪn sɛd. wən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nɑɾəd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi, ə θɪn fɹɔsti smaɪl tʌtʃt hɑɹɪnz lɪps. "pɝhæps æftɝ wi faɪn kɔɹɾɝz, jə ən aɪ kən dɪskʌs ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz."

"You will not be able to channel in there?" Harine said. When the Aes Sedai nodded without looking away from the city, a thin frosty smile touched Harine's lips. "Perhaps after we find quarters, you and I can discuss instructions."

"ju ɹɛd ðə fəlɑsəfi?" sɝin lʊk stɑɹɾəld. "ðə θɪɹi ʌv ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz, ɪts nɑt wɛl θɔɾ ə ðiz deɪz, jɛɾ aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz bɪliv ðəɹ wɑz mʌtʃ tə lɝn ðɛɹ. ə dɪskʌʃən wɪl bi plɛzənt, tə teɪk maɪ maɪn fɹəm ʌðɝ mæɾɝz. ɪf kædzueɪn əlaʊz əs taɪm."

"You read the philosophy?" Sarene looked startled. "The Theory of Instructions, it is not well thought of these days, yet I have always believed there was much to learn there. A discussion will be pleasant, to take my mind from other matters. If Cadsuane allows us time."

hɑɹɪnz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən. ɡeɪpɪŋ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi fɝɡɑt tə klɪŋ tə hɝ sæɾəl, ən oʊnli moʊd sizɪŋ əɹ ɑɹm seɪvd əɹ fɹəm ə fɔl.

Harine's mouth fell open. Gaping at the Aes Sedai, she forgot to cling to her saddle, and only Moad seizing her arm saved her from a fall.

ʃələn hæd nɛvɝ hɝd hɑɹɪn mɛnʃən fəlɑsəfi, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wʌɾ əɹ sɪstɝ wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt. stɛɹɪŋ təwɔɹd fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, ʃi swɑloʊd hɑɹd. ʃi hæd lɝn tə ʃið sʌmwʌn əɡɛns juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, ən bɪn ʃið hɝsɛlf əz pɑɹɾ ə hɝ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, jɛt wən jə wɝ ʃiðd, jə kəd stɪl fil ðə sɔɹs. wʌt wəɾ ɪt bi laɪk nɑt tə fil ɪt, laɪk ðə sʌn dʒʌst aʊɾ ə saɪt bɪɑn ðə kɔɹnɝ ə jəɹ aɪ? wʌt wəɾ ɪt bi laɪk tə luz ðə sʌn?

Shalon had never heard Harine mention philosophy, but she did not care what her sister was talking about. Staring toward Far Madding, she swallowed hard. She had learned to sheathe someone against using the Power, of course, and been sheathed herself as part of her training, yet when you were sheathed, you could still feel the Source. What would it be like not to feel it, like the sun just out of sight beyond the corner of your eye? What would it be like to lose the sun?

əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd nɪɹɝ ðə leɪk, ʃi fɛl mɔɹ əwɛɹ ə ðə sɔɹs ðən ʃi hæd sɪns əɹ fɝs dʒɔɪ ət tʌtʃɪŋ ɪt. ɪt wɑz ɔl ʃi kəd də nɑt tə dʒɹɪŋk ʌv ɪt, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd si ðə laɪɾ ən noʊ, ən laɪkli noʊ waɪ. ʃi wəd nɑt ʃeɪm hɝsɛlf əɹ hɑɹɪn ɪn ðət mænɝ. smɔl, bimi kɹæf dɑɾəd ðə wɔɾɝ, nʌn mɔɹ ðən sɪks əɹ sɛvən spænz ɪn lɛŋθ, səm hɔlɪŋ ɪn nɛts, ʌðɝz kɹipɪŋ əlɔŋ ɑn lɔŋ swips. dʒʌdʒɪŋ baɪ ðə wɪnswɛp swɛlz ðət ɹoʊld əkɹɔs ðə sɝfəs, səmtaɪmz kɹæʃɪŋ ɪndə wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn faʊntənz ə foʊm laɪk sɝf, seɪlz maɪɾ əv bɪn əz mʌtʃ hɪnʒɹəns əz hɛlp. stɪl, ðə boʊts simd ɔlmoʊst ə fəmɪljɝ θɪŋ, ðoʊ nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðə slik fɔɹz əɹ eɪts əɹ twɛlvz kæɹiɾ ɑn ðə ʃɪps. ə taɪni kʌmfɝɾ əmɪd stʃɹeɪnʒnəs.

As they rode nearer the lake, she felt more aware of the Source than she had since her first joy at touching it. It was all she could do not to drink of it, but the Aes Sedai would see the light and know, and likely know why. She would not shame herself or Harine in that manner. Small, beamy craft dotted the water, none more than six or seven spans in length, some hauling in nets, others creeping along on long sweeps. Judging by the windswept swells that rolled across the surface, sometimes crashing into one another in fountains of foam like surf, sails might have been as much hindrance as help. Still, the boats seemed almost a familiar thing, though nothing like the sleek fours or eights or twelves carried on the ships. A tiny comfort amid strangeness.

ðə ɹoʊd tɝn ɑntu ə spɪɾ ə læn dʒʌɾɪŋ hæf ə maɪl əɹ mɔɹ ɪndə ðə leɪk, ən əbɹʌpli ðə sɔɹs vænɪʃt. sɝin saɪd, bʌt ɡeɪv noʊ ʌðɝ saɪn ʃi hæd noʊɾəst. ʃələn wɛɾ əɹ lɪps. ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ bæɾ əz ʃi hæd fɪɹd. ɪt meɪɾ əɹ fil . . . ɛmpti . . . bʌt ʃi kəd bɛɹ ðæt. əz lɔŋ əz ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bɛɹ ɪt tu lɔŋ. ðə wɪnd, ɡʌstɪŋ ən kɝlɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stil kloʊks, sʌɾənli fɛl mʌtʃ koʊldɝ.

The road turned onto a spit of land jutting half a mile or more into the lake, and abruptly the Source vanished. Sarene sighed, but gave no other sign she had noticed. Shalon wet her lips. It was not so bad as she had feared. It made her feel . . . empty . . . but she could bear that. As long as she did not have to bear it too long. The wind, gusting and curling and trying to steal cloaks, suddenly felt much colder.

ət ði ɛn ə ðə spɪt, ə vɪlədʒ ʌv ɡɹeɪ stoʊn haʊsəz wɪð dɑɹkɝ sleɪt ɹufs stʊd bɪtwin ɹoʊɾ ən wɔɾɝ ɑn wʌn saɪd. vɪlədʒ wɪmən hɝiɪŋ əlɔŋ wɪð lɑɹdʒ bæskəts stɑpt ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə maʊntəd pɑɹɾi. mɔɹ ðən wʌn fɛlt əɾ əɹ oʊn noʊz əz ʃi stɛɹd. ʃələn hæd ɡɹoʊn ɔlmoʊst əkʌstəm tə ðoʊz stɛɹz, ɪn kɛɹhin. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðə fɔɹɾəfəkeɪʃən ɑpəzət ðə vɪlədʒ dʒɹu hɝ aɪz, ə maʊn ə taɪt-fɪɾəd stoʊn faɪv spænz haɪ wɪð soʊlʒɝz wɑtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə bɑɹd feɪsɡɑɹdz ə ðɛɹ hɛlməts fɹəm ətɑp taʊɝz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz. səm hɛl dʒɹɔn kɹɔsboʊz wɛɹ ʃi kəd si ðɛm. fɹəm ə lɑɹdʒ aɪɝn-pleɪɾəd dɔɹ ət ði ɛnd nɪɹəs ðə bɹɪdʒ, mɔɹ hɛlməɾɪd soʊlʒɝz spɪld aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹoʊd, mɛn ɪn skwɛɹ-skeɪld ɑɹmɝ wɪð ə ɡoʊldən sɔɹd wɝkt ɑn ðə lɛft ʃoʊldɝ. səm wɔɹ sɔɹdz ət ðɛɹ weɪsts ən ʌðɝz kæɹid lɔŋ spɪɹz əɹ kɹɔsboʊz. ʃələn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə tʃɹaɪ faɪɾɪŋ pæst. ən ɔfəsɝ wɪð ə jɛloʊ plum ɑn ɪz hɛlmət moʊʃən kædzueɪn tə ə hɔlt, ðən əpɹoʊtʃt əɹ ən ɹimuvd ɪz hɛlmət, fɹiɪŋ ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹik hɛɹ ðət spɪl daʊn ɪz bæk tə hɪz weɪst. hi hæɾ ə hɑɹd, dɪsɡɹʌntəl feɪs.

At the end of the spit, a village of gray stone houses with darker slate roofs stood between road and water on one side. Village women hurrying along with large baskets stopped at the sight of the mounted party. More than one felt at her own nose as she stared. Shalon had grown almost accustomed to those stares, in Cairhien. In any case, the fortification opposite the village drew her eyes, a mound of tight-fitted stone five spans high with soldiers watching through the barred faceguards of their helmets from atop towers at the corners. Some held drawn crossbows where she could see them. From a large iron-plated door at the end nearest the bridge, more helmeted soldiers spilled out into the road, men in square-scaled armor with a golden sword worked on the left shoulder. Some wore swords at their waists and others carried long spears or crossbows. Shalon wondered whether they expected the Aes Sedai to try fighting past. An officer with a yellow plume on his helmet motioned Cadsuane to a halt, then approached her and removed his helmet, freeing gray-streaked hair that spilled down his back to his waist. He had a hard, disgruntled face.

kædzueɪn lin loʊ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə ɪkstʃeɪnʒ ə fju kwaɪət wɝdz wɪð ðə mæn, ðən pɹədust ə fæt pɝs fɹəm bɪniθ əɹ sæɾəlbæɡz. hi tʊk ɪɾ ən stɛp bæk, moʊʃənɪŋ wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz fɔɹwɝd, ə tɔl boʊni mæn u wɑz nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ə hɛlmət. hi kæɹiɾ ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɔɹd, ən ɪz hɛɹ, ɡæðɝɾ ət ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd laɪk ði ɔfəsɝz, ɔlsoʊ hʌŋ tə hɪz weɪst. hi bɛn ɪz nɛk ɹɪspɛkfəli bɪfɔɹ ɪnkwaɪɝɪŋ ɑlɑnəz neɪm, ən ɹoʊɾ ɪt vɛɹi kɛɹfəli, wɪð ɪz tʌŋ kɑt bɪtwin ɪz tiθ, dɪpɪŋ ɪz pɛn ɔfən. hɛlməɾ ɑn ɪz hɪp, ðə dɪskəntɛntɪɾ ɔfəsɝ stʊd stʌɾiɪŋ ði ʌðɝz bɪhaɪn kædzueɪn wɪð noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən. ðə pɝs hʌŋ fɹəm ɪz hæn əz ðoʊ fɝɡɑɾən. hi simd ʌnəwɛɹ i hæd bɪn spikɪŋ wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. əɹ meɪbi, hi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. hɪɹ, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ wʊmən. ʃələn ʃʌɾɝəd. hɪɹ, ʃi wɑz noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ wʊmən, bɝɛft ə hɝ ɡɪfs fəɹ ðə dʊɹeɪʃən ə hɝ steɪ. bɝɛft.

Cadsuane leaned low in her saddle to exchange a few quiet words with the man, then produced a fat purse from beneath her saddlebags. He took it and stepped back, motioning one of the soldiers forward, a tall bony man who was not wearing a helmet. He carried a writing board, and his hair, gathered at the back of his head like the officer's, also hung to his waist. He bent his neck respectfully before inquiring Alanna's name, and wrote it very carefully, with his tongue caught between his teeth, dipping his pen often. Helmet on his hip, the discontented officer stood studying the others behind Cadsuane with no expression. The purse hung from his hand as though forgotten. He seemed unaware he had been speaking with an Aes Sedai. Or maybe, he did not care. Here, an Aes Sedai was no different from any other woman. Shalon shuddered. Here, she was no different from any other woman, bereft of her gifts for the duration of her stay. Bereft.

"ðeɪ teɪk ðə neɪmz ʌv ɔl fɔɹənɝz," sɝin sɛd. "ðə kaʊnsəlz, ðeɪ laɪk tə noʊ hu ɪz ɪn ðə sɪɾi."

"They take the names of all foreigners," Sarene said. "The Counsels, they like to know who is in the city."

"pɝhæps ðeɪ wəɾ ədmɪɾ ə weɪvməstʃɹəs wɪθaʊt bɹaɪbz," hɑɹɪn sɛd dʒɹɪli. ðə boʊni soʊlʒɝ, tɝnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɑlɑnə, ɡeɪv ðə juʒəwəl ʃɔɹbaʊn stɑɹɾ ət ʃələn ən hɑɹɪnz dʒuəlɹi bɪfɔɹ kʌmɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛm.

"Perhaps they would admit a Wavemistress without bribes," Harine said drily. The bony soldier, turning away from Alanna, gave the usual shorebound start at Shalon and Harine's jewelry before coming toward them.

"jɔɹ neɪm, mɪstʃɹəs, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ju?" hi sɛd pəlaɪtli tə sɝin, dʌkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn. ʃi ɡeɪv ɪt wɪθaʊt mɛnʃənɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃələn ɡeɪv hɝz əz sɪmpli, bʌt hɑɹɪn ɔfɝd ðə taɪɾəlz əz wɛl, hɑɹɪn dɪn toʊɡɑɹə tu wɪnz, weɪvməstʃɹəs ə klæn ʃoʊdaɪn, æmbæsəɾɝ ɪkstʃɹɔɹɾənɛɹi ʌv ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ. ðə fɛloʊ blɪŋkt, ðən bɪɾ ɪz tʌŋ ən bɛn ɪz nɛk oʊvɝ ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɔɹd. hɑɹɪn skaʊld. wən ʃi wɑntəd tə ɪmpɹɛs sʌmwʌn, ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ əm tə bi ɪmpɹɛst.

"Your name, Mistress, if it pleases you?" he said politely to Sarene, ducking his head again. She gave it without mentioning that she was Aes Sedai. Shalon gave hers as simply, but Harine offered the titles as well, Harine din Togara Two Winds, Wavemistress of Clan Shodein, Ambassador Extraordinary of the Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere. The fellow blinked, then bit his tongue and bent his neck over the writing board. Harine scowled. When she wanted to impress someone, she expected them to be impressed.

əz ðə boʊni mæn wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ, ə stɑki, hɛlməɾɪd soʊlʒɝ wɪð ə lɛðɝ skɹɪp hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝ pʊʃt bɪtwin hɑɹɪnz hɔɹs ən moʊdz. bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɹz ə hɪz feɪsɡɑɹd, ə pʌkɝd skɑɹ daʊn ɪz feɪs pʊld ʌp wʌn saɪɾ ə hɪz maʊθ ɪn ə snɪɹ, bʌɾ i baʊɾ ɪz hɛd tə hɑɹɪn ɹɪspɛkfəli ɪnʌf. ən ðən i tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk moʊdz sɔɹd.

As the bony man was writing, a stocky, helmeted soldier with a leather scrip hanging from his shoulder pushed between Harine's horse and Moad's. Behind the bars of his faceguard, a puckered scar down his face pulled up one side of his mouth in a sneer, but he bowed his head to Harine respectfully enough. And then he tried to take Moad's sword.

"ju mʌst əlaʊ ɪɾ əɹ liv jəɹ bleɪdz hɪɹ əntɪl jə dɪpɑɹt," sɝin sɛd kwɪkli wən ðə sɔɹdmæstɝ twɪtʃt ðə skæbɝɾ aʊɾ ə ðə stɑki mænz hænz. "ðɪs sɝvəs, ɪts wʌt kædzueɪn wɑz peɪɪŋ fɔɹ, weɪvməstʃɹəs. ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, noʊ mæn ɪz əlaʊd tə kæɹi mɔɹ ðən ðə bɛl naɪf ənlɛs ɪts pis-bɑndəd soʊ ɪt kænɑt bi dʒɹɔn. ivən ðə wɔl ɡɑɹdz laɪk ðiz mɛn kænɑt teɪk ə sɔɹɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðɛɹ pleɪs ə duɾi. ɪz ðət nɑt soʊ?" ʃi æsk ðə skɪni soʊlʒɝ, ən i ɹɪplaɪd ðəɾ ɪt wɑz, ən ə ɡʊd θɪŋ, tu.

"You must allow it or leave your blades here until you depart," Sarene said quickly when the Swordmaster twitched the scabbard out of the stocky man's hands. "This service, it is what Cadsuane was paying for, Wavemistress. In Far Madding, no man is allowed to carry more than the belt knife unless it is peace-bonded so it cannot be drawn. Even the Wall Guards like these men cannot take a sword away from their place of duty. Is that not so?" she asked the skinny soldier, and he replied that it was, and a good thing, too.

wɪð ə ʃɹʌɡ, moʊd lɪftəd ðə sɔɹd fɹəm ɪz sæʃ, ən wən ðə fɛloʊ wɪð ðə pɝpɛtʃuəl snɪɹ dɪmændəɾ ɪz aɪvɝi-hɪltɪd dæɡɝ əz wɛl, hi hændəd ðəɾ oʊvɝ. tʌkɪŋ ðə lɔŋ dæɡɝ bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt, ðə mæn pɹədust ə spul ə faɪn waɪɝ fɹəm ɪz skɹɪp ən dɛfli bɪɡæn ɹæpɪŋ ðə sɔɹɾ ɪn ə faɪn nɛt. ɛvɹi soʊ ɔfən i pɔz tə plʌk ə sil-pɹɛs fɹəm ɪz bɛlt ən foʊld ə smɔl lɛd dɪsk ɝaʊn ðə waɪɝz, bʌɾ i hæd kwɪk, pɹæktəs hænz.

With a shrug, Moad lifted the sword from his sash, and when the fellow with the perpetual sneer demanded his ivory-hilted dagger as well, he handed that over. Tucking the long dagger behind his belt, the man produced a spool of fine wire from his scrip and deftly began wrapping the sword in a fine net. Every so often he paused to pluck a seal-press from his belt and fold a small lead disc around the wires, but he had quick, practiced hands.

"ðə lɪst ə neɪmz, ɪɾəl bi dɪstʃɹɪbjəɾəd tə ði ʌðɝ tu bɹɪdʒəz," sɝin wɛn ɑn, "æn ðə mɛn wɪl əv tə ʃoʊ ðə waɪɝz ənbɹoʊkən əɹ ðəl bi hɛld əntɪl ə mædʒəstʃɹeɪt dətɝmənz ðət noʊ ʌðɝ kɹaɪm əz bɪn kəmɪɾəd. ivən ɪf nʌn hæz, ðə pɛnəlti ɪz boʊθ ə vɛɹi hɛvi faɪn ən flɑɡɪŋ. moʊs fɔɹənɝz, ðeɪ dəpɑzɪt ðɛɹ wɛpənz bɪfɔɹ ɛntɝɪŋ tə seɪv ðə kɔɪn, bʌt ðət wəd min wi mʌs liv baɪ ðɪs bɹɪdʒ. ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz wɪtʃ dɝɛkʃən wɪl wɑnə ɡoʊ wən wi liv hɪɹ." lʊkɪŋ təwɔɹd kædzueɪn, hu əpɪɹd tə bi ɹistʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɑlɑnə fɹəm ɹaɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə lɔŋ bɹɪdʒ əloʊn, sɝin æɾəd ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, "æt list, aɪ hoʊp ðəɾ ɪz əɹ ɹizənɪŋ."

"The list of names, it will be distributed to the other two bridges," Sarene went on, "and the men will have to show the wires unbroken or they will be held until a magistrate determines that no other crime has been committed. Even if none has, the penalty is both a very heavy fine and flogging. Most foreigners, they deposit their weapons before entering to save the coin, but that would mean we must leave by this bridge. The Light alone knows which direction we will want to go when we leave here." Looking toward Cadsuane, who appeared to be restraining Alanna from riding across the long bridge alone, Sarene added almost under her breath, "At least, I hope that is her reasoning."

hɑɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd. "ðɪs ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs. haʊ ɪz i tə dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf?"

Harine snorted. "This is ridiculous. How is he to defend himself?"

"noʊ nid fəɹ ɛni mæn tə dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, mɪstʃɹəs." ðə stɑki mænz vɔɪs wɑz kɔɹs, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt saʊn mɑkɪŋ. hi wɑz steɪɾɪŋ ði ɑbviəs. "ðə stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz teɪk kɛɹ ə ðæt. lɛɾ ɛni mæn əz wɑns stɑɹt kæɹiɪŋ ə sɔɹd, ən sun wid bi əz bæɾ əz ɛvɹaɪpleɪs ɛls. aɪ hɝd wʌt ðəɹ laɪk, mɪstʃɹəs, ən wi doʊnt wɑn ðət hɪɹ." boʊɪŋ tə hɑɹɪn, hi stʃɹoʊɾ ɑn daʊn ðə kɑləm fɑloʊd baɪ ðə mæn wɪð ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɔɹd.

"No need for any man to defend himself in Far Madding, Mistress." The stocky man's voice was coarse, but he did not sound mocking. He was stating the obvious. "The Street Guards take care of that. Let any man as wants start carrying a sword, and soon we'd be as bad as everyplace else. I heard what they're like, Mistress, and we don't want that here." Bowing to Harine, he strode on down the column followed by the man with the writing board.

moʊd bɹifli ɪɡzæmən ɪz sɔɹɾ ən dæɡɝ, boʊθ nitli ɹæp hɪlt ən skæbɝd, ðən izd əm bæk ɪn pleɪs, teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ nɑt tə snæɡ hɪz sæʃ ɑn ðə silz. "sɔɹdz oʊnli bɪkʌm jusfəl wən wɪts feɪl," hi sɛd. hɑɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd əɡɛn. ʃələn wʌndɝd haʊ ðət fɛloʊ hæd ɡeɪn ɪz skɑɹ ɪf fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ wɑz soʊ seɪf.

Moad briefly examined his sword and dagger, both neatly wrapped hilt and scabbard, then eased them back in place, taking care not to snag his sash on the seals. "Swords only become useful when wits fail," he said. Harine snorted again. Shalon wondered how that fellow had gained his scar if Far Madding was so safe.

saʊnz ə pɹoʊɾɛst ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə ɹɪɹ, wɛɹ ði ʌðɝ mɛn wɝ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ kwɪkli saɪlənst. baɪ mɛɹaɪs, ʃələn wəɾ əv weɪdʒɝd. ət taɪmz, ðə wʊmən meɪd kædzueɪn sim læks. hɝ wɔɹɾɝz wɝ laɪk ðə tʃɹeɪnd ɡɑɹd dɑɡz ði æmɑjɹ juzd, ɹɛɾi tə lip əɾ ə wɪsəl, ən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl hɛzɪɾənt əbaʊt kɔlɪŋ daʊn ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪz wɔɹɾɝz. sun ɪnʌf ɔl ə ðə sɔɹdz hæd bɪn pis-bɑndəd, ən ðə pækhɔɹsɪz sɝtʃt fəɹ hɪɾən wɛpənz, ən ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ɑntu ðə bɹɪdʒ, hʊvz ɹɪŋɪŋ ɑn stoʊn. ʃələn tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk ɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ, nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ fɹəm ɪntʃɹəst əz tə teɪk əɹ maɪn ɔf wʌt wɑz mɪsɪŋ.

Sounds of protest rose from the rear, where the other men were, but they were quickly silenced. By Merise, Shalon would have wagered. At times, the woman made Cadsuane seem lax. Her Warders were like the trained guard dogs the Amayar used, ready to leap at a whistle, and she was not at all hesitant about calling down the other Aes Sedai's Warders. Soon enough all of the swords had been peace-bonded, and the packhorses searched for hidden weapons, and they rode out onto the bridge, hooves ringing on stone. Shalon tried to take in everything, not so much from interest as to take her mind off what was missing.

ðə bɹɪdʒ wɑz flæɾ ən əz waɪɾ əz ðə ɹoʊd bɪhaɪnd, wɪð loʊ stoʊn koʊpɪŋz ɑn ðə saɪd ðət wəd stɑp ə wæɡən fɹəm plʌnʒɪŋ oʊvɝ bʌt ɡɪv noʊ ʃɛltɝ tə ətækɝz, ən ɪt wɑz lɔŋ, tu, pɝhæp əz mʌtʃ əz θɹi-kɔɹɾɝz ʌv ə maɪl, ən stʃɹeɪɾ əz ən æɹoʊ. naʊ ən ðən wʌn ə ðə boʊts pæs bɪniθ, wɪtʃ ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əv dʌn hæd ðeɪ hæd mæsts. tɔl taʊɝz flæŋk ðə sɪɾiz aɪɝn-stʃɹæpt ɡeɪts - ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɡeɪt wɑz ðə neɪm sɝin ɡeɪv - wɛɹ ɡɑɹdz wɪð ðə ɡoʊldən sɔɹɾ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz baʊd ðɛɹ hɛdz tə ðə wɪmən ən kæst səspɪʃəs aɪz ɑn ðə mɛn. ðə stʃɹit bɪɑnd. . . .

The bridge was flat and as wide as the road behind, with low stone copings on the side that would stop a wagon from plunging over but give no shelter to attackers, and it was long, too, perhap as much as three-quarters of a mile, and straight as an arrow. Now and then one of the boats passed beneath, which they could not have done had they had masts. Tall towers flanked the city's iron-strapped gates - the Caemlyn Gate was the name Sarene gave - where guards with the golden sword on their shoulders bowed their heads to the women and cast suspicious eyes on the men. The street beyond. . . .

tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bi əbzɝvənt wɑz noʊ jus. ðə stʃɹit wɑz waɪɾ ən stʃɹeɪt, fʊl ə pipəl ən kɑɹts, laɪnd wɪð stoʊn bɪldɪŋz tu əɹ θɹi stɔɹiz haɪ, ən ɪɾ ɔl simd ə blɝ. ðə sɔɹs wɑz ɡɔn! ʃi nu ɪt wəd kʌm bæk wən ʃi lɛf ðɪs pleɪs, ən laɪt, ʃi wɑntəd tə liv naʊ. bʌt haʊ lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kʊd? ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ maɪt bi ɪn ðɪs sɪɾi, ən hɑɹɪn mɛn tə meɪk hɝsɛlf fæs tə ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ, pɝhæps kəz ə hu hi wɑz, pɝhæps kəz ʃi θɔɾ i wəd hɛlp əɹ ɹaɪz tə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps. əntɪl hɑɹɪn lɛft, əntɪl kædzueɪn fɹiɾ əm fɹəm ði əɡɹimənt, ʃələn wɑz æŋkɝd hɪɹ. hɪɹ, wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃɹu sɔɹs.

Trying to be observant was no use. The street was wide and straight, full of people and carts, lined with stone buildings two or three stories high, and it all seemed a blur. The Source was gone! She knew it would come back when she left this place, and Light, she wanted to leave now. But how long before she could? The Coramoor might be in this city, and Harine meant to make herself fast to the Coramoor, perhaps because of who he was, perhaps because she thought he would help her rise to Mistress of the Ships. Until Harine left, until Cadsuane freed them from the agreement, Shalon was anchored here. Here, where there was no True Source.

sɝin tɔkt ɪnsɛsənli, jɛt ʃələn bɛɹli hɝd hɝ. ðeɪ kɹɔst ə lɑɹdʒ skwɛɹ wɪð ə hjudʒ stætʃu ʌv ə wʊmən ɪn ðə sɛntɝ, bʌt ʃələn kɑɾ oʊnli hɝ neɪm, aɪnjən əvhɑɝɪn, ðoʊ ʃi nu sɝin wɑz tɛlɪŋ əɹ waɪ ðə wʊmən wɑz feɪməs ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ ən waɪ hɝ stætʃu wɑz pɔɪntɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɡeɪt. ə ɹoʊ ʌv lifləs tʃɹiz dɪvaɪɾəd ðə stʃɹit bɪɑn ðə skwɛɹ. sɪdæn tʃɛɹz ən koʊtʃɪz ən mɛn ɪn skwɛɹ-skeɪld ɑɹmɝ θɹɛɾəd ðoʊ ðə kɹaʊdz, bʌt ðeɪ ɹɛdʒəstɝɾ oʊnli ɑn əɹ aɪz. tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, ʃi hʌɾəld ɪn ɑn hɝsɛlf. ðə sɪɾi vænɪʃt. taɪm vænɪʃt. ɛvɹiθɪŋ vænɪʃt ɪksɛpt əɹ fɪɹ ðət ʃi wəd nɛvɝ fil ðə sɔɹs əɡɛn. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ ɹilaɪzd wʌt kʌmfɝt ʃi hæd teɪkən ɪn ɪts ənsin pɹɛzəns. ɪt hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ðɛɹ, pɹɑməsɪŋ dʒɔɪ bɪɑnd noʊɪŋ, laɪf soʊ ɹɪtʃ ðət kʌlɝz peɪld wən ðə paʊɝ wɑz ɡɔn fɹəm hɝ. ən naʊ ðə sɔɹs ɪtsɛlf wɑz ɡɔn. ɡɔn. ðət wɑz ɔl ʃi wɑz əwɛɹ ʌv, ɔl ʃi kəd bi əwɛɹ ʌv. ɪt wɑz ɡɔn.

Sarene talked incessantly, yet Shalon barely heard her. They crossed a large square with a huge statue of a woman in the center, but Shalon caught only her name, Einion Avharin, though she knew Sarene was telling her why the woman was famous in Far Madding and why her statue was pointing toward the Caemlyn Gate. A row of leafless trees divided the street beyond the square. Sedan chairs and coaches and men in square-scaled armor threaded though the crowds, but they registered only on her eyes. Trembling, she huddled in on herself. The city vanished. Time vanished. Everything vanished except her fear that she would never feel the Source again. She had never before realized what comfort she had taken in its unseen presence. It had always been there, promising joy beyond knowing, life so rich that colors paled when the Power was gone from her. And now the Source itself was gone. Gone. That was all she was aware of, all she could be aware of. It was gone.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifɔɹ


CHAPTER 24

əmʌŋ ðə kaʊnsəlz


Among the Counsels

sʌmwʌn ʃʊk ʃələnz ɑɹm. ɪt wɑz sɝin, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz tɔkɪŋ tə hɝ. "ɪɾ ɪz ɪn ðɛɹ," sɝin sɛd, "ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə kaʊnsəlz. bɪniθ ðə doʊm." wɪθdʒɹɔɪŋ əɹ hænd, ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən ɡæðɝɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz. "ɪɾ ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs tə θɪŋk ðət ði ɪfɛkt ɪz ɛni wɝs dʒʌs kəz wəɹ kloʊs," ʃi mʌɾɝd, "bʌɾ ɪt dʌz fil soʊ."

Someone shook Shalon's arm. It was Sarene, and the Aes Sedai was talking to her. "It is in there," Sarene said, "in the Hall of the Counsels. Beneath the dome." Withdrawing her hand, she took a deep breath and gathered her reins. "It is ridiculous to think that the effect is any worse just because we are close," she muttered, "but it does feel so."

ʃələn ɹaʊz hɝsɛlf wɪð ən ɛfɝt. ði ɛmptinəs wəd nɑt ɡoʊ əweɪ, bʌt ʃi fɔɹs hɝsɛlf tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt. jɛɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ ʃi fɛl kɔɹd laɪk ə pis ə fɹut.

Shalon roused herself with an effort. The emptiness would not go away, but she forced herself to ignore it. Yet in truth she felt cored like a piece of fruit.

ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ə hjudʒ - ʃi səpoʊzd ɪt wɑz stɪl kɔld ə skwɛɹ, ðoʊ ðɪs wʌn wɑz ɹaʊnd - ə hjudʒ skwɛɹ peɪvd wɪð waɪt stoʊn. ət ðə sɛntɝ stʊɾ ə ɡɹeɪt pæləs, ə ɹaʊn stʃɹʌktʃɝ ɔl ʌv waɪɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə tɔl blu doʊm ɑn tɑp, laɪk hæf ʌv ə bɔl. mæsɪv fluɾəd kɑləmz sɝaʊndəd ði ʌpɝ tu lɛvəlz bɪloʊ ðə doʊm, ən ə stɛɾi stʃɹim ə pipəl floʊɾ ʌp ən daʊn ðə bɹɔd waɪt stoʊn stɛɹz liɾɪŋ ʌp tə ðə sɛkən lɛvəl ɑn iðɝ saɪd. ɪksɛp fəɹ ə pɛɹ ə tɔl ɑɹtʃt bɹɑnz ɡeɪts stændɪŋ oʊpən dɝɛkli əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, ðə loʊəs lɛvəl wɑz ɔl waɪt stoʊn kɑɹvd wɪð daɪəɾɪmd wɪmən mɔɹ ðən twaɪs laɪf-saɪz, ən bɪtwin ðɛm, waɪt stoʊn ʃivz ʌv ɡɹeɪn ən boʊls ə klɔθ ðət sim tə hæv ðɛɹ fɹi ɛnz ɹɪpəlɪŋ ɪn ə wɪnd, ən stæks ʌv ɪŋɡəts ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn mɛn fəɹ ɡoʊld əɹ sɪlvɝ əɹ aɪɝn əɹ pɝhæps ɔl θɹi, ən sæks spɪlɪŋ aʊt wʌt lʊkt kɔɪnz ən dʒɛmstoʊnz. bɪniθ ðə wɪmənz fit, mʌtʃ smɔlɝ waɪt stoʊn fɪɡjɝz dʒɹoʊv wæɡənz ən wɝk fɔɹdʒɪz ən lumz ɪn ə kəntɪnjuəs bænd. ðiz pipəl hæd meɪɾ ə mɑnjəmən pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ ðɛɹ səksɛs ət tʃɹeɪd. ðət wɑz fulɪʃ. wən pipəl dɪsaɪɾɪd jə wɝ bɛɾɝ ət tʃɹeɪd ðən ðeɪ, ðeɪ nɑɾ oʊnli ɡɹu dʒɛləs, ðeɪ bɪkeɪm stʌbɝn ən tʃɹaɪd tə dɪmæn ɹɪdɪkjələs bɑɹɡənz. ən səmtaɪmz jə hæd noʊ ɔltɝnəɾɪv seɪv tə æksɛpt.

They were in a huge - she supposed it was still called a square, though this one was round - a huge square paved with white stone. At the center stood a great palace, a round structure all of white except for the tall blue dome on top, like half of a ball. Massive fluted columns surrounded the upper two levels below the dome, and a steady stream of people flowed up and down the broad white stone stairs leading up to the second level on either side. Except for a pair of tall arched bronze gates standing open directly ahead of them, the lowest level was all white stone carved with diademed women more than twice life-size, and between them, white stone sheaves of grain and bolts of cloth that seemed to have their free ends rippling in a wind, and stacks of ingots that might have been meant for gold or silver or iron or perhaps all three, and sacks spilling out what looked coins and gemstones. Beneath the women's feet, much smaller white stone figures drove wagons and worked forges and looms in a continuous band. These people had made a monument proclaiming their success at trade. That was foolish. When people decided you were better at trade than they, they not only grew jealous, they became stubborn and tried to demand ridiculous bargains. And sometimes you had no alternative save to accept.

ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət hɑɹɪn wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ ət hɝ, ən stʃɹeɪɾənd hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə sæɾəl. "fɝɡɪv mi, weɪvməstʃɹəs," ʃi sɛd. ðə sɔɹs wɑz ɡɔn, bʌɾ ɪt wəd ɹɪtɝn - ʌv kɔɹs ɪt wʊd! - ən ʃi hæɾ əɹ duɾi. ʃi wɑz əʃeɪm ðət ʃi hæd lɛt hɝsɛlf ɡɪv ɪn tə fɪɹ, jɛt ði ɛmptinəs ɹɪmeɪnd. oʊ, laɪt, ði ɛmptinəs! "aɪ æm bɛɾɝ, naʊ. əl də bɛɾɝ fɹəm hɪɹ ɑn." hɑɹɪn mɪɹli nɑɾəd, stɪl fɹaʊnɪŋ, ən ʃələnz skælp pɹɪkəld. wən hɑɹɪn feɪl tə dɪlɪvɝ ən ɪkspɛktəd tʌŋ-læʃɪŋ, ɪt wɑz kəz ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə dɪlɪvɝ wɝs.

She realized that Harine was frowning at her, and straightened herself in the saddle. "Forgive me, Wavemistress," she said. The Source was gone, but it would return - of course it would! - and she had her duty. She was ashamed that she had let herself give in to fear, yet the emptiness remained. Oh, Light, the emptiness! "I am better, now. I will do better from here on." Harine merely nodded, still frowning, and Shalon's scalp prickled. When Harine failed to deliver an expected tongue-lashing, it was because she intended to deliver worse.

kædzueɪn ɹoʊd stʃɹeɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ ən θɹu ðə hɔl ə ðə kaʊnsəlz' oʊpən ɡeɪts ɪndə ə lɑɹdʒ, haɪ-silɪŋɡd ɹum ðəɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ən ɪndɔɹ steɪbliɑɹd. ə dʌzən mɛn ɪn blu koʊts, skwɑɾɪŋ bɪsaɪd sɪdæn tʃɛɹz wɪð boʊθ ə ɡoʊldən sɔɹɾ ən ə ɡoʊldən hæn peɪntəɾ ɑn ðə dɔɹz, lʊkt ʌp ɪn sɝpɹaɪz wən ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪn. soʊ dɪd ðə mɛn ɪn blu vɛsts u wɝ ənhɑɹnəsɪŋ ðə tim fɹəm ə koʊtʃ wɪð ðə sɔɹd-ænd-hæn sɪdʒəl, ən ðoʊz swipɪŋ ðə stoʊn flɔɹ wɪð lɑɹdʒ pʊʃbɹumz. tu mɔɹ ɡɹumz wɝ liɾɪŋ hɔɹsəz daʊn ə waɪd kɔɹəɾɝ ðət ɡeɪv ɔf ðə smɛl ə heɪ ən dʌŋ.

Cadsuane rode straight across the square and through the Hall of the Counsels' open gates into a large, high-ceilinged room that appeared to be an indoor stableyard. A dozen men in blue coats, squatting beside sedan chairs with both a golden sword and a golden hand painted on the doors, looked up in surprise when they rode in. So did the men in blue vests who were unharnessing the team from a coach with the sword-and-hand sigil, and those sweeping the stone floor with large pushbrooms. Two more grooms were leading horses down a wide corridor that gave off the smell of hay and dung.

ə plʌmp, smuð-tʃik mæn ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz keɪm skɝiɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, bɑbɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn smɔl baʊz ən dʒɹaɪ-wɑʃɪŋ ɪz hænz. wɛɹ ði ʌðɝ mɛn hæd ðɛɹ lɔŋ hɛɹ taɪɾ ət ðə neɪp ə ðə nɛk, hɪz wɑz kɑt wɪð ə smɔl sɪlvɝ klɪp, ən ɪz blu koʊɾ əpɪɹɾ ʌv ɡʊd kwɑləɾi wʊl, wɪð ðə ɡoʊldən sɔɹd-ænd-hæn ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd lɑɹdʒ ɑn ɪz lɛf bɹɛst. "fɝɡɪv mi," hi sɛd wɪð ən ʌŋtʃwəs smaɪl, "aɪ min noʊ əfɛns, bʌɾ aɪ fɪɹ jə mʌst əv mɪsteɪkən jəɹ dɝɛkʃən. ðɪs ɪz ðə hɔl ə ðə kaʊnsəlz, ən - "

A plump, smooth-cheeked man in his middle years came scurrying across the paving stones, bobbing his head in small bows and dry-washing his hands. Where the other men had their long hair tied at the nape of the neck, his was caught with a small silver clip, and his blue coat appeared of good quality wool, with the golden Sword-and-Hand embroidered large on his left breast. "Forgive me," he said with an unctuous smile, "I mean no offense, but I fear you must have mistaken your direction. This is the Hall of the Counsels, and - "

"tɛl fɝs kaʊnsəl bɑɹsælə ðət kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn ɪz hɪɹ tə si hɝ," kædzueɪn bɹoʊk ɪn ɑn ɪm əz ʃi dɪsmaʊntɪd.

"Tell First Counsel Barsalla that Cadsuane Melaidhrin is here to see her," Cadsuane broke in on him as she dismounted.

ðə mænz smaɪl slɪɾ ɔf tə wʌn saɪd, ən ɪz aɪz waɪɾənd. "kædzueɪn məleɪdʒɹɪn? aɪ θɔt jə wɝ - !" hi kʌt hɪmsɛlf ʃɔɹɾ əɾ əɹ sʌɾənli hɑɹd stɛɹ, ðən kɔft ɪndə hɪz hæn ən ɹiəsumd ɪz fʊlsəm smaɪl. "fɝɡɪv mi, kædzueɪn sədaɪ. wɪl jə əlaʊ mi tə ʃoʊ jə ən jəɹ kəmpænjənz tə ə weɪɾɪŋ ɹum wɛɹ jə kən ɹəsiv wɛlkəm waɪl aɪ sɛnd wɝd tə ðə fɝs kaʊnsəl?" hɪz aɪz waɪɾənd slaɪtli əz i tʊk ɪn ðoʊz kəmpænjənz. pleɪnli hi, tu, kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ət list ɪn ə ɡɹup. ʃələn ən hɑɹɪn meɪɾ ɪm blɪŋk, bʌɾ i hæd sɛlf-kəntʃɹoʊl, fəɹ wʌn ə ðə ʃɔɹbaʊnd. hi dɪd nɑt ɡeɪp.

The man's smile slid off to one side, and his eyes widened. "Cadsuane Melaidhrin? I thought you were - !" He cut himself short at her suddenly hard stare, then coughed into his hand and reassumed his fulsome smile. "Forgive me, Cadsuane Sedai. Will you allow me to show you and your companions to a waiting room where you can receive welcome while I send word to the First Counsel?" His eyes widened slightly as he took in those companions. Plainly he, too, could recognize Aes Sedai, at least in a group. Shalon and Harine made him blink, but he had self-control, for one of the shorebound. He did not gape.

"aɪl əlaʊ jə tə ɹʌn tɛl əlaɪz aɪm hɪɹ əz fæst əz jəɹ lɛɡz kən kæɹi ju, bɔɪ," kædzueɪn ɹɪplaɪd, ənfæsənɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ən tɔsɪŋ ɪɾ əkɹɔs əɹ sæɾəl. "tɛl əɹ əl bi ɪn ðə doʊm, ən tɛl əɹ aɪ doʊn əv ɔl deɪ. wɛl? hɑp!" ðɪs taɪm ðə mænz smaɪl dɪd nɑt slaɪd, ɪt tɝn sɪkli, bʌɾ i oʊnli hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ sɛɾɪŋ ɔf əɾ ə dɛd ɹʌn waɪl ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ ɡɹumz tə kʌm teɪk ðə hɔɹsəz.

"I'll allow you to run tell Aleis I'm here as fast as your legs can carry you, boy," Cadsuane replied, unfastening her cloak and tossing it across her saddle. "Tell her I'll be in the dome, and tell her I don't have all day. Well? Hop!" This time the man's smile did not slide, it turned sickly, but he only hesitated a moment before setting off at a dead run while shouting for grooms to come take the horses.

kædzueɪn hæd dɪsmɪst ɪm fɹəm əɹ ətɛnʃən əz sun əz ʃi fɪnɪʃt ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ɪz ɔɹɾɝz, haʊɛvɝ. "vɛɹɪn, kʌmaɪɹə, jə tu wɪl kʌm wɪð mi," ʃi ənaʊns bɹɪskli. "mɛɹaɪs, kip ɛvɹiwʌn təɡɛðɝ ən ɹɛɾi əntɪl aɪ - ɑlɑnə, kʌm bæk ən dɪsmaʊnt. ɑlɑnə!" ɹɪlʌktənli ɑlɑnə tɝn əɹ maʊn əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɡeɪts ən klaɪm daʊn wɪð ə sʌlki ɡlaʊɝ. hɝ slɪm wɔɹɾɝ, ɪvɑn, wɑtʃt əɹ æŋkʃəsli. kædzueɪn saɪɾ əz ðoʊ hɝ peɪʃəns wɑz ɔlmoʊst əɾ ən ɛnd. "sɪɾ ɑn əɹ ɪf jə mʌs tə kip əɹ hɪɹ, mɛɹaɪs," ʃi sɛd, hændɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz tə ə smɔl, wɪɹi ɡɹum. "aɪ wɑn ɛvɹiwʌn ɹɛɾi tə liv wən aɪm dʌn wɪð əlaɪz." mɛɹaɪs nɑɾəd, ən kædzueɪn tɝn tə ðə ɡɹum. "ə lɪɾəl wɔɾɝ ɪz ɔl i nidz," ʃi sɛd, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs ən əfɛkʃənət pæt. "aɪ hævən ɛksɝsaɪzd ɪm mʌtʃ tədeɪ."

Cadsuane had dismissed him from her attention as soon as she finished giving him his orders, however. "Verin, Kumira, you two will come with me," she announced briskly. "Merise, keep everyone together and ready until I - Alanna, come back and dismount. Alanna!" Reluctantly Alanna turned her mount away from the gates and climbed down with a sulky glower. Her slim Warder, Ihvon, watched her anxiously. Cadsuane sighed as though her patience was almost at an end. "Sit on her if you must to keep her here, Merise," she said, handing her reins to a small, wiry groom. "I want everyone ready to leave when I'm done with Aleis." Merise nodded, and Cadsuane turned to the groom. "A little water is all he needs," she said, giving her horse an affectionate pat. "I haven't exercised him much today."

ʃələn wɑz mɔɹ ðən hæpi tə tɝn əɹ oʊn hɔɹs oʊvɝ tə ə ɡɹum wɪθaʊɾ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. ʃi wəd nɑt maɪn ɪf i kɪl ðə kɹitʃɝ. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ fɑɹ ʃi hæd ɹɪɾən ɪn ə deɪz, bʌt ʃi fɛlt əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn ɪn ðət sæɾəl ɛvɹi maɪl ə ðə haʊɛvɝ mɛni hʌnʒɹəd liɡz tə kɛɹhin. ʃi fɛlt ɹʌmpəld ɪn əɹ flɛʃ əz wɛl əz əɹ kloʊðz. əbɹʌpli, ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət dʒɑhɹz pɹɪɾi feɪs wɑz nɑt wɪð ði ʌðɝ mɛn. vɛɹɪnz toʊmɑs, ə stɑki ɡɹeɪ-hɛɾ əz hɑɹɾ əz ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz, wɑz liɾɪŋ ðə spɑɾəd ɡɹeɪ pæk ænəməl ðət hæd bɪn dʒɑhɹz. wɛɹ hæd ðə jʌŋ mæn ɡɑɾən tə? mɛɹaɪs sɝɾənli dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ kənsɝn baɪ hɪz æbsəns.

Shalon was more than happy to turn her own horse over to a groom without instructions. She would not mind if he killed the creature. She did not know how far she had ridden in a daze, but she felt as though she had been in that saddle every mile of the however many hundred leagues to Cairhien. She felt rumpled in her flesh as well as her clothes. Abruptly, she realized that Jahar's pretty face was not with the other men. Verin's Tomas, a stocky gray-head as hard as any of the others, was leading the spotted gray pack animal that had been Jahar's. Where had the young man gotten to? Merise certainly did not appear concerned by his absence.

"ðɪs fɝs kaʊnsəl," hɑɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, lɛɾɪŋ moʊd hɛlp əɹ daʊn. ʃi muvd əz stɪfli əz ʃələn. hi hæd sɪmpli lɛp fɹəm ɪz hɔɹs. "ʃi ɪz ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt wʊmən hɪɹ, sɝin?"

"This First Counsel," Harine growled, letting Moad help her down. She moved as stiffly as Shalon. He had simply leapt from his horse. "She is an important woman here, Sarene?"

"ju maɪt seɪ ʃiz ðə ɹulɝ ə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, ðoʊ ði ʌðɝ kaʊnsəlz, ðeɪ kɔl əɹ fɝst əmʌŋ ikwəlz, wʌtɛvɝ ðəɾ ɪz səpoʊz tə min." hændɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ oʊn maʊn tə ə ɡɹum, sɝin lʊkt kwaɪɾ ʌnɹəmpəld. pɝhæps ʃi hæd bɪn əpsɛt bɪfɔɹ oʊvɝ ðɪs tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət stoʊl ðə sɔɹs, bʌt naʊ ʃi wɑz ɔl kul dɪtætʃmənt, laɪk kɑɹvd aɪs. ðə ɡɹum stʌmbəld oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn fit lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ feɪs. "wʌns, ðə fɝs kaʊnsəl, ʃi ædvaɪz ðə kwinz ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ, bʌt sɪns mɑɹeɪɾoʊz . . . dɪsəluʃən . . . moʊs fɝs kaʊnsəlz əv kənsɪɾɝd ðɛmsɛlvz ðə nætʃɹəl ɛɹz ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊz ɹulɝz."

"You might say she is the ruler of Far Madding, though the other Counsels, they call her first among equals, whatever that is supposed to mean." Handing over her own mount to a groom, Sarene looked quite unrumpled. Perhaps she had been upset before over this ter'angreal that stole the Source, but now she was all cool detachment, like carved ice. The groom stumbled over his own feet looking at her face. "Once, the First Counsel, she advised the queens of Maredo, but since Maredo's . . . dissolution . . . most First Counsels have considered themselves the natural heirs of Maredo's rulers."

ʃələn nu ðəɾ əɹ nɑlədʒ ə ðə ʃɔɹbaʊnz hɪstɝi wɑz əz ənsɝɾən əz əɹ nɑlədʒ ə dʒiɑɡɹəfi əweɪ fɹəm ðə ʃɔɹ, bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛni neɪʃən kɔl mɑɹeɪɾoʊ. ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf fəɹ hɑɹɪn, ðoʊ. ɪf ðɪs fɝs kaʊnsəl ɹul hɪɹ, ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs ə klæn ʃoʊdaɪn mʌs mit hɝ. hɑɹɪnz dɪɡnəɾi dɪmændəd noʊ lɛs. ʃi hɑbəl dətɝmənədli əkɹɔs ðə steɪbliɑɹd tə kædzueɪn.

Shalon knew that her knowledge of the shorebound's history was as uncertain as her knowledge of geography away from the shore, but she had never heard of any nation called Maredo. It was enough for Harine, though. If this First Counsel ruled here, the Wavemistress of Clan Shodein must meet her. Harine's dignity demanded no less. She hobbled determinedly across the stableyard to Cadsuane.

"oʊ, jɛs," ði ɪnsʌfɝəbəl ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd bɪfɔɹ hɑɹɪn kəd mɔɹ ðən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. "ju wɪl kʌm wɪð mi, əz wɛl. ən jəɹ sɪstɝ. aɪ θɪŋk nɑt jəɹ sɔɹdmæstɝ, ðoʊ. ə mæn ɪn ðə doʊm wəd bi bæɾ ɪnʌf; bʌɾ ə mæn wɪð ə sɔɹd maɪt meɪk ðə kaʊnsəlz fɔl oʊvɝ ɪn fɪts. juv ə kwɛstʃən, weɪvməstʃɹəs?" hɑɹɪn snæpt əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt wɪð ən ɑɾəbəl klɪk ə tiθ. "ɡʊd," kædzueɪn mɝmɝd. ʃələn ɡɹoʊnd. ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ ɪmpɹuvɪŋ əɹ sɪstɝz tɛmpɝ baɪ ə fɛðɝ.

"Oh, yes," the insufferable Aes Sedai said before Harine could more than open her mouth. "You will come with me, as well. And your sister. I think not your Swordmaster, though. A man in the dome would be bad enough; but a man with a sword might make the Counsels fall over in fits. You have a question, Wavemistress?" Harine snapped her mouth shut with an audible click of teeth. "Good," Cadsuane murmured. Shalon groaned. This was not improving her sister's temper by a feather.

kædzueɪn lɛɾ əm əlɔŋ bɹɔd, blu-taɪl kɔɹɪɾɝz hʌŋ wɪð bɹaɪt tæpəstʃɹiz ən lɪt baɪ ɡɪldɪd stæn læmps wɪð ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ mɪɹɝz, wɛɹ sɝvəns ɪn blu fɝst stɛɹɾ əɾ əm ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ðən meɪd heɪsti ʃɔɹbaʊn kɝɾəsiz əz ðeɪ pæst. ʃi lɛɾ əm ʌp lɔŋ, swupɪŋ flaɪts ʌv waɪt stoʊn stɛɹz ðət hʌŋ ənsəpɔɹɾɪd ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ðeɪ tʌtʃt ə peɪl wɔl, wɪtʃ ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz. kædzueɪn ɡlaɪɾɪd laɪk ə swɑn, bʌɾ əɾ ə spid ðət meɪd ði eɪk ɪn ʃələnz lɛɡz bɪɡɪn tə bɝn. hɑɹɪnz feɪs sɛɾ ɪn ə wʊɾən mæsk, haɪɾɪŋ ði ɛfɝɾ ə tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ʌp stɛɹz. ivən kʌmaɪɹə simd ə tʃɹaɪfəl sɝpɹaɪzd, ðoʊ kædzueɪnz peɪs kɑzd əɹ noʊ əpɛɹən ɪɡzɝʃən. ɹaʊn lɪɾəl vɛɹɪn tʃɝn əweɪ ət kædzueɪnz saɪd, naʊ ən ðən smaɪlɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət hɑɹɪn ən ʃələn. səmtaɪmz ʃələn θɔt ʃi heɪɾəd vɛɹɪn, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ spaɪɾ əɹ əmjuzmən ɪn ðoʊz smaɪlz, oʊnli ɛnkɝɪdʒmənt.

Cadsuane led them along broad, blue-tiled corridors hung with bright tapestries and lit by gilded stand lamps with glittering mirrors, where servants in blue first stared at them in surprise, then made hasty shorebound courtesies as they passed. She led them up long, swooping flights of white stone stairs that hung unsupported except where they touched a pale wall, which they did not always. Cadsuane glided like a swan, but at a speed that made the ache in Shalon's legs begin to burn. Harine's face set in a wooden mask, hiding the effort of trotting up stairs. Even Kumira seemed a trifle surprised, though Cadsuane's pace caused her no apparent exertion. Round little Verin churned away at Cadsuane's side, now and then smiling over her shoulder at Harine and Shalon. Sometimes Shalon thought she hated Verin, but there was no spite or amusement in those smiles, only encouragement.

kædzueɪn tʊk əm ʌp ə faɪnəl kɝlɪŋ flaɪɾ ə stɛɹz, ɛnkloʊz baɪ wɔlz, ən sʌɾənli ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ə bælkəni wɪð ən ɪntʃɹəkət, ɡɪldɪd mɛɾəl ɹeɪlɪŋ ðət ɹæn ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊnd. . . . fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ʃələn' ɡeɪpt. əbʌv əɹ ɹoʊz ən oʊvɝɑɹtʃɪŋ blu doʊm ə hʌnʒɹəd fiɾ əɹ mɔɹ haɪ əɾ ɪts pik. nʌθɪŋ hɛld ɪɾ ʌp bʌɾ ɪtsɛlf. hɝ ɪɡnɝəns ə ðə ʃɔɹbaʊn ɪkstɛndəd tə ɑɹkətɛktʃɝ əz wɛl əz dʒiɑɡɹəfi ən hɪstɝi - ən ɛɛs sədaɪ - ɪn fækt, hɝ ɪɡnɝəns ə ðə ʃɔɹbaʊnd wɑz ɔlmoʊs kəmplit, ɛksɛptɪŋ oʊnli kɛɹhin. ʃi nu haʊ tə dʒɹɔ ðə plænz fəɹ ə ɹeɪkɝ ən si ɪt bɪlt, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɪmædʒən haʊ tə kənstʃɹʌk ðɪs.

Cadsuane took them up a final curling flight of stairs, enclosed by walls, and suddenly they were on a balcony with an intricate, gilded metal railing that ran all the way around. . . . For a moment, Shalon' gaped. Above her rose an overarching blue dome a hundred feet or more high at its peak. Nothing held it up but itself. Her ignorance of the shorebound extended to architecture as well as geography and history - and Aes Sedai - in fact, her ignorance of the shorebound was almost complete, excepting only Cairhien. She knew how to draw the plans for a raker and see it built, but she could not begin to imagine how to construct this.

ɑɹtʃt dɔɹweɪz ɛdʒd wɪð waɪt stoʊn, laɪk ðə wʌn ðeɪ hæd kʌm θɹu, mɑɹk stɛɹz ət θɹi ʌðɝ pleɪsəz ɝaʊn ðə lɔŋ bælkəni, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn, ən ðət sim tə pliz kædzueɪn, ðoʊ ɔl ʃi dɪd wɑz nɑd tə hɝsɛlf. "kʌmaɪɹə, ʃoʊ ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs ən əɹ sɪstɝ fɑɹ mæɾɪŋz ɡɑɹɾiən." hɝ vɔɪs ɛkoʊd feɪnli ɪnsaɪd ðə væs doʊm. ʃi dʒɹu vɛɹɪn ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns əweɪ, ən ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm pʊt ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɛkoʊ ʌv wʌt ðeɪ wɪspɝd.

Arched doorways edged with white stone, like the one they had come through, marked stairs at three other places around the long balcony, but they were alone, and that seemed to please Cadsuane, though all she did was nod to herself. "Kumira, show the Wavemistress and her sister Far Madding's guardian." Her voice echoed faintly inside the vast dome. She drew Verin a little distance away, and the pair of them put their heads together. There was no echo of what they whispered.

"ju mʌs fɝɡɪv ðɛm," kʌmaɪɹə toʊl hɑɹɪn ən ʃələn kwaɪətli. ivən ðət pɹədust ə slaɪt saʊnd, ɪf nɑt kwaɪɾ ən ɛkoʊ. "pis, bʌt ðɪs mʌs bi ɑkwɝd, ivən fəɹ kædzueɪn." ʃi ɹæn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɝ ʃɔɹt bɹaʊn hɛɹ ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd tə sɛɾəl ɪt bæk ɪn pleɪs. "ðə kaʊnsəlz ɑɹ sɛldəm hæpi tə si ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪspɛʃli sɪstɝz bɔɹn hɪɹ. aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ wəd laɪk tə pɹitɛn ðə paʊɝ dʌzn ɪɡzɪst. wɛl, ðɛɹ hɪstɝi ɡɪvz əm ɹizən, ən fəɹ ðə læs tu θaʊzən jɪɹz ðeɪv hæd ðə minz tə səpɔɹt ðə pɹitɛns. ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt, kædzueɪn ɪz kædzueɪn. ʃi sɛldəm siz ə swɛl hɛd wɪθaʊt dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə dɪfleɪɾ ɪt, ivən wən ɪt hæpənz tə bi wɛɹɪŋ ə kɹaʊn. əɹ ə kaʊnsəlz daɪədɛm. hɝ læs vɪzət wɑz oʊvɝ twɛnti jɪɹz əɡoʊ, dʊɹɪŋ ði il wɔɹ, bʌɾ aɪ səspɛk səm u ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪɾəl wɑnə haɪɾ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ bɛdz wən ðeɪ lɝn ʃiz bæk." kʌmaɪɹə ɡeɪv ə smɔl, əmjuz læf. ʃələn sɔ nʌθɪŋ tə læf æt. hɑɹɪn twɪstəɾ əɹ lɪps, bʌɾ ɪt meɪɾ əɹ lʊk əz ðoʊ ʃi sʌfɝd fɹəm ə bæd bɛli.

"You must forgive them," Kumira told Harine and Shalon quietly. Even that produced a slight sound, if not quite an echo. "Peace, but this must be awkward, even for Cadsuane." She ran her fingers through her short brown hair and shook her head to settle it back in place. "The Counsels are seldom happy to see Aes Sedai, especially sisters born here. I think they would like to pretend the Power doesn't exist. Well, their history gives them reason, and for the last two thousand years they have had the means to support the pretense. In any event, Cadsuane is Cadsuane. She seldom sees a swelled head without deciding to deflate it, even when it happens to be wearing a crown. Or a Counsel's diadem. Her last visit was over twenty years ago, during the Aiel War, but I suspect some who remember it will want to hide under their beds when they learn she is back." Kumira gave a small, amused laugh. Shalon saw nothing to laugh at. Harine twisted her lips, but it made her look as though she suffered from a bad belly.

"ju wɪʃ tə si ðə . . . ɡɑɹɾiən?" kʌmaɪɹə wɛn ɑn. "æz ɡʊɾ ə neɪm əz ɛni, aɪ səpoʊz. ðəɹ ɪzən mʌtʃ tə si." ʃi stɛp kɔʃəsli kloʊsɝ tə ðə ɡɪldɪd ɹeɪlɪŋ ən pɪɹɾ oʊvɝ əz ɪf fɪɹɪŋ ʃi maɪt fɔl, bʌt ðoʊz blu aɪz hæd ʃɑɹpən əɡɛn. "aɪ wəd ɡɪv ɛniθɪŋ tə stʌɾi ɪt, bʌt ðəɾ ɪz ɪmpɑsəbəl, ʌv kɔɹs. hu noʊz wʌɾ ɛls ɪt maɪt bi eɪbəl tə də bɪsaɪd wʌt wi ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ?" hɝ toʊn hɛld əz mʌtʃ ɑ əz ɹəɡɹɛt.

"You wish to see the . . . guardian?" Kumira went on. "As good a name as any, I suppose. There isn't much to see." She stepped cautiously closer to the gilded railing and peered over as if fearing she might fall, but those blue eyes had sharpened again. "I would give anything to study it, but that is impossible, of course. Who knows what else it might be able to do beside what we already know?" Her tone held as much awe as regret.

ʃələn hæd noʊ fɪɹ ə haɪts, ən ʃi pɹɛs hɝsɛlf əɡɛns ði ɪlæbɹətli wɝk mɛɾəl bɪsaɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɑntɪŋ tə si ðɪs θɪŋ ðət hæd teɪkən ðə sɔɹs əweɪ. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, hɑɹɪn dʒɔɪn ðɛm. tə ʃələnz sɝpɹaɪz, ðə dʒɹɑp ðət meɪd kʌmaɪɹə ənizi wɑz lɛs ðən twɛnti fit, bɪloʊ, ə smuð flɔɹ taɪld ɪn blu ən waɪt tə meɪk ə kɑnvəluɾəd meɪz sɛntɝɾ ɑn ə dʌbəl-pɔɪntəd ɹɛɾ oʊvəl ɹɪmd wɪð jɛloʊ. bɪniθ ðə bælkəni, θɹi wɪmən ɪn waɪt sæɾ ɑn stulz speɪst ikwəli ɝaʊn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə flɔɹ, ɹaɪɾ əɡɛns ðə doʊmz wɔl, ən bɪsaɪɾ itʃ wʊmən, ə dɪsk ə fʊl spæn əkɹɔs ðət lʊk laɪk klaʊɾəd kɹɪstəl hæd bɪn sɛɾ ɪndə ðə flɔɹ ən ɪnleɪd wɪð ə lɔŋ θɪn wɛdʒ ə klɪɹ kɹɪstəl ðət pɔɪntəd təwɔɹd ðə tʃeɪmbɝz sɛntɝ. mɛɾəl kɑlɝz sɝaʊndəd ðə mɝki dɪsks, mɑɹkt ɔf laɪk ə kʌmpəs bʌt wɪð ɛvɝ-smɔlɝ mɑɹkɪŋz bɪtwin ðə lɑɹdʒɝ. ʃələn kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ, bʌt ðə kɑlɝ nɪɹəst əɹ əpɪɹd tə bi ɪnskɹaɪbd wɪð numɝəlz. ðət wɑz ɔl. noʊ mɑnstʃɹəs ʃeɪps. ʃi hæɾ ɪmædʒən sʌmθɪŋ hjudʒ ən blæk ðət sʌkt ɪn ðə laɪt. hɝ hænz taɪɾənd ɑn ðə ɹeɪl tə kip fɹəm tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, ən ʃi lɑkt əɹ niz tə hoʊl hɝsɛlf stɪl. wʌtɛvɝ wɑz daʊn ðɛɹ, ɪt hæd stoʊlən ðə laɪt.

Shalon had no fear of heights, and she pressed herself against the elaborately worked metal beside the Aes Sedai, wanting to see this thing that had taken the Source away. After a moment, Harine joined them. To Shalon's surprise, the drop that made Kumira uneasy was less than twenty feet, below, a smooth floor tiled in blue and white to make a convoluted maze centered on a double-pointed red oval rimmed with yellow. Beneath the balcony, three women in white sat on stools spaced equally around the edge of the floor, right against the dome's wall, and beside each woman, a disc a full span across that looked like clouded crystal had been set into the floor and inlaid with a long thin wedge of clear crystal that pointed toward the chamber's center. Metal collars surrounded the murky discs, marked off like a compass but with ever-smaller markings between the larger. Shalon could not be sure, but the collar nearest her appeared to be inscribed with numerals. That was all. No monstrous shapes. She had imagined something huge and black that sucked in the light. Her hands tightened on the rail to keep from trembling, and she locked her knees to hold herself still. Whatever was down there, it had stolen the Light.

ə wɪspɝ ə slɪpɝz ənaʊns nu ɝaɪvəlz ɑn ðə bælkəni baɪ ðə seɪm dɔɹweɪ ðeɪ hæd juzd, əbaʊɾ ə dʌzən smaɪlɪŋ wɪmən wɪð ðɛɹ hɛɹ ɑn tɑp ə ðɛɹ hɛdz, ɪn floʊɪŋ blu sɪlk ɹoʊbz wɔɹn oʊvɝ ðɛɹ dʒɹɛsəz laɪk slivələs koʊts, ɹɪtʃli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn ɡoʊld ən tʃɹeɪlɪŋ bɪhaɪn əm ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ðiz pipəl nu haʊ tə mɑɹk aʊt ɹæŋk. itʃ wʊmən wɔɹ ə lɑɹdʒ pɛndən ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ə ðət ɡoʊld-ɹɪmd ɹɛɾ oʊvəl səspɛndəd fɹəm ə nɛkləs ə hɛvi ɡoʊldən lɪŋks, ən ðə seɪm ʃeɪp wɑz ɹɪpiɾɪd ət ðə fɹʌn ʌv itʃ nɛɹoʊ ɡoʊldən daɪədɛm. ɑn wʌn wʊmən, ðə ɹɛɾ oʊvəlz wɝ meɪɾ ə ɹubiz, nɑɾ ɪnæməl, ən sæfaɪɝz ən munstoʊnz ɔlmoʊs hɪd ðə ɡoʊldən sɝkləɾ ɑn əɹ bɹaʊz, ən ʃi wɔɹ ə hɛvi ɡoʊldən sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ. ʃi wɑz tɔl ən steɪtli, hɝ blæk hɛɹ dʒɹɔn ʌp ɪn ə lɑɹdʒ bɔl, hɛvəli wɪŋd wɪð waɪt, ðoʊ hɝ feɪs wɑz ənlaɪnd. ði ʌðɝz wɝ tɔl, ʃɔɹt, staʊt, θɪn, pɹɪɾi ən pleɪn, nʌn jʌŋ, ən ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm hæɾ ən ɛɹ ʌv əθɔɹəɾi əbaʊt hɝ, bʌt ʃi stʊɾ aʊt fəɹ mɔɹ ðən əɹ dʒɛmz. kəmpæʃən ən wɪzdəm fɪld əɹ lɑɹdʒ dɑɹk aɪz, ən ɪt wɑz kəmæn ðət ʃi ɹeɪɾieɪtəd, nɑt sɪmpəl əθɔɹəɾi. ʃələn dɪd nɑt nid tə bi toʊl ðət ðɪs wɑz ðə fɝs kaʊnsəl, bʌt ðə wʊmən ənaʊnst ɪɾ ɛniweɪ.

A whisper of slippers announced new arrivals on the balcony by the same doorway they had used, about a dozen smiling women with their hair on top of their heads, in flowing blue silk robes worn over their dresses like sleeveless coats, richly embroidered in gold and trailing behind them on the floor. These people knew how to mark out rank. Each woman wore a large pendant in the shape of that gold-rimmed red oval suspended from a necklace of heavy golden links, and the same shape was repeated at the front of each narrow golden diadem. On one woman, the red ovals were made of rubies, not enamel, and sapphires and moonstones almost hid the golden circlet on her brows, and she wore a heavy golden signet ring on her right forefinger. She was tall and stately, her black hair drawn up in a large ball, heavily winged with white, though her face was unlined. The others were tall, short, stout, thin, pretty and plain, none young, and every one of them had an air of authority about her, but she stood out for more than her gems. Compassion and wisdom filled her large dark eyes, and it was command that she radiated, not simple authority. Shalon did not need to be told that this was the First Counsel, but the woman announced it anyway.

"aɪ æm əlaɪz bɑɹsælə, fɝs kaʊnsəl ə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ." hɝ mɛləfls vɔɪs, dip fəɹ ə wʊmən, sim tə bi meɪkɪŋ ə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən, ən ɪkspɛktɪŋ tʃɪɹz. ðə saʊn ə hɝ vɔɪs baʊnsɪŋ ɪnsaɪd ðə doʊm ɡeɪv sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ækləmeɪʃən. "fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ ɡɪvz wɛlkəm tə hɑɹɪn dɪn toʊɡɑɹə tu wɪnz, weɪvməstʃɹəs ə klæn ʃoʊdaɪn ən æmbæsəɾɝ ɪkstʃɹɔɹɾənɛɹi fəɹ ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ. meɪ ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin jə ən si jə pɹɑspɝ. jəɹ kʌmɪŋ ɡlæɾənz ɛvɹi hɑɹɾ ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. aɪ ɛmbɹeɪs ðə tʃæns tə lɝn mɔɹ ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, bʌt jə mʌs bi wɪɹi fɹəm ðə ɹɪɡɝz ə jəɹ dʒɝni. aɪ hæv ɝeɪnʒd plɛzən kɔɹɾɝz fəɹ jə ɪn maɪ pæləs. wən juv ɹɛstəɾ ən iɾən, wi kən tɔk; tə əɹ mjutʃəwəl ædvæntɪdʒ, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt." ði ʌðɝz spɹɛd ðə skɝts ə ðɛɹ ɹoʊbz ən meɪd hæf baʊz.

"I am Aleis Barsalla, First Counsel of Far Madding." Her mellifluous voice, deep for a woman, seemed to be making a proclamation, and expecting cheers. The sound of her voice bouncing inside the dome gave something like acclamation. "Far Madding gives welcome to Harine din Togara Two Winds, Wavemistress of Clan Shodein and Ambassador Extraordinary for the Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere. May the Light illumine you and see you prosper. Your coming gladdens every heart in Far Madding. I embrace the chance to learn more of the Atha'an Miere, but you must be weary from the rigors of your journey. I have arranged pleasant quarters for you in my palace. When you have rested and eaten, we can talk; to our mutual advantage, if it pleases the Light." The others spread the skirts of their robes and made half bows.

hɑɹɪn ɪnklaɪn əɹ hɛd slaɪtli, ə hɪn ə sæɾəsfækʃən ɪn əɹ smaɪl. hɪɹ, ət læst, wɝ ðoʊz u ʃoʊɾ əɹ pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛkt. ən vɛɹi laɪkli ɪt hɛlp ðət ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɡeɪp əɾ əɹ ən ʃələnz dʒuəlɹi.

Harine inclined her head slightly, a hint of satisfaction in her smile. Here, at last, were those who showed her proper respect. And very likely it helped that they did not gape at her and Shalon's jewelry.

"ðə mɛsənʒɝz fɹəm ðə ɡeɪts ɑɹ əz kwɪk əz ɛvɝ, ɪt simz, əlaɪz," kædzueɪn sɛd. "ɪz ðəɹ noʊ wɛlkəm fəɹ mi?" əlaɪz' smaɪl θɪn fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən səm ə ði ʌðɝ smaɪlz feɪɾəd ɔltəɡɛðɝ əz kædzueɪn muv tə stæn bɪsaɪd hɑɹɪn. ðoʊz ðət ɹɪmeɪnd wɝ fɔɹst. ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən wɪð ə sɪɹiəs kæs tə hɝ feɪs wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə skaʊl.

"The messengers from the gates are as quick as ever, it seems, Aleis," Cadsuane said. "Is there no welcome for me?" Aleis' smile thinned for a moment, and some of the other smiles faded altogether as Cadsuane moved to stand beside Harine. Those that remained were forced. A pretty woman with a serious cast to her face went so far as to scowl.

"wi ɑɹ ɡɹeɪtfəl tə jə fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs hɪɹ, kædzueɪn sədaɪ." ðə fɝs kaʊnsəl dɪd nɑt saʊn pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɡɹeɪtfəl. ʃi dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp tə hɝ fʊl haɪɾ ən lʊk stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, oʊvɝ kædzueɪnz hɛd ɹæðɝ ðən ət hɝ. "aɪ æm ʃʊɹ wi kən faɪn səm weɪ tə meɪk ðə dɛpθ ʌv əɹ ɡɹæɾətud noʊn bɪfɔɹ jə liv."

"We are grateful to you for bringing the Wavemistress here, Cadsuane Sedai." The First Counsel did not sound particularly grateful. She drew herself up to her full height and looked straight ahead, over Cadsuane's head rather than at her. "I am sure we can find some way to make the depth of our gratitude known before you leave."

ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv meɪɾ əɹ dɪsmɪsəl pleɪnɝ ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə kəmænd, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ smaɪld ʌp ət ðə tɔlɝ wʊmən. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ən ənplɛzən smaɪl, ɪɡzækli, bʌt niðɝ wɑz ɪɾ ɪn ðə list əmjuzd. "aɪ meɪ nɑt bi livɪŋ fəɹ ə waɪl, əlaɪz. aɪ θæŋk jə fəɹ ði ɔfɝ ʌv əkɑmədeɪʃənz, ən æksɛpt. ə pæləs ɑn ðə haɪts ɪz ɔlweɪz pɹɛfɝəbəl tə ivən ðə bɛst ɪn." ðə fɝs kaʊnsəlz aɪz waɪɾənd wɪð stɑɹɾəlmənt, ðən nɛɹoʊɾ ɪn dɪtɝməneɪʃən.

She could not have made her dismissal plainer short of a command, but the Aes Sedai smiled up at the taller woman. It was not an unpleasant smile, exactly, but neither was it in the least amused. "I may not be leaving for a while, Aleis. I thank you for the offer of accommodations, and accept. A palace on the Heights is always preferable to even the best inn." The First Counsel's eyes widened with startlement, then narrowed in determination.

"kædzueɪn mʌst steɪ wɪð mi," hɑɹɪn sɛd, mænɪdʒɪŋ tə saʊnd noʊ mɔɹ ðən hæf stʃɹæŋɡəld, bɪfɔɹ əlaɪz kəd spik. "wɛɹ ʃiz ənwɛlkəm, soʊ æm aɪ." ðɪs hæd bɪn pɑɹɾ ə ðə bɑɹɡən fɔɹst ɑn hɝ, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tə əkʌmpəni kædzueɪn. əmʌŋ ʌðɝ θɪŋz ðeɪ mʌst ɡoʊ wən ən wɛɹ ʃi sɛɾ əntɪl ðeɪ dʒɔɪn ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ, ən ɪnkluɾ əɹ ɪn ɛni ɪnvɪteɪʃənz ðeɪ ɹəsivd. ðət læs hæd sim vɛɹi smɔl ət ðə taɪm, ɪspɛʃli weɪɾ əɡɛns ðə ɹɛst, bʌt pleɪnli ðə wʊmən hæd noʊn ɪɡzækli ðə ɹɪsɛpʃən ʃi wəd ɹəsiv.

"Cadsuane must stay with me," Harine said, managing to sound no more than half strangled, before Aleis could speak. "Where she is unwelcome, so am I." This had been part of the bargain forced on her, if they were to accompany Cadsuane. Among other things they must go when and where she said until they joined the Coramoor, and include her in any invitations they received. That last had seemed very small at the time, especially weighed against the rest, but plainly the woman had known exactly the reception she would receive.

"noʊ nid tə bi dɪshɑɹɾənd, əlaɪz." kædzueɪn lin təwɔɹd ðə fɝs kaʊnsəl kɑnfaɪɾɪŋli, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt loʊɝ əɹ vɔɪs. ðə ɹɪvɝbɝeɪʃənz ɪn ðə doʊm mæɡnəfaɪɾ əɹ wɝdz. "aɪm ʃʊɹ jə noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əv ɛni bæd hæbəts fəɹ mi tə kɝɛkt."

"No need to be disheartened, Aleis." Cadsuane leaned toward the First Counsel confidingly, but she did not lower her voice. The reverberations in the dome magnified her words. "I'm sure you no longer have any bad habits for me to correct."

ðə fɝs kaʊnsəlz feɪs flʌɾəd wɪð kɹɪmzən, ən bɪhaɪn əɹ bæk, spɛkjələɾɪv fɹaʊnz pæs bɪtwin ði ʌðɝ kaʊnsəlz. səm kɑntəmpleɪɾɪd əɹ əz ɪf wɪð fɹɛʃ aɪz. haʊ dɪd ðeɪ əteɪn ɹæŋk, ən haʊ luz ɪt? bɪsaɪdz əlaɪz, ðeɪ wɝ twɛlv, ʃʊɹli ə koʊɪnsɪɾəns, bʌt ðə fɝs twɛlv əmʌŋ ə klænz seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz tʃoʊz ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs, juʒəwəli wʌn ə ðɛɹ oʊn nʌmbɝ, dʒʌst əz ðə fɝs twɛlv əmʌŋ ðə weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz tʃoʊz ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps. ðət wɑz waɪ hɑɹɪn hæɾ æksɛptɪd ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ ɡɝlz wɝdz, kəz ʃi wɑz ə ðə fɝs twɛlv. ðæt, ən ðə fæk ðət tu ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd ðə ɡɝl sɔ tʃɹu vɪʒənz. eɪ weɪvməstʃɹəs əɹ ivən ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps kəd bi dɪpoʊzd, ðoʊ oʊnli fəɹ spɛsəfaɪd kɑzəz, sətʃ əz ɡɹoʊs ɪnkɑmpəɾəns əɹ luzɪŋ əɹ wɪts, ən ðə fɝs twɛlv hæd tə spik wɪð ə junænəməs vɔɪs. θɪŋz sim tə bi dʌn dɪfɹənli əmʌŋ ðə ʃɔɹbaʊnd, ən ɔfən slɑpəli. əlaɪz' aɪz, fɪks naʊ ɑn kædzueɪn, wɝ boʊθ heɪt-fɪld ən hʌntəd. pɝhæps ʃi kəd fil twɛlv sɛts ʌv aɪz ɑn əɹ bæk. ði ʌðɝ kaʊnsəlz hæɾ əɹ ɑn ðə skeɪlz. bʌɾ ɪf kædzueɪn hæd tʃoʊzən tə mɛɾəl ɪn ðə pɑlətɪks ə ðɪs pleɪs, waɪ? ən waɪ soʊ blʌnli?

The First Counsel's face flooded with crimson, and behind her back, speculative frowns passed between the other Counsels. Some contemplated her as if with fresh eyes. How did they attain rank, and how lose it? Besides Aleis, they were twelve, surely a coincidence, but the First Twelve among a clan's Sailmistresses chose the Wavemistress, usually one of their own number, just as the First Twelve among the Wavemistresses chose the Mistress of the Ships. That was why Harine had accepted that strange girl's words, because she was of the First Twelve. That, and the fact that two Aes Sedai said the girl saw true visions. A Wavemistress or even the Mistress of the Ships could be deposed, though only for specified causes, such as gross incompetence or losing her wits, and the First Twelve had to speak with a unanimous voice. Things seemed to be done differently among the shorebound, and often sloppily. Aleis' eyes, fixed now on Cadsuane, were both hate-filled and hunted. Perhaps she could feel twelve sets of eyes on her back. The other Counsels had her on the scales. But if Cadsuane had chosen to meddle in the politics of this place, why? And why so bluntly?

"ə mæn dʒʌs tʃænəld," vɛɹɪn sɛd sʌɾənli. ʃi hæd nɑt dʒɔɪn ðə ɹɛst ən wɑz piɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə ɹeɪl, tɛn peɪsɪz əweɪ. ðə doʊm meɪɾ əɹ vɔɪs kæɹi. "du juv mɛni mɛn tʃænəlɪŋ leɪtli, fɝs kaʊnsəl?"

"A man just channeled," Verin said suddenly. She had not joined the rest and was peering over the rail, ten paces away. The dome made her voice carry. "Do you have many men channeling lately, First Counsel?"

ʃələn lʊk daʊn, ən blɪŋkt. ðə fɔɹmɝli klɪɹ wɛdʒəz wɝ naʊ blæk, ən ɹæðɝ ðən pɔɪntɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə tʃeɪmbɝz hɑɹt, sʌmhaʊ ðeɪ hæd tɝn ɪn ɹʌfli ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən. wʌn ə ðə wɪmən bɪloʊ wɑz ɑn əɹ fit, bɛndɪŋ oʊvɝ tə stʌɾi wɛɹ əlɔŋ ðə mɑɹkt kɑlɝ ðə θɪn blæk wɛdʒ wɑz pɔɪntɪŋ, ən ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɹeɪsɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ə ɹaʊnd-tɑp dɔɹweɪ. sʌɾənli, ʃələn nu. tʃɹaɪæŋɡjəleɪʃən wɑz ə sɪmpəl mæɾɝ tə ɛni wɪndfɪndɝ. sʌmwɛɹ bɪɑn ðət dɔɹweɪ wɑz ə tʃɑɹt, ən sun ðə pəzɪʃən wɛɹ ðə mæn hæd tʃænəld wəd bi mɑɹkt ɑn ɪt.

Shalon looked down, and blinked. The formerly clear wedges were now black, and rather than pointing toward the chamber's heart, somehow they had turned in roughly the same direction. One of the women below was on her feet, bending over to study where along the marked collar the thin black wedge was pointing, and the other two women were already racing toward a round-topped doorway. Suddenly, Shalon knew. Triangulation was a simple matter to any Windfinder. Somewhere beyond that doorway was a chart, and soon the position where the man had channeled would be marked on it.

"ɪt wəd bi ɹɛd fəɹ ə wʊmən, nɑt blæk," kʌmaɪɹə sɛɾ ɪn ɔlmoʊst ə wɪspɝ. ʃi stɪl stʊɾ ə lɪɾəl bæk fɹəm ðə ɹeɪl, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɡɹɪpɪŋ ɪt wɪð boʊθ hænz ən linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə pɪɹ ət ðə sin bɪloʊ. "ɪt wɔɹnz ən loʊkeɪts ən dɪfɛnz. ən wʌɾ ɛls? ðə wɪmən u meɪɾ ɪt wʊɾə wɑntəd mɔɹ, pɝhæps niɾəd mɔɹ. nɑt noʊɪŋ wʌɾ ɛls kəd bi ɪnkɹɛɾəbli deɪnʒɝəs." ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn fɹaɪɾənd, ðoʊ. ʃi saʊndəɾ ɪksaɪɾəd.

"It would be red for a woman, not black," Kumira said in almost a whisper. She still stood a little back from the rail, but she was gripping it with both hands and leaning forward to peer at the scene below. "It warns and locates and defends. And what else? The women who made it would have wanted more, perhaps needed more. Not knowing what else could be incredibly dangerous." She did not sound frightened, though. She sounded excited.

"æn æʃəmən, aɪ ɪkspɛkt," əlaɪz sɛd kɑmli, pʊlɪŋ əɹ ɡeɪz fɹəm kædzueɪn. "ðeɪ kænɑt tʃɹʌbəl ʌs. ðeɪ ɑɹ fɹi tə ɛntɝ ðə sɪɾi, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ oʊbeɪ ðə lɔ." haʊɛvɝ kɑm ʃi wɑz, səm ə ðə wɪmən bɪhaɪn əɹ tɪɾɝd laɪk nu dɛkɡɝlz ðɛɹ fɝs taɪm əmʌŋ ðə ʃɔɹbaʊnd. "fɝɡɪv mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ. fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ ɡɪvz jə wɛlkəm. aɪm əfɹeɪɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ jəɹ neɪm, ðoʊ."

"An Asha'man, I expect," Aleis said calmly, pulling her gaze from Cadsuane. "They cannot trouble us. They are free to enter the city, so long as they obey the law." However calm she was, some of the women behind her tittered like new deckgirls their first time among the shorebound. "Forgive me, Aes Sedai. Far Madding gives you welcome. I am afraid I don't know your name, though."

vɛɹɪn wɑz stɪl ɡeɪzɪŋ daʊn ət ðə doʊmz flɔɹ. ʃələn ɡlænst oʊvɝ ðə ɹeɪl əɡɛn, ən blɪŋkt əz ðə θɪn blæk wɛdʒəz . . . tʃeɪnʒd. wʌn moʊmən ðeɪ wɝ blæk ən pɔɪntɪŋ nɔɹθ, ðə nɛks klɪɹ ən wʌns əɡɛn pɔɪntɪŋ tə ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə meɪz. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt tɝn; ðeɪ dʒʌst wɝ wʌn θɪŋ, ðən ði ʌðɝ.

Verin was still gazing down at the dome's floor. Shalon glanced over the rail again, and blinked as the thin black wedges . . . changed. One moment they were black and pointing north, the next clear and once again pointing to the center of the maze. They did not turn; they just were one thing, then the other.

"ɔl ə jə meɪ kɔl mi idwinə," vɛɹɪn sɛd. ʃələn bɛɹli səpɹɛst ə stɑɹt. kʌmaɪɹə dɪd nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz blɪŋk. "du jə kənsɪɾɝ hɪstɝi, fɝs kaʊnsəl?" vɛɹɪn kəntɪnjud wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ʌp. "ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsənz sidʒ ə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ læstəd dʒʌs θɹi wiks. ə sævədʒ bɪznəs, ət ði ɛnd."

"All of you may call me Eadwina," Verin said. Shalon barely suppressed a start. Kumira did not so much as blink. "Do you consider history, First Counsel?" Verin continued without looking up. "Guaire Amalasan's siege of Far Madding lasted just three weeks. A savage business, at the end."

"aɪ daʊt ðeɪ wɑnə hɪɹ əbaʊt hɪm," kædzueɪn sɛd ʃɑɹpli, ən ɪndid, fəɹ səm ɹizən mɔɹ ðən wʌn ə ðə kaʊnsəlz lʊkt ənkʌmftəɹbəl. hu ɪn ðə laɪt wɑz ðɪs ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsən? ðə neɪm saʊndəd veɪɡli fəmɪljɝ, bʌt ʃələn kəd nɑt pleɪs ɪt. səm ʃɔɹbaʊn kɑŋkɝɝ, ɑbviəsli.

"I doubt they want to hear about him," Cadsuane said sharply, and indeed, for some reason more than one of the Counsels looked uncomfortable. Who in the Light was this Guaire Amalasan? The name sounded vaguely familiar, but Shalon could not place it. Some shorebound conqueror, obviously.

əlaɪz ɡlænst ət kædzueɪn, ən əɹ maʊθ taɪɾənd. "hɪstɝi ɹɛkɝdz ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsən əz ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl dʒɛnɝəl, idwinə sədaɪ, pɝhæps sɛkən oʊnli tə ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ hɪmsɛlf. wʌt bɹɪŋz ɪm tə maɪnd?"

Aleis glanced at Cadsuane, and her mouth tightened. "History records Guaire Amalasan as a remarkable general, Eadwina Sedai, perhaps second only to Artur Hawkwing himself. What brings him to mind?"

ʃələn hæd nɛvɝ sin wʌn ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð kædzueɪn feɪl tə hiɾ əɹ moʊs kæʒəwəl wɔɹnɪŋ əz kwɪkli əz ðeɪ oʊbeɪɾ əɹ kəmænz, bʌt vɛɹɪn peɪd noʊ hid ðɪs taɪm. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ʌp. "aɪ wɑz dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ ðəɾ i kʊdn juz ðə paʊɝ, jɛɾ i kɹʌʃt fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ laɪk ən oʊvɝɹaɪp plʌm." ðə staʊt lɪɾəl ɛɛs sədaɪ pɔzd əz ðoʊ sʌmθɪŋ hæd dʒʌst əkɝd tə hɝ. "ju noʊ, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz ɑɹmiz ɪn ɪljən ən tiɹ, ɪn ændɝ ən kɛɹhin. nɑt tə mɛnʃən mɛni tɛnz ə θaʊzənz ʌv il. vɛɹi fɪɹs, ði il. aɪ wʌndɝ jə kən bi soʊ kəmpleɪsən əbaʊɾ ɪz æʃəmən skaʊɾɪŋ ju."

Shalon had never seen one of the Aes Sedai traveling with Cadsuane fail to heed her most casual warning as quickly as they obeyed her commands, but Verin paid no heed this time. She did not look up. "I was just thinking that he couldn't use the Power, yet he crushed Far Madding like an overripe plum." The stout little Aes Sedai paused as though something had just occurred to her. "You know, the Dragon Reborn has armies in Illian and Tear, in Andor and Cairhien. Not to mention many tens of thousands of Aiel. Very fierce, the Aiel. I wonder you can be so complacent about his Asha'man scouting you."

"aɪ θɪŋk juv fɹaɪɾənd əm kwaɪɾ ɪnʌf," kædzueɪn sɛd fɝmli.

"I think you have frightened them quite enough," Cadsuane said firmly.

vɛɹɪn faɪnəli tɝn fɹəm ðə ɡɪldɪd ɹeɪl, hɝ aɪz oʊpən vɛɹi waɪd, ə ɹaʊnd, stɑɹɾəld ʃɔɹbɝd. hɝ plʌmp hænz ivən flʌɾɝd laɪk wɪŋz. "oʊ. aɪ dɪdn min . . . oʊ, noʊ. aɪ wəd θɪŋk ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wʊɾə muvd əɡɛns jə ɔlɹɛɾi ɪf i ɪntɛndəd tə. noʊ, aɪ səspɛk ðə sintʃæn . . . juv hɝɾ ə ðɛm? wʌt wi hɪɹ fɹəm ɔltɑɹə ən fɑɹðɝ wɛst ɪz ɹɪli kwaɪt hɔɹəbəl. ðeɪ sim tə swip ɛvɹiθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðɛm. noʊ, aɪ səspɛk ðəɹ sʌmwʌt mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hɪz plænz ðən kæptʃɝɪŋ fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. ənlɛs jə də sʌmθɪŋ tə æŋɡɝ hɪm, ʌv kɔɹs, əɹ əpsɛɾ ɪz fɑloʊɝz. bʌɾ aɪm ʃʊɹ jə ɑɹ tu ɪntɛlədʒən tə də ðæt." ʃi lʊk vɛɹi ɪnəsənt. ðəɹ wɑz ə stɝ əmʌŋ ðə kaʊnsəlz, ðə ɹɪpəl ðət smɔl fɪʃ meɪɾ ɑn ðə sɝfəs wən ə laɪənfɪʃ swæm bɪloʊ.

Verin finally turned from the gilded rail, her eyes open very wide, a round, startled shorebird. Her plump hands even fluttered like wings. "Oh. I didn't mean . . . Oh, no. I would think the Dragon Reborn would have moved against you already if he intended to. No, I suspect the Seanchan . . . You've heard of them? What we hear from Altara and farther west is really quite horrible. They seem to sweep everything before them. No, I suspect they're somewhat more important to his plans than capturing Far Madding. Unless you do something to anger him, of course, or upset his followers. But I am sure you are too intelligent to do that." She looked very innocent. There was a stir among the Counsels, the ripple that small fish made on the surface when a lionfish swam below.

kædzueɪn saɪd, hɝ peɪʃəns klɪɹli əɾ ən ɛnd. "ɪf jə wɑnə dɪskʌs ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, idwinə, jə mʌs də soʊ wɪθaʊt mi. aɪ wɑnə wɑʃ maɪ feɪs ən əv səm hɑt ti."

Cadsuane sighed, her patience clearly at an end. "If you want to discuss the Dragon Reborn, Eadwina, you must do so without me. I want to wash my face and have some hot tea."

ðə fɝs kaʊnsəl dʒɝkt əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd fɝɡɑɾən kædzueɪnz ɛɡzɪstəns, ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl əz ðət simd. "jɛs. jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs. kmɪɹ, nɑɹveɪ, wəd jə pliz ɛskɔɹt ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs ən kædzueɪn sədaɪ tə . . . tə maɪ pæləs ən meɪk əm wɛlkəm?" ðət slaɪt hɪtʃ wɑz ði oʊnli saɪn ʃi ɡeɪv ə dɪskʌmfɝɾ ət hævɪŋ kædzueɪn ɪn əɹ dwɛlɪŋ. "aɪ wɪʃ tə hæv səm fɝðɝ tɔk wɪð idwinə sədaɪ, ɪf ɪt plizɪz hɝ." fɑloʊd baɪ moʊst ə ðə kaʊnsəlz, əlaɪz ɡlaɪɾɪd əweɪ əlɔŋ ðə bælkəni. vɛɹɪn lʊk sʌɾənli əlɑɹmd ən ənsɝɾən əz ðeɪ ɡæðɝɾ əɹ ʌp ən swɛpt əɹ əlɔŋ. ʃələn dɪd nɑt bɪliv ðə sɝpɹaɪz əɹ əniz ɛni mɔɹ ðən ʃi hæd ði ɝliɝ ɪnəsəns. ʃi θɔt ʃi nu naʊ wɛɹ dʒɑhɹ wɑz. ʃi dʒʌs dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ.

The First Counsel jerked as though she had forgotten Cadsuane's existence, incredible as that seemed. "Yes. Yes, of course. Cumere, Narvais, would you please escort the Wavemistress and Cadsuane Sedai to . . . to my palace and make them welcome?" That slight hitch was the only sign she gave of discomfort at having Cadsuane in her dwelling. "I wish to have some further talk with Eadwina Sedai, if it pleases her." Followed by most of the Counsels, Aleis glided away along the balcony. Verin looked suddenly alarmed and uncertain as they gathered her up and swept her along. Shalon did not believe the surprise or unease any more than she had the earlier innocence. She thought she knew now where Jahar was. She just did not know why.

ðə wɪmən əlaɪz hæd neɪmd, ðə pɹɪɾi wʌn u hæd skaʊld ət kædzueɪn, ən ə slɪm ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən, tʊk ðə fɝs kaʊnsəlz ɹɪkwɛst əz ə kəmænd, wɪtʃ pɝhæps ɪt wɑz. ðeɪ spɹɛd ðɛɹ ɹoʊbz ən meɪd ðoʊz hæf baʊz, æskɪŋ hɑɹɪn wɛðɝ ʃi wəd bi pliz tə əkʌmpəni ðɛm ən ənaʊnsɪŋ ɪn flaʊɝi tɝmz ðɛɹ plɛʒɝ əɾ ɛskɔɹɾɪŋ hɝ. hɑɹɪn lɪsənd wɪð ə saʊɝ feɪs. ðeɪ kəd stʃɹu bæskəts ə ɹoʊz pɛɾəlz ɪn əɹ pæθ ɪf ðeɪ wɪʃt, bʌt ðə fɝs kaʊnsəl hæd lɛft əɹ tə ʌndɝlɪŋz. ʃələn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɛni weɪ tə əvɔɪɾ əɹ sɪstɝ əntɪl əɹ tɛmpɝ kuld.

The women Aleis had named, the pretty one who had scowled at Cadsuane, and a slim gray-haired woman, took the First Counsel's request as a command, which perhaps it was. They spread their robes and made those half bows, asking Harine whether she would be pleased to accompany them and announcing in flowery terms their pleasure at escorting her. Harine listened with a sour face. They could strew baskets of rose petals in her path if they wished, but the First Counsel had left her to underlings. Shalon wondered whether there was any way to avoid her sister until her temper cooled.

kædzueɪn dɪd nɑt wɑtʃ vɛɹɪn liv wɪð əlaɪz, nɑɾ oʊpənli, bʌɾ əɹ maʊθ kɝvd ɪn ə feɪn smaɪl wən ðeɪ vænɪʃt θɹu ðə nɛkst ɑɹtʃt dɔɹweɪ əlɔŋ ðə bælkəni. "kmɪɹ ən nɑɹveɪ," ʃi sɛɾ əbɹʌpli. "ðæt wəd bi kmɪɹ paʊiz ən nɑɹveɪ mæzlɪn? aɪ hæv hɝd θɪŋz əbaʊt ju." ðət dʒɝk ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən əweɪ fɹəm hɑɹɪn. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ stændɝdz ɛni kaʊnsəl ʃəd mit," kædzueɪn wɛn ɑn ɪn ə fɝm toʊn, teɪkɪŋ əm itʃ baɪ ə sliv ən tɝnɪŋ əm təwɔɹd ðə stɛɹz ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɝ. ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ wɝid ɡlænsɪz, ðeɪ lɛt hɝ, hɑɹɪn əpɛɹənli kwaɪt fɝɡɑɾən. ət ðə dɔɹweɪ, kædzueɪn pɔz tə lʊk bæk, bʌt nɑɾ ət hɑɹɪn əɹ ʃələn. "kʌmaɪɹə? kʌmaɪɹə!"

Cadsuane did not watch Verin leave with Aleis, not openly, but her mouth curved in a faint smile when they vanished through the next arched doorway along the balcony. "Cumere and Narvais," she said abruptly. "That would be Cumere Powys and Narvais Maslin? I have heard things about you." That jerked their attention away from Harine. "There are standards any Counsel should meet," Cadsuane went on in a firm tone, taking them each by a sleeve and turning them toward the stairs on either side of her. Exchanging worried glances, they let her, Harine apparently quite forgotten. At the doorway, Cadsuane paused to look back, but not at Harine or Shalon. "Kumira? Kumira!"

ði ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ən wɪð ə læs lɪŋɡɝɪŋ lʊk oʊvɝ ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ, pʊl hɝsɛlf əweɪ tə fɑloʊ kædzueɪn. wɪtʃ lɛf hɑɹɪn ən ʃələn noʊ ɑpʃən ɪksɛp tə fɑloʊ, tu, əɹ bi lɛf tə tʃɹaɪ faɪndɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ aʊt. ʃələn dɑɹɾɪd æftɝ ði ʌðɝz, ən hɑɹɪn wɑz noʊ lɛs kwɪk. stɪl ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə kaʊnsəlz tə hɝ saɪdz, kædzueɪn lɛd ðə weɪ daʊn ðə kɝlɪŋ stɛɹz, tɔkɪŋ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs. wɪð kʌmaɪɹə bɪtwin əɹ ən ðə θɹi, ʃələn kəd hɪɹ nʌθɪŋ. kmɪɹ ən nɑɹveɪ tʃɹaɪd tə spik, bʌt kædzueɪn əlaʊd niðɝ mɔɹ ðən ə fju wɝdz bɪfɔɹ ʃi bɪɡæn əɡɛn. ʃi sim kɑm, mæɾɝ-ʌv-fækt. ðə pɛɹ wɪð əɹ bɪɡæn tə lʊk æŋkʃəs. wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt wɑz kædzueɪn ʌp tə?

The other Aes Sedai gave a start, and with a last lingering look over the railing, pulled herself away to follow Cadsuane. Which left Harine and Shalon no option except to follow, too, or be left to try finding their own way out. Shalon darted after the others, and Harine was no less quick. Still gripping the Counsels to her sides, Cadsuane led the way down the curling stairs, talking in a low voice. With Kumira between her and the three, Shalon could hear nothing. Cumere and Narvais tried to speak, but Cadsuane allowed neither more than a few words before she began again. She seemed calm, matter-of-fact. The pair with her began to look anxious. What in the Light was Cadsuane up to?

"ðɪs pleɪs tʃɹʌbəlz ju?" hɑɹɪn sɛd sʌɾənli.

"This place troubles you?" Harine said suddenly.

"ɪɾ ɪz əz ɪf aɪ hæv lɔs maɪ aɪz." ʃələn ʃɪvɝɾ ət ðə tʃɹuθ ə ðæt. "aɪ æm əfɹeɪd, weɪvməstʃɹəs, bʌt ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, aɪ kən kəntʃɹoʊl maɪ fɪɹ." laɪt, ʃi hoʊpt ʃi kʊd. ʃi dɛspɝətli niɾəd tə.

"It is as if I have lost my eyes." Shalon shivered at the truth of that. "I am afraid, Wavemistress, but the Light willing, I can control my fear." Light, she hoped she could. She desperately needed to.

hɑɹɪn nɑɾəd, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə wɪmən əhɛɾ ə ðɛm daʊn ðə stɛɹz. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ əlaɪz' pæləs əz ə tʌb bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ əs tə beɪð təɡɛðɝ, ən aɪ daʊt ðeɪ noʊ hʌnid waɪn, bʌt wɪl faɪn sʌmθɪŋ." ɡlænsɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm kædzueɪn ən ði ʌðɝz, ʃi tʌtʃt ʃələnz ɑɹm ɔkwɝdli. "aɪ wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wən aɪ wɑz ə tʃaɪld, ən jə nɛvɝ lɛf mi əloʊn tɪl ðə fɪɹ pæst. əl nɑt liv jə əloʊn, iðɝ, ʃələn."

Harine nodded, frowning at the women ahead of them down the stairs. "I do not know whether Aleis' palace has a tub big enough for us to bathe together, and I doubt they know honeyed wine, but we will find something." Glancing away from Cadsuane and the others, she touched Shalon's arm awkwardly. "I was afraid of the dark when I was a child, and you never left me alone till the fear passed. I will not leave you alone, either, Shalon."

ʃələn mɪst ə stɛp ən bɛɹli kɑt hɝsɛlf ʃɔɹɾ ə tʌmbəlɪŋ daʊn hɛɾ oʊvɝ hilz. hɑɹɪn hæd nɑt juzd əɹ neɪm ɪksɛpt ɪn pɹaɪvət sɪns ʃi wɑz fɝs meɪd seɪlməstʃɹəs. ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ðɪs fɹɛnli ɪn pɹaɪvət sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðæt. "θæŋk ju," ʃi sɛd, ən wɪð ən ɛfɝt, æɾəd, "hɑɹɪn." hɝ sɪstɝ pæɾəd əɹ ɑɹm əɡɛn, ən smaɪld. hɑɹɪn wɑz ʌnpɹæktəst ət smaɪlɪŋ, bʌt ði ɑkwɝɾ ɛfɝt hɛld wɔɹmθ.

Shalon missed a step and barely caught herself short of tumbling down head over heels. Harine had not used her name except in private since she was first made Sailmistress. She had not been this friendly in private since before that. "Thank you," she said, and with an effort, added, "Harine." Her sister patted her arm again, and smiled. Harine was unpracticed at smiling, but the awkward effort held warmth.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɔɹmθ ɪn ðə lʊk ʃi dɝɛktəd təwɔɹd ðə wɪmən əhɛd, ðoʊ. "pɝhæps aɪ tʃɹuli kən meɪk ə bɑɹɡən hɪɹ. kædzueɪn əz ɔlɹɛɾi ʃɪftəd ðɛɹ bæləst soʊ ðeɪ ɹaɪd wɪð ə lɪst. jə mʌs tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn aʊt waɪ, ʃələn, wən jə ɡɛt kloʊs tə hɝ. aɪ wəd laɪk tə pʊɾ əlaɪz' aɪtiθ ɑn ə stʃɹɪŋ - wɔkɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm mi wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə wɝd! - bʌt nɑɾ ət ði ɪkspɛns ə lɛɾɪŋ kædzueɪn mɛʃ ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ ɪn səm tʃɹʌbəl hɪɹ. jə mʌs faɪn aʊt, ʃələn."

There was no warmth in the look she directed toward the women ahead, though. "Perhaps I truly can make a bargain here. Cadsuane has already shifted their ballast so they ride with a list. You must try to find out why, Shalon, when you get close to her. I would like to put Aleis' eyeteeth on a string - walking away from me without so much as a word! - but not at the expense of letting Cadsuane mesh the Coramoor in some trouble here. You must find out, Shalon."

"aɪ θɪŋk pɝhæps kædzueɪn mɛɾəlz ðə weɪ ɛniwʌn ɛls bɹiðz," ʃələn ɹɪplaɪd wɪð ə saɪ, "bʌɾ əl tʃɹaɪ, hɑɹɪn. əl də maɪ bɛst."

"I think perhaps Cadsuane meddles the way anyone else breathes," Shalon replied with a sigh, "but I will try, Harine. I will do my best."

"ju ɔlweɪz hæv, sɪstɝ. jə ɔlweɪz wɪl. aɪ noʊ ðæt."

"You always have, sister. You always will. I know that."

ʃələn saɪɾ əɡɛn. ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ tu sun tə tɛs ðə dɛpθ ə hɝ sɪstɝz nufaʊnd wɔɹmθ. kənfɛʃən maɪt bɹɪŋ æbsəluʃən əɹ nɑt, ən ʃi kəd nɑt lɪv wɪð ðə lɔs ə hɝ mɛɹɪdʒ ən əɹ ɹæŋk ət wʌn bloʊ. bʌt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm sɪns vɛɹɪn hæd blʌnli leɪɾ aʊt kædzueɪnz tɝmz fəɹ kipɪŋ əɹ sikɹət, ʃələn bɪɡæn tə kənsɪɾɝ kənfɛʃən.

Shalon sighed again. It was much too soon to test the depth of her sister's newfound warmth. Confession might bring absolution or not, and she could not live with the loss of her marriage and her rank at one blow. But for the first time since Verin had bluntly laid out Cadsuane's terms for keeping her secret, Shalon began to consider confession.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifaɪv


CHAPTER 25

bɑnz


Bonds

ɪn ɪz ɹum ət ðə kaʊnsəlz hɛd, ɹænd sæɾ ɑn ðə bɛd wɪð ɪz lɛɡz foʊldəɾ ən ɪz bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl, pleɪɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝ-maʊntəd flut tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn hæd ɡɪvən ɪm soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ. ən eɪdʒ əɡoʊ. ðɪs ɹum, wɪð kɑɹvd wɔl pænəlz ən wɪndoʊz oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə nɛθvɪn mɑɹkət, wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ðət ðeɪ hæɾ əbændən ət ðə kɹaʊn ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ. ðə pɪloʊz stæk bɪsaɪɾ ɪm wɝ ɡus daʊn, ðə bɛd hæɾ ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd kænəpi ən kɝɾənz, ən ðə mɪɹɝ əbʌv ðə wɑʃstæn hæd nɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl bʌbəl. ðə lɪntəl əbʌv ðə stoʊn faɪɝpleɪs ivən hæɾ ə bɪɾ ə sɪmpəl kɑɹvɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ə ɹum fəɹ ə wɛl-tə-du fɔɹən mɝtʃənt. hi wɑz ɡlæɾ i hæd θɔt tə bɹɪŋ ɪnʌf ɡoʊld wən i lɛf kɛɹhin. hi hæd lɔs ðə hæbəɾ ə kæɹiɪŋ mʌtʃ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd bɪn pɹəvaɪɾəd fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. stɪl, hi cʊɾə ɝn ə bɛɾ ə səm sɔɹt wɪð ðə flut. ðə tun wɑz kɔld "ləmɛn fəɹ ðə lɔŋ naɪt," ən i hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ ɪn ɪz laɪf. luz θɝɪn hæd, ðoʊ. ɪt wɑz laɪk ðə skɪl ət dʒɹɔɪŋ. ɹænd θɔt ðət ʃəd fɹaɪɾən hɪm, əɹ meɪk ɪm æŋɡɹi, bʌɾ i sɪmpli sæɾ ən pleɪd waɪl luz θɝɪn wɛpt.

In his room at The Counsel's Head, Rand sat on the bed with his legs folded and his back against the wall, playing the silver-mounted flute Thom Merrilin had given him so long ago. An Age ago. This room, with carved wall panels and windows overlooking the Nethvin Market, was better than that they had abandoned at The Crown of Maredo. The pillows stacked beside him were goose down, the bed had an embroidered canopy and curtains, and the mirror above the washstand had not a single bubble. The lintel above the stone fireplace even had a bit of simple carving. It was a room for a well-to-do foreign merchant. He was glad he had thought to bring enough gold when he left Cairhien. He had lost the habit of carrying much. Everything had been provided for the Dragon Reborn. Still, he could have earned a bed of some sort with the flute. The tune was called "Lament for the Long Night," and he had never heard it before in his life. Lews Therin had, though. It was like the skill at drawing. Rand thought that should frighten him, or make him angry, but he simply sat and played while Lews Therin wept.

"laɪt, ɹænd," mɪn mʌɾɝd, "ɑɹ jə dʒʌs gɑnə sɪt ðəɹ pʌfɪŋ ɑn ðət θɪŋ?" hɝ skɝts swɝld əz ʃi peɪst ʌp ən daʊn ðə flaʊɝd kɑɹpət. ðə bɑnd wɪð əɹ ən ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə fɛlt əz ðoʊ hi hæd nɛvɝ noʊn ɛniθɪŋ ɛls əɹ wɑntəd tə. hi bɹiðd, ən i wɑz bɑndəd tə ðɛm; wʌn wɑz əz nætʃɹəl əz ði ʌðɝ. "ɪf ʃi sɛz wʌn ɹɔŋ wɝd wɛɹ ɪt kən bi oʊvɝhɝd, ɪf ʃiz ɔlɹɛɾi sɛɾ ɪt . . . aɪm nɑt lɛɾɪŋ ɛniwʌn, hɔl jə ɔf tə ə sɛl fəɹ ɪleɪɾə!" ɑlɑnəz bɑn hæd nɛvɝ fɛl ðət weɪ. ɪt hæd nɑt tʃeɪnʒd, nɑɾ ɪn ɪtsɛlf, jɛɾ ɪnkɹisɪŋli sɪns ðət deɪ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ɑlɑnəz bɑn simd ən ɪntʃɹuʒən, ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ə sændspɝ ɪn ɪz but. "du juv tə pleɪ ðæt? ɪt meɪks mi wɑnə kɹaɪ, ən ɪt meɪks maɪ skɪn kɹɔl ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ɪf ʃi pʊts jə ɪn deɪnʒɝ . . . !" snætʃɪŋ wʌn ə hɝ naɪvz fɹəm ɪts haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs ʌp ə lus-fɪɾɪŋ sliv, ʃi flɝɪʃt ɪɾ ɪn əɹ fɪst.

"Light, Rand," Min muttered, "are you just going to sit there puffing on that thing?" Her skirts swirled as she paced up and down the flowered carpet. The bond with her and Elayne and Aviendha felt as though he had never known anything else or wanted to. He breathed, and he was bonded to them; one was as natural as the other. "If she says one wrong word where it can be overheard, if she's already said it . . . I am not letting anyone, haul you off to a cell for Elaida!" Alanna's bond had never felt that way. It had not changed, not in itself, yet increasingly since that day in Caemlyn, Alanna's bond seemed an intrusion, a stranger looking over his shoulder, a sandspur in his boot. "Do you have to play that? It makes me want to cry, and it makes my skin crawl at the same time. If she puts you in danger . . . !" Snatching one of her knives from its hiding place up a loose-fitting sleeve, she flourished it in her fist.

hi tʊk ðə fluɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɪz maʊθ ən saɪlənli lʊkt əɾ əɹ oʊvɝ ɪt. hɝ feɪs ɹɛɾənd, ən wɪð ə sʌɾən snɑɹl, ʃi hɝl ðə bleɪd tə stɪk kwɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ðə dɔɹ.

He took the flute away from his mouth and silently looked at her over it. Her face reddened, and with a sudden snarl, she hurled the blade to stick quivering in the door.

"ʃiz ðɛɹ," hi sɛd, juzɪŋ ðə flut tə pɔɪnt. ʌnkɑnʃəsli, hi ʃɪftəd ði ɪnstʃɹəmənt, fɑloʊɪŋ ɑlɑnə ɪɡzækli. "ʃil bi hɪɹ sun." ʃi hæd bɪn ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ sɪns ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ, ən i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ʃi hæd weɪɾəd tɪl naʊ. ɑlɑnə wɑz ə tæŋɡəl ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz skʌl, nɝvəs ən wɛɹi, wɝiɾ ən dɪtɝmən ən əbʌv ɔl, æŋɡɹi. ɪn ə bɛɹli ɹistʃɹeɪn fjʊɹi. "ɪf jud ɹæðɝ nɑt bi hɪɹ, jə kən weɪt. . . ." mɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd fɪɹsli. ɹaɪt bɪsaɪɾ ɑlɑnə ɪn ɪz hɛd leɪ ðə bʌndəl ðət wɑz hɝ. ʃi bʌbəld wɪð wɝi ən æŋɡɝ, tu, bʌt lʌv ʃoʊn θɹu laɪk ə bikən wɛnɛvɝ ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm ən ɔfən wən ʃi dɪd nɑt. fɪɹ ʃoʊn θɹu, əz wɛl, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd ðæt.

"She's there," he said, using the flute to point. Unconsciously, he shifted the instrument, following Alanna exactly. "She'll be here soon." She had been in Far Madding since the day before, and he did not understand why she had waited till now. Alanna was a tangle of emotions inside his skull, nervous and wary, worried and determined and above all, angry. In a barely restrained fury. "If you'd rather not be here, you can wait. . . ." Min shook her head fiercely. Right beside Alanna in his head lay the bundle that was her. She bubbled with worry and anger, too, but love shone through like a beacon whenever she looked at him and often when she did not. Fear shone through, as well, though she was trying to hide that.

hi pʊt ðə flut bæk tə hɪz lɪps ən bɪɡæn "ðə dʒɹʌŋkən pɛdlɝ." ðət wɑz dʒɑli ɪnʌf tə tʃɪɹ ðə dɛd. luz θɝɪn snɑɹəld ət hɪm.

He put the flute back to his lips and began "The Drunken Peddler." That was jolly enough to cheer the dead. Lews Therin snarled at him.

mɪn stʊd stʌɾiɪŋ hɪm, hɝ ɑɹmz foʊldəd, ðən əbɹʌpli ɡeɪv əɹ dʒɹɛs ə twɪtʃ, sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪɾ ɑn əɹ hɪps. wɪð ə saɪ, hi loʊɝd ðə fluɾ ən weɪɾəd. wən ə wʊmən ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ kloʊðz fəɹ noʊ ɹizən, ɪt wɑz laɪk ə mæn taɪɾənɪŋ ðə stʃɹæps ə hɪz ɑɹmɝ ən tʃɛkɪŋ ɪz sæɾəl ɡɝθ; ʃi mɛn tə dʒɹaɪv hoʊm ə tʃɑɹdʒ, ən jə wəd bi kʌt daʊn laɪk ə dɔɡ ɪf jə ɹæn. dɪtɝməneɪʃən wɑz əz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn mɪn naʊ əz ɪt wɑz ɪn ɑlɑnə, twɪn sʌnz flɛɹɪŋ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz bɹeɪn.

Min stood studying him, her arms folded, then abruptly gave her dress a twitch, settling it on her hips. With a sigh, he lowered the flute and waited. When a woman adjusted her clothes for no reason, it was like a man tightening the straps of his armor and checking his saddle girth; she meant to drive home a charge, and you would be cut down like a dog if you ran. Determination was as strong in Min now as it was in Alanna, twin suns flaring in the back of his brain.

"wi wɪl nɑt tɔk əbaʊɾ ɑlɑnə ɛni mɔɹ əntɪl ʃi ɡɛts hɪɹ," ʃi sɛd fɝmli, əz ðoʊ hi hæd bɪn ðə wʌn ɪnsɪstɪŋ. dɪtɝməneɪʃən, ən stɪl ðə fɪɹ, stʃɹɔŋɝ naʊ ðən bɪfɔɹ, kəntɪnjuəli tʃɹæmpəl daʊn ən kəntɪnjuəli spɹɪŋɪŋ bæk ʌp.

"We will not talk about Alanna any more until she gets here," she said firmly, as though he had been the one insisting. Determination, and still the fear, stronger now than before, continually trampled down and continually springing back up.

"waɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, waɪf, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ju," hi ɹɪplaɪd, bɛndɪŋ ɪz nɛk ɪn ði əpɹuv fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ fæʃən. ʃi snɪf laʊdli.

"Why, of course, wife, if it pleases you," he replied, bending his neck in the approved Far Madding fashion. She sniffed loudly.

"ɹænd, aɪ laɪk əliviə. aɪ du, ivən ɪf ʃi dʌz meɪk nɪneɪiv əv kɪɾənz lɛft ən ɹaɪt." wʌn fɪs plæntəɾ ɑn əɹ hɪp, mɪn lin fɔɹwɝɾ ən pɔɪntəɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ əɾ ɪz noʊz. "bʌt ʃiz gɑnə kɪl ju." ʃi bɪɾ ɔf ɛvɹi wɝd.

"Rand, I like Alivia. I do, even if she does make Nynaeve have kittens left and right." One fist planted on her hip, Min leaned forward and pointed a finger at his nose. "But she is going to kill you." She bit off every word.

"ju sɛd ʃi wɑz gɑnə hɛlp mi daɪ," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. "ðoʊz wɝ jəɹ wɝdz." haʊ wəɾ i fil ət daɪɪŋ? sædnəs ət livɪŋ hɝ, ət livɪŋ ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə. sædnəs fəɹ ðə peɪn i hæd bɹɔt ðɛm. hi wəd laɪk tə si hɪz fɑðɝ əɡɛn bɪfɔɹ ði ɛnd. əsaɪd fɹəm ðoʊz θɪŋz, hi ɔlmoʊs θɔt dɛθ wəd bi ə ɹɪlif.

"You said she was going to help me die," he said quietly. "Those were your words." How would he feel at dying? Sadness at leaving her, at leaving Elayne and Aviendha. Sadness for the pain he had brought them. He would like to see his father again before the end. Aside from those things, he almost thought death would be a relief.

dɛθ ɪz ə ɹɪlif, luz θɝɪn sɛd fɝvənli. aɪ wɑn dɛθ. wi dɪzɝv dɛθ!

Death is a relief, Lews Therin said fervently. I want death. We deserve death!

"hɛlpɪŋ mi daɪ ɪzən ðə seɪm əz kɪlɪŋ mi," ɹænd wɛn ɑn. hi wɑz vɛɹi ɡʊɾ əɾ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə vɔɪs, naʊ. "ənlɛs juv tʃeɪnʒd jəɹ maɪn əbaʊt wʌt jə sɔ."

"Helping me die isn't the same as killing me," Rand went on. He was very good at ignoring the voice, now. "Unless you've changed your mind about what you saw."

mɪn flʌŋ ʌp əɹ hænz ɪn ɛksæspɝeɪʃən. "aɪ sɔ wʌɾ aɪ sɔ ən ɪts wʌɾ aɪ toʊl ju, bʌt ðə pɪɾ ə dum swɑloʊ mi ɪf aɪ kən si ɛni dɪfɝəns. ən aɪ kæn si waɪ jə θɪŋk ðəɹ ɪz!"

Min flung up her hands in exasperation. "I saw what I saw and it's what I told you, but the Pit of Doom swallow me if I can see any difference. And I can't see why you think there is!"

"sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, aɪ hæv tə daɪ, mɪn," hi sɛd peɪʃənli. hi hæd bɪn toʊl baɪ ðoʊz i hæd tə bɪliv. tə lɪv, jə mʌs daɪ. ðət stɪl meɪd noʊ sɛns tə hɪm, bʌɾ ɪt lɛft wʌn koʊl hɑɹd fækt. dʒʌst əz ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən sim tə seɪ, hi hæd tə daɪ. "nɑt sun, aɪ hoʊp. aɪ plæn nɑt sun. aɪm sɑɹi, mɪn. aɪ nɛvɝ ʃəɾ əv lɛt jə bɑn mi." bʌɾ i hæd nɑt bɪn stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹəfjuz, ɛni mɔɹ ðən i hæd bɪn stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə pʊʃ əɹ əweɪ. hi wɑz tu wik fəɹ wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn. hi niɾəd tə dʒɹɪŋk ɪn wɪntɝ, tɪl i meɪd wɪntɝz hɑɹt sim sʌndeɪ nun.

"Sooner or later, I have to die, Min," he said patiently. He had been told by those he had to believe. To live, you must die. That still made no sense to him, but it left one cold hard fact. Just as the Prophecies of the Dragon seemed to say, he had to die. "Not soon, I hope. I plan not soon. I'm sorry, Min. I never should have let you bond me." But he had not been strong enough to refuse, any more than he had been strong enough to push her away. He was too weak for what had to be done. He needed to drink in winter, till he made winter's heart seem Sunday noon.

"ɪf jə hædnt, wiɾ əv taɪd jə ʌp ən dʌn ɪɾ ɛniweɪ." bɛs nɑt tə æsk haʊ ðət wʊɾə dɪfɝd fɹəm wʌɾ ɑlɑnə hæd dʌn, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd. sɝɾənli, ʃi sɔ ə dɪfɝəns. klaɪmɪŋ ɑntu ðə bɛɾ ɑn əɹ niz, ʃi kʌpt ɪz feɪs ɪn əɹ hænz, "ju lɪsən tə mi, ɹænd ælθɹ. aɪ woʊn lɛt jə daɪ. ən ɪf jə mænədʒ ɪt dʒʌs tə spaɪt mi, əl fɑloʊ jə ən bɹɪŋ jə bæk." sʌɾənli ə θɪk veɪn ʌv əmjuzmən ɹɪpəl θɹu ðə sɪɹiəsnəs i fɛlt ɪn ɪz hɛd. hɝ vɔɪs tʊk ɑn ə mɑk stɝnnəs: "æn ðən əl bɹɪŋ jə bæk hɪɹ tə lɪv. əl meɪk jə ɡɹoʊ jəɹ hɛɹ bɪloʊ jəɹ weɪst ən wɛɹ hɛɹ klɪps wɪð munstoʊnz."

"If you hadn't, we'd have tied you up and done it anyway." Best not to ask how that would have differed from what Alanna had done, he decided. Certainly, she saw a difference. Climbing onto the bed on her knees, she cupped his face in her hands, "You listen to me, Rand al'Thor. I won't let you die. And if you manage it just to spite me, I'll follow you and bring you back." Suddenly a thick vein of amusement rippled through the seriousness he felt in his head. Her voice took on a mock sternness: "And then I'll bring you back here to live. I'll make you grow your hair below your waist and wear hair clips with moonstones."

hi smaɪld ət hɝ. ʃi kəd stɪl meɪk ɪm smaɪl. "aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə feɪt wɝs ðən dɛθ, bʌɾ aɪ θɪŋk ðət fɪts."

He smiled at her. She could still make him smile. "I never heard of a fate worse than death, but I think that fits."

sʌmwʌn nɑkt ət ðə dɔɹ, ən mɪn fɹoʊz. ɪn ə saɪlən kwɛstʃən, ʃi maʊðd ɑlɑnəz neɪm. ɹænd nɑɾəd, ən tə hɪz əmeɪzmənt, mɪn pʊʃt ɪm oʊvɝ ɑntu ðə pɪloʊz ən flʌŋ hɝsɛlf ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. skwɝmɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd, ən i ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə wɑʃstæn mɪɹɝ. faɪnəli ʃi faʊn ə pəzɪʃən ʃi laɪkt, laɪɪŋ hæf ɑn tɑp ə hɪm wɪð wʌn hæn bɪhaɪn ɪz nɛk ən ði ʌðɝ bɪsaɪɾ əɹ feɪs ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. "kʌm ɪn," ʃi kɔld.

Someone knocked at the door, and Min froze. In a silent question, she mouthed Alanna's name. Rand nodded, and to his amazement, Min pushed him over onto the pillows and flung herself on his chest. Squirming around, she raised her head, and he realized she was trying to see herself in the washstand mirror. Finally she found a position she liked, lying half on top of him with one hand behind his neck and the other beside her face on his chest. "Come in," she called.

kædzueɪn stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum ən stɑpt, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə naɪf stʌk ɪn ðə dɔɹ. ɪn ə dʒɹɛs ə faɪn dɑɹk ɡɹin wʊl ən ə fɝ-laɪn kloʊk hɛl baɪ ə sɪlvɝ bɹutʃ ət ðə nɛk, ʃi maɪɾ əv pæs fəɹ ə səksɛsfəl mɝtʃən əɹ ə bæŋkɝ, ðoʊ ðə ɡoʊldən bɝdz ən fɪʃ, stɑɹz ən munz dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ði aɪɝn-ɡɹeɪ bʌn ətɑp əɹ hɛd wʊɾə bɪn ɑstənteɪʃəs fəɹ iðɝ. ʃi wɑz nɑt wɛɹɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ, soʊ ɪt simd ʃi wɑz meɪkɪŋ səm ɛfɝt tə əvɔɪd tu mʌtʃ noʊɾəs. "hæv jə tʃɪlʒɹən bɪn ɑɹɡjuɪŋ?" ʃi æsk maɪldli.

Cadsuane stepped into the room and stopped, frowning at the knife stuck in the door. In a dress of fine dark green wool and a fur-lined cloak held by a silver brooch at the neck, she might have passed for a successful merchant or a banker, though the golden birds and fish, stars and moons dangling from the iron-gray bun atop her head would have been ostentatious for either. She was not wearing her Great Serpent ring, so it seemed she was making some effort to avoid too much notice. "Have you children been arguing?" she asked mildly.

ɹænd kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil luz θɝɪn ɡoʊ stɪl, laɪk ə ɹɪdʒ kæt kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz. luz θɝɪn wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz wɛɹi ʌv ðɪs wʊmən əz i wɑz hɪmsɛlf.

Rand could almost feel Lews Therin go still, like a ridge cat crouching in the shadows. Lews Therin was almost as wary of this woman as he was himself.

ɹɛd-feɪst, mɪn skɹæmbəl tə hɝ fit smuðɪŋ fjʊɹiəsli əɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs. "ju sɛɾ ɪt wɑz hɝ!" ʃi sɛɾ əkjuzɪŋli, dʒʌst əz ɑlɑnə ɛntɝd. kædzueɪn kloʊz ðə dɔɹ.

Red-faced, Min scrambled to her feet smoothing furiously at her dress. "You said it was her!" she said accusingly, just as Alanna entered. Cadsuane closed the door.

ɑlɑnə ɡlænst wʌns ət mɪn ən dɪsmɪs hɝ, foʊkəsɪŋ ɑn ɹænd. wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ əɹ dɑɹk aɪz fɹəm hɪm, ʃi swɛpt əɹ kloʊk ɔf ən flʌŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ wʌn ə ðə ɹumz tu tʃɛɹz. hɝ hænz sɛɾəld ɑn əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ skɝts, ɡɹɪpɪŋ əm hɑɹd. ʃi wɑz nɑt wɛɹɪŋ əɹ ɡoʊldən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪŋ, iðɝ. fɹəm ðə moʊmən əɹ aɪz fɛl ɑn hɪm, dʒɔɪ blumd əlɔŋ ðə bɑnd. ɔl ðə ɹɛst wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, ðə nɝvəsnəs, ðə fjʊɹi, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə fil dʒɔɪ!

Alanna glanced once at Min and dismissed her, focusing on Rand. Without taking her dark eyes from him, she swept her cloak off and flung it over one of the room's two chairs. Her hands settled on her dark gray skirts, gripping them hard. She was not wearing her golden Aes Sedai ring, either. From the moment her eyes fell on him, joy bloomed along the bond. All the rest was still there, the nervousness, the fury, but he had never expected her to feel joy!

nɑt tʃeɪnʒɪŋ haʊ hi leɪ, hi pɪkt ʌp ðə fluɾ ən tɔɪd wɪð ɪt. "ʃʊɾ aɪ bi sɝpɹaɪz tə si ju, kædzueɪn? jə pɑp ʌp wən aɪ doʊnt wɑnə si jə tu ɔfən tə sut. hu tɔt jə tə tʃɹævəl?" ɪt hæd tə hæv bɪn ðæt. wʌn moʊmən ɑlɑnə hæd bɪn ə veɪɡ əwɛɹnəs ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə θɔt, ən ðə nɛkst ʃi spɹæŋ tə laɪf fʊl stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ɪz hɛd. ət fɝst, hi hæd θɔt ʃi hɝsɛlf hæd lɝn tʃɹævlɪŋ sʌmhaʊ, bʌt siɪŋ kædzueɪn, hi nu bɛɾɝ.

Not changing how he lay, he picked up the flute and toyed with it. "Should I be surprised to see you, Cadsuane? You pop up when I don't want to see you too often to suit. Who taught you to Travel?" It had to have been that. One moment Alanna had been a vague awareness on the edge of thought, and the next she sprang to life full strength in his head. At first, he had thought she herself had learned Traveling somehow, but seeing Cadsuane, he knew better.

ɑlɑnəz maʊθ taɪɾənd, ən ivən mɪn lʊk dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ. ði ɪmoʊʃənz floʊɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn fɹəm wʌn dʒʌmpt ən skɪɾɝd; fɹəm ði ʌðɝ, ðəɹ wɑz dʒʌst æŋɡɝ mɪŋɡəld wɪð dɪlaɪt, naʊ. waɪ dɪɾ ɑlɑnə fil dʒɔɪ?

Alanna's mouth tightened, and even Min looked disapproving. The emotions flowing along the Warder bond from one jumped and skittered; from the other, there was just anger mingled with delight, now. Why did Alanna feel joy?

"stɪl noʊ mɔɹ mænɝz ðən ə ɡoʊt, aɪ si," kædzueɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "bɔɪ, aɪ hɑɹdli θɪŋk aɪ nid jəɹ pɝmɪʃən tə vɪzət maɪ bɝθpleɪs. əz fəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ, ɪts nʌn ə jəɹ bɪznəs wɛɹ əɹ wən aɪ lɝn ɛniθɪŋ." ənpɪnɪŋ əɹ kloʊk, ʃi stʌk ðə bɹutʃ ɑn əɹ bɛlt, ɹɛɾi tə hænd, ən foʊldəd ðə kloʊk oʊvɝ wʌn ɑɹm əz ðoʊ meɪkɪŋ ɪt nit wɝ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən i wɑz. hɝ vɔɪs tʊk ɑn ən ɛdʒ ʌv ɪɹɪteɪʃən. "juv lʌmbɝd mi wɪð ə lɑɾ ə tʃɹævlɪŋ kəmpænjənz, wʌn weɪ ən ənʌðɝ. ɑlɑnə wɑz soʊ fɹæntɪk tə si jə əɡɛn, oʊnli ə hɑɹɾ ə stoʊn cʊɾə ɹəfjuz tə bɹɪŋ hɝ, ən sɔɹɪliə sɛd səm ə ði ʌðɝz u plɛdʒ ðɛmsɛlvz tə jə wəd bi ɡʊd fəɹ nʌθɪŋ əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ əlaʊd tə ɡoʊ wɪð ɑlɑnə, soʊ aɪv ɛndəɾ ʌp bɹɪŋɪŋ nɛsun, sɝin, ɛɹiən, bɛldaɪn ən ɛlzə, tu. nɑt tə mɛnʃən hɑɹɪn, plʌs əɹ sɪstɝ ən ðət sɔɹdmæstɝ ə hɝz. ʃi dɪdnt noʊ wɛðɝ tə feɪnt, skɹim əɹ baɪt sʌmwʌn wən ʃi faʊn aʊɾ ɑlɑnə wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɔf tə faɪn ju. ən ðən ðəɹ ɑɹ ðoʊz θɹi blæk-koʊɾəd fɹɛnz ə jʊɹz. aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ iɡɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ tə si ju, bʌt ðəɹ hɪɹ, əz wɛl. wɛl, naʊ ðət wiv loʊkeɪɾəd ju, aɪ kən sɛn ðə si foʊk ən ðə sɪstɝz tə jə ən lɛt jə dil wɪð ðɛm."

"Still no more manners than a goat, I see," Cadsuane said dryly. "Boy, I hardly think I need your permission to visit my birthplace. As for Traveling, it is none of your business where or when I learned anything." Unpinning her cloak, she stuck the brooch on her belt, ready to hand, and folded the cloak over one arm as though making it neat were much more important than he was. Her voice took on an edge of irritation. "You've lumbered me with a lot of traveling companions, one way and another. Alanna was so frantic to see you again, only a heart of stone could have refused to bring her, and Sorilea said some of the others who pledged themselves to you would be good for nothing until they were allowed to go with Alanna, so I've ended up bringing Nesune, Sarene, Erian, Beldeine and Elza, too. Not to mention Harine, plus her sister and that Swordmaster of hers. She didn't know whether to faint, scream or bite someone when she found out Alanna was going off to find you. And then there are those three black-coated friends of yours. I don't know how eager they are to see you, but they're here, as well. Well, now that we've located you, I can send the Sea Folk and the sisters to you and let you deal with them."

ɹænd spɹæŋ tə hɪz fit wɪð ə mʌɾɝd oʊθ. "noʊ! kip əm əweɪ fɹəm mi!"

Rand sprang to his feet with a muttered oath. "No! Keep them away from me!"

kædzueɪnz dɑɹk aɪz nɛɹoʊd. "aɪv wɔɹn jə bɪfɔɹ əbaʊt jəɹ læŋɡwədʒ; əl nɑt wɔɹn jə əɡɛn." ʃi fɹaʊn əɾ ɪm ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ, ðən nɑɾəd əz ðoʊ ʃi θɔɾ i hæd teɪkən ðə lɛsən tə hɑɹt. "naʊ, wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk jə kən tɛl mi wʌt tə du, bɔɪ?"

Cadsuane's dark eyes narrowed. "I've warned you before about your language; I will not warn you again." She frowned at him a moment longer, then nodded as though she thought he had taken the lesson to heart. "Now, what makes you think you can tell me what to do, boy?"

ɹænd stʃɹʌɡəld wɪð hɪmsɛlf. hi kəd nɑɾ ɪʃu ɔɹɾɝz hɪɹ. hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə ɔɹɾɝ kædzueɪn ɛniwɛɹ. mɪn sɛɾ i niɾəd ðə wʊmən, ðət ʃi wəd titʃ ɪm sʌmθɪŋ i niɾəd tə lɝn, bʌɾ ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ðəɾ oʊnli meɪɾ ɪm mɔɹ ənizi əbaʊt hɝ. "aɪ wɑnə fɪnɪʃ maɪ bɪznəs hɪɹ ən liv kwaɪətli," hi sɛɾ ət læst. "ɪf jə tɛl ðɛm, ət lis meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ si aɪ kæn əfɔɹd tə hæv əm kʌm ɛniwɛɹ nɪɹ mi, nɑɾ əntɪl aɪm ɹɛɾi tə liv." ðə wʊmən ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət hɪm, weɪɾɪŋ, ən i tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. waɪ dɪd ʃi ɔlweɪz nid tə meɪk ɛvɹiθɪŋ dɪfəkəlt? "aɪ wəɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾ ɪt vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɪf jə dɪdn tɛl ɛni ʌv əm wɛɹ aɪ æm." ɹɪlʌktənli, vɛɹi ɹɪlʌktənli, hi æɾəd, "pliz." mɪn ɛksheɪld əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd bɪn hoʊldɪŋ əɹ bɹɛθ.

Rand struggled with himself. He could not issue orders here. He had never been able to order Cadsuane anywhere. Min said he needed the woman, that she would teach him something he needed to learn, but if anything, that only made him more uneasy about her. "I want to finish my business here and leave quietly," he said at last. "If you tell them, at least make sure they see I can't afford to have them come anywhere near me, not until I'm ready to leave." The woman raised an eyebrow at him, waiting, and he took a deep breath. Why did she always need to make everything difficult? "I would appreciate it very much if you didn't tell any of them where I am." Reluctantly, very reluctantly, he added, "Please." Min exhaled as though she had been holding her breath.

"ɡʊd," kædzueɪn sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "ju kən ʃoʊ mænɝz wən jə tʃɹaɪ, ivən ɪf ɪt dʌz meɪk jə lʊk əz ðoʊ jəɹ tiθ ætʃt. aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kən kip jəɹ sikɹət fəɹ ju, fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ. nɑɾ ɔl ə ðɛm ivən noʊ jə ɑɹ ɪn ðə sɪɾi. oʊ, jɛs. aɪ ʃəd tɛl ju, mɛɹaɪs əz bɑndəd nɛɹɪʃmə, kɔɹəl əz deɪmɝ, ən jʌŋ hɑpwəl ɪz deɪdʒiənz." ʃi sɛd ðəɾ əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ dʒʌst ə kæʒəwəl bɪɾ ʌv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ðət maɪɾ izəli hæv slɪpt əɹ maɪnd.

"Good," Cadsuane said after a moment. "You can show manners when you try, even if it does make you look as though your teeth ached. I suppose I can keep your secret for you, for the time being. Not all of them even know you are in the city. Oh, yes. I should tell you, Merise has bonded Narishma, Corele has Damer, and young Hopwil is Daigian's." She said that as though it were just a casual bit of information that might easily have slipped her mind.

hi dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə mʌɾɝ ɪz oʊθ ðɪs taɪm, ən kædzueɪnz fʊl-ɑɹm slæp ɔlmoʊst ənhɪnʒd ɪz dʒɔ. blæk spɑts ʃɪmɝɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz aɪz. wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ wɪmən ɡæspt.

He did not bother to mutter his oath this time, and Cadsuane's full-armed slap almost unhinged his jaw. Black spots shimmered in front of his eyes. One of the other women gasped.

"aɪ dɪd tɛl ju," kædzueɪn sɛd plɑtʃədli. "noʊ mɔɹ wɔɹnɪŋz."

"I did tell you," Cadsuane said placidly. "No more warnings."

mɪn tʊk ə stɛp təwɔɹd hɪm, ən i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd slaɪtli. ɪt hɛlp tə klɪɹ ðə spɑts. hi wɑntəd tə ɹʌb ɪz dʒɔ, bʌɾ i kɛpt ɪz hænz əɾ ɪz saɪdz. hi hæd tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf lusən ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə flut. fəɹ kædzueɪnz pɑɹt, ðə slæp maɪt nɛvɝ hæɾ əkɝd.

Min took a step toward him, and he shook his head slightly. It helped to clear the spots. He wanted to rub his jaw, but he kept his hands at his sides. He had to make himself loosen his grip on the flute. For Cadsuane's part, the slap might never had occurred.

"waɪ wəd flɪn ən ði ʌðɝz æksɛp biɪŋ bɑndəd?" hi dɪmændəd.

"Why would Flinn and the others accept being bonded?" he demanded.

"æsk əm wən jə si ðɛm," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd. "mɪn, aɪ səspɛkt ɑlɑnə wɑns tə bi əloʊn wɪð ɪm əwaɪl." tɝnɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mɪnz ɹɪplaɪ, ʃi æɾəd, "ɑlɑnə, əl bi weɪɾɪŋ bɪloʊ, ɪn ðə wɪmənz ɹum. doʊn bi tu lɔŋ. aɪ wɑnə ɡɛt bæk tə ðə haɪts. mɪn?"

"Ask them when you see them," she replied. "Min, I suspect Alanna wants to be alone with him awhile." Turning toward the door without waiting for Min's reply, she added, "Alanna, I will be waiting below, in the Women's Room. Don't be too long. I want to get back to the Heights. Min?"

mɪn ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɑlɑnə. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ət ɹænd. ðən ʃi flʌŋ ʌp əɹ hænz ən stɔkt aʊɾ æftɝ kædzueɪn, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. ʃi slæm ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɝ.

Min glared at Alanna. She glared at Rand. Then she flung up her hands and stalked out after Cadsuane, muttering under her breath. She slammed the door behind her.

"aɪ laɪk jə bɛɾɝ wɪð jəɹ oʊn hɛɹ." ɑlɑnə foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts ən stʌɾid hɪm. æŋɡɝ ən dʒɔɪ wɔɹd wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn ðə bɑnd. "aɪ hæd hoʊp ðət biɪŋ kloʊs tə jə wəd bi bɛɾɝ, bʌt jə ɑɹ stɪl laɪk ə stoʊn ɪn maɪ hɛd. ivən stændɪŋ hɪɹ, aɪ kən hɑɹdli tɛl wɛðɝ jəɹ əpsɛɾ əɹ nɑt. ivən soʊ, biɪŋ hɪɹ ɪz bɛɾɝ. aɪ dɪslaɪk biɪŋ pɑɹɾəd fɹəm ə wɔɹɾɝ soʊ lɔŋ."

"I liked you better with your own hair." Alanna folded her arms beneath her breasts and studied him. Anger and joy warred with one another in the bond. "I had hoped that being close to you would be better, but you are still like a stone in my head. Even standing here, I can hardly tell whether you're upset or not. Even so, being here is better. I dislike being parted from a Warder so long."

ɹænd ɪɡnɔɹɾ əɹ ən ðə ɹɪpəlɪŋ dʒɔɪ ðət floʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə bɑnd. "ʃi dɪdn æsk waɪ aɪ keɪm tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd kwaɪətli, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ əz ɪf i kəd si kædzueɪn θɹu ðə wʊd. ʃʊɹli, ʃi hæd tə wʌndɝ. "ju toʊld əɹ aɪ wɑz hɪɹ, ɑlɑnə. ɪt hæd tə bi ju. wʌt hæpən tə jəɹ oʊθ?"

Rand ignored her and the rippling joy that flowed along the bond. "She didn't ask why I came to Far Madding," Rand said quietly, staring at the door as if he could see Cadsuane through the wood. Surely, she had to wonder. "You told her I was here, Alanna. It had to be you. What happened to your oath?"

ɑlɑnə dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, ən ə moʊmən pæs bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ æm nɑt ʃʊɹ kædzueɪn kɛɹz tu pɪnz əbaʊt ju," ʃi snæpt. "aɪ kip ðəɾ oʊθ əz wɛl əz aɪ kæn, bʌt jə də meɪk kipɪŋ ɪt hɑɹd." hɝ vɔɪs bɪɡæn tə hɑɹɾən, ən æŋɡɝ wɛl mɔɹ stʃɹɔŋli θɹu ðə bɑnd. "aɪ oʊ fiəlti tə ə mæn u wɔks ɔf ən livz mi bɪhaɪnd. dʒʌs haʊ æm aɪ səpoʊz tə sɝv ju? mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾəntli, wʌd jə du?" kɹɔsɪŋ ðə kɑɹpət, ʃi stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm, fjʊɹi bɝnɪŋ ɪn əɹ aɪz. hi tɑpt əɹ baɪ mɔɹ ðən ə fʊt, ən ʃi sim nɑt tə noʊɾəs. "ju dɪd sʌmθɪŋ, aɪ noʊ. aɪ wɑz ʌnkɑnʃəs fəɹ θɹi deɪz! wʌd jə du?"

Alanna drew a deep breath, and a moment passed before she replied. "I am not sure Cadsuane cares two pins about you," she snapped. "I keep that oath as well as I can, but you do make keeping it hard." Her voice began to harden, and anger welled more strongly through the bond. "I owe fealty to a man who walks off and leaves me behind. Just how am I supposed to serve you? More importantly, what did you do?" Crossing the carpet, she stood staring up at him, fury burning in her eyes. He topped her by more than a foot, and she seemed not to notice. "You did something, I know. I was unconscious for three days! What did you do?"

"aɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪf aɪ wɑz gɑnə bi bɑndəd, ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl bi baɪ sʌmwʌn aɪ sɛd kʊd." hi bɛɹli kɑɾ əɹ hæn bɪfɔɹ ɪt lændəɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs. "aɪv bɪn slæpt ɪnʌf fəɹ wʌn deɪ."

"I decided if I was going to be bonded, it might as well be by someone I said could." He barely caught her hand before it landed on his face. "I've been slapped enough for one day."

ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ʌp ət hɪm, tiθ bɛɹɾ əz ɪf ɹɛɾi tə baɪɾ aʊɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. ðə bɑn kæɹiɾ oʊnli fjʊɹi ən aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ, naʊ, dɪstɪl tə dæɡɝz. "ju lɛt sʌmwʌn ɛls bɑn ju?" ʃi snɑɹəld. "haʊ dɛɹ ju! huɛvɝ ʃi ɪz, əl si hɝ bɪfɔɹ ə kɔɹt! əl si hɝ bɝtʃt! jə ɑɹ maɪn!"

She glared up at him, teeth bared as if ready to bite out his throat. The bond carried only fury and outrage, now, distilled to daggers. "You let someone else bond you?" she snarled. "How dare you! Whoever she is, I'll see her before a court! I'll see her birched! You are mine!"

"bɪkɔz jə tʊk mi, ɑlɑnə," hi sɛd koʊldli. "ɪf mɔɹ sɪstɝz nu, jə wəd bi ðə wʌn bɝtʃt." mɪn hæd toʊld ɪm wʌns ðəɾ i kəd tʃɹʌst ɑlɑnə, ðət ʃi hæd sin ðə ɡɹin ən fɔɹ ʌðɝ sɪstɝz "ɪn ɪz hænd." hi dɪd tʃɹʌs hɝ, ɪn ən ɑd fæʃən, jɛɾ i wɑz ɪn ɑlɑnəz hænd, tu, ən i dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi. "ɹilis mi, ən əl dɪnaɪ ɪɾ ɛvɝ hæpənd." hi hæd nɑɾ ivən noʊn ðət wɑz pɑsəbəl əntɪl læn toʊld ɪm əbaʊt hɪmsɛlf ən maɪɹɛl. "ɹilis mi, ən əl sɛt jə fɹi ʌv jəɹ oʊθ."

"Because you took me, Alanna," he said coldly. "If more sisters knew, you would be the one birched." Min had told him once that he could trust Alanna, that she had seen the Green and four other sisters "in his hand." He did trust her, in an odd fashion, yet he was in Alanna's hand, too, and he did not want to be. "Release me, and I'll deny it ever happened." He had not even known that was possible until Lan told him about himself and Myrelle. "Release me, and I'll set you free of your oath."

ðə ɹɔɪlɪŋ æŋɡɝ floʊɪŋ θɹu ðə bɑn lɛsənd wɪθaʊt dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs ɡɹu kɑm, ən əɹ vɔɪs wɑz kəmpoʊzd. "ju ɑɹ hɝɾɪŋ maɪ ɹɪst."

The roiling anger flowing through the bond lessened without disappearing, but her face grew calm, and her voice was composed. "You are hurting my wrist."

hi nu hi wɑz. hi kəd fil ðə peɪn θɹu ðə bɑnd. hi lɛt ɡoʊ, ən ʃi məsɑʒd əɹ ɹɪs fɑɹ mɔɹ ɑstənteɪʃəsli ðən ɹikwaɪɝd baɪ ðə hɝɾ i fɛlt. stɪl ɹʌbɪŋ əɹ ɹɪst, ʃi sæɾ ɑn ðə sɛkən tʃɛɹ ən kɹɔst əɹ lɛɡz. ʃi sim tə bi θɪŋkɪŋ.

He knew he was. He could feel the pain through the bond. He let go, and she massaged her wrist far more ostentatiously than required by the hurt he felt. Still rubbing her wrist, she sat on the second chair and crossed her legs. She seemed to be thinking.

"aɪv θɔɾ ə biɪŋ fɹi ʌv ju," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "aɪ hæv dʒɹimd ʌv ɪt." ʃi ɡeɪv ə smɔl, ɹufəl læf. "aɪ ivən æskt kædzueɪn tə lemi pæs ðə bɑn tə hɝ. ə saɪn ə haʊ dɛspɹɪɾ aɪ wɑz, tə æsk sətʃ ə θɪŋ. bʌɾ ɪf ɛniwʌn kən hændəl ju, kædzueɪn kæn. oʊnli, ʃi ɹəfjuzd. ʃi wɑz fjʊɹiəs ðəɾ aɪ sədʒɛstəɾ ɪt wɪθaʊɾ æskɪŋ ju, aʊtʃɹeɪdʒd, bʌɾ ivən ɪf jə əɡɹid, ʃi woʊnt." ʃi spɹɛɾ əɹ hænz. "soʊ jə ɑɹ maɪn." hɝ feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌɾ əz ʃi sɛd ðæt, ðə dʒɔɪ flɛɹɾ ənu. "haʊɛvɝ aɪ əkwaɪɝd ju, jə ɑɹ maɪ wɔɹɾɝ, ən aɪ hæv ə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi. ðəɾ ɪz əz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn mi əz ði oʊθ aɪ swɔɹ tə oʊbeɪ ju. ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz stʃɹɔŋ. soʊ əl nɑt ɹilis jə tə ɛniwʌn ənlɛs aɪ noʊ ʃi kən hændəl jə pɹɑpɝli. hu bɑndəd ju? ɪf ʃiz keɪpəbəl, əl lɛɾ əɹ əv ju."

"I've thought of being free of you," she said finally. "I have dreamed of it." She gave a small, rueful laugh. "I even asked Cadsuane to let me pass the bond to her. A sign of how desperate I was, to ask such a thing. But if anyone can handle you, Cadsuane can. Only, she refused. She was furious that I suggested it without asking you, outraged, but even if you agreed, she won't." She spread her hands. "So you are mine." Her face did not change, but as she said that, the joy flared anew. "However I acquired you, you are my Warder, and I have a responsibility. That is as strong in me as the oath I swore to obey you. Every bit as strong. So I will not release you to anyone unless I know she can handle you properly. Who bonded you? If she is capable, I will let her have you."

dʒʌs ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ðət kædzueɪn maɪɾ əv ɹəsivd ɪz bɑn sɛn aɪsɪkəlz daʊn ɹændz spaɪn. ɑlɑnə hæd nɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪm wɪð ðə bɑnd, ən i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɛni sɪstɝ kʊd, bʌɾ i wəd nɛvɝ ɹɪsk ɪt wɪð ðət wʌn. laɪt!

Just the possibility that Cadsuane might have received his bond sent icicles down Rand's spine. Alanna had never been able to control him with the bond, and he did not think any sister could, but he would never risk it with that one. Light!

"wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk ʃi dʌzn kɛɹ əbaʊt mi?" hi dɪmændəɾ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ænsɝɪŋ ɑlɑnəz kwɛstʃən. tʃɹʌst əɹ noʊ tʃɹʌst, noʊ wʌn wəd lɝn ðəɾ ænsɝ ɪf i kəd hɛlp ɪt. wʌɾ ɪleɪn ən mɪn ən eɪvinhə hæd dʌn maɪt bi əlaʊd baɪ taʊɝ lɔ, jɛt ðeɪ hæd wɝs tə fɪɹ ðən pʌnɪʃmən fɹəm ʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪf ɪt keɪm aʊt ðeɪ wɝ lɪŋk tə hɪm ɪn ðɪs weɪ. sɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə bɛd, hi tɝn ðə fluɾ oʊvɝ ɪn ɪz hænz. "dʒʌs kəz ʃi ɹəfjuz maɪ bɑnd? meɪbi ʃi ɪzən əz nɑnʃəlɑn əbaʊt ðə kɑnsəkwɛnsəz əz ju. ʃi keɪm tə mi ɪn kɛɹhin, ən steɪd lɔŋ æftɝ ðəɹ kəd bi ɛni ɹizən bʌt mi. æm aɪ ɹɪli səpoʊz tə bɪliv ʃi dʒʌs dɪsaɪɾɪd tə vɪzət fɹɛnz waɪl aɪ hæpən tə bi hɪɹ? ʃi bɹɔt jə tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ soʊ ʃi kəd faɪn mi."

"What makes you think she doesn't care about me?" he demanded instead of answering Alanna's question. Trust or no trust, no one would learn that answer if he could help it. What Elayne and Min and Aviendha had done might be allowed by Tower law, yet they had worse to fear than punishment from other Aes Sedai if it came out they were linked to him in this way. Sitting down on the edge of the bed, he turned the flute over in his hands. "Just because she refused my bond? Maybe she isn't as nonchalant about the consequences as you. She came to me in Cairhien, and stayed long after there could be any reason but me. Am I really supposed to believe she just decided to visit friends while I happen to be here? She brought you to Far Madding so she could find me."

"ɹænd, ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ wɛɹ jə wɝ ɛvɹi deɪ," ɑlɑnə sɛd dɪsmɪsɪvli, "bʌɾ aɪ daʊt ðɛɹz ə ʃɛpɝɾ ɪn seɪlaɪzɪn u dʌznt wʌndɝ wɛɹ jə ɑɹ. ðə hoʊl wɝld wɑns tə noʊ ðæt. aɪ nu jə wɝ fɑɹ tə ðə saʊθ, ðət jə hædn muv fəɹ deɪz. noʊ mɔɹ. wən aɪ faʊn aʊt ʃi ən vɛɹɪn wɝ kʌmɪŋ hɪɹ, aɪ hæd tə bɛɡ hɝ - bɛɡ ɑn maɪ niz! - bɪfɔɹ ʃi wəd lemi kʌm əlɔŋ. bʌɾ aɪ dɪdnt noʊ maɪsɛlf ðət jə wɝ hɪɹ əntɪl aɪ keɪm aʊɾ ə ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪn ðə hɪlz əbʌv ðə sɪɾi. bɪfɔɹ ðæt, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ maɪɾ əv tə tʃɹævəl hæfweɪ tə tɛɹ tə faɪn ju. kædzueɪn tɔt mi ðæt, wən wi keɪm hɪɹ, soʊ doʊn θɪŋk jə kən ɪveɪd mi soʊ izəli ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ."

"Rand, she wanted to know where you were every day," Alanna said dismissively, "but I doubt there's a shepherd in Seleisin who doesn't wonder where you are. The whole world wants to know that. I knew you were far to the south, that you hadn't moved for days. No more. When I found out she and Verin were coming here, I had to beg her - beg on my knees! - before she would let me come along. But I didn't know myself that you were here until I came out of the gateway in the hills above the city. Before that, I thought I might have to Travel halfway to Tear to find you. Cadsuane taught me that, when we came here, so don't think you can evade me so easily in the future."

kædzueɪn hæd tɔɾ ɑlɑnə tə tʃɹævəl? ðət stɪl dɪd nɑt seɪ hu hæd tɔt kædzueɪn, ðoʊ. nɑt ðəɾ ɪt mæɾɝd, hi səpoʊzd. "æn deɪmɝ ən ði ʌðɝ tu əlaʊd ðɛmsɛlvz tə bi bɑndəd? əɹ dɪd ðoʊz sɪstɝz dʒʌs teɪk əm ðə weɪ jə tʊk mi?"

Cadsuane had taught Alanna to Travel? That still did not say who had taught Cadsuane, though. Not that it mattered, he supposed. "And Damer and the other two allowed themselves to be bonded? Or did those sisters just take them the way you took me?"

ə feɪn flʌʃ steɪn əɹ tʃiks, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs wɑz stɛɾi. "aɪ hɝd mɛɹaɪs æsk dʒɑhɹ. ɪt tʊk ɪm tu deɪz tə æksɛpt, ən ʃi nɛvɝ pɹɛʃɝɾ ɪm ðəɾ aɪ sɔ. aɪ kænɑt spik fəɹ ði ʌðɝz, bʌɾ əz kædzueɪn sɛd, jə kən ɔlweɪz æsk ðɛm. ɹænd, jə mʌst ʌndɝstænd, ðoʊz mɛn wɝ əfɹeɪd tə ɡoʊ bæk tə ðɪs 'blæk taʊɝ' ʌv jʊɹz." hɝ maʊθ twɪstəd saʊɝli ɝaʊn ðə neɪm. "ðeɪ wɝ əfɹeɪd ðeɪ wəd bi bleɪmd ɪn ði ətæk ɑn ju. ɪf ðeɪ sɪmpli ɹæn, ðeɪ wəd bi hʌntəd daʊn əz dɛzɝɾɝz. aɪ ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ ɪz jəɹ stændɪŋ ɔɹɾɝ? wɛɹ ɛls kəd ðeɪ ɡoʊ, ɪksɛp tə ɛɛs sədaɪ? ən ə ɡʊd θɪŋ ðeɪ dɪd, tu." ʃi smaɪld əz ðoʊ ʃi hæd dʒʌst sin sʌmθɪŋ wʌndɝfəl, ən əɹ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm ɪksaɪɾəd. "ɹænd, deɪmɝ əz dɪskʌvɝɾ ə weɪ tə hil biɪŋ stɪld! laɪt, aɪ kən seɪ ðət wɝd wɪθaʊt fɹizɪŋ maɪ tʌŋ. hi hild ɝɡən ən ɹɑneɪl ən sæʃəl. ðeɪv swɔɹn fiəlti tə ju, tu, dʒʌs laɪk ɔl ði ʌðɝz."

A faint flush stained her cheeks, but her voice was steady. "I heard Merise ask Jahar. It took him two days to accept, and she never pressured him that I saw. I cannot speak for the others, but as Cadsuane said, you can always ask them. Rand, you must understand, those men were afraid to go back to this 'Black Tower' of yours." Her mouth twisted sourly around the name. "They were afraid they would be blamed in the attack on you. If they simply ran, they would be hunted down as deserters. I understand that is your standing order? Where else could they go, except to Aes Sedai? And a good thing they did, too." She smiled as though she had just seen something wonderful, and her voice became excited. "Rand, Damer has discovered a way to Heal being stilled! Light, I can say that word without freezing my tongue. He Healed Irgain and Ronaille and Sashalle. They've sworn fealty to you, too, just like all the others."

"wʌt dʒju min, ɔl ði ʌðɝz?"

"What do you mean, all the others?"

"aɪ min ɔl ðə sɪstɝz ði il wɝ hoʊldɪŋ. ivən ðə ɹɛdz." ʃi saʊndəd hæf dɪsbɪlivɪŋ əbaʊt ðæt, əz wɛl ʃi ʃʊd, bʌt dɪsbɪlif mɛltəɾ ɪndə ɪntɛnsəɾi əz ʃi pʊt boʊθ fiɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ ən lin təwɔɹd hɪm, hɝ aɪz fɪkst ɑn hɪz. "ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm əz swɔɹn ən æksɛptɪd ðə pɛnəns jə pʊɾ ɑn nɛsun ən ði ʌðɝz, ðə fɝs faɪv ə ðɛm u swɔɹ. kædzueɪn dʌzn tʃɹʌs ðɛm. ʃi wʊdn lɛɾ əm bɹɪŋ ɛni ʌv ðɛɹ wɔɹɾɝz. aɪ ədmɪɾ aɪ wɑz ənsɝɾən ət fɝst, bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv jə kən tʃɹʌs ðɛm. ðeɪ swɔɹ oʊθ tə ju. jə noʊ wʌt ðət minz fəɹ ə sɪstɝ. wi kæn bɹeɪk ən oʊθ, ɹænd. ɪɾ ɪzən pɑsəbəl."

"I mean all the sisters the Aiel were holding. Even the Reds." She sounded half disbelieving about that, as well she should, but disbelief melted into intensity as she put both feet on the floor and leaned toward him, her eyes fixed on his. "Every one of them has sworn and accepted the penance you put on Nesune and the others, the first five of them who swore. Cadsuane doesn't trust them. She wouldn't let them bring any of their Warders. I admit I was uncertain at first, but I believe you can trust them. They swore oath to you. You know what that means for a sister. We can't break an oath, Rand. It isn't possible."

ivən ðə ɹɛdz. hi hæd bɪn sɝpɹaɪzd wən ðoʊz fɝs faɪv kæptɪvz ɔfɝd fiəlti. ɪleɪɾə hæd sɛn əm tə kɪdnæp hɪm, ən ðeɪ hæd. hi hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ɪm biɪŋ tɑvɝən ðət hæd dʌn ɪt, bʌt ðəɾ oʊnli ɔltɝd tʃæns, meɪd wʌt maɪt hæpən wʌn taɪm ɪn ə mɪljən bɪkʌm ə sɝɾənti. ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə bɪliv ðəɾ ə ɹɛd wəd swɛɹ ʌndɝ ɛni sɝkəmstænsəz tə ə mæn u kəd tʃænəl.

Even the Reds. He had been surprised when those first five captives offered fealty. Elaida had sent them to kidnap him, and they had. He had been sure it was him being ta'veren that had done it, but that only altered chance, made what might happen one time in a million become a certainty. It was hard to believe that a Red would swear under any circumstances to a man who could channel.

"ju niɾ ʌs, ɹænd." ɹaɪzɪŋ, ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə peɪs, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd ʃi stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, ənblɪŋkɪŋ. hɝ hænz smuðd əɹ skɝts əz ɪf ʃi wɑz ʌnəwɛɹ ʌv wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ. "ju nid ðə səpɔɹɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. wɪθaʊɾ ɪt, jəl əv tə kɑŋkɝ ɛvɹi neɪʃən, ən jə hævən dʌn vɛɹi wɛl ət ðət ðʌs fɑɹ. ðə ɹɪbɛljən ɪn kɛɹhin maɪt sim fɪnɪʃt tə ju, bʌt nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn laɪks dɑbɹeɪn biɪŋ neɪm jəɹ stuɝd. ə ɡʊd mɛni maɪt ɡoʊ tə tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən, ɪf i ɹiəpɪɹz. ðə haɪ lɔɹd dɑɹlɪn ɪz snʌɡ ɪn ðə stoʊn, soʊ wi hɪɹ, ənaʊnst əz jəɹ stuɝɾ ɪn tiɹ, bʌt ðə ɹɛbəlz ðəɹ hævən kʌm stʃɹimɪŋ aʊɾ ə hæɾən mɝk tə səpɔɹt hɪm. əz fəɹ ændɝ, ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən maɪt seɪ ʃɪl səpɔɹt jə wʌns ʃiz ðə θɹoʊn, bʌt ʃiz mənuvɝd jəɹ soʊlʒɝz aʊɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn, ən əl wɛɹ bɛlz ɪn ðə blaɪɾ ɪf ʃi lɛts əm ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ændɝ wən ʃi dʌz səksid. sɪstɝz kən hɛlp ju. ɪleɪn wɪl lɪsən tə ʌs. ðə ɹɛbəlz ɪn kɛɹhin ən tiɹ wɪl lɪsən. ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz stɑpt wɔɹz ən ɛndəd ɹɪbɛljənz fəɹ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz. jə meɪ nɑt laɪk ðə tʃɹiɾi ɹæfɛlə ən mɛɹænə nəɡoʊʃieɪɾəd wɪð hɑɹɪn, bʌt ðeɪ ɡɑɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ jə æsk fɔɹ. laɪt, mæn, lɛɾ əs hɛlp ju!"

"You need us, Rand." Rising, she shifted as if she wanted to pace, but instead she stood watching him, unblinking. Her hands smoothed her skirts as if she was unaware of what they were doing. "You need the support of Aes Sedai. Without it, you will have to conquer every nation, and you haven't done very well at that thus far. The rebellion in Cairhien might seem finished to you, but not everyone likes Dobraine being named your Steward. A good many might go to Toram Riatin, if he reappears. The High Lord Darlin is snug in the Stone, so we hear, announced as your Steward in Tear, but the rebels there haven't come streaming out of Haddon Mirk to support him. As for Andor, Elayne Trakand might say she will support you once she has the throne, but she has maneuvered your soldiers out of Caemlyn, and I'll wear bells in the Blight if she lets them remain in Andor when she does succeed. Sisters can help you. Elayne will listen to us. The rebels in Cairhien and Tear will listen. The White Tower has stopped wars and ended rebellions for three thousand years. You may not like the treaty Rafela and Merana negotiated with Harine, but they got everything you asked for. Light, man, let us help you!"

ɹænd nɑɾəd sloʊli. ɪt hæd sim dʒʌst ə weɪ tə ɪmpɹɛs pipəl wɪð ɪz paʊɝ, ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪv ɪm fiəlti. fɪɹ ðət ðeɪ maɪt mənɪpjəleɪɾ ɪm tə ðɛɹ oʊn ɛnz hæd blaɪndɪɾ ɪm tə ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk ædmɪɾɪŋ ðæt. hi hæd bɪn ə ful.

Rand nodded slowly. It had seemed just a way to impress people with his power, that Aes Sedai gave him fealty. Fear that they might manipulate him to their own ends had blinded him to anything else. He did not like admitting that. He had been a fool.

ə mæn u tʃɹʌsts ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz ə ful, luz θɝɪn sɛd, ən ə mæn u tʃɹʌsts noʊ wʌn ɪz ə ful. wəɹ ɔl fulz, ɪf wi laɪv lɔŋ ɪnʌf. hi ɔlmoʊst saʊndəd seɪn.

A man who trusts everyone is a fool, Lews Therin said, and a man who trusts no one is a fool. We are all fools, if we live long enough. He almost sounded sane.

"ɡoʊ bæk tə kɛɹhin," hi sɛd. "tɛl ɹæfɛlə ən mɛɹænə aɪ wɑn əm tə əpɹoʊtʃ ðə ɹɛbəlz ɪn hæɾən mɝk. tɛl əm tə teɪk bɛɹə ən feɪlʒɹɪn, tu." ðoʊz wɝ ðə fɔɹ bɪsaɪdz ɑlɑnə hum mɪn sɛɾ i kəd tʃɹʌst. wʌt hæd ʃi sɛɾ əbaʊt ðə faɪv ʌðɝz kædzueɪn hæd bɹɔt wɪð hɝ? ðəɾ itʃ wəd sɝv ɪm ɪn əɹ fæʃən. ðət wɑz nɑt stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf, nɑt jɛt. "aɪ wɑn dɑɹlɪn sɪsnɛɹə əz maɪ stuɝɾ ən ðə lɔz aɪ meɪd lɛft ɪn pleɪs. ðeɪ kən nəɡoʊʃieɪɾ əweɪ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ɛn ðə ɹɪbɛljən. æftɝ ðət . . . wʌts ðə mæɾɝ?"

"Go back to Cairhien," he said. "Tell Rafela and Merana I want them to approach the rebels in Haddon Mirk. Tell them to take Bera and Faeldrin, too." Those were the four besides Alanna whom Min said he could trust. What had she said about the five others Cadsuane had brought with her? That each would serve him in her fashion. That was not strong enough, not yet. "I want Darlin Sisnera as my Steward and the laws I made left in place. They can negotiate away anything else as long as they end the rebellion. After that . . . What's the matter?"

ɑlɑnəz feɪs hæd fɔlən, ən ʃi hæd sæɡd bæk ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ. "ɪts dʒʌs ðəɾ aɪv kʌm ɔl ðɪs weɪ, ən jə ɑɹ sɛndɪŋ mi ɹaɪɾ ɔf əɡɛn. aɪ səpoʊz ɪts fəɹ ðə bɛst, wɪð ðət ɡɝl hɪɹ," ʃi saɪd. "ju hæv noʊ aɪdiə wʌɾ aɪ wɛn θɹu ɪn kɛɹhin, mæskɪŋ ðə bɑn dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə kip wʌt ðə tu ʌv jə wɝ duɪŋ fɹəm kipɪŋ mi əweɪk ɔl naɪt. ðəɾ ɪz mʌtʃ hɑɹɾɝ ðən sɪmpli mæskɪŋ ɪt kəmplitli, bʌɾ aɪ dɪslaɪk luzɪŋ tʌtʃ wɪð maɪ wɔɹɾɝz kəmplitli. oʊnli, ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə kɛɹhin wɪl bi ɔlmoʊst əz bæd."

Alanna's face had fallen, and she had sagged back in her chair. "It's just that I've come all this way, and you are sending me right off again. I suppose it is for the best, with that girl here," she sighed. "You have no idea what I went through in Cairhien, masking the bond just enough to keep what the two of you were doing from keeping me awake all night. That is much harder than simply masking it completely, but I dislike losing touch with my Warders completely. Only, going back to Cairhien will be almost as bad."

ɹænd klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "ðæts wʌɾ aɪ wɑn jə tə du." wɪmən, hi hæd lɝnd, tɔkt əbaʊt səm θɪŋz mʌtʃ mɔɹ oʊpənli ðən mɛn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl ə ʃɑk wən ðeɪ dɪd. hi hoʊpt ɪleɪn ən eɪvinhə mæsk ðə bɑnd wən i wɑz meɪkɪŋ lʌv wɪð mɪn. wən ðə tu ʌv əm wɝ təɡɛðɝ ɪn bɛd, noʊ wʌn ɛls ɪɡzɪstəɾ ɪksɛp hɝ, ðə seɪm əz ɪt hæd bɪn wɪð ɪleɪn. hi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt wɪð ɑlɑnə. "aɪ meɪ bi dʌn hɪɹ baɪ ðə taɪm jə fɪnɪʃ ɪn kɛɹhin. ɪf aɪ hævənt . . . ɪf aɪ hævənt, jə kən ɹɪtɝn hɪɹ. bʌt jəl əv tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm mi əntɪl aɪ seɪ ʌðɝwaɪz." ivən wɪð ðət ɹistʃɹɪkʃən, ðə dʒɔɪ bɪloʊɾ ʌp ɪn əɹ əfɹɛʃ.

Rand cleared his throat. "That's what I want you to do." Women, he had learned, talked about some things much more openly than men, but it was still a shock when they did. He hoped Elayne and Aviendha masked the bond when he was making love with Min. When the two of them were together in bed, no one else existed except her, the same as it had been with Elayne. He certainly did not want to talk about it with Alanna. "I may be done here by the time you finish in Cairhien. If I haven't . . . If I haven't, you can return here. But you'll have to stay away from me until I say otherwise." Even with that restriction, the joy billowed up in her afresh.

"ju ɑɹən gɑnə tɛl mi hu bɑndəd ju, ɑɹ ju?" hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən ʃi saɪd. "aɪ hæd bɛɾɝ ɡoʊ." ɹaɪzɪŋ, ʃi tʊk ʌp əɹ kloʊk ən dʒɹeɪpt ɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ ɑɹm. "kædzueɪn ɪz ɪmpeɪʃən ət bɛst. sɔɹɪliə ədmɑnɪʃt əɹ tə lʊk æftɝ əs laɪk ə mʌðɝ hɛn, ən ʃi dʌz. æftɝ əɹ fæʃən." ət ðə dɔɹ, ʃi pɔz fəɹ wʌn læs kwɛstʃən. "waɪ ɑɹ jə hɪɹ, ɹænd? kædzueɪn meɪ nɑt kɛɹ, bʌɾ aɪ du. əl kip ɪt sikɹət, ɪf jə wɪʃ. aɪ hæv nɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə steɪ mɔɹ ðən ə fju deɪz ɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ. waɪ wəd jə bi wɪlɪŋ tə steɪ hɪɹ, wɛɹ jə kæn ivən fil ðə sɔɹs?"

"You aren't going to tell me who bonded you, are you?" He shook his head, and she sighed. "I had better go." Rising, she took up her cloak and draped it over her arm. "Cadsuane is impatient at best. Sorilea admonished her to look after us like a mother hen, and she does. After her fashion." At the door, she paused for one last question. "Why are you here, Rand? Cadsuane may not care, but I do. I'll keep it secret, if you wish. I have never been able to stay more than a few days in a stedding. Why would you be willing to stay here, where you can't even feel the Source?"

"meɪbi ɪɾ ɪzən ðət bæd fəɹ mi," hi laɪd. hi kəd tɛl hɝ, hi ɹilaɪzd. hi dɪd tʃɹʌst əɹ tə kip ɪt sikɹət. bʌt ʃi dɪd si hɪm əz əɹ wɔɹɾɝ, ən ʃi wɑz ə ɡɹin. noʊ ɛkspləneɪʃən kəd meɪk əɹ lɛɾ ɪm feɪs ɪɾ əloʊn, bʌɾ ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, ʃi wɑz noʊ bɛɾɝ eɪbəl tə dɪfɛn hɝsɛlf ðən mɪn, meɪbi lɛs. "ɡoʊ ɑn, ɑlɑnə. aɪv weɪstəɾ ɪnʌf taɪm."

"Maybe it isn't that bad for me," he lied. He could tell her, he realized. He did trust her to keep it secret. But she did see him as her Warder, and she was a Green. No explanation could make her let him face it alone, but in Far Madding, she was no better able to defend herself than Min, maybe less. "Go on, Alanna. I've wasted enough time."

wʌns ʃi wɑz ɡɔn, hi ʃɪftəd hɪmsɛlf tə pʊɾ ɪz bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl əɡɛn ən sæt fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə flut. hi θɔɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə pleɪɪŋ, ðoʊ. mɪn sɛɾ i niɾəd kædzueɪn, bʌt kædzueɪn wɑz nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ɪm ɪksɛpt əz ə kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. ə bæd-mænɝd kjʊɹiɑsəɾi. sʌmhaʊ, hi hæd tə meɪk əɹ ɪntʃɹəstəd. haʊ ɪn ðə laɪt wɑz i gɑnə də ðæt?

Once she was gone, he shifted himself to put his back against the wall again and sat fingering the flute. He thought instead of playing, though. Min said he needed Cadsuane, but Cadsuane was not interested in him except as a curiosity. A bad-mannered curiosity. Somehow, he had to make her interested. How in the Light was he going to do that?

wɪð səm dɪfəkəlti vɛɹɪn skwiz hɝsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə sɪdæn tʃɛɹ ɪn ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ ʌv əlaɪz' pæləs. ʃi wɑz sɪmpli nɑt kənstʃɹʌktəd tə fɪt ðə θɪŋz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ðə fæstəst weɪ tə ɡɛɾ əbaʊɾ ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. koʊtʃɪz ɔlweɪz bɑɡd daʊn ɪn ðə kɹaʊdz sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ən ðeɪ kəd nɑt ɡoʊ səm pleɪsəz ʃi wɑntəd tə. ðə dæmp wɪnz ɔf ðə leɪk wɝ tɝnɪŋ koʊldɝ əz ivnɪŋ dipən ɪndə twaɪlaɪt, bʌt ʃi lɛt ðə wɪnd wɪp əɹ kloʊk əbaʊt waɪl ʃi dʌɡ tu sɪlvɝ pɛniz fɹəm əɹ pɝs ən ɡeɪv əm tə ðə bɛɹɝz. ʃi wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə, ʌv kɔɹs, sɪns ðeɪ wɝ əlaɪz' bɔɪz, bʌɾ idwinə wəd nɑt noʊ ðæt. ðeɪ ʃəd nɑɾ əv æksɛptɪd, bʌt ðə sɪlvɝ vænɪʃt ɪndə ðɛɹ koʊts ɪn ə twɪŋkəlɪŋ, ən ðə jʌŋɡɝ ə ðə pɛɹ, ə hænsəm fɛloʊ ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz, ivən meɪɾ əɹ ə flɝɪʃɪŋ baʊ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ pɪkt ʌp ðə tʃɛɹ ən tʃɹɑɾəd ɔf təwɔɹd ðə steɪbəl, ə loʊ stʃɹʌktʃɝ sɛɾ ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ əɡɛns ðə fɹʌnt wɔl. vɛɹɪn saɪd. ə bɔɪ ɪn ɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz. ɪt hæd nɑt teɪkən əɹ lɔŋ bæk ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ tə bɪɡɪn θɪŋkɪŋ əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɛvɝ lɛft. ʃi hæd tə bi kɛɹfəl əbaʊt ðæt. ɪt kəd bi deɪnʒɝəs, nɑt list ɪf əlaɪz əɹ ði ʌðɝz dɪskʌvɝɾ əɹ dɪsɛpʃən. ʃi səspɛktəd ðə wɔɹəns fəɹ vɛɹɪn mæθwɪnz ɛɡzaɪl hæd nɛvɝ bɪn səspɛndəd. fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ kɛp kwaɪət wən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fɛl əfaʊl ə ðə lɔ, bʌt ðə kaʊnsəlz hæd noʊ ɹizən tə fɪɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən fəɹ ɪts oʊn ɹizənz, ðə taʊɝ ɪn tɝn kɛp kwaɪəɾ ɑn ðoʊz ɹɛɹ əkeɪʒənz wən ə sɪstɝ faʊn hɝsɛlf stʃɹʌŋ ʌp fəɹ ə dʒudɪʃəl flɑɡɪŋ. ʃi hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə biɪŋ ðə leɪɾəst ɹizən fəɹ ðə taʊɝ tə kip saɪləns.

With some difficulty Verin squeezed herself out of the sedan chair in the courtyard of Aleis' palace. She was simply not constructed to fit the things, but they were the fastest way to get about in Far Madding. Coaches always bogged down in the crowds sooner or later, and they could not go some places she wanted to. The damp winds off the lake were turning colder as evening deepened into twilight, but she let the wind whip her cloak about while she dug two silver pennies from her purse and gave them to the bearers. She was not supposed to, of course, since they were Aleis' boys, but Eadwina would not know that. They should not have accepted, but the silver vanished into their coats in a twinkling, and the younger of the pair, a handsome fellow in his middle years, even made her a flourishing bow before they picked up the chair and trotted off toward the stable, a low structure set in a corner against the front wall. Verin sighed. A boy in his middle years. It had not taken her long back in Far Madding to begin thinking as if she had never left. She had to be careful about that. It could be dangerous, not least if Aleis or the others discovered her deception. She suspected the warrants for Verin Mathwin's exile had never been suspended. Far Madding kept quiet when an Aes Sedai fell afoul of the law, but the Counsels had no reason to fear Aes Sedai, and for its own reasons, the Tower in turn kept quiet on those rare occasions when a sister found herself strung up for a judicial flogging. She had no intention of being the latest reason for the Tower to keep silence.

əlaɪz' pæləs wɑz nɑɾ ə pætʃ ɑn ðə sʌn pæləs, ʌv kɔɹs, əɹ ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ɪn ændɝ, əɹ ɛni ʌv ðə pæləsəz kɪŋz ən kwinz ɹul fɹʌm. ɪt wɑz əɹ oʊn pɹɑpɝɾi, nɑɾ ətætʃt tə hɝ pəzɪʃən əz fɝs kaʊnsəl. ʌðɝz, lɑɹdʒɝ ən smɔlɝ, mɑɹtʃt əweɪ ɑn iðɝ saɪd, itʃ sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə haɪ wɔl ɪksɛpt ɑn ði ɛnd wɛɹ ðə haɪts, ði oʊnli pɔɪn əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ə hɪl ɑn ði ɪntaɪɝ aɪlənd, fɛl əweɪ tə ðə wɔɾɝ ɪn ə ʃɪɹ blʌf. stɪl, ɪt wɑz nɑt smɔl, iðɝ. ðə bɑɹsælə wɪmən hæd bɪn dilɪŋ ɪn tʃɹeɪɾ ən pɑlətɪks sɪns ðə sɪɾi wɑz stɪl kɔl fɛl mɔɹinə. tɔl-kɑləmd wɔks sɝaʊndəd ðə bɑɹsælə pæləs ɑn boʊθ lɛvəlz, ən ðə waɪt mɑɹbəl kjub kʌvɝd moʊst ə ðə wɔld ɡɹaʊnz.

Aleis' palace was not a patch on the Sun Palace, of course, or the Royal Palace in Andor, or any of the palaces kings and queens ruled from. It was her own property, not attached to her position as First Counsel. Others, larger and smaller, marched away on either side, each surrounded by a high wall except on the end where the Heights, the only point approaching a hill on the entire island, fell away to the water in a sheer bluff. Still, it was not small, either. The Barsalla women had been dealing in trade and politics since the city was still called Fel Moreina. Tall-columned walks surrounded the Barsalla palace on both levels, and the white marble cube covered most of the walled grounds.

ʃi faʊn kædzueɪn ɪn ə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum ðət wʊɾə ɔfɝɾ ə ɡʊd vju ʌv ðə leɪk ɪf ðə kɝɾənz hæd nɑt bɪn dʒɹɔn tə kip ɪn ðə wɔɹmθ ə ðə bleɪz ɪn ðə waɪd mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪs. kædzueɪn sæt, wɪð əɹ soʊɪŋ bæskəɾ ɑn ə smɔl ɪnleɪd teɪbəl bɪsaɪɾ əɹ tʃɛɹ, kɑmli wɝkɪŋ wɪð niɾəl ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. vɛɹɪn foʊldəɾ əɹ kloʊk oʊvɝ ðə bæk ʌv ə pæɾəd tʃɛɹ ən tʊk ənʌðɝ tə weɪt.

She found Cadsuane in a sitting room that would have offered a good view of the lake if the curtains had not been drawn to keep in the warmth of the blaze in the wide marble fireplace. Cadsuane sat, with her sewing basket on a small inlaid table beside her chair, calmly working with needle and embroidery hoop. She was not alone. Verin folded her cloak over the back of a padded chair and took another to wait.

ɛlzə bɛɹli ɡlænst ət hɝ. ðə juʒəwəli plɛzənt-feɪst ɡɹin stʊɾ ɑn ðə kɑɹpəɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə kædzueɪn lʊkɪŋ kwaɪt fɪɹs, hɝ feɪs ɹɛɾ ən əɹ aɪz ɡlɛɹɪŋ. ɛlzə wɑz ɔlweɪz vɛɹi kɑnʃəs ʌv wɛɹ ʃi stʊd wɪð ɹɪspɛk tə ʌðɝ sɪstɝz, pɝhæps tu mʌtʃ soʊ. fəɹ əɹ tə ɪɡnɔɹ vɛɹɪn, mʌtʃ lɛs kənfɹʌn kædzueɪn, ʃi mʌst əv bɪn ɪn ə faɪn swɪvət. "haʊ kəd jə lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ?" ʃi dɪmændəɾ ə kædzueɪn. "haʊ ɑɹ wi tə faɪn ɪm wɪθaʊt hɝ?" ɑ, soʊ ðət wɑz ɪt.

Elza barely glanced at her. The usually pleasant-faced Green stood on the carpet in front of Cadsuane looking quite fierce, her face red and her eyes glaring. Elza was always very conscious of where she stood with respect to other sisters, perhaps too much so. For her to ignore Verin, much less confront Cadsuane, she must have been in a fine swivet. "How could you let her go?" she demanded of Cadsuane. "How are we to find him without her?" Ah, so that was it.

kædzueɪnz hɛd ɹɪmeɪn bɛn oʊvɝ əɹ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup, ən əɹ niɾəl kəntɪnjud tə meɪk taɪni stɪtʃɪz. "ju kən weɪɾ əntɪl ʃi ɹɪtɝnz," ʃi sɛd kɑmli.

Cadsuane's head remained bent over her embroidery hoop, and her needle continued to make tiny stitches. "You can wait until she returns," she said calmly.

ɛlzəz hænz dʌbəld ɪndə fɪsts əɾ əɹ saɪd. "haʊ kən jə bi soʊ dɪtætʃt?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "hi ɪz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn! ðɪs pleɪs kəd bi ə dɛθ tʃɹæp fəɹ hɪm! juv tə - !" hɝ tiθ snæpt ʃʌɾ əz kædzueɪn hɛld ʌp ə fɪŋɡɝ. ðət wɑz ɔl kædzueɪn dɪd, bʌt fɹəm əɹ ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf.

Elza's hands doubled into fists at her side. "How can you be so detached?" she demanded. "He is the Dragon Reborn! This place could be a death trap for him! You have to - !" Her teeth snapped shut as Cadsuane held up a finger. That was all Cadsuane did, but from her it was enough.

"aɪv pʊɾ ʌp wɪð jəɹ taɪɹeɪd lɔŋ ɪnʌf, ɛlzə. jə meɪ ɡoʊ. naʊ!"

"I've put up with your tirade long enough, Elza. You may go. Now!"

ɛlzə hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bʌt ʃi ɹɪli hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs. hɝ feɪs wɑz stɪl ɹɛɾ əz ʃi bɑbd ə kɝtsi wɪð əɹ dɑɹk ɡɹin skɝts klʌtʃt ɪn əɹ fɪsts, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi stɔk fɹəm ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ʃi stɪl lɛft wɪθaʊt fɝðɝ dɪleɪ.

Elza hesitated, but she really had no choice. Her face was still red as she bobbed a curtsy with her dark green skirts clutched in her fists, but if she stalked from the sitting room, she still left without further delay.

kædzueɪn sɛt ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup ɑn əɹ læp ən lin bæk. "wɪl jə meɪk mi səm ti, vɛɹɪn?"

Cadsuane set the embroidery hoop on her lap and leaned back. "Will you make me some tea, Verin?"

ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf, vɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ə smɔl stɑɹt. ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝ hæd nɑt lʊkt ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən wʌns. "ʌv kɔɹs, kædzueɪn." ə hɛvəli wɝk sɪlvɝ tipɑt sæɾ ɑn ə fɔɹ-lɛɡəd stæn ɑn wʌn ə ðə saɪd teɪbəlz, ən wɑz stɪl hɑt, lʌkəli. "wɑz ɪt waɪz tə lɛɾ ɑlɑnə ɡoʊ?" ʃi æskt.

In spite of herself, Verin gave a small start. The other sister had not looked in her direction once. "Of course, Cadsuane." A heavily worked silver teapot sat on a four-legged stand on one of the side tables, and was still hot, luckily. "Was it wise to let Alanna go?" she asked.

"aɪ kəd hɑɹdli stɑp əɹ wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ ðə bɔɪ noʊ mɔɹ ðən i ʃʊd, naʊ kəɾ aɪ?" kædzueɪn ɹɪplaɪd dʒɹaɪli.

"I could hardly stop her without letting the boy know more than he should, now could I?" Cadsuane replied dryly.

teɪkɪŋ əɹ taɪm, vɛɹɪn tɪp ðə tipɑt tə pɔɹ ɪndə ə θɪn blu pɔɹsələn kʌp. nɑt si foʊk pɔɹsələn, bʌt vɛɹi faɪn. "du juv ɛni aɪdiə waɪ hi keɪm tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, ʌv ɔl pleɪsəz? aɪ nɪɹli swɑloʊd maɪ tʌŋ wən ɪt keɪm tə mi ðət ðə ɹizən i hæd stɑp lipɪŋ əbaʊt maɪt bi kəz i wɑz hɪɹ. ɪf ɪts sʌmθɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs, pɝhæps wi ʃəd tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp hɪm."

Taking her time, Verin tipped the teapot to pour into a thin blue porcelain cup. Not Sea Folk porcelain, but very fine. "Do you have any idea why he came to Far Madding, of all places? I nearly swallowed my tongue when it came to me that the reason he had stopped leaping about might be because he was here. If it's something dangerous, perhaps we should try to stop him."

"vɛɹɪn, hi kən də wʌtɛvɝ ɪz hɑɹt dɪzaɪɝz, ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl, əz lɔŋ əz i laɪvz tə ɹitʃ tɑɹmən ɡdən. ən əz lɔŋ əz aɪ kən bi əɾ ɪz saɪd lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪm lɝn haʊ tə læf əɡɛn, ən kɹaɪ." kloʊzɪŋ əɹ aɪz, ʃi ɹʌbd əɹ tɛmpəlz wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps ən saɪd. "hi ɪz tɝnɪŋ ɪndə ə stoʊn, vɛɹɪn, ən ɪf i dʌzn ɹilɝn ðət hiz hjumən, wɪnɪŋ ðə læs bæɾəl meɪ nɑt bi mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən luzɪŋ. jʌŋ mɪn toʊld ɪm i nidz mi; aɪ ɡɑt ðət mʌtʃ aʊɾ ə hɝ wɪθaʊt ɹaʊzɪŋ əɹ səspɪʃənz. bʌɾ aɪ mʌst weɪt fəɹ ɪm tə kʌm tə mi. jə si ðə weɪ hi ɹʌnz ɹʌfʃɑɾ oʊvɝ ɑlɑnə ən ði ʌðɝz. ɪɾəl bi hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf titʃɪŋ hɪm, ɪf i dʌz æsk. hi faɪts ɡaɪɾəns, hi θɪŋks i mʌs də ɛvɹiθɪŋ, lɝn ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɑn ɪz oʊn, ən ɪf aɪ də nɑt meɪk ɪm wɝk fəɹ ɪt, hi woʊn lɝn əɾ ɔl." hɝ hænz dʒɹɑpt ɑntu ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi hup ɑn əɹ læp. "aɪ sim tə bi ɪn ə kənfaɪɾɪŋ mud tənaɪt. ənjuʒəwəl, fəɹ mi. ɪf jə ɛvɝ fɪnɪʃ pɔɹɪŋ ðət ti, aɪ meɪ kənfaɪd səm mɔɹ."

"Verin, he can do whatever his heart desires, anything at all, as long as he lives to reach Tarmon Gai'don. And as long as I can be at his side long enough to make him learn how to laugh again, and cry." Closing her eyes, she rubbed her temples with her fingertips and sighed. "He is turning into a stone, Verin, and if he doesn't relearn that he's human, winning the Last Battle may not be much better than losing. Young Min told him he needs me; I got that much out of her without rousing her suspicions. But I must wait for him to come to me. You see the way he runs roughshod over Alanna and the others. It will be hard enough teaching him, if he does ask. He fights guidance, he thinks he must do everything, learn everything, on his own, and if I do not make him work for it, he won't learn at all." Her hands dropped onto the embroidery hoop on her lap. "I seem to be in a confiding mood tonight. Unusual, for me. If you ever finish pouring that tea, I may confide some more."

"oʊ, jɛs; ʌv kɔɹs." heɪstəli fɪlɪŋ ə sɛkən kʌp, vɛɹɪn slɪp ðə smɔl vaɪəl bæk ɪndə hɝ paʊtʃ ənoʊpənd. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd tə bi ʃʊɹ ə kædzueɪn ət læst. "du jə teɪk hʌni?" ʃi æskt ɪn əɹ moʊs mʌɾəld vɔɪs. "aɪ nɛvɝ kən ɹɪmɛmbɝ."

"Oh, yes; of course." Hastily filling a second cup, Verin slipped the small vial back into her pouch unopened. It was good to be sure of Cadsuane at last. "Do you take honey?" she asked in her most muddled voice. "I never can remember."


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɪks


CHAPTER 26

ɛkspɛkteɪʃən


Expectation

wɔkɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə bɹaʊn-ɡɹæs vɪlədʒ ɡɹin ʌv ɛmənz fild wɪð ɛɡwin, ɪleɪn fɛl sæɾənd baɪ ðə tʃeɪnʒəz. ɛɡwin sim stʌn baɪ ðɛm. wən ʃi fɝst əpɪɹɾ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ə lɔŋ bɹeɪd hæd dæŋɡəl daʊn ɛɡwinz bæk ən ʃi wɑz ɪn ə pleɪn wʊlən dʒɹɛs, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz, wɪð staʊt ʃuz pikɪŋ aʊt bɪniθ əɹ skɝts əz ʃi wɔkt. ɪleɪn səpoʊzd ɪt wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə kloʊðɪŋ ʃi hæd wɔɹn wən ʃi lɪvd ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. naʊ hɝ dɑɹk hɛɹ hʌŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, sɪkjʊɹd baɪ ə smɔl kæp ə faɪn leɪs, ən əɹ ɡɑɹməns wɝ əz faɪn əz ɪleɪnz, ə ɹɪtʃ blu ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð sɪlvɝ ɑn ðə bɑɾəs ən haɪ nɛk əz wɛl əz əlɔŋ ðə hɛm ə hɝ skɝɾ ən əɹ kʌfs. sɪlvɝ-wɝk vɛlvət slɪpɝz ɹipleɪs ðə θɪk lɛðɝ ʃuz. ɪleɪn niɾəd tə meɪnteɪn əɹ foʊkəs tə kip əɹ oʊn ɡɹin sɪlk ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs fɹəm ɔltɝɪŋ, pɝhæps ɪn ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ fæʃən, bʌt fəɹ əɹ fɹɛnd, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni daʊt, ðə tʃeɪnʒəz wɝ dɪlɪbɝɪt.

Walking across the brown-grassed village green of Emond's Field with Egwene, Elayne felt saddened by the changes. Egwene seemed stunned by them. When she first appeared in Tel'aran'rhiod, a long braid had dangled down Egwene's back and she was in a plain woolen dress, of all things, with stout shoes peeking out beneath her skirts as she walked. Elayne supposed it was the sort of clothing she had worn when she lived in the Two Rivers. Now her dark hair hung about her shoulders, secured by a small cap of fine lace, and her garments were as fine as Elayne's, a rich blue embroidered with silver on the bodice and high neck as well as along the hem of her skirt and her cuffs. Silver-worked velvet slippers replaced the thick leather shoes. Elayne needed to maintain her focus to keep her own green silk riding dress from altering, perhaps in embarrassing fashion, but for her friend, without any doubt, the changes were deliberate.

ʃi hoʊpt ɹænd kəd stɪl lʌv ɛmənz fild, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðə vɪlədʒ wɛɹ i ən ɛɡwin hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ pipəl, hɪɹ ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, jɛt klɪɹli ɛmənz fild wɑz ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl taʊn naʊ, ə pɹɑspɝəs taʊn, wɪð nɪɹli wʌn haʊs ɪn θɹi meɪɾ ʌv wɛl-dʒɹɛst stoʊn, səm ə θɹi stɔɹiz, ən mɔɹ ɹuft wɪð taɪlz ɪn ɛvɹi hju ʌv ðə ɹeɪnboʊ ðən wɪð θætʃ. səm stʃɹits wɝ peɪvd wɪð smuð wɛl-fɪɾəd stoʊn, nu ən ənwɹn əz jɛt, ən ðəɹ wɑz ivən ə θɪk stoʊn wɔl ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp ɝaʊn ðə taʊn, wɪð taʊɝz ən aɪɝn-pleɪɾəd ɡeɪts ðət wʊɾə suɾəd ə bɔɹɾɝlənd taʊn. aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz ðəɹ wɝ ɡɹɪstmɪlz ən sɔmɪlz, ən aɪɝn faʊnʒɹi ən lɑɹdʒ wɝkʃɑps fəɹ wivɝz ə boʊθ wʊlənz ən kɑɹpəts, ən wɪðɪn wɝ ʃɑps ɹʌn baɪ fɝnɪtʃɝ meɪkɝz, pɑɾɝz, simstʃɹəsəz, kʌtlɝz, ən ɡoʊld-æn sɪlvɝsmɪθs, mɛni əz faɪn əz kəd bi sin ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ðoʊ səm ə ðə staɪlz sim tə bi fɹəm ɑɹæd dumən əɹ tæɹɑbən.

She hoped Rand could still love Emond's Field, but it was no longer the village where he and Egwene had grown up. There were no people, here in the World of Dreams, yet clearly Emond's Field was a considerable town now, a prosperous town, with nearly one house in three made of well-dressed stone, some of three stories, and more roofed with tiles in every hue of the rainbow than with thatch. Some streets were paved with smooth well-fitted stone, new and unworn as yet, and there was even a thick stone wall going up around the town, with towers and iron-plated gates that would have suited a Borderland town. Outside the walls there were gristmills and sawmills, an iron foundry and large workshops for weavers of both woolens and carpets, and within were shops run by furniture makers, potters, seamstresses, cutlers, and gold-and silversmiths, many as fine as could be seen in Caemlyn, though some of the styles seemed to be from Arad Doman or Tarabon.

ði ɛɹ wɑz kul bʌt nɑt koʊld, ən ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə saɪn ə snoʊ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ət lis fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. ðə sʌn stʊd stʃɹeɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd hɪɹ, ðoʊ ɪleɪn hoʊpt ɪt wɑz stɪl naɪɾ ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld. ʃi wɑntəd səm ɹil slip bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæd tə feɪs ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz taɪɝd, ðə læs fju deɪz; ðəɹ wɑz dʒʌst soʊ mʌtʃ tə bi dʌn, ən soʊ fju aʊɝz. ðeɪ hæd kʌm hɪɹ kəz ɪt simd ənlaɪkli ɛni spaɪ kəd faɪn əm hɪɹ, bʌɾ ɛɡwin hæd lɪŋɡɝd tə stɛɹ ət ðə tʃeɪnʒəz ɪn ðə pleɪs ʃi wɑz bɔɹn. ən ɪleɪn hæɾ əɹ oʊn ɹizənz, bɪɑn ɹænd, fəɹ wɑntɪŋ tə lʊk oʊvɝ ɛmənz fild. ðə pɹɑbləm, wʌn ə ðə pɹɑbləmz, wɑz ðət wʌn aʊɝ maɪt pæs ɪn ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld waɪl jə spɛn faɪv əɹ tɛn ɪn ðə wɝld ə dʒɹimz, bʌɾ ɪt kəd dʒʌst əz izəli bi ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɝaʊnd. ɪt maɪt bi mɔɹnɪŋ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn keɪɛmlɪn.

The air was cool but not cold, and there was not a sign of snow on the ground, at least for the moment. The sun stood straight overhead here, though Elayne hoped it was still night in the waking world. She wanted some real sleep before she had to face the morning. She was always tired, the last few days; there was just so much to be done, and so few hours. They had come here because it seemed unlikely any spy could find them here, but Egwene had lingered to stare at the changes in the place she was born. And Elayne had her own reasons, beyond Rand, for wanting to look over Emond's Field. The problem, one of the problems, was that one hour might pass in the waking world while you spent five or ten in the World of Dreams, but it could just as easily be the other way around. It might be morning already in Caemlyn.

stɑpɪŋ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɡɹin, ɛɡwin ɡeɪz bæk ət ðə waɪd stoʊn bɹɪdʒ ðəɾ ɑɹtʃt oʊvɝ ðə ɹæpədli waɪɾənɪŋ stʃɹim ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ə spɹɪŋ ðət ɡʌʃt aʊɾ ʌv ə stoʊn aʊtkɹɑp stʃɹɔŋli ɪnʌf tə nɑk ə mæn daʊn. ə mæsɪv mɑɹbəl ʃæf kɑɹvd ɔl oʊvɝ wɪð neɪmz stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɡɹin, ən tu tɔl flæɡpoʊlz ɑn stoʊn beɪsəz. "ə bæɾəl mɑnjəmənt," ʃi mɝmɝd. "hu kəɾ ɪmædʒən sətʃ ə θɪŋ ɪn ɛmənz fild? ðoʊ mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ðət wʌns ə ɡɹeɪt bæɾəl wɑz fɔɾ ɑn ðɪs spɑt, ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, wən meɪnɛðɝən daɪd."

Stopping at the edge of the green, Egwene gazed back at the wide stone bridge that arched over the rapidly widening stream running from a spring that gushed out of a stone outcrop strongly enough to knock a man down. A massive marble shaft carved all over with names stood in the middle of the green, and two tall flagpoles on stone bases. "A battle monument," she murmured. "Who could imagine such a thing in Emond's Field? Though Moiraine said that once a great battle was fought on this spot, in the Trolloc Wars, when Manetheren died."

"ɪt wɑz ɪn ðə hɪstɝi aɪ stʌɾid," ɪleɪn sɛd kwaɪətli, ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə bɛɹ flæɡpoʊlz. bɛɹ fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. ʃi kəd nɑt fil ɹænd, hɪɹ. oʊ, hi wɑz stɪl ɪn əɹ hɛɾ əz mʌtʃ əz bɝdʒɪt, ə ɹɑklaɪk nɑɾ ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz ən fɪzɪkəl sɛnseɪʃənz ðət wɑz ivən mɔɹ dɪfəkəl tə ɪntɝpɹət naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz fɑɹ əweɪ, jɛt hɪɹ ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ʃi kəd nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ dɝɛkʃən i wɑz. ʃi mɪs ðət nɑlədʒ, smɔl əz ɪt wɑz. ʃi mɪs hɪm.

"It was in the history I studied," Elayne said quietly, glancing at the bare flagpoles. Bare for the moment. She could not feel Rand, here. Oh, he was still in her head as much as Birgitte, a rocklike knot of emotions and physical sensations that was even more difficult to interpret now that he was far away, yet here in Tel'aran'rhiod, she could not know which direction he was. She missed that knowledge, small as it was. She missed him.

bænɝz əpɪɹɾ ətɑp ðə flæɡpoʊlz, ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ dʒʌs lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪpəl wʌns læzəli. lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk aʊɾ ɑn wʌn ə ɹɛɾ iɡəl flaɪɪŋ əkɹɔs ə fild ə blu. nɑɾ ə ɹɛɾ iɡəl; ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl. wʌns, vɪzəɾɪŋ ðɪs pleɪs wɪð nɪneɪiv ɪn tɛlɝɑnɹhiəd, ʃi hæd θɔt ʃi ɡlɪmpst ɪt, hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ʃi mʌs bi mɪsteɪkən. mæstɝ nɔɹi hæd bɪɡʌn sɛɾɪŋ əɹ stʃɹeɪt. ʃi lʌvd ɹænd, bʌɾ ɪf sʌmwʌn ɪn ðə pleɪs i ɡɹu ʌp wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹeɪz meɪnɛðɝən fɹəm ɪts eɪntʃənt ɡɹeɪv, ʃi wəɾ əv tə teɪk kɑɡnəzəns, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ɪt peɪn hɪm. ðət bænɝ ən ðət neɪm stɪl kæɹiɾ ɪnʌf paʊɝ tə θɹɛɾən ændɝ.

Banners appeared atop the flagpoles, remaining just long enough to ripple once lazily. Long enough to make out on one a red eagle flying across a field of blue. Not a red eagle; the Red Eagle. Once, visiting this place with Nynaeve in Tel'aran'rhiod, she had thought she glimpsed it, had decided she must be mistaken. Master Norry had begun setting her straight. She loved Rand, but if someone in the place he grew up was trying to raise Manetheren from its ancient grave, she would have to take cognizance, however much it pained him. That banner and that name still carried enough power to threaten Andor.

"aɪ hɝɾ əbaʊt tʃeɪnʒəz fɹəm boʊd kɔθən ən ði ʌðɝ nɑvəsɪz fɹəm hoʊm," ɛɡwin wɛn ɑn, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə haʊsəz ɝaʊn ðə ɡɹin, "bʌt nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs." moʊst ə ðoʊz haʊsəz wɝ stoʊn. ə taɪni ɪn stɪl stʊd bɪsaɪd ðə spɹɔlɪŋ stoʊn faʊndeɪʃən ə səm mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ bɪldɪŋ, wɪð ə hjudʒ oʊk ɡɹoʊɪŋ ʌp θɹu ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt, bʌt wʌt lʊk tə bi ən ɪn mɛni taɪmz bɪɡɝ wɑz ɔlmoʊs fɪnɪʃt ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə faʊndeɪʃən, wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ saɪn ɹiɾɪŋ ði ɑɹtʃɝz ɔlɹɛɾi hʌŋ əbʌv ðə dɔɹ. "aɪ wʌndɝ wɛðɝ maɪ fɑðɝ ɪz stɪl meɪɝ. ɪz maɪ mʌðɝ wɛl? maɪ sɪstɝz?"

"I heard about changes from Bode Cauthon and the other novices from home," Egwene went on, frowning at the houses around the green, "but nothing like this." Most of those houses were stone. A tiny inn still stood beside the sprawling stone foundation of some much larger building, with a huge oak growing up through the middle of it, but what looked to be an inn many times bigger was almost finished on the other side of the foundation, with a large sign reading The Archers already hung above the door. "I wonder whether my father is still Mayor. Is my mother well? My sisters?"

"aɪ noʊ jə ɑɹ muvɪŋ ði ɑɹmi təmɑɹoʊ," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ɪf ɪɾ ɪzən təmɑɹoʊ ɔlɹɛɾi, bʌt ʃʊɹli jə kəd faɪn ə fju aʊɝz tə vɪzət hɪɹ wʌns jə ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn." tʃɹævlɪŋ meɪd sətʃ θɪŋz izi. pɝhæps ʃi hɝsɛlf ʃəd sɛn sʌmwʌn tə ɛmənz fild. ɪf ʃi nu hum tə tʃɹʌs fəɹ ðə mɪʃən. ɪf ʃi kəd spɛɹ ɛniwʌn ʃi dɪd tʃɹʌst.

"I know you are moving the army tomorrow," Elayne said, "if it isn't tomorrow already, but surely you could find a few hours to visit here once you reach Tar Valon." Traveling made such things easy. Perhaps she herself should send someone to Emond's Field. If she knew whom to trust for the mission. If she could spare anyone she did trust.

ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɪleɪn, aɪv hæd tə ɔɹɾɝ wɪmən aɪ ɡɹu ʌp wɪð swɪtʃt kəz ðeɪ doʊn bɪliv aɪm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, əɹ ɪf ðeɪ du, ðət ðeɪ kən bɹeɪk ðə ɹulz kəz ðeɪ nu mi." sʌɾənli ðə sɛvən-stʃɹaɪp stoʊl hʌŋ fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. əntɪl ʃi noʊɾəst ɪt wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs, ən ɪt vænɪʃt əɡɛn. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ kən feɪs kənfɹʌntɪŋ ɛmənz fild əz æmɪɝlɪn," ʃi sɛd sædli. "nɑt jɛt." ʃi ɡeɪv hɝsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ən əɹ vɔɪs fɝmd. "ðə wil tɝnz, ɪleɪn, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒəz. aɪ mʌst ɡɛt juz tə ɪt. əl ɡɛt juz tə ɪt." ʃi saʊndəɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil laɪk sɪuən sɑntʃ, əz sɪuən hæd saʊndəɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪfɔɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd. stoʊl əɹ noʊ stoʊl, ɛɡwin saʊndəd laɪk ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. "ɑɹ jə sɝɾən aɪ kæn sɛn jə səm ʌv ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪnz soʊlʒɝz? ɪnʌf tə hɛlp sɪkjʊɹ keɪɛmlɪn, ət list."

Egwene shook her head. "Elayne, I've had to order women I grew up with switched because they don't believe I am the Amyrlin Seat, or if they do, that they can break the rules because they knew me." Suddenly the seven-striped stole hung from her shoulders. Until she noticed it with a grimace, and it vanished again. "I don't think I can face confronting Emond's Field as Amyrlin," she said sadly. "Not yet." She gave herself a shake, and her voice firmed. "The Wheel turns, Elayne, and everything changes. I must get used to it. I will get used to it." She sounded a great deal like Siuan Sanche, as Siuan had sounded in Tar Valon before everything had changed. Stole or no stole, Egwene sounded like the Amyrlin Seat. "Are you certain I can't send you some of Gareth Bryne's soldiers? Enough to help secure Caemlyn, at least."

əbɹʌpli, ðeɪ wɝ sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɡlɪsnɪŋ snoʊ, stændɪŋ ni-dip ɪn ɪt. snoʊ meɪd ɡlimɪŋ waɪt maʊnz ɑn ðə ɹuftɑps əz ɪf fɹəm ə hɛvi fɔl. ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm sətʃ ə θɪŋ hæd hæpənd, ən ðeɪ sɪmpli ɹəfjuz tə lɛt ðə sʌɾən koʊl tʌtʃ ðɛm, ɹæðɝ ðən ɪmædʒənɪŋ kloʊks ən wɔɹmɝ kloʊðz.

Abruptly, they were surrounded by glistening snow, standing knee-deep in it. Snow made gleaming white mounds on the rooftops as if from a heavy fall. This was not the first time such a thing had happened, and they simply refused to let the sudden cold touch them, rather than imagining cloaks and warmer clothes.

"noʊ wʌn ɪz gɑnə muv əɡɛns mi bɪfɔɹ spɹɪŋ," ɪleɪn sɛd. ɑɹmiz dɪd nɑt muv ɪn wɪntɝ, ət list, nɑɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ hæd ðə bɛnəfɪɾ ə tʃɹævlɪŋ, laɪk ɛɡwinz ɑɹmi. snoʊ bɑɡd ɛvɹiθɪŋ daʊn, ən mʌd wɛnɛvɝ ðə snoʊ mɛltəd. ðoʊz bɔɹɾɝləndɝz pɹɑbli hæd bɪɡʌn ðɛɹ mɑɹtʃ saʊθ θɪŋkɪŋ wɪntɝ wɑz nɛvɝ kʌmɪŋ ðɪs jɪɹ. "bɪsaɪdz, jəl niɾ ɛvɹi mæn wən jə ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"No one is going to move against me before spring," Elayne said. Armies did not move in winter, at least, not unless they had the benefit of Traveling, like Egwene's army. Snow bogged everything down, and mud whenever the snow melted. Those Borderlanders probably had begun their march south thinking winter was never coming this year. "Besides, you will need every man when you reach Tar Valon."

ʌnsɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, ɛɡwin nɑɾəd æksɛptəns wɪθaʊt meɪkɪŋ ði ɔfɝ əɡɛn. ivən wɪð ðɪs pæs mʌnθ ə hɑɹd ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ, ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn stɪl hæd noʊ mɔɹ ðən hæf ðə soʊlʒɝz i hæd toʊld əɹ wəd bi niɾəd tə teɪk tɑɹ vəlɑn. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ɛɡwin, hi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə bɪɡɪn wɪð wʌɾ i hæd, bʌt klɪɹli ɪt tʃɹʌbəl hɝ. "aɪ hæv hɑɹd dɪsɪʒənz tə meɪk, ɪleɪn. ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, bʌɾ ɪts stɪl mi hu hæz tə dɪsaɪd."

Unsurprisingly, Egwene nodded acceptance without making the offer again. Even with this past month of hard recruiting behind her, Gareth Bryne still had no more than half the soldiers he had told her would be needed to take Tar Valon. According to Egwene, he was ready to begin with what he had, but clearly it troubled her. "I have hard decisions to make, Elayne. The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, but it is still me who has to decide."

ɪmpʌlsɪvli, ɪleɪn weɪɾɪd θɹu ðə snoʊ ən θɹu hɝ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ɛɡwin tə hʌɡ hɝ. ət list, ʃi stɑɹɾəd aʊt weɪɾɪŋ. əz ʃi klæsp ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tə hɝ, ðə snoʊ vænɪʃt, livɪŋ nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə dæmp spɑɾ ɑn ðɛɹ dʒɹɛsəz. ðə tu ʌv əm stæɡɝɾ əz ɪf dænsɪŋ wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ ən ɔlmoʊs fɛl.

Impulsively, Elayne waded through the snow and threw her arms around Egwene to hug her. At least, she started out wading. As she clasped the other woman to her, the snow vanished, leaving not so much as a damp spot on their dresses. The two of them staggered as if dancing with one another and almost fell.

"aɪ noʊ jəl meɪk ðə ɹaɪt dɪsɪʒən," ɪleɪn sɛd, læfɪŋ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf. ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt dʒɔɪn əɹ læftɝ.

"I know you will make the right decision," Elayne said, laughing in spite of herself. Egwene did not join her laughter.

"aɪ hoʊp soʊ," ʃi sɛd ɡɹeɪvli, "bɪkɔz wʌtɛvɝ aɪ dɪsaɪd, pipəl ɑɹ gɑnə daɪ fəɹ ɪt." ʃi pæɾəd ɪleɪnz ɑɹm. "wɛl, jə ʌndɝstæn ðət sɔɹɾ ə dɪsɪʒən, doʊn ju. wi boʊθ nid tə bi bæk ɪn əɹ bɛdz." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "ɪleɪn, ɪf ɹænd kʌmz tə jə əɡɛn, jə mʌs lemi noʊ wʌɾ i sɛz, wɛðɝ i ɡɪvz jə ɛni klu wʌɾ i minz tə də əɹ wɛɹ i minz tə ɡoʊ."

"I hope so," she said gravely, "because whatever I decide, people are going to die for it." She patted Elayne's arm. "Well, you understand that sort of decision, don't you. We both need to be back in our beds." She hesitated before going on. "Elayne, if Rand comes to you again, you must let me know what he says, whether he gives you any clue what he means to do or where he means to go."

"aɪ wɪl tɛl jə wʌtɛvɝ aɪ kæn, ɛɡwin." ɪleɪn fɛlt ə stæb ʌv ɡɪlt. ʃi hæd toʊld ɛɡwin ɛvɹiθɪŋ - ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiθɪŋ - bʌt nɑt ðət ʃi hæd bɑndəd ɹænd wɪð mɪn ən eɪvinhə. taʊɝ lɔ dɪd nɑt pɹoʊhɪbət wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn. vɛɹi kɛɹfəl kwɛstʃənɪŋ ə vændin hæd meɪd ðət mʌtʃ klɪɹ. bʌt wɛðɝ ɪt wəd bi pɝmɪɾəd wɑz nɑt klɪɹ əɾ ɔl. stɪl, əz ʃi hæd hɝɾ ən ɝæfɛlɪn mɝsənɛɹi ɹɪkɹuɾɪd baɪ bɝdʒɪt seɪ, "wʌt wɑz nɑt fɔɹbɪɾən wɑz əlaʊd." ðət saʊndəɾ ɔlmoʊs laɪk wʌn ə liniz oʊl seɪɪŋz, ðoʊ ʃi daʊɾɪd əɹ nɝs wəɾ ɛvɝ əv bɪn soʊ pɝmɪsɪv. "jɔɹ tʃɹʌbəl baɪ hɪm, ɛɡwin. mɔɹ ðən juʒəwəl, aɪ min. aɪ kən tɛl. waɪ?"

"I will tell you whatever I can, Egwene." Elayne felt a stab of guilt. She had told Egwene everything - almost everything - but not that she had bonded Rand with Min and Aviendha. Tower law did not prohibit what they had done. Very careful questioning of Vandene had made that much clear. But whether it would be permitted was not clear at all. Still, as she had heard an Arafellin mercenary recruited by Birgitte say, "what was not forbidden was allowed." That sounded almost like one of Lini's old sayings, though she doubted her nurse would ever have been so permissive. "You're troubled by him, Egwene. More than usual, I mean. I can tell. Why?"

"aɪ hæv ɹizən tə bi, ɪleɪn. ði aɪz-ænd-ɪɹz ɹipɔɹt vɛɹi tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ ɹumɝz. oʊnli ɹumɝz, aɪ hoʊp, bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹənt . . ." ʃi wɑz vɛɹi mʌtʃ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit naʊ, ə ʃɔɹt slɛndɝ jʌŋ wʊmən u sim stʃɹɔŋ əz stil ən tɔl əz ə maʊntən. dɪtɝməneɪʃən fɪld əɹ dɑɹk aɪz ən sɛɾ əɹ dʒɔ. "aɪ noʊ jə lʌv hɪm. aɪ lʌv hɪm, tu. bʌɾ aɪm nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hil ðə waɪt taʊɝ dʒʌst soʊ hi kən tʃeɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ laɪk deɪmeɪn. slip wɛl ən əv plɛzən dʒɹimz, ɪleɪn. plɛzən dʒɹimz ɑɹ mɔɹ væljəbəl ðən pipəl ɹilaɪz." ən wɪð ðæt, ʃi wɑz ɡɔn, bæk tə ðə weɪkɪŋ wɝld.

"I have reason to be, Elayne. The eyes-and-ears report very troubling rumors. Only rumors, I hope, but if they aren't . . ." She was very much the Amyrlin Seat now, a short slender young woman who seemed strong as steel and tall as a mountain. Determination filled her dark eyes and set her jaw. "I know you love him. I love him, too. But I am not trying to Heal the White Tower just so he can chain Aes Sedai like damane. Sleep well and have pleasant dreams, Elayne. Pleasant dreams are more valuable than people realize." And with that, she was gone, back to the waking world.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɪleɪn stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə spɑt wɛɹ ɛɡwin hæd bɪn. wʌt hæd ʃi bɪn tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt? ɹænd wəd nɛvɝ də ðæt! ɪf oʊnli fəɹ lʌv ə hɝ, hi wəd nɑt! ʃi pɹɑɾɪd ðət ɹɑk-hɑɹd nɑɾ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd. wɪð ɪm soʊ fɑɹ əweɪ, ðə veɪnz ʌv ɡoʊld ʃoʊn oʊnli ɪn mɛmɹi. ʃʊɹli hi wəd nɑt. tʃɹʌbəld ɪn hɝsɛlf, ʃi stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə dʒɹim, bæk tə hɝ slipɪŋ bɑɾi.

For a moment, Elayne stood staring at the spot where Egwene had been. What had she been talking about? Rand would never do that! If only for love of her, he would not! She prodded that rock-hard knot in the back of her head. With him so far away, the veins of gold shone only in memory. Surely he would not. Troubled in herself, she stepped out of the dream, back to her sleeping body.

ʃi niɾəd slip, bʌt noʊ sunɝ wɑz ʃi bæk ɪn əɹ oʊn bɑɾi ðən sʌnlaɪt fɛl ɑn əɹ aɪlɪdz. wʌɾ aʊɝ wɑz ɪt? ʃi hæɾ əpɔɪnmənts tə kip, duɾiz tə kæɹi aʊt. ʃi wɑntəd tə slip fəɹ mʌnθs. ʃi ɹɛsəld wɪð duɾi, bʌt duɾi wʌn. ʃi hæɾ ə bɪzi deɪ əhɛd. ɛvɹi deɪ wɑz ə bɪzi deɪ. hɝ aɪz pɑpt oʊpən, filɪŋ ɡɹeɪni, əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt slɛpt əɾ ɔl. baɪ ðə slæn ə laɪt θɹu ðə wɪndoʊz, ɪt wɑz wɛl bɪɑn sʌnɹaɪz. ʃi kəd sɪmpli laɪ ðɛɹ. duɾi. eɪvinhə ʃɪftəɾ ɪn əɹ slip, ən ɪleɪn poʊkt əɹ ʃɑɹpli ɪn ðə ɹɪbz. ɪf ʃi hæd tə bi əweɪk, ðən eɪvinhə wɑz nɑt gɑnə lɑl əbaʊt.

She needed sleep, but no sooner was she back in her own body than sunlight fell on her eyelids. What hour was it? She had appointments to keep, duties to carry out. She wanted to sleep for months. She wrestled with duty, but duty won. She had a busy day ahead. Every day was a busy day. Her eyes popped open, feeling grainy, as if she had not slept at all. By the slant of light through the windows, it was well beyond sunrise. She could simply lie there. Duty. Aviendha shifted in her sleep, and Elayne poked her sharply in the ribs. If she had to be awake, then Aviendha was not going to loll about.

eɪvinhə woʊk wɪð ə stɑɹt, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ fəɹ əɹ naɪf laɪɪŋ ətɑp ðə smɔl teɪbəl ɑn əɹ saɪɾ ə ðə bɛd. bɪfɔɹ əɹ hæn tʌtʃt ðə dɑɹk hɔɹn hɪlt, ʃi lɛɾ ɪt fɔl. "sʌmθɪŋ woʊk mi," ʃi mʌɾɝd. "aɪ θɔɾ ə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɑz - lʊk ət ðə sʌn! waɪ dɪd jə lemi slip soʊ leɪt?" ʃi dɪmændəd, skɹæmbəlɪŋ fɹəm ðə bɛd. "dʒʌs kəz aɪm əlaʊd tə steɪ wɪð jə - " ðə wɝdz wɝ mʌfəl fəɹ ən ɪnstən əz ʃi dʒɝkt əɹ slip-ɹɪŋkəld ʃɪft ɔf oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd " - dʌz nɑt min mɑneɪəl woʊn swɪtʃ mi ɪf ʃi θɪŋks aɪm biɪŋ leɪzi. dʒju min tə laɪ ðəɹ ɔl deɪ?"

Aviendha woke with a start, stretching for her knife lying atop the small table on her side of the bed. Before her hand touched the dark horn hilt, she let it fall. "Something woke me," she muttered. "I thought a Shaido was - Look at the sun! Why did you let me sleep so late?" she demanded, scrambling from the bed. "Just because I'm allowed to stay with you - " the words were muffled for an instant as she jerked her sleep-wrinkled shift off over her head " - does not mean Monaelle won't switch me if she thinks I am being lazy. Do you mean to lie there all day?"

wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn, ɪleɪn klaɪmd aʊɾ ə ðə bɛd. ɛsænd wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi weɪɾɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ tə ðə dʒɹɛsɪŋ ɹum; ʃi nɛvɝ weɪkt ɪleɪn ənlɛs ɪleɪn ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə ɔɹɾɝ ɪt. ɪleɪn sɝɛndɝd hɝsɛlf tə ðə waɪt-hɛɹd wʊmənz ɔlmoʊst saɪlən mɪnəstʃɹeɪʃənz waɪl eɪvinhə dʒɹɛs hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ əɹ sɪstɝ meɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ɛsænz kwaɪət wɪð ə læfɪŋ stʃɹɪŋ ə kɑmɛns əlɔŋ ðə laɪn ə haʊ hævɪŋ sʌmwʌn ɛls pʊt jəɹ kloʊðz ɑn jə mʌs fil laɪk biɪŋ ə beɪbi əɡɛn ən haʊ ɪleɪn maɪt fɝɡɛt haʊ tə pʊɾ ɑn əɹ oʊn kloʊðz ən nid sʌmbɑɾi tə dʒɹɛs hɝ. ʃi hæd dʌn vɛɹi mʌtʃ ðə seɪm ɛvɹi mɔɹnɪŋ sɪns ðeɪ hæd bɪɡʌn tə ʃɛɹ ðə seɪm bɛd. eɪvinhə faʊn ɪt vɛɹi fʌni. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑt seɪ ə wɝd, ɪksɛp tə ænsɝ əɹ taɪɝ-wʊmənz sədʒɛstʃənz ɑn wʌt ʃi ʃəd wɛɹ, əntɪl ðə læs mʌðɝ-ʌv-pɝl bʌɾən wɑz dʌn ʌp ən ʃi stʊɾ ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪn ðə stænd-mɪɹɝ.

With a groan, Elayne climbed out of the bed. Essande was already waiting at the door to the dressing room; she never waked Elayne unless Elayne remembered to order it. Elayne surrendered herself to the white-haired woman's almost silent ministrations while Aviendha dressed herself, but her sister made up for Essande's quiet with a laughing string of comments along the line of how having someone else put your clothes on you must feel like being a baby again and how Elayne might forget how to put on her own clothes and need somebody to dress her. She had done very much the same every morning since they had begun to share the same bed. Aviendha found it very funny. Elayne did not say a word, except to answer her tire-woman's suggestions on what she should wear, until the last mother-of-pearl button was done up and she stood examining herself in the stand-mirror.

"ɛsænd," ʃi sɛd ðɛn, kæʒəwəli, "ɑɹ eɪvinhəz kloʊðz ɹɛɾi?" ðə faɪn blu wʊl wɪð ə lɪɾəl sɪlvɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi wəd də wɛl ɪnʌf fəɹ wʌt ʃi feɪs tədeɪ.

"Essande," she said then, casually, "are Aviendha's clothes ready?" The fine blue wool with a little silver embroidery would do well enough for what she faced today.

ɛsæn bɹaɪɾənd. "ɔl leɪɾi eɪvinhəz pɹɪɾi sɪlks ən leɪsəz, maɪ leɪɾi? oʊ, jɛs. ɔl bɹʌʃt ən klin ən aɪɝn ən pʊɾ əweɪ." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊbz laɪnɪŋ wʌn wɔl.

Essande brightened. "All Lady Aviendha's pretty silks and laces, my Lady? Oh, yes. All brushed and cleaned and ironed and put away." She gestured to the wardrobes lining one wall.

ɪleɪn smaɪld oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ əɾ əɹ sɪstɝ. eɪvinhə stɛɹɾ ət ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊbz əz ðoʊ ðeɪ kənteɪn vaɪpɝz, ðən ɡʌlpt ən heɪstəli fɪnɪʃt waɪndɪŋ ðə dɑɹk foʊldəd kɝtʃəf ɝaʊn əɹ hɛd.

Elayne smiled over her shoulder at her sister. Aviendha stared at the wardrobes as though they contained vipers, then gulped and hastily finished winding the dark folded kerchief around her head.

wən ɪleɪn hæd dɪsmɪst ɛsænd, ʃi sɛd, "dʒʌst ɪn keɪs jə nid ðɛm."

When Elayne had dismissed Essande, she said, "Just in case you need them."

"vɛɹi wɛl," eɪvinhə mʌɾɝd, pʊɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ sɪlvɝ nɛkləs. "noʊ mɔɹ dʒoʊks əbaʊt ðə wʊmən dʒɹɛsɪŋ ju."

"Very well," Aviendha muttered, putting on her silver necklace. "No more jokes about the woman dressing you."

"ɡʊd. əɹ əl tɛl əɹ tə stɑɹt dʒɹɛsɪŋ ju. naʊ, ðət wəd bi əmjuzɪŋ."

"Good. Or I'll tell her to start dressing you. Now, that would be amusing."

ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ əbaʊt pipəl u kəd nɑt teɪk ə dʒoʊk, eɪvinhə pleɪnli dɪd nɑɾ əɡɹi. ɪleɪn hæf ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə dɪmæn ðəɾ ɔl ðə kloʊðz ʃi hæɾ əkwaɪɝd bi dɪskɑɹɾɪd. ʃi wɑz ə lɪɾəl sɝpɹaɪzd eɪvinhə hæd nɑt sin tə ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi.

Grumbling under her breath about people who could not take a joke, Aviendha plainly did not agree. Elayne half expected her to demand that all the clothes she had acquired be discarded. She was a little surprised Aviendha had not seen to it already.

fəɹ eɪvinhə, ðə bɹɛkfəs leɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum kənsɪstəɾ ə kjʊɹd hæm wɪð ɹeɪzənz, ɛɡz kʊkt wɪð dʒɹaɪd plʌmz, dʒɹaɪd fɪʃ pɹipɛɹd wɪð paɪn nʌts, fɹɛʃ bɹɛd slæðɝd wɪð bʌɾɝ, ən ti meɪd sɪɹəpi wɪð hʌni. wɛl, nɑɾ æktʃəli  sɪɹəpi, bʌɾ ɪt sim soʊ. ɪleɪn ɡɑt noʊ bʌɾɝ ɑn əɹ bɹɛd, vɛɹi lɪɾəl hʌni ɪn əɹ ti, ən ɪnstɛɾ ə ðə ɹɛst, ə hɑt pɔɹədʒ ʌv ɡɹeɪnz ən ɝbz ðət wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ɪspɛʃli hɛlθi. ʃi dɪd nɑt fil wɪð tʃaɪld, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt mɪn hæd toʊld eɪvinhə, bʌt mɪn hæd toʊl bɝdʒɪt, tu, wʌns ðə θɹi ʌv əm bɪɡæn ɡɛɾɪŋ dʒɹʌŋk. bɪtwin əɹ wɔɹɾɝ, daɪɛlɪn, ən ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ, ʃi naʊ faʊn hɝsɛlf lɪməɾəd tə ə daɪət "suɾəbəl fəɹ ə wʊmən ɪn əɹ kəndɪʃən." ɪf ʃi sɛn tə ðə kɪtʃənz fəɹ ə tʃɹit, sʌmhaʊ ɪt nɛvɝ ɝaɪvd, ən ɪf ʃi slɪp daʊn ðəɹ hɝsɛlf, ðə kʊks ɡeɪv əɹ sətʃ ɡlʌm dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ stɛɹz ðət ʃi slɪp bæk aʊɾ əɡɛn wɪð nʌθɪŋ.

For Aviendha, the breakfast laid out in the sitting room consisted of cured ham with raisins, eggs cooked with dried plums, dried fish prepared with pine nuts, fresh bread slathered with butter, and tea made syrupy with honey. Well, not actually syrupy, but it seemed so. Elayne got no butter on her bread, very little honey in her tea, and instead of the rest, a hot porridge of grains and herbs that was supposed to be especially healthy. She did not feel with child, no matter what Min had told Aviendha, but Min had told Birgitte, too, once the three of them began getting drunk. Between her Warder, Dyelin, and Reene Harfor, she now found herself limited to a diet "suitable for a woman in her condition." If she sent to the kitchens for a treat, somehow it never arrived, and if she slipped down there herself, the cooks gave her such glum disapproving stares that she slipped back out again with nothing.

ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli mɔɹn ðə spaɪst waɪn ən swits ən ði ʌðɝ θɪŋz ʃi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əlaʊd - nɑt ðət mʌtʃ, ɛniweɪ, ɪksɛpt wən eɪvinhə wɑz ɡɑbəlɪŋ tɑɹts əɹ pʊɾɪŋz - bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə pæləs nu ʃi wɑz pɹɛɡnənt. ən ə kɔɹs, ðət mɛn ðeɪ nu haʊ ʃi hæd ɡɑɾən ðət weɪ, ɪf nɑt wɪð hum. ðə mɛn wɝ nɑt tu bæd, bɪɑn ðə fæk ðət ðeɪ nu, ən ʃi nu ðeɪ nu, bʌt ðə wɪmən dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə haɪd noʊɪŋ. wɛðɝ ðeɪ æksɛptɪɾ əɹ dɪpɹəkeɪɾɪd ðə sɪtʃueɪʃən, hæf lʊkt əɾ əɹ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ ə hɔɪɾən ən ði ʌðɝ hæf wɪð spɛkjəleɪʃən. fɔɹsɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə swɑloʊ ðə pɔɹədʒ - ɪt wɑz nɑt ðət bæd, ɹɪli, bʌt ʃi dɪɹli wʊɾə lʌv səm ə ðə hæm eɪvinhə wɑz slaɪsɪŋ, əɹ ə lɪɾəl ə ði ɛɡ wɪð plʌmz - spunɪŋ lʌmpi pɔɹədʒ ɪndə hɝ maʊθ, ʃi ɔlmoʊs lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə ðə stɑɹɾ ə bɝθɪŋ sɪknəs, soʊ ʃi kəd ʃɛɹ ðə kwizi bɛli wɪð bɝdʒɪt.

She did not really mourn the spiced wine and sweets and the other things she was no longer allowed - not that much, anyway, except when Aviendha was gobbling tarts or puddings - but everyone in the Palace knew she was pregnant. And of course, that meant they knew how she had gotten that way, if not with whom. The men were not too bad, beyond the fact that they knew, and she knew they knew, but the women did not bother to hide knowing. Whether they accepted or deprecated the situation, half looked at her as though she were a hoyden and the other half with speculation. Forcing herself to swallow the porridge - it was not that bad, really, but she dearly would have loved some of the ham Aviendha was slicing, or a little of the egg with plums - spooning lumpy porridge into her mouth, she almost looked forward to the start of birthing sickness, so she could share the queasy belly with Birgitte.

ðə fɝs vɪzəɾɝ tə ɛntɝ əɹ əpɑɹtməns ðət mɔɹnɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɛsænd wɑz ðə liɾɪŋ kændəɾeɪt əmʌŋ ðə pæləs wɪmən fəɹ ðə fɑðɝ ə hɝ bɛɹli kwɪkən tʃaɪld.

The first visitor to enter her apartments that morning beside Essande was the leading candidate among the Palace women for the father of her barely quickened child.

"maɪ kwin," kæptən mɛlɝ sɛd, swipɪŋ ɔf ɪz plum hæɾ ɪn ə flɝɪʃɪŋ baʊ. "ðə tʃif klɝk əweɪts jəɹ mædʒəstiz plɛʒɝ." ðə kæptənz dɑɹk, ənblɪŋkɪŋ aɪz sɛɾ i wəd nɛvɝ əv dʒɹimz ə ðə mɛn i kɪld, ən ðə leɪs-ɛdʒ sæʃ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst ən ðə leɪs əɾ ɪz nɛk ən ɹɪsts oʊnli meɪɾ ɪm lʊk hɑɹɾɝ. waɪpɪŋ ɡɹis fɹəm əɹ tʃɪn wɪð ə lɪnən næpkɪn, eɪvinhə wɑtʃt ɪm wɪð noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs. ðə tu ɡɑɹdzwɪmən stændɪŋ wʌn ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə dɔɹz ɡɹɪməs feɪnli. mɛlɝ ɔlɹɛɾi hæɾ ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fəɹ pɪntʃɪŋ ɡɑɹdzwɪmənz bɑɾəmz, ðə pɹɪɾiɝ wʌnz' ət list, nɑt tə mɛnʃən dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋ ðɛɹ əbɪləɾiz ɪn ðə sɪɾiz tævɝnz. ðə sɛkənd wɑz fɑɹ wɝs, ɪn ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmənz aɪz.

"My Queen," Captain Mellar said, sweeping off his plumed hat in a flourishing bow. "The Chief Clerk awaits Your Majesty's pleasure." The captain's dark, unblinking eyes said he would never have dreams of the men he killed, and the lace-edged sash across his chest and the lace at his neck and wrists only made him look harder. Wiping grease from her chin with a linen napkin, Aviendha watched him with no expression on her face. The two Guardswomen standing one on either side of the doors grimaced faintly. Mellar already had a reputation for pinching Guardswomen's bottoms, the prettier ones' at least, not to mention disparaging their abilities in the city's taverns. The second was far worse, in the Guardswomen's eyes.

"aɪ æm nɑɾ ə kwin, jɛt, kæptən," ɪleɪn sɛd bɹɪskli. ʃi ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə kip əz mʌtʃ tə ðə pɔɪn əz pɑsəbəl wɪð ðə mæn. "haʊ ɪz ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ fəɹ maɪ bɑɾiɡɑɹd kʌmɪŋ əlɔŋ?"

"I am not a queen, yet, Captain," Elayne said briskly. She always tried to keep as much to the point as possible with the man. "How is recruiting for my bodyguard coming along?"

"oʊnli θɝɾi-tu, soʊ fɑɹ, maɪ leɪɾi." stɪl hoʊldɪŋ ɪz hæt, ðə hætʃət-feɪs mæn ɹɛstəd boʊθ hænz ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, hɪz laʊnʒɪŋ pɑstʃɝ hɑɹdli suɾəbəl fəɹ ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv wʌn i hæd kɔld ɪz kwin. nɔɹ wɑz ɪz ɡɹɪn. "leɪɾi bɝdʒɪɾ əz ɪɡzæktɪŋ stændɝdz. nɑt mɛni wɪmən kən mætʃ ðɛm. ɡɪmi tɛn deɪz, ən aɪ kən faɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn hul bɛɾɝ əm ən hoʊl jə əz dɪɹ ɪn ðɛɹ hɑɹts əz aɪ du."

"Only thirty-two, so far, my Lady." Still holding his hat, the hatchet-faced man rested both hands on his sword hilt, his lounging posture hardly suitable for the presence of one he had called his queen. Nor was his grin. "Lady Birgitte has exacting standards. Not many women can match them. Give me ten days, and I can find a hundred men who'll better them and hold you as dear in their hearts as I do."

"aɪ θɪŋk nɑt, kæptən mɛlɝ." ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt tə kip ə tʃɪl aʊɾ ə hɝ vɔɪs. hi hæd tə hæv hɝd ðə ɹumɝz kənsɝnɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ən hɝ. kəɾ i θɪŋk ðət dʒʌs kəz ʃi hæd nɑt dɪnaɪd ðɛm, ʃi maɪɾ æktʃəli  faɪn ɪm . . . ətʃɹæktɪv? pʊʃɪŋ əweɪ ðə hæf-ɛmpti pɔɹədʒ boʊl, ʃi səpɹɛst ə ʃʌɾɝ. θɝɾi-tu, soʊ fɑɹ? ðə nʌmbɝz wɝ ɡɹoʊɪŋ kwɪkli. səm ə ðə hʌntɝz fəɹ ðə hɔɹn u hæd bɪn dɪmændɪŋ ɹæŋk hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət sɝvɪŋ ɪn ɪleɪnz bɑɾiɡɑɹd kæɹiɾ ə sɝɾən flɛɹ. ʃi kənsiɾɪd ðət ðə wɪmən kəd nɑɾ ɔl bi ɑn duɾi deɪ ən naɪt, bʌt noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt bɝdʒɪt sɛd, ðə ɡoʊl ʌv ə hʌnʒɹəd simd ɪksɛsɪv. ðə wʊmən dʌɡ ɪn əɹ hilz naʊ əɾ ɛni sədʒɛstʃən ə fjuɝ, ðoʊ. "pliz tɛl ðə tʃif klɝk i kən kʌm ɪn," ʃi toʊl hɪm. hi swɛpt əɹ ənʌðɝ ɪlæbɹət baʊ.

"I think not, Captain Mellar." It was an effort to keep a chill out of her voice. He had to have heard the rumors concerning himself and her. Could he think that just because she had not denied them, she might actually find him . . . attractive? Pushing away the half-empty porridge bowl, she suppressed a shudder. Thirty-two, so far? The numbers were growing quickly. Some of the Hunters for the Horn who had been demanding rank had decided that serving in Elayne's bodyguard carried a certain flair. She conceded that the women could not all be on duty day and night, but no matter what Birgitte said, the goal of a hundred seemed excessive. The woman dug in her heels now at any suggestion of fewer, though. "Please tell the Chief Clerk he can come in," she told him. He swept her another elaborate bow.

ʃi ɹoʊz tə fɑloʊ hɪm, ən əz i pʊld wʌn ə ðə laɪən-kɑɹv dɔɹz oʊpən, ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ɑɹm ən smaɪld. "θæŋk jə əɡɛn fəɹ seɪvɪŋ maɪ laɪf, kæptən," ʃi sɛd, ðɪs taɪm wɔɹm ɪnʌf fəɹ ə kɝɛs.

She rose to follow him, and as he pulled one of the lion-carved doors open, she laid a hand on his arm and smiled. "Thank you again for saving my life, Captain," she said, this time warm enough for a caress.

ðə fɛloʊ smɝkt ət hɝ! ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, fɹoʊzən, ðoʊz ʃi kəd si aʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔl bɪfɔɹ ðə dɔɹz kloʊz bɪhaɪn ɪm əz wɛl əz ðoʊz ɪnsaɪd, ən wən ɪleɪn tɝn ɝaʊnd, eɪvinhə wɑz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ wɪð lɪɾəl mɔɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən ðən ʃi hæd ʃoʊn mɛlɝ. ðət lɪɾəl wɑz pjʊɹ əmeɪzmənt, ðoʊ. ɪleɪn saɪd.

The fellow smirked at her! The Guardswomen stared straight ahead, frozen, those she could see out in the hall before the doors closed behind him as well as those inside, and when Elayne turned around, Aviendha was staring at her with little more expression than she had shown Mellar. That little was pure amazement, though. Elayne sighed.

kɹɔsɪŋ ðə kɑɹpəts, ʃi bɛn tə pʊɾ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn əɹ sɪstɝ ən spoʊk sɔfli, fəɹ əɹ ɪɹ əloʊn. ʃi tʃɹʌstɪd ðə wɪmən ə hɝ bɑɾiɡɑɹd wɪð θɪŋz ʃi toʊl vɛɹi fju ʌðɝz, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ səm mæɾɝz ʃi dɛɹd nɑt tʃɹʌs tə ðɛm. "aɪ sɔ ə meɪd pæsɪŋ, eɪvinhə. meɪdz ɡɑsəp wɝs ðən mɛn. ðə mɔɹ u θɪŋk ðɪs tʃaɪld ɪz dɔɪlɪn mɛlɝz, ðə seɪfɝ ɪɾəl bi. ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi, əl lɛt ðə mæn pɪntʃ maɪ bɑɾəm."

Crossing the carpets, she bent to put an arm around her sister and spoke softly, for her ear alone. She trusted the women of her bodyguard with things she told very few others, but there were some matters she dared not trust to them. "I saw a maid passing, Aviendha. Maids gossip worse than men. The more who think this child is Doilin Mellar's, the safer it will be. If necessary, I'll let the man pinch my bottom."

"aɪ si," eɪvinhə sɛd sloʊli, ən fɹaʊn ɪndə hɝ pleɪɾ əz ðoʊ siɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən ði ɛɡz ən plʌmz ʃi bɪɡæn pʊʃɪŋ ɝaʊnd wɪð əɹ spun.

"I see," Aviendha said slowly, and frowned into her plate as though seeing something other than the eggs and plums she began pushing around with her spoon.

mæstɝ nɔɹi pɹizɛntəɾ ɪz juʒəwəl blɛn ə məndeɪn meɪntənəns ə ðə pæləs ən ðə sɪɾi, tɪdbɪts fɹəm ɪz kɔɹəspɑndəns ɪn fɔɹən kæpəɾəlz, ən ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ɡlin fɹəm mɝtʃəns ən bæŋkɝz ən ʌðɝz u hæd dilɪŋz bɪɑn ðə bɔɹɾɝz, bʌɾ ɪz fɝs pis ə nuz wɑz baɪ fɑɹ ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hɝ, ɪf nɑt ðə moʊst ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ.

Master Norry presented his usual blend of mundane maintenance of the Palace and the city, tidbits from his correspondents in foreign capitals, and information gleaned from merchants and bankers and others who had dealings beyond the borders, but his first piece of news was by far the most important to her, if not the most interesting.

"ðə tu moʊs pɹɑmənən bæŋkɝz ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɑɹ . . . əmɛnəbəl, maɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛɾ ɪn ðət dʒɹaɪ-æz-dʌs vɔɪs ə hɪz. klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz lɛðɝ foʊldɝ tə hɪz nɛɹoʊ tʃɛst, hi aɪɾ eɪvinhə saɪdweɪz. hi wɑz stɪl nɑɾ əkʌstəm tə hɝ pɹɛzəns waɪl i meɪɾ ɪz ɹɪpɔɹts. əɹ ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən. eɪvinhə bɛɹɾ əɹ tiθ ət hɪm, ən i blɪŋkt, ðən kɔft ɪndə ə boʊni hænd. "mæstɝ hɔfli ən mɪstʃɹəs ændskeɪl wɝ sʌmwʌt . . . hɛzɪɾənt . . . ət fɝst, bʌt ðeɪ noʊ ðə mɑɹkət fəɹ æləm əz wɛl əz aɪ. ɪt wəd nɑt bi seɪf tə seɪ ðət ðɛɹ kɑfɝz ɑɹ naʊ jʊɹz, bʌɾ aɪ hæv ɝeɪnʒd fəɹ twɛnti θaʊzənd ɡoʊl kɹaʊnz tə bi muv tə ðə pæləs stʃɹɔŋɡɹum, ən mɔɹ wɪl kʌm əz niɾəd."

"The two most prominent bankers in the city are . . . amenable, my Lady," he said in that dry-as-dust voice of his. Clutching his leather folder to his narrow chest, he eyed Aviendha sideways. He was still not accustomed to her presence while he made his reports. Or the Guardswomen. Aviendha bared her teeth at him, and he blinked, then coughed into a bony hand. "Master Hoffley and Mistress Andscale were somewhat . . . hesitant . . . at first, but they know the market for alum as well as I. It would not be safe to say that their coffers are now yours, but I have arranged for twenty thousand gold crowns to be moved to the Palace strongroom, and more will come as needed."

"ɪnfɔɹm ðə leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt," ɪleɪn toʊl hɪm, haɪɾɪŋ əɹ ɹɪlif. bɝdʒɪt hæd nɑt jɛt saɪn ɪnʌf nu ɡɑɹdz tə hoʊld ə sɪɾi əz lɑɹdʒ əz keɪɛmlɪn, mʌtʃ lɛs də ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, bʌɾ ɪleɪn kəd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk tə si ɹɛvənu fɹəm əɹ ɪsteɪts bɪfɔɹ spɹɪŋ, ən ðə mɝsənɛɹiz wɝ ɪkspɛnsɪv. naʊ ʃi wəd nɑt luz əm fəɹ læk ʌv ɡoʊl bɪfɔɹ bɝdʒɪt ɹɪkɹuɾɪd mɛn tə ɹipleɪs ðɛm. "nɛkst, mæstɝ nɔɹi?"

"Inform the Lady Birgitte," Elayne told him, hiding her relief. Birgitte had not yet signed enough new Guards to hold a city as large as Caemlyn, much less do anything else, but Elayne could not expect to see revenue from her estates before spring, and the mercenaries were expensive. Now she would not lose them for lack of gold before Birgitte recruited men to replace them. "Next, Master Norry?"

"aɪ fɪɹ ðə suɝz mʌs bi ɡɪvən ə haɪ pɹaɪɔɹəɾi, maɪ leɪɾi. ðə ɹæts ɑɹ bɹiɾɪŋ ɪn əm əz ɪf ɪt wɝ spɹɪŋ, ən . . ."

"I fear the sewers must be given a high priority, my Lady. The rats are breeding in them as if it were spring, and . . ."

hi mɪŋɡəld ɪɾ ɔl təɡɛðɝ, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə wʌɾ i fɛlt wɑz moʊs pɹɛsɪŋ. nɔɹi sim tə teɪk ɪɾ əz ə pɝsənəl feɪljɝ ðəɾ i hæd nɑt jɛt lɝn u hæd fɹiɾ ɛləniə ən nɑiən, ðoʊ lɛs ðən ə wik hæd pæst sɪns ðɛɹ ɹɛskju. ðə pɹaɪs ʌv ɡɹeɪn wɑz klaɪmɪŋ ɛksɹbɪɾəntli, əlɔŋ wɪð ðəɾ ʌv ɛvɹi ʌðɝ sɔɹɾ ə fudstʌf, ən ɪt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi əpɛɹən ðət ɹɪpɛɹz tə ðə pæləs ɹuf wəd teɪk lɔŋɡɝ ən kɑs mɔɹ ðən ðə meɪsənz hæd fɝst ɛstəmeɪɾəd, bʌt fuɾ ɔlweɪz ɡɹu mɔɹ ɪkspɛnsɪv əz wɪntɝ wɛn ɑn ən meɪsənz ɔlweɪz kɑs mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ fɝs hæd sɛd ðeɪ wʊd. nɔɹi ədmɪɾəd ðəɾ ɪz læs kɔɹəspɑndəns fɹəm nu bɹəm wɑz sɛvɹəl deɪz oʊld, bʌt ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz əpɪɹd kɑntɛn tə ɹɪmeɪn wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ, wɪtʃ i kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. ɛni ɑɹmi, mʌtʃ lɛs wʌn əz lɑɹdʒ əz ðɪs wɑz sɛd tə bi, ɔt tə bi stʃɹɪpɪŋ ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪt bɛɹ baɪ naʊ. ɪleɪn dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ iðɝ, bʌt ʃi wɑz kəntɛn ðəɾ ɪt wɑz soʊ. fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ. ɹumɝz ɪn kɛɹhin ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ swɛɹɪŋ fiəlti tə ɹænd ət list ɡeɪv ə ɹizən fəɹ ɛɡwinz kənsɝn, ðoʊ ɪt hɑɹdli sim laɪkli ɛni sɪstɝ wəɾ æktʃəli  də sətʃ ə θɪŋ. ðət wɑz ðə list ɪmpɔɹɾənt pis ə nuz, ɪn nɔɹiz ɛstəmeɪʃən, bʌt nɑɾ ɪn hɝz. ɹænd kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə eɪljəneɪt ðə sɪstɝz wɪð ɛɡwin. hi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə eɪljəneɪɾ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌɾ i dɪd sim tə faɪnd weɪz tə də soʊ.

He mingled it all together, according to what he felt was most pressing. Norry seemed to take it as a personal failure that he had not yet learned who had freed Elenia and Naean, though less than a week had passed since their rescue. The price of grain was climbing exorbitantly, along with that of every other sort of foodstuff, and it was already apparent that repairs to the Palace roof would take longer and cost more than the masons had first estimated, but food always grew more expensive as winter went on and masons always cost more than they first had said they would. Norry admitted that his last correspondence from New Braem was several days old, but the Borderlanders appeared content to remain where they were, which he could not understand. Any army, much less one as large as this was said to be, ought to be stripping the countryside around it bare by now. Elayne did not understand why either, but she was content that it was so. For the time being. Rumors in Cairhien of Aes Sedai swearing fealty to Rand at least gave a reason for Egwene's concern, though it hardly seemed likely any sister would actually do such a thing. That was the least important piece of news, in Norry's estimation, but not in hers. Rand could not afford to alienate the sisters with Egwene. He could not afford to alienate any Aes Sedai. But he did seem to find ways to do so.

ɹɪn hɑɹfɝ sun ɹipleɪs hælwɪn nɔɹi, nɑɾɪŋ tə ðə bɑɾiɡɑɹdz ət ðə dɔɹ ɪn pæsɪŋ ən ɡɪvɪŋ eɪvinhə ən oʊpən smaɪl. ɪf ðə plʌmp ɡɹeɪɪŋ wʊmən hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ənsɝɾən əbaʊɾ ɪleɪn kɔlɪŋ eɪvinhə sɪstɝ, ʃi hæd nɛvɝ ʃoʊn ɪt, ən naʊ ʃi dʒɛnjəwənli əpɪɹd tə əpɹuv. smaɪlz əɹ noʊ smaɪlz, ðoʊ, hɝ ɹipɔɹt wɑz mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɡɹɪm ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ðə tʃif klɝks.

Reene Harfor soon replaced Halwin Norry, nodding to the bodyguards at the door in passing and giving Aviendha an open smile. If the plump graying woman had ever been uncertain about Elayne calling Aviendha sister, she had never shown it, and now she genuinely appeared to approve. Smiles or no smiles, though, her report was much more grim than anything in the Chief Clerk's.

"dʒɑn skɛlɪɾ ɪz ɪn ðə peɪ ʌv haʊs ɑɝɔn, maɪ leɪɾi," ɹɪn sɛd, hɝ ɹaʊn feɪs stɝn ɪnʌf tə fɪɾ ə hæŋmən. "twaɪs naʊ hiz bɪn sin æksɛptɪŋ ə pɝs fɹəm mɛn noʊn tə feɪvɝ ɑɝɔn. ən ðəɹ ɪz noʊ daʊt ðəɾ ɛstɝ nɔɹhəm ɪz ɪn sʌmwʌnz peɪ. ʃi ɪzən stilɪŋ, bʌt ʃiz oʊvɝ fɪfti kɹaʊnz ʌv ɡoʊl hɪɾən ʌndɝ ə lus flɔɹbɔɹd, ən ʃi æɾəd tɛn kɹaʊnz læs naɪt."

"Jon Skellit is in the pay of House Arawn, my Lady," Reene said, her round face stern enough to fit a hangman. "Twice now he has been seen accepting a purse from men known to favor Arawn. And there is no doubt that Ester Norham is in someone's pay. She isn't stealing, but she has over fifty crowns of gold hidden under a loose floorboard, and she added ten crowns last night."

"du əz wɪð ði ʌðɝz," ɪleɪn sɛd sædli. ðə fɝs meɪd hæɾ ənkʌvɝd naɪn spaɪz ʃi wɑz sɝɾən ʌv, soʊ fɑɹ, fɔɹ ə ðɛm ɛmplɔɪd baɪ pipəl ɹɪn hæd nɑt jɛt bɪn eɪbəl tə ənkʌvɝ. ðət ɹɪn hæd faʊn ɛni əɾ ɔl wɑz ɪnʌf tə æŋɡɝ ɪleɪn, bʌt ðə bɑɹbɝ ən ðə hɛɹdʒɹɛsɝ wɝ sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ. boʊθ hæd bɪn ɪn əɹ mʌðɝz sɝvəs. ə pɪɾi ðeɪ hæd nɑt sin fɪt tə tʃɹænsfɝ ðɛɹ lɔɪəlti tə mɔɹɡeɪsəz dɔɾɝ.

"Do as with the others," Elayne said sadly. The First Maid had uncovered nine spies she was certain of, so far, four of them employed by people Reene had not yet been able to uncover. That Reene had found any at all was enough to anger Elayne, but the barber and the hairdresser were something more. Both had been in her mother's service. A pity they had not seen fit to transfer their loyalty to Morgase's daughter.

eɪvinhə ɡɹɪməst əz mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ mɝmɝd ðət ʃi wʊd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn dɪstʃɑɹdʒɪŋ ðə spaɪz, əɹ kɪlɪŋ əm əz eɪvinhə hæd sədʒɛstəd. ðeɪ wəd dʒʌs bi ɹipleɪs baɪ spaɪz ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ. ə spaɪ ɪz jəɹ ɛnəmiz tul əntɪl jə noʊ hɝ, hɝ mʌðɝ hæd sɛd, bʌt ðən ʃiz jəɹ tul. wən jə faɪn ə spaɪ, tɑm hæd toʊl hɝ, ɹæp ɪm ɪn swɑɾəlɪŋ ən fiɾ ɪm wɪð ə spun. ðə mɛn ən wɪmən u hæd bɪtʃɹeɪd ðɛɹ sɝvəs wəd bi "əlaʊd" tə dɪskʌvɝ wʌɾ ɪleɪn wɑntəɾ əm tə noʊ, nɑɾ ɔl tʃɹu, sətʃ əz ðə nʌmbɝz bɝdʒɪt hæd ɹɪkɹuɾɪd.

Aviendha grimaced as Mistress Harfor murmured that she would, but there was no point in discharging the spies, or killing them as Aviendha had suggested. They would just be replaced by spies she did not know. A spy is your enemy's tool until you know her, her mother had said, but then she is your tool. When you find a spy, Thom had told her, wrap him in swaddling and feed him with a spoon. The men and women who had betrayed their service would be "allowed" to discover what Elayne wanted them to know, not all true, such as the numbers Birgitte had recruited.

"æn ði ʌðɝ mæɾɝ, mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ?"

"And the other matter, Mistress Harfor?"

"nʌθɪŋ jɛt, maɪ leɪɾi, bʌɾ aɪ hæv hoʊps," ɹɪn sɛɾ ivən mɔɹ ɡɹɪmli ðən bɪfɔɹ. "aɪ hæv hoʊps."

"Nothing yet, my Lady, but I have hopes," Reene said even more grimly than before. "I have hopes."

fɑloʊɪŋ ðə fɝs meɪdz dɪpɑɹtʃɝ keɪm tu dɛləɡeɪʃənz ə mɝtʃəns, fɝst ə lɑɹdʒ ɡɹup ə kændɔɹi wɪð dʒɛm-stʌɾɪd ɪɹɪŋz ən sɪlvɝ ɡɪld-tʃeɪnz dʒɹeɪpt əkɹɔs ðɛɹ tʃɛsts ən ðɛn, ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn ðɛm, hæf ə dʌzən ɪliɑnɝz wɪð oʊnli ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi ɑn ʌðɝwaɪz sɑmbɝ koʊts ən dʒɹɛsəz. ʃi juzd wʌn ə ðə smɔlɝ ɹɪsɛpʃən ɹumz. ðə tæpəstʃɹiz flæŋkɪŋ ðə mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪs wɝ ə hʌntɪŋ sinz, nɑt ðə waɪt laɪən, ən ðə pɑlɪʃt wʊɾən wɔl pænəlz wɝ ənkɑɹvd. ðeɪ wɝ mɝtʃəns, nɑt dɪpləmæts, ðoʊ səm sim tə fil slaɪɾɪd ðət ʃi ɔfɝɾ oʊnli waɪn ən dɪd nɑt dʒɹɪŋk wɪð ðɛm. kændɔɹi əɹ ɪliɑnɝz, ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ lʊkt əskæns ət ðə tu ɡɑɹdzwɪmən u fɑloʊɾ əɹ ɪndə ðə ɹum ən poʊstɪd ðɛmsɛlvz bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ, ðoʊ ɪf baɪ ðɪs taɪm ðeɪ hæd nɑt hɝd ðə teɪlz ʌv ən ətɛmp tə kɪl hɝ, ðeɪ mʌs bi dɛf. sɪks mɔɹ ə hɝ bɑɾiɡɑɹd weɪɾəd aʊtsaɪd ðə dɔɹ.

Following the First Maid's departure came two delegations of merchants, first a large group of Kandori with gem-studded earrings and silver guild-chains draped across their chests and then, right behind them, half a dozen Illianers with only a touch of embroidery on otherwise somber coats and dresses. She used one of the smaller reception rooms. The tapestries flanking the marble fireplace were of hunting scenes, not the White Lion, and the polished wooden wall panels were uncarved. They were merchants, not diplomats, though some seemed to feel slighted that she offered only wine and did not drink with them. Kandori or Illianers, they also looked askance at the two Guardswomen who followed her into the room and posted themselves beside the door, though if by this time they had not heard the tales of an attempt to kill her, they must be deaf. Six more of her bodyguard waited outside the door.

ðə kændɔɹi stʌɾid eɪvinhə sɝəptɪʃəsli wən nɑt lɪsnɪŋ ətɛntɪvli tə ɪleɪn, ən ði ɪliɑnɝz əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ əɾ ɔl æftɝ ðə fɝst waɪɾənɪŋ ʌv aɪz ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. daʊtləs ðeɪ ɹɛd səɡnɪfɪkəns ɪndə ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ən il, ivən ɪf ʃi oʊnli sæɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ən sɛd nʌθɪŋ, bʌt wɛðɝ kændɔɹi əɹ ɪliɑnɝz, ðə mɝtʃəns wɑntəd ðə seɪm θɪŋ, ɹiəʃʊɹəns ðəɾ ɪleɪn wəd nɑt soʊ æŋɡɝ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ðəɾ i wəɾ ɪntɝfɪɹ wɪð tʃɹeɪd baɪ sɛndɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmiz ən ɪz il tə ɹævədʒ ændɝ, ðoʊ ðeɪ dɪd nɑt kʌm aʊɾ ən seɪ soʊ. nɔɹ dɪd ðeɪ mɛnʃən ðəɾ il ən ðə lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən boʊθ hæd lɑɹdʒ ɛnkæmpməns nɑt mɛni maɪlz fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn. ðɛɹ pəlaɪt kwɛstʃənz əbaʊɾ əɹ plænz naʊ ðət ʃi hæd ɹimuv ðə dʒɹæɡən bænɝz ən ðə bænɝz ə laɪt fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn wɝ səfɪʃənt. ʃi toʊld əm wʌt ʃi toʊld ɛvɹiwʌn, ðəɾ ændɝ wəɾ əlaɪ ɪtsɛlf tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn bʌt wɑz nɑɾ ɪz kɑŋkwɛst. ɪn ɹɪtɝn, ðeɪ ɔfɝd veɪɡ wɪʃɪz fəɹ əɹ wɛl-biɪŋ, sədʒɛstɪŋ ðət ðeɪ səpɔɹɾəd əɹ kleɪm tə ðə laɪən θɹoʊn hoʊlhɑɹɾɪdli wɪθaʊɾ æktʃəli  seɪɪŋ ɛni sətʃ θɪŋ. æftɝ ɔl, ɪf ʃi feɪld, ðeɪ wɑnə tə bi wɛlkəm ɪn ændɝ ʌndɝ huɛvɝ dɪd ɡeɪn ðə kɹaʊn.

The Kandori studied Aviendha surreptitiously when not listening attentively to Elayne, and the Illianers avoided looking at her at all after the first widening of eyes in surprise. Doubtless they read significance into the presence of an Aiel, even if she only sat on the floor in a corner and said nothing, but whether Kandori or Illianers, the merchants wanted the same thing, reassurance that Elayne would not so anger the Dragon Reborn that he would interfere with trade by sending his armies and his Aiel to ravage Andor, though they did not come out and say so. Nor did they mention that Aiel and the Legion of the Dragon both had large encampments not many miles from Caemlyn. Their polite questions about her plans now that she had removed the Dragon banners and the Banners of Light from Caemlyn were sufficient. She told them what she told everyone, that Andor would ally itself to the Dragon Reborn but was not his conquest. In return, they offered vague wishes for her well-being, suggesting that they supported her claim to the Lion Throne wholeheartedly without actually saying any such thing. After all, if she failed, they would want to be welcome in Andor under whoever did gain the crown.

wən ði ɪliɑnɝz hæd meɪd ðɛɹ baʊz ən kɝtsiz ən dɪpɑɹɾəd, ʃi kloʊzd əɹ aɪz fəɹ ə moʊmən ən ɹʌbd əɹ tɛmpəlz. ʃi stɪl hæɾ ə miɾɪŋ wɪð ə dɛləɡeɪʃən ʌv ɡlæsmeɪkɝz bɪfɔɹ ðə mɪddeɪ mil, ən faɪv mɔɹ wɪð mɝtʃəns əɹ kɹæftsfoʊk leɪɾɝ; ə vɛɹi bɪzi deɪ, fʊl ə mili-maʊð plæɾɪtudz ən æmbɪɡjuəɾi. ən wɪð nɪneɪiv ən mɛɝɪlɪl ɡɔn, ɪt wɑz əɹ tɝn tə titʃ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz əɡɛn tənaɪt, ət bɛst ə lɛs plɛzən ɪkspɪɹiəns ðən ðə wɝs miɾɪŋ wɪð mɝtʃəns. wɪtʃ maɪt liv əɹ ə lɪɾəl taɪm tə stʌɾi ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðeɪ hæd bɹɔɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz soʊ wɪɹi ðət ʃi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kip əɹ aɪz oʊpən. ɪt wɑz ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ wən eɪvinhə hæd tə hæf kæɹi hɝ tə bɛd, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt stɑp. ðəɹ wɑz tu mʌtʃ tə bi dʌn ən nɑɾ ɪnʌf taɪm ɪn ə deɪ.

When the Illianers had made their bows and curtsies and departed, she closed her eyes for a moment and rubbed her temples. She still had a meeting with a delegation of glassmakers before the midday meal, and five more with merchants or craftsfolk later; a very busy day, full of mealy-mouthed platitudes and ambiguity. And with Nynaeve and Merilille gone, it was her turn to teach the Windfinders again tonight, at best a less pleasant experience than the worst meeting with merchants. Which might leave her a little time to study the ter'angreal they had brought out of Ebou Dar before she was so weary that she could no longer keep her eyes open. It was embarrassing when Aviendha had to half carry her to bed, but she could not stop. There was too much to be done and not enough time in a day.

ðəɹ wɑz ɔlmoʊst ən aʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡlæsmeɪkɝz, bʌɾ eɪvinhə ɹuθləsli ɹoʊɾ oʊvɝ əɹ sədʒɛstʃən ðət ʃi maɪt teɪk ə pik ət ðə θɪŋz fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ.

There was almost an hour before the glassmakers, but Aviendha ruthlessly rode over her suggestion that she might take a peek at the things from Ebou Dar.

"hæz bɝdʒɪt bɪn tɔkɪŋ tə ju?" ɪleɪn dɪmændəɾ əz əɹ sɪstɝ ɔl bʌt dʒɹæɡd əɹ ʌp ə nɛɹoʊ flaɪɾ ə stoʊn stɛɹz. fɔɹ ɡɑɹdzwɪmən wɛn əhɛd, ən ði ʌðɝz tʃɹeɪl bɪhaɪnd, stuɾiəsli ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ wʌt pæs bɪtwin əɹ ən eɪvinhə. ðoʊ ʃi θɔt ðət ɹæsɔɹiə dəmæntʃ, ə stɑki hʌntɝ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn wɪð ðə blu aɪz ən jɛloʊ hɛɹ əkeɪʒənəli faʊn əmʌŋ tɛɹənz, wɔɹ ə taɪni smaɪl.

"Has Birgitte been talking to you?" Elayne demanded as her sister all but dragged her up a narrow flight of stone stairs. Four Guardswomen went ahead, and the others trailed behind, studiously ignoring what passed between her and Aviendha. Though she thought that Rasoria Domanche, a stocky Hunter for the Horn with the blue eyes and yellow hair occasionally found among Tairens, wore a tiny smile.

"du aɪ niɾ əɹ tə tɛl mi jə spɛn tu mɛni aʊɝz ɪnsaɪɾ ən slip tu lɪɾəl?" eɪvinhə ɹɪplaɪd kəntɛmptʃwəsli. "ju nid fɹɛʃ ɛɹ."

"Do I need her to tell me you spend too many hours inside and sleep too little?" Aviendha replied contemptuously. "You need fresh air."

ði ɛɹ ɪn ðə haɪ kɑləneɪd wɑz sɝɾənli fɹɛʃ. ən kɹɪsp, ðoʊ ðə sʌn stʊd haɪ ɪn ə ɡɹeɪ skaɪ. ə koʊl bɹiz blu ɝaʊn ðə smuð kɑləmz, soʊ ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən stændɪŋ ɹɛɾi tə pɹətɛkt əɹ fɹəm pɪdʒənz hæd tə hæŋ ɑn tə ðɛɹ plum hæts. pɝvɝsli, ɪleɪn ɹəfjuz tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə tʃɪl.

The air in the high colonnade was certainly fresh. And crisp, though the sun stood high in a gray sky. A cold breeze blew around the smooth columns, so the Guardswomen standing ready to protect her from pigeons had to hang on to their plumed hats. Perversely, Elayne refused to ignore the chill.

"daɪɛlɪn tɔk tə ju," ʃi ɡɹʌmbəld, ʃɪvɝɪŋ. daɪɛlɪn kleɪmd ə wʊmən wɪð tʃaɪl niɾəd lɔŋ wɔks ɛvɹi deɪ. ʃi hæd bɪn kwɪk tə ɹimaɪn ɪleɪn ðæt, dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ əɹ nɑt, ʃi wɑz ɹɪli oʊnli ðə haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tʃɹəkən fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ən ɪf ðə haɪ siɾ ə tʃɹəkənd wɑntəd tə tɔk wɪð ðə haɪ siɾ ə tæɹɑvɪn, ʃi kəd də ɪt tʃɹæmpɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn ðə pæləs kɔɹɪɾɝz əɹ nɑɾ əɾ ɔl.

"Dyelin talked to you," she grumbled, shivering. Dyelin claimed a woman with child needed long walks every day. She had been quick to remind Elayne that, Daughter-Heir or not, she was really only the High Seat of House Trakand for the moment, and if the High Seat of Trakand wanted to talk with the High Seat of Taravin, she could do it tramping up and down the Palace corridors or not at all.

"mɑneɪəl əz bɔɹn sɛvən tʃɪlʒɹən," eɪvinhə ɹɪplaɪd. "ʃi sɛz aɪ mʌst si jə ɡɛt fɹɛʃ ɛɹ." dɪspaɪt noʊ mɔɹ ðən əɹ ʃɔl pʊld oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ə filɪŋ ðə wɪnd. bʌt ðɛn, il wɝ əz ɡʊɾ əz ðə sɪstɝz əɾ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ði ɛləməns. ɹæpɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn skaʊld.

"Monaelle has borne seven children," Aviendha replied. "She says I must see you get fresh air." Despite no more than her shawl pulled over her shoulders, she gave no sign of feeling the wind. But then, Aiel were as good as the sisters at ignoring the elements. Wrapping her arms around herself, Elayne scowled.

"stɑp sʌlkɪŋ, sɪstɝ," eɪvinhə sɛd. ʃi pɔɪntəd daʊn tə wʌn ə ðə steɪbliɑɹdz, dʒʌs vɪzəbəl oʊvɝ ðə waɪt-taɪld ɹufs. "lʊk, ɹin kɔɹli ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi tʃɛkɪŋ tə si ɪf mɛɝɪlɪl ʃiændɪvɪn ɪz ɹɪtɝnɪŋ." ðə fəmɪljɝ vɝɾɪkəl slæʃ ə laɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ ən ɹoʊteɪɾɪd ɪndə ə hoʊl ɪn ði ɛɹ tɛn fit tɔl ən əz waɪd.

"Stop sulking, sister," Aviendha said. She pointed down to one of the stableyards, just visible over the white-tiled roofs. "Look, Reanne Corly is already checking to see if Merilille Ceandevin is returning." The familiar vertical slash of light appeared in the stableyard and rotated into a hole in the air ten feet tall and as wide.

ɪleɪn skaʊl daʊn ət ɹinz hɛd. ʃi wɑz nɑt sʌlkɪŋ. pɝhæps ʃi ʃəd nɑɾ əv tɔt ɹin tə tʃɹævəl, sɪns ðə kɪnswʊmən wɑz nɑt jɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt nʌn ə ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz wɝ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ðə wiv wɝk, ən ɪf ðə wɪndfɪndɝz wɝ əlaʊd tə lɝn, ðən ðə fju kɪnswɪmən u kəd ʃəd bi əlaʊd, tu, ɪn əɹ bʊk. bɪsaɪdz, ʃi kəd nɑt də ɛvɹiθɪŋ hɝsɛlf. laɪt, hæd wɪntɝ bɪn ðɪs aɪsi bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɝn tə stɑp hiɾ ən koʊl fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ hɝ?

Elayne scowled down at Reanne's head. She was not sulking. Perhaps she should not have taught Reanne to Travel, since the Kinswoman was not yet Aes Sedai, but none of the other sisters were strong enough to make the weave work, and if the Windfinders were allowed to learn, then the few Kinswomen who could should be allowed, too, in her book. Besides, she could not do everything herself. Light, had winter been this icy before she learned to stop heat and cold from touching her?

tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, mɛɝɪlɪl ɹoʊd θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ʃeɪkɪŋ snoʊ fɹəm əɹ dɑɹk fɝ-laɪn kloʊk, fɑloʊd baɪ ðə hɛlməɾɪd ɡɑɹdzmɪn u hæd bɪn sɛn ɔf wɪð əɹ sɛvən deɪz ɝliɝ. zeɪɾə ən ðə wɪndfɪndɝz hæd bɪn moʊst ənplɛzən oʊvɝ əɹ dɪsəpɪɹəns, tə pʊɾ ɪt maɪldli, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪ hæd lɛpt əɾ ə tʃæns tə ɪskeɪp əm fəɹ haʊɛvɝ lɔŋ. ɪt hæd bɪn nɛsəsɛɹi tə tʃɛk fəɹ əɹ ɛvɹi deɪ, oʊpənɪŋ ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ðə seɪm spɑt, jɛɾ ɪleɪn hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ fəɹ ə wik jɛɾ ət ðə vɛɹi bɛst. əz ðə læst ə ðə tɛn ɹɛd-kloʊkt ɡɑɹdz ɛntɝd ðə steɪbliɑɹd, ðə slɪm lɪɾəl ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ klaɪm daʊn fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl, hændəɾ əɹ ɹeɪnz tə ə ɡɹum, ən hɝiɾ ɪndə ðə pæləs bɪfɔɹ ðə wʊmən fɹəm ðə steɪbəlz kəd mɔɹ ðən ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ weɪ.

To her surprise, Merilille rode through the gateway shaking snow from her dark fur-lined cloak, followed by the helmeted Guardsmen who had been sent off with her seven days earlier. Zaida and the Windfinders had been most unpleasant over her disappearance, to put it mildly, but the Gray had leaped at a chance to escape them for however long. It had been necessary to check for her every day, opening a gateway to the same spot, yet Elayne had not expected her for a week yet at the very best. As the last of the ten red-cloaked Guards entered the stableyard, the slim little Gray sister climbed down from her saddle, handed her reins to a groom, and hurried into the Palace before the woman from the stables could more than get out of her way.

"aɪ æm ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðə fɹɛʃ ɛɹ," ɪleɪn sɛd, dʒʌs kipɪŋ əɹ tiθ fɹəm tʃæɾɝɪŋ, "bʌɾ ɪf mɛɝɪlɪl ɪz bæk, aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ daʊn." eɪvinhə kwɝkt ən aɪbɹaʊ əz ɪf ʃi səspɛktəd ði ɪveɪʒən, bʌt ʃi wɑz ðə fɝs tə stɑɹt fəɹ ðə stɛɹz. mɛɝɪlɪlz ɹɪtɝn wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ən baɪ hɝ heɪst, ʃi bɹɔɾ iðɝ vɛɹi ɡʊd nuz əɹ vɛɹi bæd.

"I am enjoying the fresh air," Elayne said, just keeping her teeth from chattering, "but if Merilille is back, I must go down." Aviendha quirked an eyebrow as if she suspected the evasion, but she was the first to start for the stairs. Merilille's return was important, and by her haste, she brought either very good news or very bad.

baɪ ðə taɪm ɪleɪn ən əɹ sɪstɝ wɔkt ɪndə hɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum - fɑloʊd baɪ tu ʌv ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən, ʌv kɔɹs, hu plæntəd ðɛmsɛlvz bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹz - mɛɝɪlɪl wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ. hɝ dæmp-spɑɾəd kloʊk leɪ oʊvɝ ðə bæk ʌv ə tʃɛɹ, hɝ peɪl ɡɹeɪ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz wɝ tʌk bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt, ən əɹ blæk hɛɹ cʊɾə juzd ə bɹʌʃ. wɪð pɝpəl kɹɛsəns ʌndɝ əɹ dɑɹk aɪz, mɛɝɪlɪlz peɪl feɪs lʊkt əz wɪɹi əz ɪleɪn fɛlt.

By the time Elayne and her sister walked into her sitting room - followed by two of the Guardswomen, of course, who planted themselves beside the doors - Merilille was already there. Her damp-spotted cloak lay over the back of a chair, her pale gray riding gloves were tucked behind her belt, and her black hair could have used a brush. With purple crescents under her dark eyes, Merilille's pale face looked as weary as Elayne felt.

əz kwɪkli əz ʃi hæd kʌm ʌp fɹəm ðə steɪbliɑɹd, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. bɝdʒɪt, fɹaʊnɪŋ pɛnsɪvli, stʊd wɪð wʌn hæn ɑn ðə kɑɹv mæntəl oʊvɝ ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ði ʌðɝ ɡɹɪpt əɹ lɔŋ ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd, ɔlmoʊs laɪk nɪneɪiv. tədeɪ, ʃi wɔɹ vəlumənəs dɑɹk ɡɹin tʃɹaʊzɝz wɪð əɹ ʃɔɹt ɹɛd koʊt, ə kɑmbəneɪʃən tə meɪk ði aɪ flɪntʃ. ən kæptən mɛlɝ meɪɾ ɪleɪn ən ɪlæbɹət baʊ, weɪvɪŋ ɪz waɪt-plum hæɾ əbaʊt. hi hæd noʊ pleɪs hɪɹ, bʌt ʃi lɛɾ ɪm steɪ, ən ivən ɡeɪv ɪm ə vɛɹi wɔɹm smaɪl. vɛɹi wɔɹm.

As quickly as she had come up from the stableyard, she was not alone. Birgitte, frowning pensively, stood with one hand on the carved mantel over the fireplace. The other gripped her long golden braid, almost like Nynaeve. Today, she wore voluminous dark green trousers with her short red coat, a combination to make the eye flinch. And Captain Mellar made Elayne an elaborate bow, waving his white-plumed hat about. He had no place here, but she let him stay, and even gave him a very warm smile. Very warm.

ðə plʌmp jʌŋ meɪɾ u hæd dʒʌs pleɪst ə lɑɹdʒ sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ ɑn wʌn ə ðə saɪdbɔɹdz blɪŋkt ən lʊkt waɪd-aɪɾ ət mɛlɝ bɪfɔɹ ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ tə meɪk əɹ kɝtsi ɑn ɡoʊɪŋ. ɪleɪn hɛld əɹ smaɪl əntɪl ðə dɔɹ kloʊzd. wʌtɛvɝ pɹətɛktəɾ əɹ beɪbi, ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə du. ðəɹ wɑz hɑt spaɪst waɪn ɑn ðə ɹoʊp wɝk tʃɹeɪ fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, ən wik ti fəɹ hɝ. wɛl, ət list ɪt wɑz hɑt.

The plump young maid who had just placed a large silver tray on one of the sideboards blinked and looked wide-eyed at Mellar before remembering to make her curtsy on going. Elayne held her smile until the door closed. Whatever protected her baby, she was willing to do. There was hot spiced wine on the rope work tray for everyone else, and weak tea for her. Well, at least it was hot.

"aɪ wɑz kwaɪt lʌki," mɛɝɪlɪl saɪd wʌns ʃi wɑz siɾəd, ɡɪvɪŋ mɛlɝ ən ənsɝɾən ɡlæns oʊvɝ əɹ waɪnkʌp. ʃi nu ðə teɪl ə hɪm seɪvɪŋ ɪleɪnz laɪf, bʌt ʃi hæd lɛf bɪfɔɹ ðə ɹumɝz bɪɡæn. "ɪt tɝn aʊt ðət ɹin hæɾ oʊpən əɹ ɡeɪtweɪ nɑt faɪv maɪlz fɹəm ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz. ðeɪv nɑt muv sɪns ɝaɪvɪŋ." hɝ noʊz ɹɪŋkəld. "ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə wɛðɝ, ðə stɛntʃ ə lætʃɹinz ən hɔɹs dʌŋ wəd bi oʊvɝpaʊɹɪŋ. jə wɝ ɹaɪt, ɪleɪn. ɔl fɔɹ ɹulɝz ɑɹ ðɛɹ, ɪn fɔɹ kæmps ə fju maɪlz əpɑɹt. itʃ hoʊlz ən ɑɹmi. aɪ faʊn ðə ʃaɪnɝənz ðə fɝs deɪ, ən moʊst ə maɪ taɪm sɪns əz bɪn spɛn tɔkɪŋ wɪð isɑɹ ə ʃaɪnɝ ən ði ʌðɝ θɹi. wi mɛɾ ɪn ə dɪfɹən kæmp itʃ deɪ."

"I was quite lucky," Merilille sighed once she was seated, giving Mellar an uncertain glance over her winecup. She knew the tale of him saving Elayne's life, but she had left before the rumors began. "It turned out that Reanne had opened her gateway not five miles from the Borderlanders. They have not moved since arriving." Her nose wrinkled. "If not for the weather, the stench of latrines and horse dung would be overpowering. You were right, Elayne. All four rulers are there, in four camps a few miles apart. Each holds an army. I found the Shienarans the first day, and most of my time since has been spent talking with Easar of Shienar and the other three. We met in a different camp each day."

"ju spɛn ə lɪɾəl taɪm lʊkɪŋ tu, aɪ hoʊp," bɝdʒɪt sɛd ɹɪspɛkfəli fɹəm ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ʃi wɑz ɹɪspɛkfəl wɪð ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪksɛp ðə wʌn ʃi wɑz bɑndəd tə. "haʊ mɛni ɑɹ ðeɪ?"

"You spent a little time looking too, I hope," Birgitte said respectfully from in front of the fireplace. She was respectful with every Aes Sedai except the one she was bonded to. "How many are they?"

"aɪ doʊn səpoʊz jə ɡɑɾ ən ækjɝət kaʊnt," mɛlɝ pʊɾ ɪn, saʊndɪŋ əz ðoʊ hi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt. fəɹ wʌns, hɪz nɛɹoʊ feɪs wɑz ənsmaɪlɪŋ. piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɪz waɪn, hi ʃɹʌɡd. "wʌtɛvɝ jə sɔ maɪɾ əv səm vælju, ðoʊ. ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ ɪnʌf ə ðɛm, ðeɪ meɪ stɑɹv ðɛmsɛlvz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kən θɹɛɾən keɪɛmlɪn. ðə lɑɹdʒəst ɑɹmi ɪn ðə wɝld ɪz dʒʌst soʊ mɛni wɔkɪŋ kɔɹpsəz wɪθaʊt fuɾ ən fɑɾɝ." hi læft. bɝdʒɪt stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz bæk dɑɹkli, bʌɾ ɪleɪn lɪftəɾ ə hæn slaɪtli əɾ əɹ saɪd, moʊʃənɪŋ ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tə kip saɪlənt.

"I don't suppose you got an accurate count," Mellar put in, sounding as though he expected anything but. For once, his narrow face was unsmiling. Peering into his wine, he shrugged. "Whatever you saw might have some value, though. If there are enough of them, they may starve themselves before they can threaten Caemlyn. The largest army in the world is just so many walking corpses without food and fodder." He laughed. Birgitte stared at his back darkly, but Elayne lifted a hand slightly at her side, motioning the other woman to keep silent.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑɾ ɪn ə ɡʊd weɪ fəɹ fud, kæptən," mɛɝɪlɪl sɛd kuli, sɪɾɪŋ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾɝ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝ ɑbviəs fətiɡ, "bʌt niðɝ ɑɹ ðeɪ stɑɹvɪŋ kwaɪt jɛt. aɪ ʃəd nɑt kaʊn ɑn stɑɹveɪʃən tə dɪfit ðɛm, ɪf ɪt kʌmz tə ðæt." æftɝ ə lɪɾəl taɪm əweɪ fɹəm ðə si foʊk, hɝ bɪɡ aɪz wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ pɝpɛtʃuəli stɑɹɾəld, ən dɪspaɪɾ əɹ smuð ɛɛs sədaɪ kəmpoʊʒɝ, ɪt wɑz pleɪn ʃi hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə dɪslaɪk dɔɪlɪn mɛlɝ noʊ mæɾɝ huz laɪf i hæd seɪvd. "æz fəɹ nʌmbɝz, sʌmθɪŋ oʊvɝ tu hʌnʒɹəd θaʊzənd, aɪ ʃəd seɪ, ən aɪ vɛɹi mʌtʃ daʊɾ ɛniwʌn bʌt ðɛɹ oʊn ɔfəsɝz kəd bi mɔɹ ækjɝət ðən ðæt. ivən hʌŋɡɹi, ðəɾ ɪz ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni sɔɹdz," mɛlɝ ʃɹʌɡd əɡɛn, ʌndɪstɝbd baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛɹz.

"They are not in a good way for food, Captain," Merilille said coolly, sitting up straighter in spite of her obvious fatigue, "but neither are they starving quite yet. I should not count on starvation to defeat them, if it comes to that." After a little time away from the Sea Folk, her big eyes were no longer perpetually startled, and despite her smooth Aes Sedai composure, it was plain she had decided to dislike Doilin Mellar no matter whose life he had saved. "As for numbers, something over two hundred thousand, I should say, and I very much doubt anyone but their own officers could be more accurate than that. Even hungry, that is a great many swords," Mellar shrugged again, undisturbed by Aes Sedai stares.

ðə slɪm ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ niðɝ lʊkt əɾ ɪm əɡɛn nɔɹ ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪm ɪn ɛni ɑbviəs weɪ; hi dʒʌst sim tə bɪkʌm ə pis ə ðə fɝnɪtʃɝ fəɹ əɹ əz ʃi wɛn ɑn. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ət lis tɛn sɪstɝz wɪð ðɛm, ɪleɪn, ðoʊ ðeɪ meɪɾ ə ɡɹeɪɾ ɛfɝt tə haɪd ðə fækt. nɑɾ ædhɪɹəns tə ɛɡwin, aɪ ʃəd θɪŋk, ðoʊ ðeɪ nid nɑt bi ɪleɪɾəz iðɝ. ə ɡʊd mɛni sɪstɝz əpɪɹ tə bi sɪɾɪŋ tə wʌn saɪɾ əntɪl ðə taʊɝz tʃɹʌbəlz ɑɹ oʊvɝ, aɪ fɪɹ." ʃi saɪɾ əɡɛn, pɝhæps nɑt fɹəm taɪɹədnəs ðɪs taɪm.

The slim Gray sister neither looked at him again nor ignored him in any obvious way; he just seemed to become a piece of the furniture for her as she went on. "There are at least ten sisters with them, Elayne, though they made a great effort to hide the fact. Not adherents to Egwene, I should think, though they need not be Elaida's either. A good many sisters appear to be sitting to one side until the Tower's troubles are over, I fear." She sighed again, perhaps not from tiredness this time.

wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs, ɪleɪn sɛɾ əɹ tikʌp əsaɪd. ðə kɪtʃənz hæd nɑt sɛn ʌp ɛni hʌni, ən ʃi ɹɪli dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt bɪɾɝ. "wʌt də ðeɪ wɑnt, mɛɝɪlɪl? ðə ɹulɝz, nɑt ðə sɪstɝz." tɛn sɪstɝz meɪd ðəɾ ɑɹmi tɛn taɪmz əz deɪnʒɝəs, ɪspɛʃli tə ɹænd. noʊ, tə ɛniwʌn. "ðeɪ hævən bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ ɪn ðə snoʊ ɔl ðɪs taɪm fəɹ ðə dʒɔɪ ʌv ɪt."

With a grimace, Elayne set her teacup aside. The kitchens had not sent up any honey, and she really did not like it bitter. "What do they want, Merilille? The rulers, not the sisters." Ten sisters made that army ten times as dangerous, especially to Rand. No, to anyone. "They haven't been sitting there in the snow all this time for the joy of it."

ðə ɡɹeɪ spɹɛɾ əɹ slɪm hænz slaɪtli. "oʊvɝ ðə lɔŋ ɹʌn, aɪ kən oʊnli meɪk səpəzɪʃənz. oʊvɝ ðə ʃɔɹt, ðeɪ wɑnə mit ju, ən əz sun əz pɑsəbəl. ðeɪ sɛn ɹaɪɾɝz təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn wən ðeɪ ɝaɪvd ət nu bɹəm, bʌt ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ, ɪt maɪt teɪk ənʌðɝ wik əɹ mɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɝaɪv hɪɹ. tɛnoʊbiə ʌv sɑldɑiə lɛt slɪp, əɹ pɹitɛndəd tə lɛt slɪp, ðət ðeɪ noʊ juv səm kənɛkʃən tə, əɹ list ə kloʊs əkweɪntəns wɪð, ə sɝɾən pɝsən ɪn hum ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ əpɛɹənli hæv ən ɪntʃɹəst. sʌmhaʊ, ðeɪ noʊ ʌv jəɹ pɹɛzəns ɪn fɑlm wən sɝɾən ɪvɛns tʊk pleɪs." mɛlɝ fɹaʊn ɪn kənfjuʒən, bʌt noʊ wʌn ɛnlaɪɾənd hɪm. "aɪ dɪd nɑt dɪskloʊz tʃɹævlɪŋ, kəz ə ðoʊz sɪstɝz, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd seɪ aɪ kəd ɹɪtɝn wɪð ə ɹɪplaɪ vɛɹi sun."

The Gray spread her slim hands slightly. "Over the long run, I can only make suppositions. Over the short, they want to meet you, and as soon as possible. They sent riders toward Caemlyn when they arrived at New Braem, but this time of year, it might take another week or more before they arrive here. Tenobia of Saldaea let slip, or pretended to let slip, that they know you have some connection to, or least a close acquaintance with, a certain person in whom they also apparently have an interest. Somehow, they know of your presence in Falme when certain events took place." Mellar frowned in confusion, but no one enlightened him. "I did not disclose Traveling, because of those sisters, but I did say I could return with a reply very soon."

ɪleɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə lʊk wɪð bɝdʒɪt, hu ɔlsoʊ ʃɹʌɡd, ðoʊ ɪn əɹ keɪs niðɝ fɹəm dɪtætʃmənt nɔɹ fɹəm dɪsdeɪn. ðə lɑɹdʒəs hoʊl ɪn ɪleɪnz hoʊps tə juz ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz tə ɪnfluəns əɹ əpoʊnəns fəɹ ðə θɹoʊn hæd bɪn haʊ tə əpɹoʊtʃ sɪɾɪŋ ɹulɝz waɪl ʃi wɑz mɪɹli ðə haɪ siɾ ə tʃɹəkən ən dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ə dɪsis kwin. bɝdʒɪts ʃɹʌɡ sɛd bi θæŋkfəl fəɹ ðə hoʊl kloʊzɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪleɪn wʌndɝd haʊ ðiz pipəl fɹəm ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz hæd lɝnd wʌt vɛɹi fju ʌðɝz nu. ən ɪf ðeɪ nu, haʊ mɛni mɔɹ dɪd, tu? ʃi wəd pɹətɛkt əɹ ʌnbɔɹn tʃaɪld.

Elayne exchanged a look with Birgitte, who also shrugged, though in her case neither from detachment nor from disdain. The largest hole in Elayne's hopes to use the Borderlanders to influence her opponents for the throne had been how to approach sitting rulers while she was merely the High Seat of Trakand and Daughter-Heir of a deceased queen. Birgitte's shrug said be thankful for the hole closing, but Elayne wondered how these people from the Borderlands had learned what very few others knew. And if they knew, how many more did, too? She would protect her unborn child.

"wʊd jə bi wɪlɪŋ tə ɡoʊ bæk ɹaɪɾ əweɪ, mɛɝɪlɪl?" ʃi æskt. ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝ æksɛptɪd wɪð əlækɹəɾi, ən wɪð ə slaɪt waɪɾənɪŋ ə hɝ aɪz ðət sədʒɛstəd ʃi wəd pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɛni əmaʊn ə stɛntʃ tə əvɔɪd ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ. "ðɛn wɪl ɡoʊ təɡɛðɝ. ɪf ðeɪ wɑnə mit mi sun, nʌθɪŋ kən bi sunɝ ðən tədeɪ." ðeɪ nu tu mʌtʃ fəɹ dɪleɪ. nʌθɪŋ kəd bi əlaʊd tə θɹɛɾən əɹ tʃaɪld. nʌθɪŋ!

"Would you be willing to go back right away, Merilille?" she asked. The other sister accepted with alacrity, and with a slight widening of her eyes that suggested she would put up with any amount of stench to avoid returning to the Windfinders a little longer. "Then we will go together. If they want to meet me soon, nothing can be sooner than today." They knew too much for delay. Nothing could be allowed to threaten her child. Nothing!


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɛvən


CHAPTER 27

tə sɝpɹaɪz kwinz ən kɪŋz


To Surprise Queens and Kings

ɪt wɑz nɑt kwaɪt soʊ sɪmpəl əz dʒʌst seɪɪŋ ʃi wəd ɡoʊ, ʌv kɔɹs.

It was not quite so simple as just saying she would go, of course.

"ðɪs ɪz ənwaɪz, sɪstɝ," eɪvinhə sɛd dɑɹkli əz mɛɝɪlɪl skɝiɾ ɔf tə fɹɛʃən hɝsɛlf. skɝiɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ; ðə ɡɹeɪ sim tə bi kipɪŋ ə ʃɑɹp aɪ aʊt fəɹ si foʊk bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹitʃt ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum dɔɹz. wən ə sɪstɝ ʌv ɪleɪnz stændɪŋ sɛd ɡoʊ, mɛɝɪlɪl wɛnt. ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ ən ʃɔl ɹæpt ɝaʊn əɹ soʊ ʃi lʊk vɛɹi mʌtʃ ðə waɪz wʌn, eɪvinhə stʊɾ oʊvɝ ɪleɪn əɾ əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ teɪbəl, "ðɪs ɪz vɛɹi ənwaɪz."

"This is unwise, sister," Aviendha said darkly as Merilille scurried off to freshen herself. Scurried in truth; the Gray seemed to be keeping a sharp eye out for Sea Folk before she reached the sitting room doors. When a sister of Elayne's standing said go, Merilille went. Arms folded and shawl wrapped around her so she looked very much the Wise One, Aviendha stood over Elayne at her writing table, "This is very unwise."

"waɪz?" bɝdʒɪt ɡɹaʊld, fiɾ əpɑɹɾ ən fɪsts plæntəɾ ɑn əɹ hɪps. "waɪz? ðə ɡɝl wʊdnt noʊ 'waɪz' ɪf ɪt bɪɾ əɹ ɑn ðə noʊz! waɪ ðɪs ɹʌʃ? lɛt mɛɝɪlɪl də wʌt ɡɹeɪz du, ɝeɪnʒ ə pɑɹli ɪn ə fju deɪz, əɹ ə wik. kwinz heɪt biɪŋ sɝpɹaɪzd, ən kɪŋz dɪspaɪz ɪt. bɪliv mi, aɪ noʊ ɪt tə maɪ kɑst. ðeɪ faɪnd weɪz tə meɪk jə ɹəɡɹɛɾ ɪt." ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn mɪɹɝɾ əɹ æŋɡɝ ən fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən.

"Wise?" Birgitte growled, feet apart and fists planted on her hips. "Wise? The girl wouldn't know 'wise' if it bit her on the nose! Why this rush? Let Merilille do what Grays do, arrange a parley in a few days, or a week. Queens hate being surprised, and kings despise it. Believe me, I know it to my cost. They find ways to make you regret it." The Warder bond mirrored her anger and frustration.

"aɪ wɑnə kætʃ əm baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, bɝdʒɪt. ɪt maɪt hɛlp mi tə faɪn aʊt dʒʌs haʊ mʌtʃ ðeɪ noʊ əbaʊt mi." ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, ɪleɪn pʊʃt əweɪ ðə blɑɾɪd peɪdʒ ən tʊk ənʌðɝ ʃit fɹəm ði ɪnleɪd ɹoʊzwʊd peɪpɝ-bɑks. hɝ wɪɹinəs hæd vænɪʃt wɪð mɛɝɪlɪlz nuz, bʌt ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə stɛɾi, klin hæn dɪd sim dɪfəkəlt. ðə wɝɾɪŋ niɾəd tə bi dʒʌst ɹaɪt, tu. ðɪs wɑz nɑt tə bi ə lɛɾɝ fɹəm ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ, bʌt fɹəm ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ. ðeɪ hæd tə si wʌt ʃi wɑntəɾ əm tə si.

"I want to catch them by surprise, Birgitte. It might help me to find out just how much they know about me." Grimacing, Elayne pushed away the blotted page and took another sheet from the inlaid rosewood paper-box. Her weariness had vanished with Merilille's news, but writing a steady, clean hand did seem difficult. The wording needed to be just right, too. This was not to be a letter from the Daughter-Heir of Andor, but from Elayne Trakand, Aes Sedai of the Green Ajah. They had to see what she wanted them to see.

"tʃɹaɪ tə tɔk səm blʌɾi sɛns ɪndə hɝ, eɪvinhə," bɝdʒɪt mʌɾɝd. "ɪn keɪs jə kænt, aɪ hæd bɛst si ɪf aɪ kən skɹeɪp təɡɛðɝ ə suɾəbəl fleɪmɪŋ ɛskɔɹt."

"Try to talk some bloody sense into her, Aviendha," Birgitte muttered. "In case you can't, I had best see if I can scrape together a suitable flaming escort."

"noʊ ɛskɔɹt, bɝdʒɪt. ɪksɛp fəɹ ju. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ən əɹ wɔɹɾɝ. ən eɪvinhə, ʌv kɔɹs." ɪleɪn pɔzd ɪn ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə smaɪl əɾ əɹ sɪstɝ, hu dɪd nɑt smaɪl bæk.

"No escort, Birgitte. Except for you. An Aes Sedai and her Warder. And Aviendha, of course." Elayne paused in writing to smile at her sister, who did not smile back.

"aɪ noʊ jəɹ kɝədʒ, ɪleɪn," eɪvinhə sɛd. "aɪ ædmaɪɹ jəɹ kɝədʒ. bʌɾ ivən ʃəməd kɑnd noʊ wən tə bi kɔʃəs!" ʃi spoʊk ə kɑʃən? eɪvinhə wəd nɑt noʊ kɑʃən ɪf . . . wɛl . . . ɪf ɪt bɪɾ əɹ ɑn ðə noʊz!

"I know your courage, Elayne," Aviendha said. "I admire your courage. But even Sha'mad Conde know when to be cautious!" She spoke of caution? Aviendha would not know caution if . . . well . . . if it bit her on the nose!

"æn ɛɛs sədaɪ ən əɹ wɔɹɾɝ?" bɝdʒɪɾ ɪkskleɪmd. "aɪ toʊl ju, jə kænt ɡoʊ ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hæv ædvɛntʃɝz ɛni mɔɹ!"

"An Aes Sedai and her Warder?" Birgitte exclaimed. "I told you, you can't go running off trying to have adventures any more!"

"noʊ ɛskɔɹt," ɪleɪn sɛd fɝmli, dɪpɪŋ əɹ pɛn fəɹ ənʌðɝ tʃɹaɪ. "ðɪs ɪzən ən ædvɛntʃɝ. ɪts dʒʌs ðə weɪ ɪt mʌs bi dʌn." θɹoʊɪŋ ʌp əɹ hænz, bɝdʒɪt ɡɹaʊl sɛvɹəl oʊðz, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ɪleɪn hæd nɑt hɝd bɪfɔɹ.

"No escort," Elayne said firmly, dipping her pen for another try. "This isn't an adventure. It is just the way it must be done." Throwing up her hands, Birgitte growled several oaths, but nothing Elayne had not heard before.

tə hɝ sɝpɹaɪz, mɛlɝ meɪd noʊ əbdʒɛkʃən tə steɪɪŋ bɪhaɪnd. ə miɾɪŋ wɪð fɔɹ ɹulɝz wəd hɑɹdli bi əz bɔɹɪŋ əz miɾɪŋ mɝtʃəns, bʌɾ i bɛɡd liv tə bi əbaʊɾ ɪz duɾiz sɪns ʃi dɪd nɑt nid hɪm. ðət kəntɛntəd hɝ. eɪ kæptən ə ðə ɹɔɪəl ɡɑɹdz wəd meɪk ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz θɪŋk ə hɝ əz dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ sunɝ ðən ʃi wɑntəd. nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðət mɛlɝ maɪt dɪsaɪd tə lɪɹ ət hɝ.

To her surprise, Mellar made no objection to staying behind. A meeting with four rulers would hardly be as boring as meeting merchants, but he begged leave to be about his duties since she did not need him. That contented her. A Captain of the Royal Guards would make the Borderlanders think of her as Daughter-Heir sooner than she wanted. Not to mention that Mellar might decide to leer at her.

kæptən mɛlɝz ʌnkənsɝn wɑz nɑt ʃɛɹd baɪ ðə ɹɛst ə hɝ bɑɾiɡɑɹd, ðoʊ. wʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹdzwɪmən əpɛɹənli wɛn ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ keɪsil, kəz ðə tɔl ɝæfɛlɪn wʊmən keɪm stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum waɪl ɪleɪn wɑz stɪl ɹaɪɾɪŋ, dɪmændɪŋ tə əkʌmpəni ɪleɪn wɪð ði ɪntaɪɝ bɑɾiɡɑɹd. bɝdʒɪt faɪnəli hæd tə ɔɹɾɝ əɹ aʊt tə stɑp əɹ pɹoʊɾɛsts.

Captain Mellar's unconcern was not shared by the rest of her bodyguard, though. One of the Guardswomen apparently went running for Caseille, because the tall Arafellin woman came striding into the sitting room while Elayne was still writing, demanding to accompany Elayne with the entire bodyguard. Birgitte finally had to order her out to stop her protests.

fəɹ wʌns, bɝdʒɪɾ əpɪɹd tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə fæk ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz nɑt gɑnə bi bʌdʒd, livɪŋ wɪð keɪsil tə tʃeɪnʒ əɹ kloʊðz. wɛl, ʃi stɔkt ɔf ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ oʊðz, slæmɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn əɹ wɪð ə kɹæʃ, bʌɾ ət list ʃi dɪd ɡoʊ. jə maɪɾ əv θɔt ʃi wəd bi hæpi fəɹ ə tʃæns tə teɪk ɔf ðət kæptən-dʒɛnɝəlz koʊt, bʌt ðə bɑn maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ən ɛkoʊ ʌv əɹ kɝsɪz. eɪvinhə dɪd nɑt kɝs, bʌt ʃi kɛpt ʌp əɹ ædmənɪʃənz. ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd tə bi dʌn ɪn sətʃ ə wɝlwɪnd, ðoʊ, ðəɾ ɪleɪn hæɾ ən ɪkskjus tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðɛm.

For once, Birgitte appeared to recognize the fact that Elayne was not going to be budged, leaving with Caseille to change her clothes. Well, she stalked off grumbling oaths, slamming the door behind her with a crash, but at least she did go. You might have thought she would be happy for a chance to take off that Captain-General's coat, but the bond might as well have been an echo of her curses. Aviendha did not curse, but she kept up her admonitions. Everything had to be done in such a whirlwind, though, that Elayne had an excuse to ignore them.

ɛsænd wɑz sʌmən ən bɪɡæn leɪɪŋ aʊt suɾəbəl ɡɑɹməns, waɪl ɪleɪn heɪstəli eɪɾ əɹ mɪddeɪ mil ɝli. ʃi hæd nɑt sɛn fəɹ ɪt; eɪvinhə hæd. əpɛɹənli, mɑneɪəl sɛd mɪsɪŋ milz wɑz əz bæɾ əz iɾɪŋ tu mʌtʃ. mɪstʃɹəs hɑɹfɝ, ɪnfɔɹm ðət ʃi wəɾ əv tə hændəl ðə ɡlæsmeɪkɝz, ən ði ʌðɝ dɛləɡeɪʃənz əz wɛl, ɡɹɪməs feɪnli ivən əz ʃi ɪnklaɪn əɹ hɛɾ ɪn æksɛptəns. bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ, ʃi ənaʊns ðət ʃi hæɾ əkwaɪɝd ɡoʊts fəɹ ðə pæləs. ɪleɪn niɾəd tə dʒɹɪŋk ɡoʊts mɪlk, ən lɑts ʌv ɪt. kɛɝin ɡɹoʊn ət hɪɹɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz tə titʃ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ðət naɪt, bʌɾ ət lis ðə wʊmən meɪd noʊ kɑmɛn ɑn əɹ daɪət. ɪn tʃɹuθ, ʃi hoʊp tə bi bæk ɪn ðə pæləs baɪ naɪtfɔl, bʌt ʃi ɔlsoʊ ɪkspɛktəd tə bi əz taɪɝɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi tɔt ðət lɛsən. vændin dɪd nɑɾ ɔfɝ ædvaɪs, iðɝ, nɑɾ ə ðət sɔɹt. ɪleɪn hæd stʌɾid ðə neɪʃənz ə ðə blaɪtbɔɹɾɝ əlɔŋ wɪð ɛvɹi ʌðɝ læn əz pɑɹɾ ə hɝ ɛdʒəkeɪʃən, ən hæd dɪskʌst əɹ ɪntɛntʃənz wɪð ðə waɪt-hɛɹd ɡɹin, hu nu ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz wɛl, jɛt ʃi wəɾ əv dɪɹli lʌv tə teɪk vændin əlɔŋ. sʌmwʌn u hæɾ æktʃəli  lɪvd ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz maɪt si nuɑnsɪz ðəɾ ɪskeɪp hɝ. bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt dɛɹ də mɔɹ ðən æsk ə fju læs hɝid kwɛstʃənz waɪl ɛsænd wɑz dʒɹɛsɪŋ hɝ, dʒʌs tə ɹiəʃʊɹ hɝsɛlf ɑn θɪŋz vændin hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi toʊl hɝ. nɑt ðət ʃi niɾəd ɹiəʃʊɹəns, ʃi ɹilaɪzd. ʃi fɛlt əz foʊkəst əz bɝdʒɪt dʒɹɔɪŋ ə baʊ.

Essande was summoned and began laying out suitable garments, while Elayne hastily ate her midday meal early. She had not sent for it; Aviendha had. Apparently, Monaelle said missing meals was as bad as eating too much. Mistress Harfor, informed that she would have to handle the glassmakers, and the other delegations as well, grimaced faintly even as she inclined her head in acceptance. Before leaving, she announced that she had acquired goats for the Palace. Elayne needed to drink goat's milk, and lots of it. Careane groaned at hearing that she was to teach the Windfinders that night, but at least the woman made no comment on her diet. In truth, she hoped to be back in the Palace by nightfall, but she also expected to be as tired as if she had already taught that lesson. Vandene did not offer advice, either, not of that sort. Elayne had studied the nations of the Blightborder along with every other land as part of her education, and had discussed her intentions with the white-haired Green, who knew the Borderlands well, yet she would have dearly loved to take Vandene along. Someone who had actually lived in the Borderlands might see nuances that escaped her. But she did not dare do more than ask a few last hurried questions while Essande was dressing her, just to reassure herself on things Vandene had already told her. Not that she needed reassurance, she realized. She felt as focused as Birgitte drawing a bow.

faɪnəli, ɹin hæd tə bi bɹɔt fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi wɑz jɛɾ əɡɛn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns ə fɔɹmɝ sʌldəm ðət ʃi, tu, kəd tʃænəl. ɹin hæd bɪn meɪkɪŋ ðət wiv ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ ɛvɹi deɪ sɪns ʃi fɝst woʊv ɪt tə sɛn mɛɝɪlɪl ɔf; ʃi kəɾ oʊpən ɪɾ ɑn ðə seɪm spɑɾ ɪn bɹəm wʊd wɪð noʊ dɪfəkəlti. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ mæps ə ðəɾ ɛɹiə ɪn ðə pæləs ðət wɝ ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ mɛɝɪlɪl tə mɑɹk ðə kæmps pəzɪʃənz vɛɹi wɛl, ən ɪf ɪleɪn əɹ eɪvinhə woʊv ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, ɪt maɪɾ oʊpən tɛn maɪlz əɹ mɔɹ fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ðə kæmps ðən ðə smɔl klɪɹɪŋ ɹin nu. ðə snoʊ hæd stɑp fɔlɪŋ ɪn bɹəm wʊd bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡɹeɪ ɹɪtɝnd, jɛɾ ivən soʊ, tɛn maɪlz ɪn fɹɛʃ snoʊ kəd min ənʌðɝ tu aʊɝz ət bɛst. ɪleɪn wɑntəd ðɪs dʌn kwɪkli. spid. ɛvɹiwʌn hæd tə muv wɪð spid.

Finally, Reanne had to be brought from where she was yet again trying to convince a former sul'dam that she, too, could channel. Reanne had been making that weave in the stableyard every day since she first wove it to send Merilille off; she could open it on the same spot in Braem Wood with no difficulty. There were no maps of that area in the Palace that were good enough for Merilille to mark the camp's positions very well, and if Elayne or Aviendha wove the gateway, it might open ten miles or more farther from the camps than the small clearing Reanne knew. The snow had stopped falling in Braem Wood before the Gray returned, yet even so, ten miles in fresh snow could mean another two hours at best. Elayne wanted this done quickly. Speed. Everyone had to move with speed.

ðə si foʊk mʌst əv bɪn əwɛɹ ə ðə bʌsəl ðəɾ ɛnvɛləp ðə pæləs, ɡɑɹdzwɪmən ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðə hɔlweɪz kæɹiɪŋ mɛsədʒəz ən fɛtʃɪŋ ðɪs pɝsən əɹ ðæt, bʌɾ ɪleɪn meɪd ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ toʊl nʌθɪŋ. səpoʊz zeɪɾə dɪsaɪɾɪd tə kʌm əlɔŋ, ʃi wɑz keɪpəbəl ə hævɪŋ wʌn ə ðə wɪndfɪndɝz meɪk əɹ oʊn ɡeɪtweɪ ɪf ɪleɪn ɹəfjuz hɝ, ən ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs wɑz ə kɑmpləkeɪʃən tə bi əvɔɪɾəd. ðə wʊmən ɔlɹɛɾi bɪheɪvd əz ðoʊ ʃi hæɾ əz mʌtʃ ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə pæləs əz ɪleɪn hɝsɛlf. zeɪɾə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɑmənɪɹ kəd ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ əz ʃʊɹli əz mɛlɝ lɪɹɪŋ ət hɝ.

The Sea Folk must have been aware of the bustle that enveloped the Palace, Guardswomen running through the hallways carrying messages and fetching this person or that, but Elayne made sure they were told nothing. Suppose Zaida decided to come along, she was capable of having one of the Windfinders make her own gateway if Elayne refused her, and the Wavemistress was a complication to be avoided. The woman already behaved as though she had as much right in the Palace as Elayne herself. Zaida trying to domineer could ruin everything as surely as Mellar leering at her.

meɪkɪŋ heɪst sim bɪɑn ɛsænz əbɪləɾi, jɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls flu, ən baɪ ðə taɪm ðə sʌn stʊd stʃɹeɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd, ɪleɪn faʊn hɝsɛlf ɹaɪɾɪŋ faɪɹhɑɹt sloʊli θɹu ðə snoʊz ə bɹəm wʊd, nɪɹ ɪnʌf fɪfti liɡz nɔɹθ ə keɪɛmlɪn əz ðə waɪld ɡus flu bʌɾ oʊnli ə stɛp θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ ɪndə θɪk fɔɹəst ə tɔl paɪn ən lɛðɝlif ən oʊk mɪkst wɪð ɡɹeɪ-bɹæntʃt tʃɹiz ðət hæd lɔs ðɛɹ livz. əkeɪʒənəli ə bɹɔd mɛdoʊ oʊpən ʌp, kʌvɝd wɪð snoʊ laɪk waɪt kɑɹpəts, ənblɛmɪʃt seɪv fəɹ ðə hʊfpɹɪns ə mɛɝɪlɪlz ɹʌnɪŋ hɔɹs. mɛɝɪlɪl hæd bɪn sɛn əhɛd wɪð ðə lɛɾɝ, ən ɪleɪn, eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪt hæd fɑloʊɾ æftɝ ən aʊɝ, tə ɡɪv əɹ taɪm tə ɹitʃ ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz əhɛɾ ə ðɛm. ðə ɹoʊd fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn tə nu bɹəm leɪ səm maɪlz tə ðə wɛst. hɪɹ, ðeɪ cʊɾə bɪn ə θaʊzən liɡz fɹəm hjumən hæbəteɪʃən.

Making haste seemed beyond Essande's ability, yet everyone else flew, and by the time the sun stood straight overhead, Elayne found herself riding Fireheart slowly through the snows of Braem Wood, near enough fifty leagues north of Caemlyn as the wild goose flew but only a step through the gateway into thick forest of tall pine and leatherleaf and oak mixed with gray-branched trees that had lost their leaves. Occasionally a broad meadow opened up, covered with snow like white carpets, unblemished save for the hoofprints of Merilille's running horse. Merilille had been sent ahead with the letter, and Elayne, Aviendha and Birgitte had followed after an hour, to give her time to reach the Borderlanders ahead of them. The road from Caemlyn to New Braem lay some miles to the west. Here, they could have been a thousand leagues from human habitation.

fəɹ ɪleɪn, dʒɹɛsɪŋ hæd bɪn əz sɪɹiəs əz tʃuzɪŋ ɑɹmɝ. hɝ kloʊk wɑz laɪnd wɪð mɑɹɾən fəɹ æɾəd wɔɹmθ, bʌt ðə mətɪɹiəl wɑz dɑɹk ɡɹin wʊl, sɑf jɛt θɪk, ən əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs wɑz ɡɹin sɪlk, ən ʌnədɔɹnd. ivən əɹ snʌɡ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɡlʌvz wɝ pleɪn dɑɹk ɡɹin lɛðɝ. ənlɛs ðə sɔɹdz hæd bɪn dʒɹɔn, ðət wɑz ði ɑɹmɝ ɪn wɪtʃ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪst ɹulɝz. hɝ oʊnli vɪzəbəl dʒuəlɹi wɑz ə smɔl æmbɝ bɹutʃ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə tɝɾəl, ən ɪf ɛniwʌn θɔt ðəɾ ɑd, lɛt ðɛm. ən ɑɹmi ʌv bɔɹɾɝləndɝz wɑz bɪɑn ɛni tʃɹæp wʌn ə hɝ ɹaɪvəlz kəd leɪ, əɹ ivən ɪleɪɾə, bʌt ðoʊz tɛn sɪstɝz - tɛn əɹ mɔɹ - maɪt bi ɪleɪɾəz. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə lɛt hɝsɛlf bi bʌndəld ɔf bæk tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ.

For Elayne, dressing had been as serious as choosing armor. Her cloak was lined with marten for added warmth, but the material was dark green wool, soft yet thick, and her riding dress was green silk, and unadorned. Even her snug riding gloves were plain dark green leather. Unless the swords had been drawn, that was the armor in which an Aes Sedai faced rulers. Her only visible jewelry was a small amber brooch in the shape of a turtle, and if anyone thought that odd, let them. An army of Borderlanders was beyond any trap one of her rivals could lay, or even Elaida, but those ten sisters - ten or more - might be Elaida's. She was not about to let herself be bundled off back to the White Tower.

"wi kən tɝn bæk fɹəm ðɪs wɪθaʊɾ ɪnkɝɪŋ toʊ, ɪleɪn." eɪvinhə, skaʊlɪŋ, stɪl wɔɹ əɹ il ɡɑɹməns, wɪð əɹ sɪŋɡəl sɪlvɝ nɛkləs ən hɛvi aɪvɝi bɹeɪslət. hɝ stɑki beɪ wɑz ə hænd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən faɪɹhɑɹɾ əɹ bɝdʒɪts lin ɡɹeɪ, æɹoʊ, ən mʌtʃ dʒɛnlɝ tə hændəl, ðoʊ ʃi ɹoʊd mɔɹ izəli ðən wʌns ʃi hæd. dɑɹk-stɑkɪnɡd lɛɡz bɛɹɾ əbʌv ðə ni baɪ stʃɹædlɪŋ ə sæɾəl, ʃi æktʃəli  lʊkt wɔɹm, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə ʃɔl ɹæpt ɝaʊn əɹ hɛd. ənlaɪk bɝdʒɪt, ʃi hæd nɑt sist əɹ ətɛmps tə dɪsweɪɾ ɪleɪn. "sɝpɹaɪz ɪz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, ðəl wɪl ɹɪspɛk jə mɔɹ ɪf ðeɪ mʌs mit jə hæfweɪ."

"We can turn back from this without incurring toh, Elayne." Aviendha, scowling, still wore her Aiel garments, with her single silver necklace and heavy ivory bracelet. Her stocky bay was a hand shorter than Fireheart or Birgitte's lean gray, Arrow, and much gentler to handle, though she rode more easily than once she had. Dark-stockinged legs bared above the knee by straddling a saddle, she actually looked warm, except for the shawl wrapped around her head. Unlike Birgitte, she had not ceased her attempts to dissuade Elayne. "Surprise is all very well, but they will respect you more if they must meet you halfway."

"aɪ kən hɑɹdli əbændən mɛɝɪlɪl," ɪleɪn sɛd mɔɹ peɪʃənli ðən ʃi fɛlt. pɝhæps ʃi wɑz nɑt wɪɹi ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, bʌt niðɝ dɪd ʃi fil pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli fɹɛʃ, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl ɹɛɾi tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð bædʒɝɪŋ. bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑnə snæp əɾ eɪvinhə. "ʃi maɪt fil sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə ful, stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɪð ə lɛɾɝ ənaʊnsɪŋ ðəɾ aɪm kʌmɪŋ ən aɪ doʊn kʌm. wɝs, aɪ wəd fil ə ful."

"I can hardly abandon Merilille," Elayne said more patiently than she felt. Perhaps she was not weary any longer, but neither did she feel particularly fresh, not at all ready to put up with badgering. But she did not want to snap at Aviendha. "She might feel something of a fool, standing there with a letter announcing that I'm coming and I don't come. Worse, I would feel a fool."

"bɛɾɝ tə fil ə ful ðən bi wʌn," bɝdʒɪt mʌɾɝd, hæf ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. hɝ dɑɹk kloʊk spɹɛd bɪhaɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ən əɹ ɪntʃɹəkət bɹeɪd hʌŋ fɹəm ði oʊpənɪŋ ə hɝ hʊɾ ɔlmoʊs tə hɝ weɪst. pʊlɪŋ ðət hʊɾ ʌp dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə fɹeɪm əɹ feɪs wɑz ðə wʌn kənsɛʃən ʃi hæd meɪd tə ðə koʊld ən ðə ɡʌstɪŋ wɪn ðət səmtaɪmz lɪftəd fɹɛʃ-fɔlən snoʊ laɪk fɛðɝz. ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn əɹ vɪʒən əbskjʊɹd. ðə kʌvɝ ɑn əɹ baʊz sæɾəl-keɪs, mɛn tə kip ðə bɑstʃɹɪŋ dʒɹaɪ, hʌŋ daʊn soʊ ʃi kəd ɹitʃ ðə baʊ kwɪkli. ðə sədʒɛstʃən ðət ʃi wɛɹ ə sɔɹd hæd bɪn kwɔʃt wɪð əz mʌtʃ ɪndɪɡneɪʃən əz ɪf ɪleɪn hæɾ æskt eɪvinhə tə wɛɹ wʌn. bɝdʒɪt nu ðə baʊ, bʌt ʃi kleɪmd ʃi maɪt stæb hɝsɛlf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒɹɔ ə sɔɹd. stɪl, hɝ ʃɔɹt ɡɹin koʊt wʊɾə blɛndəɾ ɪndə wʊdlænz əɾ ənʌðɝ taɪm ə ðə jɪɹ, ən fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, hɝ waɪd-lɛɡəd tʃɹaʊzɝz wɝ ðə seɪm kʌlɝ. ʃi wɑz ə wɔɹɾɝ naʊ, nɑt ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd, jɛt ʃi wɑz nɑt soʊ pliz baɪ ðə taɪɾəl əz maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪkspɛktəd. ðə bɑn kæɹiɾ əz mʌtʃ fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən əz əlɝtnəs.

"Better to feel a fool than be one," Birgitte muttered, half under her breath. Her dark cloak spread behind her saddle, and her intricate braid hung from the opening of her hood almost to her waist. Pulling that hood up just enough to frame her face was the one concession she had made to the cold and the gusting wind that sometimes lifted fresh-fallen snow like feathers. She did not want her vision obscured. The cover on her bow's saddle-case, meant to keep the bowstring dry, hung down so she could reach the bow quickly. The suggestion that she wear a sword had been quashed with as much indignation as if Elayne had asked Aviendha to wear one. Birgitte knew the bow, but she claimed she might stab herself trying to draw a sword. Still, her short green coat would have blended into woodlands at another time of the year, and for a wonder, her wide-legged trousers were the same color. She was a Warder now, not the Captain-General of the Queen's Guard, yet she was not so pleased by the title as might have been expected. The bond carried as much frustration as alertness.

ɪleɪn saɪd, hɝ bɹɛθ mɪstɪŋ. "ju tu noʊ wʌɾ aɪ hoʊp tə ətʃiv hɪɹ. juv noʊn sɪns aɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd. waɪ ɑɹ jə sʌɾənli tʃɹiɾɪŋ mi əz ɪf aɪm meɪɾ ə bloʊn ɡlæs?"

Elayne sighed, her breath misting. "You two know what I hope to achieve here. You've known since I decided. Why are you suddenly treating me as if I'm made of blown glass?"

ðə pɛɹ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks pæs hɝ, itʃ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ði ʌðɝ tə spik fɝst, ðən saɪlənli tɝn tə stɛɹ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, ən sʌɾənli ʃi nu.

The pair exchanged looks past her, each waiting for the other to speak first, then silently turned to stare straight ahead, and suddenly she knew.

"wɛn maɪ tʃaɪld ɪz bɔɹn," ʃi sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "ju kən boʊθ əplaɪ tə bi hɝ wɛt nɝs." ɪf əɹ tʃaɪld wɑz "hɝ." ɪf mɪn hæd sɛd, ɪt wɑz lɔst ɪn eɪvinhə ən bɝdʒɪts waɪn-heɪz mɛmɹiz ə ðət naɪt. ɪt maɪt bi bɛɾɝ tə hæv ə sʌn fɝst, soʊ hi kəd bɪɡɪn ɪz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪz sɪstɝ keɪm. jɛɾ ə dɔɾɝ sɪkjʊɹd ðə səksɛʃən, waɪl ə loʊn sʌn wəd bi pʊʃt əsaɪd, ən əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi wɑntəd mɔɹ ðən wʌn, nʌθɪŋ sɛd ʃi wəɾ əv ənʌðɝ tʃaɪld. ðə laɪt sɛn əɹ mɔɹ ə ɹændz tʃɪlʒɹən, bʌt ʃi hæd tə bi pɹæktəkəl. "aɪ maɪsɛlf də nɑt niɾ ə wɛt nɝs."

"When my child is born," she said dryly, "you can both apply to be her wet nurse." If her child was "her." If Min had said, it was lost in Aviendha and Birgitte's wine-hazed memories of that night. It might be better to have a son first, so he could begin his training before his sister came. Yet a daughter secured the succession, while a lone son would be pushed aside, and as much as she wanted more than one, nothing said she would have another child. The Light send her more of Rand's children, but she had to be practical. "I myself do not need a wet nurse."

eɪvinhəz sʌn-dɑɹkən tʃiks tɝn dɑɹkɝ wɪð ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. bɝdʒɪts ɪkspɹɛʃən dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, jɛt ðə seɪm ɪmoʊʃən uzd əlɔŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑnd.

Aviendha's sun-darkened cheeks turned darker with embarrassment. Birgitte's expression did not change, yet the same emotion oozed along the Warder bond.

ðeɪ ɹoʊd sloʊli, fɑloʊɪŋ mɛɝɪlɪlz tʃɹæks fəɹ kloʊs ɑn tu aʊɝz, ən ɪleɪn wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ðət ðə nɪɹəs kæmp mʌs bi vɛɹi kloʊz wən bɝdʒɪt sʌɾənli pɔɪntəɾ əhɛɾ ən sɛd, "ʃaɪnɝənz," ðən izd əɹ baʊ ɪn ɪts keɪs. əlɝtnəs swɑloʊd fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ðə bɑnd. eɪvinhə tʌtʃt ðə hɪlt ə hɝ bɛl naɪf əz ɪf meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ.

They rode slowly, following Merilille's tracks for close on two hours, and Elayne was thinking that the nearest camp must be very close when Birgitte suddenly pointed ahead and said, "Shienarans," then eased her bow in its case. Alertness swallowed frustration and everything else in the bond. Aviendha touched the hilt of her belt knife as if making sure it was there.

weɪɾɪŋ bɪniθ ðə tʃɹiz, ɔf tə wʌn saɪd fɹəm mɛɝɪlɪlz tʃɹeɪsəz, mɛn ən hɔɹsəz əlaɪk wɝ soʊ stɪl ðəɾ ɪleɪn ɔlmoʊs tʊk əm fəɹ nætʃɹəl aʊtkɹɑps ə səm sɔɹɾ əntɪl ʃi meɪɾ aʊt ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ swupɪŋ kɹɛsts ɑn ðɛɹ hɛlməts. ðɛɹ maʊns wɝ nɑɾ ɑɹmɝd, əz ʃaɪnɝən hɛviz' ænəməlz ɔfən wɝ, bʌt ðə mɛn ðɛmsɛlvz wɔɹ pleɪt-ænd-meɪl, wɪð lɔŋ-hɪltɪd sɔɹdz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, ən sɔɹdz ən meɪsəz hʌŋ ət ðɛɹ bɛls ən fɹəm ðɛɹ sæɾəlz. ðɛɹ dɑɹk aɪz nɛvɝ blɪŋkt. wʌn ə ðə hɔɹsəz swɪʃt ɪts teɪl, ən ðə muvmən sim stɑɹtlɪŋ.

Waiting beneath the trees, off to one side from Merilille's traces, men and horses alike were so still that Elayne almost took them for natural outcrops of some sort until she made out the strange swooping crests on their helmets. Their mounts were not armored, as Shienaran heavies' animals often were, but the men themselves wore plate-and-mail, with long-hilted swords on their backs, and swords and maces hung at their belts and from their saddles. Their dark eyes never blinked. One of the horses swished its tail, and the movement seemed startling.

ə ʃɑɹp-feɪs mæn wɪð ə hɑɹʃ vɔɪs spoʊk əz ɪleɪn ən ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən dʒɹu ɹeɪn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. ðə kɹɛst ətɑp ɪz hɛlmət lʊk laɪk nɛɹoʊ wɪŋz. "kɪŋ isɑɹ sɛnz ɪz əʃʊɹəns ə jəɹ seɪfti, ɪleɪn sədaɪ, ən aɪ æd maɪ oʊn. aɪm kən jəkɑɾə, lɔɹɾ ə fæl aɪsən, ən meɪ pis əbændən mi ən ðə blaɪt kənsum maɪ soʊl ɪf hɑɹm bɪfɔlz jə əɹ ɛniwʌn wɪð jə ɪn əɹ kæmp."

A sharp-faced man with a harsh voice spoke as Elayne and the other two women drew rein in front of him. The crest atop his helmet looked like narrow wings. "King Easar sends his assurance of your safety, Elayne Sedai, and I add my own. I am Kayen Yokata, Lord of Fal Eisen, and may Peace abandon me and the Blight consume my soul if harm befalls you or anyone with you in our camp."

ðət wɑz nɑt soʊ kʌmfɝɾɪŋ əz ɪleɪn maɪɾ əv wɪʃt. ɔl ðiz ɡɛɹəntiz ə hɝ seɪfti oʊnli meɪd klɪɹ ðət ðəɹ hæd bɪn səm kwɛstʃən ʌv ɪt, ən maɪt stɪl bi. "dʌz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ niɾ əʃʊɹənsɪz fɹəm ʃaɪnɝənz?" ʃi sɛd. ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə ɹʌn θɹu ə nɑvəs ɛksɝsaɪz fəɹ kɑmnəs, ən ɹilaɪzd ʃi dɪd nɑt niɾ ɪt. vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ. "ju meɪ lɛd, lɔɹd kən." hi mɪɹli nɑɾəd ən tɝn ɪz hɔɹs.

That was not so comforting as Elayne might have wished. All these guarantees of her safety only made clear that there had been some question of it, and might still be. "Does an Aes Sedai need assurances from Shienarans?" she said. She started to run through a novice exercise for calmness, and realized she did not need it. Very strange. "You may lead, Lord Kayen." He merely nodded and turned his horse.

səm ə ðə ʃaɪnɝənz ɡlænst əɾ eɪvinhə wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən, ɹɛkəɡnaɪzɪŋ ən il, bʌt fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt ðeɪ sɪmpli fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪnd. oʊnli ðə hʊvz kɹʌntʃɪŋ ðə hɑɹɾɝ snoʊ bɪniθ ðə fɹɛʃ fɔl bɹoʊk ðə saɪləns ə ðɛɹ ʃɔɹt ɹaɪd. ʃi hæd bɪn ɹaɪt. ðə ʃaɪnɝən kæmp wɑz vɛɹi kloʊs. ʃi bɪɡæn tə si sɛntʃɹiz, maʊntəɾ ən ɑɹmɝd, dʒʌs mɪnəts leɪɾɝ, ən sun æftɝ ðət ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə ʃaɪnɝən kæmp.

Some of the Shienarans glanced at Aviendha without expression, recognizing an Aiel, but for the most part they simply fell in behind. Only the hooves crunching the harder snow beneath the fresh fall broke the silence of their short ride. She had been right. The Shienaran camp was very close. She began to see sentries, mounted and armored, just minutes later, and soon after that they rode into the Shienaran camp.

spɹɔld əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, ði ɛnkæmpmən sim lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ʃi hæɾ ɪmædʒənd. wɛðɝ ʃi lʊk lɛft, ɹaɪɾ əɹ əhɛd, tɛns ən kʊkfaɪɝz, laɪnz ə tɛðɝd hɔɹsəz ən ɹoʊz ʌv wæɡənz stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ə hɝ saɪt. əz ʃi ən əɹ ɛskɔɹt pæst, soʊlʒɝz lʊkt ʌp ɪn kjʊɹiɑsəɾi, hɑɹd-feɪs mɛn wɪð ðɛɹ hɛdz ʃeɪvd ɪksɛp fəɹ ə tʌft ɑn tɑp ðət wɑz səmtaɪmz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹitʃ ðə ʃoʊldɝz. fju wɔɹ ɛni pɑɹɾ ə ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ, bʌɾ ɑɹmɝ ən wɛpənz ɔlweɪz leɪ kloʊs tə hænd. ðə smɛl wɑz nɑt soʊ bæɾ əz mɛɝɪlɪl hæd dɪskɹaɪbd, ðoʊ ʃi kəd meɪk aʊt ðə feɪn oʊɾɝ ə lætʃɹinz ən hɔɹs dʌŋ bɪniθ ði ɝoʊmə ʌv wʌtɛvɝ wɑz bɔɪlɪŋ ɪn ɔl ðiz kʊkpɑts. noʊ wʌn əpɪɹd hʌŋɡɹi, ðoʊ mɛni wɝ lin. nɑt ðə linnəs ə stɑɹveɪʃən, ðoʊ, dʒʌs ðəɾ ə mɛn u hæd nɛvɝ kæɹid mʌtʃ fæɾ ɑn ðɛm. ʃi dɪd noʊɾəs ðət ðəɹ wɝ noʊ spɪts oʊvɝ ɛni faɪɝ ʃi kəd si. mit wəd bi hɑɹɾɝ tə kʌm baɪ ðən ɡɹeɪn, ðoʊ ɡɹeɪn ɪtsɛlf wɑz ɪn ʃɔɹɾ ɪnʌf səplaɪ ðɪs leɪɾ ɪn wɪntɝ. bɑɹli sup dɪd nɑt stʃɹɛŋθən ə mæn ðə weɪ mit dɪd. ðeɪ niɾəd tə muv sun; noʊwɛɹ kəd səpɔɹt fɔɹ ɑɹmiz ðɪs saɪz fəɹ lɔŋ. ʃi dʒʌs hæd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðeɪ muvd ɪn ðə ɹaɪt dɝɛkʃən.

Sprawled among the trees, the encampment seemed larger than she had imagined. Whether she looked left, right or ahead, tents and cookfires, lines of tethered horses and rows of wagons stretched out of her sight. As she and her escort passed, soldiers looked up in curiosity, hard-faced men with their heads shaved except for a tuft on top that was sometimes long enough to reach the shoulders. Few wore any part of their armor, but armor and weapons always lay close to hand. The smell was not so bad as Merilille had described, though she could make out the faint odor of latrines and horse dung beneath the aroma of whatever was boiling in all these cookpots. No one appeared hungry, though many were lean. Not the leanness of starvation, though, just that of men who had never carried much fat on them. She did notice that there were no spits over any fire she could see. Meat would be harder to come by than grain, though grain itself was in short enough supply this late in winter. Barley soup did not strengthen a man the way meat did. They needed to move soon; nowhere could support four armies this size for long. She just had to make sure they moved in the right direction.

nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ʃi sɔ wɑz ə soʊlʒɝ wɪð ə ʃeɪvən hɛd, ʌv kɔɹs, ðoʊ ðə mɛn əmʌŋ əm lʊkt ɔlmoʊst əz hɑɹd. ðəɹ wɝ flɛtʃɝz meɪkɪŋ æɹoʊz, wilɹaɪts wɝkɪŋ ɑn wæɡənz, fɛɹiɝz ʃuɪŋ hɔɹsəz, lɔnʒɹəsəz stɝɪŋ bɔɪlɪŋ kɛɾəlz, wɪmən wɝkɪŋ wɪð niɾəlz u maɪɾ əv bɪn simstʃɹəsəz əɹ waɪvz. ɡɹeɪt nʌmbɝz ə pipəl ɔlweɪz fɑloʊɾ ən ɑɹmi, səmtaɪmz əz mɛni əz ðə soʊlʒɝz ðɛmsɛlvz. ʃi dɪd nɑt si ɛniwʌn u cʊɾə bɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊ; sɪstɝz wɝ ənlaɪkli tə pʊʃ ʌp ðɛɹ slivz ən wɝk wʊɾən pæɾəlz ɪn ðə lɔnʒɹi kɛɾəlz, əɹ dɑn pætʃt wʊlənz ən sɪt dɑɹnɪŋ bɹitʃɪz. waɪ dɪd ðeɪ wɑnə ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən? ʃi ɹɪzɪstɪd ðə dɪzaɪɝ tə ɛmbɹeɪs ðə sɔɹs, tə dʒɹɔ seɪaɪdɑɹ θɹu ðə tɝɾəl æŋɡɹil pɪn tə hɝ bɹɛst. wʌn bæɾəl əɾ ə taɪm, ən fɝst ʃi mʌs faɪt fəɹ ændɝ.

Not everyone she saw was a soldier with a shaven head, of course, though the men among them looked almost as hard. There were fletchers making arrows, wheelwrights working on wagons, farriers shoeing horses, laundresses stirring boiling kettles, women working with needles who might have been seamstresses or wives. Great numbers of people always followed an army, sometimes as many as the soldiers themselves. She did not see anyone who could have been Aes Sedai, though; sisters were unlikely to push up their sleeves and work wooden paddles in the laundry kettles, or don patched woolens and sit darning breeches. Why did they want to remain hidden? She resisted the desire to embrace the Source, to draw saidar through the turtle angreal pinned to her breast. One battle at a time, and first she must fight for Andor.

bɪfɔɹ ə mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ tɛn ðən ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz ʃi kəd si, peɪl kænvəs wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl lɔŋ pik, kən dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən hændəɾ əɹ daʊn. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊvɝ wɛðɝ tə də ðə seɪm fəɹ bɝdʒɪɾ ən eɪvinhə, bʌt bɝdʒɪt sɑlvd ɪz dɪlɛmə baɪ stɛpɪŋ daʊn smuðli ən hændɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz tə ə weɪɾɪŋ soʊlʒɝ, eɪvinhə baɪ hæf-fɔlɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə sæɾəl. ʃi hæɾ ɪmpɹuvd əɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ, bʌt maʊntɪŋ ən dɪsmaʊntɪŋ stɪl ɡeɪv əɹ dɪfəkəlti. ɡlɛɹɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ tə si wɛðɝ ɛniwʌn wɑz læfɪŋ, ʃi smuð daʊn əɹ bʌlki skɝts, ðən ənɹæp ðə ʃɔl fɹəm ɝaʊn əɹ hɛɾ ən sɛɾəld ɪɾ ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. bɝdʒɪt wɑtʃt əɹ hɔɹs biɪŋ teɪkən əweɪ əz ðoʊ ʃi wɪʃt ʃi hæd teɪkən əɹ baʊ ən kwɪvɝ fɹəm ðə sæɾəl. kən pʊld oʊpən wʌn ə ði ɛntʃɹi flæps ən baʊd.

Before a much larger tent than any of the others she could see, pale canvas with a single long peak, Kayen dismounted and handed her down. He hesitated over whether to do the same for Birgitte and Aviendha, but Birgitte solved his dilemma by stepping down smoothly and handing her reins to a waiting soldier, Aviendha by half-falling out of the saddle. She had improved her riding, but mounting and dismounting still gave her difficulty. Glaring around her to see whether anyone was laughing, she smoothed down her bulky skirts, then unwrapped the shawl from around her head and settled it on her shoulders. Birgitte watched her horse being taken away as though she wished she had taken her bow and quiver from the saddle. Kayen pulled open one of the entry flaps and bowed.

dʒɹɔɪŋ ə læs dip kɑmɪŋ bɹɛθ, ɪleɪn lɛd ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən ɪn. ʃi kəd nɑɾ əlaʊ ðɛm tə si hɝ əz ə sʌpləkənt. ʃi wɑz nɑt hɪɹ tə bɛɡ, əɹ tə dɪfɛnd. səmtaɪmz, ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn hæd toʊld əɹ wən ʃi wɑz ə tʃaɪld, jə faɪn jɝsɛlf aʊtnʌmbɝd, wɪð noʊ pæθ tə slɪp əweɪ. ɔlweɪz də wʌt jəɹ ɛnəmi list ɪkspɛks, ɪleɪn. ɪn ðət keɪs, jə mʌst ətæk. fɹəm ðə stɑɹt, ʃi mʌst ətæk.

Drawing a last deep calming breath, Elayne led the other two women in. She could not allow them to see her as a supplicant. She was not here to beg, or to defend. Sometimes, Gareth Bryne had told her when she was a child, you find yourself outnumbered, with no path to slip away. Always do what your enemy least expects, Elayne. In that case, you must attack. From the start, she must attack.

ɪnsaɪd, mɛɝɪlɪl ɡlaɪɾɪd tə hɝ əkɹɔs ðə leɪɝd kɑɹpəts leɪd daʊn fəɹ ə flɔɹ. ðə dɪmɪnjəɾɪv ɡɹeɪz smaɪl wɑz nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli ɹɪlivd, bʌt klɪɹli ʃi wɑz ɡlæd tə si ɪleɪn. əsaɪd fɹəm hɝ, ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli faɪv ʌðɝz pɹɛzənt, tu wɪmən ən θɹi mɛn, ən wʌn ə ðə læɾɝ wɑz ə sɝvənt, ən oʊl kævəlɹimən baɪ hɪz baʊd lɛɡz ən skɑɹd feɪs, hu keɪm tə teɪk kloʊks ən ɡlʌvz - ən blɪŋk əɾ eɪvinhə - bɪfɔɹ ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ tə ə pleɪn wʊɾən teɪbəl ðət hɛld ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ wɪð ə tɔl-nɛk pɪtʃɝ ən ən ɝeɪ ʌv kʌps. ði ʌðɝ fɔɹ ɹul ðə neɪʃənz ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ə skæɾɝɪŋ ə bækləs kæmp tʃɛɹz ən fɔɹ lɑɹdʒ bɹeɪʒɝz hoʊldɪŋ ɡloʊɪŋ koʊlz kəmpliɾəd ðə tɛns fɝnɪʃɪŋz. ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə sɔɹɾ ə ɹɪsɛpʃən ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ maɪɾ əv ɪkspɛktəd, wɪð kɔɹɾiɝz ən mɛni sɝvəns, ən aɪɾəl kɑnvɝseɪʃən tə bi meɪd bɪfɔɹ sɪɹiəs dɪskʌʃənz kəd bɪɡɪn, ən mɛn ən wɪmən ət ðoʊz ɹulɝz' ʃoʊldɝz tə ædvaɪz ðɛm. wʌt ʃi faʊnd wɑz wʌt ʃi hæd hoʊp fɔɹ.

Inside, Merilille glided to her across the layered carpets laid down for a floor. The diminutive Gray's smile was not precisely relieved, but clearly she was glad to see Elayne. Aside from her, there were only five others present, two women and three men, and one of the latter was a servant, an old cavalryman by his bowed legs and scarred face, who came to take cloaks and gloves - and blink at Aviendha - before retreating to a plain wooden table that held a silver tray with a tall-necked pitcher and an array of cups. The other four ruled the nations of the Borderlands. A scattering of backless camp chairs and four large braziers holding glowing coals completed the tent's furnishings. This was not the sort of reception the Daughter-Heir of Andor might have expected, with courtiers and many servants, and idle conversation to be made before serious discussions could begin, and men and women at those rulers' shoulders to advise them. What she found was what she had hoped for.

hilɪŋ hæd ɹɪd mɛɝɪlɪlz aɪz ə ðɛɹ dɑɹk sɝkəlz bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɛf ðə pæləs, ən ʃi meɪɾ ɪleɪnz ɪntʃɹədʌkʃən wɪð sɪmpəl dɪɡnəɾi. "ðɪs ɪz ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, ʌv ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, əz aɪ toʊl ju." ðæt, ən nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ. ɪleɪn nu ɪnʌf fɹəm vændin tə pɪk aʊt wʌn fɹəm ənʌðɝ ə ðə fɔɹ ɹulɝz u feɪs hɝ.

Healing had rid Merilille's eyes of their dark circles before she left the Palace, and she made Elayne's introduction with simple dignity. "This is Elayne Trakand, of the Green Ajah, as I told you." That, and nothing more. Elayne knew enough from Vandene to pick out one from another of the four rulers who faced her.

"aɪ ɡɪv jə wɛlkəm, ɪleɪn sədaɪ," isɑɹ ə ʃaɪnɝ sɛd. "pis ən ðə laɪt feɪvɝ ju." hi wɑz ə ʃɔɹt mæn, noʊ tɔlɝ ðən hɝsɛlf, slɪm ɪn ə bɹɑnz-kʌlɝd koʊt, hɪz feɪs ənɹɪŋkəl dɪspaɪɾ ə lɔŋ waɪt tɑpnɑt ðət hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz hɛd. lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪz sæɾ aɪz, ʃi ɹimaɪndəd hɝsɛlf ðəɾ i wɑz əkaʊntəɾ ə waɪz ɹulɝ ən ə skɪl dɪpləmæɾ əz wɛl əz ə faɪn soʊlʒɝ. ɪn əpɪɹəns, hi wɑz nʌn ə ðoʊz θɪŋz. "meɪ aɪ ɔfɝ jə waɪn? ðə spaɪsəz ɑɹ nɑt fɹɛʃ, bʌt ðeɪv ɡeɪn ɛkstʃɹə ʃɑɹpnəs wɪð eɪdʒ."

"I give you welcome, Elayne Sedai," Easar of Shienar said. "Peace and the Light favor you." He was a short man, no taller than herself, slim in a bronze-colored coat, his face unwrinkled despite a long white topknot that hung over the side of his head. Looking at his sad eyes, she reminded herself that he was accounted a wise ruler and a skilled diplomat as well as a fine soldier. In appearance, he was none of those things. "May I offer you wine? The spices are not fresh, but they have gained extra sharpness with age."

"wɛn mɛɝɪlɪl toʊld əs jə wəd kʌm ɔl ðə weɪ fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn tədeɪ, aɪ kənfɛs aɪ wʊɾə daʊɾɪd hɝ, wɝ ʃi nɑɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ." ɛθɛniɛl ə kændɝ, pɝhæps hæf ə hæn tɔlɝ ðən mɛɝɪlɪl, wɑz plʌmp, hɝ blæk hɛɹ laɪtli dʌstɪd wɪð ɡɹeɪ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ mʌðɝli əbaʊɾ əɹ dɪspaɪɾ əɹ smaɪl. ɹiɡəl dɪɡnəɾi kloʊðd əɹ əz mʌtʃ əz dɪɾ əɹ faɪn blu wʊl. hɝ aɪz wɝ blu, tu, klɪɹ ən lɛvəl.

"When Merilille told us you would come all the way from Caemlyn today, I confess I would have doubted her, were she not Aes Sedai." Ethenielle of Kandor, perhaps half a hand taller than Merilille, was plump, her black hair lightly dusted with gray, but there was nothing motherly about her despite her smile. Regal dignity clothed her as much as did her fine blue wool. Her eyes were blue, too, clear and level.

"wi ɑɹ pliz ðət jə dɪd kʌm," peɪɾɝ ə ɝæfəl sɛɾ ɪn ə sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli dip, ɹɪtʃ vɔɪs ðət meɪɾ ɪleɪn fil wɔɹmd, sʌmhaʊ. "wi hæv mʌtʃ tə dɪskʌs wɪð ju." vændin hæd sɛɾ i wɑz ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl mæn ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, ən pɝhæps i hæd bɪn lɔŋ əɡoʊ, bʌɾ eɪdʒ hæd leɪd dip laɪnz ɪn ɪz feɪs, ən oʊnli ə fɹɪnʒ ə ʃɔɹt ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ɪz hɛd. hi wɑz tɔl ən bɹɔd-ʃoʊldɝd, ðoʊ, ɪn pleɪn ɡɹin, ən i dɪd lʊk stʃɹɔŋ. ən nɑɾ ə ful.

"We are pleased that you did come," Paitar of Arafel said in a surprisingly deep, rich voice that made Elayne feel warmed, somehow. "We have much to discuss with you." Vandene had said he was the most beautiful man in the Borderlands, and perhaps he had been long ago, but age had laid deep lines in his face, and only a fringe of short gray hair remained on his head. He was tall and broad-shouldered, though, in plain green, and he did look strong. And not a fool.

wɛɹ ði ʌðɝz kæɹid ðɛɹ jɪɹz wɪð ɡɹeɪs, tɛnoʊbiə ʌv sɑldɑiə flɔntɪd juθ ɪf nɑt bjuɾi, wɪð əɹ iɡəlz bik ʌv ə noʊz ən waɪd maʊð. hɝ tɪltəd, ɔlmoʊs pɝpəl aɪz, lɛvəl wɪð ɪleɪnz, wɝ əɹ bɛs fitʃɝ. pɝhæps əɹ oʊnli wʌn. wɛɹ ði ʌðɝz dʒɹɛst sɪmpli, ivən ɪf ðeɪ dɪd ɹul neɪʃənz, hɝ peɪl blu dʒɹɛs wɑz wɝkt wɪð pɝlz ən sæfaɪɝz ən ʃi wɔɹ mɔɹ sæfaɪɝz ɪn əɹ hɛɹ. suɾəbəl fəɹ ðə kɔɹt, bʌt hɑɹdli fəɹ ə kæmp. ən wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ kɝɾiəs . . . "ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, mɛɝɪlɪl sədaɪ," tɛnoʊbiə sɛɾ ɪn ə haɪ vɔɪs, fɹaʊnɪŋ, "aɪ noʊ jə spik tʃɹuθ, bʌt ʃi lʊks mɔɹ ə tʃaɪl ðən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. jə dɪd nɑt mɛnʃən ʃi wəd bi bɹɪŋɪŋ ə blæk-aɪɾ il."

Where the others carried their years with grace, Tenobia of Saldaea flaunted youth if not beauty, with her eagle's beak of a nose and wide mouth. Her tilted, almost purple eyes, level with Elayne's, were her best feature. Perhaps her only one. Where the others dressed simply, even if they did rule nations, her pale blue dress was worked with pearls and sapphires and she wore more sapphires in her hair. Suitable for the court, but hardly for a camp. And where they were courteous . . . "Under the Light, Merilille Sedai," Tenobia said in a high voice, frowning, "I know you speak truth, but she looks more a child than an Aes Sedai. You did not mention she would be bringing a black-eyed Aiel."

isɑɹz feɪs nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd, bʌt peɪɾɝz maʊθ taɪɾənd, ən ɛθɛniɛl wɛn soʊ fɑɹ əz tə kʌɾ əɹ aɪz bɹifli təwɔɹd tɛnoʊbiə ɪn ə ɡlæns ðət wʊɾə suɾəd ə mʌðɝ. ə vɛɹi ɪɹəteɪɾəd ən dɪspliz mʌðɝ.

Easar's face never changed, but Paitar's mouth tightened, and Ethenielle went so far as to cut her eyes briefly toward Tenobia in a glance that would have suited a mother. A very irritated and displeased mother.

"blæk?" eɪvinhə mʌɾɝd ɪn kənfjuʒən. "maɪ aɪz ɑɹ nɑt blæk. aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ blæk aɪz ɪksɛpt ɑn ə pɛdlɝ əntɪl aɪ kɹɔs ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl."

"Black?" Aviendha muttered in confusion. "My eyes are not black. I never saw black eyes except on a peddler until I crossed the Dragonwall."

"ju noʊ aɪ kən spik oʊnli ðə tʃɹuθ, tɛnoʊbiə, ən aɪ əʃʊɹ ju," mɛɝɪlɪl bɪɡæn.

"You know I can speak only the truth, Tenobia, and I assure you," Merilille began.

ɪleɪn saɪlənst əɹ wɪð ə tʌtʃ ɑn ði ɑɹm. "ɪɾ ɪz ɪnʌf ðət jə noʊ aɪm ɛɛs sədaɪ, tɛnoʊbiə. ðɪs ɪz maɪ sɪstɝ, eɪvinhə, ʌv ðə naɪn væliz sɛpt ə ðə tɑɹdæɾ il." eɪvinhə smaɪld ət ðɛm, əɹ ət lis bɛɹɾ əɹ tiθ. "ðɪs ɪz maɪ wɔɹɾɝ, leɪɾi bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən." bɝdʒɪt meɪɾ ə ʃɔɹt baʊ, hɝ ɡoʊldən bɹeɪd sweɪɪŋ.

Elayne silenced her with a touch on the arm. "It is enough that you know I am Aes Sedai, Tenobia. This is my sister, Aviendha, of the Nine Valleys Sept of the Taardad Aiel." Aviendha smiled at them, or at least bared her teeth. "This is my Warder, Lady Birgitte Trahelion." Birgitte made a short bow, her golden braid swaying.

wʌn ənaʊnsmən kɑzd əz mɛni stɑɹɾəld lʊks əz ði ʌðɝ - ən il wʊmən wɑz əɹ sɪstɝ? hɝ wɔɹɾɝ wɑz ə wʊmən? - bʌt tɛnoʊbiə ən ði ʌðɝz ɹuld lænz ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə blaɪt, wɛɹ naɪtmɛɹz tʃɹuli maɪt wɔk əbɹɔɾ ɪn deɪlaɪɾ ən ɛniwʌn u lɛt ðɛmsɛlvz bi stɑɹɾəld tu ɡɹeɪtli wɑz əz ɡʊɾ əz dɛd. ɪleɪn ɡeɪv əm noʊ tʃæns tə ɹɪkʌvɝ fʊli, ðoʊ. ətæk bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ noʊ wʌt jə ɑɹ duɪŋ, ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn hæd sɛd, ən kip ətækɪŋ əntɪl jə ɹaʊɾ əm əɹ bɹeɪk θɹu.

One announcement caused as many startled looks as the other - an Aiel woman was her sister? her Warder was a woman? - but Tenobia and the others ruled lands on the edge of the Blight, where nightmares truly might walk abroad in daylight and anyone who let themselves be startled too greatly was as good as dead. Elayne gave them no chance to recover fully, though. Attack before they know what you are doing, Gareth Bryne had said, and keep attacking until you rout them or break through.

"ʃæl wi kənsɪɾɝ ðə naɪsɪɾiz kəmpliɾəd?" ʃi sɛd, teɪkɪŋ ə kʌp ðət ɡeɪv ɔf ði ɝoʊmə ʌv spaɪst waɪn fɹəm ðə tʃɹeɪ pɹɑfɝd baɪ ði oʊl soʊlʒɝ. ə sɝdʒ ə kɑʃən floʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑnd, ən ʃi sɔ eɪvinhə ɡlæns saɪdweɪz ət ðə kʌp, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt min tə dʒɹɪŋk. ʃi wɑz dʒʌst ɡlæd niðɝ æktʃəli  spoʊk. "oʊnli ə ful wəd juv hæv kʌm ɔl ðɪs weɪ tə ɪnveɪɾ ændɝ," ʃi sɛd, wɔkɪŋ tə ðə tʃɛɹz ən sɪɾɪŋ. ɹulɝz əɹ nɑt, ðeɪ hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs bʌt tə fɑloʊ əɹ stɛɹ əɾ əɹ bæk. ət bɝdʒɪts bæk, sɪns ʃi stʊd bɪhaɪn hɝ. əz juʒəwəl, eɪvinhə foʊldəd hɝsɛlf tə ðə flɔɹ ən ɝeɪnʒd əɹ skɝts ɪn ə nit fæn. ðeɪ fɑloʊd. "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn bɹɪŋz ju," ɪleɪn wɛn ɑn. "ju ɹɪkwɛstɪd ðɪs ɑɾiəns wɪð mi kəz aɪ wɑz ət fɑlm. ðə kwɛstʃən ɪz, waɪ ɪz ðəɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə dʒju jə θɪŋk aɪ kən tɛl jə mɔɹ ʌv wʌt hæpən ðəɹ ðən jə ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ? ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ wɑz saʊndəd, dɛd hɪɹoʊz aʊɾ ə lɛdʒən ɹoʊɾ əɡɛnst sintʃæn ɪnveɪɾɝz, ən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn fɔt ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ðə skaɪ fəɹ ɔl tə si. ɪf jə noʊ ðət mʌtʃ, jə noʊ əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ."

"Shall we consider the niceties completed?" she said, taking a cup that gave off the aroma of spiced wine from the tray proffered by the old soldier. A surge of caution flowed along the Warder bond, and she saw Aviendha glance sideways at the cup, but she did not mean to drink. She was just glad neither actually spoke. "Only a fool would think you have come all this way to invade Andor," she said, walking to the chairs and sitting. Rulers or not, they had no choice but to follow or stare at her back. At Birgitte's back, since she stood behind her. As usual, Aviendha folded herself to the floor and arranged her skirts in a neat fan. They followed. "The Dragon Reborn brings you," Elayne went on. "You requested this audience with me because I was at Falme. The question is, why is that important to you? Do you think I can tell you more of what happened there than you already know? The Horn of Valere was sounded, dead heroes out of legend rode against Seanchan invaders, and the Dragon Reborn fought the Shadow in the sky for all to see. If you know that much, you know as much as I."

"ɑɾiəns?" tɛnoʊbiə sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, pɔzɪŋ hæf-siɾəd. ðə kæmp tʃɛɹ kɹikt əz ʃi lɛt hɝsɛlf dʒɹɑp ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ. "noʊ wʌn ɹɪkwɛstɪɾ ən ɑɾiəns! ivən ɪf jə ɔlɹɛɾi hɛl ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ - !"

"Audience?" Tenobia said incredulously, pausing half-seated. The camp chair creaked as she let herself drop the rest of the way. "No one requested an audience! Even if you already held the throne of Andor - !"

"lɛɾ əs steɪ tə ðə pɔɪnt, tɛnoʊbiə," peɪɾɝ bɹoʊk ɪn maɪldli. ɹæðɝ ðən sɪɾɪŋ, hi stʊd, əkeɪʒənəli sɪpɪŋ əɾ ɪz waɪn. ɪleɪn wɑz ɡlæd ʃi kəd si ðə ɹɪŋkəlz ɑn ɪz feɪs. ðət vɔɪs kəd kənfjuz ə wʊmənz θɔts, ʌðɝwaɪz.

"Let us stay to the point, Tenobia," Paitar broke in mildly. Rather than sitting, he stood, occasionally sipping at his wine. Elayne was glad she could see the wrinkles on his face. That voice could confuse a woman's thoughts, otherwise.

ɛθɛniɛl spɛɹd tɛnoʊbiə ənʌðɝ kwɪk ɡlæns waɪl siɾɪŋ hɝsɛlf, ən mɝmɝd sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ. ɪleɪn θɔt ʃi hɝd ðə wɝd "mɛɹɪdʒ," wɪð ə ɹufəl saʊnd, bʌt ðət meɪd noʊ sɛns. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ʃi tɝn əɹ ətɛnʃən tə ɪleɪn əz sun əz ʃi wɑz sɛɾəld ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ. "aɪ maɪt laɪk jəɹ fɝɑsəɾi ənʌðɝ taɪm, ɪleɪn sədaɪ, bʌt ðɛɹz lɪɾəl tə ɛndʒɔɪ fɔlɪŋ ɪndə ən æmbʊʃ ðət wʌn ə jəɹ oʊn ælaɪz əz hɛlp leɪ." tɛnoʊbiə skaʊld, ðoʊ ɛθɛniɛl dɪd nɑɾ ivən dɑɹt ðoʊz ʃɑɹp aɪz ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən. "wʌt hæpən ət fɑlm," ðə kwin ə kændɝ toʊld ɪleɪn, "ɪz nɑt soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt əz wʌt keɪm ʌv ɪt. noʊ, peɪɾɝ; wi mʌs tɛl əɹ wʌt wi mʌs tɛl hɝ. ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi noʊz tu mʌtʃ fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. wi noʊ ðət jə wɝ ə kəmpænjən tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ət fɑlm, ɪleɪn. ə fɹɛnd, pɝhæps. jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt; wɪv nɑt kʌm tə ɪnveɪd. wɪv kʌm tə faɪn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ən wɪv mɑɹtʃt ɔl ðɪs weɪ oʊnli tə faɪn ðət noʊ wʌn noʊz wɛɹ hiz tə bi faʊnd. dʒju noʊ wɛɹ i ɪz?"

Ethenielle spared Tenobia another quick glance while seating herself, and murmured something under her breath. Elayne thought she heard the word "marriage," with a rueful sound, but that made no sense. In any case, she turned her attention to Elayne as soon as she was settled in her chair. "I might like your ferocity another time, Elayne Sedai, but there's little to enjoy falling into an ambush that one of your own allies has helped lay." Tenobia scowled, though Ethenielle did not even dart those sharp eyes in her direction. "What happened at Falme," the Queen of Kandor told Elayne, "is not so important as what came of it. No, Paitar; we must tell her what we must tell her. She already knows too much for anything else. We know that you were a companion to the Dragon Reborn at Falme, Elayne. A friend, perhaps. You are right; we have not come to invade. We have come to find the Dragon Reborn. And we have marched all this way only to find that no one knows where he is to be found. Do you know where he is?"

ɪleɪn hɪɾ əɹ ɹɪlif ət ðə blʌn kwɛstʃən. ɪt wəd nɛvɝ əv bɪn æskt ɪf ðeɪ θɔt ʃi wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə kəmpænjən əɹ fɹɛnd. ʃi kəd bi dʒʌst əz blʌnt. ətæk ən kip ətækɪŋ. "waɪ dʒju wɑnə faɪn hɪm? ɛməsɛɹiz əɹ mɛsənʒɝz kəd teɪk ɛni wɝd jə wɑntəd tə sɛn hɪm." wɪtʃ wɑz əz ɡʊɾ əz æskɪŋ waɪ ðeɪ bɹɔt væst ɑɹmiz.

Elayne hid her relief at the blunt question. It would never have been asked if they thought she was more than a companion or friend. She could be just as blunt. Attack and keep attacking. "Why do you want to find him? Emissaries or messengers could take any word you wanted to send him." Which was as good as asking why they brought vast armies.

isɑɹ hæd teɪkən noʊ waɪn, ən i stʊd wɪð ɪz fɪsts ɑn ɪz hɪps. "ðə wɔɹ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ ɪz fɔɾ əlɔŋ ðə blaɪt," hi sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "ðə læs bæɾəl wɪl bi fɔɾ ɪn ðə blaɪt, ɪf nɑɾ ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ɪtsɛlf. ən i ɪɡnɔɹz ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz ən kənsɝnz hɪmsɛlf wɪð lænz ðəɾ əv nɑt sin ə mɹdʒɹɑl sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz."

Easar had taken no wine, and he stood with his fists on his hips. "The war against the Shadow is fought along the Blight," he said grimly. "The Last Battle will be fought in the Blight, if not at Shayol Ghul itself. And he ignores the Borderlands and concerns himself with lands that have not seen a Myrddraal since the Trolloc Wars."

"ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn dɪsaɪdz wɛɹ tə dæns ðə spɪɹz, wɛtləndɝ," eɪvinhə snɪɹd. "ɪf jə fɑloʊ hɪm, ðən jə faɪt wɛɹ i sɛz." noʊ wʌn lʊkt ət hɝ. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪleɪn. noʊ wʌn tʊk ði oʊpənɪŋ eɪvinhə hæɾ ɔfɝd.

"The Car'a'carn decides where to dance the spears, wetlander," Aviendha sneered. "If you follow him, then you fight where he says." No one looked at her. They were all looking at Elayne. No one took the opening Aviendha had offered.

ɪleɪn meɪd hɝsɛlf bɹið ivənli ən mit ðɛɹ ɡeɪzəz wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ. eɪ bɔɹɾɝlənd ɑɹmi wɑz tu ɡɹeɪɾ ə tʃɹæp fəɹ ɪleɪɾə tə leɪ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə kætʃ ɪleɪn tʃɹəkənd, bʌt ɹænd ælθɹ, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, maɪt bi ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. mɛɝɪlɪl ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ tʃɛɹ, bʌt ʃi hæɾ əɹ ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni tʃɹiɾiz ðə ɡɹeɪ sɪstɝ hæd nəɡoʊʃieɪɾəd, wʌns ɪleɪn bɪɡæn, ʃi wɑz tə kip saɪlənt. kɑnfəɾəns floʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə bɑnd wɪð bɝdʒɪt. ɹænd wɑz ə stoʊn, ənɹiɾəbəl, ən dɪstənt. "ju noʊ ʌv ðə waɪt taʊɝz pɹɑkləmeɪʃən ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ hɪm?" ʃi æskt kwaɪətli. ðeɪ mʌst, baɪ naʊ.

Elayne made herself breathe evenly and meet their gazes without blinking. A Borderland army was too great a trap for Elaida to lay in order to catch Elayne Trakand, but Rand al'Thor, the Dragon Reborn, might be another matter. Merilille shifted on her chair, but she had her instructions. No matter how many treaties the Gray sister had negotiated, once Elayne began, she was to keep silent. Confidence flowed along the bond with Birgitte. Rand was a stone, unreadable, and distant. "You know of the White Tower's proclamation regarding him?" she asked quietly. They must, by now.

"ðə taʊɝ kɔlz ənæθəmə ɑn ɛniwʌn u əpɹoʊtʃɪz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn seɪv θɹu ði ɔfəsəz ə ðə taʊɝ," peɪɾɝ sɛd dʒʌst əz kwaɪətli. teɪkɪŋ ə siɾ ət læst, hi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əɹ wɪð sɪɹiəs aɪz. "ju ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃʊɹli ðət kaʊns əz ðə seɪm θɪŋ."

"The Tower calls anathema on anyone who approaches the Dragon Reborn save through the offices of the Tower," Paitar said just as quietly. Taking a seat at last, he regarded her with serious eyes. "You are Aes Sedai. Surely that counts as the same thing."

"ðə taʊɝ mɛɾəlz ɛvɹiwɛɹ," tɛnoʊbiə mʌɾɝd. "noʊ, ɛθɛniɛl; əl seɪ ðɪs! ðə hoʊl wɝl noʊz ðə taʊɝ ɪz dɪvaɪɾəd. dʒju fɑloʊ ɪleɪɾə əɹ ðə ɹɛbəlz, ɪleɪn?"

"The Tower meddles everywhere," Tenobia muttered. "No, Ethenielle; I will say this! The whole world knows the Tower is divided. Do you follow Elaida or the rebels, Elayne?"

"ðə wɝl sɛldəm noʊz wʌɾ ɪt θɪŋks ɪt noʊz," mɛɝɪlɪl sɛɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs ðət sim tə loʊɝ ðə tɛmpɹətʃɝ ɪn ðə tɛnt. ðə taɪni wʊmən u ɹæn wən ɪleɪn ɔɹɾɝd əɹ ən skwikt wən wɪndfɪndɝz lʊkt əɾ əɹ sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾ ən feɪs tɛnoʊbiə əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, hɝ smuð feɪs əz fɹɔsti əz əɹ toʊn. "ði əfɛɹz ə ðə taʊɝ ɑɹ fəɹ ɪnɪʃiəts tə noʊ, tɛnoʊbiə. ɪf jə wɑnə lɝn, æsk tə hæv jəɹ neɪm ɹɪɾən ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk, ən ɪn twɛnti jɪɹz jə maɪt lɝn ə lɪɾəl."

"The world seldom knows what it thinks it knows," Merilille said in a voice that seemed to lower the temperature in the tent. The tiny woman who ran when Elayne ordered her and squeaked when Windfinders looked at her sat up straight and faced Tenobia as an Aes Sedai, her smooth face as frosty as her tone. "The affairs of the Tower are for initiates to know, Tenobia. If you want to learn, ask to have your name written in the novice book, and in twenty years you might learn a little."

hɝ ɪlumən mædʒəsti, tɛnoʊbiə si bæʃɪɹ kæzɑɾi, ʃild ə ðə nɔɹθ ən sɔɹɾ ə ðə blaɪtbɔɹɾɝ, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs kæzɑɾi, leɪɾi ʌv ʃheɪni, æsnɛl, kʌnwɔɹ ən ɡɑnɑi, ɡlɛɹɾ ət mɛɝɪlɪl wɪð ɔl ðə fjʊɹi ʌv ə blɪzɝd. ən sɛd nʌθɪŋ. ɪleɪnz ɹɪspɛk fəɹ əɹ ɪnkɹist slaɪtli.

Her Illumined Majesty, Tenobia si Bashere Kazadi, Shield of the North and Sword of the Blightborder, High Seat of House Kazadi, Lady of Shahayni, Asnelle, Kunwar and Ganai, glared at Merilille with all the fury of a blizzard. And said nothing. Elayne's respect for her increased slightly.

mɛɝɪlɪlz dɪsəbiɾiəns dɪd nɑt dɪspliz hɝ. ɪt seɪvd əɹ fɹəm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹɛvɝəkeɪt waɪl simɪŋ tə spik oʊnli ðə tʃɹuθ. ɛɡwin sɛd ðeɪ mʌs tʃɹaɪ tə lɪv əz ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi swɔɹn ðə θɹi oʊðz, ən hɪɹ ən naʊ, ɪleɪn fɛl ðə weɪɾ ʌv ɪt. hɪɹ, ʃi wɑz nɑt ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə kleɪm əɹ mʌðɝz θɹoʊn, əɹ nɑɾ oʊnli ðæt. ʃi wɑz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ, wɪð mɔɹ ɹizən fəɹ teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ wɪð əɹ wɝdz ðən sɪmpli haɪɾɪŋ wʌt ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən.

Merilille's disobedience did not displease her. It saved her from trying to prevaricate while seeming to speak only the truth. Egwene said they must try to live as if they had already sworn the Three Oaths, and here and now, Elayne felt the weight of it. Here, she was not the Daughter-Heir of Andor struggling to claim her mother's throne, or not only that. She was an Aes Sedai of the Green Ajah, with more reason for taking care with her words than simply hiding what she wanted to remain hidden.

"aɪ kænɑt tɛl jə ɪɡzækli wɛɹ i ɪz." tʃɹuθ, kəz ʃi kəɾ oʊnli hæv ɡɪvən əm ə veɪɡ dɝɛkʃən, ɹʌfli təwɔɹd tiɹ, ən noʊ tɛlɪŋ haʊ fɑɹ; tʃɹuθ, kəz ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌst əm səfɪʃənli fəɹ ivən ðæt. ʃi dʒʌs hæd tə bi kɛɹfəl wʌt ʃi sɛd, ən haʊ. "aɪ də noʊ ðəɾ əpɛɹənli hi ɪntɛnz tə ɹɪmeɪn wɛɹ hiz əwaɪl." hi hæd nɑt muv fəɹ deɪz, ðə fɝs taɪm sɪns livɪŋ əɹ ðəɾ i hæd ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɛni wʌn pleɪs lɔŋɡɝ ðən hæf ə deɪ. "aɪ wɪl tɛl jə wʌɾ aɪ kæn, bʌɾ oʊnli ɪf jə əɡɹi ðət jəl mɑɹtʃ saʊθ wɪðɪn ðə wik. jəl ɹʌn aʊɾ ə bɑɹli əz wɛl əz miɾ ɪf jə ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ, ɛniweɪ. aɪ pɹɑməs, jəl bi mɑɹtʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn." tə bɪɡɪn wɪð ðeɪ wəd bi, əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt.

"I cannot tell you exactly where he is." Truth, because she could only have given them a vague direction, roughly toward Tear, and no telling how far; truth, because she did not trust them sufficiently for even that. She just had to be careful what she said, and how. "I do know that apparently he intends to remain where he is awhile." He had not moved for days, the first time since leaving her that he had remained in any one place longer than half a day. "I will tell you what I can, but only if you agree that you will march south within the week. You will run out of barley as well as meat if you remain here much longer, anyway. I promise, you will be marching toward the Dragon Reborn." To begin with they would be, at any rate.

peɪɾɝ ʃʊk ɪz bɔl hɛd. "ju wɑn əs tə ɛntɝ ændɝ? ɪleɪn sədaɪ - əɹ ʃəɾ aɪ kɔl jə leɪɾi ɪleɪn, naʊ? - aɪ wɪʃ jə ðə laɪts blɛsɪŋ ɪn jəɹ kwɛs fəɹ ændɝz kɹaʊn, bʌt nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə ɔfɝ maɪ mɛn tə faɪt fəɹ ɪt."

Paitar shook his bald head. "You want us to enter Andor? Elayne Sedai - or should I call you Lady Elayne, now? - I wish you the Light's blessing in your quest for Andor's crown, but not enough to offer my men to fight for it."

"ɪleɪn sədaɪ ən leɪɾi ɪleɪn ɑɹ wʌn ən ðə seɪm," ʃi toʊl ðɛm. "aɪ də nɑɾ æsk jə tə faɪt fəɹ mi. ɪn tʃɹuθ, aɪ hoʊp wɪð ɔl maɪ hɑɹt ðət jə kɹɔs ændɝ wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə skɝmɪʃ." ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ sɪlvɝ waɪnkʌp, ʃi wɛɾ əɹ lɪps wɪθaʊt dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ. ə flæʃ ə kɑʃən sɝdʒ θɹu ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑnd, ən ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝsɛlf, ɪleɪn læft. eɪvinhə wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ əɹ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ ən fɹaʊnɪŋ. ivən naʊ, ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə lʊk æftɝ ðə mʌðɝ tə bi.

"Elayne Sedai and Lady Elayne are one and the same," she told them. "I do not ask you to fight for me. In truth, I hope with all my heart that you cross Andor without so much as a skirmish." Raising her silver winecup, she wet her lips without drinking. A flash of caution surged through the Warder bond, and in spite of herself, Elayne laughed. Aviendha was watching her from the corner of her eye and frowning. Even now, they were going to look after the mother to be.

"aɪ æm ɡlæd sʌmwʌn faɪnz ðɪs əmjuzɪŋ," ɛθɛniɛl sɛd ɹaɪli. "tʃɹaɪ tə θɪŋk laɪk ə saʊθlændɝ, peɪɾɝ. ðeɪ pleɪ ðə ɡeɪm ə haʊsəz hɪɹ, ən aɪ θɪŋk ʃiz biɪŋ vɛɹi klɛvɝ əɾ ɪt. ʃi ʃəd bi, aɪ səpoʊz; aɪv ɔlweɪz hɝd ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kɹieɪɾəd deɪz deɪmɑɹ."

"I am glad someone finds this amusing," Ethenielle said wryly. "Try to think like a Southlander, Paitar. They play the Game of Houses here, and I think she is being very clever at it. She should be, I suppose; I've always heard that Aes Sedai created Daes Dae'mar."

"θɪŋk tæktɪks, peɪɾɝ." isɑɹ wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ ɪleɪn, wɛɹɪŋ ə smɔl smaɪl. "wi muv təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn əz ɪnveɪɾɝz, soʊ ɛni ændɔɝən wɪl si ɪt. wɪntɝ meɪ bi maɪl hɪɹ, bʌt wɪl stɪl nid wiks tə ɹaɪd ðət fɑɹ. baɪ ðə taɪm wi du, ʃɪl əv ɹæliɾ ɪnʌf ə ði ændɔɝən haʊsəz əɡɛnst ʌs, ən tə hɝ, ðət ʃɪl əv ðə laɪən θɹoʊn, əɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf. ət ðə list, ɪnʌf stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪl əv bɪn plɛdʒ tə hɝ ðət noʊ wʌn ɛls wɪl bi eɪbəl tə stæn lɔŋ əɡɛns hɝ." tɛnoʊbiə ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ tʃɛɹ, fɹaʊnɪŋ ən ədʒʌstɪŋ əɹ skɝts, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹɪspɛkt ɪn əɹ aɪz wən ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪleɪn ðət hæd nɑt bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ.

"Think tactics, Paitar." Easar was studying Elayne, wearing a small smile. "We move toward Caemlyn as invaders, so any Andoran will see it. Winter may be mild here, but we'll still need weeks to ride that far. By the time we do, she will have rallied enough of the Andoran Houses against us, and to her, that she will have the Lion Throne, or near enough. At the least, enough strength will have been pledged to her that no one else will be able to stand long against her." Tenobia shifted on her chair, frowning and adjusting her skirts, but there was a respect in her eyes when she looked at Elayne that had not been there before.

"ænd wən wi ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn, ɪleɪn sədaɪ," ɛθɛniɛl sɛd, "ju wɪl . . . nəɡoʊʃieɪt . . . əs ɪndə livɪŋ ændɝ wɪθaʊɾ ə bæɾəl biɪŋ fɔt." ðət keɪm aʊɾ əz nɑt kwaɪɾ ə kwɛstʃən, bʌɾ ɔlmoʊst. "vɛɹi klɛvɝ ɪndid."

"And when we reach Caemlyn, Elayne Sedai," Ethenielle said, "you will . . . negotiate . . . us into leaving Andor without a battle being fought." That came out as not quite a question, but almost. "Very clever indeed."

"ɪf ɔl wɝks əz ʃi plænz," isɑɹ sɛd, hɪz smaɪl feɪɾɪŋ. hi pʊɾ aʊɾ ə hænd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ, ən ði oʊl soʊlʒɝ pleɪst ə waɪnkʌp ɪn ɪt. "bæɾəlz sɛldəm du; ivən ðɪs blʌdləs sɔɹt, aɪ θɪŋk."

"If all works as she plans," Easar said, his smile fading. He put out a hand without looking, and the old soldier placed a winecup in it. "Battles seldom do; even this bloodless sort, I think."

"aɪ vɛɹi mʌtʃ wɑn ɪɾ ɔl tə bi blʌdləs," ɪleɪn sɛd. laɪt, ɪt hæd tə bi, əɹ ɪnstɛɾ ə seɪvɪŋ əɹ kʌntʃɹi fɹəm sɪvəl wɔɹ, ʃi hæd plʌnʒd ɪɾ ɪndə wɝs. "aɪ wɪl wɝk hɑɹd tə si ðəɾ ɪɾ ɪz. aɪ ɪkspɛk jə tə də ðə seɪm."

"I very much want it all to be bloodless," Elayne said. Light, it had to be, or instead of saving her country from civil war, she had plunged it into worse. "I will work hard to see that it is. I expect you to do the same."

"du jə ɔlsoʊ hæpən tə noʊ wɛɹ maɪ ʌŋkəl dævɹæm ɪz, ɪleɪn sədaɪ?" tɛnoʊbiə sɛd sʌɾənli. "dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ? aɪ wəd laɪk tə spik wɪð ɪm əz mʌtʃ əz wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn."

"Do you also happen to know where my Uncle Davram is, Elayne Sedai?" Tenobia said suddenly. "Davram Bashere? I would like to speak with him as much as with the Dragon Reborn."

"lɔɹd dævɹæm ɪz nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn, tɛnoʊbiə. aɪ kænɑt pɹɑməs hɪl stɪl bi ðəɹ wən jə ɝaɪv, ðoʊ. ðəɾ ɪz, ɪf jə əɡɹi?" ɪleɪn meɪd hɝsɛlf bɹið, tə haɪɾ əɹ æŋzaɪəɾi. ʃi wɑz bɪɑnd wɛɹ ʃi kəd tɝn bæk, naʊ. ðeɪ wəd muv saʊθ naʊ, ʃi wɑz sɝɾən, bʌt wɪθaʊt ðɛɹ əɡɹimənt, ðəɹ wəd bi blʌdʃɛd.

"Lord Davram is not far from Caemlyn, Tenobia. I cannot promise he will still be there when you arrive, though. That is, if you agree?" Elayne made herself breathe, to hide her anxiety. She was beyond where she could turn back, now. They would move south now, she was certain, but without their agreement, there would be bloodshed.

fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən ðəɹ wɑz saɪləns ɪn ðə tɛn ɪksɛp fəɹ ə koʊl kɹækɪŋ ɪn wʌn ə ðə bɹeɪʒɝz. ɛθɛniɛl ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð ðə tu mɛn.

For a long moment there was silence in the tent except for a coal cracking in one of the braziers. Ethenielle exchanged glances with the two men.

"soʊ lɔŋ əz aɪ ɡɛt tə si maɪ ʌŋkəl," tɛnoʊbiə sɛd hiɾɪdli, "aɪ æm əɡɹid."

"So long as I get to see my uncle," Tenobia said heatedly, "I am agreed."

"ɑn maɪ ɑnɝ, aɪm əɡɹid," isɑɹ sɛd dɪsaɪsɪvli, ən ɔlmoʊst ətɑp hɪm, ɪf ɪn ə maɪldɝ toʊn, peɪɾɝ sɛd, "ʌndɝ ðə laɪt, aɪm əɡɹid."

"On my honor, I am agreed," Easar said decisively, and almost atop him, if in a milder tone, Paitar said, "Under the Light, I am agreed."

"ðɛn soʊ ɑɹ wi ɔl," ɛθɛniɛl bɹiðd. "ænd naʊ jəɹ pɑɹt, ɪleɪn sədaɪ. wɛɹ də wi faɪn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn?"

"Then so are we all," Ethenielle breathed. "And now your part, Elayne Sedai. Where do we find the Dragon Reborn?"

ə θɹɪl ʃɑt θɹu ɪleɪn, ən ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ɪɡzɪlɝeɪʃən, əɹ fɪɹ. ʃi hæd dʌn wʌt ʃi hæd kʌm fɔɹ, ɹɪsk ðə deɪnʒɝz fəɹ hɝsɛlf ən fəɹ ændɝ, ən oʊnli taɪm wəd tɛl wɛðɝ ʃi hæd meɪd ðə ɹaɪt dɪsɪʒən. ʃi ænsɝd wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən, "æz aɪ toʊl ju, aɪ kænɑt seɪ ɪɡzækli wɛɹ. ə sɝtʃ ɪn mʊɹændi wɪl bi pɹɑfəɾəbəl, ðoʊ." tʃɹuθ, ðoʊ ðə pɹɑfət wəd bi hɝz, nɑt ðɛɹz, ɪf ɛni keɪm. ɛɡwin hæd muv fɹəm mʊɹændi tədeɪ, teɪkɪŋ əweɪ ði ɑɹmi ðət hæd hɛld ɑɝəθɛl ɹɛnʃɝ ən ði ʌðɝ noʊbəlz ɪn ðə saʊθ. pɝhæps ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz muvɪŋ saʊθ wəd fɔɹs ɑɝəθɛl ən lwɑn ən pɛlɪvɑɹ tə dɪsaɪɾ əz daɪɛlɪn bɪliv ðeɪ wʊd, tə səpɔɹt hɝ. ðə laɪt sɛn ɪt soʊ.

A thrill shot through Elayne, and she could not say whether it was exhilaration, or fear. She had done what she had come for, risked the dangers for herself and for Andor, and only time would tell whether she had made the right decision. She answered without hesitation, "As I told you, I cannot say exactly where. A search in Murandy will be profitable, though." Truth, though the profit would be hers, not theirs, if any came. Egwene had moved from Murandy today, taking away the army that had held Arathelle Renshar and the other nobles in the south. Perhaps the Borderlanders moving south would force Arathelle and Luan and Pelivar to decide as Dyelin believed they would, to support her. The Light send it so.

ɪksɛp fəɹ tɛnoʊbiə, ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz dɪd nɑt sim əɾ ɔl ɪɡzʌltən oʊvɝ lɝnɪŋ wɛɹ tə faɪn ɹænd. ɛθɛniɛl lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ, ɔlmoʊst ə saɪ, ən isɑɹ sɪmpli nɑɾəd ən pɝst ɪz lɪps ɪn θɔt. peɪɾɝ dʒɹæŋk daʊn hæf ɪz waɪn, ðə fɝst ɹil dʒɹɪŋk i hæd teɪkən. ɪt vɛɹi mʌtʃ sim ðət haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðeɪ wɑntəd tə faɪn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə miɾɪŋ hɪm. tɛnoʊbiə, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, kɔl fəɹ ði oʊl soʊlʒɝ tə bɹɪŋ əɹ waɪn ən wɛn ɑn əbaʊt haʊ mʌtʃ ʃi wɑntəd tə si hɝ ʌŋkəl. ɪleɪn wəd nɑɾ əv θɔt ðə wʊmən hæd soʊ mʌtʃ fæmli filɪŋ.

Except for Tenobia, the Borderlanders did not seem at all exultant over learning where to find Rand. Ethenielle let out a long breath, almost a sigh, and Easar simply nodded and pursed his lips in thought. Paitar drank down half his wine, the first real drink he had taken. It very much seemed that however much they wanted to find the Dragon Reborn, they were not looking forward to meeting him. Tenobia, on the other hand, called for the old soldier to bring her wine and went on about how much she wanted to see her uncle. Elayne would not have thought the woman had so much family feeling.

naɪt keɪm ɝli ðət taɪm ə jɪɹ, ən oʊnli ə fju aʊɝz ə deɪlaɪt ɹɪmeɪnd, əz isɑɹ pɔɪntəɾ aʊt, ɔfɝɪŋ bɛdz fəɹ ðə naɪt. ɛθɛniɛl sədʒɛstəd ðəɾ əɹ oʊn tɛnt wəd bi mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl, jɛt ðeɪ ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ə dɪsəpɔɪnmənt wən ɪleɪn sɛd ʃi mʌs liv ɪmiɾiətli.

Night came early that time of year, and only a few hours of daylight remained, as Easar pointed out, offering beds for the night. Ethenielle suggested that her own tent would be more comfortable, yet they gave no sign of disappointment when Elayne said she must leave immediately.

"ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl ðət jə kən kʌvɝ sətʃ dɪstəns soʊ kwɪkli," ɛθɛniɛl mɝmɝd. "aɪ hæv hɝɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ spik ʌv ə θɪŋ kɔl tʃɹævlɪŋ. ə lɔs tælənt?"

"Remarkable that you can cover such distance so quickly," Ethenielle murmured. "I have heard Aes Sedai speak of a thing called Traveling. A lost Talent?"

"hæv jə ɪnkaʊntɝd mɛni sɪstɝz ɑn jəɹ dʒɝni?" ɪleɪn æskt.

"Have you encountered many sisters on your journey?" Elayne asked.

"sʌm," ɛθɛniɛl ɹɪplaɪd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ɪt simz." ivən tɛnoʊbiə wɑz sʌɾənli ɪkspɹɛʃənləs.

"Some," Ethenielle replied. "There are Aes Sedai everywhere, it seems." Even Tenobia was suddenly expressionless.

əlaʊɪŋ bɝdʒɪt tə leɪ ðə mɑɹɾən-laɪnd kloʊk ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ɪleɪn nɑɾəd. "soʊ ðəɹ ɑɹ. wəd juv əɹ hɔɹsəz bɹɔt?"

Allowing Birgitte to lay the marten-lined cloak on her shoulders, Elayne nodded. "So there are. Would you have our horses brought?"

nʌn ə ðɛm spoʊk əɡɛn əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ aʊɾ ə ðə kæmp, ɹaɪɾɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. ðə hɔɹs-smɛl ən lætʃɹin-stɪŋk hæd simd maɪld ɪn ðə kæmp, bʌt ðɛɹ æbsəns hɪɹ meɪd ði ɛɹ sim vɛɹi fɹɛʃ, ən ðə snoʊ waɪɾɝ, sʌmhaʊ.

None of them spoke again until they were out of the camp, riding through the trees. The horse-smell and latrine-stink had seemed mild in the camp, but their absence here made the air seem very fresh, and the snow whiter, somehow.

"ju wɝ vɛɹi kwaɪət, bɝdʒɪt tʃɹɑilaɪən," eɪvinhə sɛd, θʌmpɪŋ əɹ beɪz ɹɪbz wɪð əɹ hilz. ʃi ɔlweɪz bɪliv ði ænəməl wəd stɑp wɪθaʊt ɹimaɪndɝz tə kip ɡoʊɪŋ.

"You were very quiet, Birgitte Trahelion," Aviendha said, thumping her bay's ribs with her heels. She always believed the animal would stop without reminders to keep going.

"eɪ wɔɹɾɝ dʌzn spik fəɹ əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ; ʃi blʌɾi lɪsənz ən wɑtʃəz əɹ bæk," bɝdʒɪt ɹɪplaɪd dʒɹaɪli. ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli ðə fɔɹəs kənteɪn ɛniwʌn u maɪt θɹɛɾən ðɛm, ðɪs nɪɹ ðə ʃaɪnɝən kæmp, bʌɾ əɹ baʊ ɹɪmeɪn ənkʌvɝd, ən əɹ aɪz skæn ðə tʃɹiz.

"A Warder doesn't speak for her Aes Sedai; she bloody listens and watches her back," Birgitte replied dryly. It was unlikely the forest contained anyone who might threaten them, this near the Shienaran camp, but her bow remained uncovered, and her eyes scanned the trees.

"ə mʌtʃ heɪstiɝ fɔɹm ə nɪɡoʊʃieɪʃən ðən aɪm juz tə, ɪleɪn," mɛɝɪlɪl sɛd. "nɔɹməli, ðiz mæɾɝz ɹikwaɪɝ deɪz əɹ wiks ə tɔkɪŋ, ɪf nɑt mʌnθs, bɪfɔɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɪz əɡɹid. jə wɝ lʌki ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt dəmɑni. əɹ kɛɹhinɪn," ʃi ədmɪɾəd dʒudɪʃɪsli. "bɔɹɾɝləndɝz ɑɹ ɹifɹɛʃɪŋli oʊpən ən stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝd. izi tə dil wɪð."

"A much hastier form of negotiation than I am used to, Elayne," Merilille said. "Normally, these matters require days or weeks of talking, if not months, before anything is agreed. You were lucky they are not Domani. Or Cairhienin," she admitted judiciously. "Borderlanders are refreshingly open and straightforward. Easy to deal with."

oʊpən ən stʃɹeɪtfɔɹwɝd? ɪleɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd slaɪtli. ðeɪ wɑntəd tə faɪn ɹænd, bʌt kənsild waɪ. ðeɪ kənsil ðə pɹɛzəns ə sɪstɝz, tu. ət lis ðeɪ wəd bi muvɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, wʌns ʃi hæɾ əm ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə mʊɹændi. ðət wəɾ əv tə du, fəɹ naʊ, bʌt ʃi hæd tə wɔɹn hɪm, wʌns ʃi kəd fɪɡjɝ aʊt haʊ tə də soʊ wɪθaʊɾ ɛndeɪnʒɝɪŋ hɪm. teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪm, mɪn, ʃi θɔt. teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪm fəɹ ʌs.

Open and straightforward? Elayne shook her head slightly. They wanted to find Rand, but concealed why. They concealed the presence of sisters, too. At least they would be moving away from him, once she had them on their way to Murandy. That would have to do, for now, but she had to warn him, once she could figure out how to do so without endangering him. Take care of him, Min, she thought. Take care of him for us.

ə fju maɪlz fɹəm ðə kæmp, ʃi ɹeɪn ɪn tə stʌɾi ðə fɔɹəst əz əsɪdwəsli əz bɝdʒɪt. ɪspɛʃli bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ðə sʌn sæt loʊ ɑn ðə tʃɹitɑps. ə tʃɹɑɾɪŋ waɪt fɑks əpɪɹd fəɹ ən ɪnstən ən wɑz ɡɔn. sʌmθɪŋ flɪkɝɾ ɑn ə bɛɹ ɡɹeɪ bɹæntʃ, ə bɝd pɝhæps, əɹ ə skwɝəl. ə dɑɹk hɔk sʌɾənli plʌməɾɪd aʊɾ ə ðə skaɪ, ən ə θɪn skwil bɹoʊk ði ɛɹ ən ɛndəd sʌɾənli. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt biɪŋ fɑloʊd. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə ʃaɪnɝənz ʃi wɝiɾ əbaʊt, bʌt ðoʊz hɪɾən sɪstɝz. ðə wɪɹinəs ðət hæd vænɪʃt ɝliɝ, wɪð mɛɝɪlɪlz nuz, hæd ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ɪntʃɹəs naʊ ðəɾ əɹ miɾɪŋ wɪð ðə bɔɹɾɝləndɝz wɑz dʌn. ʃi wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ əz tə klaɪm ɪndə hɝ bɛɾ əz sun əz pɑsəbəl, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɪɾ ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ðə wiv fəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ tə sɪstɝz ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ.

A few miles from the camp, she reined in to study the forest as assiduously as Birgitte. Especially behind them. The sun sat low on the treetops. A trotting white fox appeared for an instant and was gone. Something flickered on a bare gray branch, a bird perhaps, or a squirrel. A dark hawk suddenly plummeted out of the sky, and a thin squeal broke the air and ended suddenly. They were not being followed. It was not the Shienarans she worried about, but those hidden sisters. The weariness that had vanished earlier, with Merilille's news, had returned with interest now that her meeting with the Borderlanders was done. She wanted nothing so much as to climb into her bed as soon as possible, but she did not want it enough to give the weave for Traveling to sisters she did not know.

ʃi cʊɾə woʊvən ə ɡeɪtweɪ tə ðə pæləs steɪbliɑɹd, bʌɾ oʊnli ət ðə ɹɪsk ə kɪlɪŋ sʌmwʌn u hæpən tə bi kɹɔsɪŋ wɛɹ ɪɾ oʊpənd, soʊ ɪnstɛd ʃi woʊv wʌn fəɹ ənʌðɝ pleɪs ʃi nu dʒʌst əz wɛl. ʃi wɑz soʊ taɪɝd ðəɾ ɪt ɹikwaɪɝɾ ɛfɝt tə wiv, soʊ taɪɝd ðət ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ə ði æŋɡɹil pɪn tə hɝ dʒɹɛs əntɪl ðə sɪlvɝi slæʃ hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ði ɛɹ ən oʊpən ɑntu ə fil kʌvɝd wɪð bɹaʊn ɡɹæs biɾən flæt baɪ ɝliɝ snoʊfɔlz, ə fil dʒʌst saʊθ ə keɪɛmlɪn wɛɹ ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn hæɾ ɔfən teɪkən əɹ tə wɑtʃ ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz ɹaɪd tə kəmænd, bɹeɪkɪŋ fɹəm kɑləmz tə fɔɹm ə laɪn fɔɹ əbɹɛst əɾ ə ʃaʊɾəd ɔɹɾɝ.

She could have woven a gateway to the Palace stableyard, but only at the risk of killing someone who happened to be crossing where it opened, so instead she wove one for another place she knew just as well. She was so tired that it required effort to weave, so tired that she did not think of the angreal pinned to her dress until the silvery slash had appeared in the air and opened onto a field covered with brown grass beaten flat by earlier snowfalls, a field just south of Caemlyn where Gareth Bryne had often taken her to watch the Queen's Guards ride to command, breaking from columns to form a line four abreast at a shouted order.

"ɑɹ jə dʒʌs gɑnə lʊk əɾ ɪt?" bɝdʒɪt dɪmændəd.

"Are you just going to look at it?" Birgitte demanded.

ɪleɪn blɪŋkt. eɪvinhə ən mɛɝɪlɪl wɝ stʌɾiɪŋ əɹ wɪð kənsɝn. bɝdʒɪts feɪs ɡeɪv nʌθɪŋ əweɪ, bʌt ðə bɑn kæɹid wɝi, tu.

Elayne blinked. Aviendha and Merilille were studying her with concern. Birgitte's face gave nothing away, but the bond carried worry, too.

"aɪ wɑz dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ," ɪleɪn sɛd, ən hil faɪɹhɑɹt θɹu ðə ɡeɪtweɪ. bɛd wəd bi wʌndɝfəl.

"I was just thinking," Elayne said, and heeled Fireheart through the gateway. Bed would be wonderful.

fɹəm ði oʊl pɹæktəs fil tə ðə tɔl ɑɹtʃt ɡeɪts sɛɾ ɪn ðə peɪl, fɪfti-fʊt-haɪ sɪɾi wɔlz wɑz ə ʃɔɹt ɹaɪd. ðə lɔŋ mɑɹkət bɪldɪŋz laɪnɪŋ ði əpɹoʊtʃ tə ðə ɡeɪts wɝ ɛmpti ət ðɪs aʊɝ, bʌt ʃɑɹp-aɪd ɡɑɹdzmɪn stɪl kɛpt ə wɑtʃ. ðeɪ wɑtʃt əɹ ən ði ʌðɝz ɹaɪɾ ɪn əpɛɹənli wɪθaʊt ɹɛkəɡnaɪzɪŋ hɝ. mɝsənɛɹiz, vɛɹi laɪkli. ðeɪ wəd nɑt noʊ hɝ ənlɛs ðeɪ sɔ hɝ ɑn ðə laɪən θɹoʊn. wɪð ðə hɛlp ə ðə laɪt, ən lʌk, ðeɪ wəd si hɝ ðɛɹ.

From the old practice field to the tall arched gates set in the pale, fifty-foot-high city walls was a short ride. The long market buildings lining the approach to the gates were empty at this hour, but sharp-eyed Guardsmen still kept a watch. They watched her and the others ride in apparently without recognizing her. Mercenaries, very likely. They would not know her unless they saw her on the Lion Throne. With the help of the Light, and luck, they would see her there.

twaɪlaɪt wɑz fæst əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ, ðə skaɪ tɝnɪŋ ə dip ɡɹeɪ ən ðə ʃædoʊz slæntɪŋ lɔŋ əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹits. vɛɹi fju pipəl wɝ stɪl aʊɾ ən əbaʊt, ə skæɾɝɪŋ ə foʊk hɝiɪŋ tə fɪnɪʃ ðɛɹ deɪz wɝk bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ hoʊm tə dɪnɝ ən ə wɔɹm faɪɝ. ə pɛɹ ə bɛɹɝz kæɹiɪŋ ə mɝtʃəns dɑɹk lækɝd sɪdæn-tʃɛɹ wɛn tʃɹɑɾɪŋ pæst əlɔŋ ə stʃɹiɾ əhɛd, ən ə fju moʊməns leɪɾɝ wʌn ə ðə bɪɡ pʌmp-wæɡənz ɹʌmbəld ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən bɪhaɪn eɪt ɹʌnɪŋ hɔɹsəz, ɪts aɪɝn-ʃɑd wilz laʊɾ ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. ənʌðɝ faɪɝ, sʌmwɛɹ. ðeɪ hæpən moʊst ɔfən ət naɪt. ə pətʃɹoʊl ə fɔɹ ɡɑɹdzmæn wɔk ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz təwɔɹɾ əɹ ən ɑn, wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ twaɪs. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əɹ ɛnimɔɹ ðən ðə mɛn ət ðə ɡeɪts.

Twilight was fast approaching, the sky turning a deep gray and the shadows slanting long across the streets. Very few people were still out and about, a scattering of folk hurrying to finish their day's work before going home to dinner and a warm fire. A pair of bearers carrying a merchant's dark lacquered sedan-chair went trotting past along a street ahead, and a few moments later one of the big pump-wagons rumbled in the other direction behind eight running horses, its iron-shod wheels loud on the paving stones. Another fire, somewhere. They happened most often at night. A patrol of four Guardsman walked their horses toward her and on, without looking at her twice. They did not recognize her anymore than the men at the gates.

sweɪɪŋ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ʃi ɹoʊd wɪʃɪŋ fəɹ əɹ bɛd.

Swaying in her saddle, she rode wishing for her bed.

ɪt wɑz ə ʃɑk tə ɹilaɪz ðət ʃi wɑz biɪŋ lɪftəd daʊn fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl. ʃi oʊpən aɪz ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ kloʊzɪŋ ən faʊn hɝsɛlf biɪŋ kæɹiɾ ɪndə ðə pæləs ɪn bɝdʒɪts ɑɹmz.

It was a shock to realize that she was being lifted down from her saddle. She opened eyes she did not remember closing and found herself being carried into the Palace in Birgitte's arms.

"pʊt mi daʊn," ʃi sɛd taɪɹədli. "aɪ kən stɪl wɔk."

"Put me down," she said tiredly. "I can still walk."

"ju kən hɑɹdli stæn ʌp," bɝdʒɪt ɡɹaʊld. "bi stɪl."

"You can hardly stand up," Birgitte growled. "Be still."

"ju kænɑt tɔk wɪð hɝ!" eɪvinhə sɛd laʊdli.

"You cannot talk with her!" Aviendha said loudly.

"ʃi ɹɪli dʌz nid slip, mæstɝ nɔɹi," mɛɝɪlɪl sɛɾ ɪn fɝm toʊnz. "təmɑɹoʊ wɪl əv tə du."

"She really does need sleep, Master Norry," Merilille said in firm tones. "Tomorrow will have to do."

"fɝɡɪv mi, bʌt təmɑɹoʊ wɪl nɑt du," nɔɹi ɹɪplaɪd, fəɹ ə wʌndɝ saʊndɪŋ vɛɹi fɝm hɪmsɛlf. "ɪɾ ɪz ɝdʒən aɪ spik wɪð əɹ naʊ!"

"Forgive me, but tomorrow will not do," Norry replied, for a wonder sounding very firm himself. "It is urgent I speak with her now!"

ɪleɪnz hɛd wɑntəd tə wɑbəl əz ʃi lɪftəɾ ɪt. hælwɪn nɔɹi wɑz klʌtʃɪŋ ðət lɛðɝ foʊldɝ tə hɪz skɪni tʃɛst, əz ɔlweɪz, bʌt ðə dʒɹaɪ mæn u tɔkt ə kɹaʊn hɛdz wɪð ðə seɪm dʌsti toʊn i juz fəɹ spikɪŋ ə ðə ɹuf ɹɪpɛɹz wɑz ɔlmoʊs dænsɪŋ ɑn ɪz toʊz ɪn ən ɛfɝt tə ɡɛt baɪ eɪvinhə ən mɛɝɪlɪl, hu itʃ hæɾ ɪm baɪ ən ɑɹm, hoʊldɪŋ ɪm bæk.

Elayne's head wanted to wobble as she lifted it. Halwin Norry was clutching that leather folder to his skinny chest, as always, but the dry man who talked of crowned heads with the same dusty tone he used for speaking of the roof repairs was almost dancing on his toes in an effort to get by Aviendha and Merilille, who each had him by an arm, holding him back.

"pʊt mi daʊn, bɝdʒɪt," ʃi sɛɾ əɡɛn, ən fəɹ ðə sɛkənd wʌndɝ ɪn əz mɛni moʊməns, bɝdʒɪɾ oʊbeɪd. ʃi kɛpt ə səpɔɹɾɪŋ ɑɹm ɝaʊn ɪleɪn, ðoʊ, fəɹ wɪtʃ ɪleɪn wɑz ɡɹeɪtfəl. ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ əɹ lɛɡz wʊɾə səpɔɹɾəd əɹ fəɹ vɛɹi lɔŋ. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt, mæstɝ nɔɹi? lɛt ðə mæn ɡoʊ, eɪvinhə. mɛɝɪlɪl?"

"Put me down, Birgitte," she said again, and for the second wonder in as many moments, Birgitte obeyed. She kept a supporting arm around Elayne, though, for which Elayne was grateful. She was not sure her legs would have supported her for very long. "What is it, Master Norry? Let the man go, Aviendha. Merilille?"

ðə fɝs klɝk dɑɹɾɪd fɔɹwɝɾ əz sun ðeɪ lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv hɪm. "wɝd bɪɡæn ɝaɪvɪŋ sun æftɝ jə lɛft, maɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛd, nɑt saʊndɪŋ dʌsti əɾ ɔl. wɝi pɪntʃt ɪz bɹaʊz. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ fɔɹ ɑɹmiz. . . . smɔl, aɪ ʃəd seɪ naʊ, aɪ səpoʊz. laɪt, aɪ ɹikɔl wən faɪv θaʊzən mɛn wɑz ən ɑɹmi." hi ɹʌbd ə hæn oʊvɝ ɪz bɔl hɛd, livɪŋ ðə waɪt tʌfs ɹaɪzɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz ɪɹz ɪn ɹʌfəl dɪsɝeɪ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ fɔɹ smɔl ɑɹmiz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn, fɹəm ði ist," hi wɛn ɑn ɪn ə mɔɹ juʒəwəl toʊn fəɹ hɪm. ɔlmoʊst. "ðeɪ wɪl bi hɪɹ ɪnsaɪd ðə wik, aɪ fɪɹ. twɛnti θaʊzən mɛn. pɝhæps θɝɾi. aɪ kænɑt bi ʃʊɹ." hi hæf ɪkstɛndəd ðə foʊldɝ tə hɝ əz ɪf ɔfɝɪŋ tə ʃoʊ hɝ ðə peɪpɝz ɪnsaɪd. hi wɑz ædʒəteɪɾəd.

The First Clerk darted forward as soon they let go of him. "Word began arriving soon after you left, my Lady," he said, not sounding dusty at all. Worry pinched his brows. "There are four armies. . . . Small, I should say now, I suppose. Light, I recall when five thousand men was an army." He rubbed a hand over his bald head, leaving the white tufts rising behind his ears in ruffled disarray. "There are four small armies approaching Caemlyn, from the east," he went on in a more usual tone for him. Almost. "They will be here inside the week, I fear. Twenty thousand men. Perhaps thirty. I cannot be sure." He half extended the folder to her as if offering to show her the papers inside. He was agitated.

"hu?" ʃi sɛd. ɛləniə hæɾ ɪsteɪts, ən fɔɹsɪz, ɪn ði ist, bʌt soʊ dɪd nɑiən. bʌt niðɝ kəd ɹeɪz twɛnti θaʊzən mɛn. ən ðə snoʊ ən mʌd ʃʊɾə hɛld əm əntɪl spɹɪŋ. "ʃʊd" ən "wʊd" bɪl noʊ bɹɪdʒəz, ʃi sim tə hɪɹ liniz θɪn vɔɪs seɪ.

"Who?" she said. Elenia had estates, and forces, in the east, but so did Naean. But neither could raise twenty thousand men. And the snow and mud should have held them until spring. "Should" and "would" build no bridges, she seemed to hear Lini's thin voice say.

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ, maɪ leɪɾi," nɔɹi ɹɪplaɪd, "nɑt jɛt."

"I do not know, my Lady," Norry replied, "not yet."

ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ, ɪleɪn səpoʊzd. huɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, ðeɪ wɝ kʌmɪŋ, ən naʊ. "æt fɝs laɪt, mæstɝ nɔɹi, aɪ wɑn jə tə bɪɡɪn baɪɪŋ ɔl ðə fudstʌfs jə kən faɪn aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz ən ɡɛɾ ɪt bɹɔɾ ɪn. bɝdʒɪt, hæv ðə bænɝmən ənaʊnsɪŋ ðə saɪnɪŋ baʊnti æd ðət mɝsənɛɹiz əv fɔɹ deɪz tə saɪn wɪð ðə ɡɑɹdz əɹ ðeɪ mʌs liv ðə sɪɾi. ən əv ənaʊnsməns meɪd tə ðə pipəl, tu, mæstɝ nɔɹi. huɛvɝ wɑns tə liv bɪfɔɹ ðə sidʒ bɪɡɪnz ʃəd ɡoʊ naʊ. ɪɾəl kʌt daʊn ðə nʌmbɝ ə maʊðz wɪv tə fid, ən ɪt maɪt lɛɾ ə fju mɔɹ mɛn tə ɛnlɪst ɪn ðə ɡɑɹdz." pʊʃɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm bɝdʒɪts səpɔɹt, ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə hɔlweɪ, hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ əɹ əpɑɹtməns. ði ʌðɝz wɝ fɔɹs tə fɑloʊ. "mɛɝɪlɪl, lɛt ðə kɪnswɪmən noʊ, ən ði æθɑn maɪɹ. ðeɪ meɪ wɑnə liv bɪfɔɹ ɪt bɪɡɪnz, tu, mæps, bɝdʒɪt. hæv ðə ɡʊd mæps bɹɔt tə maɪ əpɑɹtməns. ən ənʌðɝ θɪŋ, mæstɝ nɔɹi . . ."

It did not matter, Elayne supposed. Whoever it was, they were coming, and now. "At first light, Master Norry, I want you to begin buying all the foodstuffs you can find outside the walls and get it brought in. Birgitte, have the bannerman announcing the signing bounty add that mercenaries have four days to sign with the Guards or they must leave the city. And have announcements made to the people, too, Master Norry. Whoever wants to leave before the siege begins should go now. It will cut down the number of mouths we have to feed, and it might lead a few more men to enlist in the Guards." Pushing away from Birgitte's support, she strode along the hallway, heading for her apartments. The others were forced to follow. "Merilille, let the Kinswomen know, and the Atha'an Miere. They may want to leave before it begins, too, Maps, Birgitte. Have the good maps brought to my apartments. And another thing, Master Norry . . ."

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ slip, noʊ taɪm fəɹ wɪɹinəs. ʃi hæɾ ə sɪɾi tə dɪfɛnd.

There was no time for sleep, no time for weariness. She had a city to defend.


tʃæptɝ twɛntieɪt


CHAPTER 28

nuz ɪn ə klɔθ sæk


News in a Cloth Sack

ðə mɔɹnɪŋ æftɝ mæt pɹɑməs tə hɛlp tɛslɪn, ɪf i kəd - ən dʒoʊlin, ən ðɪs idɛzinə hi hæd jɛt tə leɪ aɪz ɑn! - taɪlɪn ənaʊns ðət ʃi wɑz dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ ðə sɪɾi.

The morning after Mat promised to help Teslyn, if he could - and Joline, and this Edesina he had yet to lay eyes on! - Tylin announced that she was departing the city.

"sjuɹɔθ ɪz gɑnə ʃoʊ mi haʊ mʌtʃ ʌv ɔltɑɹə aɪ kəntʃɹoʊl naʊ, pɪdʒən," ʃi sɛd. hɝ bɛl naɪf wɑz stʌk ɪn ðə kɑɹv bɪdpoʊst, ən ðeɪ wɝ stɪl laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹʌmpəld lɪnən ʃits əmɪɾ ə tæŋɡəl ə bɛɾɪŋ, hɪm ɪn oʊnli ðə sɪlk skɑɹf ðət hɪd ðə hæŋɪŋ skɑɹ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, ən əɹ ɪn əɹ skɪn. ə vɛɹi faɪn skɪn ɪt wɑz, tu, əz smuð əz i hæɾ ɛvɝ tʌtʃt. aɪdli ʃi tʃɹeɪst ɪz ʌðɝ skɑɹz wɪð ə lɔŋ, ɡɹin-lækɝd fɪŋɡɝneɪl. wʌn weɪ ən ənʌðɝ, hi hæɾ əkwaɪɝd kwaɪɾ ə fju, ðoʊ nɑt fəɹ wɑn ə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əvɔɪd ðɛm. hɪz haɪd wəd nɑt bɹɪŋ mʌtʃ əɾ ɑkʃən, ðət wɑz fəɹ ʃʊɹ, bʌt ðə skɑɹz fæsəneɪɾəd hɝ. "ɪt wɑzn əɹ aɪdiə, æktʃəli . tuɑn ɪɾəl wɪl . . . hɛlp mi . . . ɪf aɪ si wɪð maɪ oʊn aɪz ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒʌst ɑn ə mæp, ən wʌt ðət ɡɝl sədʒɛsts, sjuɹɔθ dʌz. ʃi wəd laɪk tə si ɪt dʌn jɛstɝdeɪ, ðoʊ. wɪl bi ɡoʊɪŋ baɪ tɔɹeɪkən, soʊ tə kʌvɝ ðə ɡɹaʊn kwɪkli. əz mʌtʃ əz tu hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz ɪn ə deɪ, ɪt simz. oʊ, doʊn lʊk sɪk, paɪɡlɛt. aɪ woʊn meɪk jə klaɪm ɑn wʌn ə ðoʊz θɪŋz."

"Suroth is going to show me how much of Altara I control now, pigeon," she said. Her belt knife was stuck in the carved bedpost, and they were still lying on the rumpled linen sheets amid a tangle of bedding, him in only the silk scarf that hid the hanging scar around his neck, and her in her skin. A very fine skin it was, too, as smooth as he had ever touched. Idly she traced his other scars with a long, green-lacquered fingernail. One way and another, he had acquired quite a few, though not for want of trying to avoid them. His hide would not bring much at auction, that was for sure, but the scars fascinated her. "It wasn't her idea, actually. Tuon thinks it will . . . help me . . . if I see with my own eyes instead of just on a map, and what that girl suggests, Suroth does. She would like to see it done yesterday, though. We'll be going by to'raken, so to cover the ground quickly. As much as two hundred miles in a day, it seems. Oh, don't look sick, piglet. I won't make you climb on one of those things."

mæt hivd ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif. ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn ðə pɹɑspɛkt ə flaɪɪŋ ðəɾ ʌpsɛt hɪm. hi θɔɾ i maɪɾ æktʃəli  laɪk ðæt. bʌɾ ɪf i wɑz aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ fəɹ ɛni lɛŋθ ə taɪm, ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wɛðɝ tɛslɪn əɹ dʒoʊlin əɹ ivən ðɪs idɛzinə maɪt ɡɹoʊ ɪmpeɪʃən ɪnʌf tə də sʌmθɪŋ stupəd, əɹ wʌɾ ɪɾiəsi bɛslən maɪt ɡɛɾ ʌp tə. bɛslən wɝiɾ ɪm ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ðə wɪmən. taɪlɪn, ɪksaɪɾəd baɪ hɝ kʌmɪŋ flaɪɾ ɑn wʌn ə ðə sintʃæn bists, lʊk mɔɹ ən iɡəl ðən ɛvɝ.

Mat heaved a sigh of relief. It had not been the prospect of flying that upset him. He thought he might actually like that. But if he was out of Ebou Dar for any length of time, the Light alone knew whether Teslyn or Joline or even this Edesina might grow impatient enough to do something stupid, or what idiocy Beslan might get up to. Beslan worried him almost as much as the women. Tylin, excited by her coming flight on one of the Seanchan beasts, looked more an eagle than ever.

"aɪl bi ɡɔn lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ə wik, swiɾəlɪŋ. m." ðət ɡɹin fɪŋɡɝneɪl tʃɹeɪs ðə fʊt-lɔŋ pʌkɝɪŋ ðət slæntəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz ɹɪbz. "ʃæl aɪ taɪ jə tə ðə bɛd soʊ əl noʊ jəl bi seɪf tɪl aɪ ɹɪtɝn?"

"I'll be gone little more than a week, sweetling. Hmmm." That green fingernail traced the foot-long puckering that slanted across his ribs. "Shall I tie you to the bed so I'll know you will be safe till I return?"

ɹɪtɝnɪŋ əɹ wɪkəd smaɪl wɪð ɪz moʊst wɪnɪŋ ɡɹɪn tʊk ə bɪɾ ʌv ɛfɝt. hi wɑz fɛɹli ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz dʒoʊkɪŋ, bʌɾ oʊnli fɛɹli. ðə kloʊðz ʃi tʃoʊz tədeɪ pʊɾ ɪm ɔl ɪn ɹɛd bɹɪljən ɪnʌf tə hɝt ði aɪ; ɔl ɹɛɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə flaʊɝz wɝkt ɑn ðə koʊɾ ən ðə kloʊk, ɛniweɪ, ən ɪz blæk hæɾ ən skɑɹf. ðə waɪt leɪs əɾ ɪz nɛk ən ɹɪsts oʊnli meɪd ðə ɹɛs lʊk ɹɛɾɝ. stɪl, hi skɹæmbəld ɪndə ðɛm, iɡɝ tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɝ əpɑɹtməns. wɪð taɪlɪn, ə mæn wɑz waɪz nɑt tə bi tu ʃʊɹ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ. ʃi maɪt nɑt bi dʒoʊkɪŋ, tu.

Returning her wicked smile with his most winning grin took a bit of effort. He was fairly sure she was joking, but only fairly. The clothes she chose today put him all in red brilliant enough to hurt the eye; all red except for the flowers worked on the coat and the cloak, anyway, and his black hat and scarf. The white lace at his neck and wrists only made the rest look redder. Still, he scrambled into them, eager to get out of her apartments. With Tylin, a man was wise not to be too sure of anything. She might not be joking, too.

taɪlɪn hæd nɑɾ ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd sjuɹɔθs ɪmpeɪʃəns, ɪɾ əpɪɹd. ɪn lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən tu aʊɝz baɪ ðə dʒuəl sɪləndɝ-klɑk ɪn taɪlɪnz sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ə ɡɪft fɹəm sjuɹɔθ, hi wɑz əkʌmpəniɪŋ ðə kwin tə ðə dɑks. wɛl, sjuɹɔθ ən taɪlɪn ɹoʊɾ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə twɛnti əɹ soʊ ʌðɝ blʌd ðət wɝ tə əkʌmpəni ðɛm, ən ðɛɹ əsɔɹɾɪd sɔɪhɪn, mɛn ən wɪmən u baʊd ðɛɹ hæf-ʃeɪv hɛdz tə ðə blʌɾ ən stɛɹd daʊn ðɛɹ noʊzɪz əɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, waɪl i ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn ɑn pɪps. ən ɔltɑɹən kwinz "pɹɪɾi" kəd nɑt ɹaɪd wɪð ðə blʌd, wɪtʃ ɪnkluɾəd taɪlɪn hɝsɛlf naʊ, ʌv kɔɹs. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪf i wɑz ə hɝɛɾətɛɹi sɝvən əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ə ðət lɛvəl.

Tylin had not exaggerated Suroth's impatience, it appeared. In little more than two hours by the jeweled cylinder-clock in Tylin's sitting room, a gift from Suroth, he was accompanying the Queen to the docks. Well, Suroth and Tylin rode at the head of the twenty or so other Blood that were to accompany them, and their assorted so'jhin, men and women who bowed their half-shaved heads to the Blood and stared down their noses at everyone else, while he rode behind on Pips. An Altaran Queen's "pretty" could not ride with the Blood, which included Tylin herself now, of course. It was not as if he was a hereditary servant or anything of that level.

ðə blʌɾ ən moʊst ə ðə sɔɪhɪn wɝ maʊntəɾ ɑn faɪn ænəməlz, slik mɛɹz wɪð ɑɹtʃt nɛks ən ə dɛləkət stɛp, dip-tʃɛstəd ɡɛldɪŋz wɪð fɪɹs aɪz ən stʃɹɔŋ wɪðɝz. hɪz lʌk sim tə hæv noʊ ɪfɛkt ɑn hɔɹs ɹeɪsɪŋ, bʌɾ i wʊɾə weɪdʒɝɾ ɑn pɪps əɡɛnst ɛni ʌv ðɛm. ðə blʌnt-noʊz beɪ ɡɛldɪŋ wɑz nɑt ʃoʊi, bʌt mæt wɑz ʃʊɹ i kəɾ aʊtʃɹʌn nɪɹli ɔl ə ðoʊz pɹɪɾi ænəməlz ɪn ə spɹɪn ən ɔl ə ðɛm oʊvɝ ə lɔŋ hɔl. æftɝ soʊ lɔŋ ɪn ðə steɪbəlz, pɪps wɑntəd tə fɹɪsk ɪf i kəd nɑt ɹʌn, ən ɪt tʊk ɔl mæts skɪl - wɛl, ɔl ðə skɪl ðət hæd sʌmhaʊ kʌm wɪð ðoʊz ʌðɝ mɛnz mɛmɹiz - tə kip ði ænəməl ɪn hænd. bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ hæfweɪ tə ðə dɑks, ðoʊ, hɪz lɛɡ wɑz eɪkɪŋ tə ðə hɪp. ɪf i wɑz tə liv ɛbu dɑɹ ɛni taɪm sun, ɪt wəɾ əv tə bi baɪ si, əɹ wɪð lukəz ʃoʊ. hi hæɾ ə ɡʊd noʊʃən haʊ tə meɪk ðə mæn liv bɪfɔɹ spɹɪŋ, ɪf ɪt keɪm tə ðæt. ə deɪnʒɝəs noʊʃən, meɪbi, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt si mʌtʃ tʃɔɪs. ði ɔltɝnəɾɪv wɑz ɹɪskiɝ stɪl.

The Blood and most of the so'jhin were mounted on fine animals, sleek mares with arched necks and a delicate step, deep-chested geldings with fierce eyes and strong withers. His luck seemed to have no effect on horse racing, but he would have wagered on Pips against any of them. The blunt-nosed bay gelding was not showy, but Mat was sure he could outrun nearly all of those pretty animals in a sprint and all of them over a long haul. After so long in the stables, Pips wanted to frisk if he could not run, and it took all Mat's skill - well, all the skill that had somehow come with those other men's memories - to keep the animal in hand. Before they were halfway to the docks, though, his leg was aching to the hip. If he was to leave Ebou Dar any time soon, it would have to be by sea, or with Luca's show. He had a good notion how to make the man leave before spring, if it came to that. A dangerous notion, maybe, but he did not see much choice. The alternative was riskier still.

hi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn ət ðə ɹɪɹ. mɔɹ ðən fɪfti mɛn ən wɪmən, blɛsədli wɛɹɪŋ θɪk waɪt wʊlən ɹoʊbz oʊvɝ ðə ʃɪɹ ɡɑɹməns ðeɪ juʒəwəli wɛn ɝaʊn ɪn, mɑɹtʃt bɪhaɪn ɪm ɪn tu ɹoʊz, səm liɾɪŋ pækhɔɹsɪz wɪð lɑɹdʒ wɪkɝ hæmpɝz fʊl ə dɛlɪkəsiz. ðə blʌd kəd nɑt də wɪθaʊt ðɛɹ sɝvəns; ɪn fækt, ðeɪ sim tə θɪŋk ðeɪ wəd bi slipɪŋ ɹʌf, wɪð soʊ fju. ðə dækoʊvæl sɛldəm ɹeɪz ðɛɹ aɪz fɹəm ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz, ən ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ mik əz mɪlk. hi hæd sin ə dækoʊvæl sɛn fəɹ ə stʃɹæpɪŋ wʌns, ə jɛloʊ-hɛɹd mæn əbaʊɾ ɪz eɪdʒ, ən ðə fɛloʊ hæd ɹeɪs tə bɹɪŋ ði ɪnstʃɹəmən ə hɪz oʊn pʌnɪʃmənt. hi hæd nɑɾ ivən tʃɹaɪd tə dɪleɪ əɹ haɪd, mʌtʃ lɛs ɪskeɪp ðə stʃɹæpɪŋ. mæt kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn pipəl laɪk ðæt.

He was not alone at the rear. More than fifty men and women, blessedly wearing thick white woolen robes over the sheer garments they usually went around in, marched behind him in two rows, some leading packhorses with large wicker hampers full of delicacies. The Blood could not do without their servants; in fact, they seemed to think they would be sleeping rough, with so few. The da'covale seldom raised their eyes from the paving stones, and their faces were meek as milk. He had seen a da'covale sent for a strapping once, a yellow-haired man about his age, and the fellow had raced to bring the instrument of his own punishment. He had not even tried to delay or hide, much less escape the strapping. Mat could not understand people like that.

əhɛɾ ə hɪm ɹoʊd sɪks sʌldəm, ðɛɹ ʃɔɹt dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts ʃoʊɪŋ ðɛɹ æŋkəlz. vɛɹi naɪs æŋkəlz ɑn wʌn əɹ tu, bʌt ðə wɪmən sæt ðɛɹ sæɾəlz əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ə ðə blʌd, tu. ðə kaʊlz ə ðɛɹ laɪtnɪŋ-pænəl kloʊks hʌŋ daʊn ðɛɹ bæks, ən ðeɪ lɛt ðə koʊld ɡʌsts lɪf ðə kloʊks əz ðoʊ ðə tʃɪl dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ ðɛm, əɹ wəd nɑt dɛɹ. tu hæd liʃt deɪmeɪn wɔkɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz.

Ahead of him rode six sul'dam, their short divided skirts showing their ankles. Very nice ankles on one or two, but the women sat their saddles as if they were of the Blood, too. The cowls of their lightning-paneled cloaks hung down their backs, and they let the cold gusts lift the cloaks as though the chill did not touch them, or would not dare. Two had leashed damane walking beside their horses.

mæt stʌɾid ðə wɪmən sɝəptɪʃəsli. wʌn ə ðə deɪmeɪn, ə ʃɔɹt wʊmən wɪð peɪl blu aɪz, wɑz lɪŋk baɪ ə sɪlvɝi æɾəm tə ðə plʌmp ɑləv-skɪn sʌldəm i hæd sin wɔkɪŋ tɛslɪn. ðə dɑɹk-hɛɹd deɪmeɪn ænsɝd tə ðə neɪm pʊɹə. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ eɪɡləsnəs wɑz klɪɹ ɑn əɹ smuð feɪs. hi hæd nɑt ɹɪli bɪliv tɛslɪn wən ʃi sɛd ðə wʊmən hæd bɪkʌm ə tʃɹu deɪmeɪn, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ sʌldəm lin loʊ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ tə ðə wʊmən u hæd bɪn ɹaɪmə ɡælfɹi, ən wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz ðə sʌldəm mɝmɝd, pʊɹə læft ən klæpt əɹ hænz ɪn dɪlaɪt.

Mat studied the women surreptitiously. One of the damane, a short woman with pale blue eyes, was linked by a silvery a'dam to the plump olive-skinned sul'dam he had seen walking Teslyn. The dark-haired damane answered to the name Pura. The Aes Sedai agelessness was clear on her smooth face. He had not really believed Teslyn when she said the woman had become a true damane, but the graying sul'dam leaned low in her saddle to say something to the woman who had been Ryma Galfrey, and whatever it was the sul'dam murmured, Pura laughed and clapped her hands in delight.

mæt ʃɪvɝd. ʃi wəd blʌɾi wɛl ʃaʊt fəɹ hɛlp ɪf i tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk ði æɾəm fɹəm əɹ nɛk. laɪt, wʌt wɑz i θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv! bæɾ ɪnʌf ðəɾ i wɑz stʌk wɪð pʊlɪŋ θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪz beɪkən ɔf ðə faɪɝ fəɹ əm - bɝn hɪm, bʌɾ i dɪd sim tə ɡɛt lʌmbɝd wɪð duɪŋ ðəɾ ɛvɹi taɪm i blʌɾi tɝn ɝaʊnd! - bæɾ ɪnʌf ðæt, wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ɛni mɔɹ aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ.

Mat shivered. She would bloody well shout for help if he tried to take the a'dam from her neck. Light, what was he thinking of! Bad enough that he was stuck with pulling three Aes Sedai's bacon off the fire for them - Burn him, but he did seem to get lumbered with doing that every time he bloody turned around! - bad enough that, without thinking about trying to get any more out of Ebou Dar.

ɛbu dɑɹ wɑz ə ɡɹeɪt sipɔɹt, wɪð pɝhæps ðə lɑɹdʒəs hɑɹbɝ ɪn ðə noʊn wɝld, ən ðə dɑks wɝ lɔŋ ɡɹeɪ fɪŋɡɝz ə stoʊn θɹʌstɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ðə ki ðət ɹæn ðə hoʊl lɛŋθ ə ðə sɪɾi. ɔlmoʊst ɔl ðə mʊɹɪŋ spɑts wɝ teɪkən baɪ sintʃæn vɛsəlz ʌv ɛvɹi saɪz, ðə kɹuz ɪn ðə ɹɪɡɪŋ ən tʃɪɹɪŋ vɪɡɝəsli əz sjuɹɔθ pæs baɪ, ə θʌndɝ ə vɔɪsəz kɔlɪŋ əɹ neɪm. ðə mɛn ɑn ʌðɝ ʃɪps weɪv ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ən ʃaʊɾəd əz wɛl, ðoʊ mɛni əpɪɹd kənfjuzd əz tə hu əɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ tʃɪɹɪŋ. noʊ daʊt ðeɪ θɔɾ ɪɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ə ðɛm. ɑn ðoʊz vɛsəlz, ðə wɪn bloʊɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə hɑɹbɝ stɝd ðə ɡoʊldən biz ʌv ɪljən, ən ðə kɹɛsən munz ə tiɹ, ən ðə ɡoʊldən hɔk ə min. əpɛɹənli ɹænd hæd nɑɾ ɔɹɾɝd ðə mɝtʃəns ðəɹ tə stɑp tʃɹeɪɾɪŋ wɪð sintʃæn-hɛl pɔɹts, əɹ ɛls ðə mɝtʃəns wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk. kʌlɝz flæʃt θɹu mæts skʌl, ən i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd tə klɪɹ ɪt. moʊs mɝtʃəns wəd tʃɹeɪd wɪð ðɛɹ mʌðɝz mɝɾɝɝ ɪf ɪt bɹɔt pɹɑfət.

Ebou Dar was a great seaport, with perhaps the largest harbor in the known world, and the docks were long gray fingers of stone thrusting out from the quay that ran the whole length of the city. Almost all the mooring spots were taken by Seanchan vessels of every size, the crews in the rigging and cheering vigorously as Suroth passed by, a thunder of voices calling her name. The men on other ships waved their arms and shouted as well, though many appeared confused as to who or what they were cheering. No doubt they thought it expected of them. On those vessels, the wind blowing across the harbor stirred the Golden Bees of Illian, and the Crescent Moons of Tear, and the Golden Hawk of Mayene. Apparently Rand had not ordered the merchants there to stop trading with Seanchan-held ports, or else the merchants were going behind his back. Colors flashed through Mat's skull, and he shook his head to clear it. Most merchants would trade with their mother's murderer if it brought profit.

ðə sʌðɝnmoʊs dɑk hæd bɪn klɪɹɾ ə ʃɪps, ən sintʃæn ɔfəsɝz wɪð θɪn plumz ɑn ðɛɹ lækɝd hɛlməts stʊd weɪɾɪŋ tə hæn sjuɹɔθ ən taɪlɪn daʊn ɪndə wʌn ə ðə lɑɹdʒ ɹoʊboʊts ðət stʊd weɪɾɪŋ, eɪt mɛn ɑn ðə lɔŋ ɔɹz ʌv itʃ. æftɝ taɪlɪn ɡeɪv mæt ə læs kɪs, ɛniweɪ, ɔlmoʊs jæŋkɪŋ ɪz hɛɹ aʊt tə pʊl ɪz hɛd daʊn, ən æftɝ ʃi pɪntʃt ɪz bɑɾəm əz ðoʊ noʊ wʌn wɑz blʌɾi wɑtʃɪŋ! sjuɹɔθ fɹaʊn ɪmpeɪʃənli əntɪl taɪlɪn wɑz sɛɾəld ɪn ðə lɔŋ boʊt, ən ɪn tʃɹuθ, ðə sintʃæn wʊmən dɪd nɑt stɑp tʃeɪfɪŋ ivən ðɛn, twɪtʃɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əɾ ælwɪn, hɝ sɔɪhɪn, soʊ ðə ʃɑɹp-feɪst wʊmən wɑz kəntɪnjuəli skɹæmbəlɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə bɛntʃɪz tə fɛtʃ əɹ wʌn θɪŋ əɹ ənʌðɝ.

The southernmost dock had been cleared of ships, and Seanchan officers with thin plumes on their lacquered helmets stood waiting to hand Suroth and Tylin down into one of the large rowboats that stood waiting, eight men on the long oars of each. After Tylin gave Mat a last kiss, anyway, almost yanking his hair out to pull his head down, and after she pinched his bottom as though no one was bloody watching! Suroth frowned impatiently until Tylin was settled in the long boat, and in truth, the Seanchan woman did not stop chafing even then, twitching her fingers at Alwhin, her so'jhin, so the sharp-faced woman was continually scrambling across the benches to fetch her one thing or another.

ðə ɹɛst ə ðə blʌd ɹəsiv dip baʊz fɹəm ði ɔfəsɝz, bʌt hæd tə klaɪm daʊn ðə læɾɝz wɪð ðɛɹ sɔɪhɪnz eɪd. ðə sʌldəm hɛlp ðə deɪmeɪn ɪndə ðə boʊts, ən noʊ wʌn əɾ ɔl hɛlp ðə waɪt-ɹoʊb foʊk loʊd ðə pæk hæmpɝz ən ðɛmsɛlvz. sun ɪnʌf, ðə boʊts wɝ kɹɔsɪŋ ðə hɑɹbɝ təwɔɹd wɛɹ ðə ɹeɪkən ən tɔɹeɪkən wɝ kɛp saʊθ ə ðə ɹæhəd, spaɪɾɝɪŋ θɹu ðə spɹɔlɪŋ æŋkɝd fliɾ ə sintʃæn ʃɪps ən ðə skɔɹz ə kæptʃɝd si foʊk vɛsəlz ðət dɑɾəd ðə hɑɹbɝ. ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ nʌmbɝ ə ðoʊz əpɪɹd tə hæv bɪn ɹɹɪɡd wɪð ɹɪb sintʃæn seɪlz ən dɪfɹən laɪnz. ðɛɹ kɹuz wɝ sintʃæn, tu. ɛksɛptɪŋ ðə wɪndfɪndɝz i tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt, ən meɪbi səm u hæd bɪn soʊld, ðə sɝvaɪvɪŋ æθɑn maɪɹ wɝ ɔl ɪn ðə ɹæhəd wɪð ði ʌðɝ dækoʊvæl klɪɹɪŋ ðə sɪltɪd-ʌp kənælz. ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ i kəd də əbaʊɾ ɪt. hi dɪd nɑɾ oʊ ðɛm ɛniθɪŋ, hi hæd mɔɹ ɑn ɪz pleɪt ðən i kəd hændəl ɔlɹɛɾi, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ i kəd du. ðət wɑz ɔl ðəɹ wɑz tə ɪt!

The rest of the Blood received deep bows from the officers, but had to climb down the ladders with their so'jhin's aid. The sul'dam helped the damane into the boats, and no one at all helped the white-robed folk load the pack hampers and themselves. Soon enough, the boats were crossing the harbor toward where the raken and to'raken were kept south of the Rahad, spidering through the sprawling anchored fleet of Seanchan ships and the scores of captured Sea Folk vessels that dotted the harbor. The greater number of those appeared to have been rerigged with ribbed Seanchan sails and different lines. Their crews were Seanchan, too. Excepting the Windfinders he tried not to think about, and maybe some who had been sold, the surviving Atha'an Miere were all in the Rahad with the other da'covale clearing the silted-up canals. And there was nothing he could do about it. He did not owe them anything, he had more on his plate than he could handle already, and there was nothing he could do. That was all there was to it!

hi wɑntəd tə ɹaɪɾ əweɪ ɪmiɾiətli, tə liv ðə si foʊk ʃɪps bɪhaɪn hɪm. noʊ wʌn ɑn ðə dɑks peɪɾ ɪm ðə slaɪɾəst hid. ði ɔfəsɝz hæd ɡɔn əweɪ əz sun əz ðə boʊts kæst ɔf. sʌmwʌn, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ hu, hæd teɪkən ðə pækhɔɹsɪz əweɪ. ðə simən klaɪmd aʊɾ ə ðə ɹɪɡɪŋ ən wɛn bæk tə ðɛɹ wɝk, ən ðə mɛmbɝz ə ðə kɑɹɡoʊ-loʊɾɝz ɡɪl bɪɡæn pʊʃɪŋ ðɛɹ loʊ, hɛvi bæɹoʊz stækt wɪð beɪlz ən kɹeɪts ən bæɹəlz. bʌɾ ɪf i lɛf tu sun, taɪlɪn maɪt dɪsaɪɾ i wɑz plænɪŋ tə kip ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ən sɛn fəɹ hɪm, soʊ hi sæt pɪps ɑn ði ɛn ə ðə dɑk ən weɪv laɪk ə bʊl ɡus ful tɪl ʃi wɑz fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ ðət ʃi kəd nɑt si hɪm wɪθaʊɾ ə lʊkɪŋ ɡlæs.

He wanted to ride away immediately, to leave the Sea Folk ships behind him. No one on the docks paid him the slightest heed. The officers had gone away as soon as the boats cast off. Someone, he did not know who, had taken the packhorses away. The seamen climbed out of the rigging and went back to their work, and the members of the cargo-loaders guild began pushing their low, heavy barrows stacked with bales and crates and barrels. But if he left too soon, Tylin might decide he was planning to keep riding right out of the city and send for him, so he sat Pips on the end of the dock and waved like a bull goose fool till she was far enough away that she could not see him without a looking glass.

dɪspaɪt ðə θɹɑbɪŋ lɛɡ, hi ɹoʊd sloʊli bæk ʌp ɔlmoʊs ðə hoʊl lɛŋθ ə ðə ki. hi əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə hɑɹbɝ əɡɛn. soʊbɝli dʒɹɛs mɝtʃəns stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛɹ kɑɹɡoʊ biɪŋ loʊɾəd əɹ ənloʊɾəd, səmtaɪmz slɪpɪŋ ə pɝs tə ə mæn əɹ wʊmən ɪn ə ɡɹin lɛðɝ vɛs tə əbteɪn dʒɛnlɝ hænlɪŋ fəɹ ðɛɹ ɡʊdz əɹ mɔɹ spid, nɑt ðəɾ ɪt sim pɑsəbəl ðə ɡɪldfoʊk kəd muv ɛni fæstɝ. sʌðɝnɝz ɔlweɪz sim tə muv əɾ ə hæf tʃɹɑɾ ənlɛs ðə sʌn wɑz ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd, wən ðə hit hɪɹ kəd ɹoʊst ə dʌk, ən wɪð ə ɡɹeɪ skaɪ ən ə kʌɾɪŋ wɪn ɔf ðə si, ɪt wʊɾə bɪn koʊl noʊ mæɾɝ wɛɹ ðə sʌn stʊd.

Despite the throbbing leg, he rode slowly back up almost the whole length of the quay. He avoided looking at the harbor again. Soberly dressed merchants stood watching their cargo being loaded or unloaded, sometimes slipping a purse to a man or woman in a green leather vest to obtain gentler handling for their goods or more speed, not that it seemed possible the guildfolk could move any faster. Southerners always seemed to move at a half trot unless the sun was right overhead, when the heat here could roast a duck, and with a gray sky and a cutting wind off the sea, it would have been cold no matter where the sun stood.

baɪ ðə taɪm i wɑz əbɹɛst ə ðə mɔl hɛɹə, hi hæd kaʊntəd mɔɹ ðən twɛnti sʌldəm pətʃɹoʊlɪŋ ðə dɑks wɪð deɪmeɪn, poʊkɪŋ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ɪndə boʊts livɪŋ æŋkɝd ʃɪps ðət wɝ nɑt sintʃæn, bɔɹɾɪŋ ɛni vɛsəl nuli ɝaɪvd ət ðə dɑks ɔɹ, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ɹɛɾi tə kæst ɔf laɪnz. hi hæd bɪn kwaɪt ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wəd bi ðɛɹ. ɪt wɑz gɑnə hæv tə bi vɑlən lukə. ði oʊnli ɔltɝnəɾɪv wɑz dʒʌs tu hæzɝɾəs, ɪksɛpt ɪn ən ɪmɝdʒənsi. lukə wɑz tʃænsi, tu, bʌt ði oʊnli ɹil tʃɔɪs lɛft.

By the time he was abreast of the Mol Hara, he had counted more than twenty sul'dam patrolling the docks with damane, poking their noses into boats leaving anchored ships that were not Seanchan, boarding any vessel newly arrived at the docks or, for that matter, ready to cast off lines. He had been quite sure they would be there. It was going to have to be Valan Luca. The only alternative was just too hazardous, except in an emergency. Luca was chancy, too, but the only real choice left.

bæk ət ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs, hi klaɪm daʊn ɔf pɪps wɪð ə wɪns ən pʊld ɪz wɔkɪŋ stæf aʊt fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə sæɾəl ɡɝθ. lɛɾɪŋ ə ɡɹum teɪk ðə beɪ, hi lɪmpt ɪnsaɪd, hɪz lɛf lɛɡ bɛɹli eɪbəl tə səpɔɹɾ ɪz weɪt. meɪbi ə soʊk ɪn ə hɑt bæθ wəd teɪk səm ə ðə peɪn. meɪbi ðən i kəd θɪŋk. lukə hæd tə bi kɑt baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ɪt keɪm tə lukə, ðəɹ wɝ ə fju ʌðɝ lɪɾəl pɹɑbləmz tə oʊvɝkʌm.

Back at the Tarasin Palace, he climbed down off Pips with a wince and pulled his walking staff out from behind the saddle girth. Letting a groom take the bay, he limped inside, his left leg barely able to support his weight. Maybe a soak in a hot bath would take some of the pain. Maybe then he could think. Luca had to be caught by surprise, but before it came to Luca, there were a few other little problems to overcome.

"ɑ, ðəɹ jə ɑɹ," noʊl sɛd, pɑpɪŋ ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. mæt hæd kɑɾ oʊnli ɡlɪmpsɪz ə ði oʊl mæn sɪns ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪm ə bɛd, bʌɾ i lʊkt wɛl-ɹɛstəɾ ɪn ɪz fɹɛʃli bɹʌʃt ɡɹeɪ koʊt, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðəɾ i vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə sɪɾi ɛvɹi deɪ ən oʊnli ɹɪtɝn tə ðə pæləs ət naɪt. ədʒʌstɪŋ ðə bɪts ə leɪs əɾ ɪz kʌfs, hi smaɪl kɑnfaɪɾɪŋli, ɹɪvilɪŋ ðə ɡæps ɪn ɪz tiθ. "ju ɑɹ plænɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ, lɔɹd mæt, ən aɪ wəd laɪk tə ɔfɝ maɪ sɝvəsəz."

"Ah, there you are," Noal said, popping up in front of him. Mat had caught only glimpses of the old man since getting him a bed, but he looked well-rested in his freshly brushed gray coat, considering that he vanished into the city every day and only returned to the Palace at night. Adjusting the bits of lace at his cuffs, he smiled confidingly, revealing the gaps in his teeth. "You are planning something, Lord Mat, and I would like to offer my services."

"aɪm plænɪŋ tə teɪk ðə weɪɾ ɔf maɪ lɛɡ," mæt sɛɾ əz kæʒəwəli əz i kʊd. noʊl sim hɑɹmləs ɪnʌf. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə hɑɹnən, hi toʊl stɔɹiz bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə slip, stɔɹiz ðət hɑɹnən ən ði ʌðɝ ɹɛdʒɹmz sim tə swɑloʊ hoʊl, ivən ðə wʌn əbaʊt səm pleɪs kɔld ʃɪbujə, səpoʊzədli bɪɑn ði il weɪst, wɛɹ wɪmən u kəd tʃænəl hæd tætud feɪsəz, oʊvɝ θɹi hʌnʒɹəd kɹaɪmz kæɹiɾ ə pɛnəlti ʌv dɛθ, ən dʒaɪəns lɪvd ʌndɝ ðə maʊntənz, mɛn tɔlɝ ðən oʊɡiɝ, wɪð ðɛɹ feɪsəz ɑn ðɛɹ bɛliz. hi kleɪm tə hæv bɪn ðɛɹ. noʊ wʌn u meɪd kleɪmz laɪk ðət kəd bi ɛniθɪŋ bʌt hɑɹmləs. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ðə wʌn taɪm mæt hæd sin ɪm hændəl ðoʊz lɔŋ dæɡɝz i kæɹiɾ ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt, hi hæd lʊk fɑɹ fɹəm hɑɹmləs. ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪ ə mæn hæɾ ə tʌtʃɪŋ ə wɛpən ðət sɛɾ i wɑz əkʌstəm tə juzɪŋ ɪt. "ɪf aɪ dɪsaɪd tə plæn ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, əl kip jə ɪn maɪnd."

"I'm planning to take the weight off my leg," Mat said as casually as he could. Noal seemed harmless enough. According to Harnan, he told stories before going to sleep, stories that Harnan and the other Redarms seemed to swallow whole, even the one about some place called Shibouya, supposedly beyond the Aiel Waste, where women who could channel had tattooed faces, over three hundred crimes carried a penalty of death, and giants lived under the mountains, men taller than Ogier, with their faces on their bellies. He claimed to have been there. No one who made claims like that could be anything but harmless. On the other hand, the one time Mat had seen him handle those long daggers he carried under his coat, he had looked far from harmless. There was a way a man had of touching a weapon that said he was accustomed to using it. "If I decide to plan anything else, I'll keep you in mind."

stɪl smaɪlɪŋ, noʊl tæpt wʌn ə ðoʊz kɹʊkəd fɪŋɡɝz əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz bik ʌv ə noʊz. "ju doʊn tʃɹʌs mi, jɛt. ðəɾ ɪz ʌndɝstændəbəl. ɔlðoʊ, ɪf aɪ mɛn jə ɛni hɑɹm, ɔl aɪ hæd tə də wɑz stæn bæk ðət naɪɾ ɪn ði æli. juv ðə lʊk ɪn jəɹ aɪ. aɪv sin ɡɹeɪt mɛn leɪɪŋ plænz, ən vɪlənz dɑɹk əz ðə pɪɾ ə dum, tu. ðəɹ ɪz ə lʊk ə mæn ɡɛts, leɪɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs plænz i dʌznt wɑnt noʊn."

Still smiling, Noal tapped one of those crooked fingers against the side of his beak of a nose. "You don't trust me, yet. That is understandable. Although, if I meant you any harm, all I had to do was stand back that night in the alley. You have the look in your eye. I've seen great men laying plans, and villains dark as the Pit of Doom, too. There is a look a man gets, laying dangerous plans he doesn't want known."

"maɪ aɪz ɑɹ dʒʌs taɪɝd," mæt læft, linɪŋ ɑn ɪz stæf. ɡɹeɪt mɛn leɪɪŋ plænz? ði oʊl fɛloʊ hæd pɹɑbli sin əm ɪn ʃɪbujə, wɪð ðə dʒaɪəns. "aɪ də θæŋk jə fəɹ ðəɾ æli, jə noʊ. ɪf ðɛɹz ɛvɝ ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ aɪ kən də fəɹ ju, æsk. bʌt ɹaɪt naʊ, aɪm gɑnə faɪn ə hɑt bæθ."

"My eyes are just tired," Mat laughed, leaning on his staff. Great men laying plans? The old fellow had probably seen them in Shibouya, with the giants. "I do thank you for that alley, you know. If there's ever anything more I can do for you, ask. But right now, I am going to find a hot bath."

"dʌz ðɪs ɡoʊləm dʒɹɪŋk blʌd?" noʊl æskt kætʃɪŋ mæts ɑɹm əz i stɑɹɾəd tə hɑbəl baɪ.

"Does this gholam drink blood?" Noal asked catching Mat's arm as he started to hobble by.

laɪt, hi wɪʃt i hæd nɑt mɛnʃən ðət neɪm wɛɹ ði oʊl mæn kəd hɪɹ. hi wɪʃt bɝdʒɪt hæd nɛvɝ toʊld ɪm əbaʊt ðə θɪŋ. "waɪ dʒju æsk?" ɡoʊləm lɪvd ɑn blʌd. ðeɪ eɪt nʌθɪŋ ɛls.

Light, he wished he had not mentioned that name where the old man could hear. He wished Birgitte had never told him about the thing. "Why do you ask?" Gholam lived on blood. They ate nothing else.

"ðɛɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ mæn faʊnd wɪð ɪz θɹoʊt tɔɹn aʊt, læs naɪt, oʊnli ðəɹ wɑz ɔlmoʊs noʊ blʌɾ ɑn ɪm əɹ ɪz bɛɾɪŋ. dɪɾ aɪ mɛnʃən? hi wɑz əɾ ən ɪn daʊn nɪɹ ðə moʊldin ɡeɪt. ɪf ðət θɪŋ dɪd liv ðə sɪɾi, ɪts bæk." ɡlænsɪŋ bɪɑn mæt, hi meɪɾ ə loʊ, ɪlæbɹət baʊ tə sʌmwʌn. "ɪf jə tʃeɪnʒ jəɹ maɪnd, aɪm ɔlweɪz ɹɛɾi," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə loʊɝ vɔɪs wən i stʃɹeɪɾənd.

"There was another man found with his throat torn out, last night, only there was almost no blood on him or his bedding. Did I mention? He was at an inn down near the Moldine Gate. If that thing did leave the city, it's back." Glancing beyond Mat, he made a low, elaborate bow to someone. "If you change your mind, I am always ready," he said in a lower voice when he straightened.

mæt lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əz ði oʊl mæn hɝiɾ ɔf. tuɑn wɑz stændɪŋ bɪniθ wʌn ə ðə ɡɪldɪd stæn læmps, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm θɹu hɝ veɪl. lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ət list. ɡlænsɪŋ? əz ɔlweɪz, ðə moʊmən i sɔ hɝ, ʃi tɝn əweɪ ən ɡlaɪɾɪd ɔf daʊn ðə hɔl, hɝ pliɾɪd waɪt skɝts ɹʌslɪŋ feɪnli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn wɪð hɝ, tədeɪ.

Mat looked over his shoulder as the old man hurried off. Tuon was standing beneath one of the gilded stand lamps, watching him through her veil. Looking at him, at least. Glancing? As always, the moment he saw her, she turned away and glided off down the hall, her pleated white skirts rustling faintly. There was no one with her, today.

fəɹ ðə sɛkən taɪm ðət deɪ, mæt ʃɪvɝd. ə pɪɾi ðə ɡɝl hæd nɑt ɡɔn wɪð sjuɹɔθ ən taɪlɪn. ə mæn ɡɪvən ə loʊf ʃəd nɑt kəmpleɪn ðəɾ ə fju kɹʌmz wɝ mɪsɪŋ, bʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən sintʃæn, ɡoʊləm stɔkɪŋ ɪm ən oʊl mɛn poʊkɪŋ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ɪn ən skɪni ɡɝlz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm wɑz ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ɛni mæn ðə ɡɑlɪwɑɡz. meɪbi hi ʃəd fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt weɪstɪŋ taɪm soʊkɪŋ ɪz lɛɡ.

For the second time that day, Mat shivered. A pity the girl had not gone with Suroth and Tylin. A man given a loaf should not complain that a few crumbs were missing, but Aes Sedai and Seanchan, gholam stalking him and old men poking their noses in and skinny girls staring at him was enough to give any man the golliwogs. Maybe he should forget about wasting time soaking his leg.

hi fɛl bɛɾɝ wʌns i hæd sɛn ləpɪn tə fɛtʃ ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz oʊn kloʊðz fɹəm bɛslənz tɔɪ kʌbɝd. ən nɹɪm tə faɪn dʒulɪn. hɪz lɛɡ stɪl hɝt laɪk faɪɝ ən wɑbəld wən i wɑntəd tə wɔk, bʌɾ ɪf i wɑz nɑt gɑnə weɪs taɪm, ðən i maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡɛɾ ə muv ɑn əbaʊɾ ɪt. hi wɑntəd tə bi ɡɔn fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ bɪfɔɹ taɪlɪn keɪm bæk, ən ðət ɡeɪv ɪm tɛn deɪz. lɛs, tə bi ɑn ðə seɪf saɪd.

He felt better once he had sent Lopin to fetch the rest of his own clothes from Beslan's toy cupboard. And Nerim to find Juilin. His leg still hurt like fire and wobbled when he wanted to walk, but if he was not going to waste time, then he might as well get a move on about it. He wanted to be gone from Ebou Dar before Tylin came back, and that gave him ten days. Less, to be on the safe side.

wən ðə θif-kætʃɝ stʌk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ət ðə bɛdʒɹum dɔɹ, mæt wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪn taɪlɪnz tɔl stænd-mɪɹɝ. ðə ɹɛd . . . ɡɑɹməns . . . wɝ tʌkt əweɪ ɪn ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɡɔdz ʃi hæd ɡɪvən hɪm. meɪbi taɪlɪnz nɛks pɹɪɾi kəd ɡɛt səm jus ə ðɛm. ðə koʊɾ i hæd pʊɾ ɑn wɑz ðə pleɪnəst i oʊnd, ə faɪn-woʊvən blu wʊl wɪθaʊɾ ə θɹɛɾ ʌv ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. ðə sɔɹɾ ə koʊɾ ə mæn kəd bi pɹaʊd tə wɛɹ, wɪθaʊt hævɪŋ ɛvɹibɑɾi stɛɹ ət hɪm. ə disən koʊt.

When the thief-catcher stuck his head in at the bedroom door, Mat was studying himself in Tylin's tall stand-mirror. The red . . . garments . . . were tucked away in the wardrobe with the rest of the gauds she had given him. Maybe Tylin's next pretty could get some use of them. The coat he had put on was the plainest he owned, a fine-woven blue wool without a thread of embroidery. The sort of coat a man could be proud to wear, without having everybody stare at him. A decent coat.

"meɪbi ə lɪɾəl leɪs," hi mʌɾɝd, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə nɛk ə hɪz ʃɝt. "dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl." ɪt ɹɪli wɑz ə vɛɹi pleɪn koʊt, kʌm tə θɪŋk. ɔlmoʊst soʊbɝ.

"Maybe a little lace," he muttered, fingering the neck of his shirt. "Just a little." It really was a very plain coat, come to think. Almost sober.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt leɪs," dʒulɪn sɛd. "ɪz ðət waɪ jə wɑntəd mi?"

"I don't know anything about lace," Juilin said. "Is that why you wanted me?"

"noʊ, ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡɹɪnɪŋ æt?" ðə fɛloʊ wɑz nɑt dʒʌst ɡɹɪnɪŋ; hɪz smaɪl nɪɹli splɪɾ ɪz dɑɹk feɪs ɪn tu.

"No, of course not. What are you grinning at?" The fellow was not just grinning; his smile nearly split his dark face in two.

"aɪ æm hæpi, ðæts ɔl. sjuɹɔθ ɪz ɡɔn, ən aɪm hæpi. ɪf jə doʊnt wɑnə æsk mi əbaʊt leɪs, wʌt dʒju wɑnt?"

"I am happy, that's all. Suroth is gone, and I am happy. If you don't want to ask me about lace, what do you want?"

blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz! ðə wʊmən i wɑz ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn mʌs bi wʌn ə sjuɹɔθs dækoʊvæl! wʌn ʃi hæd lɛf bɪhaɪnd. hi sɝɾənli hæd noʊ ʌðɝ ɹizən tə kɛɹ wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz ɡɔn, mʌtʃ lɛs bi hæpi oʊvɝ ɪt. ən ðə mæn wɑntəd tə teɪk wʌn ə hɝ pɹɑpɝɾi! wɛl, meɪbi ðət wɑz nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ, kəmpɛɹd tə teɪkɪŋ ə kʌpəl ə deɪmeɪn.

Blood and bloody ashes! The woman he was interested in must be one of Suroth's da'covale! One she had left behind. He certainly had no other reason to care whether she was gone, much less be happy over it. And the man wanted to take one of her property! Well, maybe that was not so much, compared to taking a couple of damane.

lɪmpɪŋ oʊvɝ tə pʊɾ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn dʒulɪnz ʃoʊldɝz, mæt wɔkt ɪm aʊɾ ɪndə ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. "aɪ niɾ ə deɪmeɪn dʒɹɛs tə fɪɾ ə wʊmən əbaʊt soʊ haɪ," hi hɛld ʌp ə hæn dʒʌst əbaʊɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, "æn slɛndɝ." hi ɡeɪv ðə fɛloʊ hɪz moʊst sənsɪɹ smaɪl, bʌt dʒulɪnz oʊn smaɪl feɪɾəd mɑɹkədli. "aɪ nid θɹi sʌldəm dʒɹɛsəz, tu, ən ən æɾəm. ən ɪt keɪm tə mi ðət ðə mæn u noʊz bɛs haʊ tə stil sʌmθɪŋ wɪθaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ kɑt wəd bi ə θif-kætʃɝ."

Limping over to put an arm around Juilin's shoulders, Mat walked him out into the sitting room. "I need a damane dress to fit a woman about so high," he held up a hand just about his shoulder, "and slender." He gave the fellow his most sincere smile, but Juilin's own smile faded markedly. "I need three sul'dam dresses, too, and an a'dam. And it came to me that the man who knows best how to steal something without getting caught would be a thief-catcher."

"aɪ æm ə θif-kætʃɝ," ðə mæn ɡɹaʊld, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɔf mæts ɑɹm, "nɑɾ ə θif!"

"I am a thief-catcher," the man growled, shaking off Mat's arm, "not a thief!"

mæt lɛɾ ɪz oʊn ɡɹɪn vænɪʃ. "dʒulɪn, jə noʊ ði oʊnli weɪ tə teɪk ðoʊz sɪstɝz aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ɪz ɪf ðə ɡɑɹdz θɪŋk ðəɹ stɪl deɪmeɪn. tɛslɪn ən idɛzinə ɑɹ wɛɹɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ nid, bʌt wɪv tə dɪsɡaɪz dʒoʊlin. sjuɹɔθ wɪl bi bæk ɪn tɛn deɪz, dʒulɪn. ɪf wi ɑɹənt ɡɔn baɪ ðɛn, ɪn ɔl laɪklihʊd jəɹ pɹɪɾi wɪl stɪl bi hɝ pɹɑpɝɾi wən wi ɡoʊ." hi kəd nɑt hɛlp filɪŋ ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ɡɔn baɪ ðɛn, nʌn ə ðɛm wəd bi ɡoʊɪŋ. laɪt, ə mæn kəd ʃɪvɝ hɪmsɛlf tə dɛθ ɪndɔɹz ɪn ðɪs sɪɾi.

Mat let his own grin vanish. "Juilin, you know the only way to take those sisters out of the city is if the guards think they're still damane. Teslyn and Edesina are wearing what they need, but we have to disguise Joline. Suroth will be back in ten days, Juilin. If we aren't gone by then, in all likelihood your pretty will still be her property when we go." He could not help feeling that if they were not gone by then, none of them would be going. Light, a man could shiver himself to death indoors in this city.

stʌfɪŋ ɪz fɪsts ɪndə ðə pɑkəts ə hɪz dɑɹk tɛɹən koʊt, dʒulɪn ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm. ɡlɛɹd θɹu hɪm, ɹɪli, ət sʌmθɪŋ ðə θif-kætʃɝ dɪd nɑt laɪk. faɪnəli hi ɡɹɪməst, ən mʌɾɝd, "ɪt woʊn bi izi."

Stuffing his fists into the pockets of his dark Tairen coat, Juilin glared at him. Glared through him, really, at something the thief-catcher did not like. Finally he grimaced, and muttered, "It won't be easy."

ðə deɪz ðət fɑloʊd wɝ ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ izi. ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən klʌkt ən læft oʊvɝ ɪz nu kloʊðz. hɪz oʊl kloʊðz, ðət wɑz. ðeɪ ɡɹɪn ən meɪd weɪdʒɝz wɛɹ i kəd hɪɹ oʊvɝ haʊ fæst i kəd tʃeɪnʒ bæk wən taɪlɪn ɹɪtɝnd - moʊst sim tə θɪŋk i wəd ɹeɪs θɹu ðə hɔlz ɹɪpɪŋ ɔf wʌtɛvɝ i wɑz wɛɹɪŋ əz sun i hɝd ʃi wɑz ɑn əɹ weɪ - bʌɾ i peɪɾ əm noʊ maɪnd. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə pɑɹɾ əbaʊt taɪlɪn ɹɪtɝnɪŋ. ðə fɝs taɪm ə sɝvɪŋ wʊmən mɛnʃən ɪt, hi nɪɹli dʒʌmpt aʊɾ ə hɪz skɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ʃi æktʃəli  hæd fəɹ səm ɹizən.

The days that followed were anything but easy. The serving women clucked and laughed over his new clothes. His old clothes, that was. They grinned and made wagers where he could hear over how fast he could change back when Tylin returned - most seemed to think he would race through the halls ripping off whatever he was wearing as soon he heard she was on her way - but he paid them no mind. Except for the part about Tylin returning. The first time a serving woman mentioned it, he nearly jumped out of his skin thinking she actually had for some reason.

ə nʌmbɝ ə ðə wɪmən ən nɪɹli ɔl ðə mɛn tʊk ɪz tʃeɪnʒ ə kloʊðɪŋ tə min i wɑz livɪŋ. ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ, ðeɪ kɔld ɪt dɪsəpɹuvɪŋli, ən dɪd wʌt ðeɪ kəd tə hæmpɝ hɪm. ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz, hi wɑz ði ɔɪnmənt tə suð taɪlɪnz eɪkɪŋ, tuθ, ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑn əɹ tə kʌm bæk ən baɪɾ əm fəɹ luzɪŋ ɪt. ɪf i hæd nɑt meɪd ʃʊɹ ləpɪn əɹ nɹɪm wɑz ɔlweɪz ɪn taɪlɪnz əpɑɹtməns ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz, ðə kloʊðz wʊɾə vænɪʃt əɡɛn, ən oʊnli veɪnɪn ən ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz kɛpt pɪps fɹəm dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə steɪbəlz.

A number of the women and nearly all the men took his change of clothing to mean he was leaving. Running away, they called it disapprovingly, and did what they could to hamper him. In their eyes, he was the ointment to soothe Tylin's aching, tooth, and they did not want her to come back and bite them for losing it. If he had not made sure Lopin or Nerim was always in Tylin's apartments guarding his belongings, the clothes would have vanished again, and only Vanin and the Redarms kept Pips from disappearing out of the stables.

mæt tʃɹaɪd tə ɛnkɝɪdʒ ðə bɪlif. wən i wɛn ən tu deɪmeɪn vænɪʃt ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ði ɪvɛns wɝ ʃʊɹ tə bi lɪŋkt, bʌt wɪð taɪlɪn ɡɔn ən ɪz ɪntɛntʃən tə ɹʌn əweɪ pleɪn bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹɪtɝnd, ʃi wəd bi seɪf fɹəm bleɪm. ɛvɹi deɪ, ivən wən ɪt ɹeɪnd, hi ɹoʊd pɪps ɪn sɝkəlz ɪn ðə steɪbəl, fəɹ ə lɔŋɡɝ taɪm ɛvɹi deɪ, əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɪld ʌp ɪz stæmənə. wɪtʃ i æktʃəli  wɑz, hi ɹilaɪzd æftɝ ə waɪl. hɪz lɛɡ ən hɪp stɪl ætʃt laɪk fjʊɹi, bʌɾ i bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk i kəd mænədʒ əz mʌtʃ əz tɛn maɪlz bɪfɔɹ niɾɪŋ tə klaɪm daʊn. eɪt maɪlz, ɛniweɪ.

Mat tried to encourage the belief. When he went and two damane vanished at the same time, the events were sure to be linked, but with Tylin gone and his intention to run away plain before she returned, she would be safe from blame. Every day, even when it rained, he rode Pips in circles in the stable, for a longer time every day, as if trying to build up his stamina. Which he actually was, he realized after a while. His leg and hip still ached like fury, but he began to think he could manage as much as ten miles before needing to climb down. Eight miles, anyway.

ɔfən, ɪf ðə skaɪ wɑz klɪɹ, sʌldəm wɝ wɔkɪŋ deɪmeɪn wən i ɛksɝsaɪzd. ðə sintʃæn wɪmən wɝ əwɛɹ i wɑz nɑt taɪlɪnz pɹɑpɝɾi, bʌɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, hi hɝd səm kɔl ɪm əɹ tɔɪ! taɪlɪnz tɔɪ, ðeɪ sɛd, əz ɪf ðət wɑz ɪz neɪm! hi wɑz nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə lɝn ɪf i hæɾ ənʌðɝ. tə ðɛm, sʌmwʌn wɑz iðɝ dækoʊvæl əɹ nɑt, ən ðɪs hæfweɪ bɪznəs əmjuzd əm noʊ ɛnd. hi ɹoʊd tə ðə saʊn ə sʌldəm læfɪŋ, ən tʃɹaɪd tə tɛl hɪmsɛlf ɪt wɑz ɔl tə ðə ɡʊd. ðə mɔɹ pipəl u kəd tɛl ðəɾ i wɝk tə fli bɪfɔɹ taɪlɪn ɹɪtɝnd, ðə bɛɾɝ fəɹ hɝ. ɪt dʒʌst wɑz nɑt vɛɹi plɛzən fəɹ hɪm.

Often, if the sky was clear, sul'dam were walking damane when he exercised. The Seanchan women were aware he was not Tylin's property, but on the other hand, he heard some call him her toy! Tylin's Toy, they said, as if that was his name! He was not important enough for them to learn if he had another. To them, someone was either da'covale or not, and this halfway business amused them no end. He rode to the sound of sul'dam laughing, and tried to tell himself it was all to the good. The more people who could tell that he worked to flee before Tylin returned, the better for her. It just was not very pleasant for him.

naʊ ən ðən i sɔ ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪsəz əmʌŋ ðə deɪmeɪn biɪŋ wɔkt, θɹi bɪsaɪdz tɛslɪn, bʌɾ i hæd nɑɾ ə klu wʌɾ idɛzinə lʊk laɪk. ʃi cʊɾə bɪn ðə ʃɔɹt peɪl wʊmən u ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ə mɔɪɹeɪn, əɹ ðə tɔl wʌn wɪð sɪlvɝi-ɡoʊldən hɛɹ, əɹ ðə slɛndɝ blæk-hɛɹd wʊmən. ɡɪldɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪsaɪɾ ə sʌldəm, ɛni ʌv əm maɪɾ əv bɪn teɪkɪŋ ə wɔk ɑn əɹ oʊn, ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə ɡlimɪŋ kɑlɝ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk ən ðə liʃ taɪɪŋ əɹ tə ðə sʌldəmz ɹɪst. tɛslɪn hɝsɛlf lʊkt ɪnkɹisɪŋli ɡɹɪm ɛvɹi taɪm i sɔ hɝ, stɛɹɪŋ fɪksədli stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd. ɛvɹi taɪm, ðəɹ sim tə bi mɔɹ dɪtɝməneɪʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs. ən sʌmθɪŋ ðət maɪɾ əv bɪn pænɪk, tu. hi bɪɡæn tə wɝi əbaʊt hɝ, ən əɹ ɪmpeɪʃəns.

Now and then he saw Aes Sedai faces among the damane being walked, three besides Teslyn, but he had not a clue what Edesina looked like. She could have been the short pale woman who reminded him of Moiraine, or the tall one with silvery-golden hair, or the slender black-haired woman. Gilding along beside a sul'dam, any of them might have been taking a walk on her own, if not for the gleaming collar around her neck and the leash tying her to the sul'dam's wrist. Teslyn herself looked increasingly grim every time he saw her, staring fixedly straight ahead. Every time, there seemed to be more determination on her face. And something that might have been panic, too. He began to worry about her, and her impatience.

hi wɑntəd tə ɹiəʃʊɹ tɛslɪn - hi dɪd nɑt nid ðoʊz oʊl mɛmɹiz tə tɛl ɪm ðət dɪtɝməneɪʃən kəmbaɪnd wɪð pænɪk kəd ɡɛt pipəl kɪld, bʌt ðeɪ kənfɝmd ɪt - hi wɑntəd tə ɹiəʃʊɹ hɝ, oʊnli hi dɛɹd nɑt ɡoʊ nɪɹ ðə kɛnəlz ɪn ði æɾɪk əɡɛn. tuɑn kəntɪnjud tə bi ðəɹ wən i tɝn ɝaʊnd, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm əɹ ɡlænsɪŋ əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑz duɪŋ, dʒʌs tu ɔfən fəɹ kʌmfɝt. nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪm θɪŋk ʃi wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm. waɪ wəd ʃi də ðæt? dʒʌs tu ɔfən. əkeɪʒənəli hɝ sɔɪhɪn sɪlutʃə wɑz wɪð hɝ, ən naʊ ən ðən ænæθ, ðoʊ ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ tɔl wʊmən sim tə vænɪʃ fɹəm ðə pæləs æftɝ ə taɪm, ət lis fɹəm ðə hɔlweɪz. ʃi wɑz "ɑn ɹitʃɹit," hi hɝd, wʌtɛvɝ ðət wɑz səpoʊz tə min, ən i oʊnli wɪʃt ʃi hæd teɪkən tuɑn wɪð hɝ. hi daʊɾɪd ðə ɡɝl wəd bɪliv i wɑz teɪkɪŋ swits tə ə wɪndfɪndɝ ə sɛkən taɪm. meɪbi ʃi stɪl wɑntəd tə baɪ hɪm? ɪf ðət wɑz ðə keɪs, hi stɪl kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ. hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə ʌndɝstænd wʌɾ ətʃɹæktəd wɪmən tə ə mæn - ðeɪ sim tə ɡoʊ pɑp-aɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə moʊst ɔɹɾənɛɹi lʊkɪŋ fɛloʊz - bʌɾ i nu hi wɑz noʊ bjuɾi, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt taɪlɪn sɛd. wɪmən laɪd tə ɡɛɾ ə mæn ɪndə bɛd, ən ðeɪ laɪd wɝs wʌns ðeɪ hæɾ ɪm ðɛɹ.

He wanted to reassure Teslyn - he did not need those old memories to tell him that determination combined with panic could get people killed, but they confirmed it - he wanted to reassure her, only he dared not go near the kennels in the attic again. Tuon continued to be there when he turned around, looking at him or glancing or whatever she was doing, just too often for comfort. Not enough to make him think she was following him. Why would she do that? Just too often. Occasionally her so'jhin Selucia was with her, and now and then Anath, though the strange tall woman seemed to vanish from the Palace after a time, at least from the hallways. She was "on retreat," he heard, whatever that was supposed to mean, and he only wished she had taken Tuon with her. He doubted the girl would believe he was taking sweets to a Windfinder a second time. Maybe she still wanted to buy him? If that was the case, he still could not understand why. He had never been able to understand what attracted women to a man - they seemed to go pop-eyed over the most ordinary looking fellows - but he knew he was no beauty, no matter what Tylin said. Women lied to get a man into bed, and they lied worse once they had him there.

ɪn ɛni keɪs, tuɑn wɑz ə maɪnɝ ɪɹəɾənt. ə flaɪ ɑn ɪz ɪɹ. noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðæt. ɪt tʊk mɔɹ ðən tʃæɾɝɪŋ wɪmən əɹ stɛɹɪŋ ɡɝlz tə meɪk ɪm swɛt. æbsən əz ʃi wɑz, haʊɛvɝ, taɪlɪn dɪd. ɪf ʃi keɪm bæk ən kɑɾ ɪm pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə liv, ʃi maɪt tʃeɪnʒ əɹ maɪn əbaʊt sɛlɪŋ. ʃi wɑz ə haɪ leɪɾi hɝsɛlf naʊ, æftɝ ɔl, ən i wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi wəd ʃeɪv əɹ hɛɹ tə ə kɹɛs bɪfɔɹ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ. ə pɹɑpɝ sintʃæn haɪ blʌd, ən u nu wʌt ʃi wəd də ðɛn? taɪlɪn kɑzd ə lɪɾəl swɛt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf ɛls tə dʒɹɛntʃ ə mæn ɪn ɪt.

In any case, Tuon was a minor irritant. A fly on his ear. No more than that. It took more than chattering women or staring girls to make him sweat. Absent as she was, however, Tylin did. If she came back and caught him preparing to leave, she might change her mind about selling. She was a High Lady herself now, after all, and he was sure she would shave her hair to a crest before much longer. A proper Seanchan High Blood, and who knew what she would do then? Tylin caused a little sweat, but there was more than enough else to drench a man in it.

hi kəntɪnjud tə hɪɹ fɹəm noʊl əbaʊt ðə ɡoʊləmz mɝɾɝz, ən səmtaɪmz fɹəm tɑm. ðəɹ wɑz ə fɹɛʃ wʌn ɛvɹi naɪt, ðoʊ noʊ wʌn bʌt ðoʊz tu ən ɪm sim tə kənɛk ðə kɪlɪŋz. mæt kɛp tə oʊpən pleɪsəz əz mʌtʃ əz i kʊd, wɪð pipəl ɝaʊn əz ɔfən əz pɑsəbəl. hi stɑp slipɪŋ ɪn taɪlɪnz bɛd, ən nɛvɝ spɛn tu naɪts ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ðə seɪm pleɪs. ɪf ðət mɛn ə naɪɾ ɪn ə steɪbəl lɔft, wɛl, hi hæd slɛpt ɪn heɪlɑfs bɪfɔɹ, ɔlðoʊ hi dɪd nɑt ɹikɔl heɪ stɪkɪŋ θɹu hɪz kloʊðz kwaɪt ðət ʃɑɹpli. stɪl, bɛɾɝ stʌk baɪ heɪ ðən hævɪŋ ɪz θɹoʊt tɔɹn aʊt.

He continued to hear from Noal about the gholam's murders, and sometimes from Thom. There was a fresh one every night, though no one but those two and him seemed to connect the killings. Mat kept to open places as much as he could, with people around as often as possible. He stopped sleeping in Tylin's bed, and never spent two nights running in the same place. If that meant a night in a stable loft, well, he had slept in haylofts before, although he did not recall hay sticking through his clothes quite that sharply. Still, better stuck by hay than having his throat torn out.

hi hæd sɔɾ aʊt tɑm stʃɹeɪɾ əweɪ æftɝ i dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tʃɹaɪ fɹiɪŋ tɛslɪn, ən hæd faʊn ɪm ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz tʃæɾɪŋ wɪð ðə kʊks oʊvɝ ə hʌni-ɡleɪz tʃɪkən. tɑm ɡɑɾ ɑn əz wɛl wɪð kʊks əz i dɪd wɪð fɑɹmɝz ən mɝtʃəns ən noʊbəlz. hi hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ ɑn wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn, dɪd tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn, ə weɪ ʌv hɪɹɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌnz ɡɑsəp ən fɪɾɪŋ ɪt təɡɛðɝ tə meɪk ə pɪktʃɝ. hi kəd lʊk ət θɪŋz fɹəm ə slæn ən si wʌɾ ʌðɝz mɪst. əz sun əz i fɪnɪʃt ðə tʃɪkən, tɑm hæd kʌm ʌp wɪð ði oʊnli weɪ tə ɡɛt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pæs ðə ɡɑɹdz. ðə hoʊl θɪŋ hæɾ ɔlmoʊst simd izi, ðɛn. fəɹ ə vɛɹi ʃɔɹt waɪl. bʌɾ ʌðɝ ɑbstəkəlz ɝoʊz.

He had sought out Thom straight away after he decided to try freeing Teslyn, and had found him in the kitchens chatting with the cooks over a honey-glazed chicken. Thom got on as well with cooks as he did with farmers and merchants and nobles. He had a way of getting on with everyone, did Thom Merrilin, a way of hearing everyone's gossip and fitting it together to make a picture. He could look at things from a slant and see what others missed. As soon as he finished the chicken, Thom had come up with the only way to get the Aes Sedai past the guards. The whole thing had almost seemed easy, then. For a very short while. But other obstacles arose.

dʒulɪn pəzɛs ðə seɪm sɔɹɾ ə twɪsti weɪ ʌv lʊkɪŋ ət θɪŋz, pɝhæps fɹəm ɪz jɪɹz əz θif-kætʃɝ, ən səm naɪts mæt mɛt wɪð ɪm ən tɑm ɪn ðə taɪni ɹum ðə tu mɛn ʃɛɹɾ ɪn ðə sɝvəns' kɔɹɾɝz tə tʃɹaɪ plænɪŋ haʊ tə oʊvɝkʌm ðoʊz ɑbstəkəlz. ðoʊz wɝ wʌt ɹɪli meɪd mæt swɛt.

Juilin possessed the same sort of twisty way of looking at things, perhaps from his years as thief-catcher, and some nights Mat met with him and Thom in the tiny room the two men shared in the servants' quarters to try planning how to overcome those obstacles. Those were what really made Mat sweat.

ət ðə fɝst ə ðoʊz miɾɪŋz, ðə naɪt taɪlɪn lɛft, bɛslən bɑɹdʒd ɪn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ tɑm, soʊ hi sɛd. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, hi hæd lɪsən ət ðə dɔɹ fɝst, hɪɹɪŋ ɪnʌf ðəɾ i kəd nɑt bi fɔɪstɪɾ ɔf wɪð ə stɔɹi. vɛɹi ənfɔɹtʃənətli, hi wɑntəd tə teɪk pɑɹt. hi ivən toʊld əm dʒʌs haʊ tə də ɪt.

At the first of those meetings, the night Tylin left, Beslan barged in looking for Thom, so he said. Unfortunately, he had listened at the door first, hearing enough that he could not be foisted off with a story. Very unfortunately, he wanted to take part. He even told them just how to do it.

"æn əpɹaɪzɪŋ," hi sɛd, skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn ðə θɹi-lɛɡəd stul bɪtwin ðə tu nɛɹoʊ bɛdz. ə wɑʃstænd wɪð ə tʃɪpt waɪt pɪtʃɝ ən boʊl ən noʊ mɪɹɝ fɪnɪʃt kɹaʊɾɪŋ ðə ɹum. dʒulɪn sæɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv wʌn bɛɾ ɪn ɪz ʃɝtslivz, hɪz feɪs ənɹiɾəbəl, ən tɑm wɑz stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ɪz nʌkəlz wɪð ə fɹaʊn. ðət lɛf mæt tə lin əɡɛns ðə dɔɹ tə kip ɛniwʌn ɛls fɹəm bɑɹdʒɪŋ ɪn. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛðɝ tə læf əɹ kɹaɪ. pleɪnli tɑm hæd noʊn əbaʊt ðɪs mædnəs ɔl əlɔŋ; ðɪs wɑz wʌɾ i hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kul daʊn. "ðə pipəl wɪl ɹaɪz wən aɪ ɡɪv ðə wɝd," bɛslən wɛn ɑn. "maɪ fɹɛnz ən aɪ hæv tɔk tə mɛn ɔl oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə faɪt!"

"An uprising," he said, squatting on the three-legged stool between the two narrow beds. A washstand with a chipped white pitcher and bowl and no mirror finished crowding the room. Juilin sat on the edge of one bed in his shirtsleeves, his face unreadable, and Thom was stretched out on the other examining his knuckles with a frown. That left Mat to lean against the door to keep anyone else from barging in. He did not know whether to laugh or cry. Plainly Thom had known about this madness all along; this was what he had been trying to cool down. "The people will rise when I give the word," Beslan went on. "My friends and I have talked to men all over the city. They are ready to fight!"

saɪɪŋ, mæt izd ɪz weɪt mɔɹ ɑntu hɪz ɡʊd lɛɡ. hi səspɛktəd ðət wən bɛslən ɡeɪv ðə wɝd, hi ən ɪz fɹɛnz wəd ɹaɪz əloʊn. moʊs pipəl wɝ mɔɹ wɪlɪŋ tə tɔk əbaʊt faɪɾɪŋ ðən tə də ɪt, ɪspɛʃli əɡɛnst soʊlʒɝz. "bɛslən, ɪn ɡlimənz teɪlz, ɡɹumz wɪð pɪtʃfɔɹks ən beɪkɝz wɪð kɑbəlstoʊnz dɪfiɾ ɑɹmiz kəz ðeɪ wɑnə bi fɹi." tɑm snɔɹɾɪd soʊ hɑɹd, hɪz lɔŋ waɪt mʌstæʃ stɝd. mæt ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm. "ɪn ɹil laɪf, ðə ɡɹumz ən ðə beɪkɝz ɡɛt kɪld. aɪ noʊ ɡʊd soʊlʒɝz wən aɪ si ðɛm, ən ðə sintʃæn ɑɹ vɛɹi ɡʊd."

Sighing, Mat eased his weight more onto his good leg. He suspected that when Beslan gave the word, he and his friends would rise alone. Most people were more willing to talk about fighting than to do it, especially against soldiers. "Beslan, in gleeman's tales, grooms with pitchforks and bakers with cobblestones defeat armies because they want to be free." Thom snorted so hard, his long white mustache stirred. Mat ignored him. "In real life, the grooms and the bakers get killed. I know good soldiers when I see them, and the Seanchan are very good."

"ɪf wi fɹi ðə deɪmeɪn əlɔŋ wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðəl faɪt bɪsaɪɾ ʌs!" bɛslən ɪnsɪstəd.

"If we free the damane along with the Aes Sedai, they will fight beside us!" Beslan insisted.

"ðɛɹ mʌs bi tu hʌnʒɹəd əɹ mɔɹ deɪmeɪn ʌp ɪn ði æɾɪk, bɛslən, moʊst ə ðɛm sintʃæn. fɹi ðɛm, ən laɪk əz nɑt, ɛvɹi læst wʌn wɪl ɹʌn tə faɪn ə sʌldəm. laɪt, wi kʊdn ivən tʃɹʌst ɔl ðə wɪmən u ɑɹən sintʃæn!" mæt hɛld ʌp ə hæn tə fɔɹstɔl bɛslənz pɹoʊɾɛst. "wi hæv noʊ weɪ tə faɪn aʊt wɪtʃ wi kən tʃɹʌst, ən noʊ taɪm tə. ən ɪf wi dɪd, wiɾ əv tə kɪl ðə ɹɛst. aɪm nɑɾ ʌp tə kɪlɪŋ ə wʊmən huz oʊnli kɹaɪm ɪz ðət ʃiz ɑn ə liʃ. ɑɹ ju?" bɛslən lʊkt əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪz dʒɔ wɑz sɛt. hi wɑz nɑt ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp.

"There must be two hundred or more damane up in the attic, Beslan, most of them Seanchan. Free them, and like as not, every last one will run to find a sul'dam. Light, we couldn't even trust all the women who aren't Seanchan!" Mat held up a hand to forestall Beslan's protest. "We have no way to find out which we can trust, and no time to. And if we did, we'd have to kill the rest. I'm not up to killing a woman whose only crime is that she's on a leash. Are you?" Beslan looked away, but his jaw was set. He was not giving up.

"wɛðɝ wi fɹi ɛni deɪmeɪn əɹ nɑt," mæt wɛn ɑn, "ɪf ðə pipəl ɹaɪz ʌp, ðə sintʃæn wɪl tɝn ɛbu dɑɹ ɪndə ə slɔɾɝ jɑɹd. ðeɪ pʊt daʊn ɹɪbɛljənz hɑɹd, bɛslən. vɛɹi hɑɹd! wi kəd kɪl ɛvɹi deɪmeɪn ɪn ði æɾɪk, ən ðeɪ wəd bɹɪŋ ɪn mɔɹ fɹəm ðə kæmps. jəɹ mʌðɝ wɪl kʌm bæk tə faɪn ɹʌbəl ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz ən jəɹ hɛd stʌk ʌp aʊtsaɪd ðɛm. wɛɹ hɝz wɪl sun dʒɔɪn ɪt. jə doʊn θɪŋk ðəl bɪliv ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌɾ əɹ oʊn sʌn wɑz plænɪŋ, də ju?" laɪt, dɪd ʃi? ðə wʊmən wɑz bɹeɪv ɪnʌf tə tʃɹaɪ ɪt. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wɑz stupəɾ ɪnʌf, bʌt . . .

"Whether we free any damane or not," Mat went on, "if the people rise up, the Seanchan will turn Ebou Dar into a slaughter yard. They put down rebellions hard, Beslan. Very hard! We could kill every damane in the attic, and they would bring in more from the camps. Your mother will come back to find rubble inside the walls and your head stuck up outside them. Where hers will soon join it. You don't think they'll believe she did not know what her own son was planning, do you?" Light, did she? The woman was brave enough to try it. He did not think she was stupid enough, but . . .

"ʃi sɛz wəɹ maɪs," bɛslən sɛd bɪɾɝli. " 'wɛn wʊlfhnz pæs baɪ, maɪs laɪ kwaɪəɾ əɹ ɡɛɾ iɾən,' " hi kwoʊɾəd. "aɪ doʊn laɪk biɪŋ ə maʊs, mæt."

"She says we are mice," Beslan said bitterly. " 'When wolfhounds pass by, mice lie quiet or get eaten,' " he quoted. "I don't like being a mouse, Mat."

mæt bɹiðd ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ izəli. "bɛɾɝ ə laɪv maʊs ðən ə dɛd wʌn, bɛslən." wɪtʃ maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn ðə moʊs dɪpləmæɾɪk weɪ tə pʊɾ ɪt - bɛslən ɡɹɪməst əɾ ɪm - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tʃɹu.

Mat breathed a little more easily. "Better a live mouse than a dead one, Beslan." Which might not have been the most diplomatic way to put it - Beslan grimaced at him - but it was true.

hi ɛnkɝɪdʒ bɛslən tə dʒɔɪn ðə miɾɪŋz, ɪf dʒʌs tə kip ə ɹeɪn ɑn hɪm, bʌt bɛslən sɛldəm keɪm, ən ɪt fɛl tə tɑm tə tʃɹaɪ tə kul ðə mænz ɑɹɾɝ wən ən əz i kʊd. ðə moʊst i kəd pɝsweɪd bɛslən tə pɹɑməs wɑz ðəɾ i kəd nɑt kɔl fəɹ ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ əntɪl ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm hæd bɪn ɡɔn ə mʌnθ, tə lɛɾ əm ɡɛt klɪɹ. ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ sɛɾəld, ɪf nɑt sæɾɪsfæktʃɹəli. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls sim tə bi teɪk tu stɛps ən hɪɾ ə stoʊn wɔl. əɹ ə tʃɹɪp waɪɝ.

He encouraged Beslan to join the meetings, if just to keep a rein on him, but Beslan seldom came, and it fell to Thom to try to cool the man's ardor when and as he could. The most he could persuade Beslan to promise was that he could not call for the rising until the rest of them had been gone a month, to let them get clear. That was something settled, if not satisfactorily. Everything else seemed to be take two steps and hit a stone wall. Or a trip wire.

dʒulɪnz leɪɾi lʌv hæd kwaɪɾ ə hoʊld ɑn hɪm. fəɹ hɝ, hi sim tə nɑt tə maɪn dɔfɪŋ ɪz tɛɹən kloʊðz fəɹ ə sɝvəns ɡɹin-ænd-waɪt lɪvɝi, əɹ mɪsɪŋ slip tə spɛn tu naɪts swipɪŋ ðə flɔɹ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə stɛɹz ðət lɛɾ ʌp tə ðə kɛnəlz. noʊ wʌn lʊk twaɪs əɾ ə sɝvən pʊʃɪŋ ə bɹum, nɑɾ ivən ði ʌðɝ sɝvəns. ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs hæɾ ɪnʌf ə ðoʊz ðət ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɔl noʊ wʌn ənʌðɝ, ən ɪf ðeɪ sɔ ə mæn ɪn lɪvɝi wɪð ə bɹum, ðeɪ əsumd i wɑz səpoʊz tə bi juzɪŋ ɪt. dʒulɪn spɛn tu hoʊl deɪz swipɪŋ, tu, ən faɪnəli ɹipɔɹɾəd ðət sʌldəm ɪnspɛktɪd ðə kɛnəlz fɝs θɪŋ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ən dʒʌst æftɝ dɑɹk, ən maɪt bi ɪn əɹ aʊɾ əɾ ɛni taɪm ə ðə deɪ bɪtwin, bʌɾ ət naɪt ðə deɪmeɪn wɝ lɛf tə ðɛmsɛlvz.

Juilin's lady love had quite a hold on him. For her, he seemed to not to mind doffing his Tairen clothes for a servant's green-and-white livery, or missing sleep to spend two nights sweeping the floor not far from the stairs that led up to the kennels. No one looked twice at a servant pushing a broom, not even the other servants. The Tarasin Palace had enough of those that they did not all know one another, and if they saw a man in livery with a broom, they assumed he was supposed to be using it. Juilin spent two whole days sweeping, too, and finally reported that sul'dam inspected the kennels first thing in the morning and just after dark, and might be in or out at any time of the day between, but at night the damane were left to themselves.

"aɪ oʊvɝhɝɾ ə sʌldəm seɪ ʃi wɑz ɡlæd ʃi wɑzn aʊɾ ɪn ðə kæmps wɛɹ . . ." laɪɪŋ stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɑn ɪz θɪn mætʃɹəs, dʒulɪn pɔz tə jɔn koʊpiəsli bɪhaɪn ɪz hænd. tɑm wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz bɛd, wɪtʃ lɛf ðə stul fəɹ mæt. ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən stændɪŋ, ɪf nɑt baɪ mʌtʃ. moʊs pipəl wəd bi əslip ət ðəɾ aʊɝ. "wɛɹ ʃiɾ əv tə stænd ɡɑɹd səm naɪts," ðə θif-kætʃɝ kəntɪnjud wən i kəd spik əɡɛn. "sɛd ʃi laɪk biɪŋ eɪbəl tə lɛt ðə deɪmeɪn slip ɔl naɪt, tu, soʊ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl fɹɛʃ kʌm sʌnɹaɪz."

"I overheard a sul'dam say she was glad she wasn't out in the camps where . . ." Lying stretched out on his thin mattress, Juilin paused to yawn copiously behind his hand. Thom was sitting on the edge of his bed, which left the stool for Mat. It was better than standing, if not by much. Most people would be asleep at that hour. "Where she'd have to stand guard some nights," the thief-catcher continued when he could speak again. "Said she liked being able to let the damane sleep all night, too, so they were all fresh come sunrise."

"soʊ wi mʌs muv ət naɪt," tɑm mɝmɝd, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ waɪt mʌstæʃ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə æd ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ muvɪŋ ət naɪt dʒɹu aɪz. sintʃæn pətʃɹoʊl ðə stʃɹits ət naɪt, wɪtʃ ðə sɪvəl ɡɑɹd nɛvɝ hæd. ðə ɡɑɹd hæd bɪn əmɛnəbəl tə bɹaɪbz, tu, əntɪl ðə sintʃæn dɪsbændɪd ðɛm. naʊ, ət naɪt, ɪt wɑz əz laɪkli tə bi ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz ɪn ðə stʃɹit, ən ɛniwʌn u tʃɹaɪd tə bɹaɪb əm maɪt nɑt lɪv tə feɪs tʃɹaɪəl.

"So we must move at night," Thom murmured, fingering his long white mustache. There was no need to add that anything moving at night drew eyes. Seanchan patrolled the streets at night, which the Civil Guard never had. The Guard had been amenable to bribes, too, until the Seanchan disbanded them. Now, at night, it was as likely to be the Deathwatch Guards in the street, and anyone who tried to bribe them might not live to face trial.

"hæv jə faʊn ən æɾəm jɛt, dʒulɪn?" mæt æskt. "ɔɹ ðə dʒɹɛsəz? dʒɹɛsəz kæn bi əz dɪfəkəlt əz ən æɾəm."

"Have you found an a'dam yet, Juilin?" Mat asked. "Or the dresses? Dresses can't be as difficult as an a'dam."

dʒulɪn jɔn ɪndə hɪz hæn əɡɛn. "aɪl ɡɛɾ əm wən aɪ ɡɛt ðɛm. ðeɪ doʊn dʒʌs liv iðɝ laɪɪŋ əbaʊt, jə noʊ."

Juilin yawned into his hand again. "I'll get them when I get them. They don't just leave either lying about, you know."

tɑm dɪskʌvɝd ðət sɪmpli wɔkɪŋ deɪmeɪn θɹu ðə ɡeɪts wɑz nɑt pɑsəbəl. əɹ ɹæðɝ, əz i fɹili ədmɪɾəd, ɹaɪzɛl hæd dɪskʌvɝɾ ɪt. ɪt sim ðət wʌn ə ðə haɪ-ɹæŋkɪŋ ɔfəsɝz steɪɪŋ ət ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən hæɾ ə sɪŋɪŋ vɔɪs ʃi faʊn moʊst ɛntɝteɪnɪŋ.

Thom discovered that simply walking damane through the gates was not possible. Or rather, as he freely admitted, Riselle had discovered it. It seemed that one of the high-ranking officers staying at The Wandering Woman had a singing voice she found most entertaining.

"wʌn ə ðə blʌd kən teɪk deɪmeɪn aʊt wɪð noʊ kwɛstʃənz æskt," tɑm sɛɾ ət ðɛɹ nɛks miɾɪŋ. ðɪs taɪm, hi ən dʒulɪn boʊθ wɝ sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ bɛdz. mæt wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə heɪt ðət stul. "ɔɹ fju ɪnʌf, ɛniweɪ. sʌldəm, ðoʊ, niɾ ən ɔɹɾɝ saɪn ən sil baɪ wʌn ə ðə blʌd, ən ɔfəsɝ huz kæptən əɹ əbʌv, əɹ ə dɝsʌldəm. ðə ɡɑɹdz ət ðə ɡeɪts ən ɑn ðə dɑks əv lɪsts ʌv ɛvɹi sil ɪn ðə sɪɾi ðət kwɑləfaɪz, soʊ aɪ kæn dʒʌs meɪk ɛni sɔɹɾ ə sil ən θɪŋk ɪɾəl bi æksɛptɪd. aɪ niɾ ə kɑpi ʌv ðə ɹaɪt sɔɹɾ ʌv ɔɹɾɝ wɪð ðə ɹaɪt sɔɹɾ ə sil. ðət livz ðə kwɛstʃən ə hu wɪl bi əɹ θɹi sʌldəm."

"One of the Blood can take damane out with no questions asked," Thom said at their next meeting. This time, he and Juilin both were sitting on their beds. Mat was beginning to hate that stool. "Or few enough, anyway. Sul'dam, though, need an order signed and sealed by one of the Blood, an officer who's captain or above, or a der'sul'dam. The guards at the gates and on the docks have lists of every seal in the city that qualifies, so I can't just make any sort of seal and think it will be accepted. I need a copy of the right sort of order with the right sort of seal. That leaves the question of who will be our three sul'dam."

"meɪbi ɹaɪzɛl wɪl bi wʌn," mæt sədʒɛstəd. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ, ən tɛlɪŋ əɹ wəd bi ə ɹɪsk. tɑm hæɾ æskt əɹ ɔl sɔɹts ə kwɛstʃənz, əz ɪf i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɝn əbaʊt laɪf ʌndɝ ðə sintʃæn, ən ʃi hæd bɪn hæpi ɪnʌf tə æsk əɹ sintʃæn fɹɛnd, bʌt ʃi maɪt nɑt bi hæpi ɪnʌf tə tʃæns əɹ pɹɪɾi hɛd ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp ɑn ə spaɪk. ʃi kəd də wɝs ðən seɪ noʊ. "ænd wʌɾ əbaʊt jəɹ leɪɾi lʌv, dʒulɪn?" hi hæɾ ə θɔɾ ɑn ðə θɝd. hi hæɾ æsk dʒulɪn tə faɪn ə sʌldəm dʒɹɛs ðət wəd fɪt sɛɾəl ɑnən, ðoʊ ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ tʃæns tə æktʃəli  pʊɾ ɪt tə hɝ, jɛt. hi hæɾ oʊnli bɪn bæk tə ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən wʌns sɪns dʒoʊlin hæd wɔkt ɪndə ðə kɪtʃən, tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ʃi ʌndɝstʊɾ i wɑz duɪŋ ɔl i kʊd. ʃi dɪd nɑt, bʌt mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən hæɾ æktʃəli  mænədʒ tə smʌðɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz æŋɡɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd bɪɡɪn ʃaʊɾɪŋ. ʃi wəd meɪk ðə pɝfək sʌldəm fəɹ dʒoʊlin.

"Maybe Riselle will be one," Mat suggested. She did not know what they were doing, and telling her would be a risk. Thom had asked her all sorts of questions, as if he was trying to learn about life under the Seanchan, and she had been happy enough to ask her Seanchan friend, but she might not be happy enough to chance her pretty head going up on a spike. She could do worse than say no. "And what about your lady love, Juilin?" He had a thought on the third. He had asked Juilin to find a sul'dam dress that would fit Setalle Anan, though there had been no chance to actually put it to her, yet. He had only been back to The Wandering Woman once since Joline had walked into the kitchen, to make sure she understood he was doing all he could. She did not, but Mistress Anan had actually managed to smother the Aes Sedai's anger before she could begin shouting. She would make the perfect sul'dam for Joline.

dʒulɪn ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. "aɪ hæɾ ə hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf taɪm kənvɪnsɪŋ θɛɹə tə ɹʌn əweɪ wɪð mi. ʃiz . . . tɪmɪd, naʊ. aɪ kən hɛlp əɹ oʊvɝkʌm ðæt, ɪn taɪm - aɪ noʊ aɪ kən - bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ʃiz ʌp tə ɛniθɪŋ laɪk pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi ə sʌldəm."

Juilin shrugged uncomfortably. "I had a hard enough time convincing Thera to run away with me. She is . . . timid, now. I can help her overcome that, in time - I know I can - but I don't think she is up to anything like pretending to be a sul'dam."

tɑm tʌɡd əɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz. "ɪts ənlaɪkli ɹaɪzɛl wəd liv ʌndɝ ɛni sɝkəmstænsəz. ɪt simz ʃi laɪks bænɝ-dʒɛnɝəl lɔɹd jəmɑɾəz sɪŋɪŋ wɛl ɪnʌf ðət ʃiz dɪsaɪɾɪd tə mɛɹi hɪm." hi saɪd ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli. "ðɛɹ wɪl bi noʊ mɔɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən fɹəm ðət wɛl, aɪ fɪɹ." ən noʊ mɔɹ pɪloʊɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɑn əɹ bʊzəm, hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən sɛd. "wɛl, boʊθ ə jə θɪŋk ɑn u wi kən æsk. ən si ɪf jə kən leɪ hænz ɑn ə kɑpi ʌv ðoʊz ɔɹɾɝz."

Thom tugged at his mustaches. "It's unlikely Riselle would leave under any circumstances. It seems she likes Banner-General Lord Yamada's singing well enough that she has decided to marry him." He sighed regretfully. "There will be no more information from that well, I fear." And no more pillowing his head on her bosom, his expression said. "Well, both of you think on who we can ask. And see if you can lay hands on a copy of those orders."

tɑm mænədʒ tə faɪn ðə pɹɑpɝ ɪŋks ən peɪpɝ, ən wɑz ɹɛɾi tə ɪməteɪɾ ɛniwʌnz hæn ən sil. hi wɑz kəntɛmptʃuəs ə silz; ɛniwʌn wɪð ə tɝnəp ən ə naɪf kəd kɑpi ðoʊz, hi sɛd. ɹaɪɾɪŋ ənʌðɝ mænz hæn soʊ ðə mæn hɪmsɛlf wəd θɪŋk i hæd ɹɪɾən ɪt wɑz ən ɑɹt. bʌt nʌn ə ðɛm wɝ eɪbəl tə faɪn ə kɑpi ʌv ɔɹɾɝz wɪð ðə nɛsəsɛɹi sil tə kɑpi. laɪk æɾəm, ðə sintʃæn dɪd nɑt liv ɔɹɾɝz laɪɪŋ əbaʊt. dʒulɪn sim tə meɪkɪŋ noʊ pɹɑɡɹɛs wɪð ði æɾəm, iðɝ. tu stɛps fɔɹwɝd, ən ə stoʊn wɔl. ən sɪks deɪz wɝ ɡɔn, dʒʌs laɪk ðæt. fɔɹ lɛft. tə mæt, ɪt fɛlt əz ɪf sɪks jɪɹz hæd pæst sɪns taɪlɪnz dɪpɑɹtʃɝ, ən fɔɹ aʊɝz ɹɪmeɪn tɪl ʃi keɪm bæk.

Thom managed to find the proper inks and paper, and was ready to imitate anyone's hand and seal. He was contemptuous of seals; anyone with a turnip and a knife could copy those, he said. Writing another man's hand so the man himself would think he had written it was an art. But none of them were able to find a copy of orders with the necessary seal to copy. Like a'dam, the Seanchan did not leave orders lying about. Juilin seemed to making no progress with the a'dam, either. Two steps forward, and a stone wall. And six days were gone, just like that. Four left. To Mat, it felt as if six years had passed since Tylin's departure, and four hours remained till she came back.

ɑn ðə sɛvənθ deɪ, tɑm stɑp mæt ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ əz sun əz i keɪm ɪn fɹəm ɪz ɹaɪd. smaɪlɪŋ əz ðoʊ meɪkɪŋ aɪɾəl kɑnvɝseɪʃən, ðə wʌn-taɪm ɡlimən pɪtʃt ɪz vɔɪs loʊ. ðə sɝvəns hɝiɪŋ pæs kəd nɑɾ əv hɝd mɔɹ ðən ə mɝmɝ. "əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə noʊl, ðə ɡoʊləm kɪld əɡɛn læs naɪt. ðə sikɝz əv bɪn ɔɹɾɝd tə faɪn ðə kɪlɝ ɪf ðeɪv tə stɑp iɾɪŋ əɹ slipɪŋ tə də ɪt, ðoʊ aɪ kæn faɪn aʊɾ u ɡeɪv ði ɔɹɾɝ. ivən ðə fæk ðət ðeɪv bɪn ɔɹɾɝd tə də ɛniθɪŋ simz tə bi ə sikɹət. ðeɪ ɑɹ pɹæktəkli ɹɛɾiɪŋ ðə ɹæk ən hiɾɪŋ ðɛɹ aɪɝnz ɔlɹɛɾi, ðoʊ."

On the seventh day, Thom stopped Mat in the hallway as soon as he came in from his ride. Smiling as though making idle conversation, the one-time gleeman pitched his voice low. The servants hurrying past could not have heard more than a murmur. "According to Noal, the gholam killed again last night. The Seekers have been ordered to find the killer if they have to stop eating or sleeping to do it, though I can't find out who gave the order. Even the fact that they have been ordered to do anything seems to be a secret. They are practically readying the rack and heating their irons already, though."

noʊ mæɾɝ ðət tɑmz vɔɪs wɑz loʊ, mæt lʊkt ɝaʊn tə si wɛðɝ ɛniwʌn wɑz lɪsnɪŋ. ði oʊnli pɝsən ɪn saɪt wɑz ə staʊt ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn neɪm nɑɹvɪn, ɪn lɪvɝi bʌt niðɝ hɝiɪŋ nɔɹ kæɹiɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ. sɝvəns əz haɪ əz nɑɹvɪn dɪd nɑt kæɹi əɹ hɝi. hi blɪŋkt ət ðə saɪɾ ə mæt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ət wʌns, ən fɹaʊnd. mæt wɑntəd tə snɑɹl, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ i ɡɹɪn əz dɪsɑɹmɪŋli əz i nu haʊ, ən nɑɹvɪn wɛn ɔf skaʊlɪŋ. mæt wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə fɛloʊ hæd bɪn ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ ðə fɝst ətɛmp tə ɹimuv pɪps fɹəm ðə steɪbəl.

No matter that Thom's voice was low, Mat looked around to see whether anyone was listening. The only person in sight was a stout gray-haired man named Narvin, in livery but neither hurrying nor carrying anything. Servants as high as Narvin did not carry or hurry. He blinked at the sight of Mat trying to look every direction at once, and frowned. Mat wanted to snarl, but instead he grinned as disarmingly as he knew how, and Narvin went off scowling. Mat was sure the fellow had been responsible for the first attempt to remove Pips from the stable.

"noʊl toʊl jə əbaʊt ðə sikɝz?" hi wɪspɝɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli əz sun əz nɑɹvɪn wɑz fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ.

"Noal told you about the Seekers?" he whispered incredulously as soon as Narvin was far enough away.

θɔɹn weɪvd ə lin hæn dɪsmɪsɪvli. "ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. dʒʌst əbaʊt ðə kɪlɪŋ. ðoʊ hi dʌz sim tə hɪɹ wɪspɝz, ən noʊ wʌt ðeɪ min. ə ɹɛɹ tælənt, ðæt. aɪ wʌndɝ wɛðɝ i ɹɪli hæz bɪn tə ʃɑɹə," hi mjuzd. "hi sɛɾ i . . ." tɑm klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ʌndɝ mæts ɡlɛɹ. "wɛl, leɪɾɝ fəɹ ðæt. aɪ də hæv ʌðɝ ɹisɔɹsɪz ðən ðə mʌtʃ-ləmɛntɪd ɹaɪzɛl. sɛvɹəl ə ðɛm ɑɹ lɪsənɝz. lɪsənɝz ɹɪli də sim tə hɪɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

Thorn waved a lean hand dismissively. "Of course not. Just about the killing. Though he does seem to hear whispers, and know what they mean. A rare talent, that. I wonder whether he really has been to Shara," he mused. "He said he . . ." Thom cleared his throat under Mat's glare. "Well, later for that. I do have other resources than the much-lamented Riselle. Several of them are Listeners. Listeners really do seem to hear everything."

"juv bɪn tɔkɪŋ tə lɪsənɝz?" mæts vɔɪs skwik laɪk ə ɹʌsti hɪnʒ. hi θɔɾ ɪz θɹoʊt maɪɾ əv ɹʌstəd sɑləd!

"You've been talking to Listeners?" Mat's voice squeaked like a rusty hinge. He thought his throat might have rusted solid!

"ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ tə ɪt, əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ doʊnt noʊ jə noʊ," tɑm tʃʌkəld. "mæt, wɪð sintʃæn juv tə əsum ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔl lɪsənɝz. ðət weɪ, jə lɝn wʌt jə wɑnə noʊ wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ ɪɹ." hi kɔft ən nʌkəld ɪz mʌstæʃ, nɑt kwaɪt haɪɾɪŋ ə smaɪl soʊ sɛlf-dɛpɹəkeɪɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɔl bʌɾ ɪnvaɪɾəd pɹeɪz. "aɪ dʒʌs hæpən tə noʊ tu əɹ θɹi hu ɹɪli ɑɹ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, mɔɹ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən nɛvɝ hɝts. jə də wɑnə bi ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ taɪlɪn ɹɪtɝnz, doʊn ju? jə sim tə lʊkɪŋ ə lɪɾəl . . . fɝlɔɹn . . . wɪð əɹ ɡɔn."

"There's nothing to it, as long as they don't know you know," Thom chuckled. "Mat, with Seanchan you have to assume they are all Listeners. That way, you learn what you want to know without saying the wrong thing in the wrong ear." He coughed and knuckled his mustache, not quite hiding a smile so self-deprecating it all but invited praise. "I just happen to know two or three who really are. In any case, more information never hurts. You do want to be gone before Tylin returns, don't you? You seem to looking a little . . . forlorn . . . with her gone."

mæt kəɾ oʊnli ɡɹoʊn.

Mat could only groan.

ðət naɪt, ðə ɡoʊləm stʃɹʌk əɡɛn. ləpɪn ən nɹɪm wɝ bʌbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ wɪð ðə nuz bɪfɔɹ mæt hæd fɪnɪʃt ɪz bɹɛkfəs fɪʃ. ðə hoʊl sɪɾi wɑz ɪn ən ʌpɹɔɹ, ðeɪ kleɪmd. ðə leɪɾəst vɪktəm, ə wʊmən, hæd bɪn dɪskʌvɝɾ ət ðə maʊθ ʌv ən æli, ən sʌɾənli pipəl wɝ tɔkɪŋ, pʊɾɪŋ təɡɛðɝ wʌn kɪlɪŋ wɪð ənʌðɝ. ðəɹ wɑz ə mædmæn ɑn ðə lus, ən ðə pipəl wɝ dɪmændɪŋ mɔɹ sintʃæn pətʃɹoʊlz ɑn ðə stʃɹits ət naɪt. mæt pʊʃt ɪz pleɪɾ əweɪ, ɔl hʌŋɡɝ ɡɔn. mɔɹ pətʃɹoʊlz. ən ɪf ðət wɝ nɑt bæɾ ɪnʌf, sjuɹɔθ maɪt kʌm bæk ɝli ɪf ʃi lɝn ə ðɪs, bɹɪŋɪŋ taɪlɪn wɪð hɝ. ət bɛst, hi kəɾ oʊnli kaʊn ɑn tu mɔɹ deɪz. hi θɔɾ i maɪt luz wʌt hiɾ ɔlɹɛɾi iɾən.

That night, the gholam struck again. Lopin and Nerim were bubbling over with the news before Mat had finished his breakfast fish. The whole city was in an uproar, they claimed. The latest victim, a woman, had been discovered at the mouth of an alley, and suddenly people were talking, putting together one killing with another. There was a madman on the loose, and the people were demanding more Seanchan patrols on the streets at night. Mat pushed his plate away, all hunger gone. More patrols. And if that were not bad enough, Suroth might come back early if she learned of this, bringing Tylin with her. At best, he could only count on two more days. He thought he might lose what he'd already eaten.

hi spɛn ðə ɹɛst ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ peɪsɪŋ - wɛl, lɪmpɪŋ - ʌp ən daʊn ðə kɑɹpəɾ ɪn taɪlɪnz bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə peɪn ɪn ɪz lɛɡ waɪl i tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ, ɛniθɪŋ, ðət wəd lɛɾ ɪm kæɹi aʊt ði ɪmpɑsəbəl ɪn tu deɪz. ðə peɪn ɹɪli wɑz lɛs. hi hæd ɡɪvən ʌp ðə wɔkɪŋ stɪk, pʊʃɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə ɹɪɡeɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ. hi θɔɾ i maɪt mænədʒ tu əɹ θɹi maɪlz ɑn fʊt wɪθaʊt niɾɪŋ tə ɹɛs ðə lɛɡ. wɪθaʊt ɹɛstɪŋ ɪt vɛɹi mʌtʃ, ɛniweɪ.

He spent the rest of the morning pacing - well, limping - up and down the carpet in Tylin's bedchamber, ignoring the pain in his leg while he tried to think of something, anything, that would let him carry out the impossible in two days. The pain really was less. He had given up the walking stick, pushing himself to regain strength. He thought he might manage two or three miles on foot without needing to rest the leg. Without resting it very much, anyway.

ət mɪddeɪ, dʒulɪn bɹɔɾ ɪm ði oʊnli ɹɪli ɡʊd nuz i hæd hɝɾ ɪn ən eɪdʒ. ɪt wɑz nɑt nuz, ɪɡzækli. ɪt wɑz ə klɔθ sæk kənteɪnɪŋ tu dʒɹɛsəz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðə sɪlvɝ lɛŋθ ʌv ən æɾəm.

At midday, Juilin brought him the only really good news he had heard in an Age. It was not news, exactly. It was a cloth sack containing two dresses wrapped around the silver length of an a'dam.


tʃæptɝ twɛntinaɪn


CHAPTER 29

ənʌðɝ plæn


Another Plan

ðə bim-silɪŋɡd beɪsmən ə ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən wɑz lɑɹdʒ, jɛɾ ɪt simd əz kɹæmpt əz ðə ɹum tɑm ən dʒulɪn ʃɛɹd, ðoʊ ɪt hɛld oʊnli faɪv pipəl. ði ɔɪl læmp sɛɾ ɑn ən ʌpɛndəd bæɹəl kæs flɪkɝɪŋ ʃædoʊz. fɑɹðɝ əweɪ, ðə beɪsmənt wɑz ɔl ʃædoʊ. ði aɪl bɪtwin ðə ʃɛlvz ən ðə ɹʌf stoʊn wɔlz wɑz bɛɹli waɪɾɝ ðən ə bæɹəl wɑz tɔl, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt wʌt meɪɾ ɪt sim kɹaʊɾəd.

The beam-ceilinged basement of The Wandering Woman was large, yet it seemed as cramped as the room Thom and Juilin shared, though it held only five people. The oil lamp set on an upended barrel cast flickering shadows. Farther away, the basement was all shadow. The aisle between the shelves and the rough stone walls was barely wider than a barrel was tall, but that was not what made it seem crowded.

"aɪ æsk fəɹ jəɹ hɛlp, nɑɾ ə nus ɝaʊn maɪ nɛk," dʒoʊlin sɛd koʊldli. æftɝ nɪɹ ə wik ɪn mɪstʃɹəs ɑnənz kɛɹ, iɾɪŋ inɪdz kʊkɪŋ, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ lʊk hæɡɝd. ðə fɹeɪd dʒɹɛs mæt hæd fɝst sin ɑn əɹ wɑz ɡɔn, ɹipleɪs baɪ haɪ-nɛk faɪn blu wʊl wɪð ə tʌtʃ ə leɪs əɾ əɹ ɹɪsts ən ʌndɝ əɹ tʃɪn. ɪn ðə weɪvɝɪŋ laɪt, hɝ feɪs hæf ʃæɾoʊd, ʃi lʊk fjʊɹiəs, hɝ aɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɔɹ hoʊlz θɹu mæts feɪs. "ɪf ɛniθɪŋ wɛn ɝaɪ - ɛniθɪŋ! - aɪd bi hɛlpləs!"

"I asked for your help, not a noose around my neck," Joline said coldly. After near a week in Mistress Anan's care, eating Enid's cooking, the Aes Sedai no longer looked haggard. The frayed dress Mat had first seen on her was gone, replaced by high-necked fine blue wool with a touch of lace at her wrists and under her chin. In the wavering light, her face half shadowed, she looked furious, her eyes trying to bore holes through Mat's face. "If anything went awry - anything! - I'd be helpless!"

hi wɑz hævɪŋ nʌn ʌv ɪt. ɔfɝ tə hɛlp aʊɾ ə ðə ɡʊdnəs ə jəɹ hɑɹt - wɛl, sɔɹɾ ʌv - ən si wʌɾ ɪt ɡɑt ju. hi pɹæktəkli ʃʊk ði æɾəm ʌndɝ əɹ noʊz. ɪt wɪɡɡəld ɪn ɪz hæn laɪk ə lɔŋ sɪlvɝ sneɪk, ɡlɪntɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪm læmplaɪt, ðə kɑlɝ ən bɹeɪslət boʊθ skɹeɪpɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə stoʊn flɔɹ, ən dʒoʊlin ɡæðɝɾ əɹ dɑɹk skɝts ən stɛp bæk tə əvɔɪd biɪŋ tʌtʃt. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn ə vaɪpɝ fɹəm ðə weɪ hɝ maʊθ twɪstəd. hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ɪt wəd fɪt hɝ; ðə kɑlɝ sim lɑɹdʒɝ ðən əɹ slɪm nɛk. "mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən wɪl teɪk ɪɾ ɔf əz sun əz wi ɡɛt jə aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz," hi ɡɹaʊld. "ju tʃɹʌs hɝ, doʊn ju? ʃi ɹɪskt əɹ hɛd tə haɪd jə daʊn hɪɹ. aɪm tɛlɪŋ ju, ɪts ði oʊnli weɪ!" dʒoʊlin ɹeɪzd əɹ tʃɪn stʌbɝnli. mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən mʌɾɝd æŋɡɹəli ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ.

He was having none of it. Offer to help out of the goodness of your heart - well, sort of - and see what it got you. He practically shook the a'dam under her nose. It wiggled in his hand like a long silver snake, glinting in the dim lamplight, the collar and bracelet both scraping across the stone floor, and Joline gathered her dark skirts and stepped back to avoid being touched. It might have been a viper from the way her mouth twisted. He wondered whether it would fit her; the collar seemed larger than her slim neck. "Mistress Anan will take it off as soon as we get you outside the walls," he growled. "You trust her, don't you? She risked her head to hide you down here. I'm telling you, it is the only way!" Joline raised her chin stubbornly. Mistress Anan muttered angrily under her breath.

"ʃi dʌz nɑt wɑnə wɛɹ ðə θɪŋ," fɛn sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs bɪhaɪn mæt.

"She does not want to wear the thing," Fen said in a flat voice behind Mat.

"ɪf ʃi dʌznt wɑnə wɛɹ ɪt, ðən ʃi dʌznt wɛɹ ɪt," blɹɪk sɛɾ ɪn ən ivən flæɾɝ, ət fɛnz saɪd.

"If she doesn't want to wear it, then she doesn't wear it," Blaeric said in an even flatter, at Fen's side.

dʒoʊlinz dɑɹk-hɛɹd wɔɹɾɝz wɝ laɪk piz ɪn ə pɑd fəɹ mɛn soʊ dɪfɹənt. fɛn, wɪð ɪz dɑɹk tɪltəɾ aɪz ən ə tʃɪn ðət kəd tʃɪp stoʊn, wɑz ə tʌtʃ ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən blɹɪk, ən meɪbi ə lɪɾəl hɛviɝ ɪn ðə tʃɛst ən ʃoʊldɝz, jɛt ðeɪ cʊɾə wɔɹn itʃ ʌðɝz kloʊðz wɪθaʊt mʌtʃ dɪfəkəlti. wɛɹ fɛnz stʃɹeɪt blæk hɛɹ hʌŋ ɔlmoʊs tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz, blu-aɪd blɹɪks vɛɹi ʃɔɹt hɛɹ wɑz slaɪtli laɪɾɝ ɪn kʌlɝ. blɹɪk wɑz ʃaɪnɝən, ən i hæd ʃeɪvd ɪz tɑpnɑɾ ən wɑz lɛɾɪŋ ɪz hɛɹ ɡɹoʊ ɪn tə əvɔɪd noʊɾəs, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt. fɛn, ə sɑldəiən, sim nɑt tə laɪk mʌtʃ ɪksɛp fəɹ dʒoʊlin. ðeɪ boʊθ laɪk dʒoʊlin ə lɑt. ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm tɔkt əlaɪk, θɔɾ əlaɪk, muvd əlaɪk. ðeɪ wɔɹ dɪnʒi ʃɝts ən wɝkmɪnz pleɪn wʊlən vɛsts ðət hʌŋ daʊn bɪloʊ ðɛɹ hɪps, jɛɾ ɛniwʌn u tʊk əm fəɹ leɪbɝɝz, ivən ɪn ðɪs pʊɹ laɪt, wɑz blaɪnd. baɪ deɪ, ɪn ðə steɪbəlz wɛɹ mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən hæɾ əm wɝkɪŋ . . . laɪt! ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət mæt əz laɪənz maɪt lʊk əɾ ə ɡoʊt ðət hæd bɛɹɾ ɪts tiθ ət ðɛm. hi muv soʊ hi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə si ðə wɔɹɾɝz ivən fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ. ðə naɪvz hɪɾən əbaʊɾ ɪm ɪn vɛɹiəs pleɪsəz wɝ smɔl kʌmfɝt, wɪð əm əɾ ɪz bæk.

Joline's dark-haired Warders were like peas in a pod for men so different. Fen, with his dark tilted eyes and a chin that could chip stone, was a touch shorter than Blaeric, and maybe a little heavier in the chest and shoulders, yet they could have worn each other's clothes without much difficulty. Where Fen's straight black hair hung almost to his shoulders, blue-eyed Blaeric's very short hair was slightly lighter in color. Blaeric was Shienaran, and he had shaved his topknot and was letting his hair grow in to avoid notice, but he did not like it. Fen, a Saldaean, seemed not to like much except for Joline. They both liked Joline a lot. The pair of them talked alike, thought alike, moved alike. They wore dingy shirts and workmen's plain woolen vests that hung down below their hips, yet anyone who took them for laborers, even in this poor light, was blind. By day, in the stables where Mistress Anan had them working . . . Light! They were looking at Mat as lions might look at a goat that had bared its teeth at them. He moved so he did not have to see the Warders even from the corner of his eye. The knives hidden about him in various places were small comfort, with them at his back.

"ɪf jəl nɑt lɪsən tə hɪm, dʒoʊlin mɑzə, jəl lɪsən tə mi." plæntɪŋ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps, sɛɾəl ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ðə slɛndɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, hɝ heɪzəl aɪz ɡlɛɹɪŋ. "aɪ min tə si jə bæk ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪf aɪ hæv tə wɔk ɛvɹi stɛp ə ðə weɪ pʊʃɪŋ ju! pɝhæps əlɔŋ ðə weɪ jəl ʃoʊ mi ðət jə noʊ wʌɾ ɪt minz tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪd sɛɾəl fəɹ ə ɡlɪmps ʌv ə ɡɹoʊn wʊmən. soʊ fɑɹ, ɔl aɪ hæv sin ɪz ə nɑvəs snaɪvəlɪŋ ɪn əɹ bɛɾ ən θɹoʊɪŋ tæntʃɹəmz!"

"If you will not listen to him, Joline Maza, you will listen to me." Planting her hands on her hips, Setalle rounded on the slender Aes Sedai, her hazel eyes glaring. "I mean to see you back in the White Tower if I have to walk every step of the way pushing you! Perhaps along the way you will show me that you know what it means to be Aes Sedai. I'd settle for a glimpse of a grown woman. So far, all I have seen is a novice sniveling in her bed and throwing tantrums!"

dʒoʊlin stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, ðoʊz bɪɡ bɹaʊn aɪz əz waɪɾ əz ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ, əz ɪf ʃi kəd nɑt bɪliv əɹ ɪɹz. mæt wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i bɪliv hɪz, iðɝ. ɪnkipɝz dɪd nɑt lip daʊn ɛɛs sədaɪz θɹoʊts. fɛn ɡɹʌntɪd, ən blɹɪk mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ðət saʊndəɾ ʌnkəmpləmɛntɝi.

Joline stared at her, those big brown eyes as wide as they would go, as if she could not believe her ears. Mat was not sure he believed his, either. Innkeepers did not leap down Aes Sedai's throats. Fen grunted, and Blaeric muttered something that sounded uncomplimentary.

"ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ jə tə ɡoʊ fɑɹðɝ ðən bɪɑn saɪɾ ə ðə ɡɑɹdz ət ðə ɡeɪts," mæt toʊl sɛɾəl heɪstəli, hoʊpɪŋ tə daɪvɝɾ ɛni ɪksploʊʒən dʒoʊlin maɪt bi kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. "kip ðə hʊɾ ə jəɹ kloʊk pʊld ʌp . . ." laɪt, hi hæd tə ɡɛɾ əɹ wʌn ə ðoʊz fænsi kloʊks! wɛl, ɪf dʒulɪn kəd stil ən æɾəm, hi kəd stil ə blʌɾi kloʊk, tu. ". . . ən ðə ɡɑɹdz wɪl dʒʌst si ənʌðɝ sʌldəm. jə kən bi bæk hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ deɪbɹeɪk, ən noʊ wʌn ðə waɪzɝ. ənlɛs jə ɪnsɪst ɑn wɛɹɪŋ jəɹ mɛɹɪdʒ naɪf." hi læft əɾ ɪz oʊn dʒoʊk, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt.

"There's no need for you to go farther than beyond sight of the guards at the gates," Mat told Setalle hastily, hoping to divert any explosion Joline might be considering. "Keep the hood of your cloak pulled up . . ." Light, he had to get her one of those fancy cloaks! Well, if Juilin could steal an a'dam, he could steal a bloody cloak, too. ". . . and the guards will just see another sul'dam. You can be back here before daybreak, and no one the wiser. Unless you insist on wearing your marriage knife." He laughed at his own joke, but she did not.

"du jə θɪŋk aɪ kəd ɹɪmeɪn ɛniwɛɹ wɪmən ɑɹ tɝn ɪndə ænəməlz kəz ðeɪ kən tʃænəl?" ʃi dɪmændəd, stɔkɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ tɪl ʃi stʊd toʊ-tə-toʊ wɪð hɪm. "du jə θɪŋk aɪd lɛt maɪ fæmli steɪ?" ɪf əɹ aɪz hæd ɡlɛɹɾ ət dʒoʊlin, ðeɪ bleɪzd ʌp ət hɪm. fɹæŋkli, hi hæd nɛvɝ kənsɪɾɝd ðə kwɛstʃən. sɝɾənli hi wəd laɪk tə si ðə deɪmeɪn fɹid, bʌt waɪ ʃəɾ ɪt mæɾɝ ðɪs mʌtʃ tə hɝ? pleɪnli, ɪt dɪd, ðoʊ; hɝ hæn slɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə hɪlt ə ðə lɔŋ kɝv dæɡɝ stʌk bɪhaɪn əɹ bɛlt, kɝɛsɪŋ ɪt. ɛbu dɑɹi dɪd nɑt teɪk kaɪnli tə ɪnsəls, ən ʃi wɑz pjʊɹ ɛbu dɑɹi tə ðəɾ ɪkstɛnt. "aɪ bɪɡæn nɪɡoʊʃieɪɾɪŋ ðə seɪl ə ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən tu deɪz æftɝ ðə sintʃæn ɝaɪvd, wən aɪ kəd si wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ. aɪ ʃʊɾə hændəɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ oʊvɝ tə laɪɾəl ɪlɑnɪd deɪz əɡoʊ, bʌɾ aɪv bɪn hoʊldɪŋ ɔf kəz laɪɾəl wəd nɑɾ ɪkspɛk tə faɪn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə beɪsmənt. wən jə ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ, aɪ kən hæn oʊvɝ ðə kiz ən ɡoʊ wɪð ju. laɪɾəl ɪz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənt," ʃi æɾəd sɪɡnɪfɪkənli oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ tə dʒoʊlin.

"Do you think I could remain anywhere women are turned into animals because they can channel?" she demanded, stalking across the floor till she stood toe-to-toe with him. "Do you think I'd let my family stay?" If her eyes had glared at Joline, they blazed up at him. Frankly, he had never considered the question. Certainly he would like to see the damane freed, but why should it matter this much to her? Plainly, it did, though; her hand slid along the hilt of the long curved dagger stuck behind her belt, caressing it. Ebou Dari did not take kindly to insults, and she was pure Ebou Dari to that extent. "I began negotiating the sale of The Wandering Woman two days after the Seanchan arrived, when I could see what they are. I should have handed everything over to Lydel Elonid days ago, but I've been holding off because Lydel would not expect to find an Aes Sedai in the basement. When you are ready to go, I can hand over the keys and go with you. Lydel is growing impatient," she added significantly over her shoulder to Joline.

ən wʌɾ əbaʊɾ ɪz ɡoʊld? hi wɑntəd tə æsk ɪndɪɡnənli. wəd laɪɾəl əv lɛɾ ɪm teɪk ðəɾ əweɪ, ə wɪndfɔl ʌndɝ əɹ kɪtʃən flɔɹ? stɪl, ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ðət meɪɾ ɪm tʃoʊk. sʌɾənli hi kəd si hɪmsɛlf sæɾəld wɪð mɪstʃɹəs ɑnənz hoʊl fæmli, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə mɛɹid sʌnz ən dɔɾɝz wɪð ðɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹən, ən meɪbi ə fju æns ən ʌŋkəlz ən kʌzənz, əz wɛl. dʌzənz ə ðɛm. skɔɹz, meɪbi. ʃi maɪt bi fɹəm ɔf, bʌɾ əɹ hʌzbən hæd ɹileɪʃənz ɔl oʊvɝ ðə sɪɾi. blɹɪk slæpt ɪm ɑn ðə bæk soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ i stæɡɝd.

And what about his gold? he wanted to ask indignantly. Would Lydel have let him take that away, a windfall under her kitchen floor? Still, it was something else that made him choke. Suddenly he could see himself saddled with Mistress Anan's whole family, including the married sons and daughters with their children, and maybe a few aunts and uncles and cousins, as well. Dozens of them. Scores, maybe. She might be from off, but her husband had relations all over the city. Blaeric slapped him on the back so hard that he staggered.

hi ʃoʊd ðə fɛloʊ hɪz tiθ ən hoʊp ðə ʃaɪnɝən wəd teɪk ɪt fəɹ ə smaɪl ə θæŋks. blɹɪks ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ ɔltɝd. blʌɾi wɔɹɾɝz! blʌɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ! blʌɾi, blʌɾi ɪnkipɝz!

He showed the fellow his teeth and hoped the Shienaran would take it for a smile of thanks. Blaeric's expression never altered. Bloody Warders! Bloody Aes Sedai! Bloody, bloody innkeepers!

"mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən," hi sɛd kɛɹfəli, "ðə weɪ aɪ min tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ, ðɛɹz oʊnli ɹum fəɹ soʊ mɛni." hi hæd nɑt toʊld əɹ əbaʊt lukəz ʃoʊ, jɛt. ðəɹ wɑz ə tʃæns i kəd nɑt kənvɪns ðə mæn, æftɝ ɔl. ən ðə mɔɹ pipəl i hæd tə kənvɪns lukə tə teɪk, ðə hɑɹɾɝ ɪt wəd bi. "kʌm bæk hɪɹ wʌns wɝ aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi. ɪf juv tə liv, ɡoʊ ɑn wʌn jəɹ hʌzbənz fɪʃɪŋ boʊts. aɪ sədʒɛs jə weɪɾ ə fju deɪz, ðoʊ. meɪbi ə wik əɹ soʊ. wʌns ðə sintʃæn dɪskʌvɝ tu deɪmeɪn mɪsɪŋ, ðəl bi ɔl oʊvɝ ɛniθɪŋ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə liv."

"Mistress Anan," he said carefully, "the way I mean to get away from Ebou Dar, there's only room for so many." He had not told her about Luca's show, yet. There was a chance he could not convince the man, after all. And the more people he had to convince Luca to take, the harder it would be. "Come back here once we're outside the city. If you have to leave, go on one your husband's fishing boats. I suggest you wait a few days, though. Maybe a week or so. Once the Seanchan discover two damane missing, they'll be all over anything trying to leave."

"tu?" dʒoʊlin pʊɾ ɪn ʃɑɹpli. "tɛslɪn ən hu?"

"Two?" Joline put in sharply. "Teslyn and who?"

mæt wɪnst. hi hæd nɑt mɛn tə lɛt ðət slɪp. hi hæd dʒoʊlin pɛɡd, ən pɛtʃələnt, wɪlfəl ən spɔɪld wɝ ðə wɝdz ðət keɪm moʊst ɹɛɾəli tə maɪnd. ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl ðət meɪɾ əɹ θɪŋk ðɪs mɔɹ dɪfəkəlt, mɔɹ laɪkli tə feɪl, maɪt dʒʌs bi ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ dɪsaɪd tə tʃɹaɪ səm kɹækbɹeɪn skim ə hɝ oʊn. sʌmθɪŋ ðət wəd noʊ daʊt ɹuən ɪz oʊn plænz. ʃi wəd bi kæptʃɝd fəɹ ʃʊɹ ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹʌn ɑn əɹ oʊn, ən ʃi wəd faɪt. ən wʌns ðə sintʃæn lɝn ðəɹ hæd bɪn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz, ðeɪ wəɾ ɪntɛnsəfaɪ ðə sɝtʃɪz fəɹ mɛɹəθdəmeɪn əɡɛn, ɪnkɹis ðə stʃɹit pətʃɹoʊlz mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi hæd fəɹ ðə "mæd kɪlɝ," ən wɝst ʌv ɔl, ðeɪ maɪt wɛl meɪk ɪɾ ivən hɑɹɾɝ tə pæs ðə ɡeɪts.

Mat winced. He had not meant to let that slip. He had Joline pegged, and petulant, willful and spoiled were the words that came most readily to mind. Anything at all that made her think this more difficult, more likely to fail, might just be enough to make her decide to try some crackbrained scheme of her own. Something that would no doubt ruin his own plans. She would be captured for sure if she tried to run on her own, and she would fight. And once the Seanchan learned there had been an Aes Sedai in the city, right under their noses, they would intensify the searches for marath'damane again, increase the street patrols more than they already had for the "mad killer," and worst of all, they might well make it even harder to pass the gates.

"idɛzinə æziɾɪn," hi sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ əbaʊt hɝ."

"Edesina Azzedin," he said reluctantly. "I don't know anything more about her."

"idɛzinə," dʒoʊlin sɛd sloʊli. ə taɪni fɹaʊn kɹist əɹ smuð fɔɹhɛd. "aɪ hɝd ðət ʃi hæd - " wʌtɛvɝ ʃi hæd hɝd, ʃi snæpt əɹ tiθ ʃʌɾ ɑn ɪɾ ən fɪkst ɪm ə fɪɹs stɛɹ. "ɑɹ ðeɪ hoʊldɪŋ ɛni ʌðɝ sɪstɝz? ɪf tɛslɪn ɪz ɡɛɾɪŋ fɹi, aɪ woʊn liv ɛni ʌðɝ sɪstɝ tə ðɛm!"

"Edesina," Joline said slowly. A tiny frown creased her smooth forehead. "I heard that she had - " Whatever she had heard, she snapped her teeth shut on it and fixed him a fierce stare. "Are they holding any other sisters? If Teslyn is getting free, I won't leave any other sister to them!"

ɪt tʊk ən ɛfɝɾ ɑn mæts pɑɹt nɑt tə ɡeɪp. pɛtʃələn ən spɔɪld? hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə laɪoʊnəs tə mætʃ blɹɪk ən fɛn. "bɪliv mi, aɪ woʊn liv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə kɛnəlz ənlɛs ʃi wɑns tə steɪ," hi sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs əz ɹaɪ əz i kʊd. ðə wʊmən wɑz stɪl wɪlfəl. ʃi maɪɾ ɪnsɪst ɑn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɛskju ði ʌðɝ tu laɪk pʊɹə. laɪt, hi ʃəd nɛvɝ əv lɛt hɪmsɛlf ɡɛt tæŋɡəld wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən i dɪd nɑt niɾ ɛni eɪntʃən mɛmɹiz tə wɔɹn hɪm! hɪz oʊn wəd də vɛɹi wɛl, θæŋk ju.

It took an effort on Mat's part not to gape. Petulant and spoiled? He was looking at a lioness to match Blaeric and Fen. "Believe me, I won't leave an Aes Sedai in the kennels unless she wants to stay," he said, making his voice as wry as he could. The woman was still willful. She might insist on trying to rescue the other two like Pura. Light, he should never have let himself get tangled with Aes Sedai, and he did not need any ancient memories to warn him! His own would do very well, thank you.

fɛn poʊkt ɪm ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz lɛft ʃoʊldɝ wɪð ə hɑɹd fɪŋɡɝ. "doʊn bi soʊ laɪt-tʌŋd," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd wɔɹnɪŋli.

Fen poked him on the back of his left shoulder with a hard finger. "Don't be so light-tongued," the Warder said warningly.

blɹɪk poʊkt ɪm ɑn ðə bæk ə ði ʌðɝ ʃoʊldɝ. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ u jə ɑɹ tɔkɪŋ tə!"

Blaeric poked him on the back of the other shoulder. "Remember who you are talking to!"

dʒoʊlin snɪft əɾ ɪz toʊn, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt pɹoʊb fɝðɝ.

Joline sniffed at his tone, but she did not probe further.

mæt fɛlt ə nɑt lusən ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk, əbaʊt wɛɹ ə hɛdzmənz æks wəd stʃɹaɪk. ɛɛs sədaɪ twɪstəd wɝdz wɪð ʌðɝ pipəl; ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt ʌðɝz tə juz ðɛɹ oʊn tʃɹɪks ɑn ðɛm.

Mat felt a knot loosen in the back of his neck, about where a headsman's axe would strike. Aes Sedai twisted words with other people; they did not expect others to use their own tricks on them.

hi tɝn tə sɛɾəl. "mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən, jə kən si jəɹ hʌzbənz boʊts ɑɹ mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ - "

He turned to Setalle. "Mistress Anan, you can see your husband's boats are much better - "

"ɪt maɪt bi soʊ," ʃi bɹoʊk ɪn, "ɪksɛp ðət dʒæsfɝ seɪld wɪð ɔl tɛn ə hɪz boʊts ən ɔl ʌv əɹ kɪn θɹi deɪz əɡoʊ. aɪ ɪkspɛk ðə ɡɪlz wɪl wɑnə tɔk tə hɪm ɪf i ɛvɝ ɹɪtɝnz. hi ɪzən səpoʊz tə kæɹi pæsənʒɝz. ðeɪ ɑɹ koʊstɪŋ tə ɪljən, wɛɹ ðəl weɪt fəɹ mi. aɪ doʊn ɹɪli ɪntɛn tə ɡoʊ əz fɑɹ əz tɑɹ vəlɑn, jə si."

"It might be so," she broke in, "except that Jasfer sailed with all ten of his boats and all of our kin three days ago. I expect the guilds will want to talk to him if he ever returns. He isn't supposed to carry passengers. They are coasting to Illian, where they will wait for me. I don't really intend to go as far as Tar Valon, you see."

ðɪs taɪm, mæt kəd nɑt stɑp ə wɪns. hi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd fɔlɪŋ bæk ɑn dʒæsfɝ ɑnənz fɪʃɪŋ boʊts ɪf i feɪl tə pɝsweɪd lukə. ə deɪnʒɝəs ɑpʃən, tʃɹu, mɔɹ ðən deɪnʒɝəs. mæd, meɪbi. ðə sʌldəm ɑn ðə dɑks laɪkli wʊɾə wɑntəd tə tʃɛk ɛni ɔɹɾɝ ðət sɛn deɪmeɪn aʊɾ ɑn fɪʃɪŋ boʊts, ɪspɛʃli ɪn ðə naɪt. bʌt ðə boʊts hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪnd. wɛl, hi wɑz dʒʌs gɑnə hæv twɪs lukəz ɑɹm hɑɹd, dʒʌst əz hɑɹɾ əz nɛsəsɛɹi.

This time, Mat could not stop a wince. He had intended falling back on Jasfer Anan's fishing boats if he failed to persuade Luca. A dangerous option, true, more than dangerous. Mad, maybe. The sul'dam on the docks likely would have wanted to check any order that sent damane out on fishing boats, especially in the night. But the boats had always been in the back of his mind. Well, he was just going to have twist Luca's arm hard, just as hard as necessary.

"ju lɛt jəɹ kɪn ɡoʊ aʊɾ ɪn ðɪs sizən?" dɪsbɪlif ən skɔɹn mɪŋɡəld ɪn dʒoʊlinz vɔɪs. "wɛn ðə wɝst stɔɹmz ɑɹ bɹuɪŋ?"

"You let your kin go out in this season?" Disbelief and scorn mingled in Joline's voice. "When the worst storms are brewing?"

hɝ bæk tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd pɹaʊdli, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt pɹaɪɾ ɪn hɝsɛlf. "aɪ tʃɹʌs dʒæsfɝ tə seɪl ɪndə ðə tiθ ʌv ə sɛmɑɹoʊz, ɪf nid bi. aɪ tʃɹʌst ɪm əz mʌtʃ əz jə də jəɹ wɔɹɾɝz, ɡɹin. mɔɹ."

Her back to the Aes Sedai, Mistress Anan raised her head proudly, but it was not pride in herself. "I trust Jasfer to sail into the teeth of a cemaros, if need be. I trust him as much as you do your Warders, Green. More."

fɹaʊnɪŋ sʌɾənli, dʒoʊlin pɪkt ʌp ðə læmp baɪ ði aɪɝn beɪs ən muvd ɪt tə kæs laɪɾ ɑn ði ɪnkipɝz feɪs. "hæv wi mɛt sʌmwɛɹ bɪfɔɹ? səmtaɪmz, wən aɪ kænɑt si jəɹ feɪs, jəɹ vɔɪs saʊnz fəmɪljɝ."

Frowning suddenly, Joline picked up the lamp by the iron base and moved it to cast light on the innkeeper's face. "Have we met somewhere before? Sometimes, when I cannot see your face, your voice sounds familiar."

ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ænsɝɪŋ, sɛɾəl tʊk ði æɾəm fɹəm mæt ən fʌmbəld ət ðə flæt sɛɡmɛntɪd bɹeɪsləɾ ɑn wʌn ɛn ə ðə ɹaʊn sɪlvɝ liʃ. ðə hoʊl θɪŋ wɑz meɪɾ ɪn sɛɡməns, fɪɾəd təɡɛðɝ soʊ kʌnɪŋli jə kəd nɑt si haʊ ɪt hæd bɪn dʌn. "wi maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡɛt ðə tɛstɪŋ oʊvɝ wɪð."

Instead of answering, Setalle took the a'dam from Mat and fumbled at the flat segmented bracelet on one end of the round silver leash. The whole thing was made in segments, fitted together so cunningly you could not see how it had been done. "We might as well get the testing over with."

"tɛstɪŋ?" hi sɛd, ən ðoʊz heɪzəl aɪz ɡeɪv ɪm ə wɪðɝɪŋ lʊk.

"Testing?" he said, and those hazel eyes gave him a withering look.

"nɑɾ ɛvɹi wʊmən kən bi ə sʌldəm. jə ʃəd noʊ ðət baɪ naʊ. aɪ hæv hoʊps ðəɾ aɪ kæn, bʌt bɛɾɝ wi faɪn aʊt bɪfɔɹ ðə læst aʊɝ." skaʊlɪŋ ət ðə stʌbɝnli kloʊz bɹeɪslət, ʃi tɝn ɪɾ ɪn əɹ hænz. "du jə noʊ haʊ tə oʊpən ðɪs θɪŋ? aɪ kænɑɾ ivən faɪnd wɛɹ ɪɾ oʊpənz."

"Not every woman can be a sul'dam. You should know that by now. I have hopes that I can, but better we find out before the last hour." Scowling at the stubbornly closed bracelet, she turned it in her hands. "Do you know how to open this thing? I cannot even find where it opens."

"jɛs," hi sɛd feɪnli. ði oʊnli taɪmz i hæd tɔkt wɪð sintʃæn əbaʊt sʌldəm ən deɪmeɪn, ɪt hæd bɪn kɔʃəs kwɛstʃənz əbaʊt haʊ ðeɪ wɝ juzd ɪn bæɾəl. hi hæd nɛvɝ ivən θɔɾ əbaʊt haʊ sʌldəm wɝ tʃoʊzən. hi maɪɾ əv tə faɪɾ əm - ðoʊz eɪntʃən mɛmɹiz hɑɹdli lɛɾ ɪm stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ tə faɪt bæɾəlz - bʌɾ i hæd sɝɾənli nɛvɝ mɛn tə ɹəkɹuɾ ɛni. "bɛɾɝ tə tɛst ɪt naʊ." ɪnstɛɾ ʌv . . . laɪt!

"Yes," he said faintly. The only times he had talked with Seanchan about sul'dam and damane, it had been cautious questions about how they were used in battle. He had never even thought about how sul'dam were chosen. He might have to fight them - those ancient memories hardly let him stop thinking about how to fight battles - but he had certainly never meant to recruit any. "Better to test it now." Instead of . . . Light!

ðə kætʃəz wɝ ə sɪmpəl mæɾɝ fəɹ hɪm, ðə bɹeɪsləɾ iziəst. ðət wɑz dʒʌst ə mæɾɝ ə skwizɪŋ ðə ɹaɪt spɑts, tɑp ən bɑɾəm, nɑt kwaɪɾ ɑpəzət ðə liʃ. ɪt kəd bi dʌn wɪð wʌn hænd, ən ðə bɹeɪslət pɑpt oʊpən ɑn wʌn wɪð ə mətælɪk klɪk. ðə kɑlɝ wɑz ə lɪɾəl tʃɹɪkiɝ, ən ɹikwaɪɝd boʊθ hænz. pʊɾɪŋ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ðə pɹɑpɝ spɑts ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ʌv wɛɹ ðə liʃ ətætʃt, hi pɹɛst, ðən twɪstəɾ ən pʊld waɪl hoʊldɪŋ ðə pɹɛʃɝ. nʌθɪŋ hæpənd, ðəɾ i kəd si, əntɪl i twɪstəd ðə tu saɪdz ði ʌðɝ weɪ. ðən ðeɪ keɪm əpɑɹt ɹaɪt bɪsaɪd ðə liʃ, wɪð ə ʃɑɹpɝ klɪk ðən ðə bɹeɪslət. sɪmpəl. ʌv kɔɹs, fɪɡjɝɪŋ ɪɾ aʊt hæd teɪkən ɪm nɪɹli ən aʊɝ, bæk ɪn ðə pæləs, ivən wɪð wʌt dʒulɪn hæd sin tə hɛlp. noʊbɑdi hɪɹ pɹeɪz hɪm, ðoʊ. noʊbɑdi ivən lʊkt əz ðoʊ hi hæd dʌn ɛniθɪŋ ðeɪ kəd nɑt!

The catches were a simple matter for him, the bracelet easiest. That was just a matter of squeezing the right spots, top and bottom, not quite opposite the leash. It could be done with one hand, and the bracelet popped open on one with a metallic click. The collar was a little trickier, and required both hands. Putting his fingers on the proper spots on either side of where the leash attached, he pressed, then twisted and pulled while holding the pressure. Nothing happened, that he could see, until he twisted the two sides the other way. Then they came apart right beside the leash, with a sharper click than the bracelet. Simple. Of course, figuring it out had taken him nearly an hour, back in the Palace, even with what Juilin had seen to help. Nobody here praised him, though. Nobody even looked as though he had done anything they could not!

snæpɪŋ ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ɹɪst, sɛɾəl lup ðə liʃ ɪn kɔɪlz ɑn əɹ fɔɹɑɹm, ðən hɛld ʌp ði oʊpən kɑlɝ. dʒoʊlin stɛɹɾ ɪt wɪð loʊθɪŋ, hɝ hænz taɪɾənɪŋ ɪndə fɪsts ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ skɝts.

Snapping the bracelet around her wrist, Setalle looped the leash in coils on her forearm, then held up the open collar. Joline stared it with loathing, her hands tightening into fists gripping her skirts.

"du jə wɑnə ɪskeɪp?" ði ɪnkipɝ æskt kwaɪətli.

"Do you want to escape?" the innkeeper asked quietly.

æftɝ ə moʊmənt, dʒoʊlin stʃɹeɪɾənd ən lɪftəɾ əɹ tʃɪn. sɛɾəl kloʊz ðə kɑlɝ ɝaʊn ði ɛɛs sədaɪz nɛk wɪð ðə seɪm kɹɪsp snæp ɪt hæd meɪɾ oʊpənɪŋ. hi mʌst əv bɪn ɹɔŋ əbaʊt ðə saɪz; ɪt fɪɾ əɹ kwaɪt snʌɡli ətɑp ðə haɪ nɛk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs. dʒoʊlinz maʊθ twɪtʃt, ðət wɑz ɔl, bʌt mæt kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil blɹɪk ən fɛn tɛnsɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ.

After a moment, Joline straightened and lifted her chin. Setalle closed the collar around the Aes Sedai's neck with the same crisp snap it had made opening. He must have been wrong about the size; it fit her quite snugly atop the high neck of her dress. Joline's mouth twitched, that was all, but Mat could almost feel Blaeric and Fen tensing behind him. He held his breath.

saɪd baɪ saɪd, ðə tu wɪmən tʊk ə smɔl stɛp, bɹʌʃɪŋ baɪ mæt, ən i bɪɡæn tə bɹið. dʒoʊlin fɹaʊn ənsɝteɪnli. ðən ðeɪ tʊk ə sɛkən stɛp.

Side by side, the two women took a small step, brushing by Mat, and he began to breathe. Joline frowned uncertainly. Then they took a second step.

wɪð ə kɹaɪ, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ fɛl tə ðə flɔɹ, ɹaɪðɪŋ ɪn æɡəni. ʃi kəd nɑt fɔɹm wɝdz, oʊnli ɪnkɹisɪŋli laʊɾɝ moʊnz. ʃi hʌɾəld ɪn ɑn hɝsɛlf, hɝ ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz ən ivən əɹ fɪŋɡɝz twɪtʃɪŋ ən kɹʊkɪŋ əɾ ɑɾ æŋɡəlz.

With a cry, the Aes Sedai fell to the floor, writhing in agony. She could not form words, only increasingly louder moans. She huddled in on herself, her arms and legs and even her fingers twitching and crooking at odd angles.

sɛɾəl dʒɹɑp tə hɝ niz əz sun əz dʒoʊlin hɪt ðə flɔɹ, hɝ hænz ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə kɑlɝ, bʌt ʃi wɑz noʊ kwɪkɝ ðən blɹɪk ən fɛn, ðoʊ ðɛɹ ækʃənz dɪd sim ɑd. nilɪŋ, blɹɪk ɹeɪzd ə weɪlɪŋ dʒoʊlin ən səpɔɹɾəd əɹ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst waɪl i bɪɡæn tə məsɑʒ əɹ nɛk, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz. fɛn wɝkt ɪz fɪŋɡɝz əlɔŋ əɹ ɑɹmz. ðə kɑlɝ keɪm lus, ən sɛɾəl fɛl bæk ɑn əɹ hilz, bʌt dʒoʊlin kəntɪnjud tə dʒɝk ən wɪmpɝ, ən əɹ wɔɹɾɝz kəntɪnjud tə wɝk oʊvɝ əɹ əz ðoʊ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹʌb əweɪ kɹæmps. ðeɪ ʃɑt koʊl stɛɹz ət mæt əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ ɔl ɪz fɔlt.

Setalle dropped to her knees as soon as Joline hit the floor, her hands going to the collar, but she was no quicker than Blaeric and Fen, though their actions did seem odd. Kneeling, Blaeric raised a wailing Joline and supported her against his chest while he began to massage her neck, of all things. Fen worked his fingers along her arms. The collar came loose, and Setalle fell back on her heels, but Joline continued to jerk and whimper, and her Warders continued to work over her as though trying to rub away cramps. They shot cold stares at Mat as though it were all his fault.

lʊkɪŋ daʊn ɑn ɔl ɪz faɪn plænz laɪɪŋ ɪn ɹuənz, mæt bɛɹli sɔ ðə mɛn. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt tə də nɛkst, wɛɹ tə bɪɡɪn. taɪlɪn maɪt bi bæk ɪn tu mɔɹ deɪz, ən i wɑz ʃʊɹ i hæd tə bi ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹɪtɝnd.

Looking down on all his fine plans lying in ruins, Mat barely saw the men. He did not know what to do next, where to begin. Tylin might be back in two more days, and he was sure he had to be gone before she returned.

skwizɪŋ pæst sɛɾəl, hi pæɾəd əɹ ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ. "tɛl əɹ wɪl tʃɹaɪ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls," hi mʌɾɝd. bʌt wʌt? ɑbviəsli ɪt hæd tə bi ə wʊmən wɪð ə sʌldəmz əbɪləɾiz tə hændəl ði æɾəm.

Squeezing past Setalle, he patted her on the shoulder. "Tell her we'll try something else," he muttered. But what? Obviously it had to be a woman with a sul'dam's abilities to handle the a'dam.

ði ɪnkipɝ kɑɾ ɪm ɪn ðə dɑɹk ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə stɛɹz liɾɪŋ ʌp tə ðə kɪtʃən waɪl i wɑz ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪz hæɾ ən kloʊk. ə staʊt, pleɪn wʊl kloʊk wɪð noʊ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. ə mæn kəd də wɪθaʊɾ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi. hi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt mɪs ɪt. ən ɔl ðət leɪs! sɝɾənli nɑt!

The innkeeper caught him in the dark at the foot of the stairs leading up to the kitchen while he was gathering his hat and cloak. A stout, plain wool cloak with no embroidery. A man could do without embroidery. He certainly did not miss it. And all that lace! Certainly not!

"du juv ənʌðɝ plæn ɹɛɾi?" ʃi æskt. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ əɹ feɪs ɪn ðə dɑɹk, bʌt ðə sɪlvɝ lɛŋθ ə ði æɾəm ɡlimd ivən soʊ. ʃi wɑz ɡɹoʊpɪŋ ət ðə bɹeɪsləɾ ɑn əɹ ɹɪst.

"Do you have another plan ready?" she asked. He could not make out her face in the dark, but the silver length of the a'dam gleamed even so. She was groping at the bracelet on her wrist.

"aɪ ɔlweɪz əv ənʌðɝ plæn," hi laɪd, ənduɪŋ ðə bɹeɪslət fəɹ hɝ. "æt lis jə kən fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt ɹɪskɪŋ jəɹ nɛk. əz sun əz aɪ teɪk dʒoʊlin ɔf jəɹ hænz, jə kən ɡoʊ dʒɔɪn jəɹ hʌzbənd."

"I always have another plan," he lied, undoing the bracelet for her. "At least you can forget about risking your neck. As soon as I take Joline off your hands, you can go join your husband."

ʃi dʒʌst ɡɹʌntɪd. hi səspɛktəd ʃi nu hi hæd noʊ plæn.

She just grunted. He suspected she knew he had no plan.

hi wɑntəd tə əvɔɪd ðə kɑmən ɹum fʊl ə sintʃæn, soʊ hi wɛn aʊt θɹu ðə kɪtʃən ɪndə ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ ən aʊt θɹu ðə ɡeɪɾ ɪndə ðə mɔl hɛɹə. hi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd ðəɾ ɛni ʌv əm wəd mɑɹk ɪm aʊɾ əɹ wʌndɝ waɪ hi wɑz ðɛɹ. ɪn ɪz dʒɹæb kloʊðz, ðeɪ sim tə teɪk ɪm fəɹ sʌmwʌn ɹʌnɪŋ ən ɛɹən fəɹ ði ɪnkipɝ wən i keɪm ɪn. bʌt ðəɹ hæd bɪn θɹi sʌldəm əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, tu wɪð deɪmeɪn. hi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə bi əfɹeɪɾ i wəɾ əv tə liv tɛslɪn ən idɛzinə kɑlɝd, ən i dʒʌs dɪd nɑt wɑnə lʊk ət deɪmeɪn ɹaɪt ðɛn. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz, hi hæɾ oʊnli pɹɑməs tə tʃɹaɪ!

He wanted to avoid the common room full of Seanchan, so he went out through the kitchen into the stableyard and out through the gate into the Mol Hara. He was not afraid that any of them would mark him out or wonder why he was there. In his drab clothes, they seemed to take him for someone running an errand for the innkeeper when he came in. But there had been three sul'dam among the Seanchan, two with damane. He was beginning to be afraid he would have to leave Teslyn and Edesina collared, and he just did not want to look at damane right then. Blood and bloody ashes, he had only promised to try!

ðə wik sʌn stɪl stʊd haɪ ɪn ðə skaɪ, bʌt ðə si wɪnd wɑz pɪkɪŋ ʌp, fʊl ə sɔlt ən ə koʊl pɹɑməs ə ɹeɪn. ɪksɛp fəɹ ə skwɑɾ ə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz mɑɹtʃɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ, hjumənz ɹæðɝ ðən oʊɡiɝ, ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə mɔl hɛɹə wɑz hɝiɪŋ tə bi dʌn wɪð wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ əbaʊt bɪfɔɹ ðə ɹeɪn keɪm. əz i ɹitʃt ðə beɪs ə kwin nɑɹaɪnz tɔl bɛɹ-bɹɛstəd stætʃu, ə hæn fɛl ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

The weak sun still stood high in the sky, but the sea wind was picking up, full of salt and a cold promise of rain. Except for a squad of Deathwatch Guards marching across the square, humans rather than Ogier, everyone in the Mol Hara was hurrying to be done with whatever they were about before the rain came. As he reached the base of Queen Nariene's tall bare-breasted statue, a hand fell on his shoulder.

"aɪ dɪd noʊ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz jə ət fɝst, wɪθaʊt jəɹ fænsi kloʊðz, mæt kɔθən."

"I did no recognize you at first, without your fancy clothes, Mat Cauthon."

mæt tɝn tə faɪn hɪmsɛlf feɪsɪŋ ðə hɛvisɛɾ ɪliɑnɝ sɔɪhɪn i hæd sin ðə deɪ dʒoʊlin ɹiəpɪɹɾ ɪn ɪz laɪf. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə plɛzən əsoʊsieɪʃən. ðə ɹaʊnd-feɪs fɛloʊ dɪd lʊk ɑd, bɪtwin ðət bɪɹɾ ən hæf ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz hɛd mɪsɪŋ, ən i wɑz ʃɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ɪz ʃɝtslivz, ʌv ɔl θɪŋz.

Mat turned to find himself facing the heavyset Illianer so'jhin he had seen the day Joline reappeared in his life. It was not a pleasant association. The round-faced fellow did look odd, between that beard and half the hair on his head missing, and he was shivering in his shirtsleeves, of all things.

"ju noʊ mi?" mæt sɛd kɔʃəsli.

"You know me?" Mat said cautiously.

ðə hɛvisɛt mæn bimd ə waɪd smaɪl ət hɪm. "fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi, aɪ du. jə dɪd teɪk ə mɛmɝəbəl vɔɪədʒ ɑn maɪ ʃɪp, wʌns, wɪð tʃɹɑləks ən ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ət wʌn ɛn ən ə mɹdʒɹɑl ən waɪtbɹɪdʒ ɪn fleɪmz ət ði ʌðɝ. beɪl doʊmən, mæstɝ kɔθən. dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ mi naʊ?"

The heavyset man beamed a wide smile at him. "Fortune prick me, I do. You did take a memorable voyage on my ship, once, with Trollocs and Shadar Logoth at one end and a Myrddraal and Whitebridge in flames at the other. Bayle Domon, Master Cauthon. Do you remember me now?"

"aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ." hi dɪd, æftɝ ə fæʃən. moʊst ə ðət vɔɪədʒ wɑz veɪɡ ɪn ɪz hɛd, tæɾɝd baɪ ðə hoʊlz ðoʊz ʌðɝ mɛnz mɛmɹiz hæd fɪld. "wil əv tə sɪt daʊn oʊvɝ hɑt spaɪst waɪn səm taɪm ən tɔk oʊvɝ oʊl taɪmz." wɪtʃ wəd nɛvɝ hæpən ɪf i sɔ doʊmən fɝst. wʌt ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɪz mɛmɹi ʌv ðət vɔɪədʒ wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒli ənplɛzənt, laɪk ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ə dɛθli ɪlnəs. ʌv kɔɹs, hi hæd bɪn ɪl, ɪn ə weɪ. ənʌðɝ ənplɛzən mɛmɹi.

"I remember." He did, after a fashion. Most of that voyage was vague in his head, tattered by the holes those other men's memories had filled. "We'll have to sit down over hot spiced wine some time and talk over old times." Which would never happen if he saw Domon first. What remained in his memory of that voyage was strangely unpleasant, like remembering a deathly illness. Of course, he had been ill, in a way. Another unpleasant memory.

"ðɛɹ bi noʊ taɪm laɪk naʊ," doʊmən læft, swɪŋɪŋ ə θɪk ɑɹm ɝaʊn mæts ʃoʊldɝz ən tɝnɪŋ ɪm bæk təwɔɹd ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən.

"There be no time like now," Domon laughed, swinging a thick arm around Mat's shoulders and turning him back toward The Wandering Woman.

ʃɔɹɾ ə faɪɾɪŋ, ðəɹ sim tə bi noʊ weɪ tə ɪskeɪp ðə mæn, soʊ mæt wɛnt. ə nɑk-daʊn faɪt wɑz noʊ weɪ tə əvɔɪd biɪŋ noʊɾəst. ɛniweɪ, hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i wəd wɪn. doʊmən lʊk fæt, bʌt ðə fæt wɑz leɪɝɾ oʊvɝ hɑɹd mʌsəl. ə dʒɹɪŋk wəd nɑt ɡoʊ əmɪs ɪn ɛni keɪs. bɪsaɪdz wɪtʃ, hædn doʊmən bɪn sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə smʌɡəlɝ? hi maɪt noʊ pæðz ɪn ən aʊɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ ðəɾ ʌðɝz dɪd nɑt, ən i maɪt ɹɪvil əm tə ə lɪɾəl dʒudɪʃəs kwɛstʃənɪŋ. ɪspɛʃli oʊvɝ waɪn. ə fæt pɝs ʌv ɡoʊld leɪ ɪn mæts koʊt pɑkət, ən i dɪd nɑt maɪn spɛndɪŋ ɪɾ ɔl tə ɡɛt ðə mæn dʒɹʌŋk əz ə fɪɾəlɝ ət sʌndeɪ. dʒɹʌŋk mɛn tɔkt.

Short of fighting, there seemed to be no way to escape the man, so Mat went. A knock-down fight was no way to avoid being noticed. Anyway, he was not sure he would win. Domon looked fat, but the fat was layered over hard muscle. A drink would not go amiss in any case. Besides which, hadn't Domon been something of a smuggler? He might know paths in and out of Ebou Dar that others did not, and he might reveal them to a little judicious questioning. Especially over wine. A fat purse of gold lay in Mat's coat pocket, and he did not mind spending it all to get the man drunk as a fiddler at Sunday. Drunk men talked.

doʊmən hʌsəld ɪm θɹu ðə kɑmən ɹum, boʊɪŋ lɛft ən ɹaɪt tə blʌɾ ən ɔfəsɝz u bɛɹli sɔ hɪm ɪf ðæt, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑɾ ɛntɝ ðə kɪtʃənz, wɛɹ inɪd maɪɾ əv ɡɪvən əm ə bɛntʃ ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ. ɪnstɛd, hi tʊk mæt ʌp ðə ɹeɪləs stɛɹz. əntɪl i ʌʃɝd mæt ɪndə ə ɹum ət ðə bæk ə ði ɪn, mæt əsum doʊmən wɑz gɑnə fɛtʃ ɪz koʊɾ ən kloʊk. ə ɡʊd faɪɝ bleɪzɪŋ ɑn ðə hɑɹθ wɔɹm ðə ɹum, bʌt mæt sʌɾənli fɛl koʊldɝ ðən i hæɾ aʊtsaɪd.

Domon hustled him through the common room, bowing left and right to Blood and officers who barely saw him if that, but he did not enter the kitchens, where Enid might have given them a bench in the corner. Instead, he took Mat up the railless stairs. Until he ushered Mat into a room at the back of the inn, Mat assumed Domon was going to fetch his coat and cloak. A good fire blazing on the hearth warmed the room, but Mat suddenly felt colder than he had outside.

kloʊzɪŋ ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, doʊmən plæntəd hɪmsɛlf ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪt wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst. "ju də bi ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ə kæptən ə ðə ɡɹin leɪɾi ɛdʒiənɪn tæmɝəθ," hi ɪntoʊnd, ðən æɾəd ɪn ə mɔɹ nɔɹməl toʊn, "ðɪs bi mæt kɔθən."

Closing the door behind them, Domon planted himself in front of it with his arms folded across his chest. "You do be in the presence of Captain of the Green Lady Egeanin Tamarath," he intoned, then added in a more normal tone, "This be Mat Cauthon."

mæt lʊk fɹəm doʊmən tə ðə tɔl wʊmən siɾəd stɪfli ɑn ə læɾɝ-bækt tʃɛɹ. hɝ pliɾɪd dʒɹɛs wɑz peɪl jɛloʊ tədeɪ, ən ʃi wɔɹ ə flaʊɝ-ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɹoʊb oʊvɝ ɪt, bʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd hɝ. hɝ peɪl feɪs wɑz hɑɹd, ən əɹ blu aɪz wɝ ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz pɹɛɾətɔɹi əz taɪlɪnz. oʊnli, hi səspɛktəɾ ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz nɑɾ æftɝ kɪsəz. hɝ hænz wɝ slɛndɝ, bʌt ðeɪ hæd sɔɝdzmənz kælʌsɪz. hi hæd noʊ tʃæns tə æsk wʌt ðɪs wɑz əbaʊt, ən noʊ nid.

Mat looked from Domon to the tall woman seated stiffly on a ladder-backed chair. Her pleated dress was pale yellow today, and she wore a flower-embroidered robe over it, but he remembered her. Her pale face was hard, and her blue eyes were every bit as predatory as Tylin's. Only, he suspected Egeanin was not after kisses. Her hands were slender, but they had swordsman's calluses. He had no chance to ask what this was about, and no need.

"maɪ sɔɪhɪn ɪnfɔɹmz mi jə ɑɹ nɑɾ ʌnfəmɪljɝ wɪð deɪnʒɝ, mæstɝ kɔθən," ʃi sɛɾ əz sun əz doʊmən fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ. hɝ sloʊ sintʃæn dʒɹɔl stɪl saʊndəd pɝɛmptɝi ən kəmændɪŋ, bʌt ðɛn, ʃi wɑz ə ðə blʌd. "aɪ nid sətʃ mɛn tə kɹu ə ʃɪp, ən əl peɪ wɛl, ɪn ɡoʊl nɑt sɪlvɝ. ɪf jə noʊ ʌðɝz laɪk jɝsɛlf, əl haɪɝ ðɛm. ðeɪ mʌs bi eɪbəl tə hoʊl ðɛɹ tʌŋz, ðoʊ. maɪ bɪznəs ɪz maɪ oʊn. beɪl mɛnʃən tu ʌðɝ neɪmz. tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn ən dʒulɪn sændɑɹ. ɪf iðɝ ɪz hɪɹ ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, aɪ kən juz ðɛɹ skɪlz, əz wɛl. ðeɪ noʊ mi, ən noʊ ðeɪ kən tʃɹʌs mi wɪð ðɛɹ lɪvz. soʊ kən ju, mæstɝ kɔθən."

"My so'jhin informs me you are not unfamiliar with danger, Master Cauthon," she said as soon as Domon finished speaking. Her slow Seanchan drawl still sounded peremptory and commanding, but then, she was of the Blood. "I need such men to crew a ship, and I will pay well, in gold not silver. If you know others like yourself, I will hire them. They must be able to hold their tongues, though. My business is my own. Bayle mentioned two other names. Thom Merrilin and Juilin Sandar. If either is here in Ebou Dar, I can use their skills, as well. They know me, and know they can trust me with their lives. So can you, Master Cauthon."

mæt sæt daʊn ɑn ðə ɹumz sɛkən tʃɛɹ ən θɹu bæk ɪz kloʊk. hi wɑz nɑt səpoʊz tə sɪɾ ivən wɪð wʌn ə ðə lɛsɝ blʌd - əz əɹ dɑɹk boʊl-kʌt hɛɹ ən ɡɹin-lækɝd lɪɾəl fɪŋɡɝneɪlz pɹoʊkleɪmd əɹ tə bi - bʌɾ i niɾəd tə θɪŋk. "ju hæv ə ʃɪp?" hi æskt, ɪn ðə meɪn tə ɡeɪn taɪm. ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ æŋɡɹəli. æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz ə ðə blʌd wɑz səpoʊz tə bi dʌn dɛləkətli.

Mat sat down on the room's second chair and threw back his cloak. He was not supposed to sit even with one of the lesser Blood - as her dark bowl-cut hair and green-lacquered little fingernails proclaimed her to be - but he needed to think. "You have a ship?" he asked, in the main to gain time. She opened her mouth angrily. Asking questions of the Blood was supposed to be done delicately.

doʊmən ɡɹʌntɪɾ ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi lʊkt ivən æŋɡɹiɝ, bʌt ðən əɹ stɝn feɪs smuðd. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, hɝ aɪz bɔɹɾ ɪndə mæt laɪk ɔɡɝz, ən ʃi ɹoʊz tə stænd wɪð əɹ fiɾ əpɑɹɾ ən əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps, kənfɹʌntɪŋ hɪm. "aɪ wɪl əv ə vɛsəl baɪ ði ɛn ə spɹɪŋ ət leɪɾəst, əz sun əz maɪ ɡoʊl kən bi bɹɔt fɹəm kæntʃɹɪn," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ən aɪsi vɔɪs.

Domon grunted and shook his head, and for a moment she looked even angrier, but then her stern face smoothed. On the other hand, her eyes bored into Mat like augers, and she rose to stand with her feet apart and her hands on her hips, confronting him. "I will have a vessel by the end of spring at latest, as soon as my gold can be brought from Cantorin," she said in an icy voice.

mæt saɪd. wɛl, ðəɹ ɹɪli hæd bɪn noʊ tʃæns i kəd teɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ aʊɾ ɑn ə ʃɪp oʊn baɪ ə sintʃæn, nɑt ɹɪli. "haʊ dʒju noʊ tɑm ən dʒulɪn?" doʊmən cʊɾə toʊld əɹ əbaʊt tɑm, sɝɾənli, bʌt, laɪt, haʊ kəd ʃi noʊ dʒulɪn?

Mat sighed. Well, there really had been no chance he could take Aes Sedai out on a ship owned by a Seanchan, not really. "How do you know Thom and Juilin?" Domon could have told her about Thom, certainly, but, Light, how could she know Juilin?

"ju æsk tu mɛni kwɛstʃənz," ʃi sɛd fɝmli, tɝnɪŋ əweɪ. "aɪ fɪɹ aɪ kænɑt juz jə æftɝ ɔl. beɪl, pʊɾ ɪm aʊt." ðə læst wɑz ə pɝɛmptɝi kəmænd.

"You ask too many questions," she said firmly, turning away. "I fear I cannot use you after all. Bayle, put him out." The last was a peremptory command.

doʊmən dɪd nɑt muv fɹəm ðə dɔɹ. "tɛl hɪm," hi ɝdʒ hɝ. "sun əɹ leɪt, hi mʌs noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əɹ hɪl pʊt jə ɪn ɡɹeɪɾɝ deɪnʒɝ ðən jə feɪs naʊ. tɛl hɪm." ivən fəɹ ə sɔɪhɪn, hi sim tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt dil. ðə sintʃæn wɝ ɡɹeɪt wʌnz fəɹ pɹɑpɝɾi kipɪŋ ɪts pleɪs. fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls kipɪŋ ðɛɹz, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ɛdʒiənɪn mʌs nɑt bi ə kɔɹɾɝ əz tʌf əz ʃi lʊkt.

Domon did not move from the door. "Tell him," he urged her. "Soon or late, he must know everything or he will put you in greater danger than you face now. Tell him." Even for a so'jhin, he seemed to get away with a great deal. The Seanchan were great ones for property keeping its place. For everyone else keeping theirs, for that matter. Egeanin must not be a quarter as tough as she looked.

ʃi lʊk vɛɹi tʌf ət ðə moʊmənt, kɪkɪŋ əɹ skɝts ən stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ, skaʊlɪŋ ət doʊmən, ət mæt. faɪnəli, ʃi stɑpt. "aɪ ɡeɪv əm səm smɔl eɪɾ ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ," ʃi sɛd. æftɝ ə moʊmənt ʃi æɾəd, "æn tu wɪmən u wɝ wɪð ðɛm, ɪleɪn tʃɹəkən ən nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə." hɝ aɪz foʊkəst ɑn ɪm ɪntɛnli, wɑtʃɪŋ tə si wɛðɝ i nu ðə neɪmz.

She looked very tough at the moment, kicking her skirts and striding back and forth, scowling at Domon, at Mat. Finally, she stopped. "I gave them some small aid in Tanchico," she said. After a moment she added, "And two women who were with them, Elayne Trakand and Nynaeve al'Meara." Her eyes focused on him intently, watching to see whether he knew the names.

mæts tʃɛs fɛl taɪt. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə peɪn, bʌt mɔɹ laɪk wɑtʃɪŋ ə hɔɹs i hæd bɛɾ ɑn stʃɹik təwɔɹd ðə fɪnɪʃ laɪn wɪð ʌðɝz kloʊs bɪhaɪn ən ðə kwɛstʃən stɪl ɪn daʊt. wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt hæd nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn bɪn ʌp tə ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ ðət ðeɪ hæd niɾəd ə sintʃænz hɛlp, ən hæd ɡɑɾən ɪt? tɑm ən dʒulɪn hæd bɪn kloʊsəməðd əbaʊt ðə dɪteɪlz. ðət wɑz bɪsaɪd ðə pɔɪnt, ɛniweɪ. ɛdʒiənɪn wɑntəd mɛn u kəd kip əɹ sikɹəts ən dɪd nɑt maɪn deɪnʒɝ. ʃi hɝsɛlf wɑz ɪn deɪnʒɝ. vɛɹi lɪɾəl wɑz deɪnʒɝəs tə wʌn ə ðə blʌd, ɪksɛp fəɹ ʌðɝ blʌɾ ən . . . "ðə sikɝz ɑɹ æftɝ ju," hi sɛd.

Mat's chest felt tight. It was not a pain, but more like watching a horse he had bet on streak toward the finish line with others close behind and the question still in doubt. What in the Light had Nynaeve and Elayne been up to in Tanchico that they had needed a Seanchan's help, and had gotten it? Thom and Juilin had been closemouthed about the details. That was beside the point, anyway. Egeanin wanted men who could keep her secrets and did not mind danger. She herself was in danger. Very little was dangerous to one of the Blood, except for other Blood and . . . "The Seekers are after you," he said.

ðə weɪ hɝ hɛd keɪm ʌp wɑz kɑnfɝmeɪʃən ɪnʌf, ən əɹ hænd wɛn tə hɝ saɪɾ əz ðoʊ ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ə sɔɹd. doʊmən ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fiɾ ən flɛkst ɪz bɪɡ hænz, hɪz aɪz ɑn mæt. aɪz sʌɾənli hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɛdʒiənɪnz. ðə θɪk mæn noʊ lɔŋɡɝ lʊk fʌni; hi lʊk deɪnʒɝəs. əbɹʌpli ɪt keɪm tə mæt ðəɾ i maɪt nɑt liv ðə ɹum əlaɪv.

The way her head came up was confirmation enough, and her hand went to her side as though reaching for a sword. Domon shifted his feet and flexed his big hands, his eyes on Mat. Eyes suddenly harder than Egeanin's. The thick man no longer looked funny; he looked dangerous. Abruptly it came to Mat that he might not leave the room alive.

"ɪf jə nid tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə sikɝz, aɪ kən hɛlp ju," hi sɛd kwɪkli. "jul əv tə ɡoʊ wɛɹ ðə sintʃæn ɑɹən ɪn kəntʃɹoʊl. ɛniwɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ, ðə sikɝz kən faɪn ju. ən ɪts bɛs tə ɡoʊ əz sun əz pɑsəbəl. jə kən ɔlweɪz ɡɛt mɔɹ ɡoʊld. ɪf ðə sikɝz doʊn teɪk jə fɝst. tɑm tɛlz mi ðəɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ vɛɹi æktɪv əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ. hiɾɪŋ ði aɪɝnz ən ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə ɹæk ɹɛɾi."

"If you need to get away from the Seekers, I can help you," he said quickly. "You'll have to go where the Seanchan aren't in control. Anywhere they are, the Seekers can find you. And it's best to go as soon as possible. You can always get more gold. If the Seekers don't take you first. Thom tells me they're getting very active about something. Heating the irons and getting the rack ready."

fəɹ ə taɪm ɛdʒiənɪn stʊd moʊʃənləs, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm. ət læst, ʃi ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə lɔŋ lʊk wɪð doʊmən. "pɝhæps ɪt wəd bi wɛl tə liv əz sun əz pɑsəbəl," ʃi bɹiðd. hɝ toʊn fɝmd ɪmiɾiətli, ðoʊ. ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn wɝi ɑn əɹ feɪs fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ɪt vænɪʃt. "ðə sikɝz wɪl nɑt stɑp mi livɪŋ ðə sɪɾi, aɪ θɪŋk, bʌt ðeɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ kən fɑloʊ mi tə sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ wɑn mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ wɑn mi. ðəl fɑloʊ mi, ən əntɪl aɪ liv ðə lænz ɔlɹɛɾi hɛl baɪ ðə ɹaɪædʒɛl, ðeɪ kən kɔl ɑn soʊlʒɝz tə ɝɛs mi, wɪtʃ ðəl əz sun əz ðeɪ dɪsaɪɾ aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə lænz nɑt jɛt ɡæðɝd. ðəɾ ɪz wən əl nid ðə skɪlz ə jəɹ fɹɛn tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn, mæstɝ kɔθən. bɪtwin hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ, aɪ mʌs vænɪʃ fɹəm ðə sikɝz' saɪt. aɪ meɪ nɑɾ əv ðə ɡoʊl fɹəm kæntʃɹɪn, bʌɾ aɪ hæv ɪnʌf tə ɹɪwɔɹd jəɹ hɛlp hænsəmli. jə kən ɹɛst əʃʊɹɾ ə ðæt."

For a time Egeanin stood motionless, staring at him. At last, she exchanged a long look with Domon. "Perhaps it would be well to leave as soon as possible," she breathed. Her tone firmed immediately, though. If there had been worry on her face for a moment, it vanished. "The Seekers will not stop me leaving the city, I think, but they think they can follow me to something they want more than they want me. They will follow me, and until I leave the lands already held by the Rhyagelle, they can call on soldiers to arrest me, which they will as soon as they decide I am going to lands not yet gathered. That is when I will need the skills of your friend Thom Merrilin, Master Cauthon. Between here and there, I must vanish from the Seekers' sight. I may not have the gold from Cantorin, but I have enough to reward your help handsomely. You can rest assured of that."

"kɔl mi mæt," hi sɛd, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ɪz vɛɹi bɛst smaɪl. ivən hɑɹd-feɪst wɪmən sɔfən fəɹ ɪz bɛst smaɪl. wɛl, ʃi dɪd nɑt sɑfən vɪzəbli - ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ʃi fɹaʊn slaɪtli - bʌt wʌn θɪŋ i dɪd noʊ əbaʊt wɪmən wɑz ði ɪfɛkt ɪz smaɪlz hæd. "aɪ noʊ haʊ tə meɪk jə vænɪʃ naʊ. noʊ jus weɪɾɪŋ, jə noʊ. ðə sikɝz maɪt dɪsaɪd tə ɝɛs jə təmɑɹoʊ." ðət hɪt hoʊm. ʃi dɪd nɑt flɪntʃ - hi səspɛktəd vɛɹi lɪɾəl meɪɾ əɹ flɪntʃ - bʌt ʃi ɔlmoʊs nɑɾəd. "ðɛɹ ɪz dʒʌst wʌn θɪŋ, ɛdʒiənɪn." ðɪs stɪl kəd bloʊ ʌp ɪn ɪz feɪs laɪk wʌn ʌv ɑlʌdʒɹəz faɪɹwɝks, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt hɛzəteɪt. səmtaɪmz, jə dʒʌs hæd tə tɔs ðə daɪs. "aɪ doʊnt niɾ ɛni ɡoʊld, bʌɾ aɪ də hæv niɾ ə θɹi sʌldəm u wɪl kip ðɛɹ maʊðz ʃʌt. dʒju θɪŋk jə səplaɪ kəd ðoʊz?"

"Call me Mat," he said, giving her his very best smile. Even hard-faced women softened for his best smile. Well, she did not soften visibly - if anything, she frowned slightly - but one thing he did know about women was the effect his smiles had. "I know how to make you vanish now. No use waiting, you know. The Seekers might decide to arrest you tomorrow." That hit home. She did not flinch - he suspected very little made her flinch - but she almost nodded. "There is just one thing, Egeanin." This still could blow up in his face like one of Aludra's fireworks, but he did not hesitate. Sometimes, you just had to toss the dice. "I don't need any gold, but I do have need of three sul'dam who will keep their mouths shut. Do you think you supply could those?"

æftɝ ə moʊmən ðət sim tə stʃɹɛtʃ aʊɝz, ʃi nɑɾəd, ən i smaɪl tə hɪmsɛlf. hɪz hɔɹs hæd kɹɔs fɝst.

After a moment that seemed to stretch hours, she nodded, and he smiled to himself. His horse had crossed first.

"doʊmən," tɑm sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs ɝaʊn ðə paɪpɛstəm klɛntʃt bɪtwin ɪz tiθ. hi wɑz laɪɪŋ wɪð ə θɪn pɪloʊ dʌbəld ʌp bɪniθ ɪz hɛd, ən i sim tə bi stʌɾiɪŋ ðə feɪn blu heɪz ðət hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ ə ðə wɪndoʊləs ɹum. ðə sɪŋɡəl læmp ɡeɪv ə fɪtfəl laɪt. "æn ɛdʒiənɪn."

"Domon," Thom said in a flat voice around the pipestem clenched between his teeth. He was lying with a thin pillow doubled up beneath his head, and he seemed to be studying the faint blue haze that hung in the air of the windowless room. The single lamp gave a fitful light. "And Egeanin."

"ænd ʃiz ə ðə blʌd, naʊ." sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz bɛd, dʒulɪn pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə tʃɑɹd boʊl ə hɪz paɪp. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ əz aɪ laɪk ðæt."

"And she is of the Blood, now." Sitting on the edge of his bed, Juilin peered into the charred bowl of his pipe. "I do not know as I like that."

"ɑɹ jə seɪɪŋ wi kæn tʃɹʌs ðɛm?" mæt dɪmændəd, tæmpɪŋ daʊn ɪz təbæk wɪð ə kɛɹləs θʌm. hi snætʃt ɪz θʌm aʊt wɪð ə maɪld oʊθ ən stʌk ɪɾ ɪn ɪz maʊθ tə sʌk ðə bɝn əweɪ. jɛɾ əɡɛn i hæd ðə tʃɔɪs ə ðə stul əɹ stændɪŋ, bʌt fəɹ wʌns i dɪd nɑt maɪn ðə stul. dilɪŋ wɪð ɛdʒiənɪn hæd teɪkən lɪɾəl ɪnʌf ə ði æftɝnun, bʌt tɑm hæd bɪn aʊɾ ə ðə pæləs əntɪl æftɝ dɑɹk, waɪl dʒulɪn hæd teɪkən ivən lɔŋɡɝ tə əpɪɹ. niðɝ əpɪɹd nɪɹli əz plizd wɪð mæts nuz əz i ɪkspɛktəd. tɑm hæd dʒʌst saɪd ðəɾ i hæd faɪnəli ɡɑɾən ə ɡʊd lʊk ət wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd silz, bʌt dʒulɪn ɡlaʊɝd wɛnɛvɝ i lʊkt ət ðə bʌndəl laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə ɹum wɛɹ i hæd hɝld ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ blʌɾi nid fəɹ ðə mæn tə kæɹi ɑn soʊ dʒʌs kəz ðeɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ niɾəd ðə sʌldəm dʒɹɛsəz. "aɪ tɛl ju, ðəɹ boʊθ skɛɹd spɪtləs oʊvɝ ðə sikɝz," mæt wɛn ɑn wən ɪz θʌm wɑz kuld. meɪbi nɑɾ ɪɡzækli spɪtləs, bʌt fɹaɪɾənd nʌnðəlɛs. "ɛdʒiənɪn meɪ bi blʌd, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ twɪtʃt ən aɪləd wən aɪ toʊld əɹ wʌɾ aɪ wɑntəd sʌldəm fɔɹ. ʃi dʒʌst sɛd ʃi nu θɹi hu wəd də wʌt wi nid, ən ʃi kəɾ əv əm ɹɛɾi təmɑɹoʊ."

"Are you saying we can't trust them?" Mat demanded, tamping down his tabac with a careless thumb. He snatched his thumb out with a mild oath and stuck it in his mouth to suck the burn away. Yet again he had the choice of the stool or standing, but for once he did not mind the stool. Dealing with Egeanin had taken little enough of the afternoon, but Thom had been out of the Palace until after dark, while Juilin had taken even longer to appear. Neither appeared nearly as pleased with Mat's news as he expected. Thom had just sighed that he had finally gotten a good look at one of the accepted seals, but Juilin glowered whenever he looked at the bundle lying in the corner of the room where he had hurled it. There was no bloody need for the man to carry on so just because they no longer needed the sul'dam dresses. "I tell you, they're both scared spitless over the Seekers," Mat went on when his thumb was cooled. Maybe not exactly spitless, but frightened nonetheless. "Egeanin may be Blood, but she never twitched an eyelid when I told her what I wanted sul'dam for. She just said she knew three who would do what we need, and she could have them ready tomorrow."

"æn ɑnɝəbəl wʊmən, ɛdʒiənɪn," tɑm mjuzd. ɛvɹi soʊ ɔfən i pɔz tə bloʊ ə smoʊk ɹɪŋ. "ɑd, tʃɹu, bʌt ðɛn, ʃiz sintʃæn. aɪ θɪŋk ivən nɪneɪiv keɪm tə laɪk hɝ, ən aɪ noʊ ɪleɪn dɪd. ən ʃi laɪk ðɛm. ivən ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ, əz ʃi bɪlivd. ʃi wɑz vɛɹi jusfəl ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ. vɛɹi jusfəl. mɔɹ ðən mɪɹli kɑmpəɾənt. aɪ tʃɹuli wəd laɪk tə noʊ haʊ ʃi keɪm bi ɹeɪz tə ðə blʌd, bʌt jɛs, aɪ bɪliv wi kən tʃɹʌst ɛdʒiənɪn. ən doʊmən. ən ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ mæn, doʊmən."

"An honorable woman, Egeanin," Thom mused. Every so often he paused to blow a smoke ring. "Odd, true, but then, she is Seanchan. I think even Nynaeve came to like her, and I know Elayne did. And she liked them. Even if they were Aes Sedai, as she believed. She was very useful in Tanchico. Very useful. More than merely competent. I truly would like to know how she came be raised to the Blood, but yes, I believe we can trust Egeanin. And Domon. An interesting man, Domon."

"ə smʌɡəlɝ," dʒulɪn mʌɾɝd dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋli. "ænd naʊ hi bɪlɔŋz tə hɝ. sɔɪhɪn ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən dʒʌs pɹɑpɝɾi, jə noʊ. ðəɹ ɑɹ sɔɪhɪn u tɛl blʌd wʌt tə du." tɑm ɹeɪzd ə ʃæɡi aɪbɹaʊ ət hɪm. dʒʌs ðæt, bʌɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ðə θif-kætʃɝ ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪ səpoʊz doʊmən ɪz tʃɹʌstwɝði," hi sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. "fɔɹ ə smʌɡəlɝ."

"A smuggler," Juilin muttered disparagingly. "And now he belongs to her. So'jhin are more than just property, you know. There are so'jhin who tell Blood what to do." Thom raised a shaggy eyebrow at him. Just that, but after a moment, the thief-catcher shrugged. "I suppose Domon is trustworthy," he said reluctantly. "For a smuggler."

mæt snɔɹɾɪd. meɪbi ðeɪ wɝ dʒɛləs. wɛl, hi wɑz tɑvɝən, ən ðeɪ hæd tə lɪv wɪð ɪt. "ðɛn təmɑɹoʊ naɪt, wi liv. ði oʊnli tʃeɪnʒ ɪn ðə plæn ɪz ðət wɪv θɹi ɹil sʌldəm ən wʌn ə ðə blʌd tə ɡɛɾ əs θɹu ðə ɡeɪts."

Mat snorted. Maybe they were jealous. Well, he was ta'veren, and they had to live with it. "Then tomorrow night, we leave. The only change in the plan is that we have three real sul'dam and one of the Blood to get us through the gates."

"æn ðiz sʌldəm ɑɹ gɑnə teɪk θɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi, lɛɾ əm ɡoʊ, ən nɛvɝ θɪŋk ə ɹeɪzɪŋ ən əlɑɹm," dʒulɪn mʌɾɝd. "wʌns, waɪl ɹænd ælθɹ wɑz ɪn tɛɹ, aɪ sɔ ə tɔs kɔɪn læn ɑn ɪts ɛdʒ faɪv taɪmz ɪn ə ɹoʊ. wi faɪnəli wɔkt əweɪ ən lɛft ɪt stændɪŋ ðəɹ ɑn ðə teɪbəl. aɪ səpoʊz ɛniθɪŋ kən hæpən."

"And these sul'dam are going to take three Aes Sedai out of the city, let them go, and never think of raising an alarm," Juilin muttered. "Once, while Rand al'Thor was in Tear, I saw a tossed coin land on its edge five times in a row. We finally walked away and left it standing there on the table. I suppose anything can happen."

"iðɝ jə tʃɹʌst əm əɹ jə doʊnt, dʒulɪn," mæt ɡɹaʊld. ðə θif-kætʃɝ ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə bʌndəl dʒɹɛsəz ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ, ən mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wʌt dɪd ðeɪ də tə hɛlp jə ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ, tɑm? blʌɾ ən æʃəz, doʊn ðə tu ʌv jə ɡoʊ ɔl flæt-aɪɾ ɑn mi əɡɛn! jə noʊ, ən ðeɪ noʊ, ən aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl."

"Either you trust them or you don't, Juilin," Mat growled. The thief-catcher glared at the bundled dresses in the corner, and Mat shook his head. "What did they do to help you in Tanchico, Thom? Blood and ashes, don't the two of you go all flat-eyed on me again! You know, and they know, and I might as well."

"nɪneɪiv sɛd nɑt tə tɛl ɛniwʌn," dʒulɪn sɛɾ əz ɪf ðət ɹɪli mæɾɝd. "ɪleɪn sɛd nɑt tə. wi pɹɑməst. jə maɪt seɪ wi swɔɹ ən oʊθ."

"Nynaeve said not to tell anyone," Juilin said as if that really mattered. "Elayne said not to. We promised. You might say we swore an oath."

tɑm ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ðə pɪloʊ. "sɝkəmstænsəz ɔltɝ keɪsəz, dʒulɪn. ən ɪn ɛni keɪs, ɪt wɑzn ən oʊθ." hi blu θɹi pɝfək smoʊk ɹɪŋz, wʌn ɪnsaɪd ði ʌðɝ. "ðeɪ hɛlpt əs əkwaɪɝ ən dɪspoʊz ʌv ə sɔɹɾ ə meɪl æɾəm, mæt. ðə blæk ədʒɑ əpɛɹənli wɑntəd tə juz ɪɾ ɑn ɹænd. jə kən si waɪ nɪneɪiv ən ɪleɪn wɑntəɾ ɪt kɛp kwaɪət. ɪf wɝd spɹɛd ðət sətʃ ə θɪŋ ɛvɝ ɪɡzɪstəd, ðə laɪt noʊz wʌt kaɪndə teɪlz wəd spɹɪŋ ʌp."

Thom shook his head on the pillow. "Circumstances alter cases, Juilin. And in any case, it wasn't an oath." He blew three perfect smoke rings, one inside the other. "They helped us acquire and dispose of a sort of male a'dam, Mat. The Black Ajah apparently wanted to use it on Rand. You can see why Nynaeve and Elayne wanted it kept quiet. If word spread that such a thing ever existed, the Light knows what kind of tales would spring up."

"hu kɛɹz wʌt stɔɹiz pipəl tɛl?" ə meɪl æɾəm? laɪt, ɪf ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæd ɡɑɾən ðəɾ ɑntu ɹændz nɛk, əɹ ðə sintʃæn hæd . . . ðoʊz kʌlɝz wɝl θɹu hɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn, ən i meɪd hɪmsɛlf stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ɹænd. "ɡɑsəp ɪzən gɑnə hɝt . . . ɛnibəɾi." noʊ kʌlɝz ðət taɪm. hi kəɾ əvɔɪɾ ɪɾ əz lɔŋ əz i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk əbaʊt . . . ðə kʌlɝz swɝld əɡɛn, ən i ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ ɑn ɪz paɪpɛstəm.

"Who cares what stories people tell?" A male a'dam? Light, if the Black Ajah had gotten that onto Rand's neck, or the Seanchan had . . . Those colors whirled through his head again, and he made himself stop thinking about Rand. "Gossip isn't going to hurt . . . anybody." No colors that time. He could avoid it as long as he did not think about . . . The colors swirled again, and he ground his teeth on his pipestem.

"nɑt tʃɹu, mæt. stɔɹiz əv paʊɝ. ɡlimənz teɪlz, ən bɑɹdz' ɛpɪks, ən ɹumɝz ɪn ðə stʃɹiɾ əlaɪk. ðeɪ stɝ pæʃənz, ən tʃeɪnʒ ðə weɪ mɛn si ðə wɝld. tədeɪ, aɪ hɝɾ ə mæn seɪ ðət ɹænd hæd swɔɹn fiəlti tə ɪleɪɾə, ðəɾ i wɑz ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ. ðə fɛloʊ bɪlivd ɪt, mæt. wʌɾ ɪf, seɪ, ɪnʌf tɛɹənz bɪɡɪn tə bɪliv? tɛɹənz dɪslaɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ. kɝɛkt, dʒulɪn?"

"Not true, Mat. Stories have power. Gleemen's tales, and bards' epics, and rumors in the street alike. They stir passions, and change the way men see the world. Today, I heard a man say that Rand had sworn fealty to Elaida, that he was in the White Tower. The fellow believed it, Mat. What if, say, enough Tairens begin to believe? Tairens dislike Aes Sedai. Correct, Juilin?"

"sʌm du," dʒulɪn əlaʊd, ðən æɾəd əz ðoʊ tɑm hæd dʒɹæɡd ɪt fɹəm hɪm, "moʊs du. bʌt ɹaɪət mɛni ʌv əs əv mɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, nɑt tə noʊ ɪt. ðeɪ weɪ ðə lɔ wɑz, fɝbɪɾɪŋ tʃænəlɪŋ, fju ɛɛs sədaɪ keɪm tə tɛɹ, ən ðeɪ vɛɹi sɛldəm ædvɝtaɪzd u ðeɪ wɝ."

"Some do," Juilin allowed, then added as though Thom had dragged it from him, "Most do. But riot many of us have met Aes Sedai, not to know it. They way the law was, forbidding channeling, few Aes Sedai came to Tear, and they very seldom advertised who they were."

"ðæts bɪsaɪd ðə pɔɪnt, maɪ faɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ-lʌvɪŋ tɛɹən fɹɛnd. ən ɪt ɡɪvz weɪt tə maɪ ɑɹɡjəmən ɪn ɛni ɪvɛnt. tɛɹ hoʊlz tə ɹænd, ðə noʊbəlz də ət list, kəz ðəɹ əfɹeɪɾ ɪf ðeɪ də nɑt, hɪl kʌm bæk, bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ bɪliv ðə taʊɝ hoʊlz hɪm, ðən meɪbi hi kæn kʌm bæk. ɪf ðeɪ bɪliv hiz ə tul ə ðə taʊɝ, ɪts dʒʌst wʌn mɔɹ ɹizən fəɹ əm tə tɝn ɑn hɪm. lɛɾ ɪnʌf tɛɹənz bɪliv ðoʊz tu θɪŋz, ən i maɪɾ əz wɛl əv lɛf tiɹ əz sun əz i dʒɹu kælændɝ. ðəɾ ɪz dʒʌs ðə wʌn ɹumɝ, ən dʒʌs tiɹ, bʌɾ ɪt kəd də əz mʌtʃ hɑɹm ɪn kɛɹhin, əɹ ɪljən, əɹ ɛniwɛɹ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt sɔɹɾ ə teɪlz maɪt spɹɪŋ fɹəm ə meɪl æɾəm, ɪn ə wɝld wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən æʃəmən, bʌɾ aɪm tu oʊl tə wɑnə faɪn aʊt."

"That's beside the point, my fine Aes Sedai-loving Tairen friend. And it gives weight to my argument in any event. Tear holds to Rand, the nobles do at least, because they're afraid if they do not, he'll come back, but if they believe the Tower holds him, then maybe he can't come back. If they believe he's a tool of the Tower, it is just one more reason for them to turn on him. Let enough Tairens believe those two things, and he might as well have left Tear as soon as he drew Callandor. That is just the one rumor, and just Tear, but it could do as much harm in Cairhien, or Illian, or anywhere. I don't know what sort of tales might spring from a male a'dam, in a world with the Dragon Reborn, and Asha'man, but I'm too old to want to find out."

mæt ʌndɝstʊd, ɪn ə mænɝ ə spikɪŋ. ə mæn ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk huɛvɝ wɑz kəmændɪŋ ðə tʃɹups əɡɛnst ɪm bɪliv ðəɾ i wɑz duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən wʌɾ i wɑz, ðəɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ wɛɹ i hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ, ən ði ɛnəmi tʃɹaɪd tə də ðə seɪm tə hɪm, ɪf ði ɛnəmi wɑz ɛni ɡʊɾ ət ðə kɹæft. səmtaɪmz boʊθ saɪdz kəd ɡɛt soʊ kənfjuz ðət vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz hæpənd. tʃɹædʒəɾiz, səmtaɪmz. sɪɾiz bɝn ðət noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛni ɪntʃɹəst ɪn bɝnɪŋ, ɪksɛp ðət ðə bɝnɝz bɪlivd wʌt wɑz əntʃɹu, ən θaʊzənz daɪd. kɹɑps dɪstʃɹɔɪd fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən, ən tɛnz ə θaʊzənz daɪɾ ɪn ðə fæmən ðət fɑloʊd.

Mat understood, in a manner of speaking. A man always tried to make whoever was commanding the troops against him believe that he was doing something other than what he was, that he was going where he had no intention of going, and the enemy tried to do the same to him, if the enemy was any good at the craft. Sometimes both sides could get so confused that very strange things happened. Tragedies, sometimes. Cities burned that no one had any interest in burning, except that the burners believed what was untrue, and thousands died. Crops destroyed for the same reason, and tens of thousands died in the famine that followed.

"soʊ aɪ woʊn kɹæk maɪ tiθ əbaʊt ðɪs æɾəm fəɹ mɛn," hi sɛd. "aɪ səpoʊz sʌmbɑɾi hæz θɔt tə tɛl . . . hɪm?" kʌlɝz flæʃt. meɪbi hi kəd dʒʌst ɪɡnɔɹ ðɛm, əɹ ɡɹoʊ juz tə ðɛm. ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn əz fæst əz ðeɪ keɪm, ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt hɝt. hi dʒʌs dɪd nɑt laɪk θɪŋz i kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. ɪspɛʃli wən ðeɪ maɪɾ əv tə də wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn səm weɪ. ðə sɪlvɝ fɑkshɛɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ʃɝt maɪt pɹətɛkt ɪm əɡɛns ðə paʊɝ, bʌt ðət pɹətɛkʃən hæɾ əz mɛni hoʊlz əz ɪz oʊn mɛmɹiz.

"So I won't crack my teeth about this a'dam for men," he said. "I suppose somebody has thought to tell . . . him?" Colors flashed. Maybe he could just ignore them, or grow used to them. They were gone as fast as they came, and they did not hurt. He just did not like things he could not understand. Especially when they might have to do with the Power in some way. The silver foxhead under his shirt might protect him against the Power, but that protection had as many holes as his own memories.

"wi hæv nɑɾ ɪɡzækli bɪn ɪn ɹɛɡjəlɝ kəmjunəkeɪʃən," tɑm sɛd dʒɹaɪli, wæɡəlɪŋ ɪz aɪbɹaʊz. "aɪ səpoʊz ɪleɪn ən nɪneɪiv əv faʊn səm weɪ tə lɛɾ ɪm noʊ, ɪf ðeɪ θɪŋk ɪɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt."

"We have not exactly been in regular communication," Thom said dryly, waggling his eyebrows. "I suppose Elayne and Nynaeve have found some way to let him know, if they think it important."

"waɪ ʃəd ðeɪ?" dʒulɪn sɛd, bɛndɪŋ tə tʌɡ ɔf ə but wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt. "ðə θɪŋ ɪz ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə si." skaʊlɪŋ, hi hɝl ðə buɾ ət ðə bʌndəl dʒɹɛsəz ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ. "ɑɹ jə gɑnə lɛɾ əs ɡɛɾ ɛni slip tənaɪt, mæt? aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wɪl əv ɛni təmɑɹoʊ naɪt, ən aɪ laɪk tə slip ət list ɛvɹi ʌðɝ naɪt."

"Why should they?" Juilin said, bending to tug off a boot with a grunt. "The thing is at the bottom of the sea." Scowling, he hurled the boot at the bundled dresses in the corner. "Are you going to let us get any sleep tonight, Mat? I don't think we'll have any tomorrow night, and I like to sleep at least every other night."

ðət naɪt, mæt tʃoʊz tə slip ɪn taɪlɪnz bɛd. nɑt fəɹ oʊl taɪmz' seɪk. ðət θɔt meɪɾ ɪm læf, ðoʊ hɪz læftɝ hæd tu mʌtʃ ə ðə saʊn ʌv ə wɪmpɝ tə bi vɛɹi fʌni. ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðəɾ ə ɡʊd fɛðɝ mætʃɹəs ən ɡus-daʊn pɪloʊz wɝ pɹɛfɝəbəl tə ə heɪlɔft wən ə mæn dɪd nɑt noʊ wən ɪz nɛks disənt naɪts slip wəd kʌm.

That night, Mat chose to sleep in Tylin's bed. Not for old times' sake. That thought made him laugh, though his laughter had too much of the sound of a whimper to be very funny. It was just that a good feather mattress and goose-down pillows were preferable to a hayloft when a man did not know when his next decent night's sleep would come.

ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɑz ðəɾ i kəd nɑt slip. hi leɪ ðəɹ ɪn ðə dɑɹk wɪð ən ɑɹm bɪhaɪn ɪz hɛɾ ən ðə mədæljənz lɛðɝ kɔɹd lup θɹu ɪtsɛlf ɑn ɪz ɹɪst, ɹɛɾi tə hæn ɪn keɪs ðə ɡoʊləm slɪd θɹu ðə kɹæk ʌndɝ ðə dɔɹ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə ɡoʊləm ðət kɛpt ɪm əweɪk. hi kəd nɑt stɑp ɡoʊɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə plæn ɪn ɪz hɛd. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd plæn, ən sɪmpəl; əz sɪmpəl əz ɪt kəd bi, ɪn ðə sɝkəmstænsəz. oʊnli, noʊ bæɾəl ɛvɝ wɛn əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə plæn, ivən ðə bɛst. ɡɹeɪt kæptənz ɝn ðɛɹ ɹɛpjəteɪʃən nɑt dʒʌs fəɹ leɪɪŋ bɹɪljən plænz, bʌt fəɹ stɪl biɪŋ eɪbəl tə faɪn vɪktɝi æftɝ ðoʊz plænz bɪɡæn tə fɔl əpɑɹt. soʊ wən fɝs laɪɾ ɪlumən ðə wɪndoʊz, hi wɑz stɪl laɪɪŋ ðɛɹ, ɹoʊlɪŋ ðə mədæljən əkɹɔs ðə bæk ə hɪz fɪŋɡɝz ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɪŋk ʌv wʌt wɑz gɑnə ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ.

The trouble was that he could not sleep. He lay there in the dark with an arm behind his head and the medallion's leather cord looped through itself on his wrist, ready to hand in case the gholam slid through the crack under the door, but it was not the gholam that kept him awake. He could not stop going over the plan in his head. It was a good plan, and simple; as simple as it could be, in the circumstances. Only, no battle ever went according to plan, even the best. Great captains earned their reputation not just for laying brilliant plans, but for still being able to find victory after those plans began to fall apart. So when first light illumined the windows, he was still lying there, rolling the medallion across the back of his fingers and trying to think of what was going to go wrong.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾi


CHAPTER 30

koʊld, fæt ɹeɪndʒɹɑps


Cold, Fat Raindrops

ðə deɪ dɔn koʊld, wɪð ɡɹeɪ klaʊdz ðəɾ əbskjʊɹd ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ən wɪnz ɔf ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz ðət ɹæɾəld lus peɪnz ʌv ɡlæs ɪn ðə wɪndoʊ keɪsməns. ɪn stɔɹiz, nɑt ðə sɔɹɾ ə deɪ fəɹ ɡɹæn ɹɛskjuz ən ɪskeɪps. ɪt wɑz ə deɪ fəɹ mɝɾɝz. nɑɾ ə plɛzən θɔt wən jə wɝ hoʊpɪŋ tə lɪv pæst ənʌðɝ dɔn. bʌt ðə plæn wɑz sɪmpəl. naʊ ðəɾ i hæɾ ə sintʃæn blʌd tə juz, nʌθɪŋ kəd pɑsəbli ɡoʊ ɹɔŋ. mæt tʃɹaɪd vɛɹi hɑɹd tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf ə ðæt.

The day dawned cold, with gray clouds that obscured the rising sun and winds off the Sea of Storms that rattled loose panes of glass in the window casements. In stories, not the sort of day for grand rescues and escapes. It was a day for murders. Not a pleasant thought when you were hoping to live past another dawn. But the plan was simple. Now that he had a Seanchan Blood to use, nothing could possibly go wrong. Mat tried very hard to convince himself of that.

ləpɪn bɹɔɾ ɪm bɹɛkfəst, bɹɛɾ ən hæm ən səm hɑɹd jɛloʊ tʃiz, waɪl i dʒɹɛst. nɹɪm wɑz foʊldɪŋ ə fju læs pisəz ə kloʊðɪŋ ðət wɝ tə ɡoʊ tə ði ɪn, ɪnkluɾɪŋ səm ə ðə ʃɝts taɪlɪn hæd hæd meɪd. ðeɪ wɝ ɡʊd ʃɝts, æftɝ ɔl, ən nɹɪm kleɪmd i kəd də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə leɪs, ðoʊ əz juʒəwəl i meɪɾ ɪt saʊn əz ɪf i wɑz ɔfɝɪŋ tə soʊ ə ʃɹaʊd. ðə luɡjubɹiəs, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd lɪɾəl fɛloʊ wɑz hændi wɪð ə niɾəl, əz mæt nu wɛl. hi hæd soʊn ʌp ɪnʌf ə mæts wunz.

Lopin brought him breakfast, bread and ham and some hard yellow cheese, while he dressed. Nerim was folding a few last pieces of clothing that were to go to the inn, including some of the shirts Tylin had had made. They were good shirts, after all, and Nerim claimed he could do something about the lace, though as usual he made it sound as if he was offering to sew a shroud. The lugubrious, gray-haired little fellow was handy with a needle, as Mat knew well. He had sewn up enough of Mat's wounds.

"nɹɪm ən əl teɪk oʊlvɝ aʊt baɪ ðə ɹɛfjus ɡeɪɾ ət ðə ɹɪɹ ə ðə pæləs," ləpɪn ɹəsaɪɾəd wɪð ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd peɪʃəns, hɪz hænz klæspt əɾ ɪz weɪst. sɝvəns ɪn ə pæləs sɛldəm mɪs milz, ən ɪz dɑɹk tɛɹən koʊt fɪt mɔɹ taɪtli ðən ɛvɝ oʊvɝ ɪz ɹaʊn bɛli. fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə koʊt dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə flɛɹ əz mʌtʃ əz ɪt wʌns hæd. "ðɛɹ ɪz nɛvɝ ɛniwʌn ðəɹ ɪksɛp ðə ɡɑɹdz əntɪl ðə ɹɛfjus kɑɹt livz ɪn ði æftɝnun, ən ðeɪ ɑɹ əkʌstəm tə əs teɪkɪŋ maɪ lɔɹdz θɪŋz aʊt ðət weɪ, soʊ ðeɪ woʊn ɹɪmɑɹk ʌs. ət ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən, wɪl sɪkjʊɹ maɪ lɔɹdz ɡoʊld ən ðə ɹɛst ə maɪ lɔɹdz ɡɑɹməns, ən mɛtwɪn, fɝdʒɪn ən ɡɔɹɾɝən wɪl miɾ əs wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz. wi ən ðə ɹɛdʒɹmz wɪl ðən teɪk jʌŋ oʊlvɝ θɹu ðə dæl ɹə ɡeɪɾ ət mɪdæftɝnun. aɪ hæv ðə lɑɾɝi toʊkənz fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ boʊθ pæk ænəməlz, ɪn maɪ pɑkət, maɪ lɔɹd. ðəɹ ɪz ən əbændən steɪbəl ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪt nɔɹθ ɹoʊd, əbaʊɾ ə maɪl nɔɹθ ə ðə sɝkəɾ ə hɛvən, wɛɹ wɪl weɪɾ əntɪl wi si maɪ lɔɹd. aɪ tʃɹʌst aɪ hæv maɪ lɔɹdz ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz kɝɛkli?"

"Nerim and I will take Olver out by the refuse gate at the rear of the Palace," Lopin recited with exaggerated patience, his hands clasped at his waist. Servants in a palace seldom missed meals, and his dark Tairen coat fit more tightly than ever over his round belly. For that matter, the bottom of the coat did not appear to flare as much as it once had. "There is never anyone there except the guards until the refuse cart leaves in the afternoon, and they are accustomed to us taking my Lord's things out that way, so they won't remark us. At The Wandering Woman, we will secure my Lord's gold and the rest of my Lord's garments, and Metwyn, Fergin and Gorderan will meet us with the horses. We and the Redarms will then take young Olver through the Dal Eira Gate at midafternoon. I have the lottery tokens for the horses, including both pack animals, in my pocket, my Lord. There is an abandoned stable on the Great North Road, about a mile north of the Circuit of Heaven, where we will wait until we see my Lord. I trust I have my Lord's instructions correctly?"

mæt swɑloʊd ðə læst ə ðə tʃiz ən dʌstɪɾ ɪz hænz. "ju θɪŋk aɪm meɪkɪŋ jə ɡoʊ oʊvɝ ɪt tu ɔfən?" hi sɛd, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ ɪndə hɪz koʊt. ə pleɪn dɑɹk ɡɹin koʊt. ə mæn wɑntəd tə bi pleɪn waɪl əbaʊt bɪznəs laɪk tədeɪz. "aɪ wɑnə meɪk ʃʊɹ juv ɪt baɪ hɑɹt. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ɪf jə doʊn si mi bɪfɔɹ sʌnɹaɪz təmɑɹoʊ, jə kip muvɪŋ əntɪl jə faɪn tælmɑnz ən ðə bænd." ði əlɑɹm wəd ɡoʊ ʌp wɪð ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ɪnspɛkʃən ə ðə kɛnəlz, ən ɪf i wɑz nɑɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi bɪfɔɹ ðæt, hi ɪkspɛktəd tə lɝn wɛðɝ ɪz lʌk ɹæn tə stɑpɪŋ ə hɛdzmənz æks. hi hæd bɪn toʊl ðəɾ i wɑz feɪɾɪd tə daɪ ən lɪv əɡɛn - ə pɹɑfəsi, əɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf wʌn - bʌɾ i wɑz pɹɪɾi ʃʊɹ ðət hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæpənd.

Mat swallowed the last of the cheese and dusted his hands. "You think I'm making you go over it too often?" he said, shrugging into his coat. A plain dark green coat. A man wanted to be plain while about business like today's. "I want to make sure you have it by heart. Remember, if you don't see me before sunrise tomorrow, you keep moving until you find Talmanes and the Band." The alarm would go up with the morning inspection of the kennels, and if he was not out of the city before that, he expected to learn whether his luck ran to stopping a headsman's axe. He had been told that he was fated to die and live again - a prophecy, or near enough one - but he was pretty sure that had already happened.

"ʌv kɔɹs, maɪ lɔɹd," ləpɪn sɛd blænli. "ɪt wɪl bi əz maɪ lɔɹd kəmænz."

"Of course, my Lord," Lopin said blandly. "It will be as my Lord commands."

"sɝɾənli, maɪ lɔɹd," nɹɪm mɝmɝd, fjunɝiəl əz ɛvɝ. "maɪ lɔɹd kəmænz, ən wi oʊbeɪ."

"Certainly, my Lord," Nerim murmured, funereal as ever. "My Lord commands, and we obey."

mæt səspɛktəd ðeɪ wɝ laɪɪŋ, bʌt tu əɹ θɹi deɪz weɪɾɪŋ wəd nɑt hɝt ðɛm, ən baɪ ðət taɪm, ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə si hi wɑz nɑt kʌmɪŋ. mɛtwɪn ən ði ʌðɝ tu soʊlʒɝz wəd kənvɪns ðɛm, ɪf nid bi. ðoʊz θɹi maɪt fɑloʊ mæt kɔθən, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ful ɪnʌf tə stʃɹɛtʃ ðɛɹ nɛks ɑn ðə tʃɑpɪŋ blɑk ɪf ɪz hɛd hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi fɔlən. fəɹ səm ɹizən, hi wɑz nɑɾ əz ʃʊɹ ə ləpɪn ən nɹɪm.

Mat suspected they were lying, but two or three days waiting would not hurt them, and by that time, they would have to see he was not coming. Metwyn and the other two soldiers would convince them, if need be. Those three might follow Mat Cauthon, but they were not fool enough to stretch their necks on the chopping block if his head had already fallen. For some reason, he was not as sure of Lopin and Nerim.

oʊlvɝ wɑz nɑɾ əz əpsɛɾ oʊvɝ livɪŋ ɹaɪzɛl əz mæt hæd fɪɹɾ i wəd bi. hi bɹɔt ðə səbdʒɛkt ʌp waɪl i wɑz hɛlpɪŋ ðə bɔɪ bʌndəl ɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz tə bi kæɹiɾ oʊvɝ tə ði ɪn. ɔl ʌv oʊlvɝz θɪŋz wɝ leɪɾ aʊt nitli ɑn ðə nɛɹoʊ bɛɾ ɪn wʌt hæd bɪn ðə sʌlkɪŋ ɹum, ə smɔl sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, wən ði əpɑɹtməns hæd bɪn mæts.

Olver was not as upset over leaving Riselle as Mat had feared he would be. He brought the subject up while he was helping the boy bundle his belongings to be carried over to the inn. All of Olver's things were laid out neatly on the narrow bed in what had been the sulking room, a small sitting room, when the apartments had been Mat's.

"ʃi ɪz ɡɛɾɪŋ mɛɹid, mæt," oʊlvɝ sɛd peɪʃənli, əz ðoʊ ɪkspleɪnɪŋ tə sʌmwʌn u dɪdn si ði ɑbviəs. pɑpɪŋ oʊpən ə nɛɹoʊ lɪɾəl kɑɹv bɑks ɹaɪzɛl hæd ɡɪvən hɪm, dʒʌs lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɪz ɹɛdhɔks fɛðɝ wɑz seɪf, hi snæpt ɪt ʃʌɾ ən tʌkt ɪɾ ɪndə ðə lɛðɝ skɹɪp i wəd bi kæɹiɪŋ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hi wɑz əz kɛɹfəl ə ðə fɛðɝ əz i hæd bɪn ə ðə pɝs hoʊldɪŋ twɛnti ɡoʊl kɹaʊnz ən ə fɪsfəl ə sɪlvɝ. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk əɹ hʌzbənd wəd laɪk əɹ tə kip titʃɪŋ mi tə ɹid. aɪ wəd nɑt, ɪf aɪ wɝ əɹ hʌzbənd."

"She is getting married, Mat," Olver said patiently, as though explaining to someone who didn't see the obvious. Popping open a narrow little carved box Riselle had given him, just long enough to make sure his redhawk's feather was safe, he snapped it shut and tucked it into the leather scrip he would be carrying on his shoulder. He was as careful of the feather as he had been of the purse holding twenty gold crowns and a fistful of silver. "I don't think her husband would like her to keep teaching me to read. I would not, if I were her husband."

"oʊ," mæt sɛd. ɹaɪzɛl hæd wɝkt kwɪkli wʌns ʃi meɪɾ əɹ maɪn ʌp. hɝ mɛɹɪdʒ tə bænɝ-dʒɛnɝəl jəmɑɾə hæd bɪn ənaʊns pʌblɪkli jɛstɝdeɪ ən wɑz tə teɪk pleɪs təmɑɹoʊ, ðoʊ baɪ kʌstəm ðəɹ wɑz juʒəwəli ə weɪɾ ə mʌnθs bɪtwin. jəmɑɾə maɪt bi ə ɡʊd dʒɛnɝəl - mæt dɪd nɑt noʊ - bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ stʊɾ ə tʃæns əɡɛnst ɹaɪzɛl ən ðət mɑɹvələs bʊzəm. tədeɪ ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə vɪnjɝɾ ɪn ðə ɹænən hɪlz ðət ðə ɡɹum wɑz baɪɪŋ fəɹ əɹ wɛɾɪŋ ɡɪft. "aɪ dʒʌs θɔt jə maɪt wɑnə - aɪ doʊnt noʊ - teɪk əɹ wɪð ʌs, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ."

"Oh," Mat said. Riselle had worked quickly once she made her mind up. Her marriage to Banner-General Yamada had been announced publicly yesterday and was to take place tomorrow, though by custom there was usually a wait of months between. Yamada might be a good general - Mat did not know - but he had never stood a chance against Riselle and that marvelous bosom. Today they were looking at a vineyard in the Rhannon Hills that the groom was buying for her wedding gift. "I just thought you might want to - I don't know - take her with us, or something."

"aɪm nɑɾ ə tʃaɪld, mæt," oʊlvɝ sɛd dʒɹaɪli. foʊldɪŋ ðə lɪnən klɔθ bæk ɝaʊn ɪz stʃɹaɪp tɝɾəl ʃɛl, hi æɾəd ðət tə ðə skɹɪp. "ju wɪl pleɪ sneɪks ən fɑksəz wɪð mi, woʊn ju? ɹaɪzɛl ɛndʒɔɪz pleɪɪŋ, ən jə nɛvɝ əv taɪm ɛni mɔɹ." dɪspaɪt ðə kloʊðz mæt wɑz bʌndəlɪŋ ʌp ɪn ə kloʊk ðət wəd ɡoʊ ɪndə ə pæk hæmpɝ, ðə bɔɪ hæɾ ə spɛɹ pɛɹ ə bɹitʃɪz ən səm klin ʃɝts ən stɑkɪŋz ɪn ðə skɹɪp, tu. ən ðə ɡeɪm ə sneɪks ən fɑksəz ɪz dɛd fɑðɝ hæd meɪd fəɹ hɪm. jə wɝ lɛs laɪkli tə luz wʌt jə kɛpt ɑn jəɹ pɝsən, ən oʊlvɝ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi lɔs mɔɹ ɪn ɪz tɛn jɪɹz ðən moʊs pipəl dɪɾ ɪn ə laɪftaɪm. bʌɾ i stɪl bɪliv jə kəd wɪn ət sneɪks ən fɑksəz wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə ɹulz, tu.

"I'm not a child, Mat," Olver said dryly. Folding the linen cloth back around his striped turtle shell, he added that to the scrip. "You will play Snakes and Foxes with me, won't you? Riselle enjoys playing, and you never have time any more." Despite the clothes Mat was bundling up in a cloak that would go into a pack hamper, the boy had a spare pair of breeches and some clean shirts and stockings in the scrip, too. And the game of Snakes and Foxes his dead father had made for him. You were less likely to lose what you kept on your person, and Olver had already lost more in his ten years than most people did in a lifetime. But he still believed you could win at Snakes and Foxes without breaking the rules, too.

"aɪ wɪl," mæt pɹɑməst. hi wəɾ ɪf i mænədʒ tə meɪk ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi. hi wɑz sɝɾənli bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪnʌf ɹulz tə dɪzɝv tə wɪn. "ju dʒʌs teɪk kɛɹ ʌv wɪn tɪl aɪ ɡɛt ðɛɹ." oʊlvɝ dʒɪnd waɪdli, ən fəɹ hɪm, ðət wɑz vɛɹi waɪɾ ɪndid. ðə bɔɪ lʌv ðət lɛɡi ɡɹeɪ ɡɛldɪŋ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz i dɪd sneɪks ən fɑksəz.

"I will," Mat promised. He would if he managed to make it out of the city. He was certainly breaking enough rules to deserve to win. "You just take care of Wind till I get there." Olver ginned widely, and for him, that was very wide indeed. The boy loved that leggy gray gelding almost as much as he did Snakes and Foxes.

ənfɔɹtʃənətli, bɛslən wɑz ənʌðɝ u sim tə θɪŋk jə kəd wɪn ət sneɪks ən fɑksəz.

Unfortunately, Beslan was another who seemed to think you could win at Snakes and Foxes.

"tənaɪt," hi ɡɹaʊld, stɔkɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs ɪn taɪlɪnz sɪɾɪŋ ɹum. ðə slɛndɝ mænz aɪz wɝ koʊld ɪnʌf tə teɪk əweɪ ðə wɔɹmθ ə ðə bleɪz, ən ɪz hænz wɝ klæsp bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk əz ɪf tə kip əm fɹəm ðə hɪlt ə hɪz nɛɹoʊ-bleɪɾɪd sɔɹd. ðə dʒuəl sɪləndɝ-klɑk ɑn ðə weɪv-kɑɹv mɑɹbəl mæntəl tʃaɪm fɔɹ taɪmz fəɹ ðə sɛkən aʊɝ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. "wɪð ə fju deɪz' wɔɹnɪŋ, aɪ cʊɾə leɪɾ ɑn sʌmθɪŋ mæɡnɪfəsənt!"

"Tonight," he growled, stalking up and down in front of the fireplace in Tylin's sitting room. The slender man's eyes were cold enough to take away the warmth of the blaze, and his hands were clasped behind his back as if to keep them from the hilt of his narrow-bladed sword. The jeweled cylinder-clock on the wave-carved marble mantel chimed four times for the second hour of the morning. "With a few days' warning, I could have laid on something magnificent!"

"aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛniθɪŋ mæɡnɪfəsənt," mæt toʊl hɪm. hi dɪd nɑt wɑn ɛniθɪŋ fɹəm ðə mæn, bʌt baɪ tʃæns bɛslən hæd sin tɑm slɪpɪŋ ɪndə ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ ə ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən ə lɪɾəl ɝliɝ. tɑm hæd ɡɔn tə kip dʒoʊlin əmjuzd əntɪl ɛdʒiənɪn bɹɔɾ əɹ sʌldəm ðəɾ ivnɪŋ, tə sɛɾəl əɹ nɝvz ən dʒɑli hɝ əlɔŋ wɪð kɔɹtli mænɝz, bʌt ðəɹ cʊɾə bɪn ɛni nʌmbɝ ə ɹizənz fəɹ ɪm tə vɪzət ði ɪn. wɛl, meɪbi nɑt ðət mɛni, wɪð ɪt fʊl ə sintʃæn, bʌt sɛvɹəl, ʃʊɹli. oʊnli, bɛslən hæd lɛp tə ðə ɹizən laɪk ə dʌk lipɪŋ ɑn ə biɾəl, ən i ɹəfjuz tə bi lɛft aʊt. "ɪt wɪl bi ɪnʌf ɪf ə fju ʌv jəɹ fɹɛnz faɪɝ səm ə ðə stɔɹz ðə sintʃæn əv stɑkpaɪld ɑn ðə beɪ ɹoʊd. æftɝ mɪdnaɪt, maɪnd, əz nɪɹ əz ðeɪ kən ɹɛkən ɪt; bɛɾɝ ən aʊɝ leɪɾɝ ðən ɛni taɪm bɪfɔɹ." wɪð ɛni lʌk, hi wəd bi aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi bɪfɔɹ mɪdnaɪt. "ðæt wɪl dʒɹɔ ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən əweɪ saʊθ, ən jə noʊ luzɪŋ stɔɹz wɪl hɝt ðɛm."

"I don't want anything magnificent," Mat told him. He did not want anything from the man, but by chance Beslan had seen Thom slipping into the stableyard of The Wandering Woman a little earlier. Thom had gone to keep Joline amused until Egeanin brought her sul'dam that evening, to settle her nerves and jolly her along with courtly manners, but there could have been any number of reasons for him to visit the inn. Well, maybe not that many, with it full of Seanchan, but several, surely. Only, Beslan had leaped to the reason like a duck leaping on a beetle, and he refused to be left out. "It will be enough if a few of your friends fire some of the stores the Seanchan have stockpiled on the Bay Road. After midnight, mind, as near as they can reckon it; better an hour later than any time before." With any luck, he would be out of the city before midnight. "That will draw their attention away south, and you know losing stores will hurt them."

"aɪ sɛɾ aɪ wəd də ɪt," bɛslən sɛd saʊɝli, "bʌt jə kæn seɪ sɛɾɪŋ faɪɝz ɪz ɪɡzækli ə ɡɹæn dʒɛstʃɝ."

"I said I would do it," Beslan said sourly, "but you can't say setting fires is exactly a grand gesture."

sɪɾɪŋ bæk, mæt ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hænz ɑn ðə bæmbu-kɑɹvd ɑɹmz ə ðə tʃɛɹ ən fɹaʊnd. hi wɑntəd tə ɹɛst ɪz hænz, ɛniweɪ, bʌɾ ɪz sɪɡnɪt ɹɪŋ meɪɾ ə mətælɪk klɪkɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɪldɪd wʊɾ əz i tæpt ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. "bɛslən, jəl bi sin əɾ ən ɪn wən ðoʊz faɪɝz ɑɹ sɛt, woʊn ju?" ði ʌðɝ mæn ɡɹɪməst. "bɛslən?"

Sitting back, Mat rested his hands on the bamboo-carved arms of the chair and frowned. He wanted to rest his hands, anyway, but his signet ring made a metallic clicking on the gilded wood as he tapped his fingers. "Beslan, you will be seen at an inn when those fires are set, won't you?" The other man grimaced. "Beslan?"

bɛslən flʌŋ ʌp ɪz hænz. "aɪ noʊ; aɪ noʊ. aɪ mʌsnt ɛndeɪnʒɝ mʌðɝ. əl bi sin. baɪ mɪdnaɪt, əl bi əz dʒɹʌŋk əz ən ɪnkipɝz hʌzbənd! jə kən weɪdʒɝ əl bi sin! ɪt dʒʌst ɪzən vɛɹi hɪɹoʊɪk, mæt. aɪm ət wɔɹ wɪð ðə sintʃæn wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt mʌðɝ ɪz."

Beslan flung up his hands. "I know; I know. I mustn't endanger Mother. I'll be seen. By midnight, I will be as drunk as an innkeeper's husband! You can wager I'll be seen! It just isn't very heroic, Mat. I'm at war with the Seanchan whether or not Mother is."

mæt tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə saɪ. hi ɔlmoʊst səksiɾəd.

Mat tried not to sigh. He almost succeeded.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə haɪd ðə θɹi ɹɛdʒɹmz muvɪŋ hɔɹsəz aʊɾ ə ðə steɪbəlz, ʌv kɔɹs. twaɪs ðət mɔɹnɪŋ i noʊɾəst sɝvɪŋ wɪmən hændɪŋ kɔɪnz tə ʌðɝz, ən boʊθ taɪmz ðə wʊmən duɪŋ ðə hændɪŋ oʊvɝ ɡlɛɹd wən ʃi sɔ hɪm. ivən wɪð veɪnɪn ən hɑɹnən əpɛɹənli stɪl sɑlədli ɪnskɑnst ɪn ðə lɔŋ bæɹəks ɹum nɪɹ ðə steɪbəlz, ðə pæləs nu ðət mæt kɔθən wɑz livɪŋ sun, ən weɪdʒɝz wɝ biɪŋ peɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. hi dʒʌs hæd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn faʊn aʊt haʊ sun bɪfɔɹ ɪt wɑz tu leɪt.

There was no way to hide the three Redarms moving horses out of the stables, of course. Twice that morning he noticed serving women handing coins to others, and both times the woman doing the handing over glared when she saw him. Even with Vanin and Harnan apparently still solidly ensconced in the long barracks room near the stables, the Palace knew that Mat Cauthon was leaving soon, and wagers were being paid already. He just had to make sure no one found out how soon before it was too late.

ðə wɪn pɪkt ʌp stʃɹɛŋkθ əz ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wɔɹ ɑn, bʌɾ i hæd pɪps sæɾəld ən ɹoʊɾ ɪz ɛnləs sɝkəlz ɪn ðə pæləs steɪbliɑɹd, hʌɾəlɪŋ ə lɪɾəl ɪn ɪz sæɾəl ən klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz kloʊk kloʊs. hi ɹoʊd mɔɹ sloʊli ðən juʒəwəl, soʊ pɪps' stil ʃuz meɪɾ ə leɪzi, plɑɾɪŋ saʊn ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. naʊ ən ðən i ɡɹɪməst ət ðə dɑɹkənɪŋ klaʊdz ɪn ðə skaɪ ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. noʊ, mæt kɔθən dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ. mæt kɔθən wəd bi steɪɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ wɔɹm ən dʒɹaɪ əntɪl ðə skaɪz klɪɹd, jɛs, hi wʊd.

The wind picked up strength as the morning wore on, but he had Pips saddled and rode his endless circles in the Palace stableyard, huddling a little in his saddle and clutching his cloak close. He rode more slowly than usual, so Pips' steel shoes made a lazy, plodding sound on the paving stones. Now and then he grimaced at the darkening clouds in the sky and shook his head. No, Mat Cauthon did not like being out in this weather. Mat Cauthon would be staying somewhere warm and dry until the skies cleared, yes, he would.

ðə sʌldəm wɔkɪŋ deɪmeɪn ɪn ðɛɹ oʊn sɝkəl ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹd nu hi wɑz livɪŋ sun, tu. meɪbi ðə sɝvɪŋ wɪmən dɪd nɑt tɔk dɝɛkli tə ðə sintʃæn wɪmən, bʌt wʌt wʌn wʊmən nu wɑz ɔlweɪz noʊn tə ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪnsaɪɾ ə maɪl sun ɪnʌf. waɪldfaɪɝ dɪd nɑt ɹʌn θɹu dʒɹaɪ wʊdz əz fæst əz ɡɑsəp ɹæn θɹu wɪmən. ə tɔl jɛloʊ-hɛɹd sʌldəm ɡlænst ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ə ʃɔɹt staʊt sʌldəm læft aʊt laʊd, splɪɾɪŋ ə feɪs əz dɑɹk əz ɛni ʌv ðə si foʊk. hi wɑz dʒʌs taɪlɪnz tɔɪ.

The sul'dam walking damane in their own circle in the stableyard knew he was leaving soon, too. Maybe the serving women did not talk directly to the Seanchan women, but what one woman knew was always known to every woman inside a mile soon enough. Wildfire did not run through dry woods as fast as gossip ran through women. A tall yellow-haired sul'dam glanced in his direction and shook her head. A short stout sul'dam laughed out loud, splitting a face as dark as any of the Sea Folk. He was just Tylin's Toy.

ðə sʌldəm dɪd nɑt kənsɝn hɪm, bʌt tɛslɪn dɪd. fəɹ sɛvɹəl deɪz, əntɪl ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, hi hæd nɑt sin əɹ əmʌŋ ðə deɪmeɪn biɪŋ ɛksɝsaɪzd. tədeɪ ðə sʌldəm lɛt ðɛɹ kloʊks flaɪ wɪð ðə wɪnd, bʌt ðə deɪmeɪn ɔl hɛl ðɛɹz taɪtli ɝaʊn ðɛm, ɪksɛp tɛslɪnz ɡɹeɪ kloʊk flæp ðɪs weɪ ən ðæt, fɝɡɑɾən, ən ʃi stʌmbəld ə lɪɾəl wɛɹ ðə peɪvmənt wɑz ənivən. hɝ aɪz wɝ waɪɾ ən wɝiɾ ɪn ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪs. əkeɪʒənəli ʃi dɑɹɾɪd ə ɡlæns ət ðə bʌksəm blæk-hɛɹd sʌldəm wɛɹɪŋ ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə hɝ sɪlvɝ liʃ, ən wən ʃi dɪd, ʃi lɪkt əɹ lɪps ənsɝteɪnli.

The sul'dam did not concern him, but Teslyn did. For several days, until this morning, he had not seen her among the damane being exercised. Today the sul'dam let their cloaks fly with the wind, but the damane all held theirs tightly around them, except Teslyn's gray cloak flapped this way and that, forgotten, and she stumbled a little where the pavement was uneven. Her eyes were wide and worried in that Aes Sedai face. Occasionally she darted a glance at the buxom black-haired sul'dam wearing the other end of her silver leash, and when she did, she licked her lips uncertainly.

ə taɪtnəs sɛɾəld ɪn mæts bɛli. wɛɹ hæd ðə dɪtɝməneɪʃən ɡɔn? ɪf ʃi wɑz ɹɛɾi tə nʌkəl ʌndɝ. . . .

A tightness settled in Mat's belly. Where had the determination gone? If she was ready to knuckle under. . . .

"ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɔl ɹaɪt?" veɪnɪn sɛd wən mæt dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən ɡeɪv ɪm pɪps' ɹeɪnz. ɹeɪn hæd bɪɡʌn tə fɔl, koʊl fæt dʒɹɑps, ən ðə sʌldəm wɝ hɝiɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃɑɹdʒəz ɪnsaɪd, læfɪŋ ən ɹʌnɪŋ tə əvɔɪd ɡɛɾɪŋ wɛt. səm ə ðə deɪmeɪn wɝ læfɪŋ, tu, ə saʊn tə tʃɪl mæts blʌd. veɪnɪn tʊk noʊ tʃænsəz ɛniwʌn maɪt wʌndɝ waɪ ðeɪ wɝ stændɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn tə tɔk. ðə fæt mæn bɛn tə lɪf pɪps' lɛft fɔɹɛlɪɡ ən stʌɾi ðə huf. "ju lʊk ə maɪt mɔɹ pik ðən juʒəwəl."

"Everything all right?" Vanin said when Mat dismounted and gave him Pips' reins. Rain had begun to fall, cold fat drops, and the sul'dam were hurrying their charges inside, laughing and running to avoid getting wet. Some of the damane were laughing, too, a sound to chill Mat's blood. Vanin took no chances anyone might wonder why they were standing in the rain to talk. The fat man bent to lift Pips' left foreleg and study the hoof. "You look a mite more peaked than usual."

"ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz dʒʌs faɪn," mæt toʊl hɪm. ði eɪk ɪn ɪz lɛɡ ən hɪp nɔd laɪk ə tuθ, bʌɾ i wɑz bɛɹli əwɛɹ ʌv ɪɾ əɹ ə ðə kwɪkənɪŋ ɹeɪn. laɪt, ɪf tɛslɪn wɑz kɹækɪŋ naʊ. . . . "dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ. ɪf jə hɪɹ ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɪnsaɪd ðə pæləs tənaɪt, əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət saʊnz laɪk tʃɹʌbəl, jə ən hɑɹnən doʊnt weɪt. jə ɹaɪɾ aʊt ɹaɪt ðən ən ɡoʊ faɪn oʊlvɝ. hɪl bi - "

"Everything is just fine," Mat told him. The ache in his leg and hip gnawed like a tooth, but he was barely aware of it or of the quickening rain. Light, if Teslyn was cracking now. . . . "Just remember. If you hear shouting inside the Palace tonight, or anything that sounds like trouble, you and Harnan don't wait. You ride out right then and go find Olver. He'll be - "

"aɪ noʊ wɛɹ ðə lɪɾəl taɪkəl bi." lɛɾɪŋ ɡoʊ ʌv pɪps' lɛɡ ən stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ, veɪnɪn spæt θɹu wʌn ə ðə ɡæps ɪn ɪz tiθ. ɹeɪndʒɹɑps ɹæn daʊn ɪz feɪs. "hɑɹnən eɪn tu stupəd tə pʊɾ ɪz buts ɑn əloʊn, ən aɪ noʊ wʌt tə du. jə dʒʌs teɪk kɛɹ ə jəɹ pis ʌv ɪɾ ən meɪk ʃʊɹ jəɹ lʌk ɪz wɝkɪŋ. kʌm ɑn ðɛɹ, bɔɪ," hi æɾəd mʌtʃ mɔɹ wɔɹmli tə pɪps. "aɪ ɡɑt səm ɡʊɾ oʊts fəɹ ju. ən ə faɪn hɑt fɪʃ stu fəɹ mi."

"I know where the little tyke'll be." Letting go of Pips' leg and straightening, Vanin spat through one of the gaps in his teeth. Raindrops ran down his face. "Harnan ain't too stupid to put his boots on alone, and I know what to do. You just take care of your piece of it and make sure your luck is working. Come on there, boy," he added much more warmly to Pips. "I got some good oats for you. And a fine hot fish stew for me."

mæt nu hi ʃəɾ it, tu, bʌɾ i fɛlt əz ðoʊ hi hæd swɑloʊɾ ə stoʊn, ən ɪt dɪd nɑt liv ɹum fəɹ fud. hɑbəlɪŋ bæk ʌp tə taɪlɪnz əpɑɹtməns, hi θɹu hɪz dæmp kloʊk oʊvɝ ə tʃɛɹ, ən fəɹ ə taɪm, stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə kɔɹnɝ wɛɹ ɪz blæk-hæftɪd spɪɹ stʊd pɹɑp nɛks tə hɪz ənstʃɹʌŋ baʊ. hi plæn tə kʌm bæk fəɹ ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ ət ðə læs moʊmənt. ðə blʌd ʃəɾ ɔl bi əbɛd baɪ ðə taɪm i muvd, ən ðə sɝvəns, əz wɛl, wɪð oʊnli ðə ɡɑɹdz aʊtsaɪd ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ əweɪk, bʌɾ i wəd nɑt ɹɪsk biɪŋ sin wɪð ɪt bɪfɔɹ i hæd tə. ivən ðə sintʃæn u kɔld ɪm tɔɪ wəd teɪk noʊɾəs ə hɪm kæɹiɪŋ ə wɛpən θɹu ðə hɔlz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt. hi hæd mɛn tə kæɹi ðə baʊ, tu. ɡʊd blæk ju wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɪmpɑsəbəl tə faɪn aʊtsaɪd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən ðeɪ kʌɾ ɪt tu ʃɔɹt bɪsaɪdz. ənstʃɹʌŋ, ə baʊ ʃəd bi tu hænz tɔlɝ ðən ðə mæn u wəd dʒɹɔ ɪt. meɪbi hi ʃəɾ əbændən ɪɾ æftɝ ɔl, ðoʊ. hi wəd nid boʊθ hænz tə juz ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ, ɪf ɪt keɪm tə ðæt, ən ðə moʊmənt niɾəd tə dʒɹɑp ðə baʊ maɪt bi ðə moʊmən ðət kɪl hɪm.

Mat knew he should eat, too, but he felt as though he had swallowed a stone, and it did not leave room for food. Hobbling back up to Tylin's apartments, he threw his damp cloak over a chair, and for a time, stood staring at the corner where his black-hafted spear stood propped next to his unstrung bow. He planned to come back for the ashandarei at the last moment. The Blood should all be abed by the time he moved, and the servants, as well, with only the guards outside remaining awake, but he would not risk being seen with it before he had to. Even the Seanchan who called him Toy would take notice of him carrying a weapon through the halls in the middle of the night. He had meant to carry the bow, too. Good black yew was almost impossible to find outside the Two Rivers, and they cut it too short besides. Unstrung, a bow should be two hands taller than the man who would draw it. Maybe he should abandon it after all, though. He would need both hands to use the ashandarei, if it came to that, and the moment needed to drop the bow might be the moment that killed him.

"ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɪl ɡoʊ əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə plæn," hi sɛɾ əlaʊd. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, hi saʊndəɾ əz wʊl-hɛɾəd əz bɛslən! "aɪ æm nɑt gɑnə hæv faɪt maɪ weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə blʌɾi pæləs!" ən ɔlmoʊst əz ful-wɪɾɪd. lʌk wɑz ə vɛɹi faɪn θɪŋ wɪð ðə daɪs. dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn lʌk ʌðɝ pleɪsəz kəd ɡɛɾ ə mæn dɛd.

"Everything will go according to plan," he said aloud. Blood and ashes, he sounded as wool-headed as Beslan! "I am not going to have fight my way out of the bloody Palace!" And almost as fool-witted. Luck was a very fine thing with the dice. Depending on luck other places could get a man dead.

laɪɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðə bɛd, hi pɹɑpt wʌn buɾɪd fʊɾ ətɑp ði ʌðɝ ən leɪ stʌɾiɪŋ ðə baʊ ən ðə spɪɹ. wɪð ðə dɔɹ tə ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum oʊpən, hi kəd hɪɹ ðə sɪləndɝ-klɑk sɔfli tʃaɪm itʃ aʊɝ əweɪ. laɪt, hi niɾəd ɪz lʌk tənaɪt.

Lying down on the bed, he propped one booted foot atop the other and lay studying the bow and the spear. With the door to the sitting room open, he could hear the cylinder-clock softly chime each hour away. Light, he needed his luck tonight.

ðə wɪndoʊ laɪt feɪɾəd soʊ sloʊli hi ɔlmoʊst ɡɑɾ ʌp tə si wɛðɝ ðə sʌn hæd stɑpt, bʌɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɡɹeɪ laɪt feɪɾəd tə pɝpəl twaɪlaɪt, ðən tə fʊl dɑɹk. ðə klɑk tʃaɪm twaɪs, ən ðən ði oʊnli saʊnz wɝ ðə dʒɹʌmɪŋ ə ðə ɹeɪn ən ðə ɹʌʃ ə ðə wɪnd. wɝkmɪn u hæd bɪn bɹeɪvɪŋ ðə wɛðɝ wəd bi daʊnɪŋ tulz tə tʃɹʌdʒ hoʊm. noʊ wʌn keɪm tə laɪt ðə læmps əɹ tɛn ðə faɪɝz. noʊ wʌn ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm tə bi ðɛɹ, sɪns i hæd slɛpt ɪn ðə bɛd ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ. ðə fleɪmz ɪn ðə bɛdʒɹum faɪɝpleɪs dwɪndəld ən daɪd. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɪn moʊʃən, naʊ. oʊlvɝ wɑz snʌɡ ɪn ðəɾ oʊl steɪbəl; ɪt stɪl hæd moʊst ʌv ɪts ɹuf. ðə klɑk saʊndəd ðə fɝs fʊl aʊɝ ə ðə naɪt, ən æftɝ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə wik, fɔɹ tʃaɪmz fəɹ ðə sɛkənd.

The window light faded so slowly he almost got up to see whether the sun had stopped, but eventually gray light faded to purple twilight, then to full dark. The clock chimed twice, and then the only sounds were the drumming of the rain and the rush of the wind. Workmen who had been braving the weather would be downing tools to trudge home. No one came to light the lamps or tend the fires. No one expected him to be there, since he had slept in the bed the night before. The flames in the bedroom fireplace dwindled and died. Everything was in motion, now. Olver was snug in that old stable; it still had most of its roof. The clock sounded the first full hour of the night, and after no more than a week, four chimes for the second.

ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə bɛd, hi fɛlt ɪz weɪ ɪndə ðə pɪtʃ-dɑɹk sɪɾɪŋ ɹum ən pʊld oʊpən ðə hɪnʒd keɪsmən ʌv wʌn ə ðə tɔl wɪndoʊz. ðə stʃɹɔŋ wɪn dʒɹoʊv ɹeɪndʒɹɑps θɹu ði ɪntʃɹəkət waɪt ɹɔt-aɪɝn skɹin, kwɪkli soʊkɪŋ ɪz koʊt. ðə mun wɑz hɪɾən bɪhaɪn klaʊdz, ən ðə sɪɾi wɑz ə mæs ə ɹeɪn-ʃɹaʊɾɪd dɑɹknəs wɪθaʊɾ ivən laɪtnɪŋ tə bɹeɪk ɪt. ɔl ðə stʃɹitlɑmps hæɾ əpɛɹənli bɪn ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃt baɪ ðə ɹeɪn ən waɪnd; ðə naɪt wəd haɪɾ əm wən ðeɪ lɛf ðə pæləs. ən ɛni pətʃɹoʊl ðət sɔ ðɛm aʊɾ ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ wəd lʊk twaɪs. ʃɪvɝɪŋ əz ðə wɪn kʌt θɹu hɪz dæmp koʊt, hi ʃʌt ðə keɪsmənt.

Rising from the bed, he felt his way into the pitch-dark sitting room and pulled open the hinged casement of one of the tall windows. The strong wind drove raindrops through the intricate white wrought-iron screen, quickly soaking his coat. The moon was hidden behind clouds, and the city was a mass of rain-shrouded darkness without even lightning to break it. All the streetlamps had apparently been extinguished by the rain and wind; the night would hide them when they left the Palace. And any patrol that saw them out in this weather would look twice. Shivering as the wind cut through his damp coat, he shut the casement.

teɪkɪŋ ə siɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv wʌn ə ðə bæmbu-kɑɹv tʃɛɹz, hi pɹɑpt ɪz ɛlboʊz ɑn ɪz niz ən wɑtʃt ðə klɑk əbʌv ðə dɛd faɪɝpleɪs. hi kəd nɑt si ɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, bʌt hɪɹ, hi kəd hɪɹ ðə stɛɾi tɪk. hi ɹɪmeɪn moʊʃənləs, ðoʊ ðə sɪŋɡəl tʃaɪm ʌv ənʌðɝ aʊɝ meɪɾ ɪm twɪtʃ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ naʊ bʌt tə weɪt. ɪn ə lɪɾəl waɪl, ɛdʒiənɪn wəd bi ɪntʃɹədusɪŋ dʒoʊlin tə hɝ sʌldəm. ɪf ʃi ɹɪli hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə faɪn θɹi hu wəd də əz ʃi kleɪmd. ɪf dʒoʊlin dɪd nɑt pænɪk wən ðeɪ fɝs pʊt ði æɾəm ɑn hɝ. tɑm, dʒoʊlin ən ði ʌðɝz fɹəm ði ɪn wəd miɾ ɪm dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ðə dæl ɹə. ən ɪf i dɪd nɑt ɹitʃ ɪt, tɑm hæd ɡɔn əhɛd wɪð kɑɹvɪŋ ɪz tɝnəp; hi wɑz ʃʊɹ i kəd ɡɛɾ əm pæs ðə ɡeɪts wɪð ɪz fɔɹdʒd ɔɹɾɝ. ət lis ðeɪ hæɾ ə tʃæns, ɪf ɪɾ ɔl fɛl əpɑɹt. ɪf. tu mɛni ɪfs tə θɪŋk əbaʊt, naʊ. ɪt wɑz tu leɪt fəɹ ðæt.

Taking a seat on the edge of one of the bamboo-carved chairs, he propped his elbows on his knees and watched the clock above the dead fireplace. He could not see it in the darkness, but here, he could hear the steady tick. He remained motionless, though the single chime of another hour made him twitch. There was nothing now but to wait. In a little while, Egeanin would be introducing Joline to her sul'dam. If she really had been able to find three who would do as she claimed. If Joline did not panic when they first put the a'dam on her. Thom, Joline and the others from the inn would meet him just before he reached the Dal Eira. And if he did not reach it, Thom had gone ahead with carving his turnip; he was sure he could get them past the gates with his forged order. At least they had a chance, if it all fell apart. If. Too many ifs to think about, now. It was too late for that.

dɪŋ, fɹəm ðə klɑk, laɪk ə pis ə kɹɪstəl tæpt wɪð ə spun. dɪŋ. əbaʊt naʊ, dʒulɪn wəd bi meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ tə hɪz pɹɛʃəs θɛɹə, ən wɪð ɛni lʌk bɛslən wɑz stɑɹɾɪŋ tə dʒɹɪŋk hɑɹɾ əɾ ən ɪn sʌmwɛɹ. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi stʊɾ ɪn ðə blæknəs ən tʃɛkt ɪz naɪvz baɪ fil, ʌp ɪz slivz, bɪniθ ɪz koʊt, tʌkt ɪndə ðə tɝnd-daʊn tɑps ə hɪz buts, wʌn hæŋɪŋ daʊn ɪnsaɪd ðə bæk ə hɪz kɑlɝ. ðət dʌn, hi lɛf ði əpɑɹtməns. tu leɪt fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

Ding, from the clock, like a piece of crystal tapped with a spoon. Ding. About now, Juilin would be making his way to his precious Thera, and with any luck Beslan was starting to drink hard at an inn somewhere. Drawing a deep breath, he stood in the blackness and checked his knives by feel, up his sleeves, beneath his coat, tucked into the turned-down tops of his boots, one hanging down inside the back of his collar. That done, he left the apartments. Too late for anything but beginning.

ði ɛmpti hɔlweɪz i wɔkt əlɔŋ wɝ oʊnli dɪmli lɪt. wʌn stæn læmp ɪn θɹi əɹ fɔɹ kæɹid fleɪmz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə mɪɹɝz, lɪɾəl pulz ə laɪt wɪð peɪl ʃædoʊz bɪtwin ðət nɛvɝ kwaɪt ɹitʃt dɑɹknəs. hɪz buts wɝ laʊɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ taɪlz. ðeɪ ɹæŋ ɑn ðə mɑɹbəl stɛɹz. ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli ɛniwʌn əɾ ɔl wəd bi əweɪk ðɪs leɪt, bʌɾ ɪf sʌmwʌn dɪd si hɪm, hi mʌs nɑt lʊk əz ɪf i wɝ skʌlkɪŋ. tʌkɪŋ ɪz θʌmz bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt, hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf sɔntɝ. ɪt wɑz noʊ wɝs ðən stilɪŋ ə paɪ fɹəm ə kɪtʃən wɪndoʊ sɪl. ðoʊ, kʌm tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, ðə spɑɾi mɛmɹiz ðət ɹɪmeɪn ə hɪz bɔɪhʊd sim tə kənteɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ hæf-skɪn fəɹ ðəɾ ə taɪm əɹ tu.

The empty hallways he walked along were only dimly lit. One stand lamp in three or four carried flames in front of the mirrors, little pools of light with pale shadows between that never quite reached darkness. His boots were loud on the floor tiles. They rang on the marble stairs. It was unlikely anyone at all would be awake this late, but if someone did see him, he must not look as if he were skulking. Tucking his thumbs behind his belt, he made himself saunter. It was no worse than stealing a pie from a kitchen window sill. Though, come to think of it, the spotty memories that remained of his boyhood seemed to contain getting half-skinned for that a time or two.

stɛpɪŋ ɑntu ðə kɑləmd wɔk ðət bɔɹɾɝd ðə steɪbliɑɹd, hi tɝn ʌp ɪz kɑlɝ əɡɛns ðə wɪnd-dʒɹɪvən ɹeɪn flaɪɪŋ bɪtwin ðə fluɾəd waɪt kɑləmz. blʌɾi ɹeɪn! ə mæn kəd dʒɹaʊn ɪn ɪt, ivən wən i hæd nɑt ɹɪli bɪn aʊtsaɪd jɛt. ðə wɔl-maʊntəd læmps hæd bloʊn aʊt, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə pɛɹ flæŋkɪŋ ði oʊpən ɡeɪts, ði oʊnli ɡloʊɪŋ spɑts ɪn ðə pɔɹɪŋ ɹeɪn. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt ðə ɡɑɹdz aʊtsaɪd ðə ɡeɪts. ðə sintʃæn skwɑd wəd bi əz moʊʃənləs əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə plɛzən æftɝnun. vɛɹi laɪkli ði ɛbu dɑɹi, tu; ðeɪ dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ ʃoʊn ʌp ɪn ɛni weɪ. æftɝ ə moʊmən i ɹitʃɹiɾəd tə ði æntəɹum dɔɹ, tə əvɔɪd ɡɛɾɪŋ kəmplitli dʒɹɛntʃt. nʌθɪŋ muvd ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹd. wɛɹ wɝ ðeɪ? blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz, wɛɹ . . . ?

Stepping onto the columned walk that bordered the stableyard, he turned up his collar against the wind-driven rain flying between the fluted white columns. Bloody rain! A man could drown in it, even when he had not really been outside yet. The wall-mounted lamps had blown out, except for the pair flanking the open gates, the only glowing spots in the pouring rain. He could not make out the guards outside the gates. The Seanchan squad would be as motionless as if it were a pleasant afternoon. Very likely the Ebou Dari, too; they did not like being shown up in any way. After a moment he retreated to the anteroom door, to avoid getting completely drenched. Nothing moved in the stableyard. Where were they? Blood and bloody ashes, where . . . ?

ɹaɪɾɝz əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə ɡeɪts, lɛd baɪ tu mɛn əfʊt kæɹiɪŋ poʊl-læntɝnz. hi kəd nɑt kaʊn əm ɪn ðə ɹeɪn, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ tu mɛni. wəd sintʃæn mɛsənʒɝz əv læntɝn-bɛɹɝz? meɪbi, ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ. ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, hi tʊk ənʌðɝ stɛp bæk, ɪndə ði æntəɹum. ðə θɪn laɪɾ ʌv ə sɪŋɡəl stænd-læmp bɪhaɪn ɪm wɑz ɪnʌf tə tɝn ðə naɪɾ aʊtsaɪd tə ə blæŋkəɾ ə blæk, bʌɾ i pɪɹɾ ɪndə ɪt. ɪn ə fju mɪnəts, fɔɹ hɛvəli kloʊk fɪɡjɝz əpɪɹd, hɝiɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ mɛsənʒɝz, ðeɪ wəd pæs ɪm baɪ wɪθaʊɾ ə sɛkənd ɡlæns.

Riders appeared in the gates, led by two men afoot carrying pole-lanterns. He could not count them in the rain, but they were too many. Would Seanchan messengers have lantern-bearers? Maybe, in this weather. Grimacing, he took another step back, into the anteroom. The thin light of a single stand-lamp behind him was enough to turn the night outside to a blanket of black, but he peered into it. In a few minutes, four heavily cloaked figures appeared, hurrying toward the door. If they were messengers, they would pass him by without a second glance.

"jɔɹ mæn veɪnɪn ɪz ɹud," ɛdʒiənɪn ənaʊnst, θɹoʊɪŋ bæk əɹ hʊɾ əz sun ʃi wɑz bɪɑn ðə fluɾəd kɑləmz. ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, hɝ feɪs wɑz dʒʌst ə ʃædoʊ, bʌt ðə koʊlnəs ə hɝ vɔɪs wɑz səfɪʃən tə tɛl ɪm wʌɾ i wəd si bɪfɔɹ ʃi stɛpt ɪndə ði æntəɹum, fɔɹsɪŋ ɪm tə muv bæk. hɝ bɹaʊz wɝ dʒɹɔn daʊn ʃɑɹpli, ən əɹ blu aɪz wɝ aɪsi ɔɡɝz. ə ɡɹɪm-feɪs doʊmən fɑloʊd hɝ, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɹeɪn fɹəm ɪz kloʊk, ən ðən ə pɛɹ ə sʌldəm, wʌn peɪl ən jɛloʊ-hɛɹd, ði ʌðɝ wɪð lɔŋ bɹaʊn hɛɹ. hi kəd nɑt si mʌtʃ mɔɹ sɪns ðeɪ stʊd wɪð ðɛɹ hɛdz daʊn, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə flɔɹ taɪlz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ fit. "ju dɪdn tɛl mi ʃi hæd tu mɛn wɪð hɝ," ɛdʒiənɪn wɛn ɑn, pilɪŋ əɹ ɡlʌvz ɔf. ɑd, haʊ ʃi kəd meɪk ðət dʒɹɔl saʊn bɹɪsk. ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɪv ə mæn ɹum tə skwiz ɪn ə wɝd. "ɔɹ ðət mɪstʃɹəs ɑnən wɑz kʌmɪŋ. lʌkəli, aɪ noʊ haʊ tə ədæpt. plænz ɔlweɪz niɾ ədæptɪŋ, wʌns ði æŋkɝ ɪz dʒɹaɪ. spikɪŋ ə dʒɹaɪ, hæv jə bɪn ɹʌnɪŋ ɝaʊn aʊtsaɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi? aɪ tʃɹʌs jə hævənt ɡɑɾən jɝsɛlf noʊɾəst."

"Your man Vanin is rude," Egeanin announced, throwing back her hood as soon she was beyond the fluted columns. In the darkness, her face was just a shadow, but the coldness of her voice was sufficient to tell him what he would see before she stepped into the anteroom, forcing him to move back. Her brows were drawn down sharply, and her blue eyes were icy augers. A grim-faced Domon followed her, shaking rain from his cloak, and then a pair of sul'dam, one pale and yellow-haired, the other with long brown hair. He could not see much more since they stood with their heads down, studying the floor tiles in front of their feet. "You didn't tell me she had two men with her," Egeanin went on, peeling her gloves off. Odd, how she could make that drawl sound brisk. She did not give a man room to squeeze in a word. "Or that Mistress Anan was coming. Luckily, I know how to adapt. Plans always need adapting, once the anchor is dry. Speaking of dry, have you been running around outside already? I trust you haven't gotten yourself noticed."

"wʌt dʒju min, jə ədæptəd, ðə plæn?" mæt dɪmændəd, ɹeɪkɪŋ ɪz hænz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ. laɪt, ɪt wɑz wɛt! "aɪ hæɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ leɪɾ aʊt!" waɪ wɝ ðoʊz tu sʌldəm stændɪŋ soʊ stɪl? ɪf i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin stætʃuz ə ɹɪlʌktəns, ɪt wɑz ðət pɛɹ. "hu ɑɹ ðoʊz ʌðɝz aʊt ðɛɹ?"

"What do you mean, you adapted, the plan?" Mat demanded, raking his hands through his hair. Light, it was wet! "I had everything laid out!" Why were those two sul'dam standing so still? If he had ever seen statues of reluctance, it was that pair. "Who are those others out there?"

"ðə pipəl fɹəm ði ɪn," ɛdʒiənɪn sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. "fɔɹ wʌn θɪŋ, aɪ niɾ ə pɹɑpɝ ɑntʊɹɑʒ tə lʊk ɹaɪt fəɹ ɛni stʃɹit pətʃɹoʊlz. ðoʊz tu - wɔɹɾɝz? - ɑɹ mʌskjəlɝ fɛloʊz; ðeɪ meɪk ɛksələn læntɝn-bɛɹɝz. fəɹ ənʌðɝ, aɪ dɪdnt wɑnə ɹɪsk mɪsɪŋ əm ɪn ðɪs bloʊ. bɛɾɝ ðət wəɹ ɔl təɡɛðɝ fɹəm ðə stɑɹt." hɝ hɛd tɝnd, fɑloʊɪŋ ɪz ɡlænsɪz ət ðə sʌldəm. "ðiz ɑɹ sɛɾə zɑɹbi ən ɹɛnə əmeɪn. aɪ səspɛk ðeɪ hoʊp jəl fɝɡɛt ðoʊz neɪmz æftɝ tənaɪt."

"The people from the inn," Egeanin said impatiently. "For one thing, I need a proper entourage to look right for any street patrols. Those two - Warders? - are muscular fellows; they make excellent lantern-bearers. For another, I didn't want to risk missing them in this blow. Better that we are all together from the start." Her head turned, following his glances at the sul'dam. "These are Seta Zarbey and Renna Emain. I suspect they hope you'll forget those names after tonight."

ðə peɪl wʊmən flɪntʃt ət ðə neɪm sɛɾə, wɪtʃ meɪd ði ʌðɝ ɹɛnə. niðɝ ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd. wʌt hoʊl dɪɾ ɛdʒiənɪn əv ɑn ðɛm, ɛniweɪ? nɑt ðəɾ ɪt mæɾɝd. ɔl ðət mæɾɝd wɑz ðət ðeɪ wɝ hɪɹ ən ɹɛɾi tə də wʌt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi.

The pale woman flinched at the name Seta, which made the other Renna. Neither raised her head. What hold did Egeanin have on them, anyway? Not that it mattered. All that mattered was that they were here and ready to do what was necessary.

"noʊ pɔɪn stændɪŋ hɪɹ," mæt sɛd. "lɛts ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ɪt." hi lɛɾ əɹ tʃeɪnʒəz ɪn ðə plæn ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt fɝðɝ kɑmɛnt. æftɝ ɔl, laɪɪŋ ɑn ðət bɛɾ ɪn taɪlɪnz əpɑɹtməns, hi hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɹɪsk ə tʃeɪnʒ əɹ tu hɪmsɛlf.

"No point standing here," Mat said. "Let's get on with it." He let her changes in the plan go without further comment. After all, lying on that bed in Tylin's apartments, he had decided to risk a change or two himself.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 31

wʌt ði æɛlfɪn sɛd


What the Aelfinn Said

ðə sintʃæn noʊbəlwʊmən ɪkspɹɛst sɝpɹaɪz, ən noʊ lɪɾəl ɪɹɪteɪʃən, wən mæt əkʌmpəniɾ əɹ təwɔɹd ðə kɛnəlz. sɛɾə ən ɹɛnə nu ðə weɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, ən i wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ən wʌtɛvɝ ɛls i mɛn tə kæɹi. ðə tu sʌldəm fɑloʊɾ əm θɹu ðə pʊɹli lɪt hɔlz, kloʊks hæŋɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ bæks ən aɪz ɑn ðə flɔɹ. doʊmən bɹɔɾ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ əz ðoʊ ʃɛpɝɾɪŋ ðə pɛɹ. ðə bɹeɪd hæŋɪŋ daʊn ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz hɛd sweɪɾ əz ɪz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd daʊn ɛvɹi kɹɔsɪŋ kɔɹəɾɝ, ən səmtaɪmz i fɛlt əɾ ɪz weɪst əz ðoʊ ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə faɪn ə sɔɹɾ əɹ ə kʌdʒəl. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðɛm, ðə tæpəstʃɹi-laɪn hɔlweɪz wɝ saɪlən ən stɪl.

The Seanchan noblewoman expressed surprise, and no little irritation, when Mat accompanied her toward the kennels. Seta and Renna knew the way, of course, and he was supposed to be getting his cloak and whatever else he meant to carry. The two sul'dam followed them through the poorly lit halls, cloaks hanging down their backs and eyes on the floor. Domon brought up the rear as though shepherding the pair. The braid hanging down the side of his head swayed as his eyes darted down every crossing corridor, and sometimes he felt at his waist as though expecting to find a sword or a cudgel. Except for them, the tapestry-lined hallways were silent and still.

"aɪ hæv ə smɔl ɛɹən ʌp ðɛɹ," mæt toʊld ɛdʒiənɪn, əz kæʒəwəli əz i nu haʊ, ən smaɪl fəɹ hɝ. "noʊ nid tə bɑðɝ jɝsɛlf. woʊn teɪk ə mɪnut." hɪz vɛɹi bɛst smaɪl sim tə meɪk noʊ mɔɹ ɪmpɹɛʃən ðən ɪt hæd jɛstɝdeɪ ɪn əɹ ɹum ət ði ɪn.

"I have a small errand up there," Mat told Egeanin, as casually as he knew how, and smiled for her. "No need to bother yourself. Won't take a minute." His very best smile seemed to make no more impression than it had yesterday in her room at the inn.

"ɪf jə ɹɛk mi naʊ - " ʃi ɡɹaʊld ɪn ə θɹɛɾənɪŋ toʊn.

"If you wreck me now - " she growled in a threatening tone.

"dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ u plæn ðɪs," hi mʌɾɝd, ən ʃi ɡɹʌntɪd. laɪt, wɪmən ɔlweɪz sim tə θɪŋk ðeɪ kəd dʒʌst stɛp ɪn ən teɪk oʊvɝ, ən də ə bɛɾɝ dʒɑb ðən ðə mæn huz dʒɑb ɪt wɑz!

"Just remember who planned this," he muttered, and she grunted. Light, women always seemed to think they could just step in and take over, and do a better job than the man whose job it was!

ət list ʃi meɪd noʊ fɝðɝ kəmpleɪnt. ðeɪ klaɪm kwɪkli tə ðə tɑp flɔɹ ə ðə pæləs, ðən ʌp ðə dɑɹk nɛɹoʊ stɛɹz tə ðə spɹɔlɪŋ æɾɪk. oʊnli ə fju ʌv ðə læmps wɝ lɪt, nɑɾ ivən əz mɛni əz ɪn ðə hɔlweɪz bɪloʊ, ən ðə meɪz ə nɛɹoʊ kɔɹɪɾɝz bɪtwin ðə taɪni wʊɾən ɹumz wɑz ə mæs ə peɪl ʃædoʊz. nʌθɪŋ muvd, ən mæt bɹiðd ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ izəli. hi wʊɾə bɹiðd iziɝ stɪl ɪf ɹɛnə hæd nɑt saɪd wɪð ɑbviəs ɹɪlif.

At least she made no further complaint. They climbed quickly to the top floor of the Palace, then up the dark narrow stairs to the sprawling attic. Only a few of the lamps were lit, not even as many as in the hallways below, and the maze of narrow corridors between the tiny wooden rooms was a mass of pale shadows. Nothing moved, and Mat breathed a little more easily. He would have breathed easier still if Renna had not sighed with obvious relief.

ʃi ən sɛɾə nu wɛɹ ðə vɛɹiəs deɪmeɪn wɝ kɛnɪld, ən ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzækli hɝi, ðeɪ meɪd noʊ dɪleɪ ɪn hɛɾɪŋ dipɝ ɪn ði æɾɪk, pɝhæps kəz doʊmən stɪl wɔkt ət ðɛɹ hilz. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ən ɪmədʒ tə ɪnspaɪɹ kɑnfəɾəns. wɛl, ɪf wɪʃɪz wɝ hɔɹsəz, bɛɡɝz wəd ɹaɪd. ə mæn meɪd də wɪð wʌɾ i hæd. ɪspɛʃli wən i hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs.

She and Seta knew where the various damane were kenneled, and if they did not exactly hurry, they made no delay in heading deeper in the attic, perhaps because Domon still walked at their heels. It was not an image to inspire confidence. Well, if wishes were horses, beggars would ride. A man made do with what he had. Especially when he had no choice.

ɛdʒiənɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ə læs hɑɹd lʊk ən ɡɹaʊld əɡɛn, wɝdləsli ðɪs taɪm, ðən stʃɹoʊɾ ɔf æftɝ ði ʌðɝz, hɝ kloʊk flɛɹɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. hi ɡɹɪməst əɾ əɹ bæk. ðə weɪ ðə wʊmən wɔkt, jə kəd teɪk əɹ fəɹ ə mæn ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑt wɛɹɪŋ ə dʒɹɛs.

Egeanin gave him a last hard look and growled again, wordlessly this time, then strode off after the others, her cloak flaring behind her. He grimaced at her back. The way the woman walked, you could take her for a man if she was not wearing a dress.

hi dɪɾ əv ən ɛɹənd, ən meɪbi nɑt soʊ smɔl. ɪt wɑz nɑt sʌmθɪŋ i wɑntəd tə du. laɪt, hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə tɔk hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ʌv ɪt! ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ i blʌɾi wɛl hæd tə du, ðoʊ. əz sun əz ɛdʒiənɪn vænɪʃt ɝaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ æftɝ doʊmən ən ði ʌðɝz, hi dɑɹɾɪd fəɹ ðə nɪɹəst ɹum ðəɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd kənteɪnɪŋ wʌn ə ðə si foʊk.

He did have an errand, and maybe not so small. It was not something he wanted to do. Light, he had tried to talk himself out of it! It was something he bloody well had to do, though. As soon as Egeanin vanished around a corner after Domon and the others, he darted for the nearest room that he remembered containing one of the Sea Folk.

izɪŋ oʊpən ðə pleɪn wʊɾən dɔɹ saʊnləsli, hi slɪpt ɪndə ðə pɪtʃ-blæk ɪntɪɹiɝ. ðə slipɪŋ wʊmən ɪnsaɪd snɔɹd wɪð ə ɹæspɪŋ saʊnd. sloʊli hi fɛlt ɪz weɪ fɔɹwɝɾ əntɪl ɪz ni bʌmpt ɪndə ðə bɛd, ðən fɛlt əlɔŋ ðə maʊn bɪniθ ðə blæŋkəts mɔɹ kwɪkli, faɪndɪŋ əɹ hɛd dʒʌst ɪn taɪm tə klæmp ɪz hæn oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ əz ʃi dʒɝkt əweɪk.

Easing open the plain wooden door soundlessly, he slipped into the pitch-black interior. The sleeping woman inside snored with a rasping sound. Slowly he felt his way forward until his knee bumped into the bed, then felt along the mound beneath the blankets more quickly, finding her head just in time to clamp his hand over her mouth as she jerked awake.

"aɪ wɑn jə tə ænsɝ ə kwɛstʃən," hi wɪspɝd. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, wʌɾ ɪf i hæd mɪsteɪkən ðə ɹum? wʌɾ ɪf ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ ə wɪndfɪndɝ əɾ ɔl, bʌt wʌn ə ðə blʌɾi sintʃæn wɪmən? "wʌt wəd jə də ɪf aɪ tʊk ðət kɑlɝ ɔf jəɹ nɛk?" lɪftɪŋ ɪz hænd, hi hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ.

"I want you to answer a question," he whispered. Blood and ashes, what if he had mistaken the room? What if this was not a Windfinder at all, but one of the bloody Seanchan women? "What would you do if I took that collar off your neck?" Lifting his hand, he held his breath.

"aɪ wəd fɹi maɪ sɪstɝz, ɪf ɪt plizɪz ðə laɪt ðət ʃəd hæpən." ðə si foʊk æksɛns ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs meɪɾ ɪm bɹið əɡɛn. "ðə laɪt bi wɪlɪŋ, wi wəd kɹɔs ðə hɑɹbɝ, sʌmhaʊ, tə wɛɹ əɹ pipəl ɑɹ hɛld, ən fɹi əz mɛni əz wi wɝ eɪbəl." ði ənsin wʊmənz vɔɪs ɹɪmeɪn loʊ, bʌt ɡɹu fɪɹsɝ baɪ ðə wɝd. "ðə laɪt bi wɪlɪŋ, wi wəd teɪk bæk əɹ ʃɪps, ən faɪɾ əɹ weɪ tə si. naʊ! ɪf ðɪs ɪz ə tʃɹɪk, pʌnɪʃ mi fəɹ ɪɾ ən bi dʌn, əɹ kɪl mi fəɹ ɪt. aɪ wɑz ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə jildɪŋ, ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp maɪsɛlf, ən ðə ʃeɪm ə ðət wɪl bɝn mi fɝɛvɝ, bʌt juv ɹimaɪndəd mi hu aɪ æm, ən naʊ əl nɛvɝ jild. dʒju hɪɹ mi? nɛvɝ!"

"I would free my sisters, if it pleases the Light that should happen." The Sea Folk accents in the darkness made him breathe again. "The Light be willing, we would cross the harbor, somehow, to where our people are held, and free as many as we were able." The unseen woman's voice remained low, but grew fiercer by the word. "The Light be willing, we would take back our ships, and fight our way to sea. Now! If this is a trick, punish me for it and be done, or kill me for it. I was on the brink of yielding, of giving up myself, and the shame of that will burn me forever, but you have reminded me who I am, and now I will never yield. Do you hear me? Never!"

"æn ɪf aɪ æsk jə tə weɪt fəɹ θɹi aʊɝz?" hi æskt, stɪl kɹaʊtʃɪŋ oʊvɝ hɝ. "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ði æθɑn maɪɹ dʒʌdʒɪŋ ðə pæsədʒ ʌv ən aʊɝ wɪðɪn mɪnəts." ðət fɛloʊ hæd nɑt bɪn hɪm, bʌt ðə mɛmɹi wɑz ɪz naʊ, pæsədʒ ɑn ən æθɑn maɪɹ vɛsəl fɹəm ælɔɹələn tə bɑɹɑʃtə, ən ə bɹaɪt-aɪd si foʊk wʊmən u wɛpt wən ʃi ɹəfjuz tə fɑloʊ hɪm əʃɔɹ.

"And if I asked you to wait for three hours?" he asked, still crouching over her. "I remember the Atha'an Miere judging the passage of an hour within minutes." That fellow had not been him, but the memory was his now, passage on an Atha'an Miere vessel from Allorallen to Barashta, and a bright-eyed Sea Folk woman who wept when she refused to follow him ashore.

"hu ɑɹ ju?" ʃi wɪspɝd.

"Who are you?" she whispered.

"aɪm kɔl mæt kɔθən, ɪf ɪt meɪks ə dɪfɝəns."

"I'm called Mat Cauthon, if it makes a difference."

"aɪ æm nɛstɛl dɪn sækʊɹə saʊθ stɑɹ, mæt kɔθən." hi hɝɾ əɹ spɪt, ən nu wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. hi spæɾ ɑn ɪz oʊn pɑm, ən ðɛɹ tu hænz faʊn itʃ ʌðɝ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. hɝz wɑz əz kælʌzd əz hɪz, hɝ ɡɹɪp stʃɹɔŋ. "aɪ wɪl weɪt," ʃi sɛd. "æn əl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ju. jə ɑɹ ə ɡɹeɪɾ ən ɡʊd mæn."

"I am Nestelle din Sakura South Star, Mat Cauthon." He heard her spit, and knew what she was doing. He spat on his own palm, and their two hands found each other in the darkness. Hers was as callused as his, her grip strong. "I will wait," she said. "And I will remember you. You are a great and good man."

"aɪm dʒʌst ə ɡæmblɝ," hi toʊl hɝ. hɝ hænd ɡaɪɾəd ɪz tə ðə sɛɡmɛntɪd kɑlɝ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, ən ɪt keɪm oʊpən fəɹ ɪm wɪð ə mətælɪk snɪk. ʃi dʒɹu ə vɛɹi lɔŋ bɹɛθ.

"I'm just a gambler," he told her. Her hand guided his to the segmented collar around her neck, and it came open for him with a metallic snick. She drew a very long breath.

hi oʊnli hæd tə pʊɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz ɪn ðə pɹɑpɝ pleɪsəz ən ʃoʊ hɝ ðə tʃɹɪk wʌns bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɡɑɾ ɪt, bʌɾ i meɪɾ əɹ kloʊs ən oʊpən ðə kɑlɝ θɹi taɪmz bɪfɔɹ i wɑz sæɾəsfaɪd. ɪf i wɑz gɑnə də ðɪs, hi maɪɾ əz wɛl meɪk ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz dʌn ɹaɪt. "θɹi aʊɝz, əz nɪɹ əz jə kæn," hi ɹimaɪndəd hɝ.

He only had to put her fingers in the proper places and show her the trick once before she got it, but he made her close and open the collar three times before he was satisfied. If he was going to do this, he might as well make sure it was done right. "Three hours, as near as you can," he reminded her.

"æz nɪɹ əz aɪ kæn," ʃi wɪspɝd.

"As near as I can," she whispered.

ʃi kəd ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪf i kəd nɑt teɪk ə tʃæns, ðən u kʊd? hi wɑz ðə mæn wɪð ðə lʌk, æftɝ ɔl. meɪbi ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn ɔl ðət mʌtʃ ɪn ɛvəɾəns leɪtli, bʌɾ i hæd faʊn ɛdʒiənɪn dʒʌst wən i niɾəd hɝ. mæt kɔθən stɪl hæd ðə lʌk.

She could ruin everything, but if he could not take a chance, then who could? He was the man with the luck, after all. Maybe it had not been all that much in evidence lately, but he had found Egeanin just when he needed her. Mat Cauthon still had the luck.

slɪpɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum əz kwaɪətli əz i hæɾ ɛntɝd, hi kloʊz ðə dɔɹ. ən ɔlmoʊs tʃoʊkt ɑn ɪz tʌŋ. hi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə bæk ʌv ə waɪd, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən ɪn ə ɹɛd-pænəl dʒɹɛs. bɪɑn əɹ stʊɾ ɛdʒiənɪn dʒɹɔn ʌp tə hɝ fʊl haɪt, ən tɛslɪn, kənɛktəd tə ɹɛnə baɪ ðə sɪlvɝ lɛŋθ ʌv ən æɾəm. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ə doʊmən əɹ sɛɾə əɹ ðɪs idɛzinə hi stɪl hæd nɑt sin tə noʊ hɝ. ɛdʒiənɪn lʊk fɪɹs əz ə laɪoʊnəs oʊvɝ əɹ kɪl, bʌt tɛslɪn wɑz waɪd-aɪɾ ən tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, tɛɹəfaɪd hæf aʊɾ ə hɝ wɪts, ən ɹɛnəz maʊθ hæɾ ə twɪs ðət sɛd ʃi maɪt sɪk ʌp ɛni moʊmənt naʊ.

Slipping out of the room as quietly as he had entered, he closed the door. And almost choked on his tongue. He was staring at the back of a wide, gray-haired woman in a red-paneled dress. Beyond her stood Egeanin drawn up to her full height, and Teslyn, connected to Renna by the silver length of an a'dam. There was no sign of Domon or Seta or this Edesina he still had not seen to know her. Egeanin looked fierce as a lioness over her kill, but Teslyn was wide-eyed and trembling, terrified half out of her wits, and Renna's mouth had a twist that said she might sick up any moment now.

nɑt dɛɹɪŋ tə bɹið, hi tʊk ə kɔʃəs stɛp təwɔɹd ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz hænz. ɪf i oʊvɝpaʊɝɾ əɹ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd kɹaɪ aʊt, ðeɪ kəd haɪd hɝ. . . . wɛɹ? sɛɾə ən ɹɛnə wəd wɑnə kɪl hɝ. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt hoʊld ɛdʒiənɪn hæɾ ɑn ðɛm, ðə wʊmən kəd neɪm ðɛm.

Not daring to breathe, he took a cautious step toward the gray-haired woman, stretching out his hands. If he overpowered her before she could cry out, they could hide her. . . . Where? Seta and Renna would want to kill her. No matter what hold Egeanin had on them, the woman could name them.

ɛdʒiənɪnz stɝn blu aɪz kɑɾ ɪz oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd sʌldəmz ʃoʊldɝ fəɹ ə bɹif ɪnstən bɪfɔɹ foʊkəsɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz feɪs əɡɛn. "noʊ!" ʃi sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ taɪm tə weɪst wɪð tʃeɪnʒəz tə maɪ plænz, naʊ. ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ sɛɾ aɪ kəd juz ɛni deɪmeɪn aɪ wɪʃ, dɝsʌldəm."

Egeanin's stern blue eyes caught his over the gray-haired sul'dam's shoulder for a brief instant before focusing on the other woman's face again. "No!" she said sharply. "There is no time to waste with changes to my plans, now. The High Lady Suroth said I could use any damane I wish, Der'sul'dam."

"ʌv kɔɹs, maɪ leɪɾi," ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən ɹɪplaɪd, saʊndɪŋ kənfjuzd. "aɪ mɪɹli pɔɪntəɾ aʊt ðət tɛsi ɪz nɑt ɹɪli tʃɹeɪnd. aɪ æktʃəli  keɪm ʌp tə lʊk ɪn ɑn ʃiz ɪz kʌmɪŋ əlɔŋ vɛɹi naɪsli, naʊ, maɪ leɪɾi, bʌt . . ."

"Of course, my Lady," the gray-haired woman replied, sounding confused. "I merely pointed out that Tessi is not really trained. I actually came up to look in on her. She is coming along very nicely, now, my Lady, but . . ."

stɪl nɑt bɹiðɪŋ, mæt bækt əweɪ ɑn tɪptoʊ. hi iz daʊn ðə dɑɹk nɛɹoʊ stɛɹz juzɪŋ ɪz hænz əɡɛns ðə wɔlz tə səpɔɹɾ əz mʌtʃ ə hɪz weɪɾ əz pɑsəbəl. hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛni kɹiki stɛps kʌmɪŋ ʌp, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ tʃænsəz, ən ðən ðəɹ wɝ tʃænsəz. ə mæn tʊk ðoʊz i hæd tə, ən dɪd nɑt pɹɛs ɪz lʌk ʌðɝwaɪz. ðət wɑz ðə weɪ tə ə lɔŋ laɪf, sʌmθɪŋ i wɪʃt fəɹ vɛɹi mʌtʃ.

Still not breathing, Mat backed away on tiptoe. He eased down the dark narrow stairs using his hands against the walls to support as much of his weight as possible. He did not remember any creaky steps coming up, but there were chances, and then there were chances. A man took those he had to, and did not press his luck otherwise. That was the way to a long life, something he wished for very much.

ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə stɛps, hi pɔz tə sʌk ɪn ɛɹ əntɪl ɪz hɑɹt stɑpt paʊndɪŋ. əntɪl ɪt sloʊɾ ə lɪɾəl, ɛniweɪ. ɪt maɪt nɑt stɑp paʊndɪŋ tɪl təmɑɹoʊ. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i hæd dʒɹɔn bɹɛθ sɪns siɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən. laɪt! ɪf ɛdʒiənɪn θɔt ʃi hæd ðə mæɾɝ ɪn hænd, wɛl ən blʌɾi ɡʊd, bʌt dʒʌs ðə seɪm, laɪt! ʃi mʌst əv nusəz ɝaʊn ðə tu sʌldəmz nɛks! hɝ plæn? wɛl, ʃi hæd bɪn ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt noʊ taɪm tə weɪst. hi ɹæn.

At the foot of the steps, he paused to suck in air until his heart stopped pounding. Until it slowed a little, anyway. It might not stop pounding till tomorrow. He was not sure he had drawn breath since seeing the gray-haired woman. Light! If Egeanin thought she had the matter in hand, well and bloody good, but just the same, Light! She must have nooses around the two sul'dam's necks! Her plan? Well, she had been right about no time to waste. He ran.

hi ɹæn əntɪl ɪz hɪp ɡeɪv ə ʃɑɹp twɪnʒ, ən i stʌmbəld ɪndə ə tɝkwɔɪz-ɪnleɪd teɪbəl. hi kɑɾ ə sʌmɝ tæpəstʃɹi tə kip fɹəm fɔlɪŋ, ən ðə bɹaɪt-flaʊɝd lɛŋθ ə sɪlk tɔɹ fɹi fɹəm ðə jɛloʊ mɑɹbəl kɔɹnəs fəɹ hæf ɪts lɛŋθ. ðə tɔl waɪt pɔɹsələn veɪs sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə teɪbəl tɑpəld, ʃæɾɝɪŋ ɑn ðə blu-ænd-ɹɛd flɔɹ taɪlz wɪð ə kɹæʃ ðəɾ ɛkoʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə hɔlweɪ. æftɝ ðæt, hi hɑbəld. bʌɾ i hɑbəld əz fæst əz ɛni mæn ɛvɝ hæd. ɪf ɛniwʌn keɪm tə ɪnvɛstəɡeɪt ðə nɔɪz, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt gɑnə faɪn mæt kɔθən stændɪŋ oʊvɝ ðət mɛs, əɹ wɪðɪn tu kɔɹɪɾɝz ʌv ɪt.

He ran until his hip gave a sharp twinge, and he stumbled into a turquoise-inlaid table. He caught a summer tapestry to keep from falling, and the bright-flowered length of silk tore free from the yellow marble cornice for half its length. The tall white porcelain vase sitting on the table toppled, shattering on the blue-and-red floor tiles with a crash that echoed along the hallway. After that, he hobbled. But he hobbled as fast as any man ever had. If anyone came to investigate the noise, they were not going to find Mat Cauthon standing over that mess, or within two corridors of it.

lɪmpɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ tə taɪlɪnz əpɑɹtməns, hi wɑz əkɹɔs ðə sɪɾɪŋ ɹum ən ɪndə ðə bɛdtʃeɪmbɝ bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪz ðət ðə læmps wɝ ɔl lɪt. ðə bleɪz ɪn ðə bɛdʒɹum faɪɝpleɪs hæd bɪn ɹɪnud wɪð splɪt bɪləts fɹəm ðə ɡɪldɪd wʊd-bæskət. taɪlɪn, hɝ ɑɹmz dʌbəl bɪhaɪn əɹ tə wɝk əɾ əɹ bʌɾənz, lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪz ɛntʃɹəns ən fɹaʊnd. hɝ dɑɹk ɡɹin ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs wɑz ɹɪŋkəld. ðə faɪɝ kɹækəld ən spæɾ ə ʃaʊɝ ə spɑɹks ʌp ðə tʃɪmni.

Limping the rest of the way to Tylin's apartments, he was across the sitting room and into the bedchamber before he realized that the lamps were all lit. The blaze in the bedroom fireplace had been renewed with split billets from the gilded wood-basket. Tylin, her arms doubled behind her to work at her buttons, looked up at his entrance and frowned. Her dark green riding dress was wrinkled. The fire crackled and spat a shower of sparks up the chimney.

"aɪ dɪdn ɪkspɛk jə bæk jɛt," hi sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɪŋk. ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ i hæd kənsɪɾɝd ɡoʊɪŋ əmɪs tənaɪt, taɪlɪn ɹɪtɝnɪŋ ɝli hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ɪn ɪt. hɪz bɹeɪn sim fɹoʊzən.

"I didn't expect you back yet," he said, trying to think. Of everything he had considered going amiss tonight, Tylin returning early had never been in it. His brain seemed frozen.

"sjuɹɔθ lɝn ðəɾ ən ɑɹmi hæd vænɪʃt ɪn mʊɹændi," taɪlɪn ɹɪplaɪd sloʊli, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ. ʃi spoʊk æbsənli, ɡɪvɪŋ wʌt ʃi sɛɾ ə fɹækʃən ə ði ətɛnʃən ʃi pʊɾ ɪndə stʌɾiɪŋ mæt kɔθən. "wʌɾ ɑɹmi, əɹ haʊ ɛni ɑɹmi kən vænɪʃ, aɪ doʊnt noʊ, bʌt ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd əɹ ɹɪtɝn wɑz ɝdʒənt. wi lɛft ɛvɹiwʌn bɪhaɪnd, keɪm əz fæst əz wʌn ə ðə bists kəd kæɹi dʒʌs ðə tu ʌv əs ən ðə wʊmən u hændəld ɪt, ən kɑməndɪɹd tu hɔɹsəz tə ɹaɪɾ ʌp fɹəm ðə dɑks əloʊn. ʃi ivən wɛn tə ðəɾ ɪn əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ wɛɹ ɔl ðɛɹ ɔfəsɝz ɑɹ ɪnstɛɾ ə kʌmɪŋ hɪɹ. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ʃi ɪntɛnz tə slip tənaɪt, əɹ lɛɾ ɛni ʌv ðɛm. . . ."

"Suroth learned that an army had vanished in Murandy," Tylin replied slowly, straightening. She spoke absently, giving what she said a fraction of the attention she put into studying Mat Cauthon. "What army, or how any army can vanish, I don't know, but she decided her return was urgent. We left everyone behind, came as fast as one of the beasts could carry just the two of us and the woman who handled it, and commandeered two horses to ride up from the docks alone. She even went to that inn across the square where all their officers are instead of coming here. I don't think she intends to sleep tonight, or let any of them. . . ."

lɛɾɪŋ əɹ wɝdz tʃɹeɪl ɔf, taɪlɪn ɡlaɪɾɪd tə hɪm əkɹɔs ðə kɑɹpəts ən fɪŋɡɝɾ ɪz pleɪn ɡɹin koʊt. "ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɪð hævɪŋ ə pɛt fɑks," ʃi mɝmɝd, "ɪz ðət sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ɪt ɹɪmɛmbɝz ɪts ə fɑks." ðoʊz bɪɡ dɑɹk aɪz pɪɹɾ ʌp ət hɪm. sʌɾənli ʃi siz tu hænfəlz ə hɪz hɛɹ ən pʊld ɪz hɛd daʊn fəɹ ə kɪs ðət kɝld ɪz toʊz ɪn ɪz buts. "ðæt," ʃi sɛd bɹɛθləsli wən ʃi faɪnəli lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ, "ɪz tə ʃoʊ jə haʊ mʌtʃ əl mɪs ju." wɪθaʊt ðə slaɪɾəst tʃeɪnʒ ʌv ɪkspɹɛʃən, ʃi slæpt ɪm soʊ hɑɹd ðət sɪlvɝ flɛks floʊɾəd ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz aɪz. "æn ðəɾ ɪz fəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə snik əweɪ waɪl aɪ wɑz ɡɔn." tɝnɪŋ əɹ bæk, ʃi pʊld əɹ meɪn ə ɹeɪvən hɛɹ oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ. "əndu maɪ bʌɾənz fəɹ mi, maɪ pɹɪɾi lɪɾəl fɑks. wi ɝaɪv soʊ leɪɾ aɪ dɪsaɪɾɪd nɑt tə weɪk maɪ meɪdz, bʌt ðiz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz meɪk bʌɾənz ɔl bʌɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl. wʌn læs naɪt təɡɛðɝ, ən təmɑɹoʊ əl sɛn jə ɑn jəɹ weɪ."

Letting her words trail off, Tylin glided to him across the carpets and fingered his plain green coat. "The trouble with having a pet fox," she murmured, "is that sooner or later it remembers it is a fox." Those big dark eyes peered up at him. Suddenly she seized two handfuls of his hair and pulled his head down for a kiss that curled his toes in his boots. "That," she said breathlessly when she finally let him go, "is to show you how much I will miss you." Without the slightest change of expression, she slapped him so hard that silver flecks floated in front of his eyes. "And that is for trying to sneak away while I was gone." Turning her back, she pulled her mane of raven hair over one shoulder. "Undo my buttons for me, my pretty little fox. We arrived so late I decided not to wake my maids, but these fingernails make buttons all but impossible. One last night together, and tomorrow I will send you on your way."

mæt ɹʌbd ɪz tʃik. ðə wʊmən cʊɾə bɹoʊkən ə tuθ fəɹ hɪm! ət list ʃi hæd dʒɑɹɾ ɪz θɔts lus. ɪf sjuɹɔθ wɑz ət ðə wɑndɝɪŋ wʊmən, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ðə tɑɹɑsɪn pæləs tə si wʌt ʃi ʃəd nɑt. hɪz lʌk wɑz stɪl ɡʊd. hi oʊnli hæd tə wɝi əbaʊt ðə wʊmən ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. ði oʊnli weɪ wɑz fɔɹwɝd.

Mat rubbed his cheek. The woman could have broken a tooth for him! At least she had jarred his thoughts loose. If Suroth was at The Wandering Woman, she was not in the Tarasin Palace to see what she should not. His luck was still good. He only had to worry about the woman in front of him. The only way was forward.

"aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tənaɪt," hi sɛd, pʊɾɪŋ ɪz hænz ɑn taɪlɪnz ʃoʊldɝz. "ænd wən aɪ du, aɪm teɪkɪŋ ə kʌpəl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm ði æɾɪk. kʌm wɪð mi. əl sɛn tɑm ən dʒulɪn tə faɪn bɛslən, ən - "

"I'm going tonight," he said, putting his hands on Tylin's shoulders. "And when I do, I'm taking a couple of Aes Sedai from the attic. Come with me. I'll send Thom and Juilin to find Beslan, and - "

"ɡoʊ wɪð ju?" ʃi sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, muvɪŋ əweɪ ən tɝnɪŋ tə feɪs hɪm. hɝ pɹaʊd feɪs wɑz skɔɹnfəl. "pɪdʒən, aɪ doʊn fænsi bɪkʌmɪŋ jəɹ pɹɪɾi, ən aɪ hæv noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə bɪkʌmɪŋ ə ɹɛfjʊdʒi. əɹ ə livɪŋ ɔltɑɹə tə huɛvɝ ðə sintʃæn tʃuz tə ɹipleɪs mi. aɪm ðə kwin ʌv ɔltɑɹə, ðə laɪt hɛlp mi, ən əl nɑɾ əbændən maɪ kʌntʃɹi naʊ. jə ɹɪli min tə tʃɹaɪ fɹiɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ? aɪ wɪʃ jə wɛl ɪn ɪt, ɪf jə mʌst - aɪ wɪʃ ðə sɪstɝz wɛl - bʌɾ ɪt simz ə ɡʊd weɪ tə hæv jəɹ hɛd stʌk ʌp ɑn ə spaɪk, swiɾəlɪŋ. ɪts tu pɹɪɾi ə hɛd tə bi kʌɾ ɔf ən kʌvɝd wɪð tɑɹ."

"Go with you?" she said incredulously, moving away and turning to face him. Her proud face was scornful. "Pigeon, I don't fancy becoming your pretty, and I have no intention of becoming a refugee. Or of leaving Altara to whoever the Seanchan choose to replace me. I am the Queen of Altara, the Light help me, and I will not abandon my country now. You really mean to try freeing the Aes Sedai? I wish you well in it, if you must - I wish the sisters well - but it seems a good way to have your head stuck up on a spike, sweetling. It's too pretty a head to be cut off and covered with tar."

hi tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk əɹ baɪ ðə ʃoʊldɝz əɡɛn, bʌt ʃi stɛp bæk wɪð ə pɪɹsɪŋ lʊk ðət meɪɾ ɪz hænz fɔl. hi pʊɾ ɛvɹi skɹæp ə ɝdʒənsi hi kəd faɪn ɪndə hɪz vɔɪs. "taɪlɪn, aɪ meɪd ʃʊɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi nu aɪ wɑz livɪŋ, ən æŋkʃəs tə bi ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ jə ɹɪtɝnd, soʊ ðə sintʃæn wəd noʊ jə dɪdn əv ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪt, bʌt naʊ - "

He tried to take her by the shoulders again, but she stepped back with a piercing look that made his hands fall. He put every scrap of urgency he could find into his voice. "Tylin, I made sure everybody knew I was leaving, and anxious to be gone before you returned, so the Seanchan would know you didn't have anything to do with it, but now - "

"aɪ ɹɪtɝn ən sɝpɹaɪz ju," ʃi bɹoʊk ɪn fɪɹsli, "æn jə taɪd mi ʌp ən lɛf mi ʌndɝ ðə bɛd. wən aɪm dɪskʌvɝɾ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, əl bi fjʊɹiəs wɪð ju. aʊtʃɹeɪdʒd!" ʃi smaɪld, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd, nɑt ðət fɑɹ fɹəm aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ naʊ, wʌtɛvɝ ʃi sɛɾ əbaʊt fɑksəz ən sɛndɪŋ ɪm ɑn ɪz weɪ. "aɪ wɪl ɔfɝ ə baʊnti fəɹ ju, ən tɛl tuɑn ʃi kən baɪ jə wən jəɹ kɑt, ɪf ʃi stɪl wɑns ju. əl bi ðə pɝfək haɪ blʌɾ ɪn maɪ æŋɡɝ. ðəl bɪliv mi, dʌklɪŋ. aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi toʊl sjuɹɔθ aɪ ɪntɛn tə ʃeɪv maɪ hɛɹ."

"I returned and surprised you," she broke in fiercely, "and you tied me up and left me under the bed. When I am discovered in the morning, I will be furious with you. Outraged!" She smiled, but her eyes glittered, not that far from outrage now, whatever she said about foxes and sending him on his way. "I will offer a bounty for you, and tell Tuon she can buy you when you're caught, if she still wants you. I will be the perfect High Blood in my anger. They'll believe me, duckling. I've already told Suroth I intend to shave my hair."

mæt ɡɹɪnd wikli. hi sɝɾənli bɪliv hɝ. ʃi ɹɪli wəd sɛl ɪm ɪf i wɑz kɑt. "wɪmən ɑɹ ə meɪz θɹu bɹaɪɹz ɪn ðə naɪt," ði oʊl seɪɪŋ wɛnt, ən ivən ðeɪ də nɑt noʊ ðə weɪ.

Mat grinned weakly. He certainly believed her. She really would sell him if he was caught. "Women are a maze through briars in the night," the old saying went, and even they do not know the way.

taɪlɪn ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn supɝvaɪzɪŋ əɹ oʊn baɪndɪŋ. ʃi sim tə teɪk pɹaɪɾ ɪn ɪt. ʃi hæd tə bi baʊnd wɪð stʃɹɪps kʌt fɹəm əɹ skɝts, əz ɪf ʃi hæd kʌm ɑn ɪm baɪ sɝpɹaɪz ən bɪn oʊvɝpaʊɝd. ðə nɑts hæd tə bi taɪt, soʊ ʃi kəd nɑɾ ɪskeɪp haʊɛvɝ ʃi stʃɹʌɡəld, ən ʃi dɪd stʃɹʌɡəl əɡɛnst əm wʌns ðeɪ wɝ taɪd, θɹæʃɪŋ əbaʊt hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf ðəɾ ɪt simd ʃi ɹɪli wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt fɹi. meɪbi ʃi wɑz; hɝ maʊθ twɪstəɾ ɪn ə snɑɹl wən ʃi feɪld. hɝ æŋkəlz ən ɹɪsts hæd tə bi taɪd təɡɛðɝ ɪn ðə smɔl ə hɝ bæk, ən ə liʃ ɹʌn fɹəm əɹ nɛk tə wʌn lɛɡ ʌv ðə bɛd, soʊ ʃi kəd nɑt ɹɪɡəl əɹ weɪ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ ən aʊɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl. ən ə kɔɹs, ʃi kəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə ʃaʊt fəɹ hɛlp, iðɝ. wən i dʒɛnli pʊʃt wʌn ə hɝ sɪlk kɝtʃəfs ɪndə hɝ maʊθ ən taɪɾ ənʌðɝ tə hoʊld ɪɾ ɪn pleɪs, ʃi smaɪld, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz wɝ fɪɹs. ə meɪz θɹu bɹaɪɹz ɪn ðə naɪt.

Tylin insisted on supervising her own binding. She seemed to take pride in it. She had to be bound with strips cut from her skirts, as if she had come on him by surprise and been overpowered. The knots had to be tight, so she could not escape however she struggled, and she did struggle against them once they were tied, thrashing about hard enough that it seemed she really was trying to get free. Maybe she was; her mouth twisted in a snarl when she failed. Her ankles and wrists had to be tied together in the small of her back, and a leash run from her neck to one leg of the bed, so she could not wriggle her way across the floor and out into the hall. And of course, she could not be able to shout for help, either. When he gently pushed one of her silk kerchiefs into her mouth and tied another to hold it in place, she smiled, but her eyes were fierce. A maze through briars in the night.

"aɪ æm gɑnə mɪs ju," hi sɛd kwaɪətli əz i pʊʃt əɹ bɪniθ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə bɛd. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i ɹɪli wʊd. laɪt! hɝidli hi ɡæðɝɾ ɪz kloʊk ən ɡlʌvz ən spɪɹ, ən snʌf ðə læmps ɑn ɪz weɪ aʊt. wɪmən kəd tæŋɡəl ə mæn ɪn ðət meɪz bɪfɔɹ i nu ɪt.

"I am going to miss you," he said quietly as he pushed her beneath the edge of the bed. To his surprise, he realized that he really would. Light! Hurriedly he gathered his cloak and gloves and spear, and snuffed the lamps on his way out. Women could tangle a man in that maze before he knew it.

ðə hɔlweɪz ɹɪmeɪn ɛmpti, ən saɪlən seɪv fəɹ ðə saʊn ə hɪz oʊn lɪmpɪŋ butstɛps, bʌɾ ɛni ɹɪlif i fɛl vænɪʃt wən i ɹitʃt ði æntəɹum ɔf ðə steɪbliɑɹd.

The hallways remained empty, and silent save for the sound of his own limping bootsteps, but any relief he felt vanished when he reached the anteroom off the stableyard.

ðə sɪŋɡəl lɪt stænd-læmp stɪl kæst ə weɪvɝɪŋ laɪɾ ɑn ðoʊz ɪnɛvəɾəbəl flaʊɝd tæpəstʃɹiz, bʌt dʒulɪn ən ɪz wʊmən wɝ nɑt ðɛɹ, ən niðɝ wɝ ɛdʒiənɪn ən ði ʌðɝz. wɪð ðə taɪm i hæd teɪkən ʌp wɪð taɪlɪn, ðeɪ ɔl ʃʊɾə bɪn weɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪm baɪ naʊ. bɪɑn ðə kɑləmd wɔk ðə ɹeɪn wɑz ʃiɾɪŋ daʊn ɪn ə sɑləd blæk kɝɾən ðət hɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. kəd ðeɪv ɡɔn ɑn tə ðə steɪbəlz? ðəɾ ɛdʒiənɪn sim tə tʃeɪnʒ ɪz plæn wɛnɛvɝ ɪt suɾəd hɝ.

The single lit stand-lamp still cast a wavering light on those inevitable flowered tapestries, but Juilin and his woman were not there, and neither were Egeanin and the others. With the time he had taken up with Tylin, they all should have been waiting on him by now. Beyond the columned walk the rain was sheeting down in a solid black curtain that hid everything. Could they have gone on to the stables? That Egeanin seemed to change his plan whenever it suited her.

ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, hi hɪtʃt ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn ɪm ən pɹipɛɹd tə meɪk ɪz weɪ tə ðə steɪbəlz θɹu ðə daʊnpɔɹ. hi hæd hæd dʒʌst əbaʊɾ ɔl i kəd teɪk ʌv wɪmən tənaɪt.

Grumbling under his breath, he hitched his cloak around him and prepared to make his way to the stables through the downpour. He had had just about all he could take of women tonight.

"soʊ jə ɑɹ ɪntɛndɪŋ tə liv. aɪ kænɑɾ əlaʊ ðæt, tɔɪ."

"So you are intending to leave. I cannot allow that, Toy."

wɪð ən oʊθ, hi spʌn ɑn ɪz hil ən faʊn hɪmsɛlf feɪsɪŋ tuɑn, hɝ dɑɹk feɪs stɝn bɪhaɪn əɹ lɔŋ tʃɹænspɛɹən veɪl. ðə nɛɹoʊ sɝklət hoʊldɪŋ ðə veɪl ɑn əɹ ʃeɪvən hɛd wɑz ə mæs ə faɪɝdʒɹɑps ən pɝlz, jɛɾ ənʌðɝ fɔɹtʃən teɪkən təɡɛðɝ wɪð ðə waɪd dʒuəl bɛl ðət sɪntʃt əɹ weɪst ən ðə lɔŋ nɛkləs ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk. ə faɪn taɪm ɪt wɑz tə bi noʊɾɪsɪŋ dʒuəlz, haʊɛvɝ ɹɪtʃ. wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪt wɑz ʃi duɪŋ əweɪk? blʌɾ ən æʃəz, ɪf ʃi wɛn ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf, ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ ɡɑɹdz tə stɑp ɪm . . . !

With an oath, he spun on his heel and found himself facing Tuon, her dark face stern behind her long transparent veil. The narrow circlet holding the veil on her shaven head was a mass of firedrops and pearls, yet another fortune taken together with the wide jeweled belt that cinched her waist and the long necklace around her neck. A fine time it was to be noticing jewels, however rich. What in the Light was she doing awake? Blood and ashes, if she went running off, shouting for guards to stop him . . . !

dɛspɝətli hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə skɪni ɡɝl, bʌt ʃi ɹɪθd əweɪ fɹəm ɪz ɡɹɪp ən sɛn ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ flaɪɪŋ wɪð ə ʃɑɹp bloʊ ðət hæf nʌmd ɪz ɹɪst. hi ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə fli, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd ʃi ɹeɪn bloʊz ət hɪm, pʌntʃɪŋ wɪð foʊldəd nʌkəlz, tʃɑpɪŋ əɹ hænz laɪk æks bleɪdz. hi hæd kwɪk hænz, ðə kwɪkɪs θɔɹn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ði oʊld ɡlimən, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə wɔɹɾ əɹ ɔf, fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt ɡɹæbɪŋ hɝ. ɪf i hæd nɑt bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd tə kip əɹ fɹəm bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪz noʊz - əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, meɪbi; ʃi hɪt vɛɹi hɑɹd fəɹ sətʃ ə taɪni θɪŋ - ɪksɛp fəɹ ðæt, hi maɪɾ əv faʊn ðə hoʊl θɪŋ læfəbəl. hi taʊɝɾ oʊvɝ hɝ, ðoʊ hi wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ əbʌv ævɝɪdʒ haɪt, jɛt ʃi keɪm əɾ ɪm ɪn ə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd fjʊɹi, əz ðoʊ ʃi wɝ ðə tɔlɝ ən stʃɹɔŋɝ ən ɪkspɛktəd tə oʊvɝwɛlm hɪm. fəɹ səm ɹizən, æftɝ ə fju moʊməns əɹ fʊl lɪps kɝvd ɪn ə smaɪl, ən ɪf i hæd nɑt noʊn bɛɾɝ, hi wʊɾə sɛd ðoʊz bɪɡ lɪkwəɾ aɪz tʊk ɑn ə ɡloʊ ʌv dɪlaɪt. bɝn hɪm, θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ pɹɪɾi ə wʊmən wɑz əɾ ə taɪm laɪk ðɪs wɑz əz bæɾ əz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹaɪs əɹ dʒɛmz!

Desperately he reached for the skinny girl, but she writhed away from his grip and sent the ashandarei flying with a sharp blow that half numbed his wrist. He expected her to flee, but instead she rained blows at him, punching with folded knuckles, chopping her hands like axe blades. He had quick hands, the quickest Thorn had ever seen according to the old gleeman, but it was all he could do to ward her off, forget about grabbing her. If he had not been trying so hard to keep her from breaking his nose - or something else, maybe; she hit very hard for such a tiny thing - except for that, he might have found the whole thing laughable. He towered over her, though he was not much above average height, yet she came at him in a concentrated fury, as though she were the taller and stronger and expected to overwhelm him. For some reason, after a few moments her full lips curved in a smile, and if he had not known better, he would have said those big liquid eyes took on a glow of delight. Burn him, thinking about how pretty a woman was at a time like this was as bad as trying to price her gems!

əbɹʌpli, ʃi floʊd bæk fɹəm hɪm, juzɪŋ boʊθ hænz tə ɹiədʒʌs ðə sɝkəl ə dʒɛmz ðət sɪkjʊɹɾ əɹ veɪl. ðəɹ wɑz sɝɾənli nʌθɪŋ laɪk dɪlaɪɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs naʊ. hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz ɔl kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən. pleɪsɪŋ əɹ fit kɛɹfəli, nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz fɹəm ɪz feɪs, ʃi bɪɡæn sloʊli ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ waɪt pliɾɪd skɝts ɪn əɹ hænz, ɪntʃɪŋ əm ʌp əbʌv əɹ niz ɪn foʊlz.

Abruptly, she flowed back from him, using both hands to readjust the circle of gems that secured her veil. There was certainly nothing like delight on her face now. Her expression was all concentration. Placing her feet carefully, never taking her eyes from his face, she began slowly gathering her white pleated skirts in her hands, inching them up above her knees in folds.

hi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ hɛlp, bʌɾ i nu ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə kɪk ət hɪm. wɛl, nɑɾ ɪf i hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə seɪ əbaʊɾ ɪt! hi lɛp fəɹ hɝ, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæpən ət wʌns. ə stæb ə peɪn ɪn ɪz hɪp sɛn ɪm tə wʌn ni. tuɑn snætʃt əɹ skɝts ɔlmoʊs tə hɝ oʊn hɪps, ən əɹ slɪm, waɪt-stɑkɪnɡd lɛɡ flæʃt aʊɾ əɾ ɪm ɪn ə kɪk ðət pæst oʊvɝ ɪz hɛɾ əz ʃi wɑz sʌɾənli hɔɪstəɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ.

He could not understand why she was not already shouting for help, but he knew she was about to kick at him. Well, not if he had anything to say about it! He leaped for her, and everything happened at once. A stab of pain in his hip sent him to one knee. Tuon snatched her skirts almost to her own hips, and her slim, white-stockinged leg flashed out at him in a kick that passed over his head as she was suddenly hoisted into the air.

hi θɔɾ i mʌs bi əz sɝpɹaɪz tə si noʊl wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðə ɡɝl əz ʃi wɑz tə hæv ðoʊz ɑɹmz ðɛɹ, bʌɾ i ɹiæktəd fæstɝ ðən ʃi. əz ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ tə ʃaʊɾ ət læst, mæt skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fiɾ ən bɪɡæn stʌfɪŋ əɹ veɪl bɪtwin əɹ tiθ, tɪpɪŋ ðə dʒuəl sɝklət tə ðə flɔɹ wɪð ə flɪp ə hɪz hænd. ʃi dɪd nɑt koʊɑpɝeɪt ðə weɪ taɪlɪn hæd, ʌv kɔɹs. ə fɝm ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ dʒɔ wɑz ɔl ðət kɛpt əɹ fɹəm sɪŋkɪŋ əɹ tiθ ɪndə hɪz fɪŋɡɝz. æŋɡɹi saʊnz keɪm fɹəm əɹ θɹoʊt, ən əɹ aɪz ʃoʊɾ ə fjʊɹi ðeɪ nɛvɝ hæɾ ət ðə wɝst ə hɝ ətæk. ʃi twɪstəɾ ɪn noʊlz ɡɹɪp ən fleɪld əɹ lɛɡz, bʌt ðə wɔɹn oʊl mæn mænədʒ tə ʃɪft ɪz bɝɾən ən hɪmsɛlf tə əvɔɪɾ ɛvɹi kɪk ə hɝ hilz. wɔɹn əɹ nɑt, hi sim tə hæv noʊ dɪfəkəlti hæŋɪŋ ɑn tə hɝ.

He thought he must be as surprised to see Noal with his arms wrapped around the girl as she was to have those arms there, but he reacted faster than she. As she opened her mouth to shout at last, Mat scrambled to his feet and began stuffing her veil between her teeth, tipping the jeweled circlet to the floor with a flip of his hand. She did not cooperate the way Tylin had, of course. A firm grip on her jaw was all that kept her from sinking her teeth into his fingers. Angry sounds came from her throat, and her eyes showed a fury they never had at the worst of her attack. She twisted in Noal's grip and flailed her legs, but the worn old man managed to shift his burden and himself to avoid every kick of her heels. Worn or not, he seemed to have no difficulty hanging on to her.

"du jə ɔfən əv ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl wɪð wɪmən?" hi æsk maɪldli ɝaʊn ə ɡæp-tuθ smaɪl. hi wɑz wɛɹɪŋ ɪz kloʊk, ən ɪz bʌndəl bɪlɔŋɪŋz wɝ taɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪɾ əkɹɔs ɪz bæk.

"Do you often have this sort of trouble with women?" he asked mildly around a gap-toothed smile. He was wearing his cloak, and his bundled belongings were tied over it across his back.

"ɔlweɪz," mæt ɹɪplaɪd saʊɝli, ən ɡɹʌntɪd wən ə ni kɑɾ ɪz eɪkɪŋ hɪp. mænɪdʒɪŋ tə əntaɪ hɪz nɛk-skɑɹf wʌn-hændəd, hi juzd ɪt tə sɪkjʊɹ ðə wɑɾəd veɪl ɪn tuɑnz maʊθ ət ðə kɑst ʌv ə nɪp θʌm. laɪt, wʌt wɑz i gɑnə də wɪð hɝ?

"Always," Mat replied sourly, and grunted when a knee caught his aching hip. Managing to untie his neck-scarf one-handed, he used it to secure the wadded veil in Tuon's mouth at the cost of a nipped thumb. Light, what was he going to do with her?

"aɪ dɪdnt noʊ ðɪs wɑz wʌt jə wɝ plænɪŋ," noʊl sɛd, nɑt bɹiðɪŋ hɑɹɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə ðə weɪ ðə taɪni wʊmən θɹæʃt hɝsɛlf əbaʊɾ ɪn ɪz ɡɹɪp, "bʌɾ əz jə kən si, ɪm livɪŋ tənaɪt, tu. aɪ θɔt ðəɾ ɪn ə deɪ əɹ tu, ðɪs maɪt bi ən ənplɛzən pleɪs fəɹ sʌmwʌn jə ɡeɪv ə bɛd tə."

"I didn't know this was what you were planning," Noal said, not breathing hard in spite of the way the tiny woman thrashed herself about in his grip, "but as you can see, I'm leaving tonight, too. I thought that in a day or two, this might be an unpleasant place for someone you gave a bed to."

"ə waɪz dɪsɪʒən," mæt mʌɾɝd. laɪt, hi ʃʊɾə θɔɾ ʌv wɔɹnɪŋ noʊl.

"A wise decision," Mat muttered. Light, he should have thought of warning Noal.

loʊɝɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə hɪz niz, hi əvɔɪɾəd tuɑnz kɪks - moʊst ə ðɛm, ɛniweɪ - lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə kætʃ əɹ lɛɡz. ə naɪf plʌk fɹəm ɪz sliv stɑɹɾəd ə kʌɾ ɪn ðə hɛm ə hɝ dʒɹɛs, ən i tɔɹ əweɪ ə lɔŋ stʃɹɪp tə taɪ hɝ æŋkəlz. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd θɪŋ i hæd ɡɑɾən ɔl ðət pɹæktəs wɪð taɪlɪn ɝliɝ. hi wɑz nɑɾ əkʌstəm tə taɪɪŋ wɪmən ʌp. tɛɹɪŋ ɔf ə sɛkən stʃɹɪp ə klɔθ fɹəm ðə bɑɾəm ə hɝ skɝt, hi pɪkt ʌp ðə sɝkəl ə dʒɛmz fɹəm ðə flɔɹ, ən stʊd wɪð wʌn ɡɹʌn fəɹ ði ɛfɝɾ ən ə dipɝ wʌn fəɹ ə læst, tu-lɛɡəd kɪk ðət sɛt faɪɝ tə hɪz hɪp. wən i sɛt ðə sɝklət bæk ɑn əɹ hɛd, tuɑn stɛɹɾ ɪm stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ði aɪ. ʃi hæd stɑp θɹæʃɪŋ əbaʊt jusləsli, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd. laɪt, ɪn əɹ pleɪs, hi wʊɾə bɪn sɔɪlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf.

Lowering himself to his knees, he avoided Tuon's kicks - most of them, anyway - long enough to catch her legs. A knife plucked from his sleeve started a cut in the hem of her dress, and he tore away a long strip to tie her ankles. It was a good thing he had gotten all that practice with Tylin earlier. He was not accustomed to tying women up. Tearing off a second strip of cloth from the bottom of her skirt, he picked up the circle of gems from the floor, and stood with one grunt for the effort and a deeper one for a last, two-legged kick that set fire to his hip. When he set the circlet back on her head, Tuon stared him straight in the eye. She had stopped thrashing about uselessly, but she was not afraid. Light, in her place, he would have been soiling himself.

dʒulɪn faɪnəli ɝaɪvd, ðɛn, kloʊkt ən fʊli əkuɾɝd, wɪð ɪz ʃɔɹt sɔɹɾ ən nɑtʃt sɔɹd-bɹeɪkɝ əɾ ɪz bɛlt ən ɪz θɪn bæmbu stæf ɪn wʌn hænd. ə slɛndɝ, dɑɹk-hɛɹd wʊmən ɪn ðə θɪk waɪt ɹoʊbz wɔɹn baɪ dækoʊvæl aʊtsaɪd klʌŋ tə hɪz ɹaɪɾ ɑɹm. ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, ɪn ə paʊɾi weɪ, wɪð ə ɹoʊzbʌd maʊθ, bʌt faɪv əɹ sɪks jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən mæt hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd, ən əɹ lɑɹdʒ dɑɹk aɪz dɑɹɾɪd tɪmədli. ət ðə saɪɾ ə tuɑn, ʃi skwikt ən lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv dʒulɪn əz ðoʊ hi wɝ ə hɑt stoʊv, foʊldɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə ðə flɔɹ bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ wɪð əɹ hɛɾ ɑn əɹ niz.

Juilin finally arrived, then, cloaked and fully accoutered, with his short sword and notched sword-breaker at his belt and his thin bamboo staff in one hand. A slender, dark-haired woman in the thick white robes worn by da'covale outside clung to his right arm. She was pretty, in a pouty way, with a rosebud mouth, but five or six years older than Mat had expected, and her large dark eyes darted timidly. At the sight of Tuon, she squeaked and let go of Juilin as though he were a hot stove, folding herself to the floor beside the door with her head on her knees.

"aɪ hæd tə tɔk θɛɹə ɪndə ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ ɔl oʊvɝ əɡɛn," ðə θif-kætʃɝ saɪd, ɡɪvɪŋ əɹ ə kənsɝn lʊk. ðət wɑz ɔl ði ɛkspləneɪʃən i meɪd fəɹ ɪz leɪtnəs, bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ ɪz ətɛnʃən tə noʊlz bɝɾən. pʊʃɪŋ bæk ðə ɹɪdɪkjələs kɑnɪkəl ɹɛd kæp i wɔɹ, hi skɹætʃt ɪz hɛd. "ænd wʌt də wi də wɪð hɝ?" hi æsk sɪmpli.

"I had to talk Thera into running away all over again," the thief-catcher sighed, giving her a concerned look. That was all the explanation he made for his lateness, before turning his attention to Noal's burden. Pushing back the ridiculous conical red cap he wore, he scratched his head. "And what do we do with her?" he asked simply.

"liv əɹ ɪn ðə steɪbəlz," mæt ɹɪplaɪd. ðeɪ wəɾ ɪf veɪnɪn hæd kənvɪns ðə ɡɹumz tə lɛɾ ɪm ən hɑɹnən tɛn tə ɛni mɛsənʒɝz' hɔɹsəz ðət keɪm ɪn. əntɪl naʊ, ðət hæd sim laɪk oʊnli ən æɾəd pɹikɔʃən, nɑt ɹɪli nɛsəsɛɹi. əntɪl naʊ. "ɪn ðə heɪlɔft. ʃi ʃʊdn bi faʊn bɪfɔɹ mɔɹnɪŋ, wən ðeɪ fɔɹk daʊn fɹɛʃ heɪ fəɹ ðə stɔlz."

"Leave her in the stables," Mat replied. They would if Vanin had convinced the grooms to let him and Harnan tend to any messengers' horses that came in. Until now, that had seemed like only an added precaution, not really necessary. Until now. "In the hayloft. She shouldn't be found before morning, when they fork down fresh hay for the stalls."

"æn aɪ θɔt jə wɝ kɪdnæpɪŋ hɝ," noʊl saɪd, sɛɾɪŋ tuɑnz baʊn fit bæk ɑn ðə flɔɹ ən ʃɪftɪŋ ɪz hoʊld ɑn əɹ tə ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ ʌpɝ ɑɹmz. hɛd haɪ, ðə lɪɾəl wʊmən dɪsdeɪn tə stʃɹʌɡəl. ivən wɪð ə ɡæɡ ɪn əɹ maʊθ, skɔɹn wɑz klɪɹ ɑn əɹ feɪs. ʃi ɹəfjuz tə faɪt, nɑt kəz ɪt wɑz hoʊpləs, bʌt kəz ʃi dɪd nɑt tʃuz tə faɪt.

"And I thought you were kidnaping her," Noal sighed, setting Tuon's bound feet back on the floor and shifting his hold on her to gripping her upper arms. Head high, the little woman disdained to struggle. Even with a gag in her mouth, scorn was clear on her face. She refused to fight, not because it was hopeless, but because she did not choose to fight.

butstɛps ɛkoʊɾ ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ liɾɪŋ tə ði æntəɹum, ɡɹoʊɪŋ laʊɾɝ. ɪt kəd bi ɛdʒiənɪn ət læst. əɹ ðə weɪ ðə naɪt sim tə bi tɝnɪŋ, ɪt maɪt bi dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz. ði oʊɡiɝ sɔɹt.

Bootsteps echoed in the corridor leading to the anteroom, growing louder. It could be Egeanin at last. Or the way the night seemed to be turning, it might be Deathwatch Guards. The Ogier sort.

heɪstəli, mæt moʊʃən ði ʌðɝ təwɔɹd kɔɹnɝz aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn kʌmɪŋ θɹu ðə dɔɹ, ðən hɑbəld oʊvɝ tə pɪk ʌp ɪz blæk spɪɹ. dʒulɪn pʊl θɛɹə tə hɝ fiɾ ən dʒɹu hɝ tə hɪz lɛft, wɛɹ ʃi kɹaʊtʃt ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ waɪl i stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ wɪð ɪz stæf hɛld ɪn boʊθ hænz. ɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ə fɹeɪl wɛpən, bʌt ðə θif-kætʃɝ kəd juz ɪt tə ɡɹeɪɾ ɪfɛkt. noʊl dʒɹæɡd tuɑn tə ði ɑpəzət kɔɹnɝ ə ðə ɹum ən ɹilist wʌn ə hɝ ɑɹmz tə pʊɾ ə hæn ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz koʊt, wɛɹ i kɛpt ɪz lɔŋ naɪvz. mæt plæntəd hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum wɪð ɪz bæk tə ðə ɹeɪn-soʊk naɪt, ði æʃhændʒɹeɪ əpɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. noʊ mæɾɝ u keɪm ɪndə ðə ɹum, hi wɑz nɑt gɑnə bi eɪbəl tə dæns əbaʊt, wɪð ɪz hɪp nɑɾɪd ɪn ə fɪs fɹəm tuɑnz kɪks, bʌɾ ɪf wɝs keɪm tə wɝst, hi kəɾ ət lis liv mɑɹks ɑn ə fju pipəl.

Hastily, Mat motioned the other toward corners out of sight of anyone coming through the door, then hobbled over to pick up his black spear. Juilin pulled Thera to her feet and drew her to his left, where she crouched in the corner while he stood in front of her with his staff held in both hands. It appeared a frail weapon, but the thief-catcher could use it to great effect. Noal dragged Tuon to the opposite corner of the room and released one of her arms to put a hand inside his coat, where he kept his long knives. Mat planted himself in the middle of the room with his back to the rain-soaked night, the ashandarei upright in front of him. No matter who came into the room, he was not going to be able to dance about, with his hip knotted in a fist from Tuon's kicks, but if worse came to worst, he could at least leave marks on a few people.

wən ɛdʒiənɪn stʃɹoʊd θɹu ðət dɔɹweɪ, hi sæɡd ɑn ðə spɪɹ ɪn ɹɪlif. tu sʌldəm ɛntɝɾ æftɝ hɝ, ən doʊmən fɑloʊd. mæt ɡɑɾ ɪz fɝs lʊk əɾ idɛzinə tə noʊ hu hi wɑz siɪŋ, ðoʊ hi dɪd ɹikɔl əɹ fɹəm wʌn deɪ wən ðə deɪmeɪn wɝ biɪŋ ɛksɝsaɪzd, ə slɛndɝ hænsəm wʊmən ɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz pleɪn ɡɹeɪ dʒɹɛsəz, wɪð blæk hɛɹ spɪlɪŋ tə hɝ weɪst. dɪspaɪt ði æɾəm liʃɪŋ əɹ tə sɛɾəz ɹɪst, idɛzinə lʊkt əbaʊɾ əɹ kɑmli. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑn ə liʃ, pɝhæps, bʌɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kɑnfəɾənt ðət liʃ wɑz kʌmɪŋ ɔf sun. tɛslɪn, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, wɑz ə kwɪvɝɪŋ mæs ʌv iɡɝnəs, lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps ən stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə dɔɹ tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd. ɹɛnə ən sɛɾə hɝid ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ əlɔŋ bɪhaɪn ɛdʒiənɪn wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ aɪz fɹəm ðə steɪbliɑɹd dɔɹ.

When Egeanin strode through that doorway, he sagged on the spear in relief. Two sul'dam entered after her, and Domon followed. Mat got his first look at Edesina to know who he was seeing, though he did recall her from one day when the damane were being exercised, a slender handsome woman in one of those plain gray dresses, with black hair spilling to her waist. Despite the a'dam leashing her to Seta's wrist, Edesina looked about her calmly. An Aes Sedai on a leash, perhaps, but an Aes Sedai confident that leash was coming off soon. Teslyn, on the other hand, was a quivering mass of eagerness, licking her lips and staring at the door to the stableyard. Renna and Seta hurried the two Aes Sedai along behind Egeanin without taking their eyes from the stableyard door.

"aɪ hæd tə suð ðə dɝsʌldəm," ɛdʒiənɪn sɛd, əz sun əz ʃi wɑz ɪndə ðə ɹum. "ðeɪ ɑɹ vɛɹi pɹətɛktɪv ə ðɛɹ tʃɑɹdʒəz." noʊɾɪsɪŋ dʒulɪn ən θɛɹə, ʃi skaʊld; ðəɹ hæd nɑt simd ɛni ɹizən tə tɛl əɹ əbaʊt θɛɹə, nɑt wən ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə hɛlp deɪmeɪn, bʌt klɪɹli ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk ðə sɝpɹaɪz ʌv wʊlən ɹoʊbz. "hɝ siɪŋ sɛɾə ən ɹɛnə tʃeɪnʒəz ə fju θɪŋz, ʌv kɔɹs," ʃi wɛn ɑn, "bʌt - " hɝ wɝdz kʌɾ ɔf əz ðoʊ slaɪst wɪð ə naɪf əz əɹ aɪz fɛl ɑn tuɑn. ɛdʒiənɪn wɑz ə peɪl wʊmən, bʌt ʃi wɛn pəlɝ. tuɑn ɡlɛɹd bæk əbʌv əɹ ɡæɡ wɪð ðə stɝn fɝɑsəɾi ʌv ə hɛdzmən. "oʊ, laɪt!" ɛdʒiənɪn sɛd hɔɹsli, sɪŋkɪŋ tə hɝ niz. "ju mædmæn! ɪts dɛθ baɪ sloʊ tɔɹtʃɝ tə leɪ hænz ɑn ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz!" ðə tu sʌldəm ɡæspt, ən nɛlt wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən, nɑɾ oʊnli pʊlɪŋ ðə tu ɛɛs sədaɪ daʊn wɪð əm bʌt ɡɹɪpɪŋ ði æɾəm ɹaɪɾ ət ðə kɑlɝ tə fɔɹs ðɛɹ feɪsəz tə ðə flɔɹ.

"I had to soothe the der'sul'dam," Egeanin said, as soon as she was into the room. "They are very protective of their charges." Noticing Juilin and Thera, she scowled; there had not seemed any reason to tell her about Thera, not when she was willing to help damane, but clearly she did not like the surprise of woolen robes. "Her seeing Seta and Renna changes a few things, of course," she went on, "but - " Her words cut off as though sliced with a knife as her eyes fell on Tuon. Egeanin was a pale woman, but she went paler. Tuon glared back above her gag with the stern ferocity of a headsman. "Oh, Light!" Egeanin said hoarsely, sinking to her knees. "You madman! It's death by slow torture to lay hands on the Daughter of the Nine Moons!" The two sul'dam gasped, and knelt without hesitation, not only pulling the two Aes Sedai down with them but gripping the a'dam right at the collar to force their faces to the floor.

mæt ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz ðoʊ tuɑn hæd dʒʌs kɪkt ɪm skwɛɹ ɪn ðə bɛli. hi fɛlt əz ɪf ʃi hæd. ðə dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz. ði æɛlfɪn hæd toʊld ɪm tʃɹuθ, mʌtʃ əz i heɪɾəd noʊɪŋ. hi wəd daɪ ən lɪv əɡɛn, ɪf i hæd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. hi wəd ɡɪv ʌp hæf ðə laɪɾ ə ðə wɝl tə seɪv ðə wɝld, ən i dɪd nɑɾ ivən wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt wʌt ðət mɛnt. hi wəd mɛɹi. . . . "ʃi ɪz maɪ waɪf," hi sɛd sɔfli. sʌmbɑɾi meɪɾ ə tʃoʊkɪŋ saʊnd; hi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz doʊmən.

Mat grunted as though Tuon had just kicked him square in the belly. He felt as if she had. The Daughter of the Nine Moons. The Aelfinn had told him truth, much as he hated knowing. He would die and live again, if he had not already. He would give up half the light of the world to save the world, and he did not even want to think about what that meant. He would marry. . . . "She is my wife," he said softly. Somebody made a choking sound; he thought it was Domon.

"wʌt?" ɛdʒiənɪn skwikt, hɝ hɛd wɪpɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪm soʊ fæs ðəɾ əɹ teɪl ə hɛɹ swʌŋ ɝaʊn tə slæp əɹ feɪs. hi wəd nɑɾ əv θɔt ʃi kəd skwik. "ju kænɑt seɪ ðæt! jə mʌs nɑt seɪ ðæt!"

"What?" Egeanin squeaked, her head whipping toward him so fast that her tail of hair swung around to slap her face. He would not have thought she could squeak. "You cannot say that! You must not say that!"

"waɪ nɑt?" hi dɪmændəd. ði æɛlfɪn ɔlweɪz ɡeɪv tʃɹu ænsɝz. ɔlweɪz. "ʃi ɪz maɪ waɪf. jəɹ blʌɾi dɔɾɝ ə ðə naɪn munz ɪz maɪ waɪf!"

"Why not?" he demanded. The Aelfinn always gave true answers. Always. "She is my wife. Your bloody Daughter of the Nine Moons is my wife!"

ðeɪ stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ɪksɛp fəɹ dʒulɪn, hu tʊk ɔf ɪz kæp ən stɛɹɾ ɪndə ðæt. doʊmən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən noʊl læf sɔfli. ɛdʒiənɪnz maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən. ðə tu sʌldəm ɡeɪpt əz ðoʊ əɾ ə mædmæn, stɑɹk ɹeɪvɪŋ ən lus. tuɑn stɛɹd, bʌɾ əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz æbsəlutli ənɹiɾəbəl, haɪɾɪŋ ɛvɹi θɔt bɪhaɪn ðoʊz dɑɹk aɪz. oʊ, laɪt, wʌt wɑz i tə du? fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ɡɛɾ ə muv ɑn bɪfɔɹ . . .

They stared at him, except for Juilin, who took off his cap and stared into that. Domon shook his head, and Noal laughed softly. Egeanin's mouth hung open. The two sul'dam gaped as though at a madman, stark raving and loose. Tuon stared, but her expression was absolutely unreadable, hiding every thought behind those dark eyes. Oh, Light, what was he to do? For one thing, get a move on before . . .

sɪlutʃə skɝiɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum, ən mæt ɡɹoʊnd. wɑz ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ðə hoʊl blʌɾi pæləs gɑnə wɔk ɪn? doʊmən tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɹæb hɝ, bʌt ʃi ɪluɾɪd hɪm, dɑɹɾɪŋ əbaʊt. ðə bʌksəm ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd sɔɪhɪn wɑz nɑt soʊ steɪtli əz juʒəwəl, ɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ hænz ən lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪn ə hʌntəd fæʃən. "fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ spikɪŋ," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə fɪɹ-fɪl vɔɪs, "bʌt wʌt jə də ɪz fulɪʃ bɪɑn mædnəs." wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn, ʃi dɑɹɾɪd tə hæf kɹaʊtʃ bɪtwin ðə nilɪŋ sʌldəm wɪð wʌn hæn ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ ʌv itʃ, əz ðoʊ sikɪŋ ðɛɹ pɹətɛkʃən. hɝ blu aɪz nɛvɝ sis flɪɾɪŋ əbaʊt ðə ɹum. "wʌtɛvɝ ði oʊmənz, ðɪs kən stɪl bi ɹɛktəfaɪɾ ɪf jəl oʊnli kənsɛn tə dʒɹɔ bæk."

Selucia scurried into the room, and Mat groaned. Was everybody in the whole bloody Palace going to walk in? Domon tried to grab her, but she eluded him, darting about. The buxom golden-haired so'jhin was not so stately as usual, wringing her hands and looking around in a hunted fashion. "Forgive me for speaking," she said in a fear-filled voice, "but what you do is foolish beyond madness." With a groan, she darted to half crouch between the kneeling sul'dam with one hand on the shoulder of each, as though seeking their protection. Her blue eyes never ceased flitting about the room. "Whatever the omens, this can still be rectified if you will only consent to draw back."

"bi izi, sɪlutʃə," mæt sɛɾ ɪn ə suðɪŋ. ʃi wɑz nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, bʌɾ i meɪd kɑmɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝz ɛniweɪ. ɪn nʌn ə hɪz mɛmɹiz kəɾ i faɪn ə weɪ tə dil wɪð ə hɪstɛɹɪkəl wʊmən. ɪksɛp tə haɪd. "noʊ wʌn ɪz gɑnə bi hɝt. noʊ wʌn! aɪ pɹɑməs ju. jə kən bi izi, naʊ."

"Be easy, Selucia," Mat said in a soothing. She was not looking at him, but he made calming gestures anyway. In none of his memories could he find a way to deal with a hysterical woman. Except to hide. "No one is going to be hurt. No one! I promise you. You can be easy, now."

fəɹ səm ɹizən, kɑnstɝneɪʃən flæʃt əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs, bʌt ʃi sɛɾəld tə hɝ niz ən foʊldəɾ əɹ hænz ɪn əɹ læp. sʌɾənli, ɔl əɹ fɪɹ vænɪʃt, ən ʃi wɑz əz ɹiɡəl əz ɛvɝ ʃi hæd bɪn. "aɪ wɪl oʊbeɪ ju, soʊ lɔŋ əz jə də nɑt hɑɹm maɪ mɪstʃɹəs. ɪf jə du, əl kɪl ju."

For some reason, consternation flashed across her face, but she settled to her knees and folded her hands in her lap. Suddenly, all her fear vanished, and she was as regal as ever she had been. "I will obey you, so long as you do not harm my mistress. If you do, I will kill you."

fɹəm ɛdʒiənɪn, ðət wʊɾə ɡɪvən ɪm pɔz. kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðɪs plʌmp kɹim-tʃikt wʊmən, ʃɔɹɾ ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz tɔlɝ ðən əɹ mɪstʃɹəs, hi pʊɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd. ðə laɪt nu wɪmən wɝ deɪnʒɝəs, bʌɾ i θɔɾ i kəd hændəl ə leɪɾiz meɪd. ət list ʃi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hɪstɛɹɪkəl. ɑd, haʊ ðət keɪm ən wɛn ɪn wɪmən.

From Egeanin, that would have given him pause. Coming from this plump cream-cheeked woman, short even if she was taller than her mistress, he put it out of his mind. The Light knew women were dangerous, but he thought he could handle a lady's maid. At least she was no longer hysterical. Odd, how that came and went in women.

"aɪ səpoʊz jə min tə liv əm boʊθ ɪn ðə heɪlɔft?" noʊl sɛd.

"I suppose you mean to leave them both in the hayloft?" Noal said.

"noʊ," mæt ɹɪplaɪd, lʊkɪŋ ət tuɑn. ʃi stɛɹd ɹaɪt bæk, stɪl wɪð noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən i kəd ɹid. ə bɔɪ-slɪm lɪɾəl wʊmən, wən i laɪkt wɪmən wɪð flɛʃ ɑn ðɛɹ boʊnz. ɛɹ tə ðə sintʃæn θɹoʊn, wən noʊbəlwɪmən ɡeɪv ɪm ɡus bʌmps. ə wʊmən u hæd wɑntəd tə baɪ hɪm, ən naʊ laɪkli wɑntəd tə pʊɾ ə naɪf ɪn ɪz ɹɪbz. ən ʃi wəd bi hɪz waɪf. ði æɛlfɪn ɔlweɪz ɡeɪv tʃɹu ænsɝz. "wi ɑɹ teɪkɪŋ əm wɪð ʌs," hi sɛd.

"No," Mat replied, looking at Tuon. She stared right back, still with no expression he could read. A boy-slim little woman, when he liked women with flesh on their bones. Heir to the Seanchan throne, when noblewomen gave him goose bumps. A woman who had wanted to buy him, and now likely wanted to put a knife in his ribs. And she would be his wife. The Aelfinn always gave true answers. "We are taking them with us," he said.

ət læst, tuɑn ʃoʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən. ʃi smaɪld, əz ɪf ʃi sʌɾənli nu ə sikɹət. ʃi smaɪld, ən i ʃɪvɝd. oʊ, laɪt, haʊ hi ʃɪvɝd.

At last, Tuon showed expression. She smiled, as if she suddenly knew a secret. She smiled, and he shivered. Oh, Light, how he shivered.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾitu


CHAPTER 32

eɪ pɔɹʃən ʌv wɪzdəm


A Portion of Wisdom

ðə ɡoʊldən wil wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ ɪn, dʒʌst ɔf ði əvhɑɝɪn mɑɹkət, wɪð ə lɔŋ, bim-silɪŋɡd kɑmən ɹum kɹaʊɾəd wɪð smɔl skwɛɹ teɪbəlz. ivən ət mɪddeɪ noʊ mɔɹ ðən wʌn teɪbəl ɪn faɪv hæɾ ɛniwʌn sɪɾɪŋ əɾ ɪt, ðoʊ, juʒəwəli ən aʊtlæn mɝtʃən feɪsɪŋ ə wʊmən ɪn soʊbɝ kʌlɝz wɪð əɹ hɛɹ wɔɹn ɑn tɑp ə hɝ hɛɾ əɹ ɡæðɝɾ ʌp ət ðə neɪp ə hɝ nɛk. ðə wɪmən wɝ mɝtʃəns, tu, əɹ bæŋkɝz; ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, bæŋkɪŋ ən tʃɹeɪd wɝ fɔɹbɪɾən tə mɛn. ɔl ðə fɔɹənɝz ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum wɝ meɪl, sɪns ðə wɪmən əmʌŋ əm kəd bi teɪkən ɪndə ðə wɪmənz ɹum. ðə smɛlz ə fɪʃ ən mʌɾən kʊkɪŋ ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz fɪl ði ɛɹ, ən əkeɪʒənəli ə ʃaʊt fɹəm wʌn ə ðə teɪbəlz sʌmənd wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ mɛn u weɪɾəd ɪn ə laɪn ət ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum. ʌðɝwaɪz, ðə mɝtʃəns ən bæŋkɝz kɛp ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz loʊ. ðə saʊn ə ðə ɹeɪn aʊtsaɪd wɑz laʊɾɝ.

The Golden Wheel was a large inn, just off the Avharin Market, with a long, beam-ceilinged common room crowded with small square tables. Even at midday no more than one table in five had anyone sitting at it, though, usually an outland merchant facing a woman in sober colors with her hair worn on top of her head or gathered up at the nape of her neck. The women were merchants, too, or bankers; in Far Madding, banking and trade were forbidden to men. All the foreigners in the common room were male, since the women among them could be taken into the Women's Room. The smells of fish and mutton cooking in the kitchens filled the air, and occasionally a shout from one of the tables summoned one of the serving men who waited in a line at the back of the room. Otherwise, the merchants and bankers kept their voices low. The sound of the rain outside was louder.

"ɑɹ jə sɝɾən?" ɹænd æskt, teɪkɪŋ ðə kɹis dʒɹɔɪŋz bæk fɹəm ə læntɝn-dʒɔd sɝvɪŋ mæn i hæd dʒɹɔn ɔf tə wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum.

"Are you certain?" Rand asked, taking the creased drawings back from a lantern-jawed serving man he had drawn off to one side of the room.

"aɪ θɪŋk ɪts hɪm," ðə fɛloʊ sɛɾ ənsɝteɪnli, waɪpɪŋ ɪz hænz ɑn ə lɔŋ eɪpɹən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð ə jɛloʊ wæɡən wil. "ɪt lʊks laɪk hɪm. hi ʃəd bi bæk sun." hɪz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd bɪɑn ɹænd, ən i saɪd. "ju bɛɾɝ baɪ ə dʒɹɪŋk əɹ ɡoʊ. mɪstʃɹəs ɡɔlɡɝ dʌzn laɪk əs tɔkɪŋ wən wi ʃəd bi wɝkɪŋ. ən ʃi wʊdn laɪk mi tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ peɪtʃɹənz ɛni taɪm."

"I think it's him," the fellow said uncertainly, wiping his hands on a long apron embroidered with a yellow wagon wheel. "It looks like him. He should be back soon." His eyes darted beyond Rand, and he sighed. "You better buy a drink or go. Mistress Gallger doesn't like us talking when we should be working. And she wouldn't like me talking about her patrons any time."

ɹænd ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ə lin wʊmən wɪð ə tɔl aɪvɝi koʊm stʌk ɪn ðə dɑɹk bʌn ɑn ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛd wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn ðə jɛloʊ-peɪntəɾ ɑɹtʃ ðət lɛd tə ðə wɪmənz ɹum. ðə weɪ ʃi lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə kɑmən ɹum - hæf kwin sɝveɪɪŋ əɹ doʊmeɪn, hæf fɑɹmɝ sɝveɪɪŋ əɹ filz, ən iðɝ weɪ dɪsplizd wɪð ðə spɑɹsɪɾi ʌv tʃɹeɪd ʃi sɔ - neɪmd əɹ ði ɪnkipɝ. wən əɹ ɡeɪz fɛl ɑn ɹænd ən ðə læntɝn-dʒɔd fɛloʊ, ʃi fɹaʊnd.

Rand glanced over his shoulder. A lean woman with a tall ivory comb stuck in the dark bun on the back of her head was standing in the yellow-painted arch that led to the Women's Room. The way she looked over the common room - half queen surveying her domain, half farmer surveying her fields, and either way displeased with the sparsity of trade she saw - named her the innkeeper. When her gaze fell on Rand and the lantern-jawed fellow, she frowned.

"mʌld waɪn," ɹænd sɛd, hændɪŋ ðə mæn səm kɔɪnz, kɑpɝz fəɹ ðə waɪn ən ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk fəɹ ɪz ɪnfɝmeɪʃən, ənsɝɾən əz ɪt wɑz. mɔɹ ðən ə wik hæd pæst sɪns i hæd kɪld ɹɑtʃeɪɾ ən kɪsmən hæd ɡɑɾən əweɪ, ən ɪn ɔl ðoʊz deɪz ðɪs wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm i hæd ɡɑɾən mɔɹ ðən ə ʃɹʌɡ əɹ ə ʃeɪk ə ðə hɛd wən i ʃoʊd ðə dʒɹɔɪŋz.

"Mulled wine," Rand said, handing the man some coins, coppers for the wine and a silver mark for his information, uncertain as it was. More than a week had passed since he had killed Rochaid and Kisman had gotten away, and in all those days this was the first time he had gotten more than a shrug or a shake of the head when he showed the drawings.

ðəɹ wɝ ə dʌzən ɛmpti teɪbəlz ɹaɪɾ ət hænd, bʌɾ i wɑntəd tə bi ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə ɹum, wɛɹ i kəd si hu keɪm ɪn wɪθaʊt biɪŋ sin hɪmsɛlf, ən əz i ɛdʒd ɪz weɪ bɪtwin ðə teɪbəlz, snætʃɪz ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən kɑɾ ɪz ɪɹ.

There were a dozen empty tables right at hand, but he wanted to be in a corner at the front of the room, where he could see who came in without being seen himself, and as he edged his way between the tables, snatches of conversation caught his ear.

ə tɔl peɪl wʊmən ɪn dɑɹk ɡɹin sɪlk ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ əɾ ə stɑki mæn ɪn ə taɪt-fɪɾɪŋ blæk tɛɹən koʊt. ən aɪɝn-ɡɹeɪ bʌn meɪɾ əɹ lʊk ə lɪɾəl laɪk kædzueɪn fɹəm ðə saɪd. hi əpɪɹd tə bi meɪɾ ə stoʊn blɑks, bʌɾ ɪz dɑɹk skwɛɹ feɪs wɑz wɝid. "ju kən pʊt jəɹ maɪn əɾ iz əbaʊɾ ændɝ, mæstɝ ædmaɪɹə," ʃi sɛd suðɪŋli. "bɪliv mi, ði ændɔɹənz wɪl ʃaʊɾ ən ʃeɪk sɔɹdz ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, bʌt ðəl nɛvɝ lɛɾ ɪt kʌm tə æktʃəwəl faɪɾɪŋ. ɪts ɪn jəɹ bɛst ɪntʃɹəsts tə steɪ wɪð ðə pɹɛzən ɹut fəɹ jəɹ ɡʊdz. kɛɹhin wəd tæks jə ə fɪfθ mɔɹ ðən fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. θɪŋk ə ði æɾəd ɪkspɛns." ðə tɛɹən ɡɹɪməst əz ɪf i wɝ θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪt. əɹ wʌndɝɪŋ wɛðɝ ɪz bɛst ɪntʃɹəsts ɹɪli koʊənsaɪɾəd wɪð hɝz.

A tall pale woman in dark green silk shook her head at a stocky man in a tight-fitting black Tairen coat. An iron-gray bun made her look a little like Cadsuane from the side. He appeared to be made of stone blocks, but his dark square face was worried. "You can put your mind at ease about Andor, Master Admira," she said soothingly. "Believe me, the Andorans will shout and shake swords at one another, but they'll never let it come to actual fighting. It is in your best interests to stay with the present route for your goods. Cairhien would tax you a fifth more than Far Madding. Think of the added expense." The Tairen grimaced as if he were thinking of it. Or wondering whether his best interests really coincided with hers.

"aɪ hɪɹ ðə bɑɾi dɪd bi ɔl blæk ən swoʊlən," ə lin, waɪt-bɪɹɾəd ɪliɑnɝ ɪn ə dɑɹk blu koʊt sɛɾ əɾ ənʌðɝ teɪbəl. "aɪ hɪɹ ðə kaʊnsəlz dɪɾ ɔɹɾɝ ɪt bɝnd." hi ɹeɪzd ɪz aɪbɹaʊz sɪɡnɪfɪkənli ən tæp ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə pɔɪntəd noʊz ðət ɡeɪv ɪm ði əpɪɹəns ʌv ə wizəl.

"I hear the body did be all black and swollen," a lean, white-bearded Illianer in a dark blue coat said at another table. "I hear the Counsels did order it burned." He raised his eyebrows significantly and tapped the side of a pointed nose that gave him the appearance of a weasel.

"ɪf ðəɹ wɑz pleɪɡ ɪn ðə sɪɾi, mæstɝ ɑzɛɹioʊz, ðə kaʊnsəlz wʊɾə ənaʊnst ɪt," ðə slɪm wʊmən sɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs fɹəm ɪm sɛd kɑmli. wɪð tu ɪlæbɹəɾ aɪvɝi koʊmz ɪn əɹ ɹoʊl hɛɹ, ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, ɪn ə fɑks-feɪst weɪ, ən kul əz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊ wɪð feɪn laɪnz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ bɹaʊn aɪz. "aɪ ɹɪli də sədʒɛst əɡɛns muvɪŋ ɛni ʌv jəɹ tʃɹeɪd tə luɡɹd. mʊɹændi ɪz moʊst ənsɛɾəld. ðə noʊbəlz wɪl nɛvɝ stæn fəɹ ɹɔdʒɹən bɪldɪŋ ən ɑɹmi. ən ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪnvɑlvd, əz aɪm ʃʊɹ juv hɝd. ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz wʌt ðəl du." ði ɪliɑnɝ ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. ðiz deɪz, noʊ wʌn wɑz vɛɹi sɝɾən wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd du, ɪf ðeɪ ɛvɝ hæd bɪn.

"If there was plague in the city, Master Azereos, the Counsels would have announced it," the slim woman sitting across from him said calmly. With two elaborate ivory combs in her rolled hair, she was pretty, in a fox-faced way, and cool as an Aes Sedai, though with faint lines at the corners of her brown eyes. "I really do suggest against moving any of your trade to Lugard. Murandy is most unsettled. The nobles will never stand for Roedran building an army. And there are Aes Sedai involved, as I'm sure you have heard. The Light alone knows what they will do." The Illianer shrugged uncomfortably. These days, no one was very certain what Aes Sedai would do, if they ever had been.

eɪ kændɔɹi wɪð ɡɹeɪ stʃɹiks ɪn ɪz fɔɹk bɪɹɾ ən ə lɑɹdʒ pɝl ɪn ɪz lɛft ɪɹ wɑz linɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ə staʊt wʊmən ɪn dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ sɪlk u wɔɹ əɹ blæk hɛɹ ɪn ə taɪt ɹoʊl əlɔŋ ðə tɑp ə hɝ hɛd. "aɪ hɪɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz bɪn kɹaʊn kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən, mɪstʃɹəs ʃɪməl." ə fɹaʊn pʊt mɔɹ ɹɪŋkəlz ɪn ɪz fɔɹhɛd. "ɡɪvən ðə waɪt taʊɝz pɹɑkləmeɪʃən, aɪm kənsɪɾɝɪŋ sɛndɪŋ maɪ spɹɪŋ wæɡənz tə tʃɹævəl əlɔŋ ði ɛɹɪnɪn tə tɛɹ. ðə ɹɪvɝ ɹoʊd meɪ bi ə hɑɹɾɝ ɹut, bʌɾ ɪljən ɪz nɑt sətʃ ə mɑɹkət fəɹ fɝz ðəɾ aɪ wɑnə teɪk tu mɛni ɹɪsks."

A Kandori with gray streaks in his forked beard and a large pearl in his left ear was leaning toward a stout woman in dark gray silk who wore her black hair in a tight roll along the top of her head. "I hear the Dragon Reborn has been crowned King of Illian, Mistress Shimel." A frown put more wrinkles in his forehead. "Given the White Tower's proclamation, I am considering sending my spring wagons to travel along the Erinin to Tear. The River Road may be a harder route, but Illian is not such a market for furs that I want to take too many risks."

ðə staʊt wʊmən smaɪld, ə vɛɹi θɪn smaɪl fəɹ sətʃ ə ɹaʊn feɪs. "aɪm toʊl ðə mæn əz hɑɹdli bɪn sin ɪn ɪljən sɪns i tʊk ðə kɹaʊn, mæstɝ pɑzəvinə. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðə taʊɝ wɪl dil wɪð hɪm, ɪf ɪt hæzən ɔlɹɛɾi, ən ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, aɪ ɹəsivd wɝd ðət ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ ɪz ʌndɝ sidʒ. ðəɾ ɪz hɑɹdli ə sɪtʃueɪʃən wɛɹ jəl faɪn mʌtʃ mɑɹkət fəɹ fɝz, naʊ ɪt? noʊ, tiɹ ɪz nɑɾ ə pleɪs tə əvɔɪd ɹɪsks." ðə ɹɪŋkəlz ɪn mæstɝ pɑzəvinəz fɔɹhɛd dipənd.

The stout woman smiled, a very thin smile for such a round face. "I'm told the man has hardly been seen in Illian since he took the crown, Master Posavina. In any case, the Tower will deal with him, if it hasn't already, and this morning, I received word that the Stone of Tear is under siege. That is hardly a situation where you will find much market for furs, now it? No, Tear is not a place to avoid risks." The wrinkles in Master Posavina's forehead deepened.

ɹitʃɪŋ ə smɔl teɪbəl ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ, ɹænd tɔst ɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ ðə bæk ə ðə tʃɛɹ ən sæt wɪð ɪz bæk tə ðə wɔl, tɝnɪŋ ʌp ɪz kɑlɝ. ðə læntɝn-dʒɔd fɛloʊ bɹɔɾ ə stimɪŋ pjuɾɝ kʌp ə spaɪst waɪn, mɝmɝɾ ə hɝid θæŋks fəɹ ðə sɪlvɝ, ən skɝiɾ ɔf əɾ ə ʃaʊt fɹəm ənʌðɝ teɪbəl. tu lɑɹdʒ faɪɝpleɪsəz ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum tʊk ðə tʃɪl ɔf ði ɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪf ɛniwʌn noʊɾəst ðət ɹænd kɛpt ɪz ɡlʌvz ɑn, noʊ wʌn ɡlænst əɾ ɪm twaɪs. hi pɹitɛndəd tə stɛɹ ɪndə ðə waɪnkʌp bɪtwin ɪz hænz ɑn ðə teɪbəl waɪl kipɪŋ ən aɪ ɑn ðə dɔɹ tə ðə stʃɹit.

Reaching a small table in the corner, Rand tossed his cloak over the back of the chair and sat with his back to the wall, turning up his collar. The lantern-jawed fellow brought a steaming pewter cup of spiced wine, murmured a hurried thanks for the silver, and scurried off at a shout from another table. Two large fireplaces on either side of the room took the chill off the air, but if anyone noticed that Rand kept his gloves on, no one glanced at him twice. He pretended to stare into the winecup between his hands on the table while keeping an eye on the door to the street.

moʊst ʌv wʌɾ i hæɾ oʊvɝhɝd dɪd nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəst ɪm ɡɹeɪtli. hi hæd hɝɾ əz mʌtʃ bɪfɔɹ, ən səmtaɪmz nu mɔɹ ðən ðə pipəl i ivzdʒɹɑpt ɑn. ɪleɪn əɡɹid wɪð ðə peɪl wʊmən, fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, ən ʃi hæd tə noʊ ændɝ bɛɾɝ ðən ɛni fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ mɝtʃənt. ðə stoʊn ʌndɝ sidʒ wɑz nu, ðoʊ. stɪl, hi nid nɑt tʃɹʌbəl hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪt jɛt. ðə stoʊn hæd nɛvɝ fɔlən, ɪksɛp tə hɪm, ən i nu ɑlɑnə wɑz sʌmwɛɹ ɪn tɛɹ. hi hæd fɛlt əɹ lip fɹəm dʒʌs nɔɹθ ə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ tə sʌmwɛɹ mʌtʃ fɑɹðɝ nɔɹθ, ðɛn, ə deɪ leɪɾɝ, tə sʌmwɛɹ fɑɹ tə ðə saʊθ ən ist. ʃi wɑz dɪstən ɪnʌf ðəɾ i kəd nɑt seɪ wɛðɝ ʃi wɑz ɪn hæɾən mɝk əɹ ðə sɪɾi ʌv tɛɹ ɪtsɛlf, jɛɾ i wɑz kɑnfəɾənt ʃi wɑz wʌn pleɪs əɹ ði ʌðɝ, wɪð fɔɹ ʌðɝ sɪstɝz i kəd tʃɹʌst. ɪf mɛɹænə ən ɹæfɛlə kəd ɡɛt wʌɾ i wɑntəd fɹəm ðə si foʊk, ðeɪ kəd fɹəm ðə tɛɹənz, tu. ɹæfɛlə wɑz tɛɹən, ən ðət ʃəd hɛlp. noʊ, ðə wɝl kəd ɡɛɾ əlɔŋ wɪθaʊɾ ɪm ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ. ɪt hæd tə.

Most of what he had overheard did not interest him greatly. He had heard as much before, and sometimes knew more than the people he eavesdropped on. Elayne agreed with the pale woman, for example, and she had to know Andor better than any Far Madding merchant. The Stone under siege was new, though. Still, he need not trouble himself with it yet. The Stone had never fallen, except to him, and he knew Alanna was somewhere in Tear. He had felt her leap from just north of Far Madding to somewhere much farther north, then, a day later, to somewhere far to the south and east. She was distant enough that he could not say whether she was in Haddon Mirk or the city of Tear itself, yet he was confident she was one place or the other, with four other sisters he could trust. If Merana and Rafela could get what he wanted from the Sea Folk, they could from the Tairens, too. Rafela was Tairen, and that should help. No, the world could get along without him a little longer. It had to.

ə tɔl mæn swɑðd ɪn ə lɔŋ, dæmp kloʊk wɪð ðə hʊd haɪɾɪŋ ɪz feɪs keɪm ɪn fɹəm ðə stʃɹit, ən ɹændz aɪz fɑloʊɾ ɪm tə ðə stɛɹz ət ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum. stɑɹɾɪŋ ʌp, ðə fɛloʊ θɹu bæk ɪz kaʊl, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə fɹɪnʒ ʌv ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ ən ə peɪl pɪntʃt feɪs. hi kəd nɑt bi ðə wʌn ðə sɝvɪŋ mæn mɛnt. noʊ wʌn wɪð aɪz wəd kənfjuz ɪm wɪð pɝəl tɔɹvəl.

A tall man swathed in a long, damp cloak with the hood hiding his face came in from the street, and Rand's eyes followed him to the stairs at the back of the room. Starting up, the fellow threw back his cowl, revealing a fringe of gray hair and a pale pinched face. He could not be the one the serving man meant. No one with eyes would confuse him with Peral Torval.

ɹænd wɛn bæk tə stʌɾiɪŋ ðə sɝfəs ə hɪz waɪn, hɪz θɔts tɝnɪŋ saʊɝ. mɪn ən nɪneɪiv hæd ɹəfjuz tə spɛnd wʌn mɔɹ aʊɝ tʃɹæmpɪŋ ðə stʃɹits, əz mɪn hæd pʊɾ ɪt, ən i səspɛktəɾ əliviə wɑz oʊnli ɡoʊɪŋ θɹu ðə moʊʃənz ə ʃoʊɪŋ ðə dʒɹɔɪŋz. wən ʃi dɪɾ ivən ðæt. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl θɹi aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi fəɹ ðə deɪ, ɪn ðə hɪlz, hi dʒʌdʒ fɹəm wʌt ðə bɑn toʊld ɪm ə mɪn. ʃi fɛl vɛɹi ɪksaɪɾəd əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ. ðə θɹi ʌv əm bɪliv kɪsmən hæd flɛɾ æftɝ feɪlɪŋ tə kɪl ɹænd, ən ði ʌðɝ ɹɛnəɡeɪdz hæɾ iðɝ ɡɔn wɪð ɪm əɹ nɛvɝ kʌm əɾ ɔl. ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɔk ɪm ɪndə livɪŋ fəɹ deɪz, naʊ. ət lis læn hæd nɑt ɡɪvən ʌp.

Rand went back to studying the surface of his wine, his thoughts turning sour. Min and Nynaeve had refused to spend one more hour tramping the streets, as Min had put it, and he suspected Alivia was only going through the motions of showing the drawings. When she did even that. They were all three out of the city for the day, in the hills, he judged from what the bond told him of Min. She felt very excited about something. The three of them believed Kisman had fled after failing to kill Rand, and the other renegades had either gone with him or never come at all. They had all been trying to talk him into leaving for days, now. At least Lan had not given up.

waɪ kæn ðə wɪmən bi ɹaɪt? luz θɝɪn wɪspɝd fɪɹsli ɪn ɪz hɛd. ðɪs sɪɾi ɪz wɝs ðən ɛni pɹɪzən. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ sɔɹs hɪɹ! waɪ wəd ðeɪ steɪ? waɪ wəɾ ɛni seɪn mæn steɪ? wi kəd ɹaɪɾ aʊt, bɪɑn ðə bæɹiɝ, dʒʌs fəɹ ə deɪ, ə fju aʊɝz. laɪt, dʒʌs fəɹ ə fju aʊɝz! ðə vɔɪs læft ʌnkəntʃɹoʊləbli, waɪldli. oʊ, laɪt, waɪ də aɪ hæv ə mædmæn ɪn maɪ hɛd? waɪ? waɪ?

Why can't the women be right? Lews Therin whispered fiercely in his head. This city is worse than any prison. There is no Source here! Why would they stay? Why would any sane man stay? We could ride out, beyond the barrier, just for a day, a few hours. Light, just for a few hours! The voice laughed uncontrollably, wildly. Oh, Light, why do I have a madman in my head? Why? Why?

æŋɡɹəli, ɹænd fɔɹs luz θɝɪn tə ə mjuɾɪd hʌm, laɪk ə baɪtim bʌzɪŋ nɪɹbaɪ. hi hæd θɔɾ əbaʊɾ əkʌmpəniɪŋ ðə wɪmən ɑn ðɛɹ ɹaɪd, dʒʌs tə fil ðə sɔɹs əɡɛn, ðoʊ oʊnli mɪn hæd ʃoʊn mʌtʃ ɪnθuziæzəm. nɪneɪiv ən əliviə wəd nɑɾ ədmɪt waɪ ðeɪ wɑntəd tə ɹaɪɾ aʊt wən ðə mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ hæd pɹɑməs ðə ɹeɪn ðət wɑz pɔɹɪŋ daʊn aʊtsaɪd naʊ. ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn. tə fil ðə sɔɹs, hi səspɛktəd. tə dʒɹɪŋk ɪn ðə wʌn paʊɝ əɡɛn, ɪf oʊnli fəɹ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm. wɛl, hi kəɾ ɛndʒjʊɹ nɑt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə tʃænəl. hi kəɾ ɛndʒjʊɹ ði æbsəns ə ðə sɔɹs. hi kʊd! hi hæd tə, soʊ hi kəd kɪl ðə mɛn u hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl hɪm.

Angrily, Rand forced Lews Therin to a muted hum, like a biteme buzzing nearby. He had thought about accompanying the women on their ride, just to feel the Source again, though only Min had shown much enthusiasm. Nynaeve and Alivia would not admit why they wanted to ride out when the morning sky had promised the rain that was pouring down outside now. This was not the first time they had gone. To feel the Source, he suspected. To drink in the One Power again, if only for a short time. Well, he could endure not being able to channel. He could endure the absence of the Source. He could! He had to, so he could kill the men who had tried to kill him.

ðəɾ ɪz nɑt ðə ɹizən! luz θɝɪn ʃaʊɾəd, fɔɹsɪŋ pæst ɹændz ɛfɝts tə ʃʌɾ ɪm ʌp. jə ɑɹ əfɹeɪd! ɪf ðə sɪknəs teɪks jə waɪl jə ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə juz ði æksɛs tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ɪt kəd kɪl ju, əɹ wɝs! ɪt kəd kɪl əs ɔl! hi moʊnd.

That is not the reason! Lews Therin shouted, forcing past Rand's efforts to shut him up. You are afraid! If the sickness takes you while you are trying to use the access ter'angreal, it could kill you, or worse! It could kill us all! he moaned.

waɪn slɑpt oʊvɝ ɹændz ɹɪst, soʊkɪŋ ɪz koʊts-liv, ən i lusən ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə waɪnkʌp. ðə θɪŋ hæd nɑt bɪn ɪn tʃɹu ɹaʊn tə bɪɡɪn wɪð, ən i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i hæd bɛn ɪɾ ɪnʌf tə bi noʊɾəst. hi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd! hi ɹəfjuz tə lɛt fɪɹ tʌtʃ hɪm. laɪt, hi hæd tə daɪ, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. hi hæɾ æksɛptɪd ðæt.

Wine slopped over Rand's wrist, soaking his coats-leeve, and he loosened his grip on the winecup. The thing had not been in true round to begin with, and he did not think he had bent it enough to be noticed. He was not afraid! He refused to let fear touch him. Light, he had to die, eventually. He had accepted that.

ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mi, ən aɪ wɑn əm dɛd fəɹ ɪt, hi θɔt. ɪf ɪt teɪks ə lɪɾəl taɪm, wɛl, meɪbi ðə sɪknəs wɪl pæs baɪ ðɛn. bɝn ju, aɪ hæv tə lɪv əntɪl ðə læs bæɾəl. ɪn ɪz hɛd, luz θɝɪn læf mɔɹ waɪldli ðən bɪfɔɹ.

They tried to kill me, and I want them dead for it, he thought. If it takes a little time, well, maybe the sickness will pass by then. Burn you, I have to live until the Last Battle. In his head, Lews Therin laughed more wildly than before.

ənʌðɝ tɔl mæn swæɡɝɾ ɪn, θɹu ðə dɔɹ tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd, ɔlmoʊst ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə stɛɹz ɪn ðə bæk ə ðə ɹum. ʃeɪkɪŋ ɹeɪn fɹəm ɪz kloʊk, hi tɔs bæk ɪz hʊɾ ən stʃɹoʊd tə ðə dɔɹweɪ ʌv ðə wɪmənz ɹum. wɪð ɪz snɪɹɪŋ maʊθ ən ʃɑɹp noʊz, ən ə ɡeɪz ðət swɛp kəntɛmptʃwəsli oʊvɝ ðə pipəl ət ðə teɪbəlz, hi dɪd lʊk sʌmθɪŋ laɪk tɔɹvəl, bʌt wɪð twɛnti jɪɹz' mɔɹ wɛɹ ɑn ɪz feɪs ən θɝɾi paʊnz ə fæɾ ɑn ɪz fɹeɪm. piɹɪŋ θɹu ðə jɛloʊ ɑɹtʃ, hi kɔld aʊɾ ɪn ə haɪ, pɹɪsi vɔɪs ðət wɑz θɪk wɪð ði æksɛns ʌv ɪljən. "mɪstʃɹəs ɡɔlɡɝ, aɪ də bi livɪŋ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. ɝli, soʊ aɪ də ɪkspɛk noʊ tʃɑɹdʒəz fəɹ təmɑɹoʊ, maɪnd!" tɔɹvəl wɑz ə tæɹɑbənɝ.

Another tall man swaggered in, through the door to the stableyard, almost at the foot of the stairs in the back of the room. Shaking rain from his cloak, he tossed back his hood and strode to the doorway of the Women's Room. With his sneering mouth and sharp nose, and a gaze that swept contemptuously over the people at the tables, he did look something like Torval, but with twenty years' more wear on his face and thirty pounds of fat on his frame. Peering through the yellow arch, he called out in a high, prissy voice that was thick with the accents of Illian. "Mistress Gallger, I do be leaving in the morning. Early, so I do expect no charges for tomorrow, mind!" Torval was a Taraboner.

ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪz kloʊk, ɹænd lɛft ɪz waɪnkʌp ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən dɪd nɑt lʊk bæk.

Gathering his cloak, Rand left his winecup on the table and did not look back.

ðə nun skaɪ wɑz ɡɹeɪ ən koʊld, ən ɪf ðə ɹeɪn hæd slækənd, ɪt wɑz nɑt baɪ mʌtʃ, ən dʒɹɪvən baɪ blʌstɝi leɪk wɪnz, ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf tə hæv dʒɹɪvən ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn fɹəm ðə stʃɹits. hi hɛl ðə kloʊk ɝaʊn ɪm wʌn-hændəd, əz mʌtʃ tə ʃɛltɝ, ðə dʒɹɔɪŋz ɪn ɪz koʊt pɑkəɾ əz tə kip ðə ɹɛst ə hɪm dʒɹaɪ, ən juz ði ʌðɝ tə hoʊld ɪz hʊɾ əɡɛns ðə ɡʌsts. ðə wɪnbloʊn ɹeɪndʒɹɑps hɪɾ ɪz feɪs laɪk flɛks ʌv aɪs. ə loʊn sɪdæn tʃɛɹ pæs hɪm, ðə bɛɹɝz' hɛɹ hæŋɪŋ sɑɾən daʊn ðɛɹ bæks ən ðɛɹ buts splæʃɪŋ ɪn pʌɾəlz ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. ə fju pipəl tʃɹʌdʒd əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹits ɹæpt ʌp ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks. ðəɹ wɝ aʊɝz ə deɪlaɪt lɛft, sətʃ əz ɪt wɑz, bʌɾ i wɔk baɪ ən ɪn kɔl ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə pleɪn wɪθaʊt ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn, ən ðən baɪ ðə θɹi leɪɾiz ə mɑɹeɪɾoʊ. hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf ɪt wɑz ðə ɹeɪn. ðɪs wɑz noʊ wɛðɝ tə bi meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ fɹəm ɪn tə ɪn. hi nu hi wɑz laɪɪŋ, ðoʊ.

The noon sky was gray and cold, and if the rain had slackened, it was not by much, and driven by blustery lake winds, it was enough to have driven almost everyone from the streets. He held the cloak around him one-handed, as much to shelter, the drawings in his coat pocket as to keep the rest of him dry, and used the other to hold his hood against the gusts. The windblown raindrops hit his face like flecks of ice. A lone sedan chair passed him, the bearers' hair hanging sodden down their backs and their boots splashing in puddles on the paving stones. A few people trudged along the streets wrapped up in their cloaks. There were hours of daylight left, such as it was, but he walked by an inn called The Heart of the Plain without going in, and then by The Three Ladies of Maredo. He told himself it was the rain. This was no weather to be making his way from inn to inn. He knew he was lying, though.

ə ʃɔɹt staʊt wʊmən kʌmɪŋ daʊn ðə stʃɹit bʌndəld ɪn ə dɑɹk kloʊk sʌɾənli vɪɹd təwɔɹd hɪm. wən ʃi stɑpt ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm ən ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd, hi sɔ ɪt wɑz vɛɹɪn.

A short stout woman coming down the street bundled in a dark cloak suddenly veered toward him. When she stopped in front of him and raised her head, he saw it was Verin.

"soʊ jə ɑɹ hɪɹ æftɝ ɔl," ʃi sɛd. ɹeɪndʒɹɑps fɛl ɑn əɹ ʌptɝn feɪs, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs. "jɔɹ ɪnkipɝ θɔt jə ɪntɛndəd tə wɔk ʌp tə ði əvhɑɝɪn, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ. aɪm əfɹeɪd mɪstʃɹəs kin dʌzn peɪ mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən tə ðə kʌmɪŋz ən ɡoʊɪŋz ə mɛn. ən hɪɹ aɪm wɪð maɪ ʃuz soʊk θɹu, ən maɪ stɑkɪŋz. aɪ juz tə laɪk wɔkɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn wən aɪ wɑz ə ɡɝl, bʌɾ ɪt simz tə hæv lɔst ɪts tʃɑɹm sʌmwɛɹ əlɔŋ ðə weɪ."

"So you are here after all," she said. Raindrops fell on her upturned face, but she did not seem to notice. "Your innkeeper thought you intended to walk up to the Avharin, but she was not sure. I'm afraid Mistress Keene doesn't pay much attention to the comings and goings of men. And here I am with my shoes soaked through, and my stockings. I used to like walking in the rain when I was a girl, but it seems to have lost its charm somewhere along the way."

"dɪd kædzueɪn sɛn ju?" hi æskt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ɪz vɔɪs fɹəm saʊndɪŋ hoʊpfəl. hi hæd kɛpt ɪz ɹum ət ðə kaʊnsəlz hɛɾ æftɝ ɑlɑnə lɛf soʊ ðət kædzueɪn kəd faɪn hɪm. hi kəd hɑɹdli meɪk əɹ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪf ʃi hæd tə hʌn fəɹ ɪm ɪn baɪ ɪn. ɪspɛʃli sɪns ʃi hæd ʃoʊn noʊ ɛvəɾəns ðət ʃi wəd hʌnt.

"Did Cadsuane send you?" he asked, trying to keep his voice from sounding hopeful. He had kept his room at The Counsel's Head after Alanna left so that Cadsuane could find him. He could hardly make her interested if she had to hunt for him inn by inn. Especially since she had shown no evidence that she would hunt.

"oʊ, noʊ; ʃi wəd nɛvɝ də ðæt." vɛɹɪn saʊndəd sɝpɹaɪzd ət ðə θɔt. "aɪ dʒʌs θɔt jə maɪt wɑnə hɪɹ ðə nuz. kædzueɪn ɪz aʊt ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə ɡɝlz." ʃi fɹaʊn θɔtfəli, tɪltɪŋ əɹ hɛd. "ðoʊ aɪ səpoʊz aɪ ʃʊdn kɔl əliviə ə ɡɝl. ən ɪntʃɹiɡɪŋ wʊmən. mʌtʃ tu oʊl tə bɪkʌm ə nɑvəs, ənfɔɹtʃənətli; oʊ, jɛs, vɛɹi ənfɔɹtʃənət. ʃi dʒɹɪŋks ɪn wʌtɛvɝ ʃiz tɔt. aɪ bɪliv ʃi meɪ noʊ ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi weɪ ðəɹ ɪz tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ sʌmθɪŋ wɪð ðə paʊɝ, bʌt ʃi noʊz ɔlmoʊs nʌθɪŋ ɛls."

"Oh, no; she would never do that." Verin sounded surprised at the thought. "I just thought you might want to hear the news. Cadsuane is out riding with the girls." She frowned thoughtfully, tilting her head. "Though I suppose I shouldn't call Alivia a girl. An intriguing woman. Much too old to become a novice, unfortunately; oh, yes, very unfortunate. She drinks in whatever she's taught. I believe she may know almost every way there is to destroy something with the Power, but she knows almost nothing else."

hi dʒɹu hɝ tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit, wɛɹ ðə dip oʊvɝhæŋɪŋ ivz ʌv ə sɪŋɡəl-stɔɹi stoʊn haʊs ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl ʃɛltɝ fɹəm ðə ɹeɪn, ɪf nɑt fɹəm ðə wɪn tə ɛni ɡɹeɪɾ ɪkstɛnt. kædzueɪn wɑz wɪð mɪn ən ði ʌðɝz? ɪt maɪt min nʌθɪŋ. hi hæd sin ɛɛs sədaɪ fæsəneɪɾəd wɪð nɪneɪiv bɪfɔɹ, ən əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə mɪn, əliviə wɑz ivən stʃɹɔŋɝ. "wʌt nuz, vɛɹɪn?" hi sɛd kwaɪətli.

He drew her to the side of the street, where the deep overhanging eaves of a single-story stone house gave a little shelter from the rain, if not from the wind to any great extent. Cadsuane was with Min and the others? It might mean nothing. He had seen Aes Sedai fascinated with Nynaeve before, and according to Min, Alivia was even stronger. "What news, Verin?" he said quietly.

ðə ɹaʊn lɪɾəl ɛɛs sədaɪ blɪŋkt əz ðoʊ ʃi fɝɡɑɾən ðəɹ wɑz ɛni nuz, ðən smaɪl sʌɾənli. "oʊ, jɛs. ðə sintʃæn. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn ɪljən. nɑt ðə sɪɾi, nɑt jɛt; noʊ nid tə ɡoʊ peɪl. bʌt ðeɪv kɹɔs ðə bɔɹɾɝ. ðeɪ ɑɹ bɪldɪŋ fɔɹɾəfaɪd kæmps əlɔŋ ðə koʊst ən ɪnlænd. aɪ noʊ lɪɾəl ə mɪlətɛɹi mæɾɝz. aɪ ɔlweɪz skɪp oʊvɝ ðə bæɾəlz wən aɪ ɹɛɾ ə hɪstɝi. bʌɾ ɪt dʌz sim tə mi ðət wɛðɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn ðə sɪɾi jɛɾ əɹ nɑt, ðəɾ ɪz wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ eɪmɪŋ. jəɹ bæɾəlz doʊn sim tə hæv dʌn mʌtʃ tə sloʊ ðɛm. ðæts waɪ aɪ doʊn ɹɛɾ əbaʊt ðə bæɾəlz. ðeɪ sɛldəm sim tə ɔltɝ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ðə lɔŋ ɹʌn, oʊnli ɪn ðə ʃɔɹt. ɑɹ jə wɛl?"

The round little Aes Sedai blinked as though she forgotten there was any news, then smiled suddenly. "Oh, yes. The Seanchan. They are in Illian. Not the city, not yet; no need to go pale. But they have crossed the border. They are building fortified camps along the coast and inland. I know little of military matters. I always skip over the battles when I read a history. But it does seem to me that whether they are in the city yet or not, that is where they are aiming. Your battles don't seem to have done much to slow them. That's why I don't read about the battles. They seldom seem to alter anything in the long run, only in the short. Are you well?"

hi fɔɹst ɪz aɪz oʊpən. vɛɹɪn pɪɹɾ ʌp əɾ ɪm laɪk ə tʃʌbi spɛɹoʊ. ɔl ðət faɪɾɪŋ, ɔl ðoʊz mɛn dɛd, mɛn i hæd kɪld, ən ɪt hæd tʃeɪnʒd nʌθɪŋ. nʌθɪŋ!

He forced his eyes open. Verin peered up at him like a chubby sparrow. All that fighting, all those men dead, men he had killed, and it had changed nothing. Nothing!

ʃiz ɹɔŋ, luz θɝɪn mɝmɝɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd. bæɾəlz kən ɔltɝ hɪstɝi. hi dɪd nɑt saʊn plizd wɪð ɪt. ðə tʃɹʌbəl ɪz, səmtaɪmz jə kænɑt seɪ haʊ hɪstɝi wɪl bi tʃeɪnʒd əntɪl ɪts tu leɪt.

She is wrong, Lews Therin murmured in his head. Battles can alter history. He did not sound pleased with it. The trouble is, sometimes you cannot say how history will be changed until it is too late.

"vɛɹɪn, ɪf aɪ wɛn tə kædzueɪn, wəd ʃi tɔk wɪð mi? əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən haʊ maɪ mænɝz doʊn sut hɝ? ðæts ɔl ʃi ɛvɝ simz tə kɛɹ əbaʊt."

"Verin, if I went to Cadsuane, would she talk with me? About something other than how my manners don't suit her? That's all she ever seems to care about."

"oʊ, dɪɹ. aɪm əfɹeɪd kædzueɪn ɪz vɛɹi mʌtʃ ə tʃɹədɪʃənəlɪst ɪn səm weɪz, ɹænd. aɪv nɛvɝ æktʃəli  hɝɾ əɹ kɔl ə mæn ʌpəɾi, bʌt . . ." ʃi leɪd fɪŋɡɝtɪps əɡɛnst əɹ maʊθ ɪn θɔt fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən nɑɾəd, ɹeɪndʒɹɑps slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn əɹ feɪs. "aɪ ʃɪl wɪl lɪsən tə juv hæv tə seɪ, ɪf jə kən mænədʒ tə ɪɹeɪs ðə bæɾ ɪmpɹɛʃən jə meɪɾ ɑn hɝ. əɹ ət list smʌdʒ ɪt, əz mʌtʃ əz jə kæn. fju sɪstɝz ɑɹ ɪmpɹɛs baɪ taɪɾəlz əɹ kɹaʊnz, ɹænd, ən kædzueɪn lɛs ðən ɛni ʌðɝ aɪ noʊ. ʃi kɛɹz mʌtʃ mɔɹ əbaʊt wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt pipəl ɑɹ fulz. ɪf jə kən ʃoʊ hɝ jə ɑɹən ə ʃɪl wɪl lɪsən."

"Oh, dear. I'm afraid Cadsuane is very much a traditionalist in some ways, Rand. I've never actually heard her call a man uppity, but . . ." She laid fingertips against her mouth in thought for a moment, then nodded, raindrops sliding down her face. "I believe she will listen to what you have to say, if you can manage to erase the bad impression you made on her. Or at least smudge it, as much as you can. Few sisters are impressed by titles or crowns, Rand, and Cadsuane less than any other I know. She cares much more about whether or not people are fools. If you can show her you aren't a fool, she will listen."

"ðɛn tɛl əɹ . . ." hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. laɪt, hi wɑntəd tə stʃɹæŋɡəl kɪsmən ən dæʃivə ən ɔl ə ðɛm wɪð ɪz bɛɹ hænz! "tɛl əɹ əl bi livɪŋ fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ təmɑɹoʊ, ən aɪ hoʊp ʃɪl kʌm wɪð mi, əz maɪ ædvaɪzɝ." luz θɝɪn saɪd wɪð ɹɪlif ət ðə fɝs pɑɹɾ ə ðæt; ɪf i hæd bɪn mɔɹ ðən ə vɔɪs, ɹænd wʊɾə sɛɾ i stɪfən ət ðə sɛkən pɑɹt. "tɛl əɹ aɪ æksɛpt əɹ tɝmz; aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ maɪ bɪheɪvjɝ ɪn kɛɹhin, ən əl də maɪ bɛs tə wɑtʃ maɪ mænɝz ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ." seɪɪŋ ðət hɑɹdli ɡɹeɪɾɪd əɾ ɔl. wɛl, ə lɪɾəl, bʌɾ ənlɛs mɪn wɑz ɹɔŋ, hi niɾəd kædzueɪn, ən mɪn wɑz nɛvɝ ɹɔŋ wɪð əɹ vjuɪŋz.

"Then tell her . . ." He drew a deep breath. Light, he wanted to strangle Kisman and Dashiva and all of them with his bare hands! "Tell her I'll be leaving Far Madding tomorrow, and I hope she will come with me, as my advisor." Lews Therin sighed with relief at the first part of that; if he had been more than a voice, Rand would have said he stiffened at the second part. "Tell her I accept her terms; I apologize for my behavior in Cairhien, and I will do my best to watch my manners in the future." Saying that hardly grated at all. Well, a little, but unless Min was wrong, he needed Cadsuane, and Min was never wrong with her viewings.

"soʊ jə faʊnd wʌt jə ɑɹ æftɝ hɪɹ?" hi fɹaʊn ət hɝ, ən ʃi smaɪl bæk ən pæɾəd ɪz ɑɹm. "ɪf jə hæd kʌm tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ θɪŋkɪŋ jə kəd kɑŋkɝ ðə sɪɾi baɪ ənaʊnsɪŋ u jə ɑɹ, jə wʊɾə lɛft əz sun əz jə ɹilaɪz jə kænɑt tʃænəl hɪɹ. ðət livz wɑntɪŋ tə faɪn sʌmθɪŋ, əɹ sʌmwʌn."

"So you found what you are after here?" He frowned at her, and she smiled back and patted his arm. "If you had come to Far Madding thinking you could conquer the city by announcing who you are, you would have left as soon as you realized you cannot channel here. That leaves wanting to find something, or someone."

"meɪbi aɪ faʊnd wʌɾ aɪ nid," hi sɛd kɝtli. dʒʌs nɑt wʌɾ i wɑntəd.

"Maybe I found what I need," he said curtly. Just not what he wanted.

"ðɛn kʌm tə ðə bɑɹsælə pæləs, ɑn ðə haɪts, ðɪs ivnɪŋ, ɹænd. ɛniwʌn kən tɛl jə haʊ tə faɪn ɪt. aɪ ɹɪli æm ʃʊɹ ʃɪl bi wɪlɪŋ tə lɪsən tə ju." ʃɪftɪŋ əɹ kloʊk, ʃi sim tə noʊɾəs ðə dæmpnəs ə ðə wʊl fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. "oʊ, maɪ. aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ dʒɹaɪ ɔf. aɪ sədʒɛs jə də ðə seɪm." hæf tɝn tə liv, ʃi pɔzd ən lʊk bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət hɪm. hɝ dɑɹk aɪz wɝ ənblɪŋkɪŋ. sʌɾənli ʃi dɪd nɑt saʊn mʌɾəld əɾ ɔl. "ju kəd də fɑɹ wɝs ðən kædzueɪn fəɹ ən ædvaɪzɝ, ɹænd, bʌɾ aɪ daʊt jə kəd də bɛɾɝ. ɪf ʃi æksɛps, ən jə tʃɹuli ɑɹ nɑɾ ə ful, jəl lɪsən tə hɝ ædvaɪs." ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd əweɪ θɹu ðə ɹeɪn lʊkɪŋ nʌθɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə vɛɹi staʊt swɑn.

"Then come to the Barsalla palace, on the Heights, this evening, Rand. Anyone can tell you how to find it. I really am sure she will be willing to listen to you." Shifting her cloak, she seemed to notice the dampness of the wool for the first time. "Oh, my. I must go dry off. I suggest you do the same." Half turned to leave, she paused and looked back over her shoulder at him. Her dark eyes were unblinking. Suddenly she did not sound muddled at all. "You could do far worse than Cadsuane for an advisor, Rand, but I doubt you could do better. If she accepts, and you truly are not a fool, you will listen to her advice." She glided away through the rain looking nothing so much as a very stout swan.

səmtaɪmz ðət wʊmən fɹaɪɾənz mi, luz θɝɪn mɝmɝd, ən ɹænd nɑɾəd. kædzueɪn dɪd nɑt fɹaɪɾən hɪm, bʌt ʃi meɪɾ ɪm wɛɹi. ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd nɑt swɔɹn tə hɪm meɪɾ ɪm wɛɹi, ɪksɛp fəɹ nɪneɪiv. ən i wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz sɝɾən ə hɝ, iðɝ.

Sometimes that woman frightens me, Lews Therin murmured, and Rand nodded. Cadsuane did not frighten him, but she made him wary. Any Aes Sedai who had not sworn to him made him wary, except for Nynaeve. And he was not always certain of her, either.

ðə ɹeɪn daɪɾ əweɪ waɪl i wɑz wɔkɪŋ ðə tu maɪlz bæk tə ðə kaʊnsəlz hɛd, bʌt ðə wɪn pɪkt ʌp, ən ðə saɪn oʊvɝ ðə dɔɹ, peɪntəd wɪð ðə stɝn vɪzədʒ ʌv ə wʊmən wɛɹɪŋ ðə dʒuəl kɔɹənɛɾ ʌv ə fɝs kaʊnsəl, swʌŋ ɑn kɹikɪŋ hɪnʒɪz. ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz smɔlɝ ðən ðəɾ ə ðə ɡoʊldən wil, bʌt ðə wɔl pænəlz wɝ kɑɹvd ən pɑlɪʃt, ðə teɪbəlz bɪniθ ðə ɹɛd silɪŋ bimz nɑt soʊ kɹaʊɾəd təɡɛðɝ. ðə dɔɹweɪ tə ðə wɪmənz ɹum wɑz ɹɛd, tu, ən kɑɹv laɪk ɪntʃɹəkət leɪs, əz wɝ ðə lɪntəlz ə ðə peɪl mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪsəz. ət ðə kaʊnsəlz hɛd, ðə sɝvɪŋ mɛn sɪkjʊɹd ðɛɹ lɔŋ hɛɹ wɪð pɑlɪʃt sɪlvɝ klɪps. oʊnli tu ʌv əm wɝ tə bi sin, stændɪŋ nɪɹ ðə kɪtʃən dɔɹ, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ dʒʌs θɹi mɛn ət ðə teɪbəlz, fɔɹən mɝtʃəns sɪɾɪŋ fɑɹ əpɑɹt, itʃ ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn ɪz oʊn waɪn. kəmpɛɾətɝz, pɝhæps, sɪns naʊ ən ðən wʌn əɹ ənʌðɝ wəd ʃɪft ɑn ɪz tʃɛɹ ən fɹaʊn ət ði ʌðɝ tu. wʌn, ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ mæn, wɔɹ ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ sɪlk koʊt, ən ə lin fɛloʊ wɪð ə hɑɹd feɪs hæɾ ə ɹɛd stoʊn ðə saɪz ʌv ə pɪdʒənz ɛɡ ɪn ɪz ɪɹ. ðə kaʊnsəlz hɛd keɪɾɝd tə ðə wɛlθiɝ aʊtlæn mɝtʃəns, ən ðəɹ wɝ nɑt mɛni ʌv ðoʊz ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ ət pɹɛzənt.

The rain died away while he was walking the two miles back to The Counsel's Head, but the wind picked up, and the sign over the door, painted with the stern visage of a woman wearing the jeweled coronet of a First Counsel, swung on creaking hinges. The common room was smaller than that of The Golden Wheel, but the wall panels were carved and polished, the tables beneath the red ceiling beams not so crowded together. The doorway to the Women's Room was red, too, and carved like intricate lace, as were the lintels of the pale marble fireplaces. At The Counsel's Head, the serving men secured their long hair with polished silver clips. Only two of them were to be seen, standing near the kitchen door, but there were just three men at the tables, foreign merchants sitting far apart, each engrossed in his own wine. Competitors, perhaps, since now and then one or another would shift on his chair and frown at the other two. One, a graying man, wore a dark gray silk coat, and a lean fellow with a hard face had a red stone the size of a pigeon's egg in his ear. The Counsel's Head catered to the wealthier outland merchants, and there were not many of those in Far Madding at present.

ðə klɑk ɑn ə mæntəl ɪn ðə wɪmənz ɹum - ə klɑk wɪð ə sɪlvɝ keɪs, soʊ mɪn sɛd - ɹæŋ ði aʊɝ wɪð smɔl bɛlz əz i keɪm ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum, ən bɪfɔɹ i hæd fɪnɪʃt ʃeɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz kloʊk, læn ɛntɝd. əz sun əz ðə wɔɹɾɝ mɛt ɹændz aɪ, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. wɛl, ɹænd hæd nɑt ɹɪli ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn əm ət ðɪs pɔɪnt. ivən fəɹ ə tɑvɝən, ðət maɪt bi pʊʃɪŋ ði ɪmpɑsəbəl.

The clock on a mantel in the Women's Room - a clock with a silver case, so Min said - rang the hour with small bells as he came into the common room, and before he had finished shaking out his cloak, Lan entered. As soon as the Warder met Rand's eye, he shook his head. Well, Rand had not really expected to find them at this point. Even for a ta'veren, that might be pushing the impossible.

wʌns ðeɪ boʊθ hæd stimɪŋ kʌps ʌv waɪn ən wɝ sɛɾəld ɑn ə lɔŋ ɹɛd bɛntʃ ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪsəz, hi toʊld læn wʌɾ i hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd, ən waɪ. pɑɹɾ ʌv waɪ. ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt pɑɹt. "ɪf aɪ hæd maɪ hænz ɑn əm ɹaɪt ðɪs mɪnət, aɪd kɪl əm ən teɪk maɪ tʃænsəz ɪskeɪpɪŋ, bʌt kɪlɪŋ əm tʃeɪnʒəz nʌθɪŋ. ɪt dʌzn tʃeɪnʒ ɪnʌf, ɛniweɪ," hi kɝɛktəd, fɹaʊnɪŋ ɪndə ðə fleɪmz. "aɪ kən weɪt wʌn mɔɹ deɪ, hoʊpɪŋ tə faɪn əm təmɑɹoʊ, fəɹ wiks. mʌnθs. oʊnli, ðə wɝld woʊnt weɪt fəɹ mi. aɪ θɔɾ aɪd bi dʌn wɪð əm baɪ naʊ, bʌɾ ɪvɛns ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi mɑɹtʃɪŋ əhɛɾ ʌv wʌɾ aɪ ɪkspɛktəd. dʒʌs ði ɪvɛns aɪ noʊ əbaʊt. laɪt, wʌts hæpənɪŋ ðəɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt kəz aɪ hævən hɝd səm mɝtʃənt næɾɝɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪz waɪn?"

Once they both had steaming cups of wine and were settled on a long red bench in front of one of the fireplaces, he told Lan what he had decided, and why. Part of why. The important part. "If I had my hands on them right this minute, I'd kill them and take my chances escaping, but killing them changes nothing. It doesn't change enough, anyway," he corrected, frowning into the flames. "I can wait one more day, hoping to find them tomorrow, for weeks. Months. Only, the world won't wait for me. I thought I'd be done with them by now, but events are already marching ahead of what I expected. Just the events I know about. Light, what's happening that I don't know about because I haven't heard some merchant nattering about it over his wine?"

"ju kən nɛvɝ noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ," læn sɛd kwaɪətli, "æn pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt jə noʊ ɪz ɔlweɪz ɹɔŋ. pɝhæps ivən ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt pɑɹt. ə pɔɹʃən ʌv wɪzdəm laɪz ɪn noʊɪŋ ðæt. ə pɔɹʃən ə kɝədʒ laɪz ɪn ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɛniweɪ."

"You can never know everything," Lan said quietly, "and part of what you know is always wrong. Perhaps even the most important part. A portion of wisdom lies in knowing that. A portion of courage lies in going on anyway."

ɹænd stʃɹɛtʃt ɪz buts təwɔɹd ðə faɪɝ. "dɪd nɪneɪiv tɛl jə ʃi ən ði ʌðɝz əv bɪn kipɪŋ kʌmpəni wɪð kædzueɪn? ðəɹ ɑn ə ɹaɪd wɪð əɹ ɹaɪt naʊ." ɑn ðə weɪ bæk fɹəm ɪt, ɹæðɝ. hi kəd fil mɪn dʒɹɔɪŋ kloʊsɝ. ʃi wəd nɑt bi mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ. ʃi wɑz stɪl ɪksaɪɾəd əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ, ə filɪŋ ðət sɝdʒd ən fɛl əz ɪf ʃi wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊld ɪt daʊn.

Rand stretched his boots toward the fire. "Did Nynaeve tell you she and the others have been keeping company with Cadsuane? They're on a ride with her right now." On the way back from it, rather. He could feel Min drawing closer. She would not be much longer. She was still excited about something, a feeling that surged and fell as if she were trying to hold it down.

læn smaɪld, ə ɹɛɹ ɪvɛnt wɪθaʊt nɪneɪiv pɹɛzənt. ɪt dɪd nɑt ɹitʃ ɪz aɪsi aɪz, ðoʊ. "ʃi fɝbeɪd mi tə ɹɪvil ɪt tə ju, bʌt sɪns jə ɔlɹɛɾi noʊ . . . ʃi ən mɪn kənvɪnst əliviə ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ kəd kætʃ kædzueɪnz ɪntʃɹəs ðɛmsɛlvz, ðeɪ maɪt bi eɪbəl tə bɹɪŋ əɹ kloʊsɝ tə ju. ðeɪ faʊn aʊt wɛɹ ʃiz steɪɪŋ ən æskt əɹ tə titʃ ðɛm." ðə smaɪl feɪɾəd, livɪŋ ə feɪs kɑɹv fɹəm stoʊn. "maɪ waɪf əz meɪɾ ə sækɹəfaɪs fəɹ ju, ʃifɝɾɝ," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. "aɪ hoʊp jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. ʃɪl nɑt seɪ mʌtʃ, bʌɾ aɪ bɪliv kædzueɪn tʃɹits əɹ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ stɪl wʌn ə ði æksɛptɪd, əɹ meɪbi ə nɑvəs. jə noʊ haʊ hɑɹd ðət wəd bi fəɹ nɪneɪiv tə bɛɹ."

Lan smiled, a rare event without Nynaeve present. It did not reach his icy eyes, though. "She forbade me to reveal it to you, but since you already know . . . She and Min convinced Alivia that if they could catch Cadsuane's interest themselves, they might be able to bring her closer to you. They found out where she is staying and asked her to teach them." The smile faded, leaving a face carved from stone. "My wife has made a sacrifice for you, sheepherder," he said quietly. "I hope you remember that. She will not say much, but I believe Cadsuane treats her as if she were still one of the Accepted, or maybe a novice. You know how hard that would be for Nynaeve to bear."

"kædzueɪn tʃɹits ɛvɹiwʌn əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑvəsɪz," ɹænd mʌɾɝd. ʌpəɾi? laɪt, haʊ wɑz i tə dil wɪð ðə wʊmən? ən jɛɾ i hæd tə faɪn ə weɪ. ðeɪ sæɾ ɪn saɪləns, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə faɪɝ əntɪl stim bɪɡæn tə ɹaɪz fɹəm ðɛɹ aʊt-θɹʌs butsoʊlz.

"Cadsuane treats everyone as if they were novices," Rand muttered. Uppity? Light, how was he to deal with the woman? And yet he had to find a way. They sat in silence, staring at the fire until steam began to rise from their out-thrust bootsoles.

ðə bɑnd ɡeɪv ɪm wɔɹnɪŋ, ən i lʊkt ɝaʊn dʒʌst əz nɪneɪiv əpɪɹd θɹu ðə dɔɹ tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd, ən ðən mɪn ən əliviə, ʃeɪkɪŋ ðə ɹeɪn ɔf ðɛɹ kloʊks ən ədʒʌstɪŋ ðɛɹ dɪvaɪɾəd skɝts ən ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ ət dæmp spɑts əz ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd tə ɡoʊ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðɪs wɛðɝ wɪθaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ dæmp. əz juʒəwəl, nɪneɪiv wɑz wɛɹɪŋ əɹ dʒuəl tɛɹæŋɡɹil, bɛlt ən nɛkləs, bɹeɪslɪts ən ɹɪŋz, ən ði ɑd bɹeɪslət-ænd-ɹɪŋz æŋɡɹil.

The bond gave him warning, and he looked around just as Nynaeve appeared through the door to the stableyard, and then Min and Alivia, shaking the rain off their cloaks and adjusting their divided skirts and grimacing at damp spots as if they had expected to go riding in this weather without getting damp. As usual, Nynaeve was wearing her jeweled ter'angreal, belt and necklace, bracelets and rings, and the odd bracelet-and-rings angreal.

stɪl niɾənɪŋ hɝsɛlf, mɪn lʊkt ət ɹænd ən smaɪld, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl sɝpɹaɪz tə si hɪm ðɛɹ, ʌv kɔɹs. wɔɹmθ floʊd fɹəm əɹ əlɔŋ ðə bɑn laɪk ə kɝɛs, ðoʊ ʃi wɑz stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə səpɹɛs əɹ ɪksaɪtmənt. ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən tʊk lɔŋɡɝ tə noʊɾəs læn ən hɪm, bʌt wən ðeɪ dɪd, ðeɪ hændəd ðɛɹ kloʊks tə wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ mɛn tə bi teɪkən ʌp tə ðɛɹ ɹumz ən dʒɔɪn ðə tu mɛn ət ðə faɪɝpleɪs, hoʊldɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ hænz tə ðə wɔɹmθ.

Still neatening herself, Min looked at Rand and smiled, not at all surprised to see him there, of course. Warmth flowed from her along the bond like a caress, though she was still trying to suppress her excitement. The other two women took longer to notice Lan and him, but when they did, they handed their cloaks to one of the serving men to be taken up to their rooms and joined the two men at the fireplace, holding out their hands to the warmth.

"dɪd jə ɛndʒɔɪ jəɹ ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹeɪn wɪð kædzueɪn?" ɹænd æskt, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz kʌp tə teɪk ə maʊθfʊl ə ðə swit waɪn. mɪnz hɛd dʒɝk təwɔɹd hɪm, ən ə flæʃ ʌv ɡɪl stæbd əlɔŋ ðə bɑnd, bʌt ði ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn əɹ feɪs wɑz pjʊɹəst ɪndɪɡneɪʃən. hi ɔlmoʊs tʃoʊkt ɪn swɑloʊɪŋ. haʊ wɑz əɹ miɾɪŋ kædzueɪn bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk ɪz fɔlt? "stɑp ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət læn, nɪneɪiv," hi sɛd wən i kəd tɔk. "vɛɹɪn toʊl mi." nɪneɪiv ʃɪftəɾ əɹ dɑɹk ɡlaʊɝ tə hɪm, ən i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi hæd hɝd wɪmən seɪ ðəɾ ɪt, wʌtɛvɝ "ɪt" wɑz, wɑz ɔlweɪz ə mænz fɔlt, bʌt səmtaɪmz wɪmən ɹɪli sim tə bɪliv ɪt! "aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ juv ɡɔn θɹu wɪð əɹ ɑn maɪ bɪhæf," hi kəntɪnjud, "bʌt jə woʊnt nid tə ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. aɪ æskt əɹ tə bi maɪ ædvaɪzɝ. əɹ ɹæðɝ, aɪ æsk vɛɹɪn tə tɛl əɹ aɪ wɑnə æsk. tənaɪt. wɪð ɛni lʌk, ʃɪl liv wɪð əs təmɑɹoʊ." hi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɛkskləmeɪʃənz ə sɝpɹaɪzd ɹɪlif, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt wʌɾ i ɡɑt.

"Did you enjoy your ride in the rain with Cadsuane?" Rand asked, raising his cup to take a mouthful of the sweet wine. Min's head jerked toward him, and a flash of guilt stabbed along the bond, but the expression on her face was purest indignation. He almost choked in swallowing. How was her meeting Cadsuane behind his back his fault? "Stop glaring at Lan, Nynaeve," he said when he could talk. "Verin told me." Nynaeve shifted her dark glower to him, and he shook his head. He had heard women say that it, whatever "it" was, was always a man's fault, but sometimes women really seemed to believe it! "I apologize for whatever you've gone through with her on my behalf," he continued, "but you won't need to any longer. I asked her to be my advisor. Or rather, I asked Verin to tell her I want to ask. Tonight. With any luck, she will leave with us tomorrow." He expected exclamations of surprised relief, but that was not what he got.

"ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl wʊmən, kædzueɪn," əliviə sɛd, pæɾɪŋ əɹ waɪt-θɹɛɾəd ɡoʊldən hɛɹ ɪndə pleɪs. hɝ hʌski dʒɹɔl saʊndəɾ ɪmpɹɛst. "ə stʃɹɪk tæskməstʃɹəs, ʃi kən titʃ."

"A remarkable woman, Cadsuane," Alivia said, patting her white-threaded golden hair into place. Her husky drawl sounded impressed. "A strict taskmistress, she can teach."

"səmtaɪmz jə kən si ðə fɔɹəst, wʊlhɛd, ɪf jəɹ lɛd tə ɪt baɪ ðə noʊz," mɪn sɛd, foʊldɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛsts. ðə bɑn kæɹiɾ əpɹuvəl, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz fəɹ dəsaɪɾɪŋ tə ɡɪv ʌp ɑn faɪndɪŋ ðə ɹɛnəɡeɪdz. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ʃi wɑns ən əpɑlədʒi fəɹ kɛɹhin. θɪŋk ə hɝ əz jəɹ ænt, ðə wʌn u woʊn pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɛni nɑnsɛns, ən jəl də ɔl ɹaɪt wɪð hɝ."

"Sometimes you can see the forest, woolhead, if you're led to it by the nose," Min said, folding her arms under her breasts. The bond carried approval, but he did not think it was for deciding to give up on finding the renegades. "Remember she wants an apology for Cairhien. Think of her as your aunt, the one who won't put up with any nonsense, and you will do all right with her."

"kædzueɪn ɪz nɑɾ əz bæɾ əz ʃi simz." nɪneɪiv fɹaʊn ət ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən, ən əɹ hæn twɪtʃt təwɔɹd ðə bɹeɪd dʒɹɔn oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ðoʊ ɔl ðeɪ hæd dʌn wɑz lʊk ət hɝ. "wɛl, ʃi ɪzənt! wɪl wɝk aʊɾ əɹ . . . dɪfɝənsɪz . . . ɪn taɪm. ðæts ɔl ɪɾəl teɪk. ə lɪɾəl taɪm."

"Cadsuane is not as bad as she seems." Nynaeve frowned at the other two women, and her hand twitched toward the braid drawn over her shoulder, though all they had done was look at her. "Well, she isn't! We will work out our . . . differences . . . in time. That's all it will take. A little time."

ɹænd ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð læn, hu ʃɹʌɡd slaɪtli ən tʊk ənʌðɝ dʒɹɪŋk. ɹænd ɛksheɪl sloʊli. nɪneɪiv hæd dɪfɝənsɪz wɪð kædzueɪn ʃi kəd wɝk aʊt wɪð taɪm, mɪn sɔ ə stʃɹɪkt æn ɪn ðə wʊmən, ən əliviə ə stʃɹɪk titʃɝ. ðə fɝst wəd kɑz spɑɹks tə flaɪ əntɪl ɪt wɑz wɝkt aʊt, ɪf i nu nɪneɪiv, ən ðə læs tu hi dɪd nɑt wɑnt. bʌɾ i wɑz stʌk wɪð ðɛm. hi tʊk ənʌðɝ swɑloʊ ʌv waɪn hɪmsɛlf.

Rand exchanged glances with Lan, who shrugged slightly and took another drink. Rand exhaled slowly. Nynaeve had differences with Cadsuane she could work out with time, Min saw a strict aunt in the woman, and Alivia a strict teacher. The first would cause sparks to fly until it was worked out, if he knew Nynaeve, and the last two he did not want. But he was stuck with them. He took another swallow of wine himself.

ðə mɛn ət ðə teɪbəlz wɝ nɑt nɪɹ ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ ənlɛs ʃi spoʊk laʊdli, bʌt nɪneɪiv loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs ən lin təwɔɹd ɹænd. "kædzueɪn ʃoʊd mi wʌt tu ʌv maɪ tɛɹæŋɡɹil du," ʃi wɪspɝd, ə ɡloʊ ʌv ɪksaɪtmən ɪn əɹ aɪz. "aɪl weɪdʒɝ ðoʊz ɔɹnəməns ʃi wɛɹz ɑɹ tɛɹæŋɡɹil, tu. ʃi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz maɪn əz sun əz ʃi tʌtʃt ðɛm." smaɪlɪŋ, nɪneɪiv θʌmd wʌn ə ðə θɹi ɹɪŋz ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hænd, ðə wʌn wɪð ə peɪl ɡɹin stoʊn. "aɪ nu ðɪs wəd dɪtɛk sʌmwʌn tʃænəlɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ əz mʌtʃ əz θɹi maɪlz əweɪ, ɪf aɪ sɛɾ ɪt, bʌt ʃi sɛz ɪɾəl dɪtɛk seɪɾɪn, tu. ʃi sim tə θɪŋk ɪt ʃəd tɛl mi wʌt dɝɛkʃən ðeɪ wɝ, əz wɛl, bʌt wi kəd nɑt si haʊ."

The men at the tables were not near enough to overhear unless she spoke loudly, but Nynaeve lowered her voice and leaned toward Rand. "Cadsuane showed me what two of my ter'angreal do," she whispered, a glow of excitement in her eyes. "I'll wager those ornaments she wears are ter'angreal, too. She recognized mine as soon as she touched them." Smiling, Nynaeve thumbed one of the three rings on her right hand, the one with a pale green stone. "I knew this would detect someone channeling saidar as much as three miles away, if I set it, but she says it will detect saidin, too. She seemed to think it should tell me what direction they were, as well, but we could not see how."

tɝnɪŋ fɹəm ðə faɪɝpleɪs, əliviə snɪf laʊdli, bʌt ʃi ɔlsoʊ loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs tə seɪ, "æn jə wɝ sæɾəsfaɪd wən ʃi kəd nɑt. aɪ sɔ ɪɾ ɑn jəɹ feɪs. haʊ kən jə bi sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð nɑt noʊɪŋ, wɪð ɪɡnɝəns?"

Turning from the fireplace, Alivia sniffed loudly, but she also lowered her voice to say, "And you were satisfied when she could not. I saw it on your face. How can you be satisfied with not knowing, with ignorance?"

"dʒʌst wɪð əɹ nɑt noʊɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd, ɡlaʊɝɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət ðə tɔlɝ wʊmən, bʌɾ ən ɪnstən leɪɾɝ əɹ smaɪl ɹɪtɝnd. "ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ, ɹænd, ɪz ðɪs." hɝ hænz sɛɾəld ɑn ðə slɪm dʒuəl bɛlt ɝaʊn əɹ weɪst. "ʃi kɔld ɪɾ ə 'wɛl.' " hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz sʌmθɪŋ bɹʌʃt ɪz feɪs, ən ʃi ɡɪɡəld. nɪneɪiv æktʃəli  ɡɪɡəld! "ɪɾ ɪz ə wɛl," ʃi læf bɪhaɪn fɪŋɡɝz pɹɛst oʊvɝ əɹ maʊθ, "ɔɹ ə bæɹəl, ɛniweɪ. ən fʊl ə seɪaɪdɑɹ. nɑt vɛɹi mʌtʃ, bʌɾ ɔl aɪ hæv tə də tə ɪts ɪz ɛmbɹeɪs seɪaɪdɑɹ θɹu ɪɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɑz ən æŋɡɹil. ɪzən ðət wʌndɝfəl?"

"Just with her not knowing everything," Nynaeve muttered, glowering over her shoulder at the taller woman, but an instant later her smile returned. "The most important thing, Rand, is this." Her hands settled on the slim jeweled belt around her waist. "She called it a 'Well.' " He gave a start as something brushed his face, and she giggled. Nynaeve actually giggled! "It is a well," she laughed behind fingers pressed over her mouth, "or a barrel, anyway. And full of saidar. Not very much, but all I have to do to refill it is embrace saidar through it as if it was an angreal. Isn't that wonderful?"

"wʌndɝfəl," hi sɛd wɪθaʊt mʌtʃ ɪnθuziæzəm. soʊ kædzueɪn wɑz wɔkɪŋ ɝaʊnd wɪð tɛɹæŋɡɹil ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, wɑz ʃi, ən vɛɹi laɪkli wʌn ə ðiz "wɛlz" əmʌŋ ðɛm, əɹ ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd ɪt. laɪt, hi θɔt noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ faʊn tu tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət dɪd ðə seɪm θɪŋ. miɾɪŋ əɹ tənaɪt wʊɾə bɪn bæɾ ɪnʌf wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ ʃi wəd bi eɪbəl tə tʃænəl, ivən hɪɹ.

"Wonderful," he said without much enthusiasm. So Cadsuane was walking around with ter'angreal in her hair, was she, and very likely one of these "wells" among them, or she would not have recognized it. Light, he thought no one had ever found two ter'angreal that did the same thing. Meeting her tonight would have been bad enough without knowing she would be able to channel, even here.

hi wɑz əbaʊt tə æsk mɪn tə kʌm wɪð hɪm, wən mɪstʃɹəs kin bʌsəld ʌp, ðə waɪt bʌn ɑn tɑp ə hɝ hɛd dʒɹɔn soʊ taɪɾ ɪt simd ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊl ðə skɪn ɔf ə hɝ feɪs. ʃi kæst ə səspɪʃəs, dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ lʊk oʊvɝ ɹænd ən læn ən pɝst əɹ lɪps əz ɪf kənsɪɾɝɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn ɹɔŋ. hi hæd sin əɹ ɡɪv ðə seɪm lʊk tə ðə mɝtʃəns u steɪɾ ət ði ɪn. ðə mɛn, ɛniweɪ. ɪf ði əkɑmədeɪʃənz hæd nɑt bɪn soʊ kʌmftəɹbəl ən ðə fud soʊ ɡʊd, ʃi maɪt nɑɾ əv hæɾ ɛni kʌstəm.

He was about to ask Min to come with him, when Mistress Keene bustled up, the white bun on top of her head drawn so tight it seemed she was trying to pull the skin off of her face. She cast a suspicious, disapproving look over Rand and Lan and pursed her lips as if considering what they had done wrong. He had seen her give the same look to the merchants who stayed at the inn. The men, anyway. If the accommodations had not been so comfortable and the food so good, she might not have had any custom.

"ðɪs wɑz dɪlɪvɝd fəɹ jəɹ hʌzbən ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, mɪstʃɹəs fɑɹʃɔ," ʃi sɛd, hændɪŋ mɪn ə lɛɾɝ sild wɪð ən əntaɪɾi blɑb ə ɹɛd wæks. ði ɪnkipɝz pɔɪntəd tʃɪn ɹoʊz. "æn ə wʊmən wɑz ɪnkwaɪɝɪŋ æftɝ hɪm."

"This was delivered for your husband this morning, Mistress Farshaw," she said, handing Min a letter sealed with an untidy blob of red wax. The innkeeper's pointed chin rose. "And a woman was inquiring after him."

"vɛɹɪn," ɹænd sɛd kwɪkli, tə fɔɹstɔl kwɛstʃənz ən ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðə wʊmən. hu nu tə sɛn ɪm ə lɛɾɝ hɪɹ? kædzueɪn? wʌn ə ði æʃəmən wɪð hɝ? meɪbi wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ sɪstɝz? hi fɹaʊn ət ðə foʊldəd skwɛɹ ə peɪpɝ ɪn mɪnz hænd, ɪmpeɪʃən fəɹ ði ɪnkipɝ tə liv.

"Verin," Rand said quickly, to forestall questions and get rid of the woman. Who knew to send him a letter here? Cadsuane? One of the Asha'man with her? Maybe one of the other sisters? He frowned at the folded square of paper in Min's hand, impatient for the innkeeper to leave.

mɪnz lɪps twɪtʃt, ən ʃi əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ i nu hi kɑz ðə smaɪl. hɝ əmjuzmən tʃɹɪkəl θɹu ðə bɑnd. "θæŋk ju, mɪstʃɹəs kin. vɛɹɪn ɪz ə fɹɛnd."

Min's lips twitched, and she avoided looking at him so hard that he knew he caused the smile. Her amusement trickled through the bond. "Thank you, Mistress Keene. Verin is a friend."

ðət ʃɑɹp tʃɪn ɹoʊz haɪɝ. "ɪf jə æsk mi, mɪstʃɹəs fɑɹʃɔ, wən juv ə pɹɪɾi hʌzbənd, jə nid tə wɑtʃ jəɹ fɹɛnz, tu."

That sharp chin rose higher. "If you ask me, Mistress Farshaw, when you have a pretty husband, you need to watch your friends, too."

wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wʊmən mɑɹtʃ bæk tə ðə ɹɛɾ ɑɹtʃ, mɪnz aɪz spɑɹkəld wɪð ðə mɝθ ðət floʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə bɑnd, ən əɹ maʊθ stʃɹʌɡəld əɡɛns læfɪŋ. ɪnstɛɾ ə hændɪŋ ðə mɛsədʒ tə ɹænd, ʃi bɹoʊk ðə sil wɪð əɹ θʌm ən ənfoʊldəd ðə lɛɾɝ hɝsɛlf, fəɹ ɔl ðə wɝld əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ə neɪɾɪv ə ðɪs mæd sɪɾi.

Watching the woman march back to the red arch, Min's eyes sparkled with the mirth that flowed along the bond, and her mouth struggled against laughing. Instead of handing the message to Rand, she broke the seal with her thumb and unfolded the letter herself, for all the world as if she were a native of this mad city.

ʃi fɹaʊn slaɪtli əz ʃi ɹɛd, bʌɾ ə bɹif flɛɹ ɪn ðə bɑnd wɑz ði oʊnli wɔɹnɪŋ i hæd. kɹʌmplɪŋ ðə lɛɾɝ, ʃi tɝn təwɔɹd ðə faɪɝpleɪs; hi baʊndəd fɹəm ðə bɛntʃ tə snætʃ ɪt fɹəm əɹ hæn dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd tɔs ɪɾ ɪndə ðə fleɪmz.

She frowned slightly as she read, but a brief flare in the bond was the only warning he had. Crumpling the letter, she turned toward the fireplace; he bounded from the bench to snatch it from her hand just before she could toss it into the flames.

"doʊn bi ə ful," ʃi sɛd, kætʃɪŋ ɪz ɹɪst. ʃi stɛɹɾ ʌp ət hɪm, hɝ lɑɹdʒ dɑɹk aɪz dɛdli sɪɹiəs. ɔl ðət keɪm tə hɪm θɹu ðə bɑnd wɑz ə ɡɹɪm ɪntɛnsəɾi. "pliz doʊn bi ə ful."

"Don't be a fool," she said, catching his wrist. She stared up at him, her large dark eyes deadly serious. All that came to him through the bond was a grim intensity. "Please don't be a fool."

"aɪ pɹɑməs vɛɹɪn aɪd tʃɹaɪ nɑt," hi sɛd, bʌt mɪn dɪd nɑt smaɪl.

"I promised Verin I'd try not," he said, but Min did not smile.

hi smuðd aʊt ðə peɪdʒ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. ðə ɹaɪɾɪŋ wɑz ɪn ə spaɪɾɝi hæn i dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ sɪɡnətʃɝ.

He smoothed out the page on his chest. The writing was in a spidery hand he did not recognize, and there was no signature.

aɪ noʊ hu jə ɑɹ, ən aɪ wɪʃ jə wɛl, bʌɾ aɪ ɔlsoʊ wɪʃ jə ɡɔn fɹəm fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn livz dɛθ ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən wɛɹ i stɛps. aɪ naʊ noʊ waɪ jə ɑɹ hɪɹ, tu. jə kɪld ɹɑtʃeɪd, ən kɪsmən ɔlsoʊ ɪz dɛd. tɔɹvəl ən dʒɛdwɪn əv teɪkən ðə tɑp flɔɹ əbʌv ə butmeɪkɝ neɪm zɹæm ɑn blu kɑɹp stʃɹit, dʒʌst əbʌv ði ɪljən ɡeɪt. kɪl əm ən ɡoʊ, ən liv fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ ɪn pis.

I know who you are, and I wish you well, but I also wish you gone from Far Madding. The Dragon Reborn leaves death and destruction where he steps. I now know why you are here, too. You killed Rochaid, and Kisman also is dead. Torval and Gedwyn have taken the top floor above a bootmaker named Zeram on Blue Carp Street, just above the Illian Gate. Kill them and go, and leave Far Madding in peace.

ðə klɑk ɪn ðə wɪmənz ɹum ɹæŋ ði aʊɝ. aʊɝz ə deɪlaɪt ɹɪmeɪn bɪfɔɹ i hæd tə mit kædzueɪn.

The clock in the Women's Room rang the hour. Hours of daylight remained before he had to meet Cadsuane.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiθɹi


CHAPTER 33

blu kɑɹp stʃɹit


Blue Carp Street

mɪn sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə bɛd, nɑɾ əz kʌmftəɹbəl ə pəzɪʃən ɪn ə ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒɹɛs əz ɪt wɑz ɪn bɹitʃɪz, ən ɹoʊld wʌn ə hɝ naɪvz əkɹɔs ðə bæks ə hɝ fɪŋɡɝz. ɪt wɑz ən æbsəlutli jusləs skɪl, tɑm hæd toʊl hɝ, bʌt səmtaɪmz ɪt kɑt pipəlz' aɪz ən meɪɾ əm peɪ ətɛnʃən wɪθaʊt nid tə də mɔɹ. ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðɛɹ ɹum ɹænd wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ɪz skæbɑɹɾɪd sɔɹɾ ʌp tə stʌɾi ðə kʌts i hæd meɪɾ ɪn ðə pis-bɑnd, ən peɪɾ əɹ noʊ ətɛnʃən əɾ ɔl. ðə dʒɹæɡənz hɛdz ɑn ðə bæks ə hɪz hænz ɡlɪɾɝd, mətælɪk ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊld.

Min sat cross-legged on the bed, not as comfortable a position in a riding dress as it was in breeches, and rolled one of her knives across the backs of her fingers. It was an absolutely useless skill, Thom had told her, but sometimes it caught peoples' eyes and made them pay attention without need to do more. In the middle of their room Rand was holding his scabbarded sword up to study the cuts he had made in the peace-bond, and paid her no attention at all. The Dragon's heads on the backs of his hands glittered, metallic red and gold.

"ju ədmɪt ðɪs əz tə bi ə tʃɹæp," ʃi ɡɹaʊld ət hɪm. "læn ədmɪts ɪt. ə hæf-blaɪnd ɡoʊɾ ɪn seɪlaɪzɪn əz mɔɹ bɹeɪnz ðən tə wɔk ɪndə ə tʃɹæp! 'oʊnli fulz kɪs hɔɹnəts əɹ baɪt faɪɝ!' " ʃi kwoʊɾəd.

"You admit this has to be a trap," she growled at him. "Lan admits it. A half-blind goat in Seleisin has more brains than to walk into a trap! 'Only fools kiss hornets or bite fire!' " she quoted.

"ə tʃɹæp ɪzən ɹɪli ə tʃɹæp ɪf jə noʊ ɪts ðɛɹ," hi sɛɾ æbsənli, bɛndɪŋ ði ɛn ʌv wʌn ə ðə sɛvɝd waɪɝz ə lɪɾəl tə laɪn ʌp bɛɾɝ wɪð ɪts meɪt. "ɪf jə noʊ ɪts ðɛɹ, meɪbi jə kən si ə weɪ tə wɔk ɪn soʊ ɪɾ ɪzən ə tʃɹæp əɾ ɔl."

"A trap isn't really a trap if you know it's there," he said absently, bending the end of one of the severed wires a little to line up better with its mate. "If you know it's there, maybe you can see a way to walk in so it isn't a trap at all."

ʃi θɹu ðə naɪf əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kʊd. ɪt flu ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs tə stɪk kwɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ðə dɔɹ, ən ʃi ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl dʒʌmp ɹɪkɔlɪŋ ðə læs taɪm ʃi hæd dʌn ðæt. wɛl, ʃi wɑz nɑt laɪɪŋ ɑn tɑp ə hɪm, naʊ, ən kædzueɪn wɑz nɑt gɑnə wɔk ɪn, wɝs lʌk. bɝn ðə mæn, ðət fɹoʊzən nɑɾ ʌv ɪmoʊʃənz ɪn əɹ hɛd hæd nɑɾ ivən kwɪvɝd wən ðə naɪf stʃɹik baɪ, nɑt baɪ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə flɪkɝ ə sɝpɹaɪz! "ivən ɪf jə dʒʌst si dʒɛdwɪn ən tɔɹvəl, jə noʊ ði ʌðɝz wɪl bi ðɛɹ, haɪɾɪŋ. laɪt, ðeɪ cʊɾə fɪfti sɛl-sɔɹdz weɪɾɪŋ!"

She threw the knife as hard as she could. It flew in front of his face to stick quivering in the door, and she gave a little jump recalling the last time she had done that. Well, she was not lying on top of him, now, and Cadsuane was not going to walk in, worse luck. Burn the man, that frozen knot of emotions in her head had not even quivered when the knife streaked by, not by so much as a flicker of surprise! "Even if you just see Gedwyn and Torval, you know the others will be there, hiding. Light, they could have fifty sell-swords waiting!"

"ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ?" hi stɑp lʊkɪŋ ət ðə naɪf stɪkɪŋ ɪn ðə dɔɹ, bʌɾ oʊnli tə ʃeɪk ɪz hɛɾ ən ɡoʊ bæk tə ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə pis-bɑnd. "aɪ daʊt ðəɹ ɑɹ tu mɝsənɛɹiz ɪn ðə hoʊl sɪɾi, mɪn. bɪliv mi, aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə ɡɛt maɪsɛlf kɪl hɪɹ. ənlɛs aɪ kən si haʊ tə spɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹæp wɪθaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ kɑt, aɪ woʊnt ɡoʊ nɪɹ ɪt." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ fɪɹ ɪn ɪm ðən ɪn ə stoʊn! ən əbaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ sɛns! hi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə ɡɛt kɪld, əz ɪf ɛniwʌn ɛvɝ ɪntɛndəd tə!

"In Far Madding?" He stopped looking at the knife sticking in the door, but only to shake his head and go back to examining the peace-bond. "I doubt there are two mercenaries in the whole city, Min. Believe me, I don't intend to get myself killed here. Unless I can see how to spring the trap without getting caught, I won't go near it." There was no more fear in him than in a stone! And about as much sense! He did not intend to get killed, as if anyone ever intended to!

skɹæmbəlɪŋ ɔf ðə bɛd, ʃi oʊpən ðə fɹʌn ə ðə bɛdsaɪd teɪbəl lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə teɪk aʊt ðə stʃɹæp ðət mɪstʃɹəs kin meɪd ʃʊɹ wɑz ɪn ɛvɹi ɹum, ivən ɪf ʃi dɪd ɹɛn tə aʊtləndɝz. ðə θɪŋ wɑz əz lɔŋ əz əɹ ɑɹm ən əz waɪɾ əz əɹ hænd, wɪð ə wʊɾən hændəl ət wʌn ɛn ən ði ʌðɝ ɛn splɪɾ ɪndə θɹi teɪlz. "meɪbi ɪf aɪ tʊk ðɪs tə ju, ɪt wəd klɪɹ jəɹ noʊz ɪnʌf tə smɛl wʌts ɪn fɹʌn ə ju!" ʃi kɹaɪd.

Scrambling off the bed, she opened the front of the bedside table long enough to take out the strap that Mistress Keene made sure was in every room, even if she did rent to outlanders. The thing was as long as her arm and as wide as her hand, with a wooden handle at one end and the other end split into three tails. "Maybe if I took this to you, it would clear your nose enough to smell what's in front of you!" she cried.

ðət wɑz wən nɪneɪiv ən læn ən əliviə wɔkt ɪn. nɪneɪiv ən læn wɝ kloʊkt, ən læn hæɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz hɪp. nɪneɪiv hæd ɹimuvd ɔl ə ðə dʒuəlɹi ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn ɡɛm bɹeɪsləɾ ən ðə dʒuəl bɛlt, ðə wɛl. læn kloʊz ðə dɔɹ kwaɪətli. nɪneɪiv ən əliviə stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət mɪn wɪð ðə stʃɹæp ɹeɪzd oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd.

That was when Nynaeve and Lan and Alivia walked in. Nynaeve and Lan were cloaked, and Lan had his sword at his hip. Nynaeve had removed all of the jewelry except for one gemmed bracelet and the jeweled belt, the Well. Lan closed the door quietly. Nynaeve and Alivia stood staring at Min with the strap raised over her head.

heɪstəli ʃi dʒɹɑp ðə θɪŋ tə ðə flaʊɝd kɑɹpəɾ ən kɪkt ɪɾ ʌndɝniθ ðə bɛd wɪð ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ fʊt. "aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd waɪ jəɹ lɛɾɪŋ læn də ðɪs, nɪneɪiv," ʃi sɛɾ əz fɝmli əz ʃi kʊd. ət ðə moʊmənt, ðət wɑz nɑt pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli fɝm. waɪ dɪd pipəl ɔlweɪz wɔk ɪn ət ðə wɝs taɪm?

Hastily she dropped the thing to the flowered carpet and kicked it underneath the bed with the side of her foot. "I don't understand why you're letting Lan do this, Nynaeve," she said as firmly as she could. At the moment, that was not particularly firm. Why did people always walk in at the worst time?

"ə sɪstɝ əz tə tʃɹʌst əɹ wɔɹɾɝz dʒʌdʒmən səmtaɪmz," nɪneɪiv sɛd kuli, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɑn əɹ ɡlʌvz. hɝ feɪs bɪlɔŋd ɑn ə pɔɹsələn dɑl fəɹ ɔl ði ɪmoʊʃən ɪt dɪspleɪd. oʊ, ʃi wɑz biɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hɝ toʊneɪlz.

"A sister has to trust her Warder's judgment sometimes," Nynaeve said coolly, drawing on her gloves. Her face belonged on a porcelain doll for all the emotion it displayed. Oh, she was being Aes Sedai to her toenails.

hi ɪzən jəɹ wɔɹɾɝ, hiz jəɹ hʌzbənd, mɪn wɑntəd tə seɪ, ən ət lis jə kən ɡoʊ əlɔŋ tə lʊk æftɝ hɪm. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf maɪ wɔɹɾɝ wɪl ɛvɝ mɛɹi mi, ən i θɹɛɾənd tə taɪ mi ʌp ɪf aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə ɡoʊ wɪð hɪm! nɑt ðət ʃi hæɾ ɑɹɡjud vɛɹi hɑɹɾ ɑn ðət pɔɪnt. ɪf i wɑz gɑnə bi ə bʊl-ɡus ful, ðəɹ wɝ bɛɾɝ weɪz tə seɪv ɪm ðən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɪk ə naɪf ɪn sʌmbɑɾi.

He isn't your Warder, he's your husband, Min wanted to say, and at least you can go along to look after him. I don't know if my Warder will ever marry me, and he threatened to tie me up if I tried to go with him! Not that she had argued very hard on that point. If he was going to be a bull-goose fool, there were better ways to save him than trying to stick a knife in somebody.

"ɪf wəɹ gɑnə də ðɪs, ʃifɝɾɝ," læn sɛd ɡɹɪmli, "bɛst wi bi əbaʊɾ ɪt waɪl ðɛɹz stɪl laɪt tə si." hɪz blu aɪz sim koʊldɝ ðən ɛvɝ, ən hɑɹɾ əz pɑlɪʃt stoʊnz. nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ɪm ə wɝid lʊk ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪd mɪn fil sɑɹi fəɹ hɝ. ɔlmoʊst.

"If we are going to do this, sheepherder," Lan said grimly, "best we be about it while there's still light to see." His blue eyes seemed colder than ever, and hard as polished stones. Nynaeve gave him a worried look that almost made Min feel sorry for her. Almost.

ɹænd bɛltəɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ɪz koʊt, ðən sɛɾəld ɪz kloʊk wɪð ðə hʊd hæŋɪŋ daʊn ɪz bæk ən tɝn təwɔɹd hɝ. hɪz feɪs wɑz əz hɑɹɾ əz lænz, hɪz blu-ɡɹeɪ aɪz ɔlmoʊst əz koʊld, bʌɾ ɪn əɹ hɛd ðət fɹoʊzən stoʊn bleɪzd wɪð veɪnz ə faɪɝi ɡoʊld. ʃi wɑntəd tə tæŋɡəl əɹ hænz ɪn ðə blæk-daɪd hɛɹ ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs bɹʌʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən kɪs ɪm noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni pipəl wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ. ɪnstɛd, ʃi foʊldəɾ əɹ ɑɹmz əkɹɔs əɹ tʃɛst ən lɪftəɾ əɹ tʃɪn, meɪkɪŋ əɹ dɪsəpɹuvəl klɪɹ. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn fəɹ ɪm tə daɪ hɪɹ, iðɝ, ən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə lɛɾ ɪm stɑɹt θɪŋkɪŋ ʃi wəd ɡɪv ɪn dʒʌs kəz i wɑz stʌbɝn.

Rand belted his sword over his coat, then settled his cloak with the hood hanging down his back and turned toward her. His face was as hard as Lan's, his blue-gray eyes almost as cold, but in her head that frozen stone blazed with veins of fiery gold. She wanted to tangle her hands in the black-dyed hair that almost brushed his shoulders and kiss him no matter how many people were watching. Instead, she folded her arms across her chest and lifted her chin, making her disapproval clear. She did not intend for him to die here, either, and she was not about to let him start thinking she would give in just because he was stubborn.

hi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə teɪk əɹ ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz. nɑɾɪŋ əz ɪf i æktʃəli  ʌndɝstʊd, hi pɪkt ʌp ɪz ɡlʌvz fɹəm ðə smɔl teɪbəl baɪ ðə dɔɹ. "aɪl bi bæk əz sun əz aɪ kæn, mɪn. ðən wɪl ɡoʊ tə kædzueɪn." ðoʊz ɡoʊldən veɪnz kəntɪnjud tə ɡloʊ ivən æftɝ i lɛf ðə ɹum, fɑloʊd baɪ læn.

He did not try to take her in his arms. Nodding as if he actually understood, he picked up his gloves from the small table by the door. "I'll be back as soon as I can, Min. Then we'll go to Cadsuane." Those golden veins continued to glow even after he left the room, followed by Lan.

nɪneɪiv pɔzd, hoʊldɪŋ ðə dɔɹ. "aɪ wɪl lʊk æftɝ əm boʊθ, mɪn. əliviə, pliz steɪ wɪð əɹ ən si ʃi dʌzn də ɛniθɪŋ fulɪʃ." ʃi wɑz ɔl kul, dɪɡnəfaɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kəmpoʊʒɝ. əntɪl ʃi ɡlænst ɪndə ðə hɔlweɪ. "bɝn ðɛm!" ʃi jɛlpt. "ðeɪɹ livɪŋ!" ən ʃi ɹæn, livɪŋ ðə dɔɹ stændɪŋ hæf oʊpən.

Nynaeve paused, holding the door. "I will look after them both, Min. Alivia, please stay with her and see she doesn't do anything foolish." She was all cool, dignified Aes Sedai composure. Until she glanced into the hallway. "Burn them!" she yelped. "They're leaving!" And she ran, leaving the door standing half open.

əliviə kloʊzd ɪt. "ʃæl wi pleɪ ɡeɪmz tə pæs ðə taɪm, mɪn?" kɹɔsɪŋ ðə kɑɹpət, ʃi sæt daʊn ɑn ðə stul ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs ən tʊk ə pis ə stʃɹɪŋ fɹəm əɹ bɛltpaʊtʃ. "kæts kɹeɪɾəl?"

Alivia closed it. "Shall we play games to pass the time, Min?" Crossing the carpet, she sat down on the stool in front of the fireplace and took a piece of string from her beltpouch. "Cat's cradle?"

"noʊ, θæŋk ju, əliviə," mɪn sɛd, ɔlmoʊst ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ət ði iɡɝnəs ɪn ðə wʊmənz vɔɪs. ɹænd maɪt bi kəmpleɪsən əbaʊt wʌɾ əliviə wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə du, bʌt mɪn hæd sɛt hɝsɛlf tə ɡɛt tə noʊ hɝ, ən wʌt ʃi hæd faʊnd wɑz stɑɹtlɪŋ. ɑn ðə sɝfəs, ðə fɔɹmɝ deɪmeɪn wɑz ə mətʃʊɹ wʊmən u əpɪɹd wɛl ɪndə hɝ mɪɾəl jɪɹz, stɝn ən fɪɹs ən ivən ɪntɪmɪdeɪɾɪŋ. ʃi sɝɾənli mænədʒ tə ɪntɪmɪdeɪt nɪneɪiv. nɪneɪiv sɛldəm sɛd pliz tə ɛniwʌn ɪksɛpt əliviə. bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn meɪd deɪmeɪn ət fɔɹtin, ən əɹ lʌv ə pleɪɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹənz ɡeɪmz wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli ɑɾəti əbaʊt hɝ.

"No, thank you, Alivia," Min said, almost shaking her head at the eagerness in the woman's voice. Rand might be complacent about what Alivia was going to do, but Min had set herself to get to know her, and what she had found was startling. On the surface, the former damane was a mature woman who appeared well into her middle years, stern and fierce and even intimidating. She certainly managed to intimidate Nynaeve. Nynaeve seldom said please to anyone except Alivia. But she had been made damane at fourteen, and her love of playing children's games was not the only oddity about her.

mɪn wɪʃt ðəɹ wɑz ə klɑk ɪn ðə ɹum, ðoʊ ði oʊnli ɪn ʃi kəɾ ɪmædʒən wɪð ə klɑk ɪn ɛvɹi ɹum wəd bi ən ɪn fəɹ kwinz ən kɪŋz. peɪsɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ ʌndɝ əliviəz wɑtʃfəl ɡeɪz, ʃi kaʊntəd sɛkənz ɪn əɹ hɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒʌdʒ haʊ lɔŋ ɪt wəd teɪk ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz tə ɡoʊ bɪɑn saɪɾ ə ði ɪn. wən ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪnʌf taɪm hæd pæst, ʃi tʊk əɹ kloʊk fɹəm ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊb.

Min wished there was a clock in the room, though the only inn she could imagine with a clock in every room would be an inn for queens and kings. Pacing back and forth under Alivia's watchful gaze, she counted seconds in her head, trying to judge how long it would take Rand and the others to go beyond sight of the inn. When she decided enough time had passed, she took her cloak from the wardrobe.

əliviə dɑɹɾɪd tə blɑk ðə dɔɹ, hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tʃaɪldlaɪk ɪn əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən. "ju ɑɹənt ɡoʊɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm," ʃi dʒɹɔld ɪn ə fɝm vɔɪs. "ɪt wəɾ oʊnli kɑz tʃɹʌbəl, naʊ, ən aɪ kæn əlaʊ ðæt." wɪð ðoʊz blu aɪz ən ðət ɡoʊldən hɛɹ, hɝ kʌlɝɪŋ wɑz ɔl ɹɔŋ, bʌt ʃi ɹimaɪndəd mɪn ə hɝ æn ɹænə, hu ɔlweɪz sim tə noʊ wən jə hæd dʌn sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ ən ɔlweɪz sɔ tə ɪt ðət jə dɪd nɑt wɑnə də ɪɾ əɡɛn.

Alivia darted to block the door, hands on her hips, and there was nothing childlike in her expression. "You aren't going after them," she drawled in a firm voice. "It would only cause trouble, now, and I can't allow that." With those blue eyes and that golden hair, her coloring was all wrong, but she reminded Min of her Aunt Rana, who always seemed to know when you had done something wrong and always saw to it that you did not want to do it again.

"du jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðoʊz tɔks wi hæɾ əbaʊt mɛn, əliviə?" ði ʌðɝ wʊmən tɝn bɹaɪt ɹɛd, ən mɪn hɝidli æɾəd, "aɪ min ðə wʌn əbaʊt haʊ ðeɪ doʊn ɔlweɪz θɪŋk wɪð ðɛɹ bɹeɪnz." ʃi hæɾ ɔfən hɝd wɪmən snɪɹ ðət səm ʌðɝ wʊmən nu nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt mɛn, bʌt ʃi hæd nɛvɝ æktʃəli  mɛt wʌn ə ðoʊz əntɪl ʃi ɪnkaʊntɝɾ əliviə. ʃi ɹɪli dɪd noʊ nʌθɪŋ! "ɹænd wɪl ɡɛt hɪmsɛlf ɪn mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf tʃɹʌbəl wɪθaʊɾ aɪm gɑnə tə faɪn kædzueɪn, ən ɪf jə tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp mi . . ." ʃi hɛld ʌp ə klɛntʃt fɪst.

"Do you remember those talks we had about men, Alivia?" The other woman turned bright red, and Min hurriedly added, "I mean the one about how they don't always think with their brains." She had often heard women sneer that some other woman knew nothing about men, but she had never actually met one of those until she encountered Alivia. She really did know nothing! "Rand will get himself in more than enough trouble without me. I am going to find Cadsuane, and if you try to stop me . . ." She held up a clenched fist.

fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt, əliviə fɹaʊn ət hɝ. faɪnəli ʃi sɛd, "lɛt mi ɡɛt maɪ kloʊk, ən əl ɡoʊ wɪð ju."

For a long moment, Alivia frowned at her. Finally she said, "Let me get my cloak, and I'll go with you."

ðəɹ wɝ noʊ sɪdæn tʃɛɹz əɹ lɪvɹid sɝvəns tə bi sin ɑn blu kɑɹp stʃɹit, ən kæɹɪdʒɪz wəd nɛvɝ əv fɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə nɛɹoʊ, twɪstɪŋ pæsədʒ. sleɪt-ɹuf stoʊn ʃɑps ən haʊsəz laɪn ðə stʃɹit, moʊst ə tu stɔɹiz, səmtaɪmz dʒæmd wʌn hɑɹɾ əɡɛns ðə nɛkst ən səmtaɪmz wɪð ə lɪɾəl æliweɪ bɪtwin. ðə peɪvmənt wɑz stɪl slɪk fɹəm ðə ɹeɪn, ən ðə koʊld wɪn tʃɹaɪd tə kæɹi ɹændz kloʊk əweɪ, bʌt pipəl wɝ bæk aʊɾ ən bʌsəlɪŋ əbaʊt. θɹi stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz, wʌn wɪð ə kætʃpoʊl ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, pɔz tə ɡlæns ət ɹændz sɔɹd, ðən wɛn ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ. nɑt fɑɹ əlɔŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit, ðə bɪldɪŋ haʊzɪŋ ðə ʃɑp ə ðə butmeɪkɝ zɹæm ɹoʊz ə fʊl θɹi stɔɹiz, nɑt kaʊntɪŋ ði æɾɪk ʌndɝ ðə pikt ɹuf.

There were no sedan chairs or liveried servants to be seen on Blue Carp Street, and carriages would never have fit along the narrow, twisting passage. Slate-roofed stone shops and houses lined the street, most of two stories, sometimes jammed one hard against the next and sometimes with a little alleyway between. The pavement was still slick from the rain, and the cold wind tried to carry Rand's cloak away, but people were back out and bustling about. Three Street Guards, one with a catchpole on his shoulder, paused to glance at Rand's sword, then went on their way. Not far along on the other side of the street, the building housing the shop of the bootmaker Zeram rose a full three stories, not counting the attic under the peaked roof.

ə skɪni mæn wɪð vɛɹi lɪɾəl tʃɪn dʒɹɑpt ɹændz kɔɪn ɪndə hɪz pɝs ən juzd ə θɪn stʃɹɪp ʌv wʊd tə lɪft ə bɹaʊn-kɹʌstɪd mitpi fɹəm ðə tʃɑɹkoʊl ɡɹɪl ɑn ɪz bæɹoʊ. hɪz feɪs wɑz laɪnd, hɪz dɑɹk koʊt ʃæbi, ən ɪz lɔŋ ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ wɑz taɪd wɪð ə lɛðɝ kɔɹd. hɪz aɪz flɪkɝd tə ɹændz sɔɹd, ən lʊkt əweɪ kwɪkli. "waɪ dʒju æsk əbaʊt ðə butmeɪkɝ? ðæts ðə bɛs mʌɾən, ðɛɹ." ə tuθi ɡɹɪn meɪɾ ɪz tʃɪn ɔlmoʊs vænɪʃ, ən ɪz aɪz sʌɾənli lʊk vɛɹi ʃɪfti. "fɝs kaʊnsəl hɝsɛlf doʊn it bɛɾɝ."

A skinny man with very little chin dropped Rand's coin into his purse and used a thin strip of wood to lift a brown-crusted meatpie from the charcoal grill on his barrow. His face was lined, his dark coat shabby, and his long graying hair was tied with a leather cord. His eyes flickered to Rand's sword, and looked away quickly. "Why do you ask about the bootmaker? That's the best mutton, there." A toothy grin made his chin almost vanish, and his eyes suddenly looked very shifty. "First Counsel herself don't eat better."

ðəɹ wɝ mit paɪz kɔl pæstiz wən aɪ wɑz ə bɔɪ, luz θɝɪn mɝmɝd. wi wəd baɪ ðɛm ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹi ən . . .

There were meat pies called pasties when I was a boy, Lews Therin murmured. We would buy them in the country and . . .

dʒʌɡəlɪŋ ðə paɪ fɹəm hæn tə hænd, ðə hit soʊkɪŋ θɹu hɪz ɡlʌvz, ɹænd səpɹɛs ðə vɔɪs. "aɪ laɪk tə noʊ wʌt kaɪndə mæn meɪks maɪ buts. ɪz i səspɪʃəs ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, fəɹ ɪnstəns? ə mæn dʌzn də hɪz bɛst wɝk ɪf hiz səspɪʃəs ə ju."

Juggling the pie from hand to hand, the heat soaking through his gloves, Rand suppressed the voice. "I like to know what kind of man makes my boots. Is he suspicious of strangers, for instance? A man doesn't do his best work if he's suspicious of you."

"jɛs, mɪstʃɹəs," ðə tʃɪnləs fɛloʊ sɛd, dʌkɪŋ ɪz hɛd tə ə staʊt ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd wʊmən wɪð ə skwɪnt. ɹæpɪŋ fɔɹ mit paɪz ɪn kɔɹs peɪpɝ, hi hændəɾ əɹ ðə pækədʒ bɪfɔɹ teɪkɪŋ əɹ kɔɪnz. "ə plɛʒɝ, mɪstʃɹəs. ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju." ʃi tɑɾɝd əweɪ wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd, klʌtʃɪŋ ðə ɹæpt paɪz ʌndɝ əɹ kloʊk, ən i ɡɹɪməst saʊɝli əɾ əɹ bæk bɪfɔɹ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ ɪz ətɛnʃən tə ɹænd. "zɹæm nɛvɝ hæɾ ə səspɪʃəs boʊn, ən ɪf i dɪd, mɪlsə wʊdn lɛɾ ɪm kip ɪt. ðæts ɪz waɪf. sɪns ðə læst ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən mɛɹid, mɪlsəz bɪn ɹɛntɪŋ aʊt ðə tɑp flɔɹ. wɛnɛvɝ ʃi faɪnz sʌmbɑɾi doʊn maɪn biɪŋ lɑkt ɪn ət naɪt, ɛniweɪ," hi læft. "mɪlsə hæd stɛɹz pʊɾ ɪn ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðə θɝd flɔɹ, soʊ ɪts pɹaɪvət, bʌt ʃi wʊdn peɪ fəɹ hævɪŋ ə nu dɔɹ kʌɾ əz wɛl, soʊ ðə stɛɹz kʌm aʊɾ ɪn ðə ʃɑp, ən ʃiz nɑt tʃɹʌstɪŋ ɪnʌf tə liv ðəɾ ənlɑkt ət naɪt. jə gɑnə it ðət paɪ, əɹ dʒʌs lʊk əɾ ɪt?"

"Yes, Mistress," the chinless fellow said, ducking his head to a stout gray-haired woman with a squint. Wrapping four meat pies in coarse paper, he handed her the package before taking her coins. "A pleasure, Mistress. The Light shine on you." She tottered away without a word, clutching the wrapped pies under her cloak, and he grimaced sourly at her back before returning his attention to Rand. "Zeram never had a suspicious bone, and if he did, Milsa wouldn't let him keep it. That's his wife. Since the last of the children married, Milsa's been renting out the top floor. Whenever she finds somebody don't mind being locked in at night, anyway," he laughed. "Milsa had stairs put in right up to the third floor, so it's private, but she wouldn't pay for having a new door cut as well, so the stairs come out in the shop, and she's not trusting enough to leave that unlocked at night. You going to eat that pie, or just look at it?"

teɪkɪŋ ə kwɪk baɪt, ɹænd waɪp hɑt dʒus fɹəm ɪz tʃɪn ən wɔkt oʊvɝ tə ʃɛltɝ bɪniθ ði ivz ʌv ə smɔl kʌtlɝz ʃɑp. əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹiɾ ʌðɝz wɝ snætʃɪŋ ə kwɪk mil fɹəm ðə fud-pɛdlɝz, mit paɪz əɹ fɹaɪd fɪʃ əɹ twɪstəd peɪpɝ koʊnz hipt wɪð ɹoʊstəd piz. θɹi əɹ fɔɹ mɛn əz tɔl əz hi, ən tu əɹ θɹi wɪmən əz tɔl əz moʊst ə ði ʌðɝ mɛn ɪn ðə stʃɹit, maɪɾ əv bɪn il. meɪbi ðə tʃɪnləs fɛloʊ wɑz nɑɾ əz ʃɪfti əz i simd, əɹ meɪbi ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðət ɹænd hæɾ iɾən nʌθɪŋ sɪns bɹɛkfəst, bʌt ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf wɑntɪŋ tə ɡɑbəl ðə paɪ daʊn ən baɪ ənʌðɝ. ɪnstɛd, hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf it sloʊli. zɹæm sim tə bi duɪŋ ə ɡʊd bɪznəs. ə stɛɾi ɪf nɑt kɑnstən floʊ ʌv mɛn wɛn ɪndə hɪz ʃɑp, moʊs kæɹiɪŋ ə pɛɹ ə buts tə bi mɛndɪd. ivən ɪf i lɛt vɪzəɾɝz ɡoʊ ʌp wɪθaʊt sɛndɪŋ wɝɾ əhɛd, hi wəd bi eɪbəl tə aɪdɛntəfaɪ ðɛm leɪɾɝ, ən meɪbi soʊ wəd tu əɹ θɹi ʌðɝz.

Taking a quick bite, Rand wiped hot juice from his chin and walked over to shelter beneath the eaves of a small cutler's shop. Along the street others were snatching a quick meal from the food-peddlers, meat pies or fried fish or twisted paper cones heaped with roasted peas. Three or four men as tall as he, and two or three women as tall as most of the other men in the street, might have been Aiel. Maybe the chinless fellow was not as shifty as he seemed, or maybe it was just that Rand had eaten nothing since breakfast, but Rand found himself wanting to gobble the pie down and buy another. Instead, he made himself eat slowly. Zeram seemed to be doing a good business. A steady if not constant flow of men went into his shop, most carrying a pair of boots to be mended. Even if he let visitors go up without sending word ahead, he would be able to identify them later, and maybe so would two or three others.

ɪf ðə ɹɛnəɡeɪdz wɝ ɹɛntɪŋ ðə tɑp flɔɹ fɹəm ðə butmeɪkɝz waɪf, biɪŋ lɑkt ɪn ət naɪt wəd nɑɾ ɪnkənvinjəns əm mʌtʃ. tə ðə saʊθ, ən æliweɪ sɛpɝeɪɾəd ðə butmeɪkɝz fɹəm ə sɪŋɡəl-stɔɹi haʊs, ə deɪnʒɝəs dʒɹɑp, bʌɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, ə tu-stɔɹi bɪldɪŋ wɪð ə simstʃɹɪs ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn flɔɹ stʊd wɔl-tə-wɔl wɪð ðə butmeɪkɝ. zɹæmz bɪldɪŋ hæd noʊ wɪndoʊz ɪksɛpt ət ðə fɹʌnt - ɪn bæk wɑz ənʌðɝ æli, fəɹ teɪkɪŋ əweɪ ɹʌbɪʃ; ɹænd hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi tʃɛkt - bʌt ðəɹ hæd tə bi ə weɪ ɑntu ðə ɹuf soʊ ðə sleɪts kəd bi ɹɪpɛɹd wən nɛsəsɛɹi. fɹəm ðəɹ ɪt wəd bi ə ʃɔɹt dʒɹɑp tə ðə simstʃɹɪsəz ɹuf, wɪð oʊnli θɹi mɔɹ tə kɹɔs bɪfɔɹ ənʌðɝ loʊ bɪldɪŋ, ə kændəlmeɪkɝz ʃɑp, ən ən izi dʒʌmp tə ðə stʃɹit, əɹ ɪndə ði æli bɪhaɪn ðə bɪldɪŋz. ðəɹ wəd nɑt bi ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə ɹɪsk ɪn ɪɾ ət naɪt, əɹ ivən ɪn deɪlaɪt, ɪf jə steɪd bæk fɹəm ðə stʃɹiɾ ən wɝ kɛɹfəl əbaʊt ðə ɡɑɹdz pətʃɹoʊlz wən jə keɪm daʊn. ðə weɪ blu kɑɹp stʃɹit bɛnt, ðə nɪɹəst wɑtʃstænz wɝ aʊɾ ə saɪt.

If the renegades were renting the top floor from the bootmaker's wife, being locked in at night would not inconvenience them much. To the south, an alleyway separated the bootmaker's from a single-story house, a dangerous drop, but on the other side, a two-story building with a seamstress on the ground floor stood wall-to-wall with the bootmaker. Zeram's building had no windows except at the front - in back was another alley, for taking away rubbish; Rand had already checked - but there had to be a way onto the roof so the slates could be repaired when necessary. From there it would be a short drop to the seamstress's roof, with only three more to cross before another low building, a candlemaker's shop, and an easy jump to the street, or into the alley behind the buildings. There would not be a great deal of risk in it at night, or even in daylight, if you stayed back from the street and were careful about the Guard's patrols when you came down. The way Blue Carp Street bent, the nearest watchstands were out of sight.

tu mɛn əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ðə butmeɪkɝz meɪɾ ɪm tɝn əweɪ ən pɹitɛn tə pɪɹ θɹu ðə bʌbəl peɪnz ə ðə kʌtlɝz smɔl ʃɑpwəndoʊ əɾ ə dɪspleɪ ʌv sɪzɝz ən naɪvz fæsən tə ə bɔɹd. wʌn ə ðə mɛn wɑz tɔl, ðoʊ nɑɾ əz tɔl əz ðə pɑsəbəl ilmɛn. ðɛɹ dip kaʊlz hɪd ðɛɹ feɪsəz, bʌt niðɝ kæɹiɾ ə pɛɹ ə buts, ən ɔlðoʊ ðeɪ hɛl ðɛɹ kloʊks wɪð boʊθ hænz, ðə wɪn flɪp ðə teɪlz ə ðɛm ɪnʌf tə ʃoʊ ðə bɑɾəmz ə skæbɑɹɾɪd sɔɹdz. ə ɡʌs pʊl ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ mænz hʊd fɹəm ɪz hɛd, ən i snætʃt ɪt bæk əɡɛn, bʌt nɑt bɪfɔɹ ðə dæmədʒ wɑz dʌn. tʃɑɹl dʒɛdwɪn hæd teɪkən tə wɛɹɪŋ ɪz hɛɹ kɑɾ ət ðə neɪp ə hɪz nɛk ɪn ə sɪlvɝ klɪp sɛt wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ ɹɛd stoʊn, bʌɾ i wɑz stɪl ə hɑɹd-feɪs mæn wɪð ə tʃælənʒɪŋ lʊk əbaʊt hɪm. ən dʒɛdwɪnz pɹɛzəns meɪd ði ʌðɝ tɔɹvəl. ɹænd wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə weɪdʒɝ ɑn ɪt. nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz wɑz əz tɔl.

Two men approaching the bootmaker's made him turn away and pretend to peer through the bubbled panes of the cutler's small shopwindow at a display of scissors and knives fastened to a board. One of the men was tall, though not as tall as the possible Aielmen. Their deep cowls hid their faces, but neither carried a pair of boots, and although they held their cloaks with both hands, the wind flipped the tails of them enough to show the bottoms of scabbarded swords. A gust pulled the shorter man's hood from his head, and he snatched it back again, but not before the damage was done. Charl Gedwyn had taken to wearing his hair caught at the nape of his neck in a silver clip set with a large red stone, but he was still a hard-faced man with a challenging look about him. And Gedwyn's presence made the other Torval. Rand was willing to wager on it. None of the others was as tall.

weɪɾɪŋ əntɪl ðə pɛɹ hæd ɡɔn ɪndə zɹæmz ʃɑp, ɹænd lɪkt ə fju ɡɹisi kɹʌmz fɹəm ɪz ɡlʌvz ən wɛn ɪn sɝtʃ ə nɪneɪiv ən læn. hi faʊn əm bɪfɔɹ i wɑz fɑɹ ɪnʌf əlɔŋ ðə kɝv ə ðə stʃɹit tə luz saɪɾ ə ðə butmeɪkɝz. ðə kændəlmeɪkɝz i hæd mɑɹkt əz ə weɪ daʊn fɹəm ðə ɹuftɑps stʊɾ ə lɪɾəl bɪhaɪn hɪm, wɪð ən æli ət wʌn saɪd. əhɛd, ðə nɛɹoʊ stʃɹit twɪstəd bæk ði ʌðɝ weɪ. noʊ mɔɹ ðən fɪfti peɪsɪz fɑɹðɝ ɑn wɑz ə wɑtʃstænd wɪð ə stʃɹit ɡɑɹɾ ət ðə tɑp, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ bɪldɪŋ ə θɹi stɔɹiz, ə kæbəntmeɪkɝz ðət ʃɛɹd ði æliweɪ wɪð ðə kændəlmeɪkɝ, blɑk ðə ɹuftɑps bɪɑn fɹəm ɪz vju.

Waiting until the pair had gone into Zeram's shop, Rand licked a few greasy crumbs from his gloves and went in search of Nynaeve and Lan. He found them before he was far enough along the curve of the street to lose sight of the bootmaker's. The candlemaker's he had marked as a way down from the rooftops stood a little behind him, with an alley at one side. Ahead, the narrow street twisted back the other way. No more than fifty paces farther on was a watchstand with a Street Guard at the top, but another building of three stories, a cabinetmaker's that shared the alleyway with the candlemaker, blocked the rooftops beyond from his view.

"hæf ə dʌzən pipəl ɹɛkəɡnaɪz tɔɹvəl ən dʒɛdwɪn," læn sɛd, "bʌt nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz." hi kɛpt ɪz vɔɪs loʊ, ðoʊ noʊ wʌn pæsɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ɡlænst ət ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm. ə ɡlɪmps ə tu mɛn wɛɹɪŋ sɔɹdz bɪniθ ðɛɹ kloʊks wɑz ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɛvɹiwʌn u noʊɾəst stɛp ə lɪɾəl fæstɝ.

"Half a dozen people recognized Torval and Gedwyn," Lan said, "but none of the others." He kept his voice low, though no one passing more than glanced at the three of them. A glimpse of two men wearing swords beneath their cloaks was enough to make everyone who noticed step a little faster.

"ə bʊtʃɝ daʊn ðə stʃɹit sɛz ðoʊz tu baɪ fɹəm hɪm," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "bʌt nɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf fəɹ tu." ʃi lʊk saɪdweɪz ət læn əz ðoʊ hɝz wɑz ðə ɹil pɹuf.

"A butcher down the street says those two buy from him," Nynaeve said, "but never more than enough for two." She looked sideways at Lan as though hers was the real proof.

"aɪ sɔ ðɛm," ɹænd sɛd. "ðeɪɹ ɪnsaɪd naʊ. nɪneɪiv, kən jə lɪf læn ən mi tə ðət ɹuftɑp fɹəm ði æli bɪhaɪn ðə bɪldɪŋ?"

"I saw them," Rand said. "They're inside now. Nynaeve, can you lift Lan and me to that rooftop from the alley behind the building?"

nɪneɪiv fɹaʊn ət zɹæmz bɪldɪŋ, ɹʌbɪŋ ðə bɛlt ɝaʊn əɹ weɪst wɪð wʌn hænd. "wʌn əɾ ə taɪm, aɪ kʊd," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli. "bʌɾ ɪt wəd juz mɔɹ ðən hæf wʌt ðə wɛl hoʊlz. aɪ wʊdn bi eɪbəl tə lɪf jə daʊn əɡɛn."

Nynaeve frowned at Zeram's building, rubbing the belt around her waist with one hand. "One at a time, I could," she said finally. "But it would use more than half what the Well holds. I wouldn't be able to lift you down again."

"ʌp ɪz ɪnʌf," ɹænd toʊl hɝ. "wi wɪl liv oʊvɝ ðə ɹuftɑps, ən klaɪm daʊn ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ bɪsaɪd ðə kændəlmeɪkɝ."

"Up is enough," Rand told her. "We will leave over the rooftops, and climb down right over beside the candlemaker."

ʃi pɹətɛstəd, ʌv kɔɹs, əz ðeɪ wɔk bæk daʊn ðə stʃɹit təwɔɹd ðə butmeɪkɝz ʃɑp. nɪneɪiv ɔlweɪz fɔɾ ɛniθɪŋ ʃi hæd nɑt θɔɾ ə hɝsɛlf. "aɪ æm dʒʌst səpoʊz tə pʊt jə ɑn ðə ɹuf ən weɪt?" ʃi mʌɾɝd, skaʊlɪŋ lɛft ən ɹaɪt soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ əz mɛni pipəl ʃaɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ əz fɹəm ðə mɛn flæŋkɪŋ hɝ, sɔɹdz əɹ noʊ sɔɹdz. ʃi θɹʌst əɹ hæn aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ əɹ kloʊk tə ʃoʊ ðə bɹeɪslət wɪð ɪts peɪl ɹɛd stoʊnz. "ðɪs kən kʌvɝ mi wɪð ɑɹmɝ bɛɾɝ ðən ɛni stil. aɪd hɑɹdli ivən fil ə sɔɹd hɪɾɪŋ mi. aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wəd bi ɡoʊɪŋ ɪnsaɪd wɪð ju."

She protested, of course, as they walked back down the street toward the bootmaker's shop. Nynaeve always fought anything she had not thought of herself. "I am just supposed to put you on the roof and wait?" she muttered, scowling left and right so hard that as many people shied away from her as from the men flanking her, swords or no swords. She thrust her hand out from under her cloak to show the bracelet with its pale red stones. "This can cover me with armor better than any steel. I'd hardly even feel a sword hitting me. I thought I would be going inside with you."

"æn də wʌt?" ɹænd æsk sɔfli. "hoʊld əm wɪð ðə paʊɝ fəɹ əs tə kɪl? kɪl əm jɝsɛlf?" ʃi fɹaʊn ət ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ fit.

"And do what?" Rand asked softly. "Hold them with the Power for us to kill? Kill them yourself?" She frowned at the paving stones in front of her feet.

wɔkɪŋ bɪɑn zɹæmz ʃɑp, ɹænd pɔzd ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə loʊ haʊs ən lʊkt ɝaʊn əz kæʒəwəli əz i kʊd. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz ɪn saɪt, bʌt wən i pɹɑɾɪd nɪneɪiv ɪndə ðə nɛɹoʊ æli, hi muv kwɪkli. hi hæd nɑt sin ɛni ɡɑɹdz bɪfɔɹ fɑloʊɪŋ ɹɑtʃeɪd, iðɝ.

Walking beyond Zeram's shop, Rand paused in front of the low house and looked around as casually as he could. There were no Street Guards in sight, but when he prodded Nynaeve into the narrow alley, he moved quickly. He had not seen any Guards before following Rochaid, either.

"ju ɑɹ vɛɹi kwaɪət," læn sɛd, fɑloʊɪŋ kloʊs bɪhaɪnd.

"You are very quiet," Lan said, following close behind.

ʃi tʊk θɹi mɔɹ kwɪk stɛps bɪfɔɹ ɹɪplaɪɪŋ, wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ əɹ lʊkɪŋ bæk. "aɪ dɪdn θɪŋk, bɪfɔɹ," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. "aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɪɾ əz ən ædvɛntʃɝ, kənfɹʌntɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ɹɛnəɡeɪɾ æʃəmən, bʌt jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ʌp ðəɹ tə ɛksəkjut ðɛm. jəl kɪl əm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ noʊ jəɹ ðəɹ ɪf jə kæn, woʊn ju?"

She took three more quick steps before replying, without slowing or looking back. "I didn't think, before," she said quietly. "I was thinking of it as an adventure, confronting Darkfriends, renegade Asha'man, but you are going up there to execute them. You'll kill them before they know you're there if you can, won't you?"

ɹænd ɡlænst oʊvɝ, hɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət læn, bʌt ði oʊldɝ mæn oʊnli ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, əz kənfjuzd əz i wɑz. ʌv kɔɹs ðeɪ wəd kɪl əm wɪθaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ ɪf ðeɪ kʊd. ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ ə duəl; ɪt wɑz ði ɛksəkjuʃən ʃi hæd neɪmd ɪt. ət list, ɹænd hoʊp vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɪt wəd bi.

Rand glanced over, his shoulder at Lan, but the older man only shook his head, as confused as he was. Of course they would kill them without warning if they could. This was not a duel; it was the execution she had named it. At least, Rand hoped very much it would be.

ði æli ðət ɹæn bɪhaɪn ðə bɪldɪŋz wɑz ə lɪɾəl waɪɾɝ ðən ðə wʌn tə ðə stʃɹit, ðə ɹɑki sɔɪl ɹʌɾɪd wɪð ðə tʃɹæks ə ðə ɹʌbɪʃ bæɹoʊz ðət wɝ pʊʃt əlɔŋ ɪt mɔɹnɪŋz. blæŋk stoʊn wɔlz ɹoʊz ɝaʊn ðɛm. noʊ wʌn wɑntəɾ ə wɪndoʊ tə wɑtʃ ðə ɹʌbɪʃ kɑɹts.

The alley that ran behind the buildings was a little wider than the one to the street, the rocky soil rutted with the tracks of the rubbish barrows that were pushed along it mornings. Blank stone walls rose around them. No one wanted a window to watch the rubbish carts.

nɪneɪiv stʊd piɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə bæk ə zɹæmz bɪldɪŋ, ðən sʌɾənli saɪd. "kɪl əm ɪn ðɛɹ slip, ɪf jə kæn," ʃi sɛd, vɛɹi kwaɪətli fəɹ sətʃ fɪɹs wɝdz.

Nynaeve stood peering up at the back of Zeram's building, then suddenly sighed. "Kill them in their sleep, if you can," she said, very quietly for such fierce words.

sʌmθɪŋ ənsin ɹæp snʌɡli ɝaʊn ɹændz tʃɛs bɪniθ ɪz ɑɹmz, ən sloʊli hi ɹoʊz ɪndə ði ɛɹ, floʊɾɪŋ haɪɝ əntɪl i dʒɹɪftəɾ oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ ə ði oʊvɝhæŋɪŋ iv. ði ɪnvɪzəbəl hɑɹnəs vænɪʃt, ən ɪz buts dʒɹɑp tə ðə sloʊpɪŋ ɹuf, slaɪɾɪŋ ə lɪɾəl ɑn ðə dæmp ɡɹeɪ sleɪts. kɹaʊtʃɪŋ, hi muv bæk ɑn ɔl fɔɹz. ə fju moʊməns leɪɾɝ, læn floʊɾəd ʌp tə læn ɑn ðə ɹuf, tu. ðə wɔɹɾɝ kɹaʊtʃt əz wɛl, ən pɪɹɾ ɪndə ði æli bɪloʊ.

Something unseen wrapped snugly around Rand's chest beneath his arms, and slowly he rose into the air, floating higher until he drifted over the edge of the overhanging eave. The invisible harness vanished, and his boots dropped to the sloping roof, sliding a little on the damp gray slates. Crouching, he moved back on all fours. A few moments later, Lan floated up to land on the roof, too. The Warder crouched as well, and peered into the alley below.

"ʃi ɪz ɡɔn," læn sɛd faɪnəli. twɪstɪŋ ɝaʊn tə feɪs ɹænd, hi pɔɪntəd. "ðɛɹ ɪz əɹ weɪ ɪn."

"She is gone," Lan said finally. Twisting around to face Rand, he pointed. "There is our way in."

ɪt wɑz ə tʃɹæpdɔɹ sɛɾ əmʌŋ ðə sleɪts haɪ təwɔɹd ðə pik, wɪð mɛɾəl flæʃɪŋ tə kip wɔɾɝ aʊɾ ə ði æɾɪk ðət lɪftɪŋ ɪt ɹɪvild. ɹænd loʊɝd hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ə dʌsti speɪs, dɪmli lɪt baɪ ðə laɪt θɹu ðə tʃɹæpdɔɹ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hi hʌŋ baɪ hɪz hænz, ðən lɛt ɡoʊ, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðə læs fju fit. ɪksɛp fəɹ ə tʃɛɹ wɪð θɹi lɛɡz ən ə tʃɛst wɪð ðə lɪd θɹoʊn oʊpən, ðə lɔŋ ɹum wɑz əz ɛmpti əz ðə tʃɛst. əpɛɹənli zɹæm hæd stɑp juzɪŋ ði æɾɪk fəɹ stɔɹədʒ wən ɪz waɪf bɪɡæn teɪkɪŋ ɹɛntɝz.

It was a trapdoor set among the slates high toward the peak, with metal flashing to keep water out of the attic that lifting it revealed. Rand lowered himself into a dusty space, dimly lit by the light through the trapdoor. For a moment, he hung by his hands, then let go, dropping the last few feet. Except for a chair with three legs and a chest with the lid thrown open, the long room was as empty as the chest. Apparently Zeram had stopped using the attic for storage when his wife began taking renters.

stɛpɪŋ laɪtli, ðə tu mɛn sɝtʃt ðə flɔɹbɔɹdz əntɪl ðeɪ faʊn ənʌðɝ, lɑɹdʒɝ tʃɹæpdɔɹ laɪɪŋ flæɾ əɡɛns ðə flɔɹ. læn fɛl ðə bɹæs hɪnʒɪz ən wɪspɝd ðət ðeɪ wɝ dʒɹaɪ bʌɾ ʌnɹəstɪd. ɹænd dʒɹu hɪz sɔɹɾ ən nɑɾəd, ən læn snætʃt ðə tʃɹæpdɔɹ oʊpən.

Stepping lightly, the two men searched the floorboards until they found another, larger trapdoor lying flat against the floor. Lan felt the brass hinges and whispered that they were dry but unrusted. Rand drew his sword and nodded, and Lan snatched the trapdoor open.

ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i wəd faɪnd wən i spɹæŋ daʊn θɹu ði oʊpənɪŋ, juzɪŋ ə hæn ɑn ðə koʊpɪŋ tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪz fɔl. hi lændəd laɪtli ɑn ðə bɔlz ə hɪz fit, ɪn ə ɹum ðət sim tə hæv teɪkən ði æɾɪks pleɪs fɹəm ðə wɔɹdʒɹoʊbz ən kæbənəts ʃʌvd əɡɛns ðə wɔlz, ðə wʊɾən tʃɛsts paɪld ɑn wʌn ənʌðɝ ən teɪbəlz wɪð tʃɛɹz stændɪŋ ətɑp ðɛm. ðə læs θɪŋ i ɪkspɛktəd, ðoʊ, wɑz tu dɛd mɛn spɹɔld ɑn ðə flɔɹ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn dʒɹæɡd ɪndə ðə stɔɹədʒ ɹum ən flʌŋ daʊn. ðə blæk swoʊlən feɪsəz wɝ ənɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbəl, bʌt ðə ʃɔɹɾɝ ə ðə pɛɹ wɔɹ ə sɪlvɝ hɛɹklɪp sɛt wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ ɹɛd stoʊn.

Rand was not sure what he would find when he sprang down through the opening, using a hand on the coping to control his fall. He landed lightly on the balls of his feet, in a room that seemed to have taken the attic's place from the wardrobes and cabinets shoved against the walls, the wooden chests piled on one another and tables with chairs standing atop them. The last thing he expected, though, was two dead men sprawled on the floor as if they had been dragged into the storage room and flung down. The black swollen faces were unrecognizable, but the shorter of the pair wore a silver hairclip set with a large red stone.

dʒɹɑpɪŋ saʊnləsli fɹəm ði æɾɪk, læn lʊkt ət ðə kɔɹpsəz ən ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. ðət wɑz ɔl. nʌθɪŋ ɛvɝ sɝpɹaɪz hɪm.

Dropping soundlessly from the attic, Lan looked at the corpses and raised an eyebrow. That was all. Nothing ever surprised him.

"feɪn ɪz hɪɹ," ɹænd wɪspɝd. əz ɪf seɪɪŋ ðə neɪm wɝ ə tʃɹɪɡɝ, ðə twɪn wunz ɪn ɪz saɪd bɪɡæn θɹɑbɪŋ, ði oʊldɝ laɪk ə dɪsk ʌv aɪs, ðə nuɝ ə bɑɹ ə faɪɝ əkɹɔs ɪt. "ɪt wɑz ɪm sɛn ðə lɛɾɝ."

"Fain is here," Rand whispered. As if saying the name were a trigger, the twin wounds in his side began throbbing, the older like a disc of ice, the newer a bar of fire across it. "It was him sent the letter."

læn dʒɛstʃɝd təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹæpdɔɹ wɪð ɪz sɔɹd, bʌt ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi hæd wɑntəd tə kɪl ðə ɹɛnəɡeɪdz wɪð ɪz oʊn hænz, jɛt naʊ ðət tɔɹvəl ən dʒɛdwɪn wɝ dɛd - ən ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli kɪsmən, tu; ðəɹ wɑz ðət swoʊlən kɔɹps mɛnʃən baɪ ðə mɝtʃən ət ðə ɡoʊldən wil - naʊ, hi ɹilaɪzd i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ u kɪld əm soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ wɝ dɛd. ɪf ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ fɪnɪʃt dæʃivə, ɪt wəd nɑt mæɾɝ. feɪn wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. feɪn hæd hɛɹɹoʊd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪð tʃɹɑləks, ən ɡɪvən ɪm ə sɛkənd waʊn ðət wəd nɑt hil. ɪf feɪn wɑz wɪðɪn ɹitʃ, ɹænd wəd nɑɾ əlaʊ hɪm tə ɪskeɪp. hi moʊʃən fəɹ læn tə də əz ðeɪ hæɾ ɪn ði æɾɪk, ən sɛt hɪmsɛlf ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə dɔɹ wɪð ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn boʊθ hænz. wən ði ʌðɝ mæn pʊl ðə dɔɹ oʊpən, hi dɑɹɾɪd ɪndə ə lɑɹdʒ læmplɪt ɹum wɪð ə poʊstɪd bɛɾ əɡɛns ðə fɑɹ wɔl ən ə faɪɝ kɹæklɪŋ ɪn ə smɔl faɪɝpleɪs.

Lan gestured toward the trapdoor with his sword, but Rand shook his head. He had wanted to kill the renegades with his own hands, yet now that Torval and Gedwyn were dead - and almost certainly Kisman, too; there was that swollen corpse mentioned by the merchant at The Golden Wheel - now, he realized he did not care who killed them so long as they were dead. If a stranger finished Dashiva, it would not matter. Fain was another matter. Fain had harrowed the Two Rivers with Trollocs, and given him a second wound that would not heal. If Fain was within reach, Rand would not allow him to escape. He motioned for Lan to do as they had in the attic, and set himself in front of the door with his sword in both hands. When the other man pulled the door open, he darted into a large lamplit room with a posted bed against the far wall and a fire crackling in a small fireplace.

oʊnli ðə spiɾ ə hɪz muvmən seɪv hɪm. ə flɪkɝ ə muvmən kɑt ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, sʌmθɪŋ tʌɡd ət ðə kloʊk bɪloʊɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən i spʌn ɔkwɝdli tə fɛn ɔf slæʃɪz ʌv ə kɝv dæɡɝ. ɛvɹi muvmənt wɑz ən ɛfɝɾ ʌv wɪl. ðə wunz ɪn ɪz saɪd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ θɹɑbd; ðeɪ klɔɾ ət hɪm, moʊltən aɪɝn ən ðə vɛɹi soʊl ʌv aɪs wɔɹɪŋ tə ɹɪp ɪm oʊpən. luz θɝɪn haʊld. ɪt wɑz ɔl ɹænd kəd də tə θɪŋk, wɪð ði æɡəni.

Only the speed of his movement saved him. A flicker of movement caught the corner of his eye, something tugged at the cloak billowing behind him, and he spun awkwardly to fend off slashes of a curved dagger. Every movement was an effort of will. The wounds in his side no longer throbbed; they clawed at him, molten iron and the very soul of ice warring to rip him open. Lews Therin howled. It was all Rand could do to think, with the agony.

"aɪ toʊl jə hiz maɪn!" ðə boʊni mæn skɹimd, dænsɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɹændz kʌt. wɪð ɪz feɪs kəntɔɹɾəd ɪn fjʊɹi, hɪz bɪɡ noʊz ən ɪɹz ðət stʌk aʊt meɪɾ ɪm sim sʌmθɪŋ kəntʃɹaɪv tə fɹaɪɾən tʃɪlʒɹən, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz hɛl mɝɾɝ. tiθ bɛɹɾ ɪn ə snɑɹl, hi lʊk laɪk ə wizəl waɪld wɪð kɪlɪŋ fjʊɹi. ə ɹæbɪd wizəl, ɹɛɾi tə sævədʒ ivən ə lɛpɝd. wɪð ðət dæɡɝ, hi kəd kɪl ɛni nʌmbɝ ə lɛpɝdz. "maɪn!" pdən feɪn ʃɹikt, lipɪŋ bæk əɡɛn əz læn ɹʌʃt ɪndə ðə ɹum. "kɪl ði ʌɡli wʌn!"

"I told you he's mine!" the bony man screamed, dancing away from Rand's cut. With his face contorted in fury, his big nose and ears that stuck out made him seem something contrived to frighten children, but his eyes held murder. Teeth bared in a snarl, he looked like a weasel wild with killing fury. A rabid weasel, ready to savage even a leopard. With that dagger, he could kill any number of leopards. "Mine!" Padan Fain shrieked, leaping back again as Lan rushed into the room. "Kill the ugly one!"

oʊnli wən læn tɝn əweɪ fɹəm feɪn dɪd ɹænd ɹilaɪz sʌmwʌn ɛls wɑz ɪn ðə ɹum, ə tɔl peɪl mæn u keɪm ɔlmoʊst iɡɝli tə mit ðə wɔɹɾɝ bleɪd tə bleɪd. tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾənz feɪs wɑz hæɡɝd, bʌɾ i floʊɾ ɪndə ðə dæns ə sɔɹdz wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə bleɪdmæstɝ i wɑz. læn mɛɾ ɪm wɪð ən ikwəl ɡɹeɪs, ə dæns ə stil ən dɛθ.

Only when Lan turned away from Fain did Rand realize someone else was in the room, a tall pale man who came almost eagerly to meet the Warder blade to blade. Toram Riatin's face was haggard, but he flowed into the dance of swords with the grace of the blademaster he was. Lan met him with an equal grace, a dance of steel and death.

stɑɹɾəld əz ɹænd wɑz tə si ðə mæn u hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kleɪm ðə θɹoʊn ə kɛɹhin ɪn ə wɔɹn koʊɾ ɪn fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, hi kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn feɪn ən ɪz sɔɹd təwɔɹd ðə wʌn taɪm pɛdlɝ. dɑɹkfɹɛn ən wɝs, mɔɪɹeɪn hæd kɔld ɪm lɔŋ əɡoʊ. ðə blaɪndɪŋ peɪn ɪn ɹændz saɪd meɪɾ ɪm stʌmbəl əz i ədvænst ɑn feɪn, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə stæmp ə buts ən ðə ɹɪŋ ə stil ɑn stil bɪhaɪn ɪm əz i ɪɡnɔɹd luz θɝɪnz ɡɹoʊnz ɪn ɪz hɛd. feɪn dænst ən dɑɹɾɪd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə juz ðə dæɡɝ ðət hæd meɪd ðə nɛvɝ-hilɪŋ slæʃ ɪn ɹændz saɪd, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ kɝsɪz ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs əz ɹændz bleɪd fɔɹst ɪm bæk. əbɹʌpli hi tɝn ən ɹæn, təwɔɹd ðə bæk ə ðə bɪldɪŋ.

Startled as Rand was to see the man who had tried to claim the throne of Cairhien in a worn coat in Far Madding, he kept his eyes on Fain and his sword toward the one time peddler. Darkfriend and worse, Moiraine had called him long ago. The blinding pain in Rand's side made him stumble as he advanced on Fain, ignoring the stamp of boots and the ring of steel on steel behind him as he ignored Lews Therin's groans in his head. Fain danced and darted, trying to get close enough to use the dagger that had made the never-healing slash in Rand's side, growling curses in a low voice as Rand's blade forced him back. Abruptly he turned and ran, toward the back of the building.

ðə tɔɹmɛn tɛɹɪŋ ət ɹænd feɪɾəd tə mɪɹ θɹɑbɪŋ əz feɪn vænɪʃt fɹəm ðə ɹum, bʌɾ i fɑloʊd kɔʃəsli ivən soʊ. ət ðə dɔɹweɪ, ðoʊ, hi sɔ ðət feɪn wɑz nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd. ðə mæn stʊd weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm ət ðə hɛɾ ə stɛɹz liɾɪŋ daʊn, ðə kɝv dæɡɝ ɪn wʌn hænd. ðə lɑɹdʒ ɹubi kæpɪŋ ðə hɪlt ɡlɪɾɝd, kætʃɪŋ ðə laɪɾ ə ðə læmps sɛɾ ɑn teɪbəlz əbaʊt ðə wɪndoʊləs ɹum. əz sun əz ɹænd stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum, faɪɝ ən aɪs ɹeɪdʒd ɪn ɪz saɪd tɪl i kəd fil ɪz hɑɹt ʃʌɾɝɪŋ. steɪɪŋ əpɹaɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝɾ ʌv aɪɝn wɪl. teɪkɪŋ ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd meɪd ðəɾ ɛfɝt sim peɪl, bʌɾ i tʊk ðət stɛp, ən ðə nɛkst.

The torment tearing at Rand faded to mere throbbing as Fain vanished from the room, but he followed cautiously even so. At the doorway, though, he saw that Fain was not trying to hide. The man stood waiting for him at the head of stairs leading down, the curved dagger in one hand. The large ruby capping the hilt glittered, catching the light of the lamps set on tables about the windowless room. As soon as Rand stepped into the room, fire and ice raged in his side till he could feel his heart shuddering. Staying upright was an effort of iron will. Taking a step forward made that effort seem pale, but he took that step, and the next.

"aɪ wɑn ɪm tə noʊ hu ɪz kɪlɪŋ hɪm," feɪn waɪn pətʃələnli. hi wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət ɹænd, bʌɾ i sim tə tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. "aɪ wɑn ɪm tə noʊ! bʌɾ ɪf hiz dɛd, ðən hɪl stɑp hɔntɪŋ maɪ dʒɹimz. jɛs. hɪl stɑp, ðɛn." wɪð ə smaɪl, hi ɹeɪzd ɪz fɹi hænd.

"I want him to know who is killing him," Fain whined petulantly. He was glaring straight at Rand, but he seemed to talking to himself. "I want him to know! But if he's dead, then he will stop haunting my dreams. Yes. He will stop, then." With a smile, he raised his free hand.

tɔɹvəl ən dʒɛdwɪn keɪm ʌp ðə stɛɹz wɪð ðɛɹ kloʊks oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz.

Torval and Gedwyn came up the stairs with their cloaks over their arms.

"aɪ seɪ wi ɑɹənt ɡoʊɪŋ nɪɹ ɪm əntɪl aɪ noʊ wɛɹ ði ʌðɝz ɑɹ," dʒɛdwɪn ɡɹaʊld. "ðə l wɪl kɪl əs ɪf . . ."

"I say we aren't going near him until I know where the others are," Gedwyn growled. "The M'Hael will kill us if . . ."

wɪθaʊt θɔt, ɹænd twɪstəɾ ɪz ɹɪsts ɪn kʌɾɪŋ ðə wɪn ən ɪmiɾiətli fɑloʊd wɪð ənfoʊldɪŋ ðə fæn.

Without thought, Rand twisted his wrists in Cutting the Wind and immediately followed with Unfolding the Fan.

ði ɪluʒən ə dɛd mɛn kʌm bæk tə laɪf vænɪʃt, ən feɪn lɛp bæk wɪð ə ʃɹik, blʌd stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz feɪs. sʌɾənli hi tɪltəɾ ɪz hɛɾ əz ðoʊ lɪsnɪŋ, ən ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ, eɪmɪŋ ə skɹim ʌv wɝdləs fjʊɹi ət ɹænd, hi flɛd daʊn ðə stɛɹz.

The illusion of dead men come back to life vanished, and Fain leaped back with a shriek, blood streaming down the side of his face. Suddenly he tilted his head as though listening, and a moment later, aiming a scream of wordless fury at Rand, he fled down the stairs.

wʌndɝɪŋ, ɹænd muv tə fɑloʊ ðə dɪsɛndɪŋ θʌmps ə feɪnz buts, bʌt læn kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹm.

Wondering, Rand moved to follow the descending thumps of Fain's boots, but Lan caught his arm.

"ðə stʃɹiɾ aʊt fɹʌn ɪz fɪlɪŋ ʌp wɪð ɡɑɹdz, ʃifɝɾɝ." ə dɑɹk wɛtnəs steɪn ðə lɛf saɪɾ ə lænz koʊt, bʌɾ ɪz sɔɹd wɑz ʃiðd, pɹuf ə hu hæd dæns ðət dæns ðə bɛɾɝ. "taɪm wi wɝ ɑn ðə ɹuf, ɪf wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ."

"The street out front is filling up with Guards, sheepherder." A dark wetness stained the left side of Lan's coat, but his sword was sheathed, proof of who had danced that dance the better. "Time we were on the roof, if we're going."

"ə mæn kæn ivən wɔk daʊn ən æli wɪð ə sɔɹɾ ɪn ðɪs sɪɾi," ɹænd mʌɾɝd, ʃiðɪŋ ɪz oʊn bleɪd. læn dɪd nɑt læf, bʌt ðɛn, hi sɛldəm dɪɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ nɪneɪiv. ʃaʊts ən skɹimz ɹoʊz ʌp ðə stɛɹwɛl fɹəm bɪloʊ. meɪbi ðə stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz wəd kæptʃɝ feɪn. meɪbi hi wəd hæŋ fəɹ ðə kɔɹpsəz ʌp hɪɹ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf, bʌɾ ɪt wəɾ əv tə du. ɹænd wɑz taɪɝɾ ʌv wʌt wəɾ əv tə du.

"A man can't even walk down an alley with a sword in this city," Rand muttered, sheathing his own blade. Lan did not laugh, but then, he seldom did except for Nynaeve. Shouts and screams rose up the stairwell from below. Maybe the Street Guards would capture Fain. Maybe he would hang for the corpses up here. It was not enough, but it would have to do. Rand was tired of what would have to do.

ɪn ði æɾɪk, læn lɛp tə kætʃ ðə koʊpɪŋ ə ðə tʃɹæpdɔɹ ɪn ðə ɹuf ən pʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp ən aʊt. ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i kəd meɪk ðət lip. ði æɡəni wɑz ɡɔn wɪð feɪn, bʌɾ ɪz saɪd fɛlt əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn biɾən wɪð æksəhændəlz. əz i wɑz ɡæðɝɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə tʃɹaɪ, læn pʊɾ ɪz hɛd bæk θɹu ðə tʃɹæpdɔɹ ən ɪkstɛndəɾ ə hænd.

In the attic, Lan leapt to catch the coping of the trapdoor in the roof and pull himself up and out. Rand was not sure he could make that leap. The agony was gone with Fain, but his side felt as if it had been beaten with axehandles. As he was gathering himself to try, Lan put his head back through the trapdoor and extended a hand.

"ðeɪ meɪ nɑt kʌm ʌp ɹaɪɾ əweɪ, ʃifɝɾɝ, bʌɾ ɪz ðəɹ ɛni pɔɪn ɪn weɪɾɪŋ tə si?"

"They may not come up right away, sheepherder, but is there any point in waiting to see?"

ɹænd kɑt lænz hæn ən lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi dʒɹɔn ʌp tə wɛɹ i kəd kætʃ ðə koʊpɪŋ ən pʊl hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ɑntu ðə ɹuf. kɹaʊtʃɪŋ loʊ, ðeɪ muvd əlɔŋ ðə dæmp sleɪts tə ðə bæk ə ðə bɪldɪŋ, ðən bɪɡæn ðə ʃɔɹt klaɪm tə ðə pik. ðəɹ maɪt bi ɡɑɹdz ɪn ðə stʃɹit, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ə tʃæns tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ ənsin, ɪspɛʃli ɪf ðeɪ kəd sɪɡnəl nɪneɪiv tə meɪk ə dɪstʃɹækʃən.

Rand caught Lan's hand and let himself be drawn up to where he could catch the coping and pull himself out onto the roof. Crouching low, they moved along the damp slates to the back of the building, then began the short climb to the peak. There might be Guards in the street, but there was still a chance to get away unseen, especially if they could signal Nynaeve to make a distraction.

ɹænd ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə ɹuf pik, ən bɪhaɪn hɪm, lænz but slɪpt ɑn ðə sleɪts wɪð ə skɹitʃ. twɪstɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ɹænd siz ði ʌðɝ mænz ɹɪst, bʌt lænz weɪt pʊld ɪm daʊn ðə slɪk ɡɹeɪ sloʊp. veɪnli ðeɪ skɹæbəld wɪð ðɛɹ fɹi hænz fəɹ ɛni hoʊld, ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə sleɪt, ɛniθɪŋ. niðɝ ʌɾɝd ə wɝd. lænz lɛɡz wɛn oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ, ən ðən ðə ɹɛst ə hɪm. ɹændz ɡlʌv fɪŋɡɝz kɑɾ ɑn sʌmθɪŋ; hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt, ən i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. hɪz hɛɾ ən wʌn ʃoʊldɝ stʌk oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə ɹuf, ən læn wɑz dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ɪz ɡɹɪp əbʌv ðə tɛn-peɪs dʒɹɑp tə ði æli nɛks tə ðə loʊ haʊs.

Rand reached for the roof peak, and behind him, Lan's boot slipped on the slates with a screech. Twisting around, Rand seized the other man's wrist, but Lan's weight pulled him down the slick gray slope. Vainly they scrabbled with their free hands for any hold, the edge of a slate, anything. Neither uttered a word. Lan's legs went over the edge, and then the rest of him. Rand's gloved fingers caught on something; he did not know what, and he did not care. His head and one shoulder stuck over the edge of the roof, and Lan was dangling from his grip above the ten-pace drop to the alley next to the low house.

"lɛt ɡoʊ," læn sɛd kwaɪətli. hi lʊkt ʌp ət ɹænd, hɪz aɪz koʊld ən hɑɹd, noʊ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs. "lɛt ɡoʊ."

"Let go," Lan said quietly. He looked up at Rand, his eyes cold and hard, no expression on his face. "Let go."

"wɛn ðə sʌn tɝnz ɡɹin," ɹænd toʊl hɪm. ɪf i kəd dʒʌs pʊl ði ʌðɝ mæn ʌp ə lɪɾəl, ɪnʌf tə kætʃ ði iv . . .

"When the sun turns green," Rand told him. If he could just pull the other man up a little, enough to catch the eave . . .

wʌtɛvɝ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz hæd kɑt bɹoʊk wɪð ə ʃɑɹp snæp, ən ði æli ɹʌʃt ʌp tə mit ðɛm.

Whatever his fingers had caught broke with a sharp snap, and the alley rushed up to meet them.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifɔɹ


CHAPTER 34

ðə hʌmɪŋbɝdz sikɹət


The Hummingbird's Secret

tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə bi tu ɑbviəs əbaʊt wɑtʃɪŋ ði æli bɪsaɪd ðə kændəlmeɪkɝz, nɪneɪiv sɛt ðə foʊldəd lɛŋθ ə flæt ɡɹin bɹeɪd bæk ɑn ðə hɔkɝz tʃɹeɪ ən slɪpt əɹ hæn ɪnsaɪɾ əɹ kloʊk tə hɛlp hoʊld ɪt ʃʌɾ əɡɛns ðə wɪnd. ɪt wɑz ə faɪnɝ kloʊk ðən ɛni ɑn ðə pipəl wɔkɪŋ baɪ, bʌt pleɪn ɪnʌf ðət noʊ wʌn mɔɹ ðən ɡlænst əɾ əɹ ɪn pæsɪŋ. ðeɪ wəɾ ɪf ðeɪ sɔ hɝ bɛlt, ðoʊ. wɪmən u wɔɹ dʒuəlz dɪd nɑt fɹikwən blu kɑɹp stʃɹit, əɹ baɪ fɹəm stʃɹit pɛdlɝz. æftɝ stændɪŋ ðəɹ fəɹ əɹ tə fɪŋɡɝ ɛvɹi læs bɪɾ ə bɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə tʃɹeɪ, ðə lin wʊmən ɡɹɪməst, bʌt nɪneɪiv hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɑt θɹi pisəz ə bɹeɪd, tu lɛŋθs ə ɹɪbən ən ə pækəɾ ə pɪnz fɹəm hɔkɝz, dʒʌs fəɹ ə ɹizən tə lɔɪɾɝ. pɪnz wɝ ɔlweɪz jusfəl, bʌt ʃi dɪd hɑt noʊ wʌt ʃi wɑz gɑnə də wɪð ðə ɹɛst.

Trying not to be too obvious about watching the alley beside the candlemaker's, Nynaeve set the folded length of flat green braid back on the hawker's tray and slipped her hand inside her cloak to help hold it shut against the wind. It was a finer cloak than any on the people walking by, but plain enough that no one more than glanced at her in passing. They would if they saw her belt, though. Women who wore jewels did not frequent Blue Carp Street, or buy from street peddlers. After standing there for her to finger every last bit of braid on the tray, the lean woman grimaced, but Nynaeve had already bought three pieces of braid, two lengths of ribbon and a packet of pins from hawkers, just for a reason to loiter. Pins were always useful, but she did hot know what she was going to do with the rest.

sʌɾənli ʃi hɝɾ ə kəmoʊʃən daʊn ðə stʃɹit, ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə wɑtʃstænd, ðə ɹækɪɾ ə stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz' ɹæɾəlz laʊɾ ən ɡɹoʊɪŋ laʊɾɝ. ðə ɡɑɹdzmæn skɹæmbəl daʊn fɹəm ɪz pɝtʃ. pæsɝzbi nɪɹ ðə wɑtʃstæn stɛɹd daʊn ðə kɹɔsɪŋ stʃɹiɾ ən fɝðɝ ʌp blu kɑɹp stʃɹit, ðən hɝidli pɹɛs ðɛmsɛlvz əɡɛns ðə saɪdz ə ðə stʃɹiɾ əz ɹʌnɪŋ ɡɑɹdzmɪn əpɪɹd, swɪŋɪŋ ðɛɹ wʊɾən ɹæɾəlz oʊvɝhɛd. nɑɾ ə pətʃɹoʊl ə tu əɹ θɹi, bʌɾ ə flʌɾ ʌv ɑɹmɝd mɛn paʊndɪŋ daʊn blu kɑɹp stʃɹit, ən mɔɹ dʒɔɪnɪŋ ðə taɪd fɹəm ði ʌðɝ stʃɹit. pipəl sloʊ tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ weɪ wɝ ʃʌvd əsaɪd, ən wʌn mæn wɛn daʊn ʌndɝ ðɛɹ buts. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sloʊ ə stɛp əz ðeɪ tʃɹæmpəl hɪm.

Suddenly she heard a commotion down the street, in the direction of the watchstand, the racket of Street Guards' rattles loud and growing louder. The Guardsman scrambled down from his perch. Passersby near the watchstand stared down the crossing street and further up Blue Carp Street, then hurriedly pressed themselves against the sides of the street as running Guardsmen appeared, swinging their wooden rattles overhead. Not a patrol of two or three, but a flood of armored men pounding down Blue Carp Street, and more joining the tide from the other street. People slow to get out of their way were shoved aside, and one man went down under their boots. They did not slow a step as they trampled him.

ðə bɹeɪd-sɛlɝ spɪl hæf əɹ tʃɹeɪ skɹæmbəlɪŋ tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit, ən nɪneɪiv wɑz dʒʌst əz kwɪk tə skwiz hɝsɛlf əɡɛns ðə stoʊn haʊsfɹʌn əlɔŋsaɪd ðə ɡeɪpɪŋ wʊmən. fɪlɪŋ ðə stʃɹit, kætʃpoʊlz ən kɔɹɾɝstɑfs dʒʌɾɪŋ ʌp laɪk paɪks, ðə mæs ʌv ɡɑɹdzmɪn bʌmpt əɹ wɪð ʃoʊldɝz, skɹeɪpɪŋ əɹ əlɔŋ ðə wɔl. ðə bɹeɪd-sɛlɝ jɛld əz əɹ tʃɹeɪ wɑz ɹɪpt əweɪ ən vænɪʃt, bʌt ðə ɡɑɹdz wɝ ɔl stɛɹɪŋ əhɛd.

The braid-seller spilled half her tray scrambling to the side of the street, and Nynaeve was just as quick to squeeze herself against the stone housefront alongside the gaping woman. Filling the street, catchpoles and quarterstaffs jutting up like pikes, the mass of Guardsmen bumped her with shoulders, scraping her along the wall. The braid-seller yelled as her tray was ripped away and vanished, but the Guards were all staring ahead.

wən ðə læs mæn ɹæn pæst, nɪneɪiv wɑz ə ɡʊd tɛn peɪsɪz fɑɹðɝ daʊn ðə stʃɹit ðən ʃi hæd bɪn. ðə bɹeɪd-sɛlɝ ʃaʊɾəd æŋɡɹəli ən ʃʊk əɹ fɪsts ət ðə mɛnz bæks. ɪndɪɡnənli pʊlɪŋ əɹ twɪstəd kloʊk ɪndə səm pɹɑpɝ ɔɹɾɝ, nɪneɪiv wɑz ʌv ə maɪn tə də mɔɹ ðən ʃaʊt. ʃi wɑz hæf ʌv ə maɪn tə . . .

When the last man ran past, Nynaeve was a good ten paces farther down the street than she had been. The braid-seller shouted angrily and shook her fists at the men's backs. Indignantly pulling her twisted cloak into some proper order, Nynaeve was of a mind to do more than shout. She was half of a mind to . . .

əbɹʌpli hɝ bɹɛθ fɹoʊz ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt. ðə stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz hæd stɑpt ɪn ə mæs, pɝhæps ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn ʃaʊɾɪŋ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ əz ɪf ðeɪ sʌɾənli wɝ ənsɝɾən wʌt tə də nɛkst. ðeɪ wɝ stɑpt ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə butmeɪkɝz ʃɑp. oʊ, laɪt, læn. ən ɹænd, tu, ɔlweɪz ɹænd, bʌt fɝst ən fɔɹmoʊst ɔlweɪz ðə hɑɹɾ ə hɝ hɑɹt, læn.

Abruptly her breath froze in her throat. The Street Guards had stopped in a mass, perhaps a hundred men shouting to one another as if they suddenly were uncertain what to do next. They were stopped in front of the bootmaker's shop. Oh, Light, Lan. And Rand, too, always Rand, but first and foremost always the heart of her heart, Lan.

ʃi meɪd hɝsɛlf bɹið. ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn. ʃi tʌtʃt ðə dʒuəl bɛlt, ðə wɛl, ɝaʊn əɹ weɪst. lɛs ðən hæf ðə seɪaɪdɑɹ ʃi hæd stɔɹɾ ɪn ɪt ɹɪmeɪnd, bʌɾ ɪt maɪt bi ɪnʌf. ɪt wəɾ əv tə bi ɪnʌf, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ fəɹ wʌɾ ɪɡzækli, jɛt. tʌɡɪŋ ðə kaʊl ə hɝ kloʊk ʌp, ʃi stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə mɛn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə butmeɪkɝz. nʌn wɑz lʊkɪŋ əɹ weɪ. ʃi kəd . . .

She made herself breathe. A hundred men. She touched the jeweled belt, the Well, around her waist. Less than half the saidar she had stored in it remained, but it might be enough. It would have to be enough, though she did not know for what exactly, yet. Tugging the cowl of her cloak up, she started toward the men in front of the bootmaker's. None was looking her way. She could . . .

hænz siz hɝ, dʒɹæɡɪŋ əɹ bækwɝɾ ən spɪnɪŋ əɹ ɝaʊn tə feɪs ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən.

Hands seized her, dragging her backward and spinning her around to face the other direction.

kædzueɪn hæd wʌn ə hɝ ɑɹmz, ʃi ɹilaɪzd, ən əliviə ði ʌðɝ, ðə pɛɹ ə ðɛm hɝiɪŋ əɹ əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit. əweɪ fɹəm ðə butmeɪkɝz. wɔkɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ əliviə, mɪn kɛp kæstɪŋ wɝid lʊks oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. əbɹʌpli ʃi flɪntʃt. "hi . . . aɪ θɪŋk i fɛl," ʃi wɪspɝd. "aɪ θɪŋk hiz ʌnkɑnʃəs, bʌt hiz hɝt, aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ bædli."

Cadsuane had one of her arms, she realized, and Alivia the other, the pair of them hurrying her along the street. Away from the bootmaker's. Walking beside Alivia, Min kept casting worried looks over her shoulder. Abruptly she flinched. "He . . . I think he fell," she whispered. "I think he's unconscious, but he's hurt, I don't know how badly."

"wi wɪl də hɪm noʊ ɡʊd hɪɹ, əɹ aʊɝsɛlvz," kædzueɪn sɛd kɑmli. ðə ɡoʊldən ɔɹnəməns dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm ðə fɹʌn ə hɝ bʌn swʌŋ ɪnsaɪd ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk əz ʃi swɪvɛld əɹ hɛd, hɝ aɪz sɝtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə pipəl əhɛɾ ə ðɛm. ʃi hɛl ðə dip kaʊl əɡɛns ðə wɪnd wɪð əɹ fɹi hænd, lɛɾɪŋ əɹ kloʊk flæp bɪhaɪn hɝ. "aɪ wɑnə bi əweɪ fɹəm hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ wʌn ə ðoʊz bɔɪz θɪŋks ʌv æskɪŋ wɪmən tə ʃoʊ ðɛɹ feɪsəz. ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ faʊnd nɪɹ blu kɑɹp stʃɹit ðɪs æftɝnun wɪl əv kwɛstʃənz tə ænsɝ kəz ə ðɪs tʃaɪld."

"We will do him no good here, or ourselves," Cadsuane said calmly. The golden ornaments dangling from the front of her bun swung inside the hood of her cloak as she swivelled her head, her eyes searching through the people ahead of them. She held the deep cowl against the wind with her free hand, letting her cloak flap behind her. "I want to be away from here before one of those boys thinks of asking women to show their faces. Any Aes Sedai found near Blue Carp Street this afternoon will have questions to answer because of this child."

"lɛt mi ɡoʊ!" nɪneɪiv snæpt, pʊlɪŋ əɡɛns ðɛm. læn. ɪf ɹænd hæd bɪn nɑkt ʌnkɑnʃəs, wʌɾ ə læn? "aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ bæk ən hɛlp ðɛm!" ðə tu wɪmən dʒɹæɡd əɹ əlɔŋ wɪð hænz laɪk aɪɝn. ɛvɹiwʌn ðeɪ pæst wɑz piɹɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə butmeɪkɝz ʃɑp.

"Let me go!" Nynaeve snapped, pulling against them. Lan. If Rand had been knocked unconscious, what of Lan? "I have to go back and help them!" The two women dragged her along with hands like iron. Everyone they passed was peering toward the bootmaker's shop.

"ju hæv dʌn kwaɪɾ ɪnʌf ɔlɹɛɾi, jə ful ɡɝl." kædzueɪnz vɔɪs wɑz koʊld aɪɝn. "aɪ toʊl jə əbaʊt fɑɹ mæɾɪŋz wɑtʃdɔɡz. fɔ! juv pʊɾ ə pænɪk ɪn ðə kaʊnsəlz wɪð jəɹ tʃænəlɪŋ wɛɹ noʊ wʌn kən tʃænəl. ɪf ðə ɡɑɹdz əv ðɛm, ɪts kəz ə ju."

"You have done quite enough already, you fool girl." Cadsuane's voice was cold iron. "I told you about Far Madding's watchdogs. Phaw! You've put a panic in the Counsels with your channeling where no one can channel. If the Guards have them, it is because of you."

"aɪ θɔt seɪaɪdɑɹ wʊdn mæɾɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd wikli. "ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə lɪɾəl, ən nɑt fəɹ lɔŋ. aɪ . . . aɪ θɔt meɪbi ðeɪ wʊdn ivən noʊɾəs."

"I thought saidar wouldn't matter," Nynaeve said weakly. "It was only a little, and not for long. I . . . I thought maybe they wouldn't even notice."

kædzueɪn ɡeɪv əɹ ə dɪsɡʌstəd ɡlæns. "ðɪs weɪ, əliviə," ʃi sɛd, pʊlɪŋ nɪneɪiv ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ baɪ ði əbændənd wɑtʃstænd. smɔl nɑts ʌv ɪksaɪɾəd pipəl dɑɾəd ðə stʃɹit, dʒæbɝɪŋ. ə mæn dʒɛstʃɝd vɪɡɝəsli əz ɪf wildɪŋ ə kætʃpoʊl. ə wʊmən pɔɪntəd tə ði ɛmpti wɑtʃstænd, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn wʌndɝ.

Cadsuane gave her a disgusted glance. "This way, Alivia," she said, pulling Nynaeve around the corner by the abandoned watchstand. Small knots of excited people dotted the street, jabbering. A man gestured vigorously as if wielding a catchpole. A woman pointed to the empty watchstand, shaking her head in wonder.

"seɪ sʌmθɪŋ, mɪn," nɪneɪiv pliɾəd. "wi kæn dʒʌs liv ðɛm." ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən θɪŋk ʌv ədʒɹɛsɪŋ əliviə, hu wɔɹ ə feɪs tə meɪk kædzueɪn əpɪɹ sɑft.

"Say something, Min," Nynaeve pleaded. "We can't just leave them." She did not even think of addressing Alivia, who wore a face to make Cadsuane appear soft.

"doʊn ɪkspɛk sɪmpəθi fɹəm mi." mɪnz loʊ vɔɪs wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz tʃɪl əz kædzueɪnz. wən ʃi lʊkt ət nɪneɪiv, ɪt wɑz ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlɛɹ bɪfɔɹ snæpɪŋ əɹ aɪz bæk tə ðə stʃɹiɾ əhɛd. "aɪ bɛɡd jə tə hɛlp mi stɑp ðɛm, bʌt jə hæd tə bi əz wʊl-hɛɾəd əz ðeɪ wɝ. naʊ wɪv tə dɪpɛn ɑn kædzueɪn."

"Don't expect sympathy from me." Min's low voice was almost as chill as Cadsuane's. When she looked at Nynaeve, it was a sidelong glare before snapping her eyes back to the street ahead. "I begged you to help me stop them, but you had to be as wool-headed as they were. Now we have to depend on Cadsuane."

nɪneɪiv snɪft. "wʌt kən ʃi du? də aɪ nid tə ɹimaɪn jə ðət læn ən ɹænd ɑɹ bɪhaɪn ʌs, ən ɡɛɾɪŋ fɑɹðɝ bɪhaɪn baɪ ðə mɪnət?"

Nynaeve sniffed. "What can she do? Do I need to remind you that Lan and Rand are behind us, and getting farther behind by the minute?"

"ðə bɔɪ ɪzən ði oʊnli wʌn u nidz lɛsənz ɪn mænɝz," kædzueɪn mʌɾɝd. "hi hæzən əpɑlədʒaɪz tə mi, jɛt, bʌɾ i toʊl vɛɹɪn i wʊd, ən aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kən æksɛp ðət fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. fɔ! ðət bɔɪ pʊts mi tə mɔɹ tʃɹʌbəl ðən ɛni tɛn aɪ ɛvɝ mɛt bɪfɔɹ. əl də wʌɾ aɪ kæn, ɡɝl, wɪtʃ ɪz ə saɪt mɔɹ ðən jə kəd də tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bæɾɝ jəɹ weɪ θɹu ðə stʃɹit ɡɑɹdz. fɹəm hɪɹ ɑn, jəl ɪɡzækli əz aɪ seɪ, əɹ əl əv əliviə sɪɾ ɑn ju!" əliviə nɑɾəd. soʊ dɪd mɪn!

"The boy isn't the only one who needs lessons in manners," Cadsuane muttered. "He hasn't apologized to me, yet, but he told Verin he would, and I suppose I can accept that for the moment. Phaw! That boy puts me to more trouble than any ten I ever met before. I will do what I can, girl, which is a sight more than you could do trying to batter your way through the Street Guards. From here on, you will exactly as I say, or I will have Alivia sit on you!" Alivia nodded. So did Min!

nɪneɪiv ɡɹɪməst. ðə wʊmən wɑz səpoʊz tə dɪfɝ tə hɝ! stɪl, ə ɡɛst ə ðə fɝs kaʊnsəl kəd də mɔɹ ðən pleɪn nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə, ivən ɪf ʃi dɑn əɹ ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ. fəɹ læn, ʃi kəd pʊɾ ʌp wɪð kædzueɪn.

Nynaeve grimaced. The woman was supposed to defer to her! Still, a guest of the First Counsel could do more than plain Nynaeve al'Meara, even if she donned her Great Serpent ring. For Lan, she could put up with Cadsuane.

bʌt wən ʃi æskt wʌt kædzueɪn plæn tə də tə fɹi ðə mɛn, ði oʊnli ænsɝ ðə wʊmən wəd ɡɪv wɑz "mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən aɪ wɑn tə, ɡɝl, ɪf aɪ kən də ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. bʌɾ aɪ meɪd ðə bɔɪ pɹɑməsəz, ən aɪ kip maɪ pɹɑməsəz. aɪ hoʊp i ɹɪmɛmbɝz ðæt." dɪlɪvɝɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs laɪk aɪs, ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə ɹɪplaɪ tə ɪnspaɪɹ kɑnfəɾəns.

But when she asked what Cadsuane planned to do to free the men, the only answer the woman would give was "Much more than I want to, girl, if I can do anything at all. But I made the boy promises, and I keep my promises. I hope he remembers that." Delivered in a voice like ice, it was not a reply to inspire confidence.

ɹænd woʊk ɪn dɑɹknəs ən peɪn, laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪz bæk. hɪz ɡlʌvz wɝ ɡɔn, ən i kəd fil ə ɹʌf pælət bɪniθ hɪm. ðeɪ hæd teɪkən ɪz buts, tu. hɪz ɡlʌvz wɝ ɡɔn. ðeɪ nu hu hi wɑz. kɛɹfəli, hi sæɾ ʌp. hɪz feɪs fɛl bɹuzd ən ɛvɹi mʌsəl ɪn ɪz bɑɾi hɝɾ əz ɪf i hæd bɪn biɾən, bʌt nʌθɪŋ sim tə bi bɹoʊkən.

Rand woke in darkness and pain, lying on his back. His gloves were gone, and he could feel a rough pallet beneath him. They had taken his boots, too. His gloves were gone. They knew who he was. Carefully, he sat up. His face felt bruised and every muscle in his body hurt as if he had been beaten, but nothing seemed to be broken.

stændɪŋ sloʊli, hi fɛlt ɪz weɪ əlɔŋ ðə stoʊn wɔl bɪsaɪd ðə pælət, ɹitʃɪŋ ə kɔɹnɝ ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli, ən ðən ə dɔɹ kʌvɝd wɪð ɹʌf aɪɝn stʃɹæps. ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs ɪz fɪŋɡɝz tʃɹeɪst ə smɔl flæp, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt pʊʃ ɪɾ oʊpən. noʊ hɪn ə laɪt sipt ɪn ɝaʊn ɪts ɛdʒəz. ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd, luz θɝɪn bɪɡæn tə pænt. ɹænd muvd ɑn, filɪŋ ɪz weɪ, ðə flɔɹstoʊnz koʊl bɪniθ ɪz bɛɹ fit. ðə nɛks kɔɹnɝ keɪm ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli, ən ðən ə θɝd, wɛɹ ɪz toʊz stʃɹʌk sʌmθɪŋ ðət ɹæɾəld ɑn ðə stoʊn flɔɹ. kipɪŋ wʌn hæn ɑn ðə wɔl, hi bɛn ən faʊn ə wʊɾən bʌkət. hi lɛft ɪt ðəɹ ən meɪd hɪmsɛlf kəmplit ðə sɝkət, ɔl ðə weɪ bæk tə ði aɪɝn dɔɹ. ɔl ðə weɪ. hi wɑz ɪnsaɪɾ ə blæk bɑks θɹi peɪsɪz lɔŋ ən dʒʌst oʊvɝ tu peɪsɪz waɪd. ɹeɪzɪŋ wʌn hænd, hi faʊn ðə stoʊn silɪŋ lɛs ðən ə fʊɾ əbʌv ɪz hɛd.

Standing slowly, he felt his way along the stone wall beside the pallet, reaching a corner almost immediately, and then a door covered with rough iron straps. In the darkness his fingers traced a small flap, but he could not push it open. No hint of light seeped in around its edges. Inside his head, Lews Therin began to pant. Rand moved on, feeling his way, the floorstones cold beneath his bare feet. The next corner came almost immediately, and then a third, where his toes struck something that rattled on the stone floor. Keeping one hand on the wall, he bent and found a wooden bucket. He left it there and made himself complete the circuit, all the way back to the iron door. All the way. He was inside a black box three paces long and just over two paces wide. Raising one hand, he found the stone ceiling less than a foot above his head.

kloʊzd ɪn, luz θɝɪn pæntɪd hɔɹsli. ɪts ðə bɑks əɡɛn. wən ðoʊz wɪmən pʊɾ əs ɪn ðə bɑks. wɪv tə ɡɛɾ aʊt! hi haʊld. wɪv tə ɡɛɾ aʊt!

Closed in, Lews Therin panted hoarsely. It's the box again. When those women put us in the box. We have to get out! he howled. We have to get out!

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə skɹimɪŋ vɔɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd, ɹænd bækt əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɔɹ əntɪl i θɔɾ i wɑz ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə sɛl, ðən loʊɝd hɪmsɛlf tə sɪt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. hi wɑz əz fɑɹ fɹəm ðə wɔlz əz i kəd pʊt hɪmsɛlf, ən ɪn ðə dɑɹk i tʃɹaɪd tə ɪmædʒən əm fɑɹðɝ əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪt sim ðəɾ ɪf i ɹitʃt aʊt, hi wəd nɑɾ əv tə stʃɹeɪɾən ɪz ɑɹm fʊli tə tʌtʃ stoʊn. hi kəd fil hɪmsɛlf tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ sʌmwʌn ɛlsəz bɑɾi ʃeɪkɪŋ ʌnkəntʃɹoʊləbli. ðə wɔlz sim dʒʌs bɪsaɪd hɪm, ðə silɪŋ ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. hi hæd tə faɪt ðɪs, əɹ i wəd bi əz mæɾ əz luz θɝɪn baɪ ðə taɪm ɛniwʌn keɪm tə lɛɾ ɪm aʊt. ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə lɛɾ ɪm aʊɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ɪf oʊnli tə hæn ɪm oʊvɝ tə huɛvɝ ɪleɪɾə sɛnt. haʊ mɛni mʌnθs fəɹ ə mɛsədʒ tə ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn ən ɪleɪɾəz ɛməsɛɹiz tə ɹɪtɝn? ɪf ðəɹ wɝ sɪstɝz lɔɪəl tə ɪleɪɾə kloʊsɝ ðən tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɪt maɪt hæpən sunɝ. hɔɹɝ æɾəd tə hɪz ʃʌɾɝz əz i ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz hoʊpɪŋ ðoʊz sɪstɝz wɝ kloʊsɝ, wɝ ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɔlɹɛɾi, soʊ ðeɪ kəd teɪk ɪm aʊɾ ə ðɪs bɑks.

Ignoring the screaming voice in his head, Rand backed away from the door until he thought he was in the center of the cell, then lowered himself to sit cross-legged on the floor. He was as far from the walls as he could put himself, and in the dark he tried to imagine them farther away, but it seemed that if he reached out, he would not have to straighten his arm fully to touch stone. He could feel himself trembling, as if it were someone else's body shaking uncontrollably. The walls seemed just beside him, the ceiling right over his head. He had to fight this, or he would be as mad as Lews Therin by the time anyone came to let him out. They would have to let him out eventually, if only to hand him over to whoever Elaida sent. How many months for a message to reach Tar Valon and Elaida's emissaries to return? If there were sisters loyal to Elaida closer than Tar Valon, it might happen sooner. Horror added to his shudders as he realized that he was hoping those sisters were closer, were in the city already, so they could take him out of this box.

"aɪ wɪl nɑt sɝɛndɝ!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "aɪ wɪl bi əz hɑɹɾ əz aɪ nid tə bi!" ɪn ðət kənfaɪn speɪs, hɪz vɔɪs bum laɪk θʌndɝ.

"I will not surrender!" he shouted. "I will be as hard as I need to be!" In that confined space, his voice boomed like thunder.

mɔɪɹeɪn hæd daɪd kəz i wɑz nɑt hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə də wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn. hɝ neɪm ɔlweɪz hɛɾəd ðə lɪst ɪnɡɹeɪvd ɑn ɪz bɹeɪn, ðə wɪmən u hæd daɪd kəz ə hɪm. mɔɪɹeɪn dəmədʒɹd. ɛvɹi neɪm ɑn ðət lɪs bɹɔɾ æŋɡwɪʃ ðət meɪɾ ɪm fɝɡɛt ðə peɪnz ə hɪz bɑɾi, fɝɡɛt ðə stoʊn wɔlz dʒʌs bɪɑn ɪz fɪŋɡɝtɪps. koʊləveɪɪɹ seɪɡən, hu daɪd kəz i hæd stʃɹɪpt əɹ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ʃi væljud. laɪæ, meɪɾən ə ðə spɪɹ, ʌv ðə koʊseɪɾə tʃɑɝin, hu daɪɾ əɾ ɪz oʊn hænz kəz ʃi fɑloʊɾ ɪm tə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. dʒɛnhaɪlɪn, ə meɪɾən ə ðə koʊl pik maɪæɡoʊmə hu daɪd kəz ʃi wɑntəd ði ɑnɝ ʌv ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɪz dɔɹ. hi hæd tə bi hɑɹd! wʌn baɪ wʌn i sʌmən ʌp ðə neɪmz ɑn ðət lɔŋ lɪst, peɪʃənli fɔɹdʒɪŋ ɪz soʊl ɪn ðə faɪɝz ə peɪn.

Moiraine had died because he was not hard enough to do what had to be done. Her name always headed the list engraved on his brain, the women who had died because of him. Moiraine Damodred. Every name on that list brought anguish that made him forget the pains of his body, forget the stone walls just beyond his fingertips. Colavaere Saighan, who died because he had stripped her of everything she valued. Liah, Maiden of the Spear, of the Cosaida Chareen, who died at his own hands because she followed him to Shadar Logoth. Jendhilin, a Maiden of the Cold Peak Miagoma who died because she wanted the honor of guarding his door. He had to be hard! One by one he summoned up the names on that long list, patiently forging his soul in the fires of pain.

pɹɛpɝeɪʃən tʊk lɔŋɡɝ ðən kædzueɪn hæd hoʊpt, lɑɹdʒli kəz ʃi hæd tə ɪmpɹɛs ɑn vɛɹiəs pipəl ðəɾ ə ɡɹæn ɹɛskju ɪn ðə bɛs tʃɹədɪʃənz ʌv ɡlimənz teɪlz wɑz aʊɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃən, soʊ ɪt wɑz naɪt bɪfɔɹ ʃi faʊn hɝsɛlf wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə læmplɪt kɔɹɪɾɝz ə ðə hɔl ə ðə kaʊnsəlz. wɔkɪŋ səɾətli, nɑt hɝiɪŋ. hɝi, ən pipəl əsum ðət jə wɝ æŋkʃəs, ðət ðeɪ hæd ði ʌpɝ hænd. ɪf ɛvɝ ɪn əɹ laɪf ʃi hæd niɾəd tə kip ði ʌpɝ hæn fɹəm ðə stɑɹt, ɪt wɑz tənaɪt.

Preparation took longer than Cadsuane had hoped, largely because she had to impress on various people that a grand rescue in the best traditions of gleemen's tales was out of the question, so it was night before she found herself walking along the lamplit corridors of the Hall of the Counsels. Walking sedately, not hurrying. Hurry, and people assumed that you were anxious, that they had the upper hand. If ever in her life she had needed to keep the upper hand from the start, it was tonight.

ðə kɔɹɪɾɝz ʃʊɾə bɪn ɛmpti ət ðɪs aʊɝ, bʌt tədeɪz ɪvɛns hæd tʃeɪnʒd ðə nɔɹməl kɔɹs ə θɪŋz. blu-koʊɾəd klɝks wɝ skɝiɪŋ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, səmtaɪmz pɔzɪŋ tə ɡeɪp əɾ əɹ kəmpænjənz. kwaɪt pɑsəbli, ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ sin fɔɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ət wʌns - ʃi wɑz nɑt wɪlɪŋ tə əlaʊ nɪneɪiv ðət taɪɾəl əntɪl ʃi tʊk ðə θɹi oʊðz - ən tədeɪz kəmoʊʃən wʊɾə æɾəd tə ðɛɹ kənfjuʒən ət ðə saɪt. ðə θɹi mɛn bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ ɝn ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni stɛɹz, ðoʊ. ðə klɝks maɪt nɑt noʊ ðə minɪŋ ə ðɛɹ blæk koʊts əɹ ðə pɪnz ɑn ðɛɹ haɪ kɑlɝz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz vɛɹi ənlaɪkli ɛni ʌv ðoʊz klɝks hæɾ ɛvɝ sin θɹi mɛn wɛɹɪŋ sɔɹdz ɪn ðiz hɔlweɪz. ɪn ɛni keɪs, wɪð ə lɪɾəl lʌk, noʊ wʌn wəd ɡoʊ ɹʌnɪŋ tə ɪnfɔɹm əlaɪz u wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə bɹeɪk ɪn ɑn ðə kaʊnsəlz sɪɾɪŋ ɪn kloʊz sɛʃən. ɪt wɑz ə pɪɾi ʃi kəd nɑɾ əv bɹɔt ðə mɛn baɪ ðɛmsɛlvz, bʌɾ ivən deɪdʒiən hæd dɪspleɪd bækboʊn ət ðə sədʒɛstʃən. ə ɡɹeɪt pɪɾi ðəɾ ɔl ə hɝ kəmpænjənz wɝ nɑt dɪspleɪɪŋ ðə kəmpoʊʒɝ ʃoʊd baɪ mɛɹaɪs ən ði ʌðɝ tu sɪstɝz.

The corridors should have been empty at this hour, but today's events had changed the normal course of things. Blue-coated clerks were scurrying everywhere, sometimes pausing to gape at her companions. Quite possibly, they had never seen four Aes Sedai at once - she was not willing to allow Nynaeve that title until she took the Three Oaths - and today's commotion would have added to their confusion at the sight. The three men bringing up the rear earned almost as many stares, though. The clerks might not know the meaning of their black coats or the pins on their high collars, but it was very unlikely any of those clerks had ever seen three men wearing swords in these hallways. In any case, with a little luck, no one would go running to inform Aleis who was coming to break in on the Counsels sitting in closed session. It was a pity she could not have brought the men by themselves, but even Daigian had displayed backbone at the suggestion. A great pity that all of her companions were not displaying the composure showed by Merise and the other two sisters.

"ðɪs wɪl nɛvɝ wɝk," nɪneɪiv ɡɹʌmbəld, fəɹ pɝhæps ðə tɛnθ taɪm sɪns livɪŋ ðə haɪts. "wi ʃəd stʃɹaɪk hɑɹd fɹəm ðə stɑɹt!"

"This will never work," Nynaeve grumbled, for perhaps the tenth time since leaving the Heights. "We should strike hard from the start!"

"wi ʃʊɾə muv fæstɝ," mɪn mʌɾɝd dɑɹkli. "aɪ kən fil ɪm tʃeɪnʒɪŋ. ɪf i wɑz ə stoʊn bɪfɔɹ, hiz aɪɝn, naʊ! laɪt, wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ duɪŋ tə hɪm?" əlɔŋ oʊnli kəz ʃi wɑz ə lɪŋk tə ðə bɔɪ, ʃi hæd bɪn ənsisɪŋ wɪð əɹ ɹɪpɔɹts, itʃ blikɝ ðən ðə læst. kædzueɪn hæd nɑt toʊld əɹ wʌt ðə sɛlz wɝ laɪk, nɑt wən ðə ɡɝl hæd bɹoʊkən daʊn dʒʌs tɛlɪŋ əɹ wʌt ðə sɪstɝz u kɪdnæp ðə bɔɪ hæd dʌn tə hɪm.

"We should have moved faster," Min muttered darkly. "I can feel him changing. If he was a stone before, he's iron, now! Light, what are they doing to him?" Along only because she was a link to the boy, she had been unceasing with her reports, each bleaker than the last. Cadsuane had not told her what the cells were like, not when the girl had broken down just telling her what the sisters who kidnapped the boy had done to him.

kædzueɪn saɪd. ə ɹæɡtæɡ ɑɹmi ʃi hæɾ əsɛmbəld, bʌɾ ivən ə meɪkʃɪft ɑɹmi niɾəd dɪsəplən. ɪspɛʃli wɪð ðə bæɾəl dʒʌst əhɛd. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn wɝs hæd ʃi nɑt fɔɹs ðə si foʊk wɪmən tə ɹɪmeɪn bɪhaɪnd. "aɪ kən də ðɪs wɪθaʊɾ iðɝ ə ju, ɪf nid bi," ʃi sɛd fɝmli. "noʊ; doʊn seɪ ɛniθɪŋ, nɪneɪiv. mɛɹaɪs əɹ kɔɹəl kən wɛɹ ðət bɛlt əz wɛl əz ju. soʊ ɪf jə tʃɪlʒɹən də nɑt stɑp waɪnɪŋ, əl əv əliviə teɪk jə bæk tə ðə haɪts ən ɡɪv jə sʌmθɪŋ tə waɪn əbaʊt." ðət wɑz ði oʊnli ɹizən ʃi hæd bɹɔt ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ waɪldɝ. əliviə hæɾ ə tɛndənsi tə bɪkʌm vɛɹi maɪld-mænɝɾ ɝaʊn ðoʊz ʃi kəd nɑt stɛɹ daʊn, bʌt ʃi stɛɹd vɛɹi fɪɹsli ət ðoʊz tu tʃæɾɝɪŋ mæɡpaɪz.

Cadsuane sighed. A ragtag army she had assembled, but even a makeshift army needed discipline. Especially with the battle just ahead. It would have been worse had she not forced the Sea Folk women to remain behind. "I can do this without either of you, if need be," she said firmly. "No; don't say anything, Nynaeve. Merise or Corele can wear that belt as well as you. So if you children do not stop whining, I will have Alivia take you back to the Heights and give you something to whine about." That was the only reason she had brought the strange wilder. Alivia had a tendency to become very mild-mannered around those she could not stare down, but she stared very fiercely at those two chattering magpies.

ðɛɹ hɛdz swɪvəl təwɔɹd ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən əz wʌn, ən ðə mæɡpaɪz fɛl blɛsədli saɪlənt. saɪlənt, jɛt hɑɹdli æksɛptɪŋ. mɪn kəd ɡɹaɪn əɹ tiθ ɔl ʃi wɑntəd, bʌt nɪneɪivz sʌlən ɡlaʊɝ ɪɹəteɪɾəd kædzueɪn. ðə ɡɝl hæd ɡʊd mətɪɹiəl ɪn hɝ, bʌɾ əɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ hæd bɪn kʌt fɑɹ tu ʃɔɹt. hɝ əbɪləɾi wɪð hilɪŋ wɑz lɪɾəl ʃɔɹɾ ə mɝækjələs, hɝ əbɪləɾi wɪð ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ ɛls dɪzməl. ən ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn pʊt θɹu ðə lɛsənz ðət wʌt mʌs bi ɛndʒjʊɹd, kəd bi ɛndʒjʊɹd. ɪn tʃɹuθ, kædzueɪn sɪmpəθaɪzd wɪð hɝ. sʌmwʌt. ɪt wɑz ə lɛsən nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn kəd lɝn ɪn ðə taʊɝ. ʃi hɝsɛlf, fʊl ə pɹaɪɾ ɪn əɹ nu ʃɔl ən əɹ oʊn stʃɹɛŋkθ, hæd bɪn tɔt baɪ ə nɪɹ tuθləs waɪldɝ əɾ ə fɑɹm ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə blæk hɪlz. oʊ, ɪt wɑz ə vɛɹi ɹæɡtæɡ lɪɾəl ɑɹmi ʃi hæd ɡæðɝd tə tʃɹaɪ stændɪŋ fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ ɑn ɪts hɛd.

Their heads swiveled toward the golden-haired woman as one, and the magpies fell blessedly silent. Silent, yet hardly accepting. Min could grind her teeth all she wanted, but Nynaeve's sullen glower irritated Cadsuane. The girl had good material in her, but her training had been cut far too short. Her ability with Healing was little short of miraculous, her ability with almost anything else dismal. And she had not been put through the lessons that what must be endured, could be endured. In truth, Cadsuane sympathized with her. Somewhat. It was a lesson not everyone could learn in the Tower. She herself, full of pride in her new shawl and her own strength, had been taught by a near toothless wilder at a farm in the heart of the Black Hills. Oh, it was a very ragtag little army she had gathered to try standing Far Madding on its head.

klɝks ən mɛsənʒɝz hæf-fɪl ðə kɑləmd æntəɹum tə ðə kaʊnsəlz' tʃeɪmbɝ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ, æftɝ ɔl, oʊnli klɝks ən mɛsənʒɝz. ðə klɝks hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ɪn ɔfɪʃəs pʌzəlmənt, itʃ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ənʌðɝ tə spik fɝst, bʌt ðə ɹɛd-koʊɾəd mɛsənʒɝz, hu nu ɪt wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ pleɪs tə seɪ ɛniθɪŋ, bækt əkɹɔs ðə blu flɔɹtaɪlz tə ðə saɪdz ə ðə ɹum, ən ðə klɝks pɑɹɾəd ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, nʌn kwaɪt dɛɹɪŋ tə bi ðə fɝs tə oʊpən ɪz maʊθ. ivən soʊ, ʃi hɝɾ ə kəlɛktɪv ɡæsp wən ʃi oʊpənd wʌn ə ðə tɔl dɔɹz kɑɹvd wɪð ðə hæn ən sɔɹd.

Clerks and messengers half-filled the columned anteroom to the Counsels' Chamber, but they were, after all, only clerks and messengers. The clerks hesitated in officious puzzlement, each waiting for another to speak first, but the red-coated messengers, who knew it was not their place to say anything, backed across the blue floortiles to the sides of the room, and the clerks parted in front of her, none quite daring to be the first to open his mouth. Even so, she heard a collective gasp when she opened one of the tall doors carved with the Hand and Sword.

ðə kaʊnsəlz' tʃeɪmbɝ wɑz nɑt lɑɹdʒ. fɔɹ mɪɹɝd stænd-læmps səfaɪs tə laɪɾ ɪt, ən ə lɑɹdʒ tɛɹən kɑɹpəɾ ɪn ɹɛɾ ən blu ən ɡoʊld ɔlmoʊs kʌvɝd ðə flɔɹ taɪlz. ə waɪd mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪs ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum meɪɾ ə fɛɹ dʒɑb ʌv wɔɹmɪŋ ði ɛɹ, ðoʊ ðə ɡlæs dɔɹz liɾɪŋ tə ðə kɑləneɪɾ aʊtsaɪd ɹæɾəld ɪn ðə naɪt wɪnd, laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə dʒɹaʊn ðə tɪkɪŋ ə ðə tɔl, ɡɪldɪɾ ɪliɑnɝ klɑk ɑn ðə mæntəl. θɝtin kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd tʃɛɹz, vɛɹi nɪɹli θɹoʊnz, meɪɾ ən ɑɹk feɪsɪŋ ðə dɔɹ, ɔl ɑkjəpaɪd baɪ wɝid-lʊkɪŋ wɪmən.

The Counsels' Chamber was not large. Four mirrored stand-lamps sufficed to light it, and a large Tairen carpet in red and blue and gold almost covered the floor tiles. A wide marble fireplace on one side of the room made a fair job of warming the air, though the glassed doors leading to the colonnade outside rattled in the night wind, loud enough to drown the ticking of the tall, gilded Illianer clock on the mantel. Thirteen carved and gilded chairs, very nearly thrones, made an arc facing the door, all occupied by worried-looking women.

əlaɪz, ət ðə hɛɾ ə ði ɑɹk, fɹaʊnd wən ʃi sɔ kædzueɪn lɛɾ əɹ lɪɾəl pɝeɪɾ ɪndə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ. "ðɪs sɛʃən ɪz kloʊzd, ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd, ət wʌns fɔɹməl ən koʊld. "wi meɪ æsk jə tə spik tə əs leɪɾɝ, bʌt - "

Aleis, at the head of the arc, frowned when she saw Cadsuane lead her little parade into the chamber. "This session is closed, Aes Sedai," she said, at once formal and cold. "We may ask you to speak to us later, but - "

"ju noʊ hu juv ɪn ðə sɛlz," kædzueɪn kʌɾ ɪn.

"You know who you have in the cells," Cadsuane cut in.

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən, bʌɾ əlaɪz tʃɹaɪd tə blʌf əɹ weɪ pæst. "ə nʌmbɝ ə mɛn, aɪ bɪliv. pʌblɪk dʒɹʌŋkɝdz, vɛɹiəs fɔɹənɝz ɝɛstəd fəɹ faɪɾɪŋ əɹ stilɪŋ, ə mæn fɹəm ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz teɪkən dʒʌs tədeɪ hu meɪ hæv mɝɾɝd θɹi mɛn. aɪ də nɑt kip ə pɝsənəl ɹɛkɝɾ ə ɝɛsts, kædzueɪn sədaɪ." nɪneɪiv dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ət mɛnʃən ʌv ə mæn teɪkən fəɹ mɝɾɝ, ən əɹ aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd deɪnʒɝəsli, bʌɾ ət ðə lis ðə tʃaɪl hæd sɛns ɪnʌf tə kip əɹ maʊθ ʃʌt.

It was not a question, but Aleis tried to bluff her way past. "A number of men, I believe. Public drunkards, various foreigners arrested for fighting or stealing, a man from the Borderlands taken just today who may have murdered three men. I do not keep a personal record of arrests, Cadsuane Sedai." Nynaeve drew a deep breath at mention of a man taken for murder, and her eyes glittered dangerously, but at the least the child had sense enough to keep her mouth shut.

"soʊ jəl tʃɹaɪ tə kənsil ðət jə hoʊl ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," kædzueɪn sɛd kwaɪətli. ʃi hæd hoʊpt - hoʊp fɝvənli! - ðət vɛɹɪnz speɪdwɝk wəd meɪk əm bæk əweɪ fɹəm ðɪs. pɝhæps ɪt kəd stɪl bi dʌn sɪmpli, ðoʊ. "aɪ kən teɪk ɪm ɔf jəɹ hænz. aɪ hæv feɪs mɔɹ ðən twɛnti mɛn u kəd tʃænəl, oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz. hi hoʊlz noʊ fɪɹz fəɹ mi."

"So you will try to conceal that you hold the Dragon Reborn," Cadsuane said quietly. She had hoped - hoped fervently! - that Verin's spadework would make them back away from this. Perhaps it could still be done simply, though. "I can take him off your hands. I have faced more than twenty men who could channel, over the years. He holds no fears for me."

"wi də θæŋk jə fəɹ ði ɔfɝ," əlaɪz ɹɪplaɪd smuðli, "bʌt wi pɹəfɝ tə kəmjunəkeɪt wɪð tɑɹ vəlɑn, fɝst." tə nəɡoʊʃieɪɾ ɪz pɹaɪs, ʃi mɛnt. wɛl, wʌt hæd tə bi, hæd tə bi. "du jə maɪn tɛlɪŋ əs haʊ jə lɝnd - "

"We do thank you for the offer," Aleis replied smoothly, "but we prefer to communicate with Tar Valon, first." To negotiate his price, she meant. Well, what had to be, had to be. "Do you mind telling us how you learned - "

kædzueɪn bɹoʊk ɪn əɡɛn. "pɝhæps aɪ ʃʊɾə mɛnʃən ɝliɝ, ðiz mɛn bɪhaɪn mi ɑɹ æʃəmən."

Cadsuane broke in again. "Perhaps I should have mentioned earlier, these men behind me are Asha'man."

ðə θɹi stɛp fɔɹwɝd ðɛn, əz ðeɪ hæd bɪn ɪnstʃɹʌktəd, ən ʃi hæd tə ədmɪt ðeɪ ɡeɪv ə deɪnʒɝəs əpɪɹəns. ɡɹɪzəl deɪmɝ lʊkt ə ɡɹeɪɪŋ bɛɹ wɪð sɔɹ tiθ, pɹɪɾi dʒɑhɹ simd ə dɑɹk, slik lɛpɝd, ən ɛbənz ənblɪŋkɪŋ ɡeɪz wɑz pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɑmənəs kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðət juθfəl feɪs. ðeɪ sɝɾənli hæd ðɛɹ ɪfɛkt ɑn ðə kaʊnsəlz. səm sɪmpli ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ tʃɛɹz əz ɪf tə dʒɹɔ bæk, bʌt sɪpɹin lɛɾ əɹ maʊθ fɔl oʊpən, ənfɔɹtʃənət wɪð əɹ pɹoʊtʃɹuɾɪŋ tiθ. sɪbeɪn, hɝ hɛɹ əz ɡɹeɪ əz kædzueɪnz, sæɡd bæk ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ ən bɪɡæn fænɪŋ hɝsɛlf wɪð ə slɛndɝ hænd, waɪl kmɪɹz maʊθ twɪstəɾ əz ɪf ʃi maɪt vɑmət.

The three stepped forward then, as they had been instructed, and she had to admit they gave a dangerous appearance. Grizzled Damer looked a graying bear with sore teeth, pretty Jahar seemed a dark, sleek leopard, and Eben's unblinking gaze was particularly ominous coming from that youthful face. They certainly had their effect on the Counsels. Some simply shifted in their chairs as if to draw back, but Cyprien let her mouth fall open, unfortunate with her protruding teeth. Sybaine, her hair as gray as Cadsuane's, sagged back in her chair and began fanning herself with a slender hand, while Cumere's mouth twisted as if she might vomit.

əlaɪz wɑz meɪɾ ə stɝnɝ stʌf, ðoʊ ʃi pɹɛs boʊθ hænz taɪɾ əɡɛnst əɹ mɪdʒɹəf. "aɪ toʊl jə wʌns ðəɾ æʃəmən wɝ fɹi tə vɪzət soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ oʊbeɪd ðə lɔ. wɪv noʊ fɪɹ ʌv æʃəmən, kædzueɪn, ðoʊ aɪ mʌst seɪ aɪm sɝpɹaɪz tə si jə ɪn ðɛɹ kʌmpəni. pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli ɪn vju ʌv ði ɔfɝ juv dʒʌs meɪd."

Aleis was made of sterner stuff, though she pressed both hands tight against her midriff. "I told you once that Asha'man were free to visit so long as they obeyed the law. We have no fear of Asha'man, Cadsuane, though I must say I am surprised to see you in their company. Particularly in view of the offer you have just made."

soʊ, ʃi wɑz pleɪn kædzueɪn naʊ, wɑz ʃi? stɪl, ʃi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ðə nəsɛsəɾi tə bɹeɪk əlaɪz. ʃi lɛd fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ wɛl, bʌt ʃi maɪt nɛvɝ ɹɪkʌvɝ fɹəm tənaɪt. "ɑɹ jə fɝɡɛɾɪŋ wʌɾ ɛls hæpən tədeɪ, əlaɪz? sʌmwʌn tʃænəld ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi." əɡɛn kaʊnsəlz ʃɪftəd, ən wɝid fɹaʊnz kɹis mɔɹ ðən wʌn fɔɹhɛd.

So, she was plain Cadsuane now, was she? Still, she regretted the necessity to break Aleis. She led Far Madding well, but she might never recover from tonight. "Are you forgetting what else happened today, Aleis? Someone channeled inside the city." Again Counsels shifted, and worried frowns creased more than one forehead.

"æn æbɝeɪʃən." ðə kulnəs wɑz ɡɔn fɹəm əlaɪz' vɔɪs, ɹipleɪs baɪ æŋɡɝ, ən meɪbi ə tʌtʃ ə fɪɹ. hɝ aɪz ʃoʊn dɑɹkli. "pɝhæps ðə ɡɑɹɾiənz wɝ ɪn ɛɹɝ. noʊ wʌn u wɑz kwɛstʃən sɔ ɛniθɪŋ tə sədʒɛst - "

"An aberration." The coolness was gone from Aleis' voice, replaced by anger, and maybe a touch of fear. Her eyes shone darkly. "Perhaps the guardians were in error. No one who was questioned saw anything to suggest - "

"ivən wʌt wi θɪŋk ɪz pɝfəkt kən əv flɔz, əlaɪz." kædzueɪn dʒɹu ɑn əɹ oʊn wɛl, teɪkɪŋ ɪn seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪn ə mɛʒɝɾ əmaʊnt. ʃi hæd pɹæktəs; ðə lɪɾəl ɡoʊldən hʌmɪŋbɝd kəd nɑt hoʊl nɪɹ soʊ mʌtʃ əz nɪneɪivz bɛlt. "flɔz kən pæs ənnoʊɾɪst fəɹ sɛntʃɝiz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ faʊnd." ðə floʊ ʌv ɛɹ ʃi woʊv wɑz dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə lɪf ðə dʒɛm-ɛnkɹʌstɪd kɔɹənɛt fɹəm əlaɪz' hɛɾ ən sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə kɑɹpəɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə wʊmənz fit. "wʌns ðeɪ ɑɹ faʊnd, haʊɛvɝ, ɪt simz ðəɾ ɛniwʌn u lʊks kən faɪn ðɛm."

"Even what we think is perfect can have flaws, Aleis." Cadsuane drew on her own Well, taking in saidar in a measured amount. She had practice; the little golden hummingbird could not hold near so much as Nynaeve's belt. "Flaws can pass unnoticed for centuries before they are found." The flow of Air she wove was just enough to lift the gem-encrusted coronet from Aleis' head and set it on the carpet in front of the woman's feet. "Once they are found, however, it seems that anyone who looks can find them."

θɝtin sɛts ə ʃɑkt aɪz stɛɹɾ ət ðə kɔɹənɛt. wʌn ən ɔl, ðə kaʊnsəlz sim fɹoʊzən, bɛɹli bɹiðɪŋ.

Thirteen sets of shocked eyes stared at the coronet. One and all, the Counsels seemed frozen, barely breathing.

"nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ ə flɔ əz ə bɑɹn dɔɹ, simz tə mi," deɪmɝ ənaʊnst. "aɪ θɪŋk ɪts pɹɪɾiɝ ɑn jəɹ hɛd."

"Not so much a flaw as a barn door, seems to me," Damer announced. "I think it's prettier on your head."

ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ sʌɾənli ʃoʊn ɝaʊnd nɪneɪiv, ən ðə kɔɹənɛt flu təwɔɹɾ əlaɪz, sloʊɪŋ ət ðə læst ɪnstən soʊ ðəɾ ɪt sɛɾəld əbʌv əɹ blʌdləs feɪs ɹæðɝ ðən kɹækɪŋ əɹ hɛd. ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ dɪd nɑt vænɪʃ fɹəm ðə ɡɝl, ðoʊ. wɛl, lɛɾ əɹ dʒɹeɪn əɹ wɛl.

The glow of the Power suddenly shone around Nynaeve, and the coronet flew toward Aleis, slowing at the last instant so that it settled above her bloodless face rather than cracking her head. The light of saidar did not vanish from the girl, though. Well, let her drain her Well.

"wɪl . . . ?" əlaɪz swɑloʊd, bʌt wən ʃi wɛn ɑn, hɝ vɔɪs stɪl kɹækt. "wɪl ɪt bi səfɪʃən ɪf wi ɹilis ɪm tə ju?" wɛðɝ ʃi mɛn kædzueɪn əɹ ði æʃəmən wɑz ənklɪɹ, pɝhæps ivən tə hɝ.

"Will . . . ?" Aleis swallowed, but when she went on, her voice still cracked. "Will it be sufficient if we release him to you?" Whether she meant Cadsuane or the Asha'man was unclear, perhaps even to her.

"aɪ θɪŋk ðəɾ ɪt wɪl," kædzueɪn sɛd kɑmli, ən əlaɪz sæɡd laɪk ə stʃɹɪŋləs pʌpət. ʃɑkt əz ðeɪ wɝ baɪ ðə dɪspleɪ ʌv tʃænəlɪŋ, kwɛstʃənɪŋ lʊks pæs bɪtwin ði ʌðɝ kaʊnsəlz. aɪz dɑɹɾɪd təwɔɹɾ əlaɪz, feɪsəz fɝmd, nɑdz wɝ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd. kædzueɪn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. ʃi hæd pɹɑməs ðə bɔɪ ðət wʌtɛvɝ ʃi dɪd wəd bi fəɹ ɪz ɡʊd, nɑt ðə ɡʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛlsəz, ən naʊ ʃi hæd bɹoʊkən ə ɡʊd wʊmən fəɹ ɪz ɡʊd. "aɪ æm vɛɹi sɑɹi, əlaɪz," ʃi sɛd. jə ɑɹ bɪldɪŋ ʌp ə lɑɹdʒ əkaʊn ɔlɹɛɾi, bɔɪ, ʃi θɔt.

"I think that it will," Cadsuane said calmly, and Aleis sagged like a stringless puppet. Shocked as they were by the display of channeling, questioning looks passed between the other Counsels. Eyes darted toward Aleis, faces firmed, nods were exchanged. Cadsuane drew a deep breath. She had promised the boy that whatever she did would be for his good, not the good of the Tower or anyone else's, and now she had broken a good woman for his good. "I am very sorry, Aleis," she said. You are building up a large account already, boy, she thought.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifaɪv


CHAPTER 35

wɪð ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl


With the Choedan Kal

ɹænd ɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə waɪd stoʊn bɹɪdʒ liɾɪŋ nɔɹθ fɹəm ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɡeɪt wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk. ðə sʌn wɑz ə peɪl ɡoʊldən bɔl dʒʌst ɹɪzən əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən ɪn ə klaʊdləs skaɪ, bʌt ði ɛɹ wɑz koʊld ɪnʌf tə mɪst ɪz bɹɛθ, ən ðə leɪk wɪnz meɪɾ ɪz kloʊk flaɪ əbaʊt. hi dɪd nɑt fil ðə tʃɪl, ðoʊ, ɪksɛpt əz sʌmθɪŋ dɪstən ən nɑt ɹɪli kənɛktəd tə hɪm. hi wɑz koʊldɝ ðən ɛni wɪntɝ kəd bi. ðə ɡɑɹdz u hæd kʌm tə teɪk ɪm aʊɾ ə ðə sɛl ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ hæd bɪn sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ɪm wɛɹɪŋ ə smɔl smaɪl. hi wɔɹ ɪt stɪl, ə slaɪt kɝv ə hɪz maʊθ. nɪneɪiv hæd hild ɪz bɹuzəz juzɪŋ ðə læst ə ðə seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪn əɹ bɛlt, jɛt ðə hɛlməɾɪd ɔfəsɝ u keɪm ɪndə ðə ɹoʊɾ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə bɹɪdʒ, ə stɑki mæn wɪð blʌn fitʃɝz, ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɪm, əz ðoʊ hɪz feɪs wɑz stɪl swoʊlən ən pɝpəl.

Rand rode across the wide stone bridge leading north from the Caemlyn Gate without looking back. The sun was a pale golden ball just risen above the horizon in a cloudless sky, but the air was cold enough to mist his breath, and the lake winds made his cloak fly about. He did not feel the chill, though, except as something distant and not really connected to him. He was colder than any winter could be. The guards who had come to take him out of the cell the night before had been surprised to find him wearing a small smile. He wore it still, a slight curve of his mouth. Nynaeve had Healed his bruises using the last of the saidar in her belt, yet the helmeted officer who came into the road at the foot of the bridge, a stocky man with blunt features, gave a start at the sight of him, as though his face was still swollen and purple.

kædzueɪn lin fɹəm əɹ sæɾəl tə spik ə fju kwaɪət wɝdz ən hæn ði ɔfəsɝ ə foʊldəd peɪpɝ. hi fɹaʊn əɾ əɹ ən bɪɡæn tə ɹid, ðən dʒɝkt ɪz hɛɾ ʌp tə stɛɹ ɪn əmeɪzmən ət ðə mɛn ən wɪmən weɪɾɪŋ peɪʃənli ɑn ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz bɪhaɪn hɝ. stɑɹɾɪŋ əɡɛn ət ðə tɑp ə ðə peɪdʒ, hi ɹɛd muvɪŋ ɪz lɪps saɪlənli, əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə bi ʃʊɹ ʌv ɛvɹi wɝd, ən smɔl wʌndɝ. saɪn ən sil baɪ ɔl θɝtin kaʊnsəlz, ði ɔɹɾɝ sɛd ðət ðəɹ wɑz tə bi noʊ tʃɛkɪŋ ə pis-bɑnz, noʊ sɝtʃ ə ðə pækhɔɹsɪz. ðɪs pɑɹɾiz neɪmz wɝ tə bi blɑɾɪd aʊt kəmplitli ɪn ðə ɹɛkɝd bʊks, ən ði ɔɹɾɝ ɪtsɛlf bɝnd. ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ kʌm tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ, noʊ æθɑn maɪɹ, nʌn ə ðɛm.

Cadsuane leaned from her saddle to speak a few quiet words and hand the officer a folded paper. He frowned at her and began to read, then jerked his head up to stare in amazement at the men and women waiting patiently on their horses behind her. Starting again at the top of the page, he read moving his lips silently, as if he wanted to be sure of every word, and small wonder. Signed and sealed by all thirteen Counsels, the order said that there was to be no checking of peace-bonds, no search of the packhorses. This party's names were to be blotted out completely in the record books, and the order itself burned. They had never come to Far Madding. No Aes Sedai, no Atha'an Miere, none of them.

"ɪts oʊvɝ, ɹænd," mɪn sɛd dʒɛnli, muvɪŋ əɹ stɝɾi bɹaʊn mɛɹ nɪɹɝ tə hɪz ɡɹeɪ ɡɛldɪŋ, ðoʊ ʃi ɔlɹɛɾi steɪɾ əz kloʊs tə hɪm əz nɪneɪiv dɪd tə læn. lænz bɹuzəz, ən ə bɹoʊkən ɑɹm, hæd bɪn hil bɪfɔɹ ʃi hæɾ ətɛndəd tə ɹænd. mɪnz feɪs ɹəflɛktəd ðə wɝi floʊɪŋ θɹu ðə bɑnd. lɛɾɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɡoʊ ɑn ðə wɪnd, ʃi pæɾəd ɪz ɑɹm. "ju doʊn əv tə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪɾ ɛnimɔɹ."

"It's over, Rand," Min said gently, moving her sturdy brown mare nearer to his gray gelding, though she already stayed as close to him as Nynaeve did to Lan. Lan's bruises, and a broken arm, had been Healed before she had attended to Rand. Min's face reflected the worry flowing through the bond. Letting her cloak go on the wind, she patted his arm. "You don't have to think about it anymore."

"aɪm ɡɹeɪtfəl tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ, mɪn." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz ɪmoʊʃənləs, dɪstənt, əz ɪt hæd bɪn wən i siz seɪɾɪn ɪn ði ɝli deɪz. hi wʊɾə wɔɹmd ɪt fəɹ hɝ, bʌt ðət sim bɪɑn hɪm. "aɪ ɹɪli dɪd faɪnd wʌɾ aɪ niɾəd hɪɹ." ɪf ə sɔɹd hæd mɛmɹi, ɪt maɪt bi ɡɹeɪtfəl tə ðə fɔɹdʒ faɪɝ, bʌt nɛvɝ fɑn ʌv ɪt. wən ðeɪ wɝ weɪv θɹu, hi kæntɝd ðə ɡɹeɪ ʌp ðə hɑɹd-pæk dɝt ɹoʊɾ ən ɪndə ðə hɪlz, ən i dɪd nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlæns bæk əntɪl tʃɹiz hɪɾ ɛni saɪɾ ə ðə sɪɾi.

"I'm grateful to Far Madding, Min." His voice was emotionless, distant, as it had been when he seized saidin in the early days. He would have warmed it for her, but that seemed beyond him. "I really did find what I needed here." If a sword had memory, it might be grateful to the forge fire, but never fond of it. When they were waved through, he cantered the gray up the hard-packed dirt road and into the hills, and he did not so much as glance back until trees hid any sight of the city.

ðə ɹoʊd klaɪmd ən waʊn θɹu fɔɹəstəd wɪntɝ hɪlz, wɛɹ oʊnli paɪn ən lɛðɝlif ʃoʊd ɡɹin ən moʊs bɹæntʃəz wɝ stɑɹk ən ɡɹeɪ, ən sʌɾənli ðə sɔɹs wɑz ðəɹ əɡɛn, simɪŋli dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ. ɪt pʌlsd ən bɛkən ən fɪld ɪm wɪð hʌŋɡɝ laɪk stɑɹveɪʃən. wɪθaʊt θɔɾ i ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən fɪl ði ɛmptinəs ɪn hɪmsɛlf wɪð seɪɾɪn, ən ævəlæntʃ ə faɪɝ, ə stɔɹm ʌv aɪs, ɔl lɑɹɾɪd wɪð ðə fɪlθi teɪn ðət meɪd ðə lɑɹdʒɝ waʊn ɪn ɪz saɪd pʌls. hi sweɪɾ ɪn ðə sæɾəl əz ɪz hɛd spʌn ən ɪz stʌmək klɛntʃt ivən əz i fɔt tə ɹaɪd ði ævəlæntʃ ðət tʃɹaɪd tə sɪɹ ɪz maɪnd, tə sɔɹ ɑn ðə stɔɹm ðət tʃɹaɪd tə skaʊɝ ɪz soʊl. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ fɝɡɪvnəs əɹ pɪɾi ɪn ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ. ə mæn fɔɾ ɪt, əɹ daɪd. hi kəd fil ðə θɹi æʃəmən bɪhaɪn ɪm fɪlɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz tu, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ət seɪɾɪn laɪk mɛn dʒʌst aʊɾ ə ðə weɪst u hæd faʊnd wɔɾɝ. ɪn ɪz hɛd, luz θɝɪn saɪd wɪð ɹɪlif.

The road climbed and wound through forested winter hills, where only pine and leatherleaf showed green and most branches were stark and gray, and suddenly the Source was there again, seemingly just beyond the corner of his eye. It pulsed and beckoned and filled him with hunger like starvation. Without thought he reached out and filled the emptiness in himself with saidin, an avalanche of fire, a storm of ice, all larded with the filthy taint that made the larger wound in his side pulse. He swayed in the saddle as his head spun and his stomach clenched even as he fought to ride the avalanche that tried to sear his mind, to soar on the storm that tried to scour his soul. There was no forgiveness or pity in the male half of the Power. A man fought it, or died. He could feel the three Asha'man behind him filling themselves too, drinking at saidin like men just out of the Waste who had found water. In his head, Lews Therin sighed with relief.

mɪn ɹeɪn əɹ maʊn soʊ kloʊs tə hɪm ðət ðɛɹ lɛɡz tʌtʃt. "ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?" ʃi sɛd wɝidli. "ju lʊk ɪl."

Min reined her mount so close to him that their legs touched. "Are you all right?" she said worriedly. "You look ill."

"aɪm əz wɛl əz ɹeɪnwɔɾɝ," hi toʊl hɝ, ən ðə laɪ wɑz nɑt dʒʌst əbaʊɾ ɪz bɛli. hi wɑz stil, ən tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, stɪl nɑt hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf. hi hæɾ ɪntɛndəd sɛndɪŋ əɹ tə keɪɛmlɪn, wɪð əliviə tə pɹətɛk hɝ. ɪf ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən wɑz gɑnə hɛlp ɪm daɪ, hi hæd tə bi eɪbəl tə tʃɹʌs hɝ. hi hæd plæn ɪz wɝdz, bʌt lʊkɪŋ ɪndə mɪnz dɑɹk aɪz, hi wɑz nɑt hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪz tʌŋ fɔɹm ðɛm. tɝnɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪ ɪn əmʌŋ ðə bɛɹ-bɹæntʃt tʃɹiz, hi spoʊk tə kædzueɪn oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ðɪs ɪz ðə pleɪs."

"I'm as well as rainwater," he told her, and the lie was not just about his belly. He was steel, and to his surprise, still not hard enough. He had intended sending her to Caemlyn, with Alivia to protect her. If the golden-haired woman was going to help him die, he had to be able to trust her. He had planned his words, but looking into Min's dark eyes, he was not hard enough to make his tongue form them. Turning the gray in among the bare-branched trees, he spoke to Cadsuane over his shoulder. "This is the place."

ʃi fɑloʊd hɪm, ʌv kɔɹs. ðeɪ ɔl dɪd. hɑɹɪn hæd bɛɹli lɛɾ ɪm aʊɾ ə hɝ saɪt lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə slip ə fju aʊɝz læs naɪt. hi wʊɾə lɛft əɹ bɪhaɪnd, bʌɾ ɑn ðət sʌbʒɪkt, kædzueɪn hæd ɡɪvən ɪm əɹ fɝst ædvaɪs. jə meɪɾ ə bɑɹɡən wɪð ðɛm, bɔɪ, ðə seɪm əz saɪnɪŋ ə tʃɹiɾi. əɹ ɡɪvɪŋ jəɹ wɝd. kip ɪt, əɹ tɛl əm ɪts bɹoʊkən. ʌðɝwaɪz, jə ɑɹ dʒʌst ə θif. blʌnt, tə ðə pɔɪnt, ən ɪn toʊnz ðət lɛf noʊ daʊɾ əz tə hɝ əpɪnjən ə θivz. hi hæd nɛvɝ pɹɑməs tə fɑloʊ hɝ kaʊnsəl, bʌt ʃi wɑz tu ɹɪlʌktən əbaʊt biɪŋ ɪz ædvaɪzɝ əɾ ɔl fəɹ ɪm tə ɹɪsk dʒɹaɪvɪŋ əɹ əweɪ ðɪs sun, soʊ ðə weɪvməstʃɹəs ən ði ʌðɝ tu si foʊk ɹoʊd wɪð əliviə, əhɛɾ ə vɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝ faɪv ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæd swɔɹn tə hɪm, ən ðə fɔɹ u wɝ kædzueɪnz kəmpænjənz. ʃi wəɾ əz sun liv ɪm əz ðɛm, hi wɑz sɝɾən, meɪbi sunɝ.

She followed him, of course. They all did. Harine had barely let him out of her sight long enough to sleep a few hours last night. He would have left her behind, but on that subject, Cadsuane had given him her first advice. You made a bargain with them, boy, the same as signing a treaty. Or giving your word. Keep it, or tell them it's broken. Otherwise, you are just a thief. Blunt, to the point, and in tones that left no doubt as to her opinion of thieves. He had never promised to follow her counsel, but she was too reluctant about being his advisor at all for him to risk driving her away this soon, so the Wavemistress and the other two Sea Folk rode with Alivia, ahead of Verin and the other five Aes Sedai who had sworn to him, and the four who were Cadsuane's companions. She would as soon leave him as them, he was certain, maybe sooner.

tə ʌðɝ aɪz ðən hɪz, nʌθɪŋ dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt ðə pleɪs wɛɹ i hæd dʌɡ bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. tə hɪz aɪz, ə θɪn ʃæf ðət ʃoʊn laɪk ə læntɝn ɹoʊz θɹu ðə dæmp mʌltʃ ɑn ðə fɔɹəs flɔɹ. ivən ənʌðɝ mæn u kəd tʃænəl cʊɾə wɔk θɹu ðət ʃæft wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ. hi dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə dɪsmaʊnt. juzɪŋ floʊz ʌv ɛɹ, hi ɹɪpt əsaɪd ðə θɪk leɪɝ ə ɹɑɾɪŋ livz ən twɪɡz ən ʃʌvəld əweɪ dæmp ɝθ əntɪl i ənkʌvɝɾ ə lɔŋ, nɛɹoʊ bʌndəl taɪd wɪð lɛðɝ kɔɹdz. klɑdz ə dɝt klʌŋ tə ðə ɹæpɪŋ-klɔθ əz i floʊɾəd kælændɝ tə hɪz hænd. hi hæd nɑt dɛɹd kæɹi ðət tə fɑɹ mæɾɪŋ. wɪθaʊɾ ə skæbɝd, hi wʊɾə hæd tə liv ɪɾ ət ðə bɹɪdʒ fɔɹtʃɹəs, ə deɪnʒɝəs flæɡ weɪɾɪŋ tə ənaʊns ɪz pɹɛzəns. ɪt wɑz ənlaɪkli ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ sɔɹd meɪɾ ə kɹɪstəl tə bi faʊn ɪn ðə wɝld, ən tu mɛni pipəl nu ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd wʌn. ən livɪŋ ɪt hɪɹ, hi hæd stɪl ɛndəɾ ʌp ɪn ə dɑɹk, kɹæmp stoʊn bɑks ʌndɝ ðə . . . noʊ. ðət wɑz dʌn ən oʊvɝ. oʊvɝ. luz θɝɪn pæntɪɾ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz ə hɪz maɪnd.

To other eyes than his, nothing distinguished the place where he had dug before going into Far Madding. To his eyes, a thin shaft that shone like a lantern rose through the damp mulch on the forest floor. Even another man who could channel could have walked through that shaft without knowing it was there. He did not bother to dismount. Using flows of Air, he ripped aside the thick layer of rotting leaves and twigs and shoveled away damp earth until he uncovered a long, narrow bundle tied with leather cords. Clods of dirt clung to the wrapping-cloth as he floated Callandor to his hand. He had not dared carry that to Far Madding. Without a scabbard, he would have had to leave it at the bridge fortress, a dangerous flag waiting to announce his presence. It was unlikely there was another sword made of crystal to be found in the world, and too many people knew that the Dragon Reborn had one. And leaving it here, he had still ended up in a dark, cramped stone box under the . . . No. That was done and over. Over. Lews Therin panted in the shadows of his mind.

θɹʌstɪŋ kælændɝ ʌndɝ ɪz sæɾəl-ɡɝθ, hi ɹeɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ ɝaʊn tə feɪs ði ʌðɝz. ðə hɔɹsəz hɛl ðɛɹ teɪlz taɪɾ əɡɛns ðə wɪnd, bʌt naʊ ən ðən wʌn stæmpt ə huf əɹ tɔst ɪts hɛd, ɪmpeɪʃən tə bi muvɪŋ əɡɛn æftɝ soʊ lɔŋ ɪn ðə steɪbəl. ðə lɛðɝ skɹɪp ðət hʌŋ fɹəm nɪneɪivz ʃoʊldɝ lʊkt ɪŋkɔŋɹuəs wɪð ɔl ðə bi-ɡɛm tɛɹæŋɡɹil ʃi wɔɹ. naʊ ðət ðə taɪm wɑz nɪɹ, ʃi wɑz stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ðə bʌlʒɪŋ skɹɪp, əpɛɹənli wɪθaʊt ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪɾ əɹ fɪɹ, bʌɾ əɹ tʃɪn tʃɹɛmbəld. kædzueɪn wɑz lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm ɪmpæsɪvli. hɝ kaʊl hæd fɔlən daʊn əɹ bæk, ən səmtaɪmz ə ɡʌst stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən moʊst sweɪd ðə ɡoʊldən fɪʃ ən bɝdz, stɑɹz ən munz, dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm əɹ bʌn.

Thrusting Callandor under his saddle-girth, he reined the gray around to face the others. The horses held their tails tight against the wind, but now and then one stamped a hoof or tossed its head, impatient to be moving again after so long in the stable. The leather scrip that hung from Nynaeve's shoulder looked incongruous with all the be-gemmed ter'angreal she wore. Now that the time was near, she was stroking the bulging scrip, apparently without realizing what she was doing. She was trying to hide her fear, but her chin trembled. Cadsuane was looking at him impassively. Her cowl had fallen down her back, and sometimes a gust stronger than most swayed the golden fish and birds, stars and moons, dangling from her bun.

"aɪ æm gɑnə ɹimuv ðə teɪn fɹəm ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə sɔɹs," hi ənaʊnst.

"I am going to remove the taint from the male half of the Source," he announced.

ðə θɹi æʃəmən, naʊ ɪn pleɪn dɑɹk koʊts ən kloʊks laɪk ði ʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝz, ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɪksaɪɾəd ɡlænsɪz, bʌɾ ə ɹɪpəl pæs θɹu ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɛsun lɛɾ aʊɾ ə ɡæsp ðət sim tu lɑɹdʒ fəɹ ðə slɛndɝ, bɝd-laɪk sɪstɝ.

The three Asha'man, now in plain dark coats and cloaks like the other Warders, exchanged excited glances, but a ripple passed through the Aes Sedai. Nesune let out a gasp that seemed too large for the slender, bird-like sister.

kædzueɪnz ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ ɔltɝd. "wɪð ðæt?" ʃi sɛd, ɹeɪzɪŋ ə skɛptəkəl aɪbɹaʊ ət ðə bʌndəl bɪniθ ɪz lɛɡ.

Cadsuane's expression never altered. "With that?" she said, raising a skeptical eyebrow at the bundle beneath his leg.

"wɪð ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl," hi ɹɪplaɪd. ðət neɪm wɑz ənʌðɝ ɡɪft fɹəm luz θɝɪn, ɹɛstɪŋ ɪn ɹændz hɛɾ əz ɪf ɪt hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ðɛɹ. "ju noʊ ðɛm əz ɪmɛns stætʃuz, sɑŋɡɹil, wʌn bɛɹiɾ ɪn kɛɹhin, ði ʌðɝ ɑn tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ." hɑɹɪnz hɛd dʒɝkt, meɪkɪŋ ðə ɡoʊldən mədæljənz ɑn əɹ noʊz tʃeɪn klɪk təɡɛðɝ, ət mɛnʃən ə ðə si foʊk aɪlənd. "ðeɪɹ tu bɪɡ tə bi muvd wɪð ɛni iz, bʌɾ aɪ hæv ə pɛɹ ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil kɔld æksɛs kiz. juzɪŋ ðoʊz, ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl kən bi tæp fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ ɪn ðə wɝld."

"With the Choedan Kal," he replied. That name was another gift from Lews Therin, resting in Rand's head as if it had always been there. "You know them as immense statues, sa'angreal, one buried in Cairhien, the other on Tremalking." Harine's head jerked, making the golden medallions on her nose chain click together, at mention of the Sea Folk island. "They're too big to be moved with any ease, but I have a pair of ter'angreal called access keys. Using those, the Choedan Kal can be tapped from anywhere in the world."

deɪnʒɝəs, luz θɝɪn moʊnd. mædnəs. ɹænd ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm. fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, oʊnli kædzueɪn mæɾɝd.

Dangerous, Lews Therin moaned. Madness. Rand ignored him. For the moment, only Cadsuane mattered.

hɝ beɪ flɪkt wʌn blæk ɪɹ, ən ət ðəɾ i simd mɔɹ ɪksaɪɾəbəl ðən ɪz ɹaɪɾɝ. "wʌn ə ðoʊz sɑŋɡɹil ɪz meɪd fəɹ ə wʊmən," ʃi sɛd kuli. "hu dʒju pɹəpoʊz tə juz ðæt? əɹ də ðiz kiz əlaʊ jə tə dʒɹɔ ɑn boʊθ jɝsɛlf?"

Her bay flicked one black ear, and at that he seemed more excitable than his rider. "One of those sa'angreal is made for a woman," she said coolly. "Who do you propose to use that? Or do these keys allow you to draw on both yourself?"

"nɪneɪiv wɪl lɪŋk wɪð mi." hi tʃɹʌstɪd nɪneɪiv, tə lɪŋk wɪð, bʌt noʊ wʌn ɛls. ʃi wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ʃi hæd bɪn ðə wɪzdəm ʌv ɛmənz fild; hi hæd tə tʃɹʌs hɝ. ʃi smaɪld əɾ ɪm ən nɑɾəd fɝmli, hɝ tʃɪn noʊ lɔŋɡɝ tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. "doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp mi, kædzueɪn." ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ, oʊnli stʌɾid hɪm, dɑɹk aɪz weɪɪŋ ən mɛʒɝɪŋ.

"Nynaeve will link with me." He trusted Nynaeve, to link with, but no one else. She was Aes Sedai, but she had been the Wisdom of Emond's Field; he had to trust her. She smiled at him and nodded firmly, her chin no longer trembling. "Don't try to stop me, Cadsuane." She said nothing, only studied him, dark eyes weighing and measuring.

"fɝɡɪv mi, kædzueɪn," kʌmaɪɹə bɹoʊk ɪndə ðə saɪləns, hilɪŋ əɹ dæpəl fɔɹwɝd. "jʌŋ mæn, hæv jə kənsɪɾɝd ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv feɪljɝ? hæv jə kənsɪɾɝd ðə kɑnsəkwɛnsəz ə feɪljɝ?"

"Forgive me, Cadsuane," Kumira broke into the silence, heeling her dapple forward. "Young man, have you considered the possibility of failure? Have you considered the consequences of failure?"

"aɪ mʌst æsk ðə seɪm kwɛstʃən," nɛsun sɛd ʃɑɹpli. ʃi sæt vɛɹi stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ən əɹ dɑɹk aɪz mɛt ɹændz ɡeɪz lɛvəli. "baɪ ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ hæv ɹɛd, ði ətɛmp tə juz ðoʊz sɑŋɡɹil meɪ ɹɪzʌlt ɪn dɪzæstɝ. təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ maɪt bi stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə kɹæk ðə wɝld laɪk ən ɛɡ."

"I must ask the same question," Nesune said sharply. She sat very straight in her saddle, and her dark eyes met Rand's gaze levelly. "By everything I have read, the attempt to use those sa'angreal may result in disaster. Together, they might be strong enough to crack the world like an egg."

laɪk ən ɛɡ! luz θɝɪn əɡɹid. ðeɪ wɝ nɛvɝ tɛstəd, nɛvɝ tʃɹaɪd. ðɪs ɪz ɪnseɪn! hi ʃɹikt. jə ɑɹ mæd! mæd!

Like an egg! Lews Therin agreed. They were never tested, never tried. This is insane! he shrieked. You are mad! Mad!

"ðə læst aɪ hɝd," ɹænd toʊl ðə sɪstɝz, "wʌn æʃəmən ɪn fɪfti hæd ɡɔn mæɾ ən hæd tə bi pʊt daʊn laɪk ə ɹæbɪd dɔɡ. mɔɹ wɪl hæv, baɪ naʊ. ðəɹ ɪz ə ɹɪsk tə duɪŋ ðɪs, bʌɾ ɪts ɔl meɪbi ən maɪt. ɪf aɪ doʊn tʃɹaɪ, ðə sɝɾənti ɪz ðət mɔɹ ən mɔɹ mɛn wɪl ɡoʊ mæd, meɪbi skɔɹz, meɪbi ɔl ʌv ʌs, ən sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ɪɾəl bi tu mɛni tə bi kɪld izəli. wɪl jə ɛndʒɔɪ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə læs bæɾəl wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd ɹæbɪɾ æʃəmən wɑndɝɪŋ əbaʊt, əɹ tu hʌnʒɹəd, əɹ faɪv? ən meɪbi mi wʌn ə ðɛm? haʊ lɔŋ wɪl ðə wɝl sɝvaɪv ðæt?" hi spoʊk tə ðə tu bɹaʊnz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz kædzueɪn u hi wɑtʃt. hɝ ɔlmoʊs blæk aɪz nɛvɝ lɛf hɪm. hi niɾəd tə kip əɹ wɪð hɪm, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə tɔk ɪm aʊɾ ʌv ɪt, hi wəd ɹɪdʒɛkt əɹ ædvaɪs noʊ mæɾɝ ðə kɑnsəkwɛnsəz. ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp ɪm . . . ? seɪɾɪn ɹeɪdʒd ɪnsaɪd hɪm.

"The last I heard," Rand told the sisters, "one Asha'man in fifty had gone mad and had to be put down like a rabid dog. More will have, by now. There is a risk to doing this, but it's all maybe and might. If I don't try, the certainty is that more and more men will go mad, maybe scores, maybe all of us, and sooner or later it will be too many to be killed easily. Will you enjoy waiting for the Last Battle with a hundred rabid Asha'man wandering about, or two hundred, or five? And maybe me one of them? How long will the world survive that?" He spoke to the two Browns, but it was Cadsuane who he watched. Her almost black eyes never left him. He needed to keep her with him, but if she tried to talk him out of it, he would reject her advice no matter the consequences. If she tried to stop him . . . ? Saidin raged inside him.

"wɪl jə də ðə did hɪɹ?" ʃi æskt.

"Will you do the deed here?" she asked.

"ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ," hi toʊl hɝ, ən ʃi nɑɾəd.

"In Shadar Logoth," he told her, and she nodded.

"ə fɪɾɪŋ pleɪs," ʃi sɛd, "ɪf wəɹ tə ɹɪsk dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ ðə wɝld."

"A fitting place," she said, "if we are to risk destroying the world."

luz θɝɪn skɹimd, ə dwɪndəlɪŋ haʊl ðəɾ ɛkoʊɾ ɪnsaɪd ɹændz skʌl əz ðə vɔɪs flɛɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹk dɛpθs. ðəɹ wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə haɪd, ðoʊ. noʊ seɪf pleɪs.

Lews Therin screamed, a dwindling howl that echoed inside Rand's skull as the voice fled into the dark depths. There was nowhere to hide, though. No safe place.

ðə ɡeɪtweɪ hi woʊv dɪd nɑɾ oʊpən ɪndə ðə ɹuən sɪɾi ʌv ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ɪtsɛlf, bʌt tə ə θɪnli wʊɾɪd, ənivən hɪltɑp ə fju maɪlz tə ðə nɔɹθ, wɛɹ ðə hɔɹs hʊvz ɹæŋ ɑn spɑɹs, stoʊni sɔɪl ðət hæd stʌntɪd ðə lifləs tʃɹiz, ən ɹæɡəd pætʃəz ə snoʊ kʌvɝd ðə ɡɹaʊnd. əz ɹænd dɪsmaʊntɪd, hɪz aɪ wɑz kɑt baɪ dɪstənt ɡlɪmpsɪz ə ðə pleɪs wʌns kɔld ɑɹɪdhɔl ʃoʊɪŋ əbʌv ðə tʃɹiz, taʊɝz ðəɾ ɛndəɾ əbɹʌpli ɪn dʒæɡd stoʊn, ən waɪɾ ʌnjən-ʃeɪp doʊmz ðət cʊɾə ʃɛltɝɾ ə vɪlədʒ hæd ðeɪ bɪn hoʊl. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk fəɹ lɔŋ. dɪspaɪt ðə klɪɹ mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ, ðoʊz peɪl doʊmz feɪl tə ɡlim əz ðeɪ ʃʊd, əz ɪf sʌmθɪŋ kæst ə ʃædoʊ oʊvɝ ðə spɹɔlɪŋ ɹuən. ivən ət ðɪs dɪstəns fɹəm ðə sɪɾi, ðə sɛkənd nɛvɝ-hilɪŋ waʊn ɪn ɪz saɪd hæd bɪɡʌn tə θɹəb feɪnli. ðə slæʃ ɡɪvən baɪ pdən feɪnz dæɡɝ, ðə dæɡɝ ðət hæd kʌm fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, dɪd nɑt bit təɡɛðɝ wɪð ðə pʌlsɪŋ ə ðə lɑɹdʒɝ waʊn ɪt kʌɾ əkɹɔs, bʌt ɹæðɝ əɡɛnst ɪt, ɔltɝneɪɾɪŋ.

The gateway he wove did not open into the ruined city of Shadar Logoth itself, but to a thinly wooded, uneven hilltop a few miles to the north, where the horse hooves rang on sparse, stony soil that had stunted the leafless trees, and ragged patches of snow covered the ground. As Rand dismounted, his eye was caught by distant glimpses of the place once called Aridhol showing above the trees, towers that ended abruptly in jagged stone, and white onion-shaped domes that could have sheltered a village had they been whole. He did not look for long. Despite the clear morning sky, those pale domes failed to gleam as they should, as if something cast a shadow over the sprawling ruin. Even at this distance from the city, the second never-healing wound in his side had begun to throb faintly. The slash given by Padan Fain's dagger, the dagger that had come from Shadar Logoth, did not beat together with the pulsing of the larger wound it cut across, but rather against it, alternating.

kædzueɪn tʊk tʃɑɹdʒ, ɪʃuɪŋ bɹɪsk kəmænz, əz maɪɾ əv bɪn ɪkspɛktəd. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔlweɪz dɪd, ɡɪvən hæf ə tʃæns, ən ɹænd dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp hɝ. læn ən nɛθən ən bæsɑn ɹoʊd daʊn ɪndə ðə fɔɹəs tə skaʊt, ən ði ʌðɝ wɔɹɾɝz hɝid tə fæsən ðə hɔɹsəz tə loʊ bɹæntʃəz aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. mɪn stʊɾ ʌp ɪn əɹ stɝəps ən pʊld ɹændz hɛd tə wɛɹ ʃi kəd kɪs ɪz aɪz. wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ ə wɝd, ʃi wɛn tə dʒɔɪn ðə mɛn wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz. ðə bɑn sɝdʒd wɪð əɹ lʌv fəɹ hɪm, wɪð kɑnfəɾəns ən ə tʃɹʌst soʊ kəmplit ðəɾ i stɛɹɾ æftɝ əɹ ɪn əmeɪzmənt.

Cadsuane took charge, issuing brisk commands, as might have been expected. One way or another, Aes Sedai always did, given half a chance, and Rand did not try to stop her. Lan and Nethan and Bassane rode down into the forest to scout, and the other Warders hurried to fasten the horses to low branches out of the way. Min stood up in her stirrups and pulled Rand's head to where she could kiss his eyes. Without speaking a word, she went to join the men with the horses. The bond surged with her love for him, with confidence and a trust so complete that he stared after her in amazement.

ɛbən keɪm tə teɪk ɹændz maʊnt, ɡɹɪnɪŋ fɹəm ɪɹ tə ɪɹ. təɡɛðɝ wɪð ɪz noʊz, ðoʊz ɪɹz stɪl sim tə meɪk ʌp hæf ɪz feɪs, bʌɾ i wɑz ə slɛndɝ juθ ɹæðɝ ðən ɡɔki, naʊ. "ɪt wɪl bi wʌndɝfəl, tʃænəlɪŋ wɪθaʊt ðə teɪnt, maɪ lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən," hi sɛɾ ɪksaɪɾədli. ɹænd θɔɾ ɛbən maɪt bi əz mʌtʃ əz sɛvəntin, bʌɾ i saʊndəd jʌŋɡɝ. "ðæɾ ɔlweɪz meɪks mi wɑnə ɛmpti maɪ bɛli, ɪf aɪ θɪŋk ɑn ɪt." hi tʃɹɑɾəd əweɪ wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪ, stɪl ɡɹɪnɪŋ.

Eben came to take Rand's mount, grinning from ear to ear. Together with his nose, those ears still seemed to make up half his face, but he was a slender youth rather than gawky, now. "It will be wonderful, channeling without the taint, my Lord Dragon," he said excitedly. Rand thought Eben might be as much as seventeen, but he sounded younger. "That always makes me want to empty my belly, if I think on it." He trotted away with the gray, still grinning.

ðə paʊɝ ɹɔɹɾ ɪn ɹænd, ən ðə fɪlθ tɑɹnɪʃɪŋ ðə pjʊɹ laɪf ə seɪɾɪn sipt ɪndə hɪm, ɹæŋk ɹʌnəlz ðət wəd bɹɪŋ mædnəs ən dɛθ.

The Power roared in Rand, and the filth tarnishing the pure life of saidin seeped into him, rank runnels that would bring madness and death.

kædzueɪn ɡæðɝd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝaʊn hɝ, ən əliviə ən ðə si foʊk wɪndfɪndɝ, tu. hɑɹɪn ɡɹʌmbəld laʊdli əbaʊt biɪŋ ɪkskluɾəd, əntɪl ə fɪŋɡɝ pɔɪntəd baɪ kædzueɪn sɛn əɹ stɔkɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə hɪltɑp. moʊd, ɪn ɪz ɑd blu kwɪltɪd koʊt, sæt hɑɹɪn daʊn ɑn ən aʊtkɹɑp, ən tɔk suðɪŋli, ðoʊ səmtaɪmz ɪz aɪz wɛn tə ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ tʃɹiz, ən ðən i slɪɾ ə hæn əlɔŋ ðə lɔŋ aɪvɝi hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd. dʒɑhɹ əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə hɔɹsəz, stʃɹɪpɪŋ ðə klɔθ ɹæpɪŋz fɹəm kælændɝ. ðə kɹɪstəl sɔɹd, wɪð ɪts lɔŋ klɪɹ hɪlt ən slaɪtli kɝvɪŋ bleɪd, spɑɹkəld ɪn ðə peɪl sʌnlaɪt. əɾ ən ɪmpɪɹiəs dʒɛstʃɝ fɹəm mɛɹaɪs, hi kwɪkən ɪz stɛp tə dʒɔɪn hɝ. deɪmɝ wɑz ɪn ðət ɡɹup, tu, ən ɛbən. kædzueɪn hæd nɑɾ æsk tə juz kælændɝ. ðət kəd pæs. fəɹ naʊ, ɪt kʊd.

Cadsuane gathered the Aes Sedai around her, and Alivia and the Sea Folk Windfinder, too. Harine grumbled loudly about being excluded, until a finger pointed by Cadsuane sent her stalking across the hilltop. Moad, in his odd blue quilted coat, sat Harine down on an outcrop, and talked soothingly, though sometimes his eyes went to the surrounding trees, and then he slid a hand along the long ivory hilt of his sword. Jahar appeared from the direction of the horses, stripping the Cloth wrappings from Callandor. The crystal sword, with its long clear hilt and slightly curving blade, sparkled in the pale sunlight. At an imperious gesture from Merise, he quickened his step to join her. Damer was in that group, too, and Eben. Cadsuane had not asked to use Callandor. That could pass. For now, it could.

"ðæt wʊmən kəd tʃɹaɪ ə stoʊnz peɪʃəns!" nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp tə ɹænd. wɪð wʌn hænd, ʃi hɛl ðə skɹɪps stʃɹæp fɝmli ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, waɪl ði ʌðɝ wɑz dʒʌst əz fɝmli ɝaʊn ðə θɪk bɹeɪd hæŋɪŋ fɹəm əɹ kaʊl. "tə ðə pɪɾ ə dum wɪð hɝ, ðæts wʌɾ aɪ seɪ! ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ mɪn kʊdn bi ɹɔŋ dʒʌs ðɪs wʌns? wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz nɑt. bʌt stɪl . . . ! wɪl jə stɑp smaɪlɪŋ laɪk ðæt? jud meɪk ə kæt nɝvəs!"

"That woman could try a stone's patience!" Nynaeve muttered, striding up to Rand. With one hand, she held the scrip's strap firmly on her shoulder, while the other was just as firmly around the thick braid hanging from her cowl. "To the Pit of Doom with her, that's what I say! Are you sure Min couldn't be wrong just this once? Well, I suppose not. But still . . . ! Will you stop smiling like that? You'd make a cat nervous!"

"wi maɪɾ əz wɛl bɪɡɪn," hi toʊl hɝ, ən ʃi blɪŋkt.

"We might as well begin," he told her, and she blinked.

"ʃʊdnt wi weɪɾ ɑn kædzueɪn?" noʊ wʌn wəd səspɛkt ʃi hæd bɪn kəmpleɪnɪŋ əbaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ə moʊmən ɝliɝ. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ʃi saʊndəɾ æŋkʃəs nɑt tə əpsɛt hɝ.

"Shouldn't we wait on Cadsuane?" No one would suspect she had been complaining about the Aes Sedai a moment earlier. If anything, she sounded anxious not to upset her.

"ʃi wɪl də wʌt ʃɪl du, nɪneɪiv. wɪð jəɹ hɛlp, əl də wʌɾ aɪ mʌst."

"She will do what she will do, Nynaeve. With your help, I will do what I must."

stɪl ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, klʌtʃɪŋ ðə skɹɪp tə hɝ tʃɛst ən kæstɪŋ wɝid ɡlænsɪz ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə wɪmən ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn kædzueɪn. əliviə lɛf ðət ɡɹup ən hɝid təwɔɹɾ əm əkɹɔs ði ənivən ɡɹaʊn hoʊldɪŋ əɹ kloʊk kloʊzd wɪð boʊθ hænz.

Still she hesitated, clutching the scrip to her chest and casting worried glances in the direction of the women gathered around Cadsuane. Alivia left that group and hurried toward them across the uneven ground holding her cloak closed with both hands.

"kædzueɪn sɛz aɪ mʌst əv ðə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, nɪneɪiv," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ðət sɑf sintʃæn dʒɹɔl. "naʊ doʊn ɑɹɡju; ðəɹ ɪzən taɪm. bɪsaɪdz, ðeɪ ɑɹ noʊ ɡʊd tə jə ɪf jəɹ gɑnə bi lɪŋk tə hɪm."

"Cadsuane says I must have the ter'angreal, Nynaeve," she said in that soft Seanchan drawl. "Now don't argue; there isn't time. Besides, they are no good to you if you're going to be linked to him."

ðɪs taɪm ðə lʊk nɪneɪiv dɝɛktəd təwɔɹd ðə wɪmən ɝaʊn kædzueɪn wɑz nɪɹ mɝɾɝəs, bʌt ʃi stʃɹɪpt ɔf ɹɪŋz ən bɹeɪslɪts, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ən hændəd ðə dʒuəl bɛlt ən nɛkləs tə əliviə, əz wɛl. æftɝ ə moʊmənt, ʃi saɪɾ ən ənfæsən ðə pəkjuljɝ bɹeɪslət kənɛktəd tə fɪŋɡɝ ɹɪŋz baɪ flæt tʃeɪnz. "ju maɪɾ əz wɛl teɪk ðɪs, tu. aɪ doʊn səpoʊz aɪ niɾ ən æŋɡɹil ɪf aɪm gɑnə bi juzɪŋ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl sɑŋɡɹil ɛvɝ meɪd. bʌɾ aɪ wɑn əm ɔl bæk, ʌndɝstænd," ʃi fɪnɪʃt fɪɹsli.

This time the look Nynaeve directed toward the women around Cadsuane was near murderous, but she stripped off rings and bracelets, muttering under her breath, and handed the jeweled belt and necklace to Alivia, as well. After a moment, she sighed and unfastened the peculiar bracelet connected to finger rings by flat chains. "You might as well take this, too. I don't suppose I need an angreal if I'm going to be using the most powerful sa'angreal ever made. But I want them all back, understand," she finished fiercely.

"aɪ æm nɑɾ ə θif," ðə hɔk-aɪd wʊmən toʊld əɹ pɹɪmli, slɪpɪŋ ðə fɔɹ ɹɪŋz oʊvɝ ðə fɪŋɡɝz ə hɝ lɛf hænd. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ði æŋɡɹil ðət fɪɾəd nɪneɪiv soʊ wɛl, fɪɾ ɑn əɹ lɔŋɡɝ hæn dʒʌst əz izəli. ðə tu wɪmən boʊθ stɛɹɾ ət ðə θɪŋ.

"I am not a thief," the hawk-eyed woman told her primly, slipping the four rings over the fingers of her left hand. Strangely, the angreal that fitted Nynaeve so well, fit on her longer hand just as easily. The two women both stared at the thing.

ɪt keɪm tə hɪm ðən ðət niðɝ ə ðɛm æknɑlɪdʒd ɛni pɑsəbɪləɾi ðəɾ i maɪt feɪl hɪɹ. hi wɪʃt i kəd bi əz sɝɾən. wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn, hæd tə bi dʌn, ðoʊ.

It came to him then that neither of them acknowledged any possibility that he might fail here. He wished he could be as certain. What had to be done, had to be done, though.

"ɑɹ jə gɑnə weɪɾ ɔl deɪ, ɹænd?" nɪneɪiv æskt wən əliviə sɛɾ ɔf bæk tə kædzueɪn, ivən mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən ʃi hæd kʌm. smuðɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ʌndɝ hɝ, nɪneɪiv sæt daʊn ɑn ən ʌpθɹʌst ɡɹeɪ stoʊn ðə saɪz ʌv ə smɔl bɛntʃ, pʊl ðə skɹɪp ɑntu hɝ læp, ən flɪp bæk ðə lɛðɝ flæp.

"Are you going to wait all day, Rand?" Nynaeve asked when Alivia set off back to Cadsuane, even more quickly than she had come. Smoothing her cloak under her, Nynaeve sat down on an upthrust gray stone the size of a small bench, pulled the scrip onto her lap, and flipped back the leather flap.

ɹænd foʊldəd hɪmsɛlf tə ðə ɡɹaʊn kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ əz ʃi pɹədus ðə tu æksɛs kiz, smuð waɪt stætʃuz ə fʊt tɔl, itʃ hoʊldɪŋ ə klɪɹ sfɪɹ ɪn wʌn əpɹeɪz hænd. ðə fɪɡjɝ ʌv ə bɪɹɾəd mæn ɪn ɹoʊbz, ʃi hændəd tə hɪm. ðəɾ ʌv ə ɹoʊbd wʊmən, ʃi sɛɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn əɾ əɹ fit. ðə feɪsəz ɑn ðoʊz fɪɡjɝz wɝ sɝin ən stʃɹɔŋ ən waɪz wɪð jɪɹz.

Rand folded himself to the ground cross-legged in front of her as she produced the two access keys, smooth white statues a foot tall, each holding a clear sphere in one upraised hand. The figure of a bearded man in robes, she handed to him. That of a robed woman, she set on the ground at her feet. The faces on those figures were serene and strong and wise with years.

"ju mʌs pʊt jɝsɛlf ɹaɪɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ ðə sɔɹs," ʃi toʊl hɪm, smuðɪŋ skɝts ðət dɪd nɑt nid smuðɪŋ. "ðɛn aɪ kən lɪŋk wɪð ju."

"You must put yourself right on the edge of embracing the Source," she told him, smoothing skirts that did not need smoothing. "Then I can link with you."

wɪð ə saɪ, ɹænd pʊt daʊn ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn ən ɹilist seɪɾɪn. ɹeɪdʒɪŋ faɪɝ ən koʊl vænɪʃt, ən ðə ɡɹis-slɪk vɪlnəs ə ðə teɪnt, ən wɪð ðɛm, laɪf sim tə dwɪndəl, tu, tɝnɪŋ ðə wɝl peɪl ən dʒɹæb. hi pleɪst ɪz hænz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪɾ ɪm əɡɛns ðə sɪknəs ðət wəd stʃɹaɪk wən i tʊk hoʊld ə ðə sɔɹs əɡɛn, bʌɾ ə dɪfɹən dɪzinəs sʌɾənli spʌn ɪz hɛd. fəɹ ə hɑɹtbit, ə veɪɡ feɪs fɪld ɪz aɪz, blɑɾɪŋ aʊt nɪneɪiv, ə mænz feɪs, ɔlmoʊst ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbəl. laɪt, ɪf ðəɾ ɛvɝ hæpənd waɪl i wɑz æktʃəli  ɡɹæbɪŋ hoʊld ə seɪɾɪn . . . nɪneɪiv bɛn təwɔɹd hɪm, kənsɝn ɑn əɹ feɪs.

With a sigh, Rand put down the bearded man and released saidin. Raging fire and cold vanished, and the grease-slick vileness of the taint, and with them, life seemed to dwindle, too, turning the world pale and drab. He placed his hands on the ground beside him against the sickness that would strike when he took hold of the Source again, but a different dizziness suddenly spun his head. For a heartbeat, a vague face filled his eyes, blotting out Nynaeve, a man's face, almost recognizable. Light, if that ever happened while he was actually grabbing hold of saidin . . . Nynaeve bent toward him, concern on her face.

"naʊ," hi sɛd, ən ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə sɔɹs θɹu ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn. ɹitʃt, bʌt dɪd nɑt siz ɪt. hi hʌŋ ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk, wɑntɪŋ tə haʊl wɪð ði æɡəni əz flɪkɝɪŋ fleɪmz sim tə bɹɔɪl ɪm ivən waɪl ʃɹikɪŋ wɪnz blæstəd pɑɹɾəkəlz ə fɹoʊzən sæn əkɹɔs ɪz skɪn. wɑtʃɪŋ nɪneɪiv teɪk ə kwɪk bɹɛθ, hi nu ɪt læstəɾ oʊnli ən ɪnstənt, jɛɾ ɪt simd i ɛndʒjʊɹd fəɹ aʊɝz bɪfɔɹ . . .

"Now," he said, and reached for the Source through the bearded man. Reached, but did not seize it. He hung on the brink, wanting to howl with the agony as flickering flames seemed to broil him even while shrieking winds blasted particles of frozen sand across his skin. Watching Nynaeve take a quick breath, he knew it lasted only an instant, yet it seemed he endured for hours before . . .

seɪɾɪn floʊd θɹu hɪm, ɔl ðə moʊltən fjʊɹi ən aɪsi tʌmbəlɪŋ, ɔl ðə faʊlnəs, ən i kəd nɑt kəntʃɹoʊl ə hɛɹ-θɪn θɹɛd. hi kəd si ðə floʊ fɹəm ɪm ɪndə nɪneɪiv. tə fil ɪt siθɪŋ θɹu hɪm, fil ðə tʃɹɛtʃɝəs taɪdz ən ʃɪftɪŋ ɡɹaʊn ðət kəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ hɪm ɪn ə hɑɹtbit, tə fil ðət wɪθaʊt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə faɪɾ əɹ kəntʃɹoʊl wɑz ən æɡəni ɪn ɪtsɛlf. hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə hɝ, hi ɹilaɪz sʌɾənli, ɪn mʌtʃ ðə seɪm weɪ hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə mɪn, bʌɾ ɔl i kəd θɪŋk ʌv wɑz seɪɾɪn, flʌɾɪŋ θɹu hɪm ʌnkəntʃɹoʊld.

Saidin flowed through him, all the molten fury and icy tumbling, all the foulness, and he could not control a hair-thin thread. He could see the flow from him into Nynaeve. To feel it seething through him, feel the treacherous tides and shifting ground that could destroy him in a heartbeat, to feel that without being able to fight or control was an agony in itself. He was aware of her, he realized suddenly, in much the same way he was aware of Min, but all he could think of was saidin, flooding through him uncontrolled.

ʃi dʒɹu ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ. "haʊ kən jə stænd . . . ðæt?" ʃi sɛd hɔɹsli. "ɔl keɪɑs ən ɹeɪdʒ ən dɛθ. laɪt! naʊ, jə mʌs tʃɹaɪ əz hɑɹɾ əz jə kən tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðə floʊz waɪl aɪ - " dɛspɹɪt tə ɡeɪn ɪz bæləns ɪn ðət nɛvɝ-ɛndɪŋ wɔɹ wɪð seɪɾɪn, hi dɪɾ əz ʃi sɛd, ən ʃi jɛlpt ən dʒʌmpt. "ju wɝ səpoʊz tə weɪɾ əntɪl aɪ . . ." ʃi bɪɡæn ɪn æŋɡɹi toʊnz, ðən wɛn ɑn ɪn ə mɪɹli ɪɹəteɪɾəd vɔɪs. "wɛl, ət list aɪm ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt. wʌɾ ɑɹ jə soʊ waɪd-aɪɾ əbaʊt? ɪm ðə wʌn hæɾ əɹ skɪn jæŋkt ɔf!"

She drew a shuddering breath. "How can you stand . . . that?" she said hoarsely. "All chaos and rage and death. Light! Now, you must try as hard as you can to control the flows while I - " Desperate to gain his balance in that never-ending war with saidin, he did as she said, and she yelped and jumped. "You were supposed to wait until I . . ." she began in angry tones, then went on in a merely irritated voice. "Well, at least I'm rid of it. What are you so wide-eyed about? I'm the one had her skin yanked off!"

"seɪaɪdɑɹ," hi mɝmɝɾ ɪn wʌndɝ. ɪt wɑz soʊ . . . dɪfɹənt.

"Saidar," he murmured in wonder. It was so . . . different.

əlɔŋsaɪd ðə tɝmɔɪl ə seɪɾɪn, seɪaɪdɑɹ wɑz ə tʃɹæŋkwəl ɹɪvɝ floʊɪŋ smuðli. hi dɪpt ɪndə ðət ɹɪvɝ, ən sʌɾənli hi wɑz stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ əɡɛns kɝəns ðət tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl ɪm fɝðɝ ɪn, swɝlɪŋ wɝlpulz ðət tʃɹaɪd tə jæŋk ɪm ʌndɝ. ðə hɑɹɾɝ i stʃɹʌɡəld, ðə stʃɹɔŋɝ ðə ʃɪftɪŋ fluksɪz ɡɹu. oʊnli ən ɪnstən sɪns i hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kəntʃɹoʊl seɪaɪdɑɹ, ən ɔlɹɛɾi hi fɛlt əz ɪf i wɑz dʒɹaʊnɪŋ ɪn ɪt, biɪŋ swɛpt əweɪ ɪndə ɪtɝnəɾi. nɪneɪiv hæd wɔɹn ɪm wʌɾ i mʌs du, bʌɾ ɪt sim soʊ fɔɹən i hæd nɑt tʃɹuli bɪlivd əntɪl naʊ. wɪð ən ɛfɝt, hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə stɑp faɪɾɪŋ ðə kɝəns, ən əz kwɪkli əz ðət ðə ɹɪvɝ wɑz tʃɹæŋkwəl wʌns mɔɹ.

Alongside the turmoil of saidin, saidar was a tranquil river flowing smoothly. He dipped into that river, and suddenly he was struggling against currents that tried to pull him further in, swirling whirlpools that tried to yank him under. The harder he struggled, the stronger the shifting fluxes grew. Only an instant since he had tried to control saidar, and already he felt as if he was drowning in it, being swept away into eternity. Nynaeve had warned him what he must do, but it seemed so foreign he had not truly believed until now. With an effort, he forced himself to stop fighting the currents, and as quickly as that the river was tranquil once more.

ðət wɑz ðə fɝs dɪfəkəlti, tə faɪt seɪɾɪn waɪl sɝɛndɝɪŋ tə seɪaɪdɑɹ. ðə fɝs dɪfəkəlti, ən ðə fɝs ki tə wʌɾ i hæd tə du. ðə meɪl ən fimeɪl hævz ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs wɝ əlaɪk ən ənɑlaɪk, ətʃɹæktɪŋ ən ɹəpɛlɪŋ, faɪɾɪŋ əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ ivən əz ðeɪ wɝk təɡɛðɝ tə dʒɹaɪv ðə wil ə taɪm. ðə teɪn ɑn ðə meɪl hæf hæɾ ɪts ɑpəzət twɪn, tu. ðə waʊnd ɡɪvən ɪm baɪ ɪʃəml θɹɑbd ɪn taɪm wɪð ðə teɪnt, waɪl ði ʌðɝ, fɹəm feɪnz bleɪd, bit kaʊntɝpɔɪn ɪn taɪm wɪð ði ivəl ðət hæd kɪld ɑɹɪdhɔl.

That was the first difficulty, to fight saidin while surrendering to saidar. The first difficulty, and the first key to what he had to do. The male and female halves of the True Source were alike and unalike, attracting and repelling, fighting against each other even as they worked together to drive the Wheel of Time. The taint on the male half had its opposite twin, too. The wound given him by Ishamael throbbed in time with the taint, while the other, from Fain's blade, beat counterpoint in time with the evil that had killed Aridhol.

ɔkwɝdli, fɔɹsɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə wɝk dʒɛnli, tə juz ði ʌnfəmɪljɝ seɪaɪdɑɹz oʊn ɪmɛns stʃɹɛŋkθ tə ɡaɪɾ ɪɾ əz i wɑntəd, hi woʊv ə kɑnduɪt ðət tʌtʃt ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə sɔɹs ət wʌn ɛn ən ðə dɪstənli sin sɪɾi ət ði ʌðɝ. ðə kɑnduɪt hæd tə bi ʌv ənteɪntɪd seɪaɪdɑɹ. ɪf ðɪs wɝkt əz i hoʊpt, ə tub ə seɪɾɪn maɪt ʃæɾɝ wən ðə teɪn bɪɡæn tə litʃ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. hi θɔɾ ʌv ɪɾ əz ə tub, ət list, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz nɑt. ðə wiv dɪd nɑt fɔɹm əɾ ɔl əz i ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪt tə. əz ɪf seɪaɪdɑɹ hæɾ ə maɪn ʌv ɪts oʊn, ðə wiv tʊk ɑn kɑnvəluʃənz ən spaɪɹəlz ðət meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ʌv ə flaʊɝ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə si, noʊ ɡɹænd wivz swipɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ðə skaɪ. ðə sɔɹs leɪ ət ðə hɑɹɾ ə kɹieɪʃən. ðə sɔɹs wɑz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ivən ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. ðə kɑnduɪt kʌvɝd dɪstəns bɪɑn ɪz ɪmædʒənɪŋ, ən hæd noʊ lɛŋθ əɾ ɔl. ɪt hæd tə bi ə kɑnduɪt, noʊ mæɾɝ ɪts əpɪɹəns. ɪf ɪt wɑz nɑt . . .

Awkwardly, forcing himself to work gently, to use the unfamiliar saidar's own immense strength to guide it as he wanted, he wove a conduit that touched the male half of the Source at one end and the distantly seen city at the other. The conduit had to be of untainted saidar. If this worked as he hoped, a tube of saidin might shatter when the taint began to leech out of it. He thought of it as a tube, at least, though it was not. The weave did not form at all as he expected it to. As if saidar had a mind of its own, the weave took on convolutions and spirals that made him think of a flower. There was nothing to see, no grand weaves sweeping down from the sky. The Source lay at the heart of creation. The Source was everywhere, even in Shadar Logoth. The conduit covered distance beyond his imagining, and had no length at all. It had to be a conduit, no matter its appearance. If it was not . . .

dʒɹɔɪŋ ɑn seɪɾɪn, faɪɾɪŋ ɪt, mæstɝɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn ðə dɛdli dæns i nu soʊ wɛl, hi fɔɹst ɪɾ ɪndə ðə flaʊɝi wiv ə seɪaɪdɑɹ. ən ɪt floʊd θɹu. seɪɾɪn ən seɪaɪdɑɹ, laɪk ən ənlaɪk, kəd nɑt mɪks. ðə floʊ ʌv seɪɾɪn skwizd ɪn ɑn ɪtsɛlf, əweɪ fɹəm ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ən ðə seɪaɪdɑɹ pʊʃt ɪt fɹəm ɔl saɪdz, kəmpɹɛsɪŋ ɪt fɝðɝ, meɪkɪŋ ɪt floʊ fæstɝ. pjʊɹ seɪɾɪn, pjʊɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə teɪnt, tʌtʃt ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ.

Drawing on saidin, fighting it, mastering it in the deadly dance he knew so well, he forced it into the flowery weave of saidar. And it flowed through. Saidin and saidar, like and unlike, could not mix. The flow of saidin squeezed in on itself, away from the surrounding saidar, and the saidar pushed it from all sides, compressing it further, making it flow faster. Pure saidin, pure except for the taint, touched Shadar Logoth.

ɹænd fɹaʊnd. hæɾ i bɪn ɹɔŋ? nʌθɪŋ wɑz hæpənɪŋ. ɪksɛpt . . . ðə wunz ɪn ɪz saɪd sim tə bi θɹɑbɪŋ fæstɝ. əmɪd ðə faɪɹstɔɹm ən aɪsi fjʊɹi ʌv seɪɾɪn, ɪt sim ðət ðə faʊlnəs stɝɾ ən ʃɪftəd. dʒʌst ə slaɪt muvmən ðət maɪɾ əv ɪskeɪp noʊɾəs hæɾ i nɑt bɪn stʃɹeɪnɪŋ tə faɪn ɛniθɪŋ. ə slaɪt stɝɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪdst ə keɪɑs, bʌɾ ɔl ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən.

Rand frowned. Had he been wrong? Nothing was happening. Except . . . The wounds in his side seemed to be throbbing faster. Amid the firestorm and icy fury of saidin, it seemed that the foulness stirred and shifted. Just a slight movement that might have escaped notice had he not been straining to find anything. A slight stirring in the midst of chaos, but all in the same direction.

"ɡoʊ ɑn," nɪneɪiv ɝdʒd. hɝ aɪz wɝ bɹaɪt, əz ðoʊ dʒʌs hævɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ floʊ ɪn əɹ wɑz ɪnʌf fəɹ dʒɔɪ.

"Go on," Nynaeve urged. Her eyes were bright, as though just having saidar flow in her was enough for joy.

hi dʒɹu mɔɹ dipli ɑn boʊθ hævz ə ðə sɔɹs, stʃɹɛŋθənɪŋ ðə kɑnduɪɾ əz i fɔɹs mɔɹ ə seɪɾɪn ɪndə ɪt, dʒɹu ɑn ðə paʊɝ əntɪl nʌθɪŋ i dɪd wəd bɹɪŋ mɔɹ. hi wɑntəd tə ʃaʊɾ ət haʊ mʌtʃ wɑz floʊɪŋ ɪndə hɪm, soʊ mʌtʃ ðəɾ ɪt simd i dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst ɛni mɔɹ, oʊnli ðə wʌn paʊɝ. hi hɝd nɪneɪiv ɡɹoʊn, bʌt ðə mɝɾɝəs stʃɹʌɡəl wɪð seɪɾɪn kənsum hɪm.

He drew more deeply on both halves of the source, strengthening the conduit as he forced more of saidin into it, drew on the Power until nothing he did would bring more. He wanted to shout at how much was flowing into him, so much that it seemed he did not exist any more, only the One Power. He heard Nynaeve groan, but the murderous struggle with saidin consumed him.

fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɑn əɹ lɛft fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ, ɛlzə stɛɹɾ ət ðə mæn ʃi hæd swɔɹn tə sɝv. hi sæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɡɹɪm-feɪst, stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ əz ɪf i kəd nɑt si ðə waɪldɝ nɪneɪiv sɪɾɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ɡloʊɪŋ laɪk ðə sʌn. pɝhæps i kəd nɑt. ʃi kəd fil seɪaɪdɑɹ swipɪŋ θɹu nɪneɪiv ɪn tɔɹəns əndʒɹimd ʌv. ɔl ðə sɪstɝz ə ðə taʊɝ kəmbaɪnd cʊɾə wildɪɾ oʊnli ə fɹækʃən ə ðəɾ oʊʃən. ʃi ɛnvid ðə waɪldɝ ðæt, ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm ʃi θɔt ʃi maɪɾ əv ɡɔn mæd fɹəm ðə ʃɪɹ dʒɔɪ ʌv ɪt. dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld, ðəɹ wɝ bidz ə swɛɾ ɑn nɪneɪivz feɪs. hɝ lɪps wɝ pɑɹɾəd, ən əɹ waɪɾ aɪz stɛɹd ɹæptɝəsli bɪɑn ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Fingering the Great Serpent ring on her left forefinger, Elza stared at the man she had sworn to serve. He sat on the ground, grim-faced, staring straight ahead as if he could not see the wilder Nynaeve sitting right in front of him, glowing like the sun. Perhaps he could not. She could feel saidar sweeping through Nynaeve in torrents undreamed of. All the sisters of the Tower combined could have wielded only a fraction of that ocean. She envied the wilder that, and at the same time she thought she might have gone mad from the sheer joy of it. Despite the cold, there were beads of sweat on Nynaeve's face. Her lips were parted, and her wide eyes stared rapturously beyond the Dragon Reborn.

"ɪt wɪl bɪɡɪn sun, aɪ fɪɹ," kædzueɪn ənaʊnst. tɝnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə siɾəd pɛɹ, ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd sɪstɝ plæntəɾ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ hɪps ən swɛpt ə pɪɹsɪŋ ɡeɪz əkɹɔs ðə hɪltɑp. "ðeɪl bi filɪŋ ðəɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən meɪbi ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɝld. ɛvɹiwʌn tə jəɹ pleɪsəz."

"It will begin soon, I fear," Cadsuane announced. Turning away from the seated pair, the gray-haired sister planted her hands on her hips and swept a piercing gaze across the hilltop. "They'll be feeling that in Tar Valon, and maybe on the other side of the world. Everyone to your places."

"kʌm, ɛlzə," mɛɹaɪs sɛd, ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ sʌɾənli ɝaʊn hɝ.

"Come, Elza," Merise said, the light of saidar suddenly around her.

ɛlzə əlaʊd hɝsɛlf tə bi dʒɹɔn ɪndə ə lɪŋk wɪð ðə stɝn-feɪst sɪstɝ, bʌt ʃi flɪntʃt wən mɛɹaɪs æɾəd əɹ æʃəmən wɔɹɾɝ tə ðə sɝkəl. hi wɑz dɑɹkli bjuɾəfəl, bʌt ðə kɹɪstəl sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz hænz ʃoʊn wɪð ə feɪn laɪt, ən ʃi kəd fil ði ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl siθɪŋ tuməl ðət mʌs bi seɪɾɪn. ivən ðoʊ mɛɹaɪs wɑz kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ ðə floʊz, ðə vɪlnəs ə seɪɾɪn tɝn ɛlzəz stʌmək. ɪt wɑz ə mɪɾən hip ɹɑɾɪŋ ɪn ə swɛltɝɪŋ sʌmɝ. ði ʌðɝ ɡɹin wɑz ə lʌvli wʊmən ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɝ stɝnnəs, bʌɾ əɹ maʊθ θɪn əz ɪf ʃi, tu, wɝ stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ nɑt tə vɑmət.

Elza allowed herself to be drawn into a link with the stern-faced sister, but she flinched when Merise added her Asha'man Warder to the circle. He was darkly beautiful, but the crystal sword in his hands shone with a faint light, and she could feel the incredible seething tumult that must be saidin. Even though Merise was controlling the flows, the vileness of saidin turned Elza's stomach. It was a midden heap rotting in a sweltering summer. The other Green was a lovely woman in spite of her sternness, but her mouth thinned as if she, too, were struggling not to vomit.

ɔl ɝaʊn ðə hɪltɑp ðə sɝkəlz wɝ fɔɹmɪŋ, sɝin ən kɔɹəl lɪŋkt wɪð ði oʊl mæn, flɪn, ən nɛsun, bɛldaɪn ən deɪdʒiən wɪð ðə bɔɪ hɑpwəl. vɛɹɪn ən kʌmaɪɹə ivən meɪɾ ə sɝkəl wɪð ðə si foʊk waɪldɝ; ʃi wɑz æktʃəli  kwaɪt stʃɹɔŋ, ən ɛvɹiwʌn hæd tə bi juzd. əz sun əz itʃ ə ðoʊz sɝkəlz fɔɹmd, ɪt muvd ɔf ðə hɪltɑp, itʃ vænɪʃɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz ɪn ə dɪfɹən dɝɛkʃən. əliviə, ðə vɛɹi pəkjuljɝ waɪldɝ u sim tə hæv noʊ ʌðɝ neɪm, stʃɹoʊɾ ɔf nɔɹθ, kloʊk flæpɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə ɡloʊ ʌv ðə paʊɝ. ə vɛɹi tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ wʊmən wɪð ðoʊz taɪni laɪnz ɝaʊn əɹ aɪz, ən ɪnkɹɛɾəbli stʃɹɔŋ. wʊɾə əv ɡɪvən ə ɡɹeɪt dil tə hæv əɹ hænz ɑn ðoʊz tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðə wʊmən wɔɹ.

All around the hilltop the circles were forming, Sarene and Corele linked with the old man, Flinn, and Nesune, Beldeine and Daigian with the boy Hopwil. Verin and Kumira even made a circle with the Sea Folk wilder; she was actually quite strong, and everyone had to be used. As soon as each of those circles formed, it moved off the hilltop, each vanishing among the trees in a different direction. Alivia, the very peculiar wilder who seemed to have no other name, strode off north, cloak flapping behind her, surrounded by the glow of the Power. A very troubling woman with those tiny lines around her eyes, and incredibly strong. Elza would have given a great deal to have her hands on those ter'angreal the woman wore.

əliviə ən ðə θɹi sɝkəlz wəd pɹəvaɪɾ ən ɛnsɝkəlɪŋ dɪfɛns, ɪf ɪt wɝ niɾəd, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst nid leɪ ɹaɪt ðəɹ ɑn ðə hɪltɑp. ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn mʌs bi pɹətɛktəɾ əɾ ɔl kɑsts. ðət dʒɑb kædzueɪn hæd teɪkən ɑn hɝsɛlf, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt mɛɹaɪsəz sɝkəl wəd ɹɪmeɪn ðɛɹ, tu. kædzueɪn mʌst əv hæɾ ən æŋɡɹil ə hɝ oʊn, fɹəm ði əmaʊn ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ʃi wɑz dʒɹɔɪŋ, mɔɹ ðən ɛlzə ən mɛɹaɪs kəmbaɪnd, jɛɾ ivən ðət peɪl bɪsaɪd ðə paʊɝ ðət floʊd ðoʊ kælændɝ.

Alivia and the three circles would provide an encircling defense, if it were needed, but the greatest need lay right there on the hilltop. The Dragon Reborn must be protected at all costs. That job Cadsuane had taken on herself, of course, but Merise's circle would remain there, too. Cadsuane must have had an angreal of her own, from the amount of saidar she was drawing, more than Elza and Merise combined, yet even that paled beside the Power that flowed though Callandor.

ɛlzə ɡlæns təwɔɹd ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "mɛɹaɪs, aɪ noʊ aɪ ʃʊdn æsk, bʌt meɪ aɪ mɛl ðə floʊz?"

Elza glanced toward the Dragon Reborn and drew a deep breath. "Merise, I know I shouldn't ask, but may I meld the flows?"

ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə hæv tə plid, bʌt ðə tɔlɝ wʊmən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ nɑɾɪŋ ən pæsɪŋ kəntʃɹoʊl tə hɝ. ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli mɛɹaɪsəz maʊθ sɔfənd, ðoʊ ɪt kəd nɛvɝ bi kɔl sɑft. faɪɝ ən aɪs ən fɪlθ wɛld ʌp ɪn ɛlzə, ən ʃi ʃʌɾɝəd. wʌtɛvɝ ðə kɑst, ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn hæd tə ɹitʃ ðə læs bæɾəl. wʌtɛvɝ ðə kɑst.

She expected to have to plead, but the taller woman hesitated only a moment before nodding and passing control to her. Almost immediately Merise's mouth softened, though it could never be called soft. Fire and ice and filth welled up in Elza, and she shuddered. Whatever the cost, the Dragon Reborn had to reach the Last Battle. Whatever the cost.

ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪz kɑɹt daʊn ðə snoʊi ɹoʊd tə tʃɹɛmoʊnzin, bɑɹmɛlɪn wʌndɝd wɛðɝ oʊl mɑɡlɪn ət ðə naɪn ɹɪŋz wəd peɪ wʌɾ i wɑntəd fəɹ ðə plʌm bɹændi ɪn ðə kɑɹt bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi wɑz nɑt sæŋɡwɪn. ʃi wɑz taɪt wɪð sɪlvɝ, mɑɡlɪn wɑz, ðə bɹændi wɑz nɑt vɛɹi ɡʊd, ən ðɪs leɪɾ ɪn ðə wɪntɝ, ʃi maɪt bi wɪlɪŋ tə weɪɾ əntɪl spɹɪŋ tə ɡɛt bɛɾɝ. sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪz ðət ðə deɪ sim vɛɹi bɹaɪt. ɔlmoʊs laɪk sʌmɝ nun ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ə wɪntɝ mɔɹnɪŋ. stʃɹeɪnʒɪst ʌv ɔl, ðə ɡloʊ sim tə bi kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə hjudʒ pɪt bɪsaɪd ðə ɹoʊd wɛɹ wɝkmɪn fɹəm ðə sɪɾi hæd bɪn dɪɡɪŋ əweɪ əntɪl ðə pɹiviəs jɪɹ. ðəɹ wɑz səpoʊz tə bi ə mɑnstʃɹəs stætʃu daʊn ðɛɹ, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪnʌf tə æktʃəli  lʊk fəɹ hɪmsɛlf.

Riding his cart down the snowy road to Tremonsien, Barmellin wondered whether old Maglin at The Nine Rings would pay what he wanted for the plum brandy in the cart behind him. He was not sanguine. She was tight with silver, Maglin was, the brandy was not very good, and this late in the winter, she might be willing to wait until spring to get better. Suddenly he realized that the day seemed very bright. Almost like summer noon instead of a winter morning. Strangest of all, the glow seemed to be coming from the huge pit beside the road where workmen from the City had been digging away until the previous year. There was supposed to be a monstrous statue down there, but he had never been interested enough to actually look for himself.

naʊ, ɔlmoʊst əɡɛnst ɪz wɪl, hi ɹeɪn ɪn ɪz staʊt mɛɹ ən klaɪm daʊn ɪndə ðə snoʊ tə tʃɹʌdʒ tə ðə bɹɪŋk ə ðə pɪt. ɪt wɑz ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz dip ən tɛn taɪmz əz fɑɹ əkɹɔs, ən i hæd tə pʊɾ ɪz hænz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs əɡɛns ðə blaɪndɪŋ ɡlɛɹ ðət keɪm fɹəm ðə bɑɾəm. skwɪntɪŋ θɹu hɪz fɪŋɡɝz, hi kəd meɪk aʊɾ ə ɡloʊɪŋ bɔl, laɪk ə sɛkən sʌn. əbɹʌpli, ɪt keɪm tə hɪm ðət ðɪs mʌs ðə wʌn paʊɝ.

Now, almost against his will, he reined in his stout mare and climbed down into the snow to trudge to the brink of the pit. It was a hundred paces deep and ten times as far across, and he had to put his hands in front of his face against the blinding glare that came from the bottom. Squinting through his fingers, he could make out a glowing ball, like a second sun. Abruptly, it came to him that this must the One Power.

wɪð ə stʃɹæŋɡəl jɛl i lʌmbɝd bæk θɹu ðə snoʊ tə hɪz kɑɹɾ ən skɹæmbəld ʌp, fleɪlɪŋ nisə wɪð ðə ɹeɪnz tə ɡɛɾ əɹ muvɪŋ ivən əz i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒɝk əɹ hɛɾ ɝaʊn tə hɛd bæk tə hɪz fɑɹm. hi wɑz gɑnə steɪ ɪn ɪz oʊn haʊs ən dʒɹɪŋk ðət bɹændi hɪmsɛlf. ɔl ʌv ɪt.

With a strangled yell he lumbered back through the snow to his cart and scrambled up, flailing Nisa with the reins to get her moving even as he was trying to jerk her head around to head back to his farm. He was going to stay in his own house and drink that brandy himself. All of it.

stʃɹoʊlɪŋ lɔst ɪn θɔt, tɪmnə bɛɹli sɔ ðə fæloʊ filz ðət kʌvɝɾ ɔl ðə hɪlsaɪdz bʌt wʌn ɝaʊn hɝ. tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ aɪlənd, ən ðɪs fɑɹ fɹəm ðə si, ðə wɪn kæɹid noʊ hɪn ə sɔlt, jɛɾ ɪt wɑz ði æθɑn maɪɹ ðət tʃɹʌbəl hɝ. ðeɪ ɹəfjuz ðə wɔɾɝ weɪ, jɛt tɪmnə wɑz wʌn ə ðə ɡaɪdz tʃoʊzən tə pɹətɛkt əm fɹəm ðɛmsɛlvz, ɪf pɑsəbəl. ðət wɑz vɛɹi dɪfəkəl naʊ, wɪð əm ɔl ɪn ən ʌpɹɔɹ oʊvɝ ðɪs kɔɹəmʊɹ ə ðɛɹz. vɛɹi fju ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ði aɪlənd. ivən ðə ɡʌvɝnɝz, ɔlweɪz fɹɛɾɪŋ ət biɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə si əz ði æθɑn maɪɹ dɪd, hæd sɛt seɪl tə sɝtʃ fəɹ ɪm ɪn ɛni kɹæf ðeɪ kəd faɪnd.

Strolling lost in thought, Timna barely saw the fallow fields that covered all the hillsides but one around her. Tremalking was a large island, and this far from the sea, the wind carried no hint of salt, yet it was the Atha'an Miere that troubled her. They refused the Water Way, yet Timna was one of the Guides chosen to protect them from themselves, if possible. That was very difficult now, with them all in an uproar over this Coramoor of theirs. Very few remained on the island. Even the Governors, always fretting at being away from the sea as the Atha'an Miere did, had set sail to search for him in any craft they could find.

sʌɾənli ðə wʌn ənploʊd hɪl kɑɾ əɹ aɪ. ə ɡɹeɪt stoʊn hæn stʌk aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹaʊn klæspɪŋ ə klɪɹ sfɪɹ əz lɑɹdʒ əz ə haʊs. ən ðət sfɪɹ wɑz ʃaɪnɪŋ laɪk ə ɡlɔɹiəs sʌmɝ sʌn.

Suddenly the one unplowed hill caught her eye. A great stone hand stuck out of the ground clasping a clear sphere as large as a house. And that sphere was shining like a glorious summer sun.

ɔl θɔts ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ ɡɔn, tɪmnə ɡæðɝɾ əɹ kloʊk ən sæt daʊn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, smaɪlɪŋ tə θɪŋk ðət ʃi maɪt si ðə fʊlfɪlmən ə pɹɑfəsi ən ði ɛn ʌv ɪluʒən.

All thoughts of the Atha'an Miere gone, Timna gathered her cloak and sat down on the ground, smiling to think that she might see the fulfillment of prophecy and the end of Illusion.

"ɪf jə tʃɹuli ɑɹ wʌn ə ðə tʃoʊzən, əl sɝv ju," ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn ɪn fɹʌn ə sɪndeɪn sɛd daʊtfəli, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt hɪɹ wʌɾ ɛls i hæd tə seɪ.

"If you truly are one of the Chosen, I will serve you," the bearded man in front of Cyndane said doubtfully, but she did not hear what else he had to say.

ʃi kəd fil ɪt. ðət mʌtʃ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ biɪŋ dʒɹɔn tə wʌn spɑt wɑz ə bikən ðəɾ ɛni wʊmən ɪn ðə wɝld u kəd tʃænəl wəd fil ən loʊkeɪt. soʊ hi hæd faʊn ə wʊmən tə juz ði ʌðɝ æksɛs ki. ʃi wʊɾə feɪs ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd - feɪs ðə kɹieɪɾɝ! - wɪð hɪm. ʃi wʊɾə ʃɛɹd ðə paʊɝ wɪð hɪm, lɛɾ ɪm ɹul ðə wɝld əɾ əɹ saɪd. ən i hæd spɝn əɹ lʌv, spɝn hɝ!

She could feel it. That much of saidar being drawn to one spot was a beacon that any woman in the world who could channel would feel and locate. So he had found a woman to use the other access key. She would have faced the Great Lord - faced the Creator! - with him. She would have shared the power with him, let him rule the world at her side. And he had spurned her love, spurned her!

ðə ful bæbəlɪŋ əɾ əɹ wɑz ən ɪmpɔɹɾənt mæn əz sətʃ θɪŋz wɝ əkaʊntəd hɪɹ ən naʊ, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv taɪm tə meɪk sɝɾən ə hɪz tʃɹʌstwɝðinəs, ən wɪθaʊt ðæt, ʃi kəd nɑt liv ɪm tə bæbəl, nɑt wən ʃi kəd fil mɔɹaɪɾɪnz hæn kɝɛsɪŋ ðə kɔɹsvɹə ðət hɛld əɹ soʊl. ə ɹeɪzɝ-θɪn floʊ ʌv ɛɹ slaɪs ðə fɛloʊz bɪɹɾ ɪn tu əz ɪt tʊk ɔf ɪz hɛd. ənʌðɝ floʊ ʃʌv ðə bɑɾi bækwɝd soʊ ðə blʌd faʊnteɪnɪŋ fɹəm ðə stʌb ə hɪz nɛk dɪd nɑt spɑɾ əɹ dʒɹɛs. bɪfɔɹ bɑɾi əɹ hɛd hɪt ðə stoʊn flɔɹ, ʃi hæd spʌn əɹ ɡeɪtweɪ. ə bikən ʃi kəd pɔɪn tə, bɛkənɪŋ hɝ.

The fool babbling at her was an important man as such things were accounted here and now, but she did not have time to make certain of his trustworthiness, and without that, she could not leave him to babble, not when she could feel Moridin's hand caressing the cour'souvra that held her soul. A razor-thin flow of Air sliced the fellow's beard in two as it took off his head. Another flow shoved the body backward so the blood fountaining from the stub of his neck did not spot her dress. Before body or head hit the stone floor, she had spun her gateway. A beacon she could point to, beckoning her.

əz ʃi stɛpt ɪndə ɹoʊlɪŋ fɔɹəst wɛɹ skæɾɝd kɑɹpəts ə snoʊ lɪɾɝd ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪniθ stɑɹk bɹæntʃəz bɛɹ seɪv fəɹ ðə θɪk ɹoʊps ə dʒɹupɪŋ bɹaʊn vaɪnz, ʃi wʌndɝd wɛɹ ðə bikən hæd dʒɹɔn hɝ. ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ. saʊθ ə hɝ, ðət bikən ʃoʊn, ɪnʌf seɪaɪdɑɹ tə leɪ weɪs tə ə kɑntənən ɪn wʌn bloʊ. hi wəd bi ðɛɹ, hɪm ən huɛvɝ ðə wʊmən wɑz i hæd bɪtʃɹeɪɾ əɹ wɪð. kɛɹfəli, ʃi dʒɹu ɑn ðə paʊɝ tə spɪn ə wɛb fəɹ ɪz dɛθ.

As she stepped into rolling forest where scattered carpets of snow littered the ground beneath stark branches bare save for the thick ropes of drooping brown vines, she wondered where the beacon had drawn her. It did not matter. South of her, that beacon shone, enough saidar to lay waste to a continent in one blow. He would be there, him and whoever the woman was he had betrayed her with. Carefully, she drew on the Power to spin a web for his death.

laɪtnɪŋz sətʃ əz kædzueɪn hæd nɛvɝ sin stʃɹik daʊn fɹəm ðə klaʊdləs skaɪ, nɑt dʒæɡd boʊls bʌt lænsɪz ə sɪlvɝ-blu ðət stʃɹʌk ət ðə hɪltɑp wɛɹ ʃi stʊd, ən stʃɹʌk ɪnstɛd ði ɪnvɝɾɪd ʃild ʃi hæd woʊvən, ɪɹʌptɪŋ wɪð ə dɛfənɪŋ ɹɔɹ fɪfti fiɾ əbʌv əɹ hɛd. ivən wɪðɪn ðə ʃil ði ɛɹ kɹækəld, ən əɹ hɛɹ stɝɾ ən lɪftəd. wɪθaʊt ði eɪɾ ə ði æŋɡɹil ðət lʊkt ə lɪɾəl laɪk ə ʃɹaɪk dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm əɹ bʌn, ʃi wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn eɪbəl tə hoʊl ðə ʃild ʌp.

Lightnings such as Cadsuane had never seen streaked down from the cloudless sky, not jagged bolts but lances of silver-blue that struck at the hilltop where she stood, and struck instead the inverted shield she had woven, erupting with a deafening roar fifty feet above her head. Even within the shield the air crackled, and her hair stirred and lifted. Without the aid of the angreal that looked a little like a shrike dangling from her bun, she would not have been able to hold the shield up.

ə sɛkənd ɡoʊldən bɝd, ə swɑloʊ, hʌŋ fɹəm əɹ hæn baɪ ɪts θɪn tʃeɪn. "ðɛɹ," ʃi sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ɪt sim tə bi flaɪɪŋ. ə pɪɾi ʃi kəd nɑt seɪ haʊ fɑɹ əweɪ ðə paʊɝ hæd bɪn tʃænəld, əɹ wɛðɝ baɪ ə mæn əɹ ə wʊmən, bʌt ðə dɝɛkʃən wəɾ əv tə du. ʃi hoʊp ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ . . . mɪshæps. hɝ pipəl wɝ aʊt ðɛɹ, tu. ɪf ðə wɔɹnɪŋ keɪm wɪð ən ətæk, ðoʊ, ðəɹ kəd nɑt bi mʌtʃ daʊt.

A second golden bird, a swallow, hung from her hand by its thin chain. "There," she said, pointing in the direction it seemed to be flying. A pity she could not say how far away the Power had been channeled, or whether by a man or a woman, but the direction would have to do. She hoped there would be no . . . mishaps. Her people were out there, too. If the warning came with an attack, though, there could not be much doubt.

əz sun əz ðə sɪŋɡəl wɝd lɛft əɹ maʊð, ə faʊntən ə fleɪm ɪɹʌptəɾ ɪn ðə fɔɹəs tə ðə nɔɹθ, ən ðən ənʌðɝ ən ənʌðɝ, ə stæɡɝd laɪn ɹeɪsɪŋ nɔɹθwɝd. kælændɝ ʃoʊn laɪk ə fleɪm ɪn jʌŋ dʒɑhɹz hænz. sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli, fɹəm ði ɪntɛnsəɾi ɑn ɛlzəz feɪs ən ðə weɪ ʃi ɡɹɪpt əɹ skɝts ɪn fɪsts, ʃi wɑz ðə wʌn dɝɛktɪŋ ðoʊz floʊz.

As soon as the single word left her mouth, a fountain of flame erupted in the forest to the north, and then another and another, a staggered line racing northward. Callandor shone like a flame in young Jahar's hands. Surprisingly, from the intensity on Elza's face and the way she gripped her skirts in fists, she was the one directing those flows.

mɛɹaɪs tʊk ə fɪsfəl ə ðə bɔɪz blæk hɛɹ ən dʒɛnli ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "stɛɾi, maɪ pɹɪɾi," ʃi mɝmɝd. "oʊ, stɛɾi, maɪ lʌvli stʃɹɔŋ wʌn." hi smaɪld ət hɝ, ə ɹævɪʃɪŋ smaɪl.

Merise took a fistful of the boy's black hair and gently shook his head. "Steady, my pretty," she murmured. "Oh, steady, my lovely strong one." He smiled at her, a ravishing smile.

kædzueɪn ʃʊk əɹ oʊn hɛd slaɪtli. ʌndɝstændɪŋ ɛni sɪstɝz ɹileɪʃənʃɪp wɪð əɹ wɔɹɾɝ wɑz dɪfəkəlt, ɪspɛʃli əmʌŋ ɡɹinz, bʌt ʃi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə fæðəm wʌt pæs bɪtwin mɛɹaɪs ən əɹ bɔɪz.

Cadsuane shook her own head slightly. Understanding any sister's relationship with her Warder was difficult, especially among Greens, but she could not begin to fathom what passed between Merise and her boys.

hɝ ɹil ətɛnʃən wɑz ɑn ənʌðɝ bɔɪ, ðoʊ. nɪneɪiv wɑz sweɪɪŋ, ɡɹoʊnɪŋ wɪð ði ɛkstəsi ʌv sətʃ ən ʌnbəlivəbəl mæs ə seɪaɪdɑɹ flʌɾɪŋ θɹu hɝ, bʌt ɹænd sæt laɪk ə stoʊn, swɛt ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn ɪz feɪs. hɪz aɪz wɝ blæŋk, laɪk pɑlɪʃt sæfaɪɝz. wɑz i ivən əwɛɹ ʌv wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm?

Her real attention was on another boy, though. Nynaeve was swaying, groaning with the ecstasy of such an unbelievable mass of saidar flooding through her, but Rand sat like a stone, sweat rolling down his face. His eyes were blank, like polished sapphires. Was he even aware of what was happening around him?

ðə swɑloʊ tɝn ɑn ɪts tʃeɪn bɪniθ əɹ hænd.

The swallow turned on its chain beneath her hand.

"ðɛɹ," ʃi sɛd, pɔɪntɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɹuənz ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ.

"There," she said, pointing toward the ruins of Shadar Logoth.

ɹænd kəd nɑt si nɪneɪiv ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. hi kəd nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ, fil ɛniθɪŋ. hi swæm ɪn sɝdʒɪŋ siz ə fleɪm, skɹæmbəld əkɹɔs kəlæpsɪŋ maʊntənz ʌv aɪs. ðə teɪn floʊd laɪk ən oʊʃən taɪd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə swip ɪm əweɪ. ɪf i lɔs kəntʃɹoʊl fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ɪt wəd stʃɹɪp əweɪ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət wɑz ɪm ən kæɹi ðət daʊn ðə kɑnduɪt, tu. əz bæd, əɹ meɪbi wɝs, dɪspaɪt ðə taɪɾ ə fɪlθ flʌɾɪŋ θɹu ðəɾ ɑd flaʊɝ, ðə teɪn ɑn ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə sɔɹs sim noʊ lɛs. ɪt wɑz laɪk ɔɪl floʊɾɪŋ ɑn wɔɾɝ ɪn ə koʊɾɪŋ soʊ θɪn jə wəd nɑt noʊɾəs tɪl jə tʌtʃt ðə sɝfəs, jɛt kʌvɝɪŋ ðə væsnəs ə ðə meɪl hæf, ɪt wɑz ən oʊʃən ɪn ɪtsɛlf. hi hæd tə hoʊld ɑn. hi hæd tə. bʌt fəɹ haʊ lɔŋ? haʊ lɔŋ kəɾ i hoʊld ɑn?

Rand could not see Nynaeve any longer. He could not see anything, feel anything. He swam in surging seas of flame, scrambled across collapsing mountains of ice. The taint flowed like an ocean tide, trying to sweep him away. If he lost control for an instant, it would strip away everything that was him and carry that down the conduit, too. As bad, or maybe worse, despite the tide of filth flooding through that odd flower, the taint on the male half of the Source seemed no less. It was like oil floating on water in a coating so thin you would not notice till you touched the surface, yet covering the vastness of the male half, it was an ocean in itself. He had to hold on. He had to. But for how long? How long could he hold on?

ɪf i kəɾ əndu wʌɾ ælθɹ hæd dʌn ət ðə sɔɹs, dɪmɑndɝd θɔɾ əz i stɛp θɹu hɪz ɡeɪtweɪ ɪndə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, əndu ɪt ʃɑɹpli ən sʌɾənli, ðət maɪt wɛl kɪl ðə mæn, əɹ ət list sɪɹ ði əbɪləɾi tə tʃænəl aʊɾ ə hɪm. hi hæd ɹizən aʊt wʌɾ ælθɹz plæn hæd tə bi əz sun əz i ɹilaɪzd wɛɹ ði æksɛs ki wɑz. ə bɹɪljən skim, hi dɪd nɑt maɪn ædmɪɾɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ ənseɪnli deɪnʒɝəs. luz θɝɪn hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ə bɹɪljən plænɝ, tu, ɪf nɑt soʊ bɹɪljən əz ɛvɹiwʌn meɪɾ aʊt. nɑt nɪɹli əz bɹɪljən əz dɪmɑndɝd hɪmsɛlf.

If he could undo what al'Thor had done at the source, Demandred thought as he stepped through his gateway into Shadar Logoth, undo it sharply and suddenly, that might well kill the man, or at least sear the ability to channel out of him. He had reasoned out what al'Thor's plan had to be as soon as he realized where the access key was. A brilliant scheme, he did not mind admitting, however insanely dangerous. Lews Therin had always been a brilliant planner, too, if not so brilliant as everyone made out. Not nearly as brilliant as Demandred himself.

wʌn lʊk ət ðə ɹʌbəl-stʃɹun stʃɹit tʃeɪnʒd ɪz maɪn əbaʊɾ ɔltɝɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ, ðoʊ. bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ɹoʊz hæf ə peɪl doʊm, ɪts ʃæɾɝd tɑp tu hʌnʒɹəd fiɾ əɹ mɔɹ əbʌv ðə stʃɹit, ən əbʌv ɪt, ðə skaɪ hɛl ðə laɪɾ ə mɪdmɔɹnɪŋ. fɹəm ðə bɹoʊkən ɹɪm ə ðə ɹuən daʊn tə ðə stʃɹit, ðoʊ, ði ɛɹ wɑz dɑɹk wɪð ʃædoʊz, əz ɪf naɪt wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi fɔlɪŋ. ðə sɪɾi . . . kwɪvɝd. hi kəd fil ɪt θɹu hɪz buts.

One look at the rubble-strewn street changed his mind about altering anything, though. Beside him rose half a pale dome, its shattered top two hundred feet or more above the street, and above it, the sky held the light of midmorning. From the broken rim of the ruin down to the street, though, the air was dark with shadows, as if night were already falling. The city . . . quivered. He could feel it through his boots.

faɪɝ ɪɹʌptəɾ ɪn ðə fɔɹəst, ɡɹeɪɾ ɪksploʊʒənz spʌn ə seɪɾɪn ðət hɝl tʃɹiz ɪndə ði ɛɹ ɑn ɡaʊts ə fleɪm ðət spɛd təwɔɹd hɪm, bʌɾ i wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi wivɪŋ ə ɡeɪtweɪ. lipɪŋ θɹu, hi lɛɾ ɪt vænɪʃ ən ɹæn θɹu ðə vaɪn-dʒɹeɪp tʃɹiz əz hɑɹɾ əz i kʊd, plaʊɪŋ θɹu pætʃəz ə snoʊ, stʌmbəlɪŋ oʊvɝ ɹɑks hɪɾən ɪn ðə mʌltʃ, bʌt nɑt sloʊɪŋ daʊn, nɛvɝ ðæt. ðə wɛb hæd bɪn ɹɪvɝst, fəɹ kɑʃənz seɪk, bʌt soʊ hæd ðə fɝst, ən i hæd bɪn ə soʊlʒɝ. stɪl ɹʌnɪŋ, hi hɝd ði ɪksploʊʒənz i ɪkspɛktəd, ən nu ðeɪ wɝ ɹeɪsɪŋ təwɔɹd wɛɹ ɪz ɡeɪtweɪ hæd bɪn əz ʃʊɹli əz ðeɪ hæd ɹeɪst stʃɹeɪt təwɔɹɾ ɪm əmʌŋ ðə ɹuənz. ðeɪ wɝ fɑɹ ɪnʌf fɹəm ɪm naʊ tə pɹizɛnt noʊ deɪnʒɝ, ðoʊ. wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ, hi tɝn təwɔɹd ði æksɛs ki. wɪð ði əmaʊn ə seɪɾɪn pɔɹɪŋ θɹu ɪt, ðəɹ maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ə faɪɝi æɹoʊ ɪn ðə skaɪ pɔɪntɪŋ tə ælθɹ.

Fire erupted in the forest, great explosions spun of saidin that hurled trees into the air on gouts of flame that sped toward him, but he was already weaving a gateway. Leaping through, he let it vanish and ran through the vine-draped trees as hard as he could, plowing through patches of snow, stumbling over rocks hidden in the mulch, but not slowing down, never that. The web had been reversed, for caution's sake, but so had the first, and he had been a soldier. Still running, he heard the explosions he expected, and knew they were racing toward where his gateway had been as surely as they had raced straight toward him among the ruins. They were far enough from him now to present no danger, though. Without slowing, he turned toward the access key. With the amount of saidin pouring through it, there might as well have been a fiery arrow in the sky pointing to al'Thor.

soʊ. ənlɛs sʌmwʌn ɪn ðɪs əkɝst eɪdʒ hæd dɪskʌvɝd jɛɾ ənʌðɝ ənnoʊn əbɪləɾi, ælθɹ mʌst əv əkwaɪɝɾ ə dɪvaɪs, ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil, ðət kəd dɪtɛkt ə mæn tʃænəlɪŋ. fɹəm wʌɾ i nu ʌv wʌt pipəl naʊ kɔl ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, æftɝ i hɪmsɛlf hæd bɪn ɪmpɹɪzən ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, ɛni wʊmən u nu haʊ tə meɪk tɛɹæŋɡɹil wʊɾə bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kɹieɪt wʌn ðət wəd də ðæt. ɪn wɔɹ, ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ɔlweɪz keɪm ʌp wɪð sʌmθɪŋ jə dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt, ən jə hæd tə kaʊntɝ ɪt. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ɡʊɾ ət wɔɹ. fɝst, hi niɾəd tə ɡɛt kloʊsɝ.

So. Unless someone in this accursed Age had discovered yet another unknown ability, al'Thor must have acquired a device, a ter'angreal, that could detect a man channeling. From what he knew of what people now called the Breaking, after he himself had been imprisoned at Shayol Ghul, any woman who knew how to make ter'angreal would have been trying to create one that would do that. In war, the other side always came up with something you did not expect, and you had to counter it. He had always been good at war. First, he needed to get closer.

sʌɾənli hi sɔ pipəl ɔf tə ðə ɹaɪɾ əhɛɾ ə hɪm θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, ən ʃɛltɝd bɪhaɪn ə ɹʌf ɡɹeɪ tʃɹʌŋk. ə bɔld-hɛɾəd oʊl mæn wɪð ə fɹɪnʒ ʌv waɪt hɛɹ wɑz lɪmpɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪtwin tu wɪmən, wʌn ə ðɛm bjuɾəfəl ɪn ə waɪld weɪ, ði ʌðɝ stʌnɪŋ. wʌt wɝ ðeɪ duɪŋ ɪn ðiz wʊdz? hu wɝ ðeɪ? fɹɛnz ʌv ælθɹ, əɹ dʒʌs pipəl ɪn ðə ɹɔŋ pleɪs ət ðə ɹɔŋ taɪm? hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd tə kɪl ðɛm, huɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ. ɛni jus ə ðə paʊɝ wəd wɔɹn ælθɹ. hi wəɾ əv tə weɪɾ əntɪl ðeɪ pæst. ði oʊl mænz hɛd wɑz tɝnɪŋ əz ɪf i wɝ sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, bʌt dɪmɑndɝd daʊɾɪd ə fɛloʊ ðət dəkɹɛpɪt kəd si vɛɹi fɑɹ.

Suddenly he saw people off to the right ahead of him through the trees, and sheltered behind a rough gray trunk. A bald-headed old man with a fringe of white hair was limping along between two women, one of them beautiful in a wild way, the other stunning. What were they doing in these woods? Who were they? Friends of al'Thor, or just people in the wrong place at the wrong time? He hesitated to kill them, whoever they were. Any use of the Power would warn al'Thor. He would have to wait until they passed. The old man's head was turning as if he were searching for something among the trees, but Demandred doubted a fellow that decrepit could see very far.

əbɹʌpli ði oʊl mæn stɑpt ən θɹʌst aʊɾ ɪz hæn stʃɹeɪt təwɔɹd dɪmɑndɝd, ən dɪmɑndɝd faʊn hɪmsɛlf fɹæntəkəli fɛndɪŋ ɔf ə nɛɾ ə seɪɾɪn ðət stʃɹʌk ɪz wɔɹɾɪŋ mʌtʃ hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɪt ʃəd hæv, əz hɑɹɾ əz ɪz oʊn spɪnɪŋ wʊd. ðət tɑɾɝɪŋ oʊl mæn wɑz ən æʃəmən! ən ət list wʌn ə ðə wɪmən mʌs bi wʌt pæs fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðɪs taɪm, ən dʒɔɪnd wɪð ðə fɛloʊ ɪn ə ɹɪŋ.

Abruptly the old man stopped and thrust out his hand straight toward Demandred, and Demandred found himself frantically fending off a net of saidin that struck his warding much harder than it should have, as hard as his own spinning would. That tottering old man was an Asha'man! And at least one of the women must be what passed for Aes Sedai in this time, and joined with the fellow in a ring.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə lɔntʃ ɪz oʊn ətæk ən kɹʌʃ ðɛm, bʌt ði oʊl mæn flʌŋ wɛb æftɝ wɛb əɾ ɪm wɪθaʊt pɔz, ən ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə fɛn əm ɔf. ðoʊz ðət stʃɹʌk tʃɹiz ɛnvɛləpt əm ɪn fleɪm əɹ blu ðə tʃɹʌŋks əpɑɹɾ ɪn splɪntɝz. hi wɑz ə dʒɛnɝəl, ə ɡɹeɪt dʒɛnɝəl, bʌt dʒɛnɝəlz dɪd nɑɾ əv tə faɪɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə mɛn ðeɪ kəmændəd! snɑɹlɪŋ, hi bɪɡæn tə ɹitʃɹiɾ əmɪd ðə kɹækəl ə bɝnɪŋ tʃɹiz ən ðə θʌndɝ ʌv ɪksploʊʒənz. əweɪ fɹəm ðə ki. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ði oʊl mæn hæd tə taɪɝ, ən ðən i kəd teɪk kɛɹ ə kɪlɪŋ ælθɹ. ɪf wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz dɪd nɑt ɡɛt ðəɹ fɝst. hi hoʊp fɝvənli ðeɪ dɪd nɑt.

He tried to launch his own attack and crush them, but the old man flung web after web at him without pause, and it was all he could do to fend them off. Those that struck trees enveloped them in flame or blew the trunks apart in splinters. He was a general, a great general, but generals did not have to fight alongside the men they commanded! Snarling, he began to retreat amid the crackle of burning trees and the thunder of explosions. Away from the key. Sooner or later the old man had to tire, and then he could take care of killing al'Thor. If one of the others did not get there first. He hoped fervently they did not.

skɝts haɪk tə hɝ niz, kɝsɪŋ, sɪndeɪn ɹæn fɹəm əɹ θɝd ɡeɪtweɪ əz sun əz ʃi wɑz θɹu. ʃi kəd hɪɹ ði ɪksploʊʒənz mɑɹtʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə saɪt, bʌt ðɪs taɪm ʃi hæd ɹilaɪzd waɪ ðeɪ keɪm stʃɹeɪt fəɹ hɝ. tʃɹɪpɪŋ ɑn vaɪnz hɪɾən ɪn ðə snoʊ, bʌmpɪŋ ɪndə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋks, ʃi ɹæn. ʃi heɪɾəd fɔɹəsts! ət list səm ə ði ʌðɝz wɝ hɪɹ - ʃi hæd sin ðoʊz faʊnteɪnɪŋ faɪɝz spiɾ ɛlswɛɹ ðən ət hɝ; ʃi kəd fil seɪaɪdɑɹ biɪŋ spʌn ət mɔɹ ðən wʌn pleɪs, spʌn wɪð fjʊɹi - bʌt ʃi pɹeɪd tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd ðət ʃi wəd ɹitʃ luz θɝɪn fɝst. ʃi wɑntəd tə si hɪm daɪ, ʃi ɹilaɪzd, ən fəɹ ðæt, ʃi wəɾ əv tə ɡɛt kloʊsɝ.

Skirts hiked to her knees, cursing, Cyndane ran from her third gateway as soon as she was through. She could hear the explosions marching toward the site, but this time she had realized why they came straight for her. Tripping on vines hidden in the snow, bumping into tree trunks, she ran. She hated forests! At least some of the others were here - she had seen those fountaining fires speed elsewhere than at her; she could feel saidar being spun at more than one place, spun with fury - but she prayed to the Great Lord that she would reach Lews Therin first. She wanted to see him die, she realized, and for that, she would have to get closer.

kɹaʊtʃɪŋ bɪhaɪn ə fɔlən lɔɡ, oʊsɑnɡɝ pæntɪd fɹəm ði ɪɡzɝʃən ə ɹʌnɪŋ. ðoʊz mʌnθs mæskɝeɪɾɪŋ əz kɔɹlən dæʃivə hæd nɑt meɪɾ ɪm ɛni fɑndɝ ʌv ɛksɝsaɪz. ði ɪksploʊʒənz ðət hæɾ ɔlmoʊs kɪld ɪm daɪɾ əweɪ, ðən stɑɹɾəd ʌp əɡɛn sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ən i kɔʃəsli ɹeɪz hɪmsɛlf ɪnʌf tə pik oʊvɝ ðə lɔɡ. nɑt ðəɾ i səpoʊzd ə pis ʌv wʊd wɑz vɛɹi mʌtʃ pɹətɛkʃən. hi hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ə soʊlʒɝ, nɑt ɹɪli. hɪz tæləns, hɪz dʒinjəs, leɪ ɛlswɛɹ. ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ ɪz meɪkɪŋ, ən ðʌs ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ðət hæd spɹʌŋ fɹəm ðɛm, ən mɛni ʌðɝ kɹitʃɝz ðət hæd ɹɑk ðə wɝld ən meɪɾ ɪz neɪm feɪməs. ði æksɛs ki bleɪzd wɪð seɪɾɪn, bʌɾ i kəd fil lɛsɝ əmaʊns biɪŋ wildɪd, tu, ɪn vɛɹiəs dɝɛkʃənz.

Crouching behind a fallen log, Osan'gar panted from the exertion of running. Those months masquerading as Corlan Dashiva had not made him any fonder of exercise. The explosions that had almost killed him died away, then started up again somewhere in the distance, and he cautiously raised himself enough to peek over the log. Not that he supposed a piece of wood was very much protection. He had never been a soldier, not really. His talents, his genius, lay elsewhere. The Trollocs were his making, and thus the Myrddraal that had sprung from them, and many other creatures that had rocked the world and made his name famous. The access key blazed with saidin, but he could feel lesser amounts being wielded, too, in various directions.

hi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəɾ ʌðɝz ə ðə tʃoʊzən tə bi hɪɹ əhɛɾ ə hɪm, hæd hoʊp ðeɪ maɪɾ əv fɪnɪʃt ðə tæsk bɪfɔɹ i ɝaɪvd, bʌt pleɪnli ðeɪ hæd nɑt. pleɪnli ælθɹ hæd bɹɔɾ əlɔŋ səm ə ðoʊz æʃəmən, ən baɪ ði əmaʊn ə seɪɾɪn ðət hæd ɡɔn ɪndə ði ɪɹʌpʃənz ðət tɑɹɡəɾɪd hɪm, kælændɝ əz wɛl. ən meɪbi səm ə hɪz teɪm, soʊ-kɔld ɛɛs sədaɪ.

He had expected others of the Chosen to be here ahead of him, had hoped they might have finished the task before he arrived, but plainly they had not. Plainly al'Thor had brought along some of those Asha'man, and by the amount of saidin that had gone into the eruptions that targeted him, Callandor as well. And maybe some of his tame, so-called Aes Sedai.

kɹaʊtʃɪŋ əɡɛn, hi bɪɾ ɪz lɪp. ðɪs fɔɹəst wɑz ə vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs pleɪs, mɔɹ soʊ ðən i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd, ən noʊwɛɹ fəɹ ə dʒinjəs. bʌt ðə fækt ɹɪmeɪn ðət mɔɹaɪɾɪn tɛɹəfaɪd hɪm. ðə mæn hæɾ ɔlweɪz tɛɹəfaɪd hɪm, fɹəm ðə vɛɹi bɪɡɪnɪŋ. hi hæd bɪn mæd wɪð paʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ sild ɪndə ðə bɔɹ, ən sɪns ðeɪ hæd bɪn fɹid, hi sim tə θɪŋk ðəɾ i wɑz ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. mɔɹaɪɾɪn wəd faɪn aʊt sʌmhaʊ ɪf i flɛd, ən kɪl hɪm. wɝs, ɪf ælθɹ səksiɾəd, ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd maɪt dɪsaɪd tə kɪl boʊθ ə ðɛm, ən oʊsɑnɡɝ əz wɛl. hi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ wɛðɝ ðeɪ daɪd, bʌɾ i dɪd vɛɹi mʌtʃ əbaʊt hɪmsɛlf.

Crouching again, he bit his lip. This forest was a very dangerous place, more so than he had expected, and nowhere for a genius. But the fact remained that Moridin terrified him. The man had always terrified him, from the very beginning. He had been mad with power before they were sealed into the Bore, and since they had been freed, he seemed to think that he was the Great Lord. Moridin would find out somehow if he fled, and kill him. Worse, if al'Thor succeeded, the Great Lord might decide to kill both of them, and Osan'gar as well. He did not care whether they died, but he did very much about himself.

hi wɑz nɑt ɡʊɾ ət dʒʌdʒɪŋ taɪm baɪ ðə sʌn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɑbviəsli stɪl ʃɔɹɾ ə nun. hɔlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd, hi dæbd ət ðə dɝɾ ɑn ɪz kloʊðz, ðən ɡeɪv ʌp ɪn dɪsɡʌst ən bɪɡæn tə skʌlk fɹəm tʃɹi tə tʃɹi ɪn wʌɾ i ɪmædʒənd wɑz ə stɛlθi mænɝ. ɪt wɑz təwɔɹd ðə ki ðəɾ i skʌlkt. pɝhæps wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz wəd fɪnɪʃ ðə mæn bɪfɔɹ i ɡɑt kloʊs tə ɪt, bʌɾ ɪf nɑt, pɝhæps i wəd faɪn ðə tʃæns tə bi ə hɪɹoʊ. kɛɹfəli, ʌv kɔɹs.

He was not good at judging time by the sun, but it was obviously still short of noon. Hauling himself from the ground, he dabbed at the dirt on his clothes, then gave up in disgust and began to skulk from tree to tree in what he imagined was a stealthy manner. It was toward the key that he skulked. Perhaps one of the others would finish the man before he got close to it, but if not, perhaps he would find the chance to be a hero. Carefully, of course.

vɛɹɪn fɹaʊn ət ði æpɝɪʃən meɪkɪŋ ɪts weɪ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz ɔf tə hɝ lɛft. ʃi kəd θɪŋk ə noʊ ʌðɝ tɝm fəɹ ə wʊmən wɔkɪŋ θɹu ðə fɔɹəst ɪn dʒɛmz ən ə ɡaʊn ðət ʃɪftəd θɹu ɛvɹi kʌlɝ fɹəm blæk tə waɪɾ ən səmtaɪmz ivən tɝn tʃɹænspɛɹənt! ʃi wɑz nɑt hɝiɪŋ, bʌt ʃi wɑz hɛɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə hɪl wɛɹ ɹænd wɑz. ən ənlɛs vɛɹɪn wɑz vɛɹi mʌtʃ mɪsteɪkən, ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən.

Verin frowned at the apparition making its way through the trees off to her left. She could think of no other term for a woman walking through the forest in gems and a gown that shifted through every color from black to white and sometimes even turned transparent! She was not hurrying, but she was heading toward the hill where Rand was. And unless Verin was very much mistaken, she was one of the Forsaken.

"ɑɹ wi dʒʌs gɑnə wɑtʃ hɝ?" ʃələn wɪspɝd fjʊɹiəsli. ʃi hæd bɪn əpsɛt ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt ðə wʌn tə mɛl ðə floʊz, əz ɪf ə waɪldɝz stʃɹɛŋkθ kaʊntəd wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən aʊɝz tʃɹæmpɪŋ θɹu ðə wʊdz hæd nɑɾ ɪmpɹuvd əɹ tɛmpɝ.

"Are we just going to watch her?" Shalon whispered furiously. She had been upset that she was not the one to meld the flows, as if a wilder's strength counted with Aes Sedai, and hours tramping through the woods had not improved her temper.

"wi mʌs də sʌmθɪŋ," kʌmaɪɹə sɛd sɔfli, ən vɛɹɪn nɑɾəd.

"We must do something," Kumira said softly, and Verin nodded.

"aɪ wɑz dʒʌs dəsaɪɾɪŋ wʌt." ə ʃild, ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd. ə kæptɪv fɔɹseɪkən maɪt pɹuv vɛɹi jusfəl.

"I was just deciding what." A shield, she decided. A captive Forsaken might prove very useful.

juzɪŋ ðə fʊl stʃɹɛŋkθ ə hɝ sɝkəl, ʃi woʊv əɹ ʃild, ən wɑtʃt əɡæst əz ɪt ɹɪbaʊndɪd. ðə wʊmən wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɛmbɹeɪsɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ðoʊ noʊ laɪt ʃoʊn ɝaʊn hɝ, ən ʃi wɑz ɪmɛnsli stʃɹɔŋ!

Using the full strength of her circle, she wove her shield, and watched aghast as it rebounded. The woman was already embracing saidar, though no light shone around her, and she was immensely strong!

ðən ʃi hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ θɔɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ əz ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən spʌn ɝaʊn ən bɪɡæn tʃænəlɪŋ. vɛɹɪn kəd nɑt si ðə wivz, bʌt ʃi nu wən ʃi wɑz faɪɾɪŋ ɔf ən ətæk ɑn əɹ laɪf, ən ʃi hæd kʌm tu fɑɹ tə daɪ hɪɹ.

Then she had no time for thought of anything as the golden-haired woman spun around and began channeling. Verin could not see the weaves, but she knew when she was fighting off an attack on her life, and she had come too far to die here.

ɛbən hɪtʃt ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf ən wɪʃt i wɝ bɛɾɝ əɾ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə koʊld. sɪmpəl koʊld, hi kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ, bʌt nɑt ðə wɪn ðət hæd spɹʌŋ ʌp sɪns ðə sʌn pæst ɪts zinəθ. ðə θɹi sɪstɝz lɪŋk tə hɪm sɪmpli lɛt ðə wɪn teɪk ðɛɹ kloʊks əz ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə wɑtʃ ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ət wʌns. deɪdʒiən wɑz liɾɪŋ ðə sɝkəl - kəz ə hɪm, hi θɔt - bʌt ʃi wɑz dʒɹɔɪŋ soʊ laɪtli ðəɾ i fɛl bɛɹli ə wɪspɝ ə seɪɾɪn pæsɪŋ θɹu hɪm. ʃi wəd nɑt wɑnə feɪs ðəɾ əntɪl ʃi hæd tə. hi lɪftəɾ əɹ kaʊl bæk ɪndə pleɪs ɑn əɹ hɛd, ən ʃi smaɪld əɾ ɪm fɹəm ɪts dɛpθs. ðə bɑn kæɹiɾ əɹ əfɛkʃən tə hɪm, ən ɪz oʊn bæk, hi səpoʊzd. wɪð taɪm, hi θɔɾ i maɪt kʌm tə lʌv ðɪs lɪɾəl ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Eben hitched his cloak around himself and wished he were better at ignoring the cold. Simple cold, he could ignore, but not the wind that had sprung up since the sun passed its zenith. The three sisters linked to him simply let the wind take their cloaks as they tried to watch every direction at once. Daigian was leading the circle - because of him, he thought - but she was drawing so lightly that he felt barely a whisper of saidin passing through him. She would not want to face that until she had to. He lifted her cowl back into place on her head, and she smiled at him from its depths. The bond carried her affection to him, and his own back, he supposed. With time, he thought he might come to love this little Aes Sedai.

ðə tɔɹən ə seɪɾɪn fɑɹ bɪhaɪn ɪm hæɾ ə tɛndənsi tə wɑʃ aʊɾ ɪz əwɛɹnəs ʌv ʌðɝ tʃænəlɪŋ, bʌɾ i kəd fil ʌðɝz wildɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. ðə bæɾəl hæd bɪn dʒɔɪnd, ɛlswɛɹ, ən soʊ fɑɹ ɔl ðə fɔɹ ə ðɛm hæd dʌn wɑz wɔk. hi dɪd nɑt maɪn ðət mʌtʃ, ɹɪli. hi hæd bɪn ət dəməaɪz wɛlz, ən fɔt ðə sintʃæn, ən i hæd lɝn ðət bæɾəlz wɝ mɔɹ fʌn ɪn ə bʊk ðən ɪn ðə flɛʃ. wʌɾ ɝk ɪm wɑz ðəɾ i hæd nɑt bɪn ɡɪvən kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə sɝkəl. ʌv kɔɹs, dʒɑhɹ hæd nɑt, bʌɾ i fɪɡjɝd mɛɹaɪs əmjuz hɝsɛlf baɪ meɪkɪŋ dʒɑhɹ bæləns ə kʊki ɑn ɪz noʊz. deɪmɝ hæd bɪn ɡɪvən kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðət sɝkəl, ðoʊ. dʒʌs kəz ðə mæn hæɾ ə fju jɪɹz ɑn ɪm - wɛl, mɔɹ ðən ə fju; hi wɑz oʊldɝ ðən ɛbənz dɑ - wɑz noʊ ɹizən fəɹ kædzueɪn tə lʊk əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i wɝ ə -  "kæn jə hɛlp mi? aɪ sim tə hæv lɔs maɪ weɪ, ən maɪ hɔɹs." ðə wʊmən u stɛp fɹəm bɪhaɪn ə tʃɹi əhɛɾ ə ðɛm dɪd nɑɾ ivən əv ə kloʊk. ɪnstɛd, ʃi wɔɹ ə ɡaʊn ə dip ɡɹin sɪlk kʌt soʊ loʊ ðət hæf ə hɝ lʌʃ bʊzəm wɑz ɪkspoʊzd. weɪvz ə blæk hɛɹ sɝaʊndəɾ ə bjuɾəfəl feɪs, wɪð ɡɹin aɪz ðət spɑɹkəld əz ʃi smaɪld.

The torrent of saidin far behind him had a tendency to wash out his awareness of other channeling, but he could feel others wielding the Power. The battle had been joined, elsewhere, and so far all the four of them had done was walk. He did not mind that much, really. He had been at Dumai's Wells, and fought the Seanchan, and he had learned that battles were more fun in a book than in the flesh. What did irk him was that he had not been given control of the circle. Of course, Jahar had not, but he figured Merise amused herself by making Jahar balance a cookie on his nose. Damer had been given control of that circle, though. Just because the man had a few years on him - well, more than a few; he was older than Eben's da - was no reason for Cadsuane to look at him as if he were a -  "Can you help me? I seem to have lost my way, and my horse." The woman who stepped from behind a tree ahead of them did not even have a cloak. Instead, she wore a gown of deep green silk cut so low that half of her lush bosom was exposed. Waves of black hair surrounded a beautiful face, with green eyes that sparkled as she smiled.

"ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pleɪs tə bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ," bɛldaɪn sɛd səspɪʃəsli. ðə pɹɪɾi ɡɹin hæd nɑt bɪn plizd wən kædzueɪn pʊt deɪdʒiən ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ, ən ʃi hæd teɪkən ɛvɹi ɑpɝtunəɾi tə steɪɾ əɹ əpɪnjən ə deɪdʒiənz dɪsɪʒənz.

"A strange place to be riding," Beldeine said suspiciously. The pretty Green had not been pleased when Cadsuane put Daigian in charge, and she had taken every opportunity to state her opinion of Daigian's decisions.

"aɪ hædn mɛn tə ɹaɪd soʊ fɑɹ," ðə wʊmən sɛd kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ. "aɪ si jəɹ ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ. wɪð ə . . . ɡɹum? dʒju noʊ wʌɾ ɔl ðə kəmoʊʃən ɪz əbaʊt?"

"I hadn't meant to ride so far," the woman said coming closer. "I see you're all Aes Sedai. With a . . . groom? Do you know what all the commotion is about?"

sʌɾənli, ɛbən fɛl ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪn fɹəm ɪz feɪs. wʌɾ i fɛlt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl! ðə ɡɹin-aɪd wʊmən fɹaʊn ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən i dɪd ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðəɾ i kʊd.

Suddenly, Eben felt the blood drain from his face. What he felt was impossible! The green-eyed woman frowned in surprise, and he did the only thing that he could.

"ʃiz hoʊldɪŋ seɪɾɪn!" hi ʃaʊɾəd, ən θɹu hɪmsɛlf əɾ əɹ əz i fɛl deɪdʒiən dʒɹɔ dipli ɑn ðə paʊɝ.

"She's holding saidin!" he shouted, and threw himself at her as he felt Daigian draw deeply on the Power.

sɪndeɪn sloʊɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə wʊmən stændɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əhɛɾ ə hɝ, ə tɔl jɛloʊ-hɛɹd wʊmən u sɪmpli wɑtʃt əɹ kʌm kloʊsɝ. ðə fil ə bæɾəlz biɪŋ fɔt wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn ʌðɝ pleɪsəz meɪɾ əɹ wɛɹi ət ðə seɪm taɪm ɪt ɡeɪv əɹ hoʊp. ðə wʊmən wɑz pleɪnli dʒɹɛst ɪn wʊl, bʌɾ ɪŋkɔŋɹuəsli dɛkt wɪð dʒɛmz əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ə ɡɹeɪt leɪɾi. wɪð seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪn hɝ, sɪndeɪn kəd si ðə feɪn laɪnz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə ðə wʊmənz aɪz. nɑt wʌn ə ðoʊz u kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðɛn. bʌt hu? ən waɪ dɪd ʃi stæn ðəɹ əz ɪf ʃi wəd bɑɹ sɪndeɪnz weɪ? ɪt dɪd nɑt ɹɪli mæɾɝ. tʃænəlɪŋ naʊ wəd ɡɪv əɹ əweɪ, bʌt ʃi hæd taɪm. ðə ki stɪl ʃoʊn əz ə bikən ə ðə paʊɝ. luz θɝɪn stɪl lɪvd. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ fɪɹs ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz aɪz, ə naɪf wəd də fəɹ hɝ, ɪf ʃi ɹɪli θɔt ʃi kəd bi ə bɑɹ. ən dʒʌst ɪn keɪs ʃi pɹuv tə bi wʌt ðeɪ kɔld ə waɪldɝ, sɪndeɪn pɹipɛɹɾ ə smɔl pɹɛzən fəɹ hɝ, ə ɹɪvɝst wɛb ʃi wəd nɑɾ ivən si əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu leɪt.

Cyndane slowed at the sight of the woman standing among the trees a hundred paces ahead of her, a tall yellow-haired woman who simply watched her come closer. The feel of battles being fought with the Power in other places made her wary at the same time it gave her hope. The woman was plainly dressed in wool, but incongruously decked with gems as if she were a great lady. With saidar in her, Cyndane could see the faint lines at the corners of the woman's eyes. Not one of those who called themselves Aes Sedai, then. But who? And why did she stand there as if she would bar Cyndane's way? It did not really matter. Channeling now would give her away, but she had time. The key still shone as a beacon of the Power. Lews Therin still lived. No matter how fierce the other woman's eyes, a knife would do for her, if she really thought she could be a bar. And just in case she proved to be what they called a wilder, Cyndane prepared a small present for her, a reversed web she would not even see until it was too late.

əbɹʌpli ðə laɪɾ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ əpɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə wʊmən, bʌt ðə ɹɛɾi bɔl ə faɪɝ stʃɹik fɹəm sɪndeɪnz hænd, smɔl ɪnʌf tə ɪskeɪp dɪtɛkʃən ʃi hoʊpt, bʌɾ ɪnʌf tə bɝn ə hoʊl θɹu ðɪs wʊmən u -  dʒʌst əz ɪt ɹitʃt ðə wʊmən, ɔlmoʊs kloʊs ɪnʌf tə sɪnʒ əɹ ɡɑɹməns, ðə wɛb ə faɪɝ ənɹævəld. ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt də ɛniθɪŋ; ðə nɛt sɪmpli keɪm əpɑɹt! sɪndeɪn hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil ðət wəd bɹeɪk ə wɛb, bʌɾ ɪt mʌs bi ðæt.

Abruptly the light of saidar appeared around the woman, but the ready ball of fire streaked from Cyndane's hand, small enough to escape detection she hoped, but enough to burn a hole through this woman who -  Just as it reached the woman, almost close enough to singe her garments, the web of Fire unraveled. The woman did not do anything; the net simply came apart! Cyndane had never heard of a ter'angreal that would break a web, but it must be that.

ðən ðə wʊmən stʃɹʌk bæk ət hɝ, ən ʃi sʌfɝɾ əɹ sɛkənd ʃɑk. ʃi wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən sɪndeɪn hæd bɪn bɪfɔɹ ði æɛlfɪn ən ði ɛlfɪn hɛl hɝ! ðət wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl; noʊ wʊmən kəd bi stʃɹɔŋɝ. ʃi mʌst əv ən æŋɡɹil, tu. ʃɑk læstəɾ oʊnli ðə taɪm ɪt tʊk əɹ tə slaɪs ði ʌðɝ wʊmənz floʊz. ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə ɹɪvɝs ðɛm. meɪbi ðət wəd bi ɪnʌf ædvæntɪdʒ. ʃi wəd si luz θɝɪn daɪ! ðə tɔlɝ wʊmən dʒɝkt əz əɹ kʌt floʊz snæp bæk ɪndə hɝ, bʌɾ ivən əz ʃi ʃɪftəɾ əɹ fit wɪð ðə bloʊ, ʃi tʃænəld əɡɛn. snɑɹlɪŋ, sɪndeɪn fɔt bæk, ən ði ɝθ hiv bɪniθ ðɛɹ fit. ʃi wəd si hɪm daɪ! ʃi wʊd!

Then the woman struck back at her, and she suffered her second shock. She was stronger than Cyndane had been before the Aelfinn and the Eelfinn held her! That was impossible; no woman could be stronger. She must have an angreal, too. Shock lasted only the time it took her to slice the other woman's flows. She did not know how to reverse them. Maybe that would be enough advantage. She would see Lews Therin die! The taller woman jerked as her cut flows snapped back into her, but even as she shifted her feet with the blow, she channeled again. Snarling, Cyndane fought back, and the earth heaved beneath their feet. She would see him die! She would!

ðə haɪ hɪltɑp wɑz nɑt vɛɹi nɪɹ tə ði æksɛs ki, bʌɾ ivən soʊ ðə ki ʃoʊn soʊ bɹaɪtli ɪn mɑɡiɾinz hɛd ðət ʃi hʌŋɡɝd fəɹ dʒʌst ə sɪp ət ðəɾ ɪmɛns floʊ ʌv seɪaɪdɑɹ. tə hoʊl soʊ mʌtʃ, ðə θaʊzənθ pɑɹɾ ə soʊ mʌtʃ, wəd bi ɛkstəsi. ʃi hʌŋɡɝd, bʌt ðɪs wʊɾɪd væntədʒ wɑz əz nɪɹ əz ʃi ɪntɛndəd ɡoʊɪŋ. oʊnli ðə θɹɛɾ ə mɔɹaɪɾɪnz hænz kɝɛsɪŋ əɹ kɔɹsvɹə hæd dʒɹɪvən əɹ tə tʃɹævəl hɪɹ əɾ ɔl, ən ʃi hæd dɪleɪd kʌmɪŋ, pɹeɪd ðəɾ ɪt wəd bi oʊvɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz fɔɹs tə. ɔlweɪz ʃi hæd wɝkt ɪn sikɹəsi, bʌt ʃi hæd hæd tə fli ən ətæk əz sun əz ʃi ɝaɪvd, ən ɪn waɪdli sɛpɝeɪɾəd pleɪsəz ɪn ðə fɔɹəst spɹɛɾ aʊt bɪfɔɹ hɝ, laɪtnɪŋz ən faɪɝz woʊvən ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ən ʌðɝz ðət mʌst əv bɪn seɪɾɪn flæʃt ən flɛɹd bɪniθ ðə mɪdæftɝnun sʌn. blæk smoʊk ɹoʊz ɪn plumz fɹəm bɝnɪŋ klʌmps ə tʃɹiz, ən θʌndɝəs ɪksploʊʒənz ɹoʊl θɹu ði ɛɹ.

The high hilltop was not very near to the access key, but even so the key shone so brightly in Moghedien's head that she hungered for just a sip at that immense flow of saidar. To hold so much, the thousandth part of so much, would be ecstasy. She hungered, but this wooded vantage was as near as she intended going. Only the threat of Moridin's hands caressing her cour'souvra had driven her to Travel here at all, and she had delayed coming, prayed that it would be over before she was forced to. Always she had worked in secrecy, but she had had to flee an attack as soon as she arrived, and in widely separated places in the forest spread out before her, lightnings and fires woven of saidar and others that must have been saidin flashed and flared beneath the midafternoon sun. Black smoke rose in plumes from burning clumps of trees, and thunderous explosions rolled through the air.

hu fɔt, hu lɪvd, hu daɪd wɝ ɔl mæɾɝz ʌv ɪndɪfɝəns tə hɝ. ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɪt wəd bi plɛzən ɪf sɪndeɪn əɹ ɡɹeɪndəl pɛɹɪʃt. əɹ boʊθ. mɑɡiɾin wəd nɑt, nɑt θɹæʃɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə bæɾəl. ən ɪf ðət wɝ nɑt bæɾ ɪnʌf, ðəɹ wɑz wʌt stʊd bɪɑn ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ ki, ən ɪmɛns flæɾənd doʊm ə blæk ɪn ðə fɔɹəst, əz ðoʊ naɪt hæd tɝn tə stoʊn. ʃi flɪntʃt əz ə ɹɪpəl pæst əkɹɔs ðə dɑɹk sɝfəs ən ðə doʊm hiv pɝsɛptəbli haɪɝ. mædnəs tə ɡoʊ ɛni kloʊsɝ tə ðæt, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz. mɔɹaɪɾɪn wəd nɑt noʊ wʌt ʃi dɪd hɪɹ, əɹ dɪd nɑt du.

Who fought, who lived, who died were all matters of indifference to her. Except that it would be pleasant if Cyndane or Graendal perished. Or both. Moghedien would not, not thrashing about in the middle of a battle. And if that were not bad enough, there was what stood beyond the shining key, an immense flattened dome of black in the forest, as though night had turned to stone. She flinched as a ripple passed across the dark surface and the dome heaved perceptibly higher. Madness to go any closer to that, whatever it was. Moridin would not know what she did here, or did not do.

ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ tə ðə bæk ə ðə hɪltɑp, əweɪ fɹəm ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ ki ən ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ doʊm, ʃi sæt daʊn tə də wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn soʊ ɔfən ɪn ðə pæst. wɑtʃ fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz, ən sɝvaɪv.

Retreating to the back of the hilltop, away from the shining key and the strange dome, she sat down to do what she had done so often in the past. Watch from the shadows, and survive.

ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd, ɹænd wɑz skɹimɪŋ. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɾ i wɑz skɹimɪŋ, ðət luz θɝɪn wɑz skɹimɪŋ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt hɪɹ iðɝ vɔɪs ɪn ðə ɹɔɹ. ðə faʊl oʊʃən ə ðə teɪnt wɑz flʌɾɪŋ θɹu hɪm, haʊlɪŋ wɪð ɪts spid. taɪɾəl weɪvz ə vɪlnəs kɹæʃt oʊvɝ hɪm. ɹeɪdʒɪŋ ɡeɪlz ə fɪlθ ɹɪpt ət hɪm. ði oʊnli ɹizən i nu ðəɾ i stɪl hɛl ðə paʊɝ wɑz ðə teɪnt. seɪɾɪn kəd bi ʃɪftɪŋ, flɛɹɪŋ, əbaʊt tə kɪl hɪm, ən i wəd nɛvɝ noʊ. ðət pjutʃɹɪd flʌɾ oʊvɝwɛlmd ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, ən i hʌŋ ɑn baɪ hɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz tə kip fɹəm biɪŋ swɛpt əweɪ ɑn ɪt. ðə teɪnt wɑz muvɪŋ. ðət wɑz ɔl ðət kaʊntəd, naʊ. hi hæd tə hoʊld ɑn!

Inside his head, Rand was screaming. He was sure that he was screaming, that Lews Therin was screaming, but he could not hear either voice in the roar. The foul ocean of the taint was flooding through him, howling with its speed. Tidal waves of vileness crashed over him. Raging gales of filth ripped at him. The only reason he knew that he still held the Power was the taint. Saidin could be shifting, flaring, about to kill him, and he would never know. That putrid flood overwhelmed everything else, and he hung on by his fingernails to keep from being swept away on it. The taint was moving. That was all that counted, now. He had to hold on!

"wʌt kən jə tɛl mi, mɪn?" kædzueɪn kɛpt əɹ fit dɪspaɪɾ əɹ wɪɹinəs. hoʊldɪŋ ðət ʃil θɹu moʊst ʌv ə deɪ wɑz ɪnʌf tə taɪɝ ɛniwʌn.

"What can you tell me, Min?" Cadsuane kept her feet despite her weariness. Holding that shield through most of a day was enough to tire anyone.

ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn ən ətæk ɑn ðə hɪltɑp fəɹ səm taɪm, ən ɪn fækt, ɪt sim ði oʊnli æktɪv tʃænəlɪŋ ʃi kəd sɛns wɑz wʌt nɪneɪiv ən ðə bɔɪ wɝ duɪŋ. ɛlzə wɑz peɪsɪŋ ən ɛnləs sɝkəl ɝaʊn ðə kɹɛst ə ðə hɪl, stɪl lɪŋk tə mɛɹaɪs ən dʒɑhɹ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ əɹ tə də ət ðə moʊmən ɪksɛp skæn ðə hɪlz ɝaʊn ðɛm. dʒɑhɹ wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə stoʊn wɪð kælændɝ ʃaɪnɪŋ feɪnli ɪn ðə kɹʊk ə hɪz ɑɹm. mɛɹaɪs sæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪɾ ɪm wɪð əɹ hɛɾ ɑn ɪz ni, ən i wɑz stʃɹoʊkɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ.

There had not been an attack on the hilltop for some time, and in fact, it seemed the only active channeling she could sense was what Nynaeve and the boy were doing. Elza was pacing an endless circle around the crest of the hill, still linked to Merise and Jahar, but there was nothing for her to do at the moment except scan the hills around them. Jahar was sitting on a stone with Callandor shining faintly in the crook of his arm. Merise sat on the ground beside him with her head on his knee, and he was stroking her hair.

"wɛl, mɪn?" kædzueɪn dɪmændəd.

"Well, Min?" Cadsuane demanded.

ðə ɡɝl lʊkt ʌp æŋɡɹəli fɹəm ðə dɪpɹɛʃən ɪn ðə stoʊni ɡɹaʊnd wɛɹ toʊmɑs ən moʊd hæd bʌndəld əɹ ən hɑɹɪn. ət lis ðə mɛn hæd sɛns ɪnʌf tə æksɛp ðət ðeɪ kəd nɑt faɪɾ ɛni pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs faɪt. hɑɹɪn wɔɹ ə sʌlən skaʊl, ən mɔɹ ðən wʌns ɪt hæd bɪn nɛsəsɛɹi fəɹ wʌn ə ðə mɛn tə ɹistʃɹeɪn mɪn fɹəm ɡoʊɪŋ tə jʌŋ ælθɹ. ðeɪ hæɾ æktʃəli  hæd tə teɪk əɹ naɪvz əweɪ, æftɝ ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə juz ðə bleɪdz ɑn ðɛm.

The girl looked up angrily from the depression in the stony ground where Tomas and Moad had bundled her and Harine. At least the men had sense enough to accept that they could not fight any part of this fight. Harine wore a sullen scowl, and more than once it had been necessary for one of the men to restrain Min from going to young al'Thor. They had actually had to take her knives away, after she tried to use the blades on them.

"aɪ noʊ hiz əlaɪv," ðə ɡɝl mʌɾɝd, "æn aɪ θɪŋk hiz hɝɾɪŋ. oʊnli, ɪf aɪ kən fil ɪnʌf tə θɪŋk hiz hɝɾɪŋ, ðən hiz ɪn æɡəni. lemi ɡoʊ tə hɪm."

"I know he's alive," the girl muttered, "and I think he's hurting. Only, if I can feel enough to think he's hurting, then he's in agony. Let me go to him."

"ju wəɾ oʊnli ɡɛɾ ɪn ðə weɪ naʊ."

"You would only get in the way now."

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə ɡɝlz fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd ɡɹoʊn, kædzueɪn wɔkt əkɹɔs ði ənivən ɡɹaʊn tə wɛɹ ɹænd ən nɪneɪiv sæt, bʌt fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət ðɛm. ivən əɾ ə dɪstəns ə maɪlz, ðə blæk doʊm lʊkt ɪmɛns, ɹɪɹɪŋ ə θaʊzən fiɾ əɾ ɪts haɪt. ən ɪt wɑz swɛlɪŋ. ðə sɝfəs lʊk laɪk blæk stil, ðoʊ ɪt dɪd nɑt spɑɹkəl ɪn ði æftɝnun sʌn. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ðə laɪt sim tə dɪm ɝaʊn ɪt.

Ignoring the girl's frustrated groan, Cadsuane walked across the uneven ground to where Rand and Nynaeve sat, but for a moment she did not look at them. Even at a distance of miles, the black dome looked immense, rearing a thousand feet at its height. And it was swelling. The surface looked like black steel, though it did not sparkle in the afternoon sun. If anything, the light seemed to dim around it.

ɹænd wɑz sɪɾɪŋ əz i hæd sɪns ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ən ənmoʊvɪŋ, ənsiɪŋ stætʃu wɪð swɛt ɹoʊlɪŋ daʊn ɪz feɪs. ɪf i wɑz ɪn æɡəni əz mɪn sɛd, hi ʃoʊd noʊ saɪn ʌv ɪt. ən ɪf i wɑz, kædzueɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt ʃi kəd du, wʌt ʃi dɛɹd tə du. dɪstɝbɪŋ ɪm naʊ ɪn ɛni weɪ maɪɾ əv daɪɹ kɑnsəkwɛnsəz. ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðət ɹaɪzɪŋ dɛd-blæk doʊm, kædzueɪn ɡɹʌntɪd. hævɪŋ lɛɾ ɪm bɪɡɪn ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs maɪɾ əv daɪɹ kɑnsəkwɛnsəz, tu.

Rand was sitting as he had since the beginning, an unmoving, unseeing statue with sweat rolling down his face. If he was in agony as Min said, he showed no sign of it. And if he was, Cadsuane did not know what she could do, what she dared to do. Disturbing him now in any way might have dire consequences. Glancing at that rising dead-black dome, Cadsuane grunted. Having let him begin in the first place might have dire consequences, too.

wɪð ə moʊn, nɪneɪiv slɪp fɹəm əɹ stoʊn sit tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hɝ dʒɹɛs wɑz sɑɾən wɪð swɛt, ən stʃɹænz ə hɛɹ klʌŋ tə hɝ slɪk feɪs. hɝ aɪlɪdz flʌɾɝd wikli, ən əɹ bɹɛsts hivd əz ʃi ɡʌlpt ɛɹ dɛspɝətli. "noʊ mɔɹ," ʃi wɪmpɝd. "aɪ kænɑt stæn ɛnimɔɹ."

With a moan, Nynaeve slipped from her stone seat to the ground. Her dress was sodden with sweat, and strands of hair clung to her slick face. Her eyelids fluttered weakly, and her breasts heaved as she gulped air desperately. "No more," she whimpered. "I cannot stand anymore."

kædzueɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, sʌmθɪŋ ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əkʌstəm tə duɪŋ. ðə ɡɝl kəd nɑt liv ðə sɝkəl əntɪl jʌŋ ælθɹ ɹilis hɝ, bʌɾ ənlɛs ðiz tʃoʊɾən kæl wɝ flɔɾ ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ əz kælændɝ, ʃi wəd bi bʌfɝɾ əɡɛns teɪkɪŋ ɪn ɪnʌf ə ðə paʊɝ tə dæmədʒ hɝ. ɪksɛp ðət ʃi wɑz æktɪŋ əz ə kɑnduɪt fəɹ fɑɹ mɔɹ ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ðən ði ɪntaɪɝ waɪt taʊɝ cʊɾə hændəl juzɪŋ ɛvɹi æŋɡɹil ən sɑŋɡɹil ðə taʊɝ pəzɛst. æftɝ hævɪŋ ðət floʊ θɹu hɝ fəɹ aʊɝz, sɪmpəl fɪzɪkəl ɪɡzɔstʃən maɪt bi kɪlɪŋ hɝ.

Cadsuane hesitated, something she was not accustomed to doing. The girl could not leave the circle until young al'Thor released her, but unless these Choedan Kal were flawed in the same way as Callandor, she would be buffered against taking in enough of the Power to damage her. Except that she was acting as a conduit for far more of saidar than the entire White Tower could have handled using every angreal and sa'angreal the Tower possessed. After having that flow through her for hours, simple physical exhaustion might be killing her.

nilɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə ɡɝl, kædzueɪn leɪd ðə swɑloʊ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪd hɝ, tʊk ðə ɡɝlz hɛɾ ɪn əɹ hænz ən lɛsən ði əmaʊn ə seɪaɪdɑɹ ʃi wɑz pʌɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə ʃild. hɝ əbɪləɾiz wɪð hilɪŋ wɝ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ævɝɪdʒ, bʌt ʃi kəd wɑʃ əweɪ səm ə ðə ɡɝlz ɪɡzɔstʃən ət list wɪθaʊt fɔlɪŋ oʊvɝ hɝsɛlf. ʃi wɑz vɛɹi kɑnʃəs ə ðə wikənd ʃild oʊvɝ ðɛm, ðoʊ, ən ʃi weɪstəd noʊ taɪm ɪn fɔɹmɪŋ ðə wivz.

Kneeling beside the girl, Cadsuane laid the swallow on the ground beside her, took the girl's head in her hands and lessened the amount of saidar she was putting into the shield. Her abilities with Healing were no more than average, but she could wash away some of the girl's exhaustion at least without falling over herself. She was very conscious of the weakened shield over them, though, and she wasted no time in forming the weaves.

skɹæmbəlɪŋ tə ðə tɑp ə ðə hɪl, oʊsɑnɡɝ dʒɹɑp tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ɑn ɪz bɛli ən smaɪld əz i kɹæb saɪdweɪz tə ʃɛltɝ bɪhaɪn ə tʃɹi. fɹəm hɪɹ, wɪð seɪɾɪn ɪn hɪm, hi kəd si ðə nɛks kɹɛs klɪɹli, ən ðə pipəl ɑn ɪt. nɑɾ əz mɛni əz i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd. wʌn wʊmən wɑz meɪkɪŋ ə sloʊ sɝkəɾ ɝaʊn ðə kɹɛst, piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɑz stɪl, nɛɹɪʃmə sɪɾɪŋ wɪð kælændɝ ɡloʊɪŋ ɪn ɪz hænz ən ə wʊmənz hɛɾ ɑn ɪz ni. ðəɹ wɝ tu ʌðɝ wɪmən ðəɾ oʊsɑnɡɝ kəd si, wʌn nilɪŋ oʊvɝ ði ʌðɝ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ əbskjʊɹd baɪ ə mænz bæk. hi dɪd nɑt nid tə si ðə mænz feɪs tə noʊ ælθɹ. ðə ki laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn əɾ ɪz saɪd neɪm hɪm. tə oʊsɑnɡɝz aɪz, ɪt ʃoʊn bɹaɪtli. ɪn ɪz hɛd, ɪɾ oʊvɝwɛlm ðə sʌn, ə θaʊzən sʌnz. wʌɾ i kəd də wɪð ðæt! ə pɪɾi ɪt hæd tə bi dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ælθɹ. bʌt stɪl, hi kəd teɪk kælændɝ æftɝ ælθɹ wɑz dɛd. noʊ wʌn ɛls əmʌŋ ðə tʃoʊzən pəzɛst soʊ mʌtʃ əz ən æŋɡɹil. ivən mɔɹaɪɾɪn wəd kweɪl bɪfɔɹ ɪm wʌns i hæd ðət kɹɪstəl sɔɹd. nɛbli? oʊsɑnɡɝ wəd bi neɪm nɛbli æftɝ i dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ælθɹ ən əndɪɾ ɔl ðəɾ i hæd dʌn hɪɹ. læfɪŋ sɔfli, hi woʊv bɑlfaɪɝ. hu wəɾ ɛvɝ əv θɔt ðəɾ i wəd tɝn aʊt tə bi ðə hɪɹoʊ ʌv ðə deɪ?

Scrambling to the top of the hill, Osan'gar dropped to the ground on his belly and smiled as he crabbed sideways to shelter behind a tree. From here, with saidin in him, he could see the next crest clearly, and the people on it. Not as many as he had expected. One woman was making a slow circuit around the crest, peering into the trees, but everyone else was still, Narishma sitting with Callandor glowing in his hands and a woman's head on his knee. There were two other women that Osan'gar could see, one kneeling over the other, but they were obscured by a man's back. He did not need to see the man's face to know al'Thor. The key lying on the ground at his side named him. To Osan'gar's eyes, it shone brightly. In his head, it overwhelmed the sun, a thousand suns. What he could do with that! A pity it had to be destroyed along with al'Thor. But still, he could take Callandor after al'Thor was dead. No one else among the Chosen possessed so much as an angreal. Even Moridin would quail before him once he had that crystal sword. Nae'blis? Osan'gar would be named Nae'blis after he destroyed al'Thor and undid all that he had done here. Laughing softly, he wove balefire. Who would ever have thought that he would turn out to be the hero of the day?

wɔkɪŋ sloʊli, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə fɔɹəstəd hɪlz ɝaʊn ðɛm, ɛlzə sʌɾənli stɑpt əz ə flɪkɝ ə muvmən kɑt ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. ʃi tɝn əɹ hɛd sloʊli, ən nɑɾ əz fɑɹ əz ðə hɪl wɛɹ ʃi hæd sin ðət flæʃ. ðə deɪ hæd bɪn vɛɹi dɪfəkəl fəɹ hɝ. ɪn əɹ kæptɪvəɾi əmʌŋ ði il tɛns ət kɛɹhin ɪt hæd kʌm tə hɝ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz pɛɹəmaʊn fəɹ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn tə ɹitʃ ðə læs bæɾəl. ɪt hæd sʌɾənli bɪkʌm soʊ blaɪndɪŋli ɑbviəs ðəɾ ɪɾ əstaʊndɪɾ əɹ ʃi hæd nɑt sin ɪt bɪfɔɹ. naʊ ɪt wɑz klɪɹ tə hɝ, əz klɪɹ əz seɪaɪdɑɹ meɪd ðə feɪs ə ðə mæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪɾ ɑn ðət hɪl waɪl pikɪŋ ɝaʊn ə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋk. tədeɪ, ʃi hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə faɪt ðə tʃoʊzən. ʃʊɹli ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd wəɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪf ʃi hæɾ æktʃəli  kɪld ɛni ʌv ðɛm, bʌt kɔɹlən dæʃivə wɑz oʊnli wʌn ə ðoʊz æʃəmən. dæʃivə ɹeɪzd ɪz hæn təwɔɹd ðə hɪl wɛɹ ʃi stʊd, ən ʃi dʒɹu əz hɑɹɾ əz ʃi kəɾ ɑn kælændɝ ɪn dʒɑhɹz hænz. seɪɾɪn simd wɛl suɾəd tə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən, tə hɝ. ə hjudʒ bɔl ə kɔɹʌskeɪɾɪŋ faɪɝ sɝaʊndəd ði ʌðɝ hɪltɑp, ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊld ən blu. wən ɪt wɑz ɡɔn, ðəɾ ʌðɝ hɪl ɛndəɾ ɪn ə smuð sɝfəs fɪfti fit loʊɝ ðən ði oʊl kɹɛst.

Walking slowly, studying the forested hills around them, Elza suddenly stopped as a flicker of movement caught the corner of her eye. She turned her head slowly, and not as far as the hill where she had seen that flash. The day had been very difficult for her. In her captivity among the Aiel tents at Cairhien it had come to her that it was paramount for the Dragon Reborn to reach the Last Battle. It had suddenly become so blindingly obvious that it astounded her she had not seen it before. Now it was clear to her, as clear as saidar made the face of the man trying to hide on that hill while peeking around a tree trunk. Today, she had been forced to fight the Chosen. Surely the Great Lord would understand if she had actually killed any of them, but Corlan Dashiva was only one of those Asha'man. Dashiva raised his hand toward the hill where she stood, and she drew as hard as she could on Callandor in Jahar's hands. Saidin seemed well suited to destruction, to her. A huge ball of coruscating fire surrounded the other hilltop, red and gold and blue. When it was gone, that other hill ended in a smooth surface fifty feet lower than the old crest.

mɑɡiɾin wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ waɪ ʃi hæd ɹɪmeɪn ðɪs lɔŋ. ðəɹ kəd nɑt bi mɔɹ ðən tu aʊɝz ə deɪlaɪt lɛft, ən ðə fɔɹəst wɑz kwaɪət. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə ki, ʃi kəd nɑt fil seɪaɪdɑɹ biɪŋ tʃænəld ɛniwɛɹ. ðət wɑz nɑt tə seɪ ðət sʌmwʌn wɑz nɑt juzɪŋ smɔl əmaʊns sʌmwɛɹ, bʌt nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðə fjʊɹi ðət hæd ɹeɪdʒd ɝliɝ. ðə bæɾəl wɑz oʊvɝ, ði ʌðɝ tʃoʊzən dɛɾ əɹ flaɪɪŋ ɪn dɪfit. pleɪnli dɪfit, sɪns ðə ki stɪl bleɪzd ɪn əɹ hɛd. əmeɪzɪŋ ðət ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl hæd sɝvaɪv kəntɪnjuəs jus fəɹ ðɪs lɔŋ, ət ðɪs lɛvəl.

Moghedien was not sure why she had remained this long. There could not be more than two hours of daylight left, and the forest was quiet. Except for the key, she could not feel saidar being channeled anywhere. That was not to say that someone was not using small amounts somewhere, but nothing like the fury that had raged earlier. The battle was over, the other Chosen dead or flying in defeat. Plainly defeat, since the key still blazed in her head. Amazing that the Choedan Kal had survived continuous use for this long, at this level.

laɪɪŋ ɑn əɹ bɛli ətɑp əɹ haɪ væntədʒ pɔɪnt wɪð əɹ tʃɪn ɪn əɹ hænz, ʃi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt doʊm. blæk noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sim tə dɪskɹaɪb ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɝm fəɹ ɪt, naʊ, bʌt blæk wɑz ə peɪl kʌlɝ baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən. ɪt wɑz hæf ə bɔl, naʊ, ɹɪɹɪŋ laɪk ə maʊntən tu maɪlz əɹ mɔɹ ɪndə ðə skaɪ. ə θɪk leɪɝ ə ʃædoʊ leɪ ɝaʊn ɪt, əz ðoʊ ɪt wɝ sʌkɪŋ ðə læs laɪɾ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd. ðət θɪŋ maɪt ɡɹoʊ əntɪl ɪɾ ɛnvɛləp ði ɪntaɪɝ wɝld, əɹ pɝhæps ʃæɾɝ ðə wɝld, əz ɝæŋɡɝ hæd sɛɾ ɪt maɪt. bʌɾ ɪf ðət hæpənd, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ seɪf pleɪs, noʊ ʃædoʊz fəɹ ðə spaɪɾɝ tə haɪɾ ɪn.

Lying on her belly atop her high vantage point with her chin in her hands, she was watching the great dome. Black no longer seemed to describe it. There was no term for it, now, but black was a pale color by comparison. It was half a ball, now, rearing like a mountain two miles or more into the sky. A thick layer of shadow lay around it, as though it were sucking the last light out of the air. She could not understand why she was not afraid. That thing might grow until it enveloped the entire world, or perhaps shatter the world, as Aran'gar had said it might. But if that happened, there was no safe place, no shadows for the Spider to hide in.

sʌɾənli sʌmθɪŋ ɹɪθd ʌp fɹəm ðət dɑɹk smuð sɝfəs, laɪk ə fleɪm ɪf fleɪmz wɝ blækɝ ðən blæk, ðən ənʌðɝ, ənʌðɝ, əntɪl ðə doʊm bɔɪld wɪð staɪdʒiən faɪɝ. ðə ɹɔɹ ə tɛn θaʊzən θʌndɝz meɪɾ əɹ klæp əɹ hænz oʊvɝ əɹ ɪɹz ən ʃɹik, saʊnləsli ɪn ðət kɹæʃ, ən ðə doʊm kəlæpst ɪn ɑn ɪtsɛlf ɪn ðə speɪs ʌv ə hɑɹtbit, tə ə pɪnpɔɪnt, tə nʌθɪŋ. ɪt wɑz waɪn ðət haʊl ðɛn, ɹʌʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə vænɪʃt doʊm, dʒɹæɡɪŋ əɹ əlɔŋ ðə stoʊni ɡɹaʊnd noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ dɛspɝətli ʃi klɔd fəɹ pɝtʃəs, tʌmbəlɪŋ əɹ əɡɛns tʃɹiz, lɪftɪŋ əɹ ɪndə ði ɛɹ. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ʃi stɪl fɛl noʊ fɪɹ. ʃi θɔɾ ɪf ʃi sɝvaɪv ðɪs, ʃi wəd nɛvɝ fil fɪɹ əɡɛn.

Suddenly something writhed up from that dark smooth surface, like a flame if flames were blacker than black, then another, another, until the dome boiled with stygian fire. The roar of ten thousand thunders made her clap her hands over her ears and shriek, soundlessly in that crash, and the dome collapsed in on itself in the space of a heartbeat, to a pinpoint, to nothing. It was wind that howled then, rushing toward the vanished dome, dragging her along the stony ground no matter how desperately she clawed for purchase, tumbling her against trees, lifting her into the air. Strangely, she still felt no fear. She thought if she survived this, she would never feel fear again.

kædzueɪn lɛt ðə θɪŋ ðət hæd bɪn ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil dʒɹɑp tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ɪt kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bi kɔld ə stætʃu ʌv ə wʊmən. ðə feɪs wɑz əz waɪzli sɝin əz ɛvɝ, bʌt ðə fɪɡjɝ wɑz bɹoʊkən ɪn tu ən lʌmpi laɪk bʌbəld wæks wɛɹ wʌn saɪd hæd mɛltəd, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ði ɑɹm ðət hæd hɛl ðə kɹɪstəl sfɪɹ naʊ laɪɪŋ ɪn ʃæɾɝd fɹæɡməns ɝaʊn ðə ɹuən θɪŋ. ðə meɪl fɪɡjɝ wɑz hoʊl, ən ɔlɹɛɾi tʌkt əweɪ ɪn əɹ sæɾəlbæɡz. kælændɝ wɑz sɪkjʊɹd, tu. ɪt wɑz bɛs nɑt tə liv tɛmteɪʃən ɑn ði oʊpən hɪltɑp. wɛɹ ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ hæd bɪn ðəɹ wɑz ə naʊ ə hjudʒ oʊpənɪŋ ɪn ðə fɔɹəst, pɝfəkli ɹaʊn ən soʊ waɪd ðəɾ ivən wɪð ðə sʌn loʊ ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən ʃi kəd si ðə fɑɹ saɪd sloʊpɪŋ daʊn ɪndə ði ɝθ.

Cadsuane let the thing that had been a ter'angreal drop to the ground. It could no longer be called a statue of a woman. The face was as wisely serene as ever, but the figure was broken in two and lumpy like bubbled wax where one side had melted, including the arm that had held the crystal sphere now lying in shattered fragments around the ruined thing. The male figure was whole, and already tucked away in her saddlebags. Callandor was secured, too. It was best not to leave temptation on the open hilltop. Where Shadar Logoth had been there was a now a huge opening in the forest, perfectly round and so wide that even with the sun low on the horizon she could see the far side sloping down into the earth.

læn, liɾɪŋ ɪz lɪmpɪŋ wɔɹhɔɹs ʌp ðə sloʊp, dʒɹɑp ðə blæk stæljənz ɹeɪnz wən i sɔ nɪneɪiv stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ən kʌvɝd tə hɝ tʃɪn wɪð əɹ kloʊk. jʌŋ ælθɹ leɪ əɾ əɹ saɪɾ ɔlsoʊ blæŋkəɾɪd ɪn ɪz kloʊk, wɪð mɪn kɝld ʌp əɡɛns hɪm, hɝ hɛɾ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. hɝ aɪz wɝ kloʊzd, bʌt baɪ hɝ smɔl smaɪl, ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əslip. læn bɛɹli spɛɹɾ əm ə ɡlæns əz i ɹæn ðə læs dɪstəns ən fɛl ɑn ɪz niz tə ɹeɪz nɪneɪivz hɛd dʒɛnli ɑn ɪz ɑɹm. ʃi dɪd nɑt stɝ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðə bɔɪ.

Lan, leading his limping warhorse up the slope, dropped the black stallion's reins when he saw Nynaeve stretched out on the ground and covered to her chin with her cloak. Young al'Thor lay at her side also blanketed in his cloak, with Min curled up against him, her head on his chest. Her eyes were closed, but by her small smile, she was not asleep. Lan barely spared them a glance as he ran the last distance and fell on his knees to raise Nynaeve's head gently on his arm. She did not stir any more than the boy.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ dʒʌst ʌnkɑnʃəs," kædzueɪn toʊl hɪm. "kɔɹəl sɛz ɪts bɛɾɝ tə lɛɾ əm ɹɪkʌvɝ ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn." ən haʊ lɔŋ ðət maɪt ɹikwaɪɝ, kɔɹəl hæd nɑt bɪn pɹipɛɹd tə seɪ. nɔɹ hæd deɪmɝ. ðə wunz ɪn ðə bɔɪz saɪd wɝ əntʃeɪnʒd, ðoʊ deɪmɝ hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðeɪ wəd bi. ɪt wɑz ɔl vɛɹi dɪstɝbɪŋ.

"They are just unconscious," Cadsuane told him. "Corele says it is better to let them recover on their own." And how long that might require, Corele had not been prepared to say. Nor had Damer. The wounds in the boy's side were unchanged, though Damer had expected they would be. It was all very disturbing.

ə lɪɾəl fɑɹðɝ ʌp ðə hɪl, ðə bɔld æʃəmən wɑz bɛn oʊvɝ ə ɡɹoʊnɪŋ bɛldaɪn, hɪz fɪŋɡɝz ɹaɪðɪŋ dʒʌst əbʌv əɹ əz i woʊv ɪz stʃɹeɪnʒ hilɪŋ. hi hæd bɪn bɪzi ðə læst aʊɝ. əliviə kəd nɑt stɑp stɛɹɪŋ ɪn wʌndɝ ən flɛksɪŋ ði ɑɹm ðət hæd bɪn bɹoʊkən əz wɛl əz sɪɹd tə ðə boʊn. sɝin wɔkt ənstɛɾəli, bʌt ðət wɑz dʒʌs taɪɹədnəs. ʃi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs daɪɾ aʊt ðəɹ ɪn ðə fɔɹəst, ən əɹ aɪz wɝ stɪl waɪd wɪð ði ɪkspɪɹiəns. waɪts wɝ nɑt juz tə ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ.

A little farther up the hill, the bald Asha'man was bent over a groaning Beldeine, his fingers writhing just above her as he wove his strange Healing. He had been busy the last hour. Alivia could not stop staring in wonder and flexing the arm that had been broken as well as seared to the bone. Sarene walked unsteadily, but that was just tiredness. She had almost died out there in the forest, and her eyes were still wide with the experience. Whites were not used to that sort of thing.

nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn hæd bɪn soʊ lʌki. vɛɹɪn ən ðə si foʊk wʊmən wɝ sɪɾɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə kloʊk-kʌvɝd fɔɹm ə kʌmaɪɹə, ðɛɹ lɪps muvɪŋ saɪlənli ɪn pɹɛɹz fəɹ əɹ soʊl, ən nɛsun wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ ɔkwɝdli tə kʌmfɝɾ ə wipɪŋ deɪdʒiən, hu kɹæɾəld jʌŋ ɛbənz kɔɹps ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz ən ɹɑkt ɪm laɪk ə beɪbi. ɡɹinz wɝ juz tə ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ, bʌt kædzueɪn dɪd nɑt laɪk luzɪŋ tu ʌv əɹ pipəl ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə fju sɪŋʒd fɔɹseɪkən ən wʌn dɛd ɹɛnəɡeɪd.

Not everyone had been so lucky. Verin and the Sea Folk woman were sitting beside the cloak-covered form of Kumira, their lips moving silently in prayers for her soul, and Nesune was trying awkwardly to comfort a weeping Daigian, who cradled young Eben's corpse in her arms and rocked him like a baby. Greens were used to that sort of thing, but Cadsuane did not like losing two of her people in return for no more than a few singed Forsaken and one dead renegade.

"ɪts klin," dʒɑhɹ sɛd sɔfli jɛɾ əɡɛn. ðɪs taɪm, mɛɹaɪs wɑz ðə wʌn sɪɾɪŋ, wɪð ɪz hɛd ɹɛstɪŋ ɪn əɹ læp. hɝ blu aɪz wɝ əz stɝn əz ɛvɝ, bʌt ʃi stʃɹoʊkt ɪz blæk hɛɹ dʒɛnli. "ɪts klin."

"It's clean," Jahar said softly yet again. This time, Merise was the one sitting, with his head resting in her lap. Her blue eyes were as stern as ever, but she stroked his black hair gently. "It's clean."

kædzueɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð mɛɹaɪs oʊvɝ ðə bɔɪz hɛd. deɪmɝ ən dʒɑhɹ boʊθ sɛd ðə seɪm θɪŋ, ðə teɪnt wɑz ɡɔn, bʌt haʊ kəd ðeɪ bi ʃʊɹ səm skɹæp dɪd nɑt ɹɪmeɪn? mɛɹaɪs hæɾ əlaʊɾ əɹ tə lɪŋk wɪð ðə bɔɪ, ən ʃi kəd nɑt fil ɛniθɪŋ laɪk wʌt ði ʌðɝ ɡɹin hæd dɪskɹaɪbd, jɛt haʊ kəd ðeɪ bi sɝɾən? seɪɾɪn wɑz soʊ eɪliən ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ kəd bi hɪɾən ɪn ðət mæd keɪɑs.

Cadsuane exchanged looks with Merise over the boy's head. Damer and Jahar both said the same thing, the taint was gone, but how could they be sure some scrap did not remain? Merise had allowed her to link with the boy, and she could not feel anything like what the other Green had described, yet how could they be certain? Saidin was so alien that anything could be hidden in that mad chaos.

"aɪ wɑnə liv əz sun əz ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɹɪtɝn," ʃi ənaʊnst. ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni kwɛstʃənz fəɹ wɪtʃ ʃi hæd noʊ ænsɝz tə sut hɝ, bʌt ʃi hæd jʌŋ ælθɹ naʊ, ən ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə luz hɪm.

"I want to leave as soon as the rest of the Warders return," she announced. There were too many questions for which she had no answers to suit her, but she had young al'Thor now, and she did not intend to lose him.

naɪt fɛl. ɑn ðə hɪltɑp, ðə wɪn blu dʌst əkɹɔs ðə fɹæɡməns ʌv wʌt hæd wʌns bɪn ə tɛɹæŋɡɹil. bɪloʊ leɪ ðə tum ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, oʊpən tə ɡɪv ðə wɝl hoʊp. ən ɑn dɪstən tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ, ðə wɝd bɪɡæn tə spɹɛd ðət ðə taɪm ʌv ɪluʒənz wɑz əɾ ən ɛnd.

Night fell. On the hilltop, the wind blew dust across the fragments of what had once been a ter'angreal. Below lay the tomb of Shadar Logoth, open to give the world hope. And on distant Tremalking, the word began to spread that the Time of Illusions was at an end.

ði ɛn ə ðə naɪnθ bʊk ə ðə wil ə taɪm ɡlɔsɝi eɪ noʊɾ ɑn deɪts ɪn ðɪs ɡlɔsɝi. ðə toʊmən kæləndɝ (dɪvaɪz baɪ toʊmə dɝ ɑməd) wɑz ədɑptəɾ əpɹɑksəmətli tu sɛntʃɝiz æftɝ ðə dɛθ ə ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ jɪɹz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld (æb). soʊ mɛni ɹɛkɝdz wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ðəɾ ət ðɛɹ ɛn ðəɹ wɑz ɑɹɡjəmən əbaʊt ði ɪɡzæk jɪɹ ʌndɝ ði oʊl sɪstəm. ə nu kæləndɝ, pɹəpoʊz baɪ tiəm ʌv ɡɑzɹ, sɛləbɹeɪɾəd fɹiɾəm fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑlɑk θɹɛɾ ən ɹəkɔɹɾəd itʃ jɪɹ əz ə fɹi jɪɹ (fi). ðə ɡɑzɝən kæləndɝ ɡeɪnd waɪɾ æksɛptəns wɪðɪn twɛnti jɪɹz æftɝ ðə wɔɹz' ɛnd. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ətɛmptəd tə ɪstæblɪʃ ə nu kæləndɝ beɪst ɑn ðə faʊndɪŋ ə hɪz ɛmpaɪɝ (, fɹəm ðə faʊndɪŋ), bʌɾ oʊnli hɪstɔɹiənz naʊ ɹəfɝ tə ɪt. æftɝ ðə dɛθ ən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ə θɝd kæləndɝ wɑz dɪvaɪz baɪ ɝɛn dɪn dʒubaɪ sɔɹɪŋ ɡʌl, ə skɑlɝ ə ðə si foʊk, ən pɹɑməlɡeɪɾəd baɪ ðə pɑnɑɹtʃ fɛɹiɾ ə tæɹɑbən. ðə fɛɹid kæləndɝ, deɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ði ɑɹbɪtʃɹɛɹəli dɪsaɪɾɪd ɛn ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ən ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ jɪɹz ə ðə nu ɛɹə (nəbɹæskə), ɪz kɝənli ɪn jus.

The End of the Ninth Book of The Wheel of Time GLOSSARY A Note on Dates in This Glossary. The Toman Calendar (devised by Toma dur Ahmid) was adopted approximately two centuries after the death of the last male Aes Sedai, recording years After the Breaking of the World (AB). So many records were destroyed in the Trolloc Wars that at their end there was argument about the exact year under the old system. A new calendar, proposed by Tiam of Gazar, celebrated freedom from the Trolloc threat and recorded each year as a Free Year (FY). The Gazaran Calendar gained wide acceptance within twenty years after the Wars' end. Artur Hawkwing attempted to establish a new calendar based on the founding of his empire (FF, From the Founding), but only historians now refer to it. After the death and destruction of the War of the Hundred Years, a third calendar was devised by Uren din Jubai Soaring Gull, a scholar of the Sea Folk, and promulgated by the Panarch Farede of Tarabon. The Farede Calendar, dating from the arbitrarily decided end of the War of the Hundred Years and recording years of the New Era (NE), is currently in use.

ɑɹmmɪn: soʊlʒɝz u oʊ əlidʒəns əɹ fiəlti tə ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ lɔɹɾ əɹ leɪɾi.

armsmen: Soldiers who owe allegiance or fealty to a particular lord or lady.

æʃəmən: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ɡɑɹɾiən" əɹ "ɡɑɹɾiənz," bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ə ɡɑɹɾiən ə dʒʌstəs ən tʃɹuθ. (tu) ðə neɪm ɡɪvən, boʊθ kəlɛktɪvli ən əz ə ɹæŋk, tə ðə mɛn u hæv kʌm tə ðə blæk taʊɝ, nɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn ɪn ændɝ, ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə lɝn tə tʃænəl. ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪts ɑn ðə weɪz ɪn wɪtʃ ðə wʌn paʊɝ kən bi juzd əz ə wɛpən, ən ɪn ənʌðɝ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ fɹəm ðə jusədʒəz ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, wʌns ðeɪ lɝn tə siz seɪɾɪn, ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ, ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹikwaɪɝd tə pɝfɔɹm ɔl tʃɔɹz ən leɪbɝz wɪð ðə paʊɝ. wən nuli ɛnɹoʊld, ə mæn ɪz tɝmd ə soʊlʒɝ; hi wɛɹz ə pleɪn blæk koʊt wɪð ə haɪ kɑlɝ, ɪn ði ændɔɝən fæʃən. biɪŋ ɹeɪz tə dɛɾəkeɪtəd bɹɪŋz ðə ɹaɪt tə wɛɹ ə sɪlvɝ pɪn, kɔl ðə sɔɹd, ɑn ðə kɑlɝ ə hɪz koʊt. pɹəmoʊʃən tə æʃəmən bɹɪŋz ðə ɹaɪt tə wɛɹ ə dʒɹæɡən pɪn, ɪn ɡoʊld ən ɹɛɾ ɪnæməl, ɑn ðə kɑlɝ ɑpəzət ðə sɔɹd. ɔlðoʊ mɛni wɪmən, ɪnkluɾɪŋ waɪvz, fli wən ðeɪ lɝn ðət ðɛɹ mɛn æktʃəli  kən tʃænəl, ə fɛɹ nʌmbɝ ə mɛn ət ðə blæk taʊɝ ɑɹ mɛɹid, ən ðeɪ juz ə vɝʒən ə ðə wɔɹɾɝ bɑn tə kɹieɪɾ ə lɪŋk wɪð ðɛɹ waɪvz. ðɪs seɪm bɑnd, ɔltɝd tə kəmpɛl oʊbiɾiəns, hæz ɹisənli bɪn juz tə bɑn kæptʃɝɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ əz wɛl.

Asha'man: (1) In the Old Tongue, "Guardian" or "Guardians," but always a guardian of justice and truth. (2) The name given, both collectively and as a rank, to the men who have come to the Black Tower, near Caemlyn in Andor, in order to learn to channel. Their training concentrates on the ways in which the One Power can be used as a weapon, and in another departure from the usages of the White Tower, once they learn to seize saidin, the male half of the Power, they are required to perform all chores and labors with the Power. When newly enrolled, a man is termed a Soldier; he wears a plain black coat with a high collar, in the Andoran fashion. Being raised to Dedicated brings the right to wear a silver pin, called the Sword, on the collar of his coat. Promotion to Asha'man brings the right to wear a Dragon pin, in gold and red enamel, on the collar opposite the Sword. Although many women, including wives, flee when they learn that their men actually can channel, a fair number of men at the Black Tower are married, and they use a version of the Warder bond to create a link with their wives. This same bond, altered to compel obedience, has recently been used to bond captured Aes Sedai as well.

beɪlwɝ, sɛbæn: fɔɹmɝli peɪdʒɹən naɪlz sɛkɹətɛɹi, ɪn pʌblɪk, ən sikɹɪtli naɪlz spaɪmæstɝ. hi eɪɾəd mɔɹɡeɪsəz ɪskeɪp fɹəm ðə sintʃæn ɪn æmədɔɹ fəɹ ɪz oʊn ɹizənz, ən naʊ ɪz ɛmplɔɪɾ əz sɛkɹətɛɹi tə pɛɹɪn tæʃɪɹ eɪbɑɹə ən feɪl ni bæʃɪɹ teɪbɑɹə.

Balwer, Sebban: Formerly Pedron Niall's secretary, in public, and secretly Niall's spymaster. He aided Morgase's escape from the Seanchan in Amador for his own reasons, and now is employed as secretary to Perrin t'Bashere Aybara and Faile ni Bashere t'Aybara.

blʌd, ðə: tɝm juz baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə dɛzəɡneɪt ðə noʊbɪləɾi. wʌn kən bi ɹeɪz tə ðə blʌɾ əz wɛl əz bɔɹn tə ɪt.

Blood, the: Term used by the Seanchan to designate the nobility. One can be raised to the Blood as well as born to it.

tʃɑ feɪl: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə fælkənz tælən." (tu) neɪm teɪkən baɪ ðə jʌŋ kɛɹhinɪn ən tɛɹənz, ətɛmptəd fɑloʊɝz ə dʒiɾoʊ, hu hæv swɔɹn fiəlti tə feɪl ni bæʃɪɹ teɪbɑɹə. ɪn sikɹət, ðeɪ ækt əz əɹ pɝsənəl skaʊts ən spaɪz.

Cha Faile: (1) In the Old Tongue, "the Falcon's Talon." (2) Name taken by the young Cairhienin and Tairens, attempted followers of ji'e'toh, who have sworn fealty to Faile ni Bashere t'Aybara. In secret, they act as her personal scouts and spies.

kəmpænjənz, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ʌv ɪɪliən, kɝənli kəmændəd baɪ fɝs kæptən dɛmiɾɝ mɑɹkəlɪn. ðə kəmpænjənz pɹəvaɪɾ ə bɑɾiɡɑɹd fəɹ ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɪljən ən ɡɑɹd ki pɔɪns ɝaʊn ðə neɪʃən. ədɪʃənəli, ðə kəmpænjənz əv tʃɹədɪʃənəli bɪn juzd ɪn bæɾəl tə əsɔl ði ɛnəmiz stʃɹɔŋɡəs pəzɪʃənz, tə ɪksplɔɪt wiknəsəz, ænd, ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi, tə kʌvɝ ðə ɹitʃɹiɾ ə ðə kɪŋ. ənlaɪk moʊst ʌðɝ sətʃ ɪlit fɔɹmeɪʃənz, fɔɹənɝz (ɛksɛptɪŋ tɛɹənz, ɔltɑɹənz ən mʊɹændiənz) ɑɹ nɑɾ oʊnli wɛlkəm, ðeɪ kən ɹaɪz ivən tə ðə haɪəst ɹæŋk, əz kən kɑmənɝz, wɪtʃ ɔlsoʊ ɪz ənjuʒəwəl. ðə junəfɔɹm ə ðə kəmpænjənz kənsɪsts ʌv ə ɡɹin koʊt, ə bɹɛstpleɪt wɝkt wɪð ðə naɪn biz ʌv ɪljən, ən ə kɑnɪkəl hɛlmət wɪð ə feɪsɡɑɹɾ ə stil bɑɹz. ðə fɝs kæptən wɛɹz fɔɹ ɹɪŋz ʌv ɡoʊldən bɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə kʌfs ə hɪz koʊt, ən θɹi θɪn ɡoʊldən plumz ɑn ɪz hɛlmət. ðə sɛkən kæptən wɛɹz θɹi ɹɪŋz ʌv ɡoʊldən bɹeɪɾ ɑn itʃ kʌf, ən θɹi ɡoʊldən plumz tɪpt wɪð ɡɹin. lutɛnəns wɛɹ tu jɛloʊ ɹɪŋz ɑn ðɛɹ kʌfs, ən tu θɪn ɡɹin plumz, ʌndɝ-lutɛnəns wʌn jɛloʊ ɹɪŋ ən ə sɪŋɡəl ɡɹin plum. bænɝmɪn ɑɹ dɛzɪɡneɪɾɪd baɪ tu bɹoʊkən ɹɪŋz ə jɛloʊ ɑn ðə kʌfs ən ə sɪŋɡəl jɛloʊ plum, skwədmən baɪ ə sɪŋɡəl bɹoʊkən ɹɪŋ ə jɛloʊ.

Companions, the: The elite military formation of IIlian, currently commanded by First Captain Demetre Marcolin. The Companions provide a bodyguard for the King of Illian and guard key points around the nation. Additionally, the Companions have traditionally been used in battle to assault the enemy's strongest positions, to exploit weaknesses, and, if necessary, to cover the retreat of the King. Unlike most other such elite formations, foreigners (excepting Tairens, Altarans and Murandians) are not only welcome, they can rise even to the highest rank, as can commoners, which also is unusual. The uniform of the Companions consists of a green coat, a breastplate worked with the Nine Bees of Illian, and a conical helmet with a faceguard of steel bars. The First Captain wears four rings of golden braid on the cuffs of his coat, and three thin golden plumes on his helmet. The Second Captain wears three rings of golden braid on each cuff, and three golden plumes tipped with green. Lieutenants wear two yellow rings on their cuffs, and two thin green plumes, under-lieutenants one yellow ring and a single green plume. Bannermen are designated by two broken rings of yellow on the cuffs and a single yellow plume, squadmen by a single broken ring of yellow.

kənsɑlədeɪʃən, ðə: wən ði ɑɹmiz sɛn baɪ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz sʌn luthɛɹ lændəɾ ɪn sintʃæn, ðeɪ dɪskʌvɝɾ ə ʃɪftɪŋ kwɪlt ə neɪʃənz ɔfən ət wɔɹ wɪð wʌn ənʌðɝ, wɛɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɔfən ɹeɪnd. wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ɪkwɪvələn ə ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl paʊɝ, juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. fɔɹmɪŋ smɔl ɡɹups, ðeɪ skimd əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ kɑnstənli. ɪn lɑɹdʒ pɑɹɾ ɪt wɑz ðɪs kɑnstən skimɪŋ fəɹ pɝsənəl ædvæntɪdʒ ən ðə ɹɪzʌltɪŋ wɔɹz əmʌŋ ðə mɪɹiəd neɪʃənz ðəɾ əlaʊd ði ɑɹmiz fɹəm ist ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən tə bɪɡɪn ðə kɑŋkwɛst ʌv ən ɪntaɪɝ kɑntənənt, ən fəɹ ðɛɹ dɪsɛndəns tə kəmpliɾ ɪt. ðɪs kɑŋkwɛst, dʊɹɪŋ wɪtʃ ðə dɪsɛndəns ə ði ɝɪdʒənəl ɑɹmiz bɪkeɪm sintʃæn əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ kɑŋkɝd sintʃæn, tʊk mɔɹ ðən naɪn hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ən ɪz kɔl ðə kənsɑlədeɪʃən.

Consolidation, the: When the armies sent by Artur Hawkwing under his son Luthair landed in Seanchan, they discovered a shifting quilt of nations often at war with one another, where Aes Sedai often reigned. Without any equivalent of the White Tower, Aes Sedai worked for their own individual power, using the Power. Forming small groups, they schemed against one another constantly. In large part it was this constant scheming for personal advantage and the resulting wars among the myriad nations that allowed the armies from east of the Aryth Ocean to begin the conquest of an entire continent, and for their descendants to complete it. This conquest, during which the descendants of the original armies became Seanchan as much as they conquered Seanchan, took more than nine hundred years and is called the Consolidation.

kɔɝɪn: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə ɹɪtɝn:" ðə neɪm ɡɪvən baɪ ðə sintʃæn boʊθ tə ðə fliɾ ə θaʊzənz ə ʃɪps ən tə ðə hʌnʒɹədz ə θaʊzənz ə soʊlʒɝz, kɹæfsmən ən ʌðɝz kæɹid baɪ ðoʊz ʃɪps, hu wɪl kʌm bɪhaɪn ðə fɔɹʌnɝz tə ɹikleɪm ðə lænz stoʊlən fɹəm ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz dɪsɛndəns. si ɔlsoʊ fɔɹʌnɝz.

Corenne: In the Old Tongue, "the Return:" The name given by the Seanchan both to the fleet of thousands of ships and to the hundreds of thousands of soldiers, craftsmen and others carried by those ships, who will come behind the Forerunners to reclaim the lands stolen from Artur Hawkwing's descendants. See also Forerunners.

dɔɾɝz ə saɪləns, ðə: dʊɹɪŋ ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ðə waɪt taʊɝ (oʊvɝ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz), vɛɹiəs wɪmən u hæv bɪn pʊɾ aʊɾ əv bɪn ənwɪlɪŋ tə æksɛp ðɛɹ feɪts ən əv tʃɹaɪd tə bæn təɡɛðɝ. sətʃ ɡɹups - moʊst ə ðɛm baɪ fɑɹ, ət list - hæv bɪn dɪspɝs baɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ əz sun əz faʊn ən pʌnɪʃt səvɪɹli ən pʌblɪkli tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðət ðə lɛsən ɪz kæɹid tə ɛvɹiwʌn. ðə læst ɡɹup tə bi dɪspɝs kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə dɔɾɝz ə saɪləns (sɛvənnaɪnfɔɹ-sɛvənhʌnʒɹədnaɪntieɪt ni). ðə dɔɾɝz kənsɪstəɾ ə tu æksɛptɪɾ u hæd bɪn pʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊɝ ən twɛnti-θɹi wɪmən ðeɪ hæd ɡæðɝɾ ən tʃɹeɪnd. ɔl wɝ kæɹid bæk tə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən pʌnɪʃt, ən ðə twɛnti-θɹi wɝ ɛnɹoʊld ɪn ðə nɑvəs bʊk. oʊnli wʌn ə ðoʊz mænədʒ tə ɹitʃ ðə ʃɔl. si ɔlsoʊ kɪn, ðə.

Daughters of Silence, the: During the history of the White Tower (over three thousand years), various women who have been put out have been unwilling to accept their fates and have tried to band together. Such groups - most of them by far, at least - have been dispersed by the White Tower as soon as found and punished severely and publicly to make sure that the lesson is carried to everyone. The last group to be dispersed called themselves the Daughters of Silence (794-798 NE). The Daughters consisted of two Accepted who had been put out of the Tower and twenty-three women they had gathered and trained. All were carried back to Tar Valon and punished, and the twenty-three were enrolled in the novice book. Only one of those managed to reach the shawl. See also Kin, the.

dækoʊvæl: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "wʌn u ɪz oʊnd," əɹ "pɝsən u ɪz pɹɑpɝɾi." (tu) əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ðə tɝm ɔfən juzd, əlɔŋ wɪð pɹɑpɝɾi, fəɹ sleɪvz. sleɪvɝi hæz ə lɔŋ ən ənjuʒəwəl hɪstɝi əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, wɪð sleɪvz hævɪŋ ði əbɪləɾi tə ɹaɪz tə pəzɪʃənz ʌv ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ ən oʊpən əθɔɹəɾi, ɪnkluɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ðoʊz u ɑɹ fɹi. si ɔlsoʊ sɔɪhɪn.

da'covale: (1) In the Old Tongue, "one who is owned," or "person who is property." (2) Among the Seanchan, the term often used, along with property, for slaves. Slavery has a long and unusual history among the Seanchan, with slaves having the ability to rise to positions of great power and open authority, including over those who are free. See also so'jhin.

dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹdz, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ə ðə sintʃæn ɛmpaɪɝ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ boʊθ hjumənz ən oʊɡiɝ. ðə hjumən mɛmbɝz ə ðə dɛθwɑtʃ ɡɑɹɾ ɑɹ ɔl dækoʊvæl, bɔɹn əz pɹɑpɝɾi ən tʃoʊzən waɪl jʌŋ tə sɝv ði ɛmpɹɛs, huz pɝsənəl pɹɑpɝɾi ðeɪ ɑɹ. fənæɾɪkəli lɔɪəl ən fɪɹsli pɹaʊd, ðeɪ ɔfən dɪspleɪ ðə ɹeɪvənz tætuɾ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ðə mɑɹk ʌv ə dækoʊvæl ə ði ɛmpɹɛs. ðə hɛlməts ən ɑɹmɝ ɑɹ lækɝɾ ɪn dɑɹk ɡɹin ən blʌd-ɹɛd, ðɛɹ ʃilz ɑɹ lækɝd blæk, ən ðɛɹ spɪɹz ən sɔɹdz kæɹi blæk tæsəlz. si ɔlsoʊ dækoʊvæl.

Deathwatch Guards, the: The elite military formation of the Seanchan Empire, including both humans and Ogier. The human members of the Deathwatch Guard are all da'covale, born as property and chosen while young to serve the Empress, whose personal property they are. Fanatically loyal and fiercely proud, they often display the ravens tattooed on their shoulders, the mark of a da'covale of the Empress. The helmets and armor are lacquered in dark green and blood-red, their shields are lacquered black, and their spears and swords carry black tassels. See also da'covale.

dɪfɛndɝz ə ðə stoʊn, ðə: ði ɪlit mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən ə tɛɹ. ðə kɝən kæptən ə ðə stoʊn (kəmændɝ ə ðə dɪfɛndɝz) ɪz ɹɑdʒɹəvɑɹ taɪhɛɹə. oʊnli tɛɹənz ɑɹ æksɛptɪɾ ɪndə ðə dɪfɛndɝz, ən ɔfəsɝz ɑɹ juʒəwəli ʌv noʊbəl bɝθ, ðoʊ ɔfən fɹəm maɪnɝ haʊsəz əɹ maɪnɝ bɹæntʃəz ə stʃɹɔŋ haʊzɪz. ðə dɪfɛndɝz ɑɹ tæsk tə hoʊl ðə ɡɹeɪt fɔɹtʃɹəs kɔl ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ, ɪn ðə sɪɾi ʌv tiɹ, tə dɪfɛn ðə sɪɾi, ən tə pɹəvaɪd pəlis sɝvəsəz ɪn pleɪs ʌv ɛni sɪɾi wɑtʃ əɹ ðə laɪk. ɪksɛpt ɪn taɪmz ʌv wɔɹ, ðɛɹ duɾiz sɛldəm teɪk əm fɑɹ fɹəm ðə sɪɾi. ðɛn, əz wɪð ʌðɝ ɪlit fɔɹmeɪʃənz, ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə kɔɹ ɝaʊnd wɪtʃ ði ɑɹmi ɪz fɔɹmd. ðə junəfɔɹm ə ðə dɪfɛndɝz kənsɪsts ʌv ə blæk koʊt wɪð pæɾəd slivz stʃɹaɪp blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld wɪð blæk kʌfs, ə bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪt, ən ə ɹɪm hɛlmət wɪð ə feɪsɡɑɹɾ ə stil bɑɹz. ðə kæptən ə ðə stoʊn wɛɹz θɹi ʃɔɹt waɪt plumz ɑn ɪz hɛlmət, ən ɑn ðə kʌfs ə hɪz koʊt θɹi ɪntɝtwaɪnd ɡoʊldən bɹeɪdz ɑn ə waɪt bænd. kæptənz wɛɹ tu waɪt plumz ən ə sɪŋɡəl laɪn ʌv ɡoʊldən bɹeɪɾ ɑn waɪt kʌfs, lutɛnəns wʌn waɪt plum ən ə sɪŋɡəl laɪn ə blæk bɹeɪɾ ɑn waɪt kʌfs ən ʌndɝ-lutɛnəns wʌn ʃɔɹt blæk plum ən pleɪn waɪt kʌfs. bænɝmɪn əv ɡoʊld-kʌlɝd kʌfs ɑn ðɛɹ koʊts, ən skwədmən əv kʌfs stʃɹaɪp blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld.

Defenders of the Stone, the: The elite military formation of Tear. The current Captain of the Stone (commander of the Defenders) is Rodrivar Tihera. Only Tairens are accepted into the Defenders, and officers are usually of noble birth, though often from minor Houses or minor branches of strong Houses. The Defenders are tasked to hold the great fortress called the Stone of Tear, in the city of Tear, to defend the city, and to provide police services in place of any City Watch or the like. Except in times of war, their duties seldom take them far from the city. Then, as with other elite formations, they are the core around which the army is formed. The uniform of the Defenders consists of a black coat with padded sleeves striped black-and-gold with black cuffs, a burnished breastplate, and a rimmed helmet with a faceguard of steel bars. The Captain of the Stone wears three short white plumes on his helmet, and on the cuffs of his coat three intertwined golden braids on a white band. Captains wear two white plumes and a single line of golden braid on white cuffs, lieutenants one white plume and a single line of black braid on white cuffs and under-lieutenants one short black plume and plain white cuffs. Bannermen have gold-colored cuffs on their coats, and squadmen have cuffs striped black-and-gold.

dɛlvɪŋ: (wʌn) ði əbɪləɾi tə juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə daɪəɡnoʊs fɪzɪkəl kəndɪʃən ən ɪlnəs. (tu) ði əbɪləɾi tə faɪn dəpɑzɪts ə mɛɾəl ɔɹz wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðət ðɪs əz lɔŋ bɪn ə lɔst əbɪləɾi əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ əkaʊn fəɹ ðə neɪm bɪkʌmɪŋ ətætʃt tə ənʌðɝ əbɪləɾi.

Delving: (1) The ability to use the One Power to diagnose physical condition and illness. (2) The ability to find deposits of metal ores with the One Power. That this has long been a lost ability among Aes Sedai may account for the name becoming attached to another ability.

dɝmɝæt-: (wʌn) ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "mæstɝ hænlɝ." (tu) əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ðə sʌfɪks əplaɪd tə ɪndəkeɪɾ ə sinjɝ ən haɪli skɪl hænlɝ ʌv wʌn ə ði ɛɡzɑɾɪks, wʌn u tʃɹeɪnz ʌðɝz, əz ɪn dɝmɝətʃɹeɪkən. dɝmɝæt kən əv ə fɛɹli haɪ soʊʃəl stæɾəs, ðə haɪəst ʌv ɔl hɛl baɪ dɝsʌldəm, ðə tʃɹeɪnɝz ə sʌldəm, hu ɹæŋk wɪð fɛɹli haɪ mɪlətɛɹi ɔfəsɝz. si ɔlsoʊ mɔɝæt.

der'morat-: (1) In the Old Tongue, "master handler." (2) Among the Seanchan, the suffix applied to indicate a senior and highly skilled handler of one of the exotics, one who trains others, as in der'morat'raken. Der'morat can have a fairly high social status, the highest of all held by der'sul'dam, the trainers of sul'dam, who rank with fairly high military officers. See also morat.

feɪn, pdən: fɔɹmɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnd, naʊ mɔɹ ən wɝs ðən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ən ən ɛnəmi ʌv ðə fɔɹseɪkən əz mʌtʃ əz hiz ə ɹænd ælθɹ, hum i heɪts wɪð ə pæʃən. læst sin juzɪŋ ðə neɪm dʒɛɹɑl mɔɹɾɪθ, ædvaɪzɪŋ lɔɹd tɔɹæm ɹieɪɾən ɪn ɪz ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ɪn kɛɹhin.

Fain, Padan: Former Darkfriend, now more and worse than a Darkfriend, and an enemy of the Forsaken as much as he is of Rand al'Thor, whom he hates with a passion. Last seen using the name Jeraal Mordeth, advising Lord Toram Riatin in his rebellion against the Dragon Reborn in Cairhien.

fɪsts ə hɛvən, ðə: laɪtli ɑɹmd ən laɪtli ɑɹmɝd sintʃæn ɪnfəntʃɹi kæɹiɾ ɪndə bæɾəl ɑn ðə bæks ə ðə flaɪɪŋ kɹitʃɝz kɔl tɔɹeɪkən. ɔl ɑɹ smɔl mɛn, əɹ wɪmən, lɑɹdʒli kəz ə lɪməts əz tə haʊ mʌtʃ weɪɾ ə tɔɹeɪkən kən kæɹi fəɹ ɛni dɪstəns. kənsɪɾɝd tə bi əmʌŋ ðə tʌfəst soʊlʒɝz, ðeɪ ɑɹ juz pɹaɪmɛɹəli fəɹ ɹeɪdz, sɝpɹaɪz əsɔls ɑn pəzɪʃənz əɾ ən ɛnəmiz ɹɪɹ, ən wɛɹ spiɾ ɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ soʊlʒɝz ɪndə pleɪs ɪz ə ði ɛsəns.

Fists of Heaven, the: Lightly armed and lightly armored Seanchan infantry carried into battle on the backs of the flying creatures called to'raken. All are small men, or women, largely because of limits as to how much weight a to'raken can carry for any distance. Considered to be among the toughest soldiers, they are used primarily for raids, surprise assaults on positions at an enemy's rear, and where speed in getting soldiers into place is of the essence.

fɔɹʌnɝz, ðə: si heɪlin.

Forerunners, the: See Hailene.

fɔɹseɪkən, ðə: ðə neɪm ɡɪvən tə θɝtin paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ, mɛn ən wɪmən boʊθ, hu wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə ʃædoʊ dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ən wɝ tʃɹæpt ɪn ðə silɪŋ ə ðə bɔɹ ɪndə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən. waɪl ɪts lɔŋ bɪn bɪliv ðət ðeɪ əloʊn əbændən ðə laɪt dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ, ɪn fækt ʌðɝz dɪɾ əz wɛl; ðiz θɝtin wɝ oʊnli ðə haɪəst ɹæŋkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛm. ðə fɔɹseɪkən (hu kɔl ðɛmsɛlvz ðə tʃoʊzən) ɑɹ sʌmwʌt ɹədust ɪn nʌmbɝ sɪns ðɛɹ əweɪkənɪŋ ɪn ðə pɹɛzən deɪ. ðə noʊn sɝvaɪvɝz ɑɹ dɪmɑndɝd, sɛmɝhɪdʒ, ɡɹeɪndəl, mɛsænə, mɑɡiɾin, ən tu hu wɝ ɹiɪnkɑɹneɪɾɪd ɪn nu bɑɾiz ən ɡɪvən nu neɪmz, oʊsɑnɡɝ ən ɝæŋɡɝ. ɹisənli, ə mæn kɔlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf mɔɹaɪɾɪn əz əpɪɹd, ən meɪ bi jɛɾ ənʌðɝ ə ðə dɛd fɔɹseɪkən bɹɔt bæk fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðə seɪm pɑsəbɪləɾi meɪ ɪɡzɪst ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə wʊmən kɔlɪŋ hɝsɛlf sɪndeɪn, bʌt sɪns ɝæŋɡɝ wɑz ə mæn bɹɔt bæk əz ə wʊmən, spɛkjəleɪʃən əz tə ði aɪdɛntɪɾiz ə mɔɹaɪɾɪn ən sɪndeɪn meɪ pɹuv fjuɾəl əntɪl mɔɹ ɪz lɝnd.

Forsaken, the: The name given to thirteen powerful Aes Sedai, men and women both, who went over to the Shadow during the Age of Legends and were trapped in the sealing of the Bore into the Dark One's prison. While it has long been believed that they alone abandoned the Light during the War of the Shadow, in fact others did as well; these thirteen were only the highest ranking among them. The Forsaken (who call themselves the Chosen) are somewhat reduced in number since their awakening in the present day. The known survivors are Demandred, Semirhage, Graendal, Mesaana, Moghedien, and two who were reincarnated in new bodies and given new names, Osan'gar and Aran'gar. Recently, a man calling himself Moridin has appeared, and may be yet another of the dead Forsaken brought back from the grave by the Dark One. The same possibility may exist regarding the woman calling herself Cyndane, but since Aran'gar was a man brought back as a woman, speculation as to the identities of Moridin and Cyndane may prove futile until more is learned.

heɪlin: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "fɔɹʌnɝz," əɹ "ðoʊz u kʌm bɪfɔɹ." ðə tɝm əplaɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə ðə mæsɪv ɛkspədɪʃənɛɹi fɔɹs sɛn əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən tə skaʊɾ aʊt ðə lænz wɛɹ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wʌns ɹuld. naʊ ʌndɝ ðə kəmæn ə ðə haɪ leɪɾi sjuɹɔθ, ɪts nʌmbɝz swoʊlən baɪ ɹəkɹuts fɹəm kɑŋkɝd lænz, ðə heɪlin əz ɡɔn fɑɹ bɪɑn ɪts ɝɪdʒənəl ɡoʊlz.

Hailene: In the Old Tongue, "Forerunners," or "Those Who Come Before." The term applied by the Seanchan to the massive expeditionary force sent across the Aryth Ocean to scout out the lands where Artur Hawkwing once ruled. Now under the command of the High Lady Suroth, its numbers swollen by recruits from conquered lands, the Hailene has gone far beyond its original goals.

hænlən, dɑvd: eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd, fɔɹmɝli kəmændɝ ə ðə waɪt laɪənz ɪn sɝvəs tə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɹɑvɪn waɪl i hɛl keɪɛmlɪn juzɪŋ ðə neɪm lɔɹd ɡeɪbɹəl. fɹəm ðɛɹ, hænlən tʊk ðə waɪt laɪənz tə kɛɹhin ʌndɝ ɔɹɾɝz tə fɝðɝ ðə ɹɪbɛljən əɡɛns ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ðə waɪt laɪənz wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪd baɪ ə "bʌbəl ʌv ivəl," ən hænlən əz bɪn ɔɹɾɝd bæk tə keɪɛmlɪn fəɹ pɝpəsəz əz jɛɾ ənnoʊn.

Hanlon, Daved: A Darkfriend, formerly commander of the White Lions in service to the Forsaken Rahvin while he held Caemlyn using the name Lord Gaebril. From there, Hanlon took the White Lions to Cairhien under orders to further the rebellion against the Dragon Reborn. The White Lions were destroyed by a "bubble of evil," and Hanlon has been ordered back to Caemlyn for purposes as yet unknown.

ɪʃɑɹə: ðə fɝs kwin ʌv ændɝ (sɝkə fi naɪnnaɪnfɔɹwʌnzɪɹoʊɾuzɪɹoʊ). ət ðə dɛθ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, ɪʃɑɹə kənvɪnst əɹ hʌzbənd, wʌn ə hɔkwɪŋz fɔɹmoʊs dʒɛnɝəlz, tə ɹeɪz ðə sidʒ ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən əkʌmpəni hɝ tə keɪɛmlɪn wɪð əz mɛni soʊlʒɝz əz i kəd bɹeɪk əweɪ fɹəm ði ɑɹmi. wɛɹ ʌðɝz tʃɹaɪd tə siz ðə hoʊl ə hɔkwɪŋz ɛmpaɪɝ ən feɪld, ɪʃɑɹə tʊk ə fɝm hoʊld ɑn ə smɔl pɑɹɾ ən səksiɾəd. tədeɪ, nɪɹli ɛvɹi noʊbəl haʊs ɪn ændɝ kənteɪnz səm ʌv ɪʃɑɹəz blʌd, ən ðə ɹaɪt tə kleɪm ðə laɪən θɹoʊn dɪpɛnz boʊθ ɑn dɝɛk dɪsɛn fɹəm əɹ ən ɑn ðə nʌmbɝ ə laɪnz ə kənɛkʃən tə hɝ ðət kən bi ɪstæblɪʃt.

Ishara: The first Queen of Andor (circa FY 9941020). At the death of Artur Hawkwing, Ishara convinced her husband, one of Hawkwing's foremost generals, to raise the siege of Tar Valon and accompany her to Caemlyn with as many soldiers as he could break away from the army. Where others tried to seize the whole of Hawkwing's empire and failed, Ishara took a firm hold on a small part and succeeded. Today, nearly every noble House in Andor contains some of Ishara's blood, and the right to claim the Lion Throne depends both on direct descent from her and on the number of lines of connection to her that can be established.

kɪn, ðə: ivən dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, mɔɹ ðən tu θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ (sɝkə wʌnzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊwʌnθɹifaɪvzɪɹoʊ æb), ðə waɪt taʊɝ kəntɪnjud tə meɪnteɪn ɪts stændɝdz, pʊɾɪŋ aʊt wɪmən u feɪl tə mɛʒɝ ʌp. wʌn ɡɹup ə ðiz wɪmən, fɪɹɪŋ tə ɹɪtɝn hoʊm ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ðə wɔɹz, flɛd tə bɑɹɑʃtə (nɪɹ ðə pɹɛzənt-deɪ saɪɾ ʌv ɛbu dɑɹ), əz fɑɹ fɹəm ðə faɪɾɪŋ əz wɑz pɑsəbəl tə ɡoʊ ət ðət taɪm. kɔlɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ðə kɪn, ən kɪnswɪmən, ðeɪ kɛpt ɪn haɪɾɪŋ ən ɔfɝɾ ə seɪf heɪvən fəɹ ʌðɝz u hæd bɪn pʊɾ aʊt. ɪn taɪm, ðɛɹ əpɹoʊtʃɪz tə wɪmən toʊl tə liv ðə taʊɝ lɛd tə kɑntæks wɪð ɹʌnəweɪz, ən waɪl ði ɪɡzækt ɹizənz meɪ nɛvɝ bi noʊn, ðə kɪn bɪɡæn tə æksɛpt ɹʌnəweɪz, əz wɛl. ðeɪ meɪd ɡɹeɪɾ ɛfɝts tə kip ðiz ɡɝlz fɹəm lɝnɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə kɪn əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ʃʊɹ ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd nɑt swup daʊn ən ɹiteɪk ðɛm. æftɝ ɔl, ɛvɹiwʌn nu ðət ɹʌnəweɪz wɝ ɔlweɪz kɑt sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, ən ðə kɪn nu ðəɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ hɛl ðɛmsɛlvz sikɹət, ðeɪ ðɛmsɛlvz wəd bi pʌnɪʃt səvɪɹli.

Kin, the: Even during the Trolloc Wars, more than two thousand years ago (circa 10001350 AB), the White Tower continued to maintain its standards, putting out women who failed to measure up. One group of these women, fearing to return home in the midst of the wars, fled to Barashta (near the present-day site of Ebou Dar), as far from the fighting as was possible to go at that time. Calling themselves the Kin, and Kinswomen, they kept in hiding and offered a safe haven for others who had been put out. In time, their approaches to women told to leave the Tower led to contacts with runaways, and while the exact reasons may never be known, the Kin began to accept runaways, as well. They made great efforts to keep these girls from learning anything about the Kin until they were sure that Aes Sedai would not swoop down and retake them. After all, everyone knew that runaways were always caught sooner or later, and the Kin knew that unless they held themselves secret, they themselves would be punished severely.

ənnoʊn tə ðə kɪn, ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə taʊɝ wɝ əwɛɹ ə ðɛɹ ɛɡzɪstəns ɔlmoʊs fɹəm ðə vɛɹi fɝst, bʌt pɹɑsəkjuʃən ə ðə wɔɹz lɛf noʊ taɪm fəɹ dilɪŋ wɪð ðɛm. baɪ ði ɛn ə ðə wɔɹz, ðə taʊɝ ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪt maɪt nɑt bi ɪn ðɛɹ bɛst ɪntʃɹəsts tə snʌf pʊt ðə kɪn. pɹaɪɝ tə ðət taɪm, ə mədʒɔɹəɾi ʌv ɹʌnəweɪz æktʃəli  hæd mænədʒ tə ɪskeɪp, wʌtɛvɝ ðə taʊɝz pɹɑpəɡændə, bʌt wʌns ðə kɪn bɪɡæn hɛlpɪŋ ðɛm, ðə taʊɝ nu ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ɛni ɹʌnəweɪ wɑz hɛɾɪŋ, ən ðeɪ bɪɡæn ɹəteɪkɪŋ naɪn aʊɾ ə tɛn. sɪns kɪnswɪmən muvd ɪn ən aʊɾ ə bɑɹɑʃtə (æn leɪɾɝ ɛbu dɑɹ) ɪn ən ɛfɝt tə haɪd ðɛɹ ɛɡzɪstəns ən ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz, nɛvɝ steɪɪŋ mɔɹ ðən tɛn jɪɹz lɛst sʌmwʌn noʊɾəs ðət ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ eɪdʒ əɾ ə nɔɹməl spid, ðə taʊɝ bɪliv ðeɪ wɝ fju, ən ðeɪ sɝɾənli wɝ kipɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz loʊ. ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə juz ðə kɪn əz ə tʃɹæp fəɹ ɹʌnəweɪz, ðə taʊɝ dɪsaɪɾɪd tə liv əm əloʊn, ənlaɪk ɛni ʌðɝ sɪməlɝ ɡɹup ɪn hɪstɝi, ən tə kip ðə vɛɹi ɛɡzɪstəns ə ðə kɪn ə sikɹət noʊn oʊnli tə fʊl ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Unknown to the Kin, Aes Sedai in the Tower were aware of their existence almost from the very first, but prosecution of the wars left no time for dealing with them. By the end of the wars, the Tower realized that it might not be in their best interests to snuff put the Kin. Prior to that time, a majority of runaways actually had managed to escape, whatever the Tower's propaganda, but once the Kin began helping them, the Tower knew exactly where any runaway was heading, and they began retaking nine out of ten. Since Kinswomen moved in and out of Barashta (and later Ebou Dar) in an effort to hide their existence and their numbers, never staying more than ten years lest someone notice that they did not age at a normal speed, the Tower believed they were few, and they certainly were keeping themselves low. In order to use the Kin as a trap for runaways, the Tower decided to leave them alone, unlike any other similar group in history, and to keep the very existence of the Kin a secret known only to full Aes Sedai.

ðə kɪn də nɑɾ əv lɔz, bʌt ɹæðɝ ɹulz beɪst ɪn pɑɹɾ ɑn ðə ɹulz fəɹ nɑvəsɪz ən æksɛptɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ɪn pɑɹɾ ɑn ðə nəsɛsəɾi ʌv meɪnteɪnɪŋ sikɹəsi. əz maɪt bi ɪkspɛktəd ɡɪvən ði ɔɹədʒɪnz ə ðə kɪn, ðeɪ meɪnteɪn ðɛɹ ɹulz vɛɹi fɝmli ɑn ɔl ə ðɛɹ mɛmbɝz.

The Kin do not have laws, but rather rules based in part on the rules for novices and Accepted in the White Tower, and in part on the necessity of maintaining secrecy. As might be expected given the origins of the Kin, they maintain their rules very firmly on all of their members.

ɹisən oʊpən kɑntæks bɪtwin ɛɛs sədaɪ ən kɪnswɪmən, waɪl noʊn oʊnli tə ə hændfʊl ə sɪstɝz, hæv pɹədust ə nʌmbɝ ə ʃɑks, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə fæks ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ twaɪs əz mɛni kɪnswɪmən əz ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðət səm ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ hæz lɪv sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. ði ɪfɛkt ə ðiz ɹɛvəleɪʃənz, boʊθ ɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɑn kɪnswɪmən, ɪz əz jɛɾ ə mæɾɝ fəɹ spɛkjəleɪʃən. si ɔlsoʊ dɔɾɝz ə saɪləns, ðə; nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, ðə.

Recent open contacts between Aes Sedai and Kinswomen, while known only to a handful of sisters, have produced a number of shocks, including the facts that there are twice as many Kinswomen as Aes Sedai and that some are more than a hundred years older than any Aes Sedai has lived since before the Trolloc Wars. The effect of these revelations, both on Aes Sedai and on Kinswomen, is as yet a matter for speculation. See also Daughters of Silence, the; Knitting Circle, the.

nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl, ðə: ðə liɾɝz ə ðə kɪn. sɪns noʊ mɛmbɝ ə ðə kɪn əz ɛvɝ noʊn haʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɝeɪnʒ ðɛɹ oʊn haɪɝɑɹki - nɑlədʒ pæst ɑn oʊnli wən ən æksɛptɪɾ əz pæst əɹ tɛs fəɹ ðə ʃɔl - ðeɪ pʊt noʊ stɔɹ ɪn stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə paʊɝ bʌt ɡɪv ɡɹeɪt weɪt tə eɪdʒ, wɪð ði oʊldɝ wʊmən ɔlweɪz stændɪŋ əbʌv ðə jʌŋɡɝ. ðə nɪɾɪŋ sɝkəl (ə taɪɾəl tʃoʊzən, laɪk ðə kɪn, kəz ɪts ɪnɑkjuəs) ðʌs kənsɪsts ə ðə θɝtin oʊldəs kɪnswɪmən ɹɛzəɾənt ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, wɪð ði oʊldəst ɡɪvən ðə taɪɾəl ʌv ɛldəst. baɪ ðə ɹulz, ɔl wɪl əv tə stɛp daʊn wən ɪts taɪm fəɹ əm tə muv ɑn, bʌt soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɛzəɾənt ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ, ðeɪv səpɹim əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ðə kɪn, tə ə dɪɡɹi ðəɾ ɛni æmɪɝlɪn sit wəɾ ɛnvi. si ɔlsoʊ kɪn, ðə.

Knitting Circle, the: The leaders of the Kin. Since no member of the Kin has ever known how Aes Sedai arrange their own hierarchy - knowledge passed on only when an Accepted has passed her test for the shawl - they put no store in strength in the Power but give great weight to age, with the older woman always standing above the younger. The Knitting Circle (a title chosen, like the Kin, because it is innocuous) thus consists of the thirteen oldest Kinswomen resident in Ebou Dar, with the oldest given the title of Eldest. By the rules, all will have to step down when it is time for them to move on, but so long as they are resident in Ebou Dar, they have supreme authority over the Kin, to a degree that any Amyrlin Seat would envy. See also Kin, the.

læns-kæptən: ɪn moʊs lænz, noʊbəlwɪmən də nɑt pɝsənəli lɛd ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn ɪndə bæɾəl ʌndɝ nɔɹməl sɝkəmstænsəz. ɪnstɛd, ðeɪ haɪɝ ə pɹəfɛʃənəl soʊlʒɝ, ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz ə kɑmənɝ, hu ɪz ɹispɑnsəbəl boʊθ fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ən liɾɪŋ ðɛɹ ɑɹmmɪn. dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn ðə lænd, ðɪs mæn kən bi kɔld ə læns-kæptən, sɔɹd-kæptən, mæstɝ ə ðə hɔɹs, əɹ mæstɝ ə ðə lænsɪz. ɹumɝz ə kloʊsɝ ɹileɪʃənʃɪps ðən leɪɾi ən sɝvən ɔfən spɹɪŋ ʌp, pɝhæps ɪnɛvəɾəbli. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹu.

Lance-Captain: In most lands, noblewomen do not personally lead their armsmen into battle under normal circumstances. Instead, they hire a professional soldier, almost always a commoner, who is responsible both for training and leading their armsmen. Depending on the land, this man can be called a Lance-Captain, Sword-Captain, Master of the Horse, or Master of the Lances. Rumors of closer relationships than Lady and servant often spring up, perhaps inevitably. Sometimes they are true.

lidʒən ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, ðə: ə lɑɹdʒ mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən, ɔl ɪnfəntʃɹi, ɡɪvɪŋ əlidʒəns tə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, tʃɹeɪn baɪ dævɹæm bæʃɪɹ əlɔŋ laɪnz wɝkt aʊt baɪ hɪmsɛlf ən mæt kɔθən, laɪnz wɪtʃ dɪpɑɹt ʃɑɹpli fɹəm ðə juʒəwəl ɛmplɔɪmən ə fʊt. waɪl mɛni mɛn sɪmpli wɔk ɪn tə vɑləntɪɹ, lɑɹdʒ nʌmbɝz ə ðə lidʒən ɑɹ skupt ʌp baɪ ɹəkɹuɾɪŋ pɑɹɾiz fɹəm ðə blæk taʊɝ, hu fɝst ɡæðɝ ɔl ə ðə mɛn ɪn ən ɛɹiə hu wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən oʊnli æftɝ teɪkɪŋ əm θɹu ɡeɪtweɪz tə nɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn wɪnoʊ aʊt ðoʊz u kən bi tɔt tə tʃænəl. ðə ɹɪmeɪndɝ, baɪ fɑɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ nʌmbɝ, ɑɹ sɛn tə bæʃɪɹz tʃɹeɪnɪŋ kæmps.

Legion of the Dragon, the: A large military formation, all infantry, giving allegiance to the Dragon Reborn, trained by Davram Bashere along lines worked out by himself and Mat Cauthon, lines which depart sharply from the usual employment of foot. While many men simply walk in to volunteer, large numbers of the Legion are scooped up by recruiting parties from the Black Tower, who first gather all of the men in an area who were willing to follow the Dragon Reborn, and only after taking them through gateways to near Caemlyn winnow out those who can be taught to channel. The remainder, by far the greater number, are sent to Bashere's training camps.

mɛɹəθdəmeɪn: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðoʊz u mʌs bi liʃt," ən ɔlsoʊ "wʌn u mʌs bi liʃt." ðə tɝm əplaɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə ɛni wʊmən keɪpəbəl ə tʃænəlɪŋ u hæz nɑt bɪn kɑlɝɾ əz ə deɪmeɪn.

marath'damane: In the Old Tongue, "those who must be leashed," and also "one who must be leashed." The term applied by the Seanchan to any woman capable of channeling who has not been collared as a damane.

mæstɝ ə ðə lænsɪz: si læns-kæptən.

Master of the Lances: See Lance-Captain.

mæstɝ ə ðə hɔɹs: si læns-kæptən.

Master of the Horse: See Lance-Captain.

mɛɝeɪɾɪn: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə bɹʌðɝləs." ðə neɪm ədɑptəd, əz ə səsaɪəɾi, baɪ ðoʊz il u əbændən klæn ən sɛpt ən wɛn tə ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ kəz ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ æksɛpt ɹænd ælθɹ, ə wɛtləndɝ, əz ðə kɑɹəkɑɹn, əɹ kəz ðeɪ ɹəfjuz tə æksɛpt ɪz ɹɛvəleɪʃənz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə hɪstɝi ən ɔɹədʒɪnz ə ði il. dɛzɝɾɪŋ klæn ən sɛp fəɹ ɛni ɹizən ɪz ənæθəmə əmʌŋ ði il, ðɛɹfɔɹ ðɛɹ oʊn wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz əmʌŋ ðə ʃeɪɾoʊ wɝ ənwɪlɪŋ tə teɪk əm ɪn, ən ðeɪ fɔɹm ðɪs səsaɪəɾi, ðə bɹʌðɝləs.

Mera'din: In the Old Tongue, "the Brotherless." The name adopted, as a society, by those Aiel who abandoned clan and sept and went to the Shaido because they could not accept Rand al'Thor, a wetlander, as the Car'a'carn, or because they refused to accept his revelations concerning the history and origins of the Aiel. Deserting clan and sept for any reason is anathema among the Aiel, therefore their own warrior societies among the Shaido were unwilling to take them in, and they formed this society, the Brotherless.

mɔɝæt-: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "hænlɝ." əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ɪts juz fəɹ ðoʊz u hændəl ɛɡzɑɾɪks, sətʃ əz mɔɹətʃɹeɪkən, ə ɹeɪkən hænlɝ əɹ ɹaɪɾɝ, ɔlsoʊ ɪnfɔɹməli kɔld ə flaɪɝ. si ɔlsoʊ dɝmɝæt-.

morat-: In the Old Tongue, "handler." Among the Seanchan, it is used for those who handle exotics, such as morat'raken, a raken handler or rider, also informally called a flier. See also der'morat-.

pɹɑfət, ðə: mɔɹ fɔɹməli, ðə pɹɑfəɾ ə ðə lɔɹd dʒɹæɡən. wʌns noʊn əz mæsimə dɑɡɝ, ə ʃaɪnɝən soʊlʒɝ, hi ʌndɝwɛn ə ɹɛvəleɪʃən ən dɪsaɪɾɪd ðəɾ i hæd bɪn kɔl tə spɹɛd ðə wɝɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡənz ɹibɝθ. hi bɪlivz ðət nʌθɪŋ - nʌθɪŋ! - ɪz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn əz ðə laɪt meɪd flɛʃ ən biɪŋ ɹɛɾi wən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn kɔlz, ən i ən ɪz fɑloʊɝz wɪl juz ɛni minz tə fɔɹs ʌðɝz tə sɪŋ ðə ɡlɔɹiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, fɔɹseɪkɪŋ ɛni neɪm bʌt "ðə pɹɑfət," hiz bɹɔt keɪɑs tə mʌtʃ ʌv ɡildən ən ɑmɑdɪʃiə, lɑɹdʒ pɑɹts ʌv wɪtʃ i kəntʃɹoʊlz.

Prophet, the: More formally, the Prophet of the Lord Dragon. Once known as Masema Dagar, a Shienaran soldier, he underwent a revelation and decided that he had been called to spread the word of the Dragon's Rebirth. He believes that nothing - nothing! - is more important than acknowledging the Dragon Reborn as the Light made flesh and being ready when the Dragon Reborn calls, and he and his followers will use any means to force others to sing the glories of the Dragon Reborn, Forsaking any name but "the Prophet," he has brought chaos to much of Ghealdan and Amadicia, large parts of which he controls.

ɹɪtɝn, ðə: si kɔɝɪn.

Return, the: See Corenne.

si foʊk haɪɝɑɹki: ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ðə si foʊk, ɑɹ ɹul baɪ ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps tə ði æθɑn maɪɹ. ʃiz əsɪstəd baɪ ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps, ən baɪ ðə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz. bɪloʊ ðɪs kʌm ðə klæn weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz, itʃ əsɪstəd baɪ hɝ wɪndfɪndɝ ən əɹ sɔɹdmæstɝ. bɪloʊ hɝ ɑɹ ðə seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz (ʃɪp kæptənz) ʌv əɹ klæn, itʃ əsɪstəd baɪ hɝ wɪndfɪndɝ ən əɹ kɑɹɡəmæstɝ. ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps əz əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl wɪndfɪndɝz tə klæn weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz, hu ɪn tɝn əv əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl ðə wɪndfɪndɝz ə hɝ klæn. laɪkwaɪz, ðə mæstɝ ə ðə bleɪdz əz əθɔɹəɾi oʊvɝ ɔl sɔɹdmæstɝz, ən ðeɪ ɪn tɝn oʊvɝ ðə kɑɹɡəmæstɝz ə ðɛɹ klænz. ɹæŋk ɪz nɑt hɝɛɾətɛɹi əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk. ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps ɪz tʃoʊzən, fəɹ laɪf, baɪ ðə fɝs twɛlv ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ðə twɛlv moʊst sinjɝ klæn weɪvməstʃɹɛsəz. ə klæn weɪvməstʃɹəs ɪz ɪlɛktəd baɪ ðə twɛlv sinjɝmoʊst seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz ə hɝ klæn, kɔl sɪmpli ðə fɝs twɛlv, ə tɝm wɪtʃ ɪz ɔlsoʊ juz tə dɛzəɡneɪt ðə sinjɝ seɪlməstʃɹɛsəz pɹɛzən ɛniwɛɹ. ʃi kən ɔlsoʊ bi ɹimuv baɪ ə voʊɾ ə ðoʊz seɪm fɝs twɛlv. ɪn fækt, ɛniwʌn ʌðɝ ðən ðə mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪps kən bi dɪmoʊɾɪd, ivən ɔl ðə weɪ daʊn tə dɛkhænd, fəɹ mælfizəns, kaʊɝɾəs əɹ ʌðɝ kɹaɪmz. ɔlsoʊ, ðə wɪndfɪndɝ tə ə weɪvməstʃɹəs əɹ mɪstʃɹəs ə ðə ʃɪp u daɪz wɪl, ʌv nəsɛsəɾi, hæv tə sɝv ə loʊɝ ɹæŋkɪŋ wʊmən, ən əɹ oʊn ɹæŋk ðʌs dikɹisəz.

Sea Folk hierarchy: The Atha'an Miere, the Sea Folk, are ruled by the Mistress of the Ships to the Atha'an Miere. She is assisted by the Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships, and by the Master of the Blades. Below this come the clan Wavemistresses, each assisted by her Windfinder and her Swordmaster. Below her are the Sailmistresses (ship captains) of her clan, each assisted by her Windfinder and her Cargomaster. The Windfinder to the Mistress of the Ships has authority over all Windfinders to clan Wavemistresses, who in turn have authority over all the Windfinders of her clan. Likewise, the Master of the Blades has authority over all Swordmasters, and they in turn over the Cargomasters of their clans. Rank is not hereditary among the Sea Folk. The Mistress of the Ships is chosen, for life, by the First Twelve of the Atha'an Miere, the twelve most senior clan Wavemistresses. A clan Wavemistress is elected by the twelve seniormost Sailmistresses of her clan, called simply the First Twelve, a term which is also used to designate the senior Sailmistresses present anywhere. She can also be removed by a vote of those same First Twelve. In fact, anyone other than the Mistress of the Ships can be demoted, even all the way down to deckhand, for malfeasance, cowardice or other crimes. Also, the Windfinder to a Wavemistress or Mistress of the Ship who dies will, of necessity, have to serve a lower ranking woman, and her own rank thus decreases.

siməsiv: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "loʊɝɾ aɪz," əɹ "daʊnkæst aɪz." əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, tə seɪ ðət wʌn əz "bɪkʌm siməsiv" minz ðət wʌn əz "lɔs feɪs." si ɔlsoʊ seɪaɪtɑɹ.

sei'mosiev: In the Old Tongue, "lowered eyes," or "downcast eyes." Among the Seanchan, to say that one has "become sei'mosiev" means that one has "lost face." See also sei'taer.

seɪaɪtɑɹ: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "stʃɹeɪɾ aɪz," əɹ "lɛvəl aɪz." əmʌŋ ðə sintʃæn, ɪt ɹəfɝz tə ɑnɝ əɹ feɪs, tə ði əbɪləɾi tə mit sʌmwʌnz aɪz. ɪts pɑsəbəl tə "bi" əɹ "hæv" seɪaɪtɑɹ, minɪŋ ðət wʌn əz ɑnɝ ən feɪs, ən ɔlsoʊ tə "ɡeɪn" əɹ "luz" seɪaɪtɑɹ. si ɔlsoʊ siməsiv.

sei'taer: In the Old Tongue, "straight eyes," or "level eyes." Among the Seanchan, it refers to honor or face, to the ability to meet someone's eyes. It is possible to "be" or "have" sei'taer, meaning that one has honor and face, and also to "gain" or "lose" sei'taer. See also sei'mosiev.

ʃɛn ən kɑlhɑɹ: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə bæn ə ðə ɹɛd hænd." (wʌn) ə lɛdʒəndɛɹi ɡɹup ə hɪɹoʊz u hæd mɛni ɛksplɔɪts, faɪnəli daɪɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪfɛns ə meɪnɛðɝən wən ðət lænd wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. (tu) ə mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹmeɪʃən pʊt təɡɛðɝ ɔlmoʊs baɪ æksəɾənt baɪ mæt kɔθən ən ɔɹɡənaɪzd əlɔŋ ðə laɪnz ə mɪlətɛɹi fɔɹsɪz dʊɹɪŋ wʌɾ ɪz kənsɪɾɝd ðə haɪɾ ə ðə mɪlətɛɹi ɑɹts, ðə deɪz ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ən ðə sɛntʃɝiz ɪmiɾiətli pɹisiɾɪŋ.

Shen an Calhar: In the Old Tongue, "the Band of the Red Hand." (1) A legendary group of heroes who had many exploits, finally dying in the defense of Manetheren when that land was destroyed during the Trolloc Wars. (2) A military formation put together almost by accident by Mat Cauthon and organized along the lines of military forces during what is considered the height of the military arts, the days of Artur Hawkwing and the centuries immediately preceding.

sɔɪhɪn: ðə kloʊsəs tʃɹænzleɪʃən fɹəm ði oʊl tʌŋ wəd bi "ə haɪɾ əmʌŋ loʊnəs," ðoʊ səm tʃɹænzleɪɾ ɪɾ əz minɪŋ "boʊθ skaɪ ən væli" əmʌŋ sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ pɑsəbɪləɾiz. sɔɪhɪn ɪz ðə tɝm əplaɪd baɪ ðə sintʃæn tə hɝɛɾətɛɹi ʌpɝ sɝvəns. ðeɪ ɑɹ dækoʊvæl, pɹɑpɝɾi, jɛɾ ɑkjəpaɪ pəzɪʃənz ə kənsɪɾɝəbəl əθɔɹəɾi ən ɔfən paʊɝ. ivən ðə blʌd stɛp kɛɹfəli ɝaʊn sɔɪhɪn ə ði ɪmpɪɹiəl fæmli, ən spik tə sɔɪhɪn ə ði ɛmpɹɛs hɝsɛlf əz tə ikwəlz. si ɔlsoʊ blʌd, ðə; dækoʊvæl.

so'jhin: The closest translation from the Old Tongue would be "a height among lowness," though some translate it as meaning "both sky and valley" among several other possibilities. So'jhin is the term applied by the Seanchan to hereditary upper servants. They are da'covale, property, yet occupy positions of considerable authority and often power. Even the Blood step carefully around so'jhin of the Imperial family, and speak to so'jhin of the Empress herself as to equals. See also Blood, the; da'covale.

sɔɹd-kæptən: si læns-kæptən.

Sword-Captain: See Lance-Captain.

waɪz wʊmən: ɑnɝɪfɪk juzd ɪn ɛbu dɑɹ fəɹ wɪmən feɪm fəɹ ðɛɹ ɪnkɹɛɾəbəl əbɪləɾiz ət hilɪŋ ɔlmoʊst ɛni ɪnʒɝi. eɪ waɪz wʊmən ɪz tʃɹədɪʃənəli mɑɹk baɪ ə ɹɛd bɛlt. waɪl səm əv noʊɾəd ðət mɛni, ɪndid moʊst, ɛbu dɑɹi waɪz wɪmən wɝ nɑɾ ivən fɹəm ɔltɑɹə, mʌtʃ lɛs ɛbu dɑɹ, wʌt wɑz nɑt noʊn əntɪl ɹisənli, ən stɪl ɪz noʊn oʊnli tə ə fju, ɪz ðəɾ ɔl waɪz wɪmən ɑɹ ɪn fækt kɪnswɪmən ən juz vɛɹiəs vɝʒənz ə hilɪŋ, ɡɪvɪŋ aʊɾ ɝbz ən poʊltəsəz oʊnli əz ə kʌvɝ. wɪð ðə flaɪɾ ə ðə kɪn fɹəm ɛbu dɑɹ æftɝ ðə sintʃæn tʊk ðə sɪɾi, noʊ waɪz wɪmən ɹɪmeɪn ðɛɹ. si ɔlsoʊ kɪn, ðə.

Wise Woman: Honorific used in Ebou Dar for women famed for their incredible abilities at healing almost any injury. A Wise Woman is traditionally marked by a red belt. While some have noted that many, indeed most, Ebou Dari Wise Women were not even from Altara, much less Ebou Dar, what was not known until recently, and still is known only to a few, is that all Wise Women are in fact Kinswomen and use various versions of Healing, giving out herbs and poultices only as a cover. With the flight of the Kin from Ebou Dar after the Seanchan took the city, no Wise Women remain there. See also Kin, the.

əbaʊt ði ɔθɝ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən wɑz bɔɹn ɪn naɪntinfɔɹɾieɪt ɪn tʃɑɹlstən, saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə. hi tɔt hɪmsɛlf tə ɹid wən i wɑz fɔɹ wɪð ði ɪnsɪdɛntəl eɪɾ ʌv ə twɛlv-jɪɹz-oʊldɝ bɹʌðɝ, ən wɑz tæklɪŋ mɑɹk tweɪn ən dʒulz vɝn baɪ faɪv. hi wɑz ə ɡɹædʒəwəɾ ə ðə sɪɾədɛl, ðə mɪlətɛɹi kɑlɪdʒ ə saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə, wɪð ə dɪɡɹi ɪn fɪzɪks. hi sɝv tu tʊɹz ɪn viɛtnɑm wɪð ðə juɛs. ɑɹmi; əmʌŋ ɪz dɛkɝeɪʃənz ɑɹ ðə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt flaɪɪŋ kɹɔs wɪð bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ðə bɹɑnz stɑɹ wɪð "vi" ən bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ən tu viɛtnɑmis ɡæləntʃɹi kɹɔsɪz wɪð pɑm. ə hɪstɝi bʌf, hi ɔlsoʊ ɹoʊt dæns ən θiəɾɝ kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm. hi ɛndʒɔɪd ði aʊtdɔɹ spɔɹts ə hʌntɪŋ, fɪʃɪŋ, ən seɪlɪŋ, ən ði ɪndɔɹ spɔɹts ə poʊkɝ, tʃɛs, pul, ən paɪp kəlɛktɪŋ. hi bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn naɪntinsɛvəntisɛvən ən kəntɪnjuɾ əntɪl ɪz dɛθ ɑn sɛptɛmbɝ sɪkstinθ, tuθaʊzənsɛvən.

About the Author Robert Jordan was born in 1948 in Charleston, South Carolina. He taught himself to read when he was four with the incidental aid of a twelve-years-older brother, and was tackling Mark Twain and Jules Verne by five. He was a graduate of The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina, with a degree in physics. He served two tours in Vietnam with the U.S. Army; among his decorations are the Distinguished Flying Cross with bronze oak leaf cluster, the Bronze Star with "V" and bronze oak leaf cluster, and two Vietnamese Gallantry Crosses with Palm. A history buff, he also wrote dance and theater criticism. He enjoyed the outdoor sports of hunting, fishing, and sailing, and the indoor sports of poker, chess, pool, and pipe collecting. He began writing in 1977 and continued until his death on September 16, 2007.

teɪbəl ə kɑntɛns taɪɾəl kɑpiɹaɪt dɛɾəkeɪʃən kɑntɛns mæps pɹoʊlɑɡ: snoʊ wʌn livɪŋ ðə pɹɑfət tu teɪkən θɹi kʌstəmz fɔɹ ɔfɝz faɪv flæɡz sɪks ðə sɛn ə mædnəs sɛvən ðə stʃɹits ə keɪɛmlɪn eɪt si foʊk ən kɪn naɪn eɪ kʌp ə ti tɛn eɪ plæn səksidz ɪlɛvən aɪdiəz ʌv ɪmpɔɹɾəns twɛlv eɪ lɪli ɪn wɪntɝ θɝtin wʌndɝfəl nuz fɔɹtin wʌɾ ə veɪl haɪdz fɪftin ɪn niɾ ʌv ə bɛlfndɝ sɪkstin ən ʌnɪkspɛktɪɾ ɪnkaʊntɝ sɛvəntin pɪŋk ɹɪbənz eɪtin ən ɔfɝ naɪntin θɹi wɪmən twɛnti kwɛstʃənz ə tʃɹizən twɛntiwʌn eɪ mæɾɝ ə pɹɑpɝɾi twɛntiɾu aʊɾ ə θɪn ɛɹ twɛntiθɹi tə luz ðə sʌn twɛntifɔɹ əmʌŋ ðə kaʊnsəlz twɛntifaɪv bɑnz twɛntisɪks ɛkspɛkteɪʃən twɛntisɛvən tə sɝpɹaɪz kwinz ən kɪŋz twɛntieɪt nuz ɪn ə klɔθ sæk twɛntinaɪn ənʌðɝ plæn θɝɾi koʊld, fæt ɹeɪndʒɹɑps θɝɾiwʌn wʌt ði æɛlfɪn sɛd θɝɾitu eɪ pɔɹʃən ʌv wɪzdəm θɝɾiθɹi blu kɑɹp stʃɹit θɝɾifɔɹ ðə hʌmɪŋbɝdz sikɹət θɝɾifaɪv wɪð ðə tʃoʊɾən kæl ɡlɔsɝi əbaʊt ði ɔθɝ 
Table of Contents Title Copyright Dedication Contents Maps Prologue: Snow 1 Leaving the Prophet 2 Taken 3 Customs 4 Offers 5 Flags 6 The Scent of Madness 7 The Streets of Caemlyn 8 Sea Folk and Kin 9 A Cup of Tea 10 A Plan Succeeds 11 Ideas of Importance 12 A Lily in Winter 13 Wonderful News 14 What a Veil Hides 15 In Need of a Bellfounder 16 An Unexpected Encounter 17 Pink Ribbons 18 An Offer 19 Three Women 20 Questions of Treason 21 A Matter of Property 22 Out of Thin Air 23 To Lose the Sun 24 Among the Counsels 25 Bonds 26 Expectation 27 To Surprise Queens and Kings 28 News in a Cloth Sack 29 Another Plan 30 Cold, Fat Raindrops 31 What the Aelfinn Said 32 A Portion of Wisdom 33 Blue Carp Street 34 The Hummingbird's Secret 35 With the Choedan Kal Glossary About the Author 