"ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld ɪz ðə bɛst ʌv ɪts ʒɑnɹə."

"The Eye of the World is the best of its genre."

 - ði ɑɾəwɑ sɪɾəzən "ə splɛndəd teɪl ə hɪɹoʊɪk fæntəsi, væst ɪn skoʊp, kʌlɝfəl ɪn dɪteɪl, ən kənvɪnsɪŋ ɪn ɪts pɹɛzənteɪʃən ə hjumən kɛɹɪktɝ ən pɝsənælɪɾi."

 - The Ottawa Citizen "A splendid tale of heroic fantasy, vast in scope, colorful in detail, and convincing in its presentation of human character and personality."

 - ɛl spɹeɪɡ di kæmp "ðɪs ɹɪtʃli dɪteɪl fæntəsi pɹizɛns fʊli ɹilaɪzd, kɑmplɛks ædvɛntʃɝ. ɹɛkəmɛndəd."

 - L. Sprague De Camp "This richly detailed fantasy presents fully realized, complex adventure. Recommended."

 - laɪbɹɛɹi dʒɝnəl "ðɪs wʌn ɪz əz sɑləɾ əz ə stil bleɪɾ ən ɡloʊɪŋ wɪð ðə tʃɹu mædʒɪk. ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən dɪzɝvz kənɡɹætʃəleɪʃənz."

 - Library Journal "This one is as solid as a steel blade and glowing with the true magic. Robert Jordan deserves congratulations."

 - fɹɛd seɪbɛɝhəɡən "wʌn hɛl ʌv ə stɔɹi. [ɪt] kɛp mi ʌp pæs maɪ bɛdtaɪm fəɹ θɹi naɪts ɹʌnɪŋ - ən ɪts bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm sɪns ə nɑvəlz dʌn ðæt."

 - Fred Saberhagen "One hell of a story. [It] kept me up past my bedtime for three nights running - and it's been a long time since a novel's done that."

 - bɛɹd sɔɹəlz, aɪzək æsɪmɑvz saɪəns fɪkʃən mæɡəzin "ə fjutʃɝ kəlɛktɝz aɪɾəm. dʒɔɹɾən əz bɹɔɾ aʊɾ ə kəmplitli nu æləɡɔɹi ɪn ə fæntəsi kɑnsɛp ðət ɡoʊz ivən bɪɑn ðɪs mæsɪv stɔɹi, wɝkɪŋ wɪð ən ɑɹɾəsts aɪ ən ðə sɛns ə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi ʌv ə sɪɹiəs hɪstɔɹiən."

 - Baird Searles, Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine "A future collector's item. Jordan has brought out a completely new allegory in a fantasy concept that goes even beyond this massive story, working with an artist's eye and the sense of responsibility of a serious historian."

 - ɡɔɹɾən ɑɹ dɪksən "klæsɪk ɑpəzɪʃənz ɑɹ bɹɔɾ ɪndə pleɪ: ɪnɪʃiəts vɝsəs ɪnəsəns, ɡʊd vɝsəs ivəl, ðə spɪɹɪtʃəwəl paʊɝ ʌv wɪmən vɝsəs ðəɾ ə mɛn. ðə tʃɹævəlɝz ðɛmsɛlvz ɑɹ fʊl ə sʌɾəltiz ən ʃædoʊz - ɔɹɾənɛɹi vɪlɪdʒɝz hu, θɹʌst ɪndə kɑzmɪk kɑnflɪkt, ɑɹ əneɪbəl tə əbændən ðɛɹ sɪmpəl hjumən dɪzaɪɝz ən fɪɹz.

 - Gordon R. Dickson "Classic oppositions are brought into play: initiates versus innocents, good versus evil, the spiritual power of women versus that of men. The travelers themselves are full of subtleties and shadows - ordinary villagers who, thrust into cosmic conflict, are unable to abandon their simple human desires and fears.

"ðɪs ɪntʃɹəkəɾ æləɡɔɹəkəl fæntəsi ɹikɔlz ðə wɝks ə toʊkin kəz ʌv ɪts ɪntɛnsəɾi ən wɔɹmθ."

"This intricate allegorical fantasy recalls the works of Tolkien because of its intensity and warmth."

 - pʌblɪʃɝz wikli "ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən əz kʌm tə dɑməneɪt ðə wɝl toʊkin bɪɡæn tə ɹɪvil."

 - Publishers Weekly "Robert Jordan has come to dominate the world Tolkien began to reveal."

 - ðə nu jɔɹk taɪmz "ðɪs əz mædʒɪk ən peɪsɪŋ ən dɪteɪl ən hjumən ɪnvɑlvmənt, wɪð ə sɝɾən sʌɾəlti ʌv pɹɛzənteɪʃən ən ə ɡɹæn sɛntʃɹəl vɪʒən. ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən . . . ɪz ə lɑɾ ə ɹaɪɾɝ!"

 - The New York Times "This has magic and pacing and detail and human involvement, with a certain subtlety of presentation and a grand central vision. Robert Jordan . . . is a lot of writer!"

 - pɪɹz ænθəni "æn ɪksaɪɾɪŋ stɔɹi; ðə ɹiɾɝ ɪz dʒɹɔn ɪn ɝli ən kɛp ðəɹ əntɪl ðə læs peɪdʒ. ðəɹ ɪz ædvɛntʃɝ ən mɪstɝi ən dɑɹk θɪŋz ðət muv ɪn ðə naɪt - ə kɑmbəneɪʃən ə ɹɑbən hʊɾ ən stivən kɪŋ ðəɾ ɪz hɑɹd tə ɹɪzɪst. . . . dʒɔɹɾən meɪks ðə ɹiɾɝ kɛɹ əbaʊt ðiz kæɹɪktɝz əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ oʊl fɹɛnz; soʊ mʌtʃ soʊ ðət ðə ɹiɾɝ wɪl pʊt daʊn ðə bʊk ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðə weɪt fəɹ ðə nɛks taɪɾəl ɪn ðə sɪɹiz."

 - Piers Anthony "An exciting story; the reader is drawn in early and kept there until the last page. There is adventure and mystery and dark things that move in the night - a combination of Robin Hood and Stephen King that is hard to resist. . . . Jordan makes the reader care about these characters as though they were old friends; so much so that the reader will put down the book regretting the wait for the next title in the series."

 - mɪlwɔki sɛntənəl "ə klæsɪk fæntəsi teɪl ə ðə stʃɹʌɡəl bɪtwin laɪɾ ən dɑɹknəs, ɡʊɾ ən ivəl, dɛθ ən laɪf. ɡʊdnəs, laɪf, ən laɪɾ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz ɪn ɹitʃɹit, ɔlweɪz əbaʊt tə bi dɪfiɾəd, bʌt nɛvɝ kwaɪt! doʊn mɪs ɪt!"

 - Milwaukee Sentinel "A classic fantasy tale of the struggle between light and darkness, good and evil, death and life. Goodness, life, and light are always in retreat, always about to be defeated, but never quite! Don't miss it!"

 - ænʒɹu ɛm ɡɹili "sɝɾənli ə taɪɾəl aɪ wɑnə æd tə maɪ pɝmənən kəlɛkʃən ən aɪ ʃæl bi iɡɝli əweɪɾɪŋ ðə sikwəl wɪtʃ ɪz pɹɑməst ət ði ɛnd."

 - Andrew M. Greeley "Certainly a title I want to add to my permanent collection and I shall be eagerly awaiting the sequel which is promised at the end."

 - ɑndʒɹeɪ nɔɹɾən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən eɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts bʊknu jɔɹk ðɪs ɪz ə wɝk ə fɪkʃən. ɔl ə ðə kæɹɪktɝz, ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃənz, ən ɪvɛns pɔɹtʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ðɪs nɑvəl ɑɹ iðɝ pɹɑɾəkts ə ði ɔθɝz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən əɹ ɑɹ juz fɪktɪʃəsli.

 - Andre Norton THE EYE OF THE WORLD ROBERT JORDAN A TOM DOHERTY ASSOCIATES BOOKNEW YORK This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.

ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl kɑpiɹaɪt  naɪntinnaɪnti baɪ ðə bændɝsnætʃ ɡɹup, ɪŋk.

THE EYE OF THE WORLD Copyright  1990 by The Bandersnatch Group, Inc.

ðə fɹeɪzəz "ðə wil ə taɪm" ən "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn," ən ðə sneɪk-wil sɪmbəl, ɑɹ tʃɹeɪdmɑɹks ə ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən.

The phrases "The Wheel of Time" and "The Dragon Reborn," and the snake-wheel symbol, are trademarks of Robert Jordan.

ɔl ɹaɪts ɹɪzɝvd.

All rights reserved.

fɹʌntispis baɪ deɪvɪd ɡɹoʊv mæps baɪ ɛlisə mɪtʃəl ən tɑməs kænti ɪntɪɹiɝ ɪləstʃɹeɪʃənz baɪ mæθju si nilsən eɪ tɔɹ bʊk pʌblɪʃt baɪ tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts,  wʌnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntifaɪv fɪfθ ævənu nu jɔɹk, nujɔɹk wʌnzɪɹoʊzɪɹoʊwʌnzɪɹoʊ

Frontispiece by David Grove Maps by Ellisa Mitchell and Thomas Canty Interior illustrations by Matthew C. Nielsen A Tor Book Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC 175 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10010

wwwtɔɹ-fɔɹdʒkɑm tɔɹ ɪz ə ɹɛdʒəstɝd tʃɹeɪdmɑɹk ə tɑm doʊɝɾi əsoʊsiɪts, .

www.tor-forge.com Tor is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.

 naɪnsɛvəneɪt-wʌn-fɔɹθaʊzəntuhʌndʒɹədnaɪntinaɪn-faɪvnaɪneɪtwʌn-zɪɹoʊ

ISBN 978-1-4299-5981-0

fɝst ədɪʃən: fɛbjəwɛɹi naɪntinnaɪnti

First Edition: February 1990

fɝst i-bʊk ədɪʃən: ɑktoʊbɝ tuθaʊzəndnaɪn

First E-book Edition: October 2009

mænjəfæktʃɝɾ ɪn ðə junaɪɾəd steɪts ʌv əmɛɹəkə tə hɛɹiət hɑɹɾ ə maɪ hɑɹt, laɪɾ ə maɪ laɪf, fɝɛvɝ.

Manufactured in the United States of America To Harriet Heart of my heart, Light of my life, Forever.

kɑntɛns pɹoʊlɑɡ dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊn mæps wʌn ən ɛmpti ɹoʊd tu stʃɹeɪnʒɝz θɹi ðə pɛdlɝ fɔɹ ðə ɡlimən faɪv wɪntɝnaɪt sɪks ðə wɛstwʊd sɛvən aʊɾ ə ðə wʊdz eɪɾ eɪ pleɪs ə seɪfti naɪn tɛlɪŋz ə ðə wil tɛn livɛteɪkɪŋ ɪlɛvən ðə ɹoʊd tə tɛɹən fɛɹi twɛlv əkɹɔs ðə tɛɹən θɝtin tʃɔɪsəz fɔɹtin ðə stæɡ ən laɪən fɪftin stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ən fɹɛnz sɪkstin ðə wɪzdəm sɛvəntin wɑtʃɝz ən hʌntɝz eɪtin ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd naɪntin ʃædoʊz weɪɾɪŋ twɛnti dʌst ɑn ðə wɪn twɛntiwʌn lɪsən tə ðə wɪn twɛntiɾu eɪ pæθ tʃoʊzən twɛntiθɹi wʊlfbɹəðɝ twɛntifɔɹ flaɪt daʊn ði ɑɹɪnɛl twɛntifaɪv ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl twɛntisɪks waɪtbɹɪdʒ twɛntisɛvən ʃɛltɝ fɹəm ðə stɔɹm twɛntieɪt fʊtpɹɪns ɪn ɛɹ twɛntinaɪn aɪz wɪθaʊt pɪɾi θɝɾi tʃɪlʒɹən ə ʃædoʊ θɝɾiwʌn pleɪ fəɹ jəɹ sʌpɝ θɝɾitu fɔɹ kɪŋz ɪn ʃædoʊ θɝɾiθɹi ðə dɑɹk weɪts θɝɾifɔɹ ðə læs vɪlədʒ θɝɾifaɪv keɪɛmlɪn θɝɾisɪks wɛb ə ðə pæɾɝn θɝɾisɛvən ðə lɔŋ tʃeɪs θɝɾieɪt ɹɛskju θɝɾinaɪn wivɪŋ ə ðə wɛb fɔɹɾi ðə wɛb taɪɾənz fɔɹɾiwʌn oʊl fɹɛnz ən nu θɹɛts fɔɹɾitu ɹimɛmbɹəns ə dʒɹimz fɔɹɾiθɹi dɪsɪʒənz ən æpɹɪʃənz fɔɹɾifɔɹ ðə dɑɹk əlɔŋ ðə weɪz fɔɹɾifaɪv wʌt fɑloʊz ɪn ʃædoʊ fɔɹɾisɪks fæl dæɹə fɔɹɾisɛvən mɔɹ teɪlz ə ðə wil fɔɹɾieɪt ðə blaɪt fɔɹɾinaɪn ðə dɑɹk wʌn stɝz fɪfti miɾɪŋz ət ði aɪ fɪftiwʌn əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ fɪftiɾu ðəɹ ɪz niðɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋ nɔɹ ɛn fɪftiθɹi ðə wil tɝnz ɡlɔsɝi 
CONTENTS PROLOGUE Dragonmount MAPS 1 An Empty Road 2 Strangers 3 The Peddler 4 The Gleeman 5 Winternight 6 The Westwood 7 Out of the Woods 8 A Place of Safety 9 Tellings of the Wheel 10 Leavetaking 11 The Road to Taren Ferry 12 Across the Taren 13 Choices 14 The Stag and Lion 15 Strangers and Friends 16 The Wisdom 17 Watchers and Hunters 18 The Caemlyn Road 19 Shadow's Waiting 20 Dust on the Wind 21 Listen to the Wind 22 A Path Chosen 23 Wolfbrother 24 Flight Down the Arinelle 25 The Traveling People 26 Whitebridge 27 Shelter From the Storm 28 Footprints in Air 29 Eyes Without Pity 30 Children of Shadow 31 Play for Your Supper 32 Four Kings in Shadow 33 The Dark Waits 34 The Last Village 35 Caemlyn 36 Web of the Pattern 37 The Long Chase 38 Rescue 39 Weaving of the Web 40 The Web Tightens 41 Old Friends and New Threats 42 Remembrance of Dreams 43 Decisions and Apparitions 44 The Dark Along the Ways 45 What Follows in Shadow 46 Fal Dara 47 More Tales of the Wheel 48 The Blight 49 The Dark One Stirs 50 Meetings at the Eye 51 Against the Shadow 52 There Is Neither Beginning Nor End 53 The Wheel Turns GLOSSARY 
pɹoʊlɑɡ dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt



PROLOGUE Dragonmount

ðə pæləs stɪl ʃʊk əkeɪʒənəli əz ði ɝθ ɹʌmbəld ɪn mɛmɹi, ɡɹoʊn əz ɪf ɪt wəd dɪnaɪ wʌt hæd hæpənd. bɑɹz ə sʌnlaɪt kæs θɹu ɹɛns ɪn ðə wɔlz meɪd moʊts ə dʌst ɡlɪɾɝ wɛɹ ðeɪ jɛt hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. skɔɹk-mɑɹks mɑɹd ðə wɔlz, ðə flɔɹz, ðə silɪŋz. bɹɔd blæk smɪɹz kɹɔs ðə blɪstɝd peɪns ən ɡɪlt ʌv wʌns-bɹaɪt mjʊɹəlz, sʊɾ oʊvɝleɪɪŋ kɹʌmbəlɪŋ fɹizɪz ə mɛn ən ænəməlz wɪtʃ sim tə hæv ətɛmptəd tə wɔk bɪfɔɹ ðə mædnəs ɡɹu kwaɪət. ðə dɛd leɪ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, mɛn ən wɪmən ən tʃɪlʒɹən, stʃɹʌk daʊn ɪn ətɛmptəd flaɪt baɪ ðə laɪtnɪŋz ðət hæd flæʃt daʊn ɛvɹi kɔɹəɾɝ, əɹ siz baɪ ðə faɪɝz ðət hæd stɔk ðɛm, əɹ sʌŋkən ɪndə stoʊn ə ðə pæləs, ðə stoʊnz ðət hæd floʊɾ ən sɔt, ɔlmoʊst əlaɪv, bɪfɔɹ stɪlnəs keɪm əɡɛn. ɪn ɑd kaʊntɝpɔɪnt, kʌlɝfəl tæpəstʃɹiz ən peɪntɪŋz, mæstɝwɝks ɔl, hʌŋ ʌndɪstɝbd ɪksɛpt wɛɹ bʌlʒɪŋ wɔlz hæd pʊʃt əm ɝaɪ. faɪnli kɑɹv fɝnɪʃɪŋz, ɪnleɪd wɪð aɪvɝi ən ɡoʊld, stʊɾ əntʌtʃt ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ɹɪpəlɪŋ flɔɹz hæd tɑpəl ðɛm. ðə maɪnd-twɪstɪŋ hæd stʃɹʌk ət ðə kɔɹ, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ pɝɪfɝəl θɪŋz.

The palace still shook occasionally as the earth rumbled in memory, groaned as if it would deny what had happened. Bars of sunlight cast through rents in the walls made motes of dust glitter where they yet hung in the air. Scorch-marks marred the walls, the floors, the ceilings. Broad black smears crossed the blistered paints and gilt of once-bright murals, soot overlaying crumbling friezes of men and animals which seemed to have attempted to walk before the madness grew quiet. The dead lay everywhere, men and women and children, struck down in attempted flight by the lightnings that had flashed down every corridor, or seized by the fires that had stalked them, or sunken into stone of the palace, the stones that had flowed and sought, almost alive, before stillness came again. In odd counterpoint, colorful tapestries and paintings, masterworks all, hung undisturbed except where bulging walls had pushed them awry. Finely carved furnishings, inlaid with ivory and gold, stood untouched except where rippling floors had toppled them. The mind-twisting had struck at the core, ignoring peripheral things.

luz θɝɪn tɛləmən wɑndɝd ðə pæləs, dɛfli kipɪŋ ɪz bæləns wən ði ɝθ hivd. "aɪlaɪɛnə! maɪ lʌv, wɛɹ ɑɹ ju?" ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz peɪl ɡɹeɪ kloʊk tʃɹeɪl θɹu blʌɾ əz i stɛpt əkɹɔs ðə bɑɾi ʌv ə wʊmən, hɝ ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd bjuɾi mɑɹd baɪ ðə hɔɹɝ ə hɝ læs moʊməns, hɝ stɪl-oʊpən aɪz fɹoʊzən ɪn dɪsbɪlif. "wɛɹ ɑɹ ju, maɪ waɪf? wɛɹ ɪz ɛvɹiwʌn haɪɾɪŋ?"

Lews Therin Telamon wandered the palace, deftly keeping his balance when the earth heaved. "Ilyena! My love, where are you?" The edge of his pale gray cloak trailed through blood as he stepped across the body of a woman, her golden-haired beauty marred by the horror of her last moments, her still-open eyes frozen in disbelief. "Where are you, my wife? Where is everyone hiding?"

hɪz aɪz kɑɾ ɪz oʊn ɹəflɛkʃən ɪn ə mɪɹɝ hæŋɪŋ əskju fɹəm bʌbəl mɑɹbəl. hɪz kloʊðz hæd bɪn ɹiɡəl wʌns, ɪn ɡɹeɪ ən skɑɹləɾ ən ɡoʊld; naʊ ðə faɪnli-woʊvən klɔθ, bɹɔt baɪ mɝtʃəns fɹəm əkɹɔs ðə wɝl si, wɑz tɔɹn ən dɝɾi, θɪk wɪð ðə seɪm dʌs ðət kʌvɝɾ ɪz hɛɹ ən skɪn. fəɹ ə moʊmən i fɪŋɡɝd ðə sɪmbəl ɑn ɪz kloʊk, ə sɝkəl hæf waɪɾ ən hæf blæk, ðə kʌlɝz sɛpɝeɪɾəd baɪ ə sɪnwəs laɪn. ɪt mɛn sʌmθɪŋ, ðət sɪmbəl. bʌt ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd sɝkəl kəd nɑt hoʊld ɪz ətɛnʃən lɔŋ. hi ɡeɪzd əɾ ɪz oʊn ɪmədʒ wɪð əz mʌtʃ wʌndɝ. ə tɔl mæn dʒʌst ɪndə hɪz mɪɾəl jɪɹz, hænsəm wʌns, bʌt naʊ wɪð hɛɹ ɔlɹɛɾi mɔɹ waɪt ðən bɹaʊn ən ə feɪs laɪn baɪ stʃɹeɪn ən wɝi, dɑɹk aɪz ðət hæd sin tu mʌtʃ. luz θɝɪn bɪɡæn tə tʃʌkəl, ðən θɹu bæk ɪz hɛd; hɪz læftɝ ɛkoʊd daʊn ðə laɪfləs hɔlz.

His eyes caught his own reflection in a mirror hanging askew from bubbled marble. His clothes had been regal once, in gray and scarlet and gold; now the finely-woven cloth, brought by merchants from across the World Sea, was torn and dirty, thick with the same dust that covered his hair and skin. For a moment he fingered the symbol on his cloak, a circle half white and half black, the colors separated by a sinuous line. It meant something, that symbol. But the embroidered circle could not hold his attention long. He gazed at his own image with as much wonder. A tall man just into his middle years, handsome once, but now with hair already more white than brown and a face lined by strain and worry, dark eyes that had seen too much. Lews Therin began to chuckle, then threw back his head; his laughter echoed down the lifeless halls.

"aɪlaɪɛnə, maɪ lʌv! kʌm tə mi, maɪ waɪf. jə mʌst si ðɪs."

"Ilyena, my love! Come to me, my wife. You must see this."

bɪhaɪn ɪm ði ɛɹ ɹɪpəld, ʃɪmɝd, səlɪɾəfaɪd ɪndə ə mæn u lʊkt ɝaʊnd, hɪz maʊθ twɪstɪŋ bɹifli wɪð dɪsteɪst. nɑt soʊ tɔl əz luz θɝɪn, hi wɑz kloʊðd ɔl ɪn blæk, seɪv fəɹ ðə snoʊ-waɪt leɪs əɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən ðə sɪlvɝwɝk ɑn ðə tɝnd-daʊn tɑps ə hɪz θaɪ-haɪ buts. hi stɛp kɛɹfəli, hænlɪŋ ɪz kloʊk fæstɪɾiəsli tə əvɔɪd bɹʌʃɪŋ ðə dɛd. ðə flɔɹ tʃɹɛmbəld wɪð æftɝʃɑks, bʌɾ ɪz ətɛnʃən wɑz fɪkst ɑn ðə mæn stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə mɪɹɝ ən læfɪŋ.

Behind him the air rippled, shimmered, solidified into a man who looked around, his mouth twisting briefly with distaste. Not so tall as Lews Therin, he was clothed all in black, save for the snow-white lace at his throat and the silverwork on the turned-down tops of his thigh-high boots. He stepped carefully, handling his cloak fastidiously to avoid brushing the dead. The floor trembled with aftershocks, but his attention was fixed on the man staring into the mirror and laughing.

"lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ," hi sɛd, "aɪ hæv kʌm fəɹ ju."

"Lord of the Morning," he said, "I have come for you."

ðə læftɝ kʌɾ ɔf əz ɪf ɪt hæd nɛvɝ bɪn, ən luz θɝɪn tɝnd, simɪŋ ənsɝpɹaɪzd. "ɑ, ə ɡɛst. hæv jə ðə vɔɪs, stʃɹeɪnʒɝ? ɪɾəl sun bi taɪm fəɹ ðə sɪŋɪŋ, ən hɪɹ ɔl ɑɹ wɛlkəm tə teɪk pɑɹt. aɪlaɪɛnə, maɪ lʌv, wɪv ə ɡɛst. aɪlaɪɛnə, wɛɹ ɑɹ ju?"

The laughter cut off as if it had never been, and Lews Therin turned, seeming unsurprised. "Ah, a guest. Have you the Voice, stranger? It will soon be time for the Singing, and here all are welcome to take part. Ilyena, my love, we have a guest. Ilyena, where are you?"

ðə blæk-klæd mænz aɪz waɪɾənd, dɑɹɾɪd tə ðə bɑɾi ʌv ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən, ðən bæk tə luz θɝɪn. "ʃeɪtɑn teɪk ju, dʌz ðə teɪn ɔlɹɛɾi hæv jə soʊ fɑɹ ɪn ɪts ɡɹɪp?"

The black-clad man's eyes widened, darted to the body of the golden-haired woman, then back to Lews Therin. "Shai'tan take you, does the taint already have you so far in its grip?"

"ðæt neɪm. ʃaɪ - " luz θɝɪn ʃʌɾɝəd ən ɹeɪzd ə hæn əz ðoʊ tə wɔɹɾ ɔf sʌmθɪŋ. "ju mʌsnt seɪ ðət neɪm. ɪts deɪnʒɝəs."

"That name. Shai - " Lews Therin shuddered and raised a hand as though to ward off something. "You mustn't say that name. It is dangerous."

"soʊ jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət mʌtʃ, ət list. deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ ju, ful, nɑt fəɹ mi. wʌɾ ɛls dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ? ɹɪmɛmbɝ, jə laɪt-blaɪndɪɾ ɪɾiət! əl nɑt lɛɾ ɪɾ ɛnd wɪð jə swɑɾəld ɪn ənəwɛɹnəs! ɹɪmɛmbɝ!"

"So you remember that much, at least. Dangerous for you, fool, not for me. What else do you remember? Remember, you Light-blinded idiot! I will not let it end with you swaddled in unawareness! Remember!"

fəɹ ə moʊmən luz θɝɪn stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz ɹeɪz hænd, fæsəneɪɾəd baɪ ðə pæɾɝnz ʌv ɡɹaɪm. ðən i waɪpt ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz ivən dɝɾiɝ koʊɾ ən tɝn ɪz ətɛnʃən bæk tə ði ʌðɝ mæn. "hu ɑɹ ju? wʌt dʒju wɑnt?"

For a moment Lews Therin stared at his raised hand, fascinated by the patterns of grime. Then he wiped his hand on his even dirtier coat and turned his attention back to the other man. "Who are you? What do you want?"

ðə blæk-klæd mæn dʒɹu hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɛɹəɡənli. "wʌns aɪ wɑz kɔld ilən mɔɹɪn tɛdʒɹənaɪ, bʌt naʊ - "

The black-clad man drew himself up arrogantly. "Once I was called Elan Morin Tedronai, but now - "

"bɪtʃɹeɪɝ ə hoʊp." ɪt wɑz ə wɪspɝ fɹəm luz θɝɪn. mɛmɹi stɝd, bʌɾ i tɝn ɪz hɛd, ʃaɪɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɪt.

"Betrayer of Hope." It was a whisper from Lews Therin. Memory stirred, but he turned his head, shying away from it.

"soʊ jə də ɹɪmɛmbɝ səm θɪŋz. jɛs, bɪtʃɹeɪɝ ə hoʊp. soʊ hæv mɛn neɪmd mi, dʒʌst əz ðeɪ neɪm jə dʒɹæɡən, bʌɾ ənlaɪk jə aɪ ɛmbɹeɪs ðə neɪm. ðeɪ ɡeɪv mi ðə neɪm tə ɹɛvaɪl mi, bʌɾ əl jɛt meɪk əm nil ən wɝʃəp ɪt. wʌt wɪl jə də wɪð jəɹ neɪm? æftɝ ðɪs deɪ, mɛn wɪl kɔl jə kɪnsleɪɝ. wʌt wɪl jə də wɪð ðæt?"

"So you do remember some things. Yes, Betrayer of Hope. So have men named me, just as they named you Dragon, but unlike you I embrace the name. They gave me the name to revile me, but I will yet make them kneel and worship it. What will you do with your name? After this day, men will call you Kinslayer. What will you do with that?"

luz θɝɪn fɹaʊn daʊn ðə ɹuən hɔl. "aɪlaɪɛnə ʃəd bi hɪɹ tə ɔfɝ ə ɡɛst wɛlkəm," hi mɝmɝɾ æbsənli, ðən ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs. "aɪlaɪɛnə, wɛɹ ɑɹ ju?" ðə flɔɹ ʃʊk; ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmənz bɑɾi ʃɪftəɾ əz ɪf ɪn ænsɝ tə hɪz kɔl. hɪz aɪz dɪd nɑt si hɝ.

Lews Therin frowned down the ruined hall. "Ilyena should be here to offer a guest welcome," he murmured absently, then raised his voice. "Ilyena, where are you?" The floor shook; the golden-haired woman's body shifted as if in answer to his call. His eyes did not see her.

ilən mɔɹɪn ɡɹɪməst. "lʊk ət ju," hi sɛd skɔɹnfəli. "wʌns jə stʊd fɝst əmʌŋ ðə sɝvəns. wʌns jə wɔɹ ðə ɹɪŋ ə tæmɪɝlɪn, ən sæɾ ɪn ðə haɪ sit. wʌns jə sʌmən ðə naɪn ɹɑdz ə dəmɪnjən. naʊ lʊk ət ju! ə pɪɾəfəl, ʃæɾɝd ɹɛtʃ. bʌɾ ɪts nɑɾ ɪnʌf. jə hʌmbəl mi ɪn ðə hɔl ə sɝvəns. jə dɪfiɾəd mi ət ðə ɡeɪts ə pɑɝən dɪsən. bʌɾ aɪm ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ, naʊ. əl nɑt lɛt jə daɪ wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ ðæt. wən jə daɪ, jəɹ læs θɔt wɪl bi ðə fʊl nɑlədʒ ə jəɹ dɪfit, ʌv haʊ kəmpliɾ ən ʌɾɝ ɪɾ ɪz. ɪf aɪ lɛt jə daɪ əɾ ɔl."

Elan Morin grimaced. "Look at you," he said scornfully. "Once you stood first among the Servants. Once you wore the Ring of Tamyrlin, and sat in the High Seat. Once you summoned the Nine Rods of Dominion. Now look at you! A pitiful, shattered wretch. But it is not enough. You humbled me in the Hall of Servants. You defeated me at the Gates of Paaran Disen. But I am the greater, now. I will not let you die without knowing that. When you die, your last thought will be the full knowledge of your defeat, of how complete and utter it is. If I let you die at all."

"aɪ kænɑɾ ɪmædʒən wʌɾ ɪz kipɪŋ aɪlaɪɛnə. ʃɪl ɡɪmi ðə ɹʌf saɪɾ ə hɝ tʌŋ ɪf ʃi θɪŋks aɪ hæv bɪn haɪɾɪŋ ə ɡɛs fɹəm hɝ. aɪ hoʊp jə ɛndʒɔɪ kɑnvɝseɪʃən, fəɹ ʃi ʃʊɹli dʌz. bi fɔɹwɔɹnd. aɪlaɪɛnə wɪl æsk jə soʊ mɛni kwɛstʃənz jə meɪ ɛn ʌp tɛlɪŋ əɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ jə noʊ."

"I cannot imagine what is keeping Ilyena. She will give me the rough side of her tongue if she thinks I have been hiding a guest from her. I hope you enjoy conversation, for she surely does. Be forewarned. Ilyena will ask you so many questions you may end up telling her everything you know."

tɔsɪŋ bæk ɪz blæk kloʊk, ilən mɔɹɪn flɛkst ɪz hænz. "ə pɪɾi fəɹ ju," hi mjuzd, "ðæt wʌn ə jəɹ sɪstɝz ɪz nɑt hɪɹ. aɪ wɑz nɛvɝ vɛɹi skɪld ət hilɪŋ, ən aɪ fɑloʊ ə dɪfɹən paʊɝ naʊ. bʌɾ ivən wʌn ə ðɛm kəɾ oʊnli ɡɪv jə ə fju lusəd mɪnəts, ɪf jə dɪd nɑt dɪstʃɹɔɪ hɝ fɝst. wʌɾ aɪ kən də wɪl sɝv əz wɛl, fəɹ maɪ pɝpəsəz." hɪz sʌɾən smaɪl wɑz kɹuəl. "bʌɾ aɪ fɪɹ ʃeɪtɑnz hilɪŋ ɪz dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə sɔɹt jə noʊ. bi hild, luz θɝɪn!" hi ɪkstɛndəɾ ɪz hænz, ən ðə laɪt dɪmd əz ɪf ə ʃædoʊ hæd bɪn leɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə sʌn.

Tossing back his black cloak, Elan Morin flexed his hands. "A pity for you," he mused, "that one of your Sisters is not here. I was never very skilled at Healing, and I follow a different power now. But even one of them could only give you a few lucid minutes, if you did not destroy her first. What I can do will serve as well, for my purposes." His sudden smile was cruel. "But I fear Shai'tan's healing is different from the sort you know. Be healed, Lews Therin!" He extended his hands, and the light dimmed as if a shadow had been laid across the sun.

peɪn bleɪzd ɪn luz θɝɪn, ən i skɹimd, ə skɹim ðət keɪm fɹəm ɪz dɛpθs, ə skɹim i kəd nɑt stɑp. faɪɝ sɪɹɾ ɪz mɛɹoʊ; æsəd ɹʌʃt əlɔŋ ɪz veɪnz. hi tɑpəl bækwɝdz, kɹæʃɪŋ tə ðə mɑɹbəl flɔɹ; hɪz hɛd stʃɹʌk ðə stoʊn ən ɹɪbaʊndɪd. hɪz hɑɹt paʊndɪd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə biɾ ɪts weɪ aʊɾ ə hɪz tʃɛst, ən ɛvɹi pʌls ɡʌʃt nu fleɪm θɹu hɪm. hɛlpləsli hi kənvʌlsd, θɹæʃɪŋ, hɪz skʌl ə sfɪɹ ə pjʊɹəst æɡəni ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə bɝstɪŋ. hɪz hɔɹs skɹimz ɹɪvɝbɝeɪɾɪd θɹu ðə pæləs.

Pain blazed in Lews Therin, and he screamed, a scream that came from his depths, a scream he could not stop. Fire seared his marrow; acid rushed along his veins. He toppled backwards, crashing to the marble floor; his head struck the stone and rebounded. His heart pounded, trying to beat its way out of his chest, and every pulse gushed new flame through him. Helplessly he convulsed, thrashing, his skull a sphere of purest agony on the point of bursting. His hoarse screams reverberated through the palace.

sloʊli, ɛvɝ soʊ sloʊli, ðə peɪn ɹəsiɾəd. ði aʊtfloʊɪŋ sim tə teɪk ə θaʊzən jɪɹz ən lɛft ɪm twɪtʃɪŋ wikli, sʌkɪŋ bɹɛθ θɹu ə ɹɔ θɹoʊt. ənʌðɝ θaʊzən jɪɹz sim tə pæs bɪfɔɹ i kəd mænədʒ tə hiv hɪmsɛlf oʊvɝ, mʌsəlz laɪk dʒɛlifɪʃ, ən ʃɑkəli pʊʃ hɪmsɛlf ʌp ɑn hænz ən niz. hɪz aɪz fɛl ɑn ðə ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd wʊmən, ən ðə skɹim ðət wɑz ɹɪpt aʊɾ ə hɪm dwɔɹft ɛvɹi saʊn i hæd meɪd bɪfɔɹ. tɑɾɝɪŋ, ɔlmoʊs fɔlɪŋ, hi skɹæbəl bɹoʊkənli əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ tə hɝ. ɪt tʊk ɛvɹi bɪɾ ə hɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ tə pʊl əɹ ʌp ɪndə hɪz ɑɹmz. hɪz hænz ʃʊk əz i smuðd əɹ hɛɹ bæk fɹəm əɹ stɛɹɪŋ feɪs.

Slowly, ever so slowly, the pain receded. The outflowing seemed to take a thousand years and left him twitching weakly, sucking breath through a raw throat. Another thousand years seemed to pass before he could manage to heave himself over, muscles like jellyfish, and shakily push himself up on hands and knees. His eyes fell on the golden-haired woman, and the scream that was ripped out of him dwarfed every sound he had made before. Tottering, almost falling, he scrabbled brokenly across the floor to her. It took every bit of his strength to pull her up into his arms. His hands shook as he smoothed her hair back from her staring face.

"aɪlaɪɛnə! laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪlaɪɛnə!" hɪz bɑɾi kɝvd ɝaʊn hɝz pɹoʊtɛktɪvli, hɪz sɑbz ðə fʊl-θɹoʊɾɪd kɹaɪz ʌv ə mæn u hæd nʌθɪŋ lɛf tə lɪv fɔɹ. "aɪlaɪɛnə, noʊ! noʊ!"

"Ilyena! Light help me, Ilyena!" His body curved around hers protectively, his sobs the full-throated cries of a man who had nothing left to live for. "Ilyena, no! No!"

"ju kən əv əɹ bæk, kɪnsleɪɝ. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk kən meɪk əɹ lɪv əɡɛn, ɪf jəl sɝv hɪm. ɪf jəl sɝv mi."

"You can have her back, Kinslayer. The Great Lord of the Dark can make her live again, if you will serve him. If you will serve me."

luz θɝɪn ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd, ən ðə blæk-klæd mæn tʊk ən ɪnvɑləntɛɹi stɛp bæk fɹəm ðət ɡeɪz. "tɛn jɪɹz, bɪtʃɹeɪɝ," luz θɝɪn sɛd sɔfli, ðə sɑf saʊn ə stil biɪŋ bɛɹd. "tɛn jɪɹz jəɹ faʊl mæstɝ əz ɹæk ðə wɝld. ən naʊ ðɪs. aɪ wɪl. . . ."

Lews Therin raised his head, and the black-clad man took an involuntary step back from that gaze. "Ten years, Betrayer," Lews Therin said softly, the soft sound of steel being bared. "Ten years your foul master has wracked the world. And now this. I will. . . ."

"tɛn jɪɹz! jə pɪɾəfəl ful! ðɪs wɔɹ əz nɑt læstəd tɛn jɪɹz, bʌt sɪns ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə taɪm. jə ən aɪ hæv fɔɾ ə θaʊzən bæɾəlz wɪð ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil, ə θaʊzən taɪmz ə θaʊzənd, ən wɪl faɪɾ əntɪl taɪm daɪz ən ðə ʃædoʊ ɪz tʃɹaɪʌmfənt!" hi fɪnɪʃt ɪn ə ʃaʊt, wɪð ə ɹeɪz fɪst, ən ɪt wɑz luz θɝɪnz tɝn tə pʊl bæk, bɹɛθ kætʃɪŋ ət ðə ɡloʊ ɪn ðə bɪtʃɹeɪɝz aɪz.

"Ten years! You pitiful fool! This war has not lasted ten years, but since the beginning of time. You and I have fought a thousand battles with the turning of the Wheel, a thousand times a thousand, and we will fight until time dies and the Shadow is triumphant!" He finished in a shout, with a raised fist, and it was Lews Therin's turn to pull back, breath catching at the glow in the Betrayer's eyes.

kɛɹfəli luz θɝɪn leɪɾ aɪlaɪɛnə daʊn, fɪŋɡɝz dʒɛnli bɹʌʃɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ. tɪɹz blɝɾ ɪz vɪʒən əz i stʊd, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs wɑz aɪst aɪɝn. "fɔɹ wʌɾ ɛls juv dʌn, ðəɹ kən bi noʊ fɝɡɪvnəs, bɪtʃɹeɪɝ, bʌt fəɹ aɪlaɪɛnəz dɛθ əl dɪstʃɹɔɪ jə bɪɑn ɛniθɪŋ jəɹ mæstɝ kən ɹɪpɛɹ. pɹipɛɹ tə - "

Carefully Lews Therin laid Ilyena down, fingers gently brushing her hair. Tears blurred his vision as he stood, but his voice was iced iron. "For what else you have done, there can be no forgiveness, Betrayer, but for Ilyena's death I will destroy you beyond anything your master can repair. Prepare to - "

"ɹɪmɛmbɝ, jə ful! ɹɪmɛmbɝ jəɹ fjuɾəl ətæk ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk! ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪz kaʊntɝstʃɹoʊk! ɹɪmɛmbɝ! ivən naʊ ðə hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz ɑɹ tɛɹɪŋ ðə wɝld əpɑɹt, ən ɛvɹi deɪ ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn mɔɹ dʒɔɪn ðɛm. wʌt hæn slu aɪlaɪɛnə sʌnhɛɹ, kɪnsleɪɝ? nɑt maɪn. nɑt maɪn. wʌt hæn stʃɹʌk daʊn ɛvɹi laɪf ðət bɔɹ ə dʒɹɑp ə jəɹ blʌd, ɛvɹiwʌn u lʌv ju, ɛvɹiwʌn jə lʌvd? nɑt maɪn, kɪnsleɪɝ. nɑt maɪn. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ən noʊ ðə pɹaɪs ʌv əpoʊzɪŋ ʃeɪtɑn!"

"Remember, you fool! Remember your futile attack on the Great Lord of the Dark! Remember his counterstroke! Remember! Even now the Hundred Companions are tearing the world apart, and every day a hundred men more join them. What hand slew Ilyena Sunhair, Kinslayer? Not mine. Not mine. What hand struck down every life that bore a drop of your blood, everyone who loved you, everyone you loved? Not mine, Kinslayer. Not mine. Remember, and know the price of opposing Shai'tan!"

sʌɾən swɛt meɪd tʃɹæks daʊn luz θɝɪnz feɪs θɹu ðə dʌst ən dɝt. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ə klaʊɾi mɛmɹi laɪk ə dʒɹim ʌv ə dʒɹim, bʌɾ i nu ɪt tʃɹu.

Sudden sweat made tracks down Lews Therin's face through the dust and dirt. He remembered, a cloudy memory like a dream of a dream, but he knew it true.

hɪz haʊl biɾ ət ðə wɔlz, ðə haʊl ʌv ə mæn u hæd dɪskʌvɝɾ ɪz soʊl dæm baɪ hɪz oʊn hænd, ən i klɔɾ əɾ ɪz feɪs əz ɪf tə tɛɹ əweɪ ðə saɪɾ ʌv wʌɾ i hæd dʌn. ɛvɹiwɛɹ i lʊkt ɪz aɪz faʊn ðə dɛd. tɔɹn ðeɪ wɝ, əɹ bɹoʊkən əɹ bɝnd, əɹ hæf-kənsum baɪ stoʊn. ɛvɹiwɛɹ leɪ laɪfləs feɪsəz i nu, feɪsəz i lʌvd. oʊl sɝvəns ən fɹɛnz ə hɪz tʃaɪldhʊd, feɪθfəl kəmpænjənz θɹu ðə lɔŋ jɪɹz ə bæɾəl. ən ɪz tʃɪlʒɹən. hɪz oʊn sʌnz ən dɔɾɝz, spɹɔld laɪk bɹoʊkən dɑlz, pleɪ stɪl fɝɛvɝ. ɔl sleɪn baɪ hɪz hænd. hɪz tʃɪlʒɹənz feɪsəz əkjuz hɪm, blæŋk aɪz æskɪŋ waɪ, ən ɪz tɪɹz wɝ noʊ ænsɝ. ðə bɪtʃɹeɪɝz læftɝ flɑɡd hɪm, dʒɹaʊn aʊɾ ɪz haʊlz. hi kəd nɑt bɛɹ ðə feɪsəz, ðə peɪn. hi kəd nɑt bɛɹ tə ɹɪmeɪn ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. dɛspɝətli hi ɹitʃt aʊt tə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, tə teɪntɪd seɪɾɪn, ən i tʃɹævəld.

His howl beat at the walls, the howl of a man who had discovered his soul damned by his own hand, and he clawed at his face as if to tear away the sight of what he had done. Everywhere he looked his eyes found the dead. Torn they were, or broken or burned, or half-consumed by stone. Everywhere lay lifeless faces he knew, faces he loved. Old servants and friends of his childhood, faithful companions through the long years of battle. And his children. His own sons and daughters, sprawled like broken dolls, play stilled forever. All slain by his hand. His children's faces accused him, blank eyes asking why, and his tears were no answer. The Betrayer's laughter flogged him, drowned out his howls. He could not bear the faces, the pain. He could not bear to remain any longer. Desperately he reached out to the True Source, to tainted saidin, and he Traveled.

ðə læn ɝaʊn ɪm wɑz flæɾ ən ɛmpti. ə ɹɪvɝ floʊd nɪɹbaɪ, stʃɹeɪɾ ən bɹɔd, bʌɾ i kəd sɛns ðəɹ wɝ noʊ pipəl wɪðɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd liɡz. hi wɑz əloʊn, əz əloʊn əz ə mæn kəd bi waɪl stɪl əlaɪv, jɛɾ i kəd nɑɾ ɪskeɪp mɛmɹi. ði aɪz pɝsuɾ ɪm θɹu ði ɛnləs kævɝnz ə hɪz maɪnd. hi kəd nɑt haɪd fɹəm ðɛm. hɪz tʃɪlʒɹənz aɪz. aɪlaɪɛnəz aɪz. tɪɹz ɡlɪsən ɑn ɪz tʃiks əz i tɝn ɪz feɪs tə ðə skaɪ.

The land around him was flat and empty. A river flowed nearby, straight and broad, but he could sense there were no people within a hundred leagues. He was alone, as alone as a man could be while still alive, yet he could not escape memory. The eyes pursued him through the endless caverns of his mind. He could not hide from them. His children's eyes. Ilyena's eyes. Tears glistened on his cheeks as he turned his face to the sky.

"laɪt, fɝɡɪv mi!" hi dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt kəd kʌm, fɝɡɪvnəs. nɑt fəɹ wʌɾ i hæd dʌn. bʌɾ i ʃaʊɾəd tə ðə skaɪ ɛniweɪ, bɛɡd fəɹ wʌɾ i kəd nɑt bɪliv i kəd ɹəsiv. "laɪt, fɝɡɪv mi!"

"Light, forgive me!" He did not believe it could come, forgiveness. Not for what he had done. But he shouted to the sky anyway, begged for what he could not believe he could receive. "Light, forgive me!"

hi wɑz stɪl tʌtʃɪŋ seɪɾɪn, ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə paʊɝ ðət dʒɹoʊv ðə junəvɝs, ðət tɝn ðə wil ə taɪm, ən i kəd fil ði ɔɪli teɪn faʊlɪŋ ɪts sɝfəs, ðə teɪn ə ðə ʃædoʊz kaʊntɝstʃɹoʊk, ðə teɪn ðət dum ðə wɝld. kəz ə hɪm. kəz ɪn ɪz pɹaɪɾ i hæd bɪliv ðət mɛn kəd mætʃ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ, kəd mɛnd wʌt ðə kɹieɪɾɝ hæd meɪɾ ən ðeɪ hæd bɹoʊkən. ɪn ɪz pɹaɪɾ i hæd bɪlivd.

He was still touching saidin, the male half of the power that drove the universe, that turned the Wheel of Time, and he could feel the oily taint fouling its surface, the taint of the Shadow's counterstroke, the taint that doomed the world. Because of him. Because in his pride he had believed that men could match the Creator, could mend what the Creator had made and they had broken. In his pride he had believed.

hi dʒɹu ɑn ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs dipli, ən stɪl mɔɹ dipli, laɪk ə mæn daɪɪŋ ə θɝst. kwɪkli hi hæd dʒɹɔn mɔɹ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðən i kəd tʃænəl əneɪɾɪd; hɪz skɪn fɛlt əz ɪf ɪt wɝ əfleɪm. stʃɹeɪnɪŋ, hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə dʒɹɔ mɔɹ, tʃɹaɪd tə dʒɹɔ ɪɾ ɔl.

He drew on the True Source deeply, and still more deeply, like a man dying of thirst. Quickly he had drawn more of the One Power than he could channel unaided; his skin felt as if it were aflame. Straining, he forced himself to draw more, tried to draw it all.

"laɪt, fɝɡɪv mi! aɪlaɪɛnə!"

"Light, forgive me! Ilyena!"

ði ɛɹ tɝn tə faɪɝ, ðə faɪɝ tə laɪt lɪkwəfaɪd. ðə boʊl ðət stʃɹʌk fɹəm ðə hɛvənz wʊɾə sɪɹɾ ən blaɪndɪɾ ɛni aɪ ðət ɡlɪmpst ɪt, ivən fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. fɹəm ðə hɛvənz ɪt keɪm, bleɪz θɹu luz θɝɪn tɛləmən, bɔɹɾ ɪndə ðə baʊəlz ə ði ɝθ. stoʊn tɝn tə veɪpɝ əɾ ɪts tʌtʃ. ði ɝθ θɹæʃt ən kwɪvɝd laɪk ə lɪvɪŋ θɪŋ ɪn æɡəni. oʊnli ə hɑɹtbit dɪd ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ bɑɹ ɪɡzɪst, kənɛktɪŋ ɡɹaʊn ən skaɪ, bʌɾ ivən æftɝ ɪt vænɪʃt ði ɝθ jɛt hiv laɪk ðə si ɪn ə stɔɹm. moʊltən ɹɑk faʊnteɪn faɪv hʌnʒɹəd fiɾ ɪndə ði ɛɹ, ən ðə ɡɹoʊnɪŋ ɡɹaʊn ɹoʊz, θɹʌstɪŋ ðə bɝnɪŋ spɹeɪ ɛvɝ ʌpwɝd, ɛvɝ haɪɝ. fɹəm nɔɹθ ən saʊθ, fɹəm ist ən wɛst, ðə wɪn haʊld ɪn, snæpɪŋ tʃɹiz laɪk twɪɡz, ʃɹikɪŋ ən bloʊɪŋ əz ɪf tə eɪd ðə ɡɹoʊɪŋ maʊntən ɛvɝ skaɪwɝd. ɛvɝ skaɪwɝd.

The air turned to fire, the fire to light liquefied. The bolt that struck from the heavens would have seared and blinded any eye that glimpsed it, even for an instant. From the heavens it came, blazed through Lews Therin Telamon, bored into the bowels of the earth. Stone turned to vapor at its touch. The earth thrashed and quivered like a living thing in agony. Only a heartbeat did the shining bar exist, connecting ground and sky, but even after it vanished the earth yet heaved like the sea in a storm. Molten rock fountained five hundred feet into the air, and the groaning ground rose, thrusting the burning spray ever upward, ever higher. From north and south, from east and west, the wind howled in, snapping trees like twigs, shrieking and blowing as if to aid the growing mountain ever skyward. Ever skyward.

ət læs ðə wɪn daɪd, ði ɝθ stɪl tə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ mʌɾɝz. ʌv luɪs θɝɪn tɛləmən, noʊ saɪn ɹɪmeɪnd. wɛɹ i hæd stʊɾ ə maʊntən naʊ ɹoʊz maɪlz ɪndə ðə skaɪ, moʊltən lɑvə stɪl ɡʌʃɪŋ fɹəm ɪts bɹoʊkən pik. ðə bɹɔd, stʃɹeɪt ɹɪvɝ hæd bɪn pʊʃt ɪndə ə kɝv əweɪ fɹəm ðə maʊntən, ən ðəɹ ɪt splɪt tə fɔɹm ə lɔŋ aɪlən ɪn ɪts mɪdst. ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ðə maʊntən ɔlmoʊst ɹitʃt ði aɪlənd; ɪt leɪ dɑɹk əkɹɔs ðə læn laɪk ði ɑmənəs hæn ə pɹɑfəsi. fəɹ ə taɪm ðə dʌl, pɹətɛstɪŋ ɹʌmbəlz ə ði ɝθ wɝ ði oʊnli saʊnd.

At last the wind died, the earth stilled to trembling mutters. Of Lewis Therin Telamon, no sign remained. Where he had stood a mountain now rose miles into the sky, molten lava still gushing from its broken peak. The broad, straight river had been pushed into a curve away from the mountain, and there it split to form a long island in its midst. The shadow of the mountain almost reached the island; it lay dark across the land like the ominous hand of prophecy. For a time the dull, protesting rumbles of the earth were the only sound.

ɑn ði aɪlənd, ði ɛɹ ʃɪmɝɾ ən koʊəlɛst. ðə blæk-klæd mæn stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə faɪɝi maʊntən ɹaɪzɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə pleɪn. hɪz feɪs twɪstəɾ ɪn ɹeɪdʒ ən kəntɛmpt. "ju kænɑɾ ɪskeɪp soʊ izəli, dʒɹæɡən. ɪts nɑt dʌn bɪtwin ʌs. ɪɾəl nɑt bi dʌn əntɪl ði ɛn ə taɪm."

On the island, the air shimmered and coalesced. The black-clad man stood staring at the fiery mountain rising out of the plain. His face twisted in rage and contempt. "You cannot escape so easily, Dragon. It is not done between us. It will not be done until the end of time."

ðən i wɑz ɡɔn, ən ðə maʊntən ən ði aɪlən stʊɾ əloʊn. weɪɾɪŋ.

Then he was gone, and the mountain and the island stood alone. Waiting.

ən ðə ʃædoʊ fɛl əpɑn ðə lænd, ən ðə wɝld wɑz ɹɪvən stoʊn fɹəm stoʊn. ði oʊʃənz flɛd, ən ðə maʊntənz wɝ swɑloʊɾ ʌp, ən ðə neɪʃənz wɝ skæɾɝd tə ði eɪt kɔɹnɝz ə ðə wɝld. ðə mun wɑz əz blʌd, ən ðə sʌn wɑz əz æʃəz. ðə siz bɔɪld, ən ðə lɪvɪŋ ɛnvid ðə dɛd. ɔl wɑz ʃæɾɝd, ən ɔl bʌt mɛmɹi lɔst, ən wʌn mɛmɹi əbʌv ɔl ʌðɝz, ʌv ɪm u bɹɔt ðə ʃædoʊ ən ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ən ɪm ðeɪ neɪm dʒɹæɡən.

And the Shadow fell upon the Land, and the World was riven stone from stone. The oceans fled, and the mountains were swallowed up, and the nations were scattered to the eight corners of the World. The moon was as blood, and the sun was as ashes. The seas boiled, and the living envied the dead. All was shattered, and all but memory lost, and one memory above all others, of him who brought the Shadow and the Breaking of the World. And him they named Dragon.

(fɹʌm ɑlɛθ nɪn tʃɹɪn ɑltə kəmɔɹəðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld.

(From Aleth nin Taerin alta Camora,The Breaking of the World.

ɔθɝ ənnoʊn, ðə fɔɹθ eɪdʒ)

Author unknown, the Fourth Age)

ən ɪt keɪm tə pæs ɪn ðoʊz deɪz, əz ɪt hæd kʌm bɪfɔɹ ən wəd kʌm əɡɛn, ðət ðə dɑɹk leɪ hɛvi ɑn ðə læn ən weɪd daʊn ðə hɑɹts ə mɛn, ən ðə ɡɹin θɪŋz feɪld, ən hoʊp daɪd. ən mɛn kɹaɪɾ aʊt tə ðə kɹieɪɾɝ, seɪɪŋ, oʊ laɪɾ ə ðə hɛvənz, laɪɾ ə ðə wɝld, lɛt ðə pɹɑməst wʌn bi bɔɹn ə ðə maʊntən, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə pɹɑfəsiz, əz i wɑz ɪn eɪdʒəz pæst ən wɪl bi ɪn eɪdʒəz tə kʌm. lɛt ðə pɹɪns ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ sɪŋ tə ðə læn ðət ɡɹin θɪŋz wɪl ɡɹoʊ ən ðə væliz ɡɪv fɔɹθ læmz. lɛt ði ɑɹm ə ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɔn ʃɛltɝ əs fɹəm ðə dɑɹk, ən ðə ɡɹeɪt sɔɹɾ ə dʒʌstəs dɪfɛn ʌs. lɛt ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹaɪɾ əɡɛn ɑn ðə wɪnz ə taɪm.

And it came to pass in those days, as it had come before and would come again, that the Dark lay heavy on the land and weighed down the hearts of men, and the green things failed, and hope died. And men cried out to the Creator, saying, O Light of the Heavens, Light of the World, let the Promised One be born of the mountain, according to the prophecies, as he was in ages past and will be in ages to come. Let the Prince of the Morning sing to the land that green things will grow and the valleys give forth lambs. Let the arm of the Lord of the Dawn shelter us from the Dark, and the great sword of justice defend us. Let the Dragon ride again on the winds of time.

(fɹʌm tʃɹəl dʒɹiənɑn ti kələmənðə saɪkəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən.

(From Charal Drianaan te Calamon,The Cycle of the Dragon.

ɔθɝ ənnoʊn, ðə fɔɹθ eɪdʒ)

Author unknown, the Fourth Age)


tʃæptɝ wʌn


CHAPTER 1

ən ɛmpti ɹoʊd


An Empty Road

ðə wil ə taɪm tɝnz, ən eɪdʒəz kʌm ən pæs, livɪŋ mɛmɹiz ðət bɪkʌm lɛdʒənd. lɛdʒən feɪdz tə mɪθ, ən ivən mɪθ ɪz lɔŋ fɝɡɑɾən wən ði eɪdʒ ðət ɡeɪv ɪt bɝθ kʌmz əɡɛn. ɪn wʌn eɪdʒ, kɔl ðə θɝɾ eɪdʒ baɪ sʌm, ən eɪdʒ jɛt tə kʌm, ən eɪdʒ lɔŋ pæst, ə wɪn ɹoʊz ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst. ðə wɪnd wɑz nɑt ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ niðɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋz nɔɹ ɛndɪŋz tə ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil ə taɪm. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə bɪɡɪnɪŋ.

The Wheel of Time turns, and Ages come and pass, leaving memories that become legend. Legend fades to myth, and even myth is long forgotten when the Age that gave it birth comes again. In one Age, called the Third Age by some, an Age yet to come, an Age long past, a wind rose in the Mountains of Mist. The wind was not the beginning. There are neither beginnings nor endings to the turning of the Wheel of Time. But it was a beginning.

bɔɹn bɪloʊ ði ɛvɝ klaʊd-kæpt piks ðət ɡeɪv ðə maʊntənz ðɛɹ neɪm, ðə wɪn blu ist, aʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə sæn hɪlz, wʌns ðə ʃɔɹ ʌv ə ɡɹeɪɾ oʊʃən, bɪfɔɹ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. daʊn ɪt fleɪld ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɪndə ðə tæŋɡəl fɔɹəs kɔl ðə wɛstwʊd, ən biɾ ət tu mɛn wɔkɪŋ wɪð ə kɑɹɾ ən hɔɹs daʊn ðə ɹɑk-stʃɹun tʃɹæk kɔl ðə kwɔɹi ɹoʊd. fəɹ ɔl ðət spɹɪŋ ʃʊɾə kʌm ə ɡʊd mʌnθ sɪns, ðə wɪn kæɹiɾ ən aɪsi tʃɪl əz ɪf ɪt wəd ɹæðɝ bɛɹ snoʊ.

Born below the ever cloud-capped peaks that gave the mountains their name, the wind blew east, out across the Sand Hills, once the shore of a great ocean, before the Breaking of the World. Down it flailed into the Two Rivers, into the tangled forest called the Westwood, and beat at two men walking with a cart and horse down the rock-strewn track called the Quarry Road. For all that spring should have come a good month since, the wind carried an icy chill as if it would rather bear snow.

ɡʌsts plæstɝd ɹænd ælθɹz kloʊk tə hɪz bæk, wɪp ði ɝθ-kʌlɝd wʊl ɝaʊn ɪz lɛɡz, ðən stʃɹimd ɪɾ aʊt bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi wɪʃt ɪz koʊt wɝ hɛviɝ, əɹ ðəɾ i hæd wɔɹn ən ɛkstʃɹə ʃɝt. hæf ðə taɪm wən i tʃɹaɪd tə tʌɡ ðə kloʊk bæk ɝaʊn ɪm ɪt kɑɾ ɑn ðə kwɪvɝ swɪŋɪŋ əɾ ɪz hɪp. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊl ðə kloʊk wʌn-hændəd dɪd nɑt də mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ ɛniweɪ; hi hæɾ ɪz baʊ ɪn ði ʌðɝ, ən æɹoʊ nɑkt ən ɹɛɾi tə dʒɹɔ.

Gusts plastered Rand al'Thor's cloak to his back, whipped the earth-colored wool around his legs, then streamed it out behind him. He wished his coat were heavier, or that he had worn an extra shirt. Half the time when he tried to tug the cloak back around him it caught on the quiver swinging at his hip. Trying to hold the cloak one-handed did not do much good anyway; he had his bow in the other, an arrow nocked and ready to draw.

əz ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli stʃɹɔŋ blæs tʌɡd ðə kloʊk aʊɾ ə hɪz hænd, hi ɡlænst əɾ ɪz fɑðɝ oʊvɝ ðə bæk ə ðə ʃæɡi bɹaʊn mɛɹ. hi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl fulɪʃ əbaʊt wɑntɪŋ tə ɹiəʃʊɹ hɪmsɛlf ðət tæm wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðət kaɪndə deɪ. ðə wɪn haʊld wən ɪt ɹoʊz, bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðæt, kwaɪət leɪ hɛvi ɑn ðə lænd. ðə sɑf kɹik ə ði æksəl saʊndəd laʊd baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən. noʊ bɝdz sæŋ ɪn ðə fɔɹəst, noʊ skwɝəlz tʃɪɾɝd fɹəm ə bɹæntʃ. nɑt ðəɾ i ɪkspɛktəd ðɛm, ɹɪli; nɑt ðɪs spɹɪŋ.

As a particularly strong blast tugged the cloak out of his hand, he glanced at his father over the back of the shaggy brown mare. He felt a little foolish about wanting to reassure himself that Tam was still there, but it was that kind of day. The wind howled when it rose, but aside from that, quiet lay heavy on the land. The soft creak of the axle sounded loud by comparison. No birds sang in the forest, no squirrels chittered from a branch. Not that he expected them, really; not this spring.

oʊnli tʃɹiz ðət kɛp lif əɹ niɾəl θɹu ðə wɪntɝ hæɾ ɛni ɡɹin əbaʊt ðɛm. snɑɹlz ə læs jɪɹz bɹæmbəl spɹɛd bɹaʊn wɛbz oʊvɝ stoʊn aʊtkɹɑps ʌndɝ ðə tʃɹiz. nɛɾəlz nʌmbɝd moʊst əmʌŋ ðə fju widz; ðə ɹɛst wɝ ðə sɔɹts wɪð ʃɑɹp bɝz əɹ θɔɹnz, əɹ stɪŋkwid, wɪtʃ lɛft ə ɹæŋk smɛl ɑn ði ənwɛɹi but ðət kɹʌʃt ɪt. skæɾɝd waɪt pætʃəz ə snoʊ stɪl dɑɾəd ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɛɹ taɪt klʌmps ə tʃɹiz kɛp dip ʃeɪd. wɛɹ sʌnlaɪt dɪd ɹitʃ, ɪt hɛl niðɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ nɔɹ wɔɹmθ. ðə peɪl sʌn sæɾ əbʌv ðə tʃɹiz tə ði ist, bʌɾ ɪts laɪt wɑz kɹɪspli dɑɹk, əz ɪf mɪkst wɪð ʃædoʊ. ɪt wɑz ən ɑkwɝd mɔɹnɪŋ, meɪd fəɹ ənplɛzən θɔts.

Only trees that kept leaf or needle through the winter had any green about them. Snarls of last year's bramble spread brown webs over stone outcrops under the trees. Nettles numbered most among the few weeds; the rest were the sorts with sharp burrs or thorns, or stinkweed, which left a rank smell on the unwary boot that crushed it. Scattered white patches of snow still dotted the ground where tight clumps of trees kept deep shade. Where sunlight did reach, it held neither strength nor warmth. The pale sun sat above the trees to the east, but its light was crisply dark, as if mixed with shadow. It was an awkward morning, made for unpleasant thoughts.

wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ i tʌtʃt ðə nɑk ə ði æɹoʊ; ɪt wɑz ɹɛɾi tə dʒɹɔ tə hɪz tʃik ɪn wʌn smuð muvmənt, ðə weɪ tæm hæd tɔt hɪm. wɪntɝ hæd bɪn bæɾ ɪnʌf ɑn ðə fɑɹmz, wɝs ðən ivən ði oʊldəs foʊk ɹɪmɛmbɝd, bʌɾ ɪt mʌst əv bɪn hɑɹʃɝ stɪl ɪn ðə maʊntənz, ɪf ðə nʌmbɝ ʌv wʊlvz dʒɹɪvən daʊn ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz ɛni ɡaɪd. wʊlvz ɹeɪɾɪd ðə ʃip pɛnz ən tʃud ðɛɹ weɪ ɪndə bɑɹnz tə ɡɛt ðə kæɾəl ən hɔɹsəz. bɛɹz hæd bɪn æftɝ ðə ʃip, tu, wɛɹ ə bɛɹ hæd nɑt bɪn sin ɪn jɪɹz. ɪt wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ seɪf tə bi aʊɾ æftɝ dɑɹk. mɛn wɝ ðə pɹeɪ əz ɔfən əz ʃip, ən ðə sʌn dɪd nɑɾ ɔlweɪz əv tə bi daʊn.

Without thinking he touched the nock of the arrow; it was ready to draw to his cheek in one smooth movement, the way Tam had taught him. Winter had been bad enough on the farms, worse than even the oldest folk remembered, but it must have been harsher still in the mountains, if the number of wolves driven down into the Two Rivers was any guide. Wolves raided the sheep pens and chewed their way into barns to get the cattle and horses. Bears had been after the sheep, too, where a bear had not been seen in years. It was no longer safe to be out after dark. Men were the prey as often as sheep, and the sun did not always have to be down.

tæm wɑz teɪkɪŋ stɛɾi stʃɹaɪdz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə bɛlə, juzɪŋ ɪz spɪɹ əz ə wɔkɪŋ stæf, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə wɪn ðət meɪɾ ɪz bɹaʊn kloʊk flæp laɪk ə bænɝ. naʊ ən əɡɛn i tʌtʃt ðə mɛɹz flæŋk laɪtli, tə ɹimaɪn əɹ tə kip muvɪŋ. wɪð ɪz θɪk tʃɛst ən bɹɔd feɪs, hi wɑz ə pɪlɝ ə ɹiæləɾi ɪn ðət mɔɹnɪŋ, laɪk ə stoʊn ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə dʒɹɪftɪŋ dʒɹim. hɪz sʌn-ɹʌfən tʃiks maɪt bi laɪn ən ɪz hɛɹ əv oʊnli ə spɹɪŋklɪŋ ə blæk əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹeɪ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə sɑlɪdnəs tə hɪm, əz ðoʊ ə flʌd kəd wɑʃ ɝaʊn ɪm wɪθaʊɾ əpɹuɾɪŋ ɪz fit. hi stʌmp daʊn ðə ɹoʊd naʊ ɪmpæsɪvli. wʊlvz ən bɛɹz wɝ ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, hɪz mænɝ sɛd, θɪŋz ðəɾ ɛni mæn u kɛpt ʃip mʌs bi əwɛɹ ʌv, bʌt ðeɪ hæd bɛs nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp tæm ælθɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ tə ɛmənz fild.

Tam was taking steady strides on the other side of Bela, using his spear as a walking staff, ignoring the wind that made his brown cloak flap like a banner. Now and again he touched the mare's flank lightly, to remind her to keep moving. With his thick chest and broad face, he was a pillar of reality in that morning, like a stone in the middle of a drifting dream. His sun-roughened cheeks might be lined and his hair have only a sprinkling of black among the gray, but there was a solidness to him, as though a flood could wash around him without uprooting his feet. He stumped down the road now impassively. Wolves and bears were all very well, his manner said, things that any man who kept sheep must be aware of, but they had best not try to stop Tam al'Thor getting to Emond's Field.

wɪð ə ɡɪlti stɑɹt ɹænd ɹɪtɝn tə wɑtʃɪŋ ɪz saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd, tæmz mæɾɝ-ʌv-fæktnəs ɹimaɪndɪŋ ɪm ə hɪz tæsk. hi wɑz ə hɛd tɔlɝ ðən ɪz fɑðɝ, tɔlɝ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls ɪn ðə dɪstʃɹɪkt, ən hæd lɪɾəl ə tæm ɪn ɪm fɪzɪkəli, ɪksɛpt pɝhæps fəɹ ə bɹɛdθ ə ʃoʊldɝ. ɡɹeɪ aɪz ən ðə ɹɛɾɪʃ tɪnʒ tə hɪz hɛɹ keɪm fɹəm ɪz mʌðɝ, soʊ tæm sɛd. ʃi hæd bɪn ən aʊtləndɝ, ən ɹænd ɹɪmɛmbɝd lɪɾəl ə hɝ əsaɪd fɹəm ə smaɪlɪŋ feɪs, ðoʊ hi dɪd pʊt flaʊɝz ɑn əɹ ɡɹeɪv ɛvɹi jɪɹ, ət bɛl taɪn, ɪn ðə spɹɪŋ, ən ət sʌndeɪ, ɪn ðə sʌmɝ.

With a guilty start Rand returned to watching his side of the road, Tam's matter-of-factness reminding him of his task. He was a head taller than his father, taller than anyone else in the district, and had little of Tam in him physically, except perhaps for a breadth of shoulder. Gray eyes and the reddish tinge to his hair came from his mother, so Tam said. She had been an outlander, and Rand remembered little of her aside from a smiling face, though he did put flowers on her grave every year, at Bel Tine, in the spring, and at Sunday, in the summer.

tu smɔl kæsks ə tæmz æpəl bɹændi ɹɛstəɾ ɪn ðə lɝtʃɪŋ kɑɹt, ən eɪt lɑɹdʒɝ bæɹəlz ʌv æpəl saɪɾɝ, oʊnli slaɪtli hɑɹɾ æftɝ ə wɪntɝz kjʊɹɪŋ. tæm dɪlɪvɝd ðə seɪm ɛvɹi jɪɹ tə ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn fəɹ jus dʊɹɪŋ bɛl taɪn, ən i hæd dɪklɛɹd ðəɾ ɪt wəd teɪk mɔɹ ðən wʊlvz əɹ ə koʊld wɪn tə stɑp ɪm ðɪs spɹɪŋ. ivən soʊ ðeɪ hæd nɑt bɪn tə ðə vɪlədʒ fəɹ wiks. nɑɾ ivən tæm tʃɹævəl mʌtʃ ðiz deɪz. bʌt tæm hæd ɡɪvən ɪz wɝɾ əbaʊt ðə bɹændi ən saɪɾɝ, ivən ɪf i hæd weɪɾəd tə meɪk dɪlɪvɝi əntɪl ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ fɛstəvəl. kipɪŋ ɪz wɝd wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə tæm. ɹænd wɑz dʒʌst ɡlæd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə fɑɹm, ɔlmoʊst əz ɡlæɾ əz əbaʊt ðə kʌmɪŋ ə bɛl taɪn.

Two small casks of Tam's apple brandy rested in the lurching cart, and eight larger barrels of apple cider, only slightly hard after a winter's curing. Tam delivered the same every year to the Winespring Inn for use during Bel Tine, and he had declared that it would take more than wolves or a cold wind to stop him this spring. Even so they had not been to the village for weeks. Not even Tam traveled much these days. But Tam had given his word about the brandy and cider, even if he had waited to make delivery until the day before Festival. Keeping his word was important to Tam. Rand was just glad to get away from the farm, almost as glad as about the coming of Bel Tine.

əz ɹænd wɑtʃt ɪz saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd, ðə filɪŋ ɡɹu ɪn ɪm ðəɾ i wɑz biɪŋ wɑtʃt. fəɹ ə waɪl i tʃɹaɪd tə ʃɹʌɡ ɪɾ ɔf. nʌθɪŋ muvd əɹ meɪɾ ə saʊn əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, ɪksɛp ðə wɪnd. bʌt ðə filɪŋ nɑɾ oʊnli pɝsɪstəd, ɪt ɡɹu stʃɹɔŋɝ. ðə hɛɹz ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz stɝd; hɪz skɪn pɹɪkəld əz ɪf ɪɾ ɪtʃt ɑn ði ɪnsaɪd.

As Rand watched his side of the road, the feeling grew in him that he was being watched. For a while he tried to shrug it off. Nothing moved or made a sound among the trees, except the wind. But the feeling not only persisted, it grew stronger. The hairs on his arms stirred; his skin prickled as if it itched on the inside.

hi ʃɪftəɾ ɪz baʊ ɪɹɪɾəbli tə ɹʌb əɾ ɪz ɑɹmz, ən toʊl hɪmsɛlf tə stɑp lɛɾɪŋ fænsiz teɪk hɪm. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðə wʊdz ɑn ɪz saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd, ən tæm wʊɾə spoʊkən ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɛniθɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ. hi ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ . . . ən blɪŋkt. nɑt mɔɹ ðən twɛnti spænz bæk daʊn ðə ɹoʊɾ ə kloʊk fɪɡjɝ ɑn hɔɹsbæk fɑloʊd ðɛm, hɔɹs ən ɹaɪɾɝ əlaɪk blæk, dʌl ən əŋɡlimɪŋ.

He shifted his bow irritably to rub at his arms, and told himself to stop letting fancies take him. There was nothing in the woods on his side of the road, and Tam would have spoken if there had been anything on the other. He glanced over his shoulder . . . and blinked. Not more than twenty spans back down the road a cloaked figure on horseback followed them, horse and rider alike black, dull and ungleaming.

ɪt wɑz mɔɹ hæbət ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðət kɛpt ɪm wɔkɪŋ bækwɝɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə kɑɹɾ ivən waɪl i lʊkt.

It was more habit than anything else that kept him walking backward alongside the cart even while he looked.

ðə ɹaɪɾɝz kloʊk kʌvɝɾ ɪm tə hɪz but tɑps, ðə kaʊl tʌɡd wɛl fɔɹwɝd soʊ noʊ pɑɹɾ ə hɪm ʃoʊd. veɪɡli ɹænd θɔt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɑɾ əbaʊt ðə hɔɹsmən, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə ʃæɾoʊd oʊpənɪŋ ə ðə hʊd ðət fæsəneɪɾəd hɪm. hi kəd si oʊnli ðə veɪɡɪst aʊtlaɪnz ʌv ə feɪs, bʌɾ i hæd ðə filɪŋ i wɑz lʊkɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ðə ɹaɪɾɝz aɪz. ən i kəd nɑt lʊk əweɪ. kwizinəs sɛɾəld ɪn ɪz stʌmək. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ʃædoʊ tə si ɪn ðə hʊd, bʌɾ i fɛl heɪtʃɹəɾ əz ʃɑɹpli əz ɪf i kəd si ə snɑɹlɪŋ feɪs, heɪtʃɹəd fəɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət lɪvd. heɪtʃɹəd fəɹ ɪm moʊst ʌv ɔl, fəɹ ɪm əbʌv ɔl θɪŋz.

The rider's cloak covered him to his boot tops, the cowl tugged well forward so no part of him showed. Vaguely Rand thought there was something odd about the horseman, but it was the shadowed opening of the hood that fascinated him. He could see only the vaguest outlines of a face, but he had the feeling he was looking right into the rider's eyes. And he could not look away. Queasiness settled in his stomach. There was only shadow to see in the hood, but he felt hatred as sharply as if he could see a snarling face, hatred for everything that lived. Hatred for him most of all, for him above all things.

əbɹʌpli ə stoʊn kɑɾ ɪz hil ən i stʌmbəld, bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ðə dɑɹk hɔɹsmən. hɪz baʊ dʒɹɑp tə ðə ɹoʊd, ən oʊnli ən aʊθɹʌs hænd ɡɹæbɪŋ bɛləz hɑɹnəs seɪvd ɪm fɹəm fɔlɪŋ flæɾ ɑn ɪz bæk. wɪð ə stɑɹɾəld snɔɹt ðə mɛɹ stɑpt, twɪstɪŋ əɹ hɛd tə si wʌt hæd kɑt hɝ.

Abruptly a stone caught his heel and he stumbled, breaking his eyes away from the dark horseman. His bow dropped to the road, and only an outthrust hand grabbing Bela's harness saved him from falling flat on his back. With a startled snort the mare stopped, twisting her head to see what had caught her.

tæm fɹaʊn oʊvɝ bɛləz bæk ət hɪm. "ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt, læd?"

Tam frowned over Bela's back at him. "Are you all right, lad?"

"ə ɹaɪɾɝ," ɹænd sɛd bɹɛθləsli, pʊlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf əpɹaɪt. "ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ, fɑloʊɪŋ ʌs."

"A rider," Rand said breathlessly, pulling himself upright. "A stranger, following us."

"wɛɹ?" ði oʊldɝ mæn lɪftəɾ ɪz bɹɔd-bleɪɾɪd spɪɹ ən pɪɹd bæk wɛɹəli.

"Where?" The older man lifted his broad-bladed spear and peered back warily.

"ðɛɹ, daʊn ðə. . . ." ɹændz wɝdz tʃɹeɪld ɔf əz i tɝn tə pɔɪnt. ðə ɹoʊd bɪhaɪnd wɑz ɛmpti. dɪsbɪlivɪŋ, hi stɛɹɾ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst ɑn boʊθ saɪdz ə ðə ɹoʊd. bɛɹ-bɹæntʃt tʃɹiz ɔfɝd noʊ haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə ɡlɪmɝ ə hɔɹs əɹ hɔɹsmən. hi mɛɾ ɪz fɑðɝz kwɛstʃənɪŋ ɡeɪz. "hi wɑz ðɛɹ. ə mæn ɪn ə blæk kloʊk, ɑn ə blæk hɔɹs."

"There, down the. . . ." Rand's words trailed off as he turned to point. The road behind was empty. Disbelieving, he stared into the forest on both sides of the road. Bare-branched trees offered no hiding place, but there was not a glimmer of horse or horseman. He met his father's questioning gaze. "He was there. A man in a black cloak, on a black horse."

"aɪ wʊdn daʊt jəɹ wɝd, læd, bʌt wɛɹ əz i ɡɔn?"

"I wouldn't doubt your word, lad, but where has he gone?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ. bʌɾ i wɑz ðɛɹ." hi snætʃt ʌp ðə fɔlən baʊ ən æɹoʊ, heɪstəli tʃɛk ðə flɛtʃɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɹɪnɑkɪŋ, ən hæf dʒɹu bɪfɔɹ lɛɾɪŋ ðə bɑstʃɹɪŋ ɹɪlæks. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə eɪm æt. "hi wɑz."

"I don't know. But he was there." He snatched up the fallen bow and arrow, hastily checked the fletching before renocking, and half drew before letting the bowstring relax. There was nothing to aim at. "He was."

tæm ʃʊk ɪz ɡɹɪzəl hɛd. "ɪf jə seɪ soʊ, læd. kʌm ɑn, ðɛn. ə hɔɹs livz hʊfpɹɪns, ivən ɑn ðɪs ɡɹaʊnd." hi stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪɹ ə ðə kɑɹt, hɪz kloʊk wɪpɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd. "ɪf wi faɪn ðɛm, wɪl noʊ fəɹ ə fækt i wɑz ðɛɹ. ɪf nɑt . . . wɛl, ðiz ɑɹ deɪz tə meɪk ə mæn θɪŋk hiz siɪŋ θɪŋz."

Tam shook his grizzled head. "If you say so, lad. Come on, then. A horse leaves hoofprints, even on this ground." He started toward the rear of the cart, his cloak whipping in the wind. "If we find them, we'll know for a fact he was there. If not . . . well, these are days to make a man think he's seeing things."

əbɹʌpli ɹænd ɹilaɪzd wʌt hæd bɪn ɑɾ əbaʊt ðə hɔɹsmən, əsaɪd fɹəm ɪz biɪŋ ðəɹ əɾ ɔl. ðə wɪn ðət biɾ ət tæm ən ɪm hæd nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ʃɪftəɾ ə foʊld ə ðət blæk kloʊk. hɪz maʊθ wɑz sʌɾənli dʒɹaɪ. hi mʌst əv ɪmædʒən ɪt. hɪz fɑðɝ wɑz ɹaɪt; ðɪs wɑz ə mɔɹnɪŋ tə pɹɪkəl ə mænz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt. oʊnli, haʊ dɪɾ i tɛl ɪz fɑðɝ ðət ðə mæn u hæɾ əpɛɹənli vænɪʃt ɪndə ɛɹ wɔɹ ə kloʊk ðə wɪn dɪd nɑt tʌtʃ?

Abruptly Rand realized what had been odd about the horseman, aside from his being there at all. The wind that beat at Tam and him had not so much as shifted a fold of that black cloak. His mouth was suddenly dry. He must have imagined it. His father was right; this was a morning to prickle a man's imagination. But he did not believe it. Only, how did he tell his father that the man who had apparently vanished into air wore a cloak the wind did not touch?

wɪð ə wɝid fɹaʊn i pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə wʊdz ɝaʊn ðɛm; ɪt lʊk dɪfɹən ðən ɪɾ ɛvɝ hæd bɪfɔɹ. ɔlmoʊst sɪns i wɑz oʊld ɪnʌf tə wɔk, hi hæd ɹʌn lus ɪn ðə fɔɹəst. ðə pɑnz ən stʃɹimz ə ðə wɔɾɝwʊd, bɪɑn ðə læs fɑɹmz ist ʌv ɛmənz fild, wɝ wɛɹ i hæd lɝn tə swɪm. hi hæɾ ɪksplɔɹɾ ɪndə ðə sæn hɪlz - wɪtʃ mɛni ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz sɛd wɑz bæd lʌk - ən wʌns i hæɾ ivən ɡɔn tə ðə vɛɹi fʊɾ ə ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, hɪm ən ɪz kloʊsəs fɹɛnz, mæt kɔθən ən pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə. ðət wɑz ə lɑt fɝðɝ əfil ðən moʊs pipəl ɪn ɛmənz fild ɛvɝ wɛnt; tə ðɛm ə dʒɝni tə ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ, ʌp tə wɑtʃ hɪl əɹ daʊn tə dɛvən ɹaɪd, wɑz ə bɪɡ ɪvɛnt. noʊwɛɹ ɪn ɔl ə ðət hæɾ i faʊn ə pleɪs ðət meɪɾ ɪm əfɹeɪd. tədeɪ, ðoʊ, ðə wɛstwʊd wɑz nɑt ðə pleɪs i ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ə mæn u kəd dɪsəpɪɹ soʊ sʌɾənli kəd ɹiəpɪɹ dʒʌst əz sʌɾənli, meɪbi ivən ɹaɪt bɪsaɪd ðɛm.

With a worried frown he peered into the woods around them; it looked different than it ever had before. Almost since he was old enough to walk, he had run loose in the forest. The ponds and streams of the Waterwood, beyond the last farms east of Emond's Field, were where he had learned to swim. He had explored into the Sand Hills - which many in the Two Rivers said was bad luck - and once he had even gone to the very foot of the Mountains of Mist, him and his closest friends, Mat Cauthon and Perrin Aybara. That was a lot further afield than most people in Emond's Field ever went; to them a journey to the next village, up to Watch Hill or down to Deven Ride, was a big event. Nowhere in all of that had he found a place that made him afraid. Today, though, the Westwood was not the place he remembered. A man who could disappear so suddenly could reappear just as suddenly, maybe even right beside them.

"noʊ, fɑðɝ, ðɛɹz noʊ nid." wən tæm stɑpt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ɹænd kʌvɝɾ ɪz flʌʃ baɪ tʌɡɪŋ ət ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk. "jɔɹ pɹɑbli ɹaɪt. noʊ pɔɪn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ wʌɾ ɪzən ðɛɹ, nɑt wən wi kən juz ðə taɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ ɑn tə ðə vɪlədʒ ən aʊɾ ə ðɪs wɪnd."

"No, father, there's no need." When Tam stopped in surprise, Rand covered his flush by tugging at the hood of his cloak. "You're probably right. No point looking for what isn't there, not when we can use the time getting on to the village and out of this wind."

"aɪ kəd də wɪð ə paɪp," tæm sɛd sloʊli, "æn ə mʌɡ ʌv eɪl wɛɹ ɪts wɔɹm." əbɹʌpli hi ɡeɪv ə bɹɔd ɡɹɪn. "æn aɪ ɪkspɛk jəɹ iɡɝ tə si ɛɡwin."

"I could do with a pipe," Tam said slowly, "and a mug of ale where it's warm." Abruptly he gave a broad grin. "And I expect you're eager to see Egwene."

ɹænd mænədʒd ə wik smaɪl. ʌv ɔl θɪŋz i maɪt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt ɹaɪt ðɛn, ðə meɪɝz dɔɾɝ wɑz fɑɹ daʊn ðə lɪst. hi dɪd nɑt niɾ ɛni mɔɹ kənfjuʒən. fəɹ ðə pæs jɪɹ ʃi hæd bɪn meɪkɪŋ ɪm ɪnkɹisɪŋli dʒɪɾɝi wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ təɡɛðɝ. wɝs, ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən sim tə bi əwɛɹ ʌv ɪt. noʊ, hi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑt wɑnə æɾ ɛɡwin tə hɪz θɔts.

Rand managed a weak smile. Of all things he might want to think about right then, the Mayor's daughter was far down the list. He did not need any more confusion. For the past year she had been making him increasingly jittery whenever they were together. Worse, she did not even seem to be aware of it. No, he certainly did not want to add Egwene to his thoughts.

hi wɑz hoʊpɪŋ ɪz fɑðɝ hæd nɑt noʊɾəst i wɑz əfɹeɪd wən tæm sɛd, "ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə fleɪm, læd, ən ðə vɔɪd."

He was hoping his father had not noticed he was afraid when Tam said, "Remember the flame, lad, and the void."

ɪt wɑz ən ɑd θɪŋ tæm hæd tɔt hɪm. kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ə sɪŋɡəl fleɪm ən fiɾ ɔl jəɹ pæʃənz ɪndə ɪt - fɪɹ, heɪt, æŋɡɝ - əntɪl jəɹ maɪn bɪkeɪm ɛmpti. bɪkʌm wʌn wɪð ðə vɔɪd, tæm sɛd, ən jə kəd də ɛniθɪŋ. noʊbɑdi ɛls ɪn ɛmənz fil tɔk ðət weɪ. bʌt tæm wʌn ði ɑɹtʃɝi kɑmpətɪʃən ət bɛl taɪn ɛvɹi jɪɹ wɪð ɪz fleɪm ən ɪz vɔɪd. ɹænd θɔɾ i maɪɾ əv ə tʃæns ət pleɪsɪŋ ðɪs jɪɹ hɪmsɛlf, ɪf i kəd mænədʒ tə hoʊld ɑntu ðə vɔɪd. fəɹ tæm tə bɹɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp naʊ mɛn i hæd noʊɾəst, bʌɾ i sɛd nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ əbaʊɾ ɪt.

It was an odd thing Tam had taught him. Concentrate on a single flame and feed all your passions into it - fear, hate, anger - until your mind became empty. Become one with the void, Tam said, and you could do anything. Nobody else in Emond's Field talked that way. But Tam won the archery competition at Bel Tine every year with his flame and his void. Rand thought he might have a chance at placing this year himself, if he could manage to hold onto the void. For Tam to bring it up now meant he had noticed, but he said nothing more about it.

tæm klʌk bɛlə ɪndə moʊʃən wʌns mɔɹ, ən ðeɪ ɹɪzum ðɛɹ dʒɝni, ði oʊldɝ mæn stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ əntuɔɹd hæd hæpən ən nʌθɪŋ əntuɔɹd kʊd. ɹænd wɪʃt i kəɾ ɪməteɪt hɪm. hi tʃɹaɪd fɔɹmɪŋ ði ɛmptinəs ɪn ɪz maɪnd, bʌɾ ɪt kɛp slɪpɪŋ əweɪ ɪndə ɪmədʒəz ə ðə blæk-kloʊk hɔɹsmən.

Tam clucked Bela into motion once more, and they resumed their journey, the older man striding along as if nothing untoward had happened and nothing untoward could. Rand wished he could imitate him. He tried forming the emptiness in his mind, but it kept slipping away into images of the black-cloaked horseman.

hi wɑntəd tə bɪliv ðət tæm wɑz ɹaɪt, ðət ðə ɹaɪɾɝ hæd dʒʌs bɪn ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, bʌɾ i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət filɪŋ ə heɪtʃɹəd tu wɛl. ðəɹ hæd bɪn sʌmwʌn. ən ðət sʌmwʌn hæd mɛn ɪm hɑɹm. hi dɪd nɑt stɑp lʊkɪŋ bæk əntɪl ðə haɪ-pikt, θætʃt ɹufs ʌv ɛmənz fil sɝaʊndəd hɪm.

He wanted to believe that Tam was right, that the rider had just been his imagination, but he could remember that feeling of hatred too well. There had been someone. And that someone had meant him harm. He did not stop looking back until the high-peaked, thatched roofs of Emond's Field surrounded him.

ðə vɪlədʒ leɪ kloʊs ɑntu ðə wɛstwʊd, ðə fɔɹəst ɡɹædʒuəli θɪnɪŋ əntɪl ðə læs fju tʃɹiz stʊɾ æktʃəli  əmʌŋ ðə staʊt fɹeɪm haʊzɪz. ðə læn sləp dʒɛnli daʊn tə ði ist. ðoʊ nɑt wɪθaʊt pætʃəz ʌv wʊdz, fɑɹmz ən hɛdʒ-bɔɹɾɝd filz ən pæstʃɝz kwɪltɪd ðə læn bɪɑn ðə vɪlədʒ ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə wɔɾɝwʊd ən ɪts tæŋɡəl ə stʃɹimz ən pɑnz. ðə læn tə ðə wɛst wɑz dʒʌst əz fɝɾəl, ən ðə pæstʃɝz ðəɹ lʌʃ ɪn moʊs jɪɹz, bʌɾ oʊnli ə hændfʊl ə fɑɹmz kəd bi faʊn ɪn ðə wɛstwʊd. ivən ðoʊz fju dwɪndəl tə nʌn maɪlz ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə sæn hɪlz, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, wɪtʃ ɹoʊz əbʌv ðə wɛstwʊd tʃɹitɑps, dɪstən bʌɾ ɪn pleɪn saɪt fɹəm ɛmənz fild. səm sɛd ðə lænd wɑz tu ɹɑki, əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ nɑt ɹɑks ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən ʌðɝz sɛɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd-lʌk lænd. ə fju mʌɾɝd ðət ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪnt ɡɛɾɪŋ ɛni kloʊsɝ tə ðə maʊntənz ðən nidz bi. wʌtɛvɝ ðə ɹizənz, oʊnli ðə hɑɹɾiɪst mɛn fɑɹmd ɪn ðə wɛstwʊd.

The village lay close onto the Westwood, the forest gradually thinning until the last few trees stood actually among the stout frame houses. The land sloped gently down to the east. Though not without patches of woods, farms and hedge-bordered fields and pastures quilted the land beyond the village all the way to the Waterwood and its tangle of streams and ponds. The land to the west was just as fertile, and the pastures there lush in most years, but only a handful of farms could be found in the Westwood. Even those few dwindled to none miles short of the Sand Hills, not to mention the Mountains of Mist, which rose above the Westwood treetops, distant but in plain sight from Emond's Field. Some said the land was too rocky, as if there were not rocks everywhere in the Two Rivers, and others said it was hard-luck land. A few muttered that there was no point getting any closer to the mountains than needs be. Whatever the reasons, only the hardiest men farmed in the Westwood.

smɔl tʃɪlʒɹən ən dɑɡz dɑdʒd ɝaʊn ðə kɑɹɾ ɪn wupɪŋ swɔɹmz wʌns ɪt pæs ðə fɝst ɹoʊ ʌv haʊsəz. bɛlə plɑɾəd ɑn peɪʃənli, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə jɛlɪŋ jʌŋstɝz u tʌmbəld ʌndɝ əɹ noʊz, pleɪɪŋ tæɡ ən ɹoʊlɪŋ hups. ɪn ðə læs mʌnθs ðəɹ hæd bɪn lɪɾəl ə pleɪ əɹ læftɝ fɹəm ðə tʃɪlʒɹən; ivən wən ðə wɛðɝ hæd slækən ɪnʌf tə lɛt tʃɪlʒɹən aʊt, fɪɹ ʌv wʊlvz kɛpt əm ɪn. ɪt sim ði əpɹoʊtʃ ə bɛl taɪn hæd tɔɾ əm haʊ tə pleɪ əɡɛn.

Small children and dogs dodged around the cart in whooping swarms once it passed the first row of houses. Bela plodded on patiently, ignoring the yelling youngsters who tumbled under her nose, playing tag and rolling hoops. In the last months there had been little of play or laughter from the children; even when the weather had slackened enough to let children out, fear of wolves kept them in. It seemed the approach of Bel Tine had taught them how to play again.

fɛstəvəl hæɾ əfɛktəd ði ədʌls əz wɛl. bɹɔd ʃʌɾɝz wɝ θɹoʊn bæk, ən ɪn ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi haʊs ðə ɡʊdwaɪf stʊɾ ɪn ə wɪndoʊ, eɪpɹən taɪɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ ən lɔŋ-bɹeɪɾɪd hɛɹ dʌn ʌp ɪn ə kɝtʃəf, ʃeɪkɪŋ ʃits əɹ hæŋɪŋ mætʃɹəsəz oʊvɝ ðə wɪndaʊsɪlz. wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt livz hæɾ əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə tʃɹiz, noʊ wʊmən wəd lɛt bɛl taɪn kʌm bɪfɔɹ əɹ spɹɪŋ klinɪŋ wɑz dʌn. ɪn ɛvɹi jɑɹd ɹʌɡz hʌŋ fɹəm stʃɹɛtʃt laɪnz, ən tʃɪlʒɹən u hæd nɑt bɪn kwɪk ɪnʌf tə ɹʌn fɹi ɪn ðə stʃɹits ɪnstɛd vɛntɪd ðɛɹ fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən ɑn ðə kɑɹpəts wɪð wɪkɝ biɾɝz. ɑn ɹuf æftɝ ɹuf ðə ɡʊdmən ə ðə haʊs klæmbɝɾ əbaʊt, tʃɛkɪŋ ðə θætʃ tə si ɪf ðə wɪntɝz dæmədʒ mɛn kɔlɪŋ ɑn oʊl sɛn bui, ðə θætʃɝ.

Festival had affected the adults as well. Broad shutters were thrown back, and in almost every house the goodwife stood in a window, apron tied about her and long-braided hair done up in a kerchief, shaking sheets or hanging mattresses over the windowsills. Whether or not leaves had appeared on the trees, no woman would let Bel Tine come before her spring cleaning was done. In every yard rugs hung from stretched lines, and children who had not been quick enough to run free in the streets instead vented their frustration on the carpets with wicker beaters. On roof after roof the goodman of the house clambered about, checking the thatch to see if the winter's damage meant calling on old Cenn Buie, the thatcher.

sɛvɹəl taɪmz tæm pɔz tə ɛnɡeɪdʒ wʌn mæn əɹ ənʌðɝ ɪn bɹif kɑnvɝseɪʃən. sɪns i ən ɹænd hæd nɑt bɪn ɔf ðə fɑɹm fəɹ wiks, ɛvɹiwʌn wɑntəd tə kætʃ ʌp ɑn haʊ θɪŋz wɝ aʊt ðət weɪ. fju wɛstwʊd mɛn hæd bɪn ɪn. tæm spoʊk ə dæmədʒ fɹəm wɪntɝ stɔɹmz, itʃ wʌn wɝs ðən ðə wʌn bɪfɔɹ, ən stɪlbɔɹn læmz, ʌv bɹaʊn filz wɛɹ kɹɑps ʃəd bi spɹaʊɾɪŋ ən pæstʃɝz ɡɹinɪŋ, ʌv ɹeɪvənz flɑkɪŋ ɪn wɛɹ sɔŋbɝdz hæd kʌm ɪn jɪɹz bɪfɔɹ. ɡɹɪm tɔk, wɪð pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz fəɹ bɛl taɪn ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɔl ɝaʊn ðɛm, ən mʌtʃ ʃeɪkɪŋ ə hɛdz. ɪt wɑz ðə seɪm ɑn ɔl saɪdz.

Several times Tam paused to engage one man or another in brief conversation. Since he and Rand had not been off the farm for weeks, everyone wanted to catch up on how things were out that way. Few Westwood men had been in. Tam spoke of damage from winter storms, each one worse than the one before, and stillborn lambs, of brown fields where crops should be sprouting and pastures greening, of ravens flocking in where songbirds had come in years before. Grim talk, with preparations for Bel Tine going on all around them, and much shaking of heads. It was the same on all sides.

moʊst ə ðə mɛn ɹoʊl ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən sɛd, "wɛl, wɪl sɝvaɪv, ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ." səm ɡɹɪn ən æɾəd, "æn ɪf ðə laɪt dʌznt wɪl, wɪl stɪl sɝvaɪv."

Most of the men rolled their shoulders and said, "Well, we'll survive, the Light willing." Some grinned and added, "And if the Light doesn't will, we'll still survive."

ðət wɑz ðə weɪ ʌv moʊs tu ɹɪvɝz pipəl. pipəl u hæd tə wɑtʃ ðə heɪl bit ðɛɹ kɹɑps əɹ ðə wʊlvz teɪk ðɛɹ læmz, ən stɑɹɾ oʊvɝ, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni jɪɹz ɪt hæpənd, dɪd nɑt ɡɪv ʌp izəli. moʊst ə ðoʊz u dɪd wɝ lɔŋ sɪns ɡɔn.

That was the way of most Two Rivers people. People who had to watch the hail beat their crops or the wolves take their lambs, and start over, no matter how many years it happened, did not give up easily. Most of those who did were long since gone.

tæm wəd nɑɾ əv stɑp fəɹ wɪt kɔŋɡɝ ɪf ðə mæn hæd nɑt kʌm aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stʃɹit soʊ ðeɪ hæd tə hɔlt əɹ lɛt bɛlə ɹʌn oʊvɝ hɪm. ðə kɔŋɡɝz - ən ðə kɑplɪnz; ðə tu fæmliz wɝ soʊ ɪntɝmæɹid noʊ wʌn ɹɪli nu wɛɹ wʌn fæmli lɛɾ ɔf ən ði ʌðɝ bɪɡæn - wɝ noʊn fɹəm wɑtʃ hɪl tə dɛvən ɹaɪd, ən meɪbi əz fɑɹ əz tɛɹən fɛɹi, əz kɑmpleɪnɝz ən tʃɹʌbəlmeɪkɝz.

Tam would not have stopped for Wit Congar if the man had not come out into the street so they had to halt or let Bela run over him. The Congars - and the Coplins; the two families were so intermarried no one really knew where one family let off and the other began - were known from Watch Hill to Deven Ride, and maybe as far as Taren Ferry, as complainers and troublemakers.

"aɪ hæv tə ɡɛt ðɪs tə bɹæn ælvɪɹ, wɪt," tæm sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ tə ðə bæɹəlz ɪn ðə kɑɹt, bʌt ðə skɹɔni mæn hɛld ɪz ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ə saʊɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs. hi hæd bɪn spɹɔld ɑn ɪz fɹʌn stɛps, nɑɾ ʌp ɑn ɪz ɹuf, ðoʊ ðə θætʃ lʊkt əz ɪf ɪt bædli niɾəd mæstɝ buiz ətɛnʃən. hi nɛvɝ simd ɹɛɾi tə stɑɹɾ oʊvɝ, əɹ tə fɪnɪʃ wʌɾ i stɑɹɾəd ðə fɝs taɪm. moʊst ə ðə kɑplɪnz ən kɔŋɡɝz wɝ laɪk ðæt, ðoʊz u wɝ nɑt wɝs.

"I have to get this to Bran al'Vere, Wit," Tam said, nodding to the barrels in the cart, but the scrawny man held his ground with a sour expression on his face. He had been sprawled on his front steps, not up on his roof, though the thatch looked as if it badly needed Master Buie's attention. He never seemed ready to start over, or to finish what he started the first time. Most of the Coplins and Congars were like that, those who were not worse.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ wi gɑnə də əbaʊt nɪneɪiv, ælθɹ?" kɔŋɡɝ dɪmændəd. "wi kæn əv ə wɪzdəm laɪk ðət fəɹ ɛmənz fild."

"What are we going to do about Nynaeve, al'Thor?" Congar demanded. "We can't have a Wisdom like that for Emond's Field."

tæm saɪd hɛvəli. "ɪts nɑɾ əɹ pleɪs, wɪt. ðə wɪzdəm ɪz wɪmənz bɪznəs."

Tam sighed heavily. "It's not our place, Wit. The Wisdom is women's business."

"wɛl, wid bɛɾɝ də sʌmθɪŋ, ælθɹ. ʃi sɛd wiɾ əv ə maɪld wɪntɝ. ən ə ɡʊd hɑɹvəst. naʊ jə æsk əɹ wʌt ʃi hɪɹz ɑn ðə wɪnd, ən ʃi dʒʌst skaʊlz ət jə ən stɑmps ɔf."

"Well, we'd better do something, al'Thor. She said we'd have a mild winter. And a good harvest. Now you ask her what she hears on the wind, and she just scowls at you and stomps off."

"ɪf jə æskt əɹ ðə weɪ jə juʒəwəli du, wɪt," tæm sɛd peɪʃənli, "jɔɹ lʌki ʃi dɪdn θʌmp jə wɪð ðət stɪk ʃi kæɹiz. naʊ ɪf jə doʊn maɪnd, ðɪs bɹændi - "

"If you asked her the way you usually do, Wit," Tam said patiently, "you're lucky she didn't thump you with that stick she carries. Now if you don't mind, this brandy - "

"nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə ɪz dʒʌs tu jʌŋ tə bi wɪzdəm, ælθɹ. ɪf ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl woʊn də sʌmθɪŋ, ðən ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl əz tə."

"Nynaeve al'Meara is just too young to be Wisdom, al'Thor. If the Women's Circle won't do something, then the Village Council has to."

"wʌt bɪznəs ə jʊɹz ɪz ðə wɪzdəm, wɪt kɔŋɡɝ?" ɹɔɹɾ ə wʊmənz vɔɪs. wɪt flɪntʃt əz ɪz waɪf mɑɹtʃt aʊɾ ə ðə haʊs. deɪz kɔŋɡɝ wɑz twaɪs əz waɪɾ əz wɪt, ə hɑɹd-feɪst wʊmən wɪθaʊɾ ən aʊns ə fæɾ ɑn hɝ. ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm wɪð əɹ fɪsts ɑn əɹ hɪps. "ju tʃɹaɪ mɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn wɪmənz sɝkəl bɪznəs, ən si haʊ jə laɪk iɾɪŋ jəɹ oʊn kʊkɪŋ. wɪtʃ jə woʊn də ɪn maɪ kɪtʃən. ən wɑʃɪŋ jəɹ oʊn kloʊðz ən meɪkɪŋ jəɹ oʊn bɛd. wɪtʃ woʊn bi ʌndɝ maɪ ɹuf."

"What business of yours is the Wisdom, Wit Congar?" roared a woman's voice. Wit flinched as his wife marched out of the house. Daise Congar was twice as wide as Wit, a hard-faced woman without an ounce of fat on her. She glared at him with her fists on her hips. "You try meddling in Women's Circle business, and see how you like eating your own cooking. Which you won't do in my kitchen. And washing your own clothes and making your own bed. Which won't be under my roof."

"bʌt, deɪz," wɪt waɪnd, "aɪ wɑz dʒʌst. . . ."

"But, Daise," Wit whined, "I was just. . . ."

"ɪf jəl pɑɹɾən mi, deɪz," tæm sɛd. "wɪt. ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn jə boʊθ." hi ɡɑt bɛlə muvɪŋ əɡɛn, liɾɪŋ əɹ ɝaʊn ðə skɹɔni fɛloʊ. deɪz wɑz kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn əɹ hʌzbənd naʊ, bʌɾ ɛni mɪnət ʃi kəd ɹilaɪz hum ɪt wɑz wɪt hæd bɪn tɔkɪŋ tə.

"If you'll pardon me, Daise," Tam said. "Wit. The Light shine on you both." He got Bela moving again, leading her around the scrawny fellow. Daise was concentrating on her husband now, but any minute she could realize whom it was Wit had been talking to.

ðət wɑz waɪ ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ æksɛptɪɾ ɛni ʌv ði ɪnvɪteɪʃənz tə stɑp fəɹ ə baɪt tə iɾ əɹ sʌmθɪŋ hɑt tə dʒɹɪŋk. wən ðeɪ sɔ tæm, ðə ɡʊdwaɪvz ʌv ɛmənz fild wɛn ɑn pɔɪn laɪk haʊnz spɑɾɪŋ ə ɹæbət. ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə wʌn ə ðɛm u dɪd nɑt noʊ dʒʌs ðə pɝfəkt waɪf fəɹ ə wɪɾoʊɝ wɪð ə ɡʊd fɑɹm, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz ɪn ðə wɛstwʊd.

That was why they had not accepted any of the invitations to stop for a bite to eat or something hot to drink. When they saw Tam, the goodwives of Emond's Field went on point like hounds spotting a rabbit. There was not a one of them who did not know just the perfect wife for a widower with a good farm, even if it was in the Westwood.

ɹænd stɛpt əlɔŋ dʒʌst əz kwɪkli əz tæm, pɝhæps ivən mɔɹ soʊ. hi wɑz səmtaɪmz kɔɹnɝd wən tæm wɑz nɑɾ ɝaʊnd, wɪð noʊ weɪ tə ɪskeɪp aʊtsaɪɾ ə ɹudnəs. hɝɾɪd ɑntu ə stul baɪ ðə kɪtʃən faɪɝ, hi wəd bi fɛd peɪstʃɹiz əɹ hʌnikeɪks əɹ mitpiz. ən ɔlweɪz ðə ɡʊdwaɪfs aɪz weɪɾ ən mɛʒɝɾ ɪm əz nitli əz ɛni mɝtʃəns skeɪlz ən teɪps waɪl ʃi toʊld ɪm ðət wʌɾ i wɑz iɾɪŋ wɑz nɑt nɪɹli soʊ ɡʊɾ əz əɹ wɪɾoʊd sɪstɝz kʊkɪŋ, əɹ əɹ nɛkst-tə-ɛldəs kʌzənz. tæm wɑz sɝɾənli nɑt ɡɛɾɪŋ ɛni jʌŋɡɝ, ʃi wəd seɪ. ɪt wɑz ɡʊd ðəɾ i hæd lʌvd ɪz waɪf soʊ - ɪt boʊɾɪd wɛl fəɹ ðə nɛkst wʊmən ɪn ɪz laɪf - bʌɾ i hæd mɔɹn lɔŋ ɪnʌf. tæm niɾəd ə ɡʊd wʊmən. ɪt wɑz ə sɪmpəl fækt, ʃi wəd seɪ, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ vɛɹi kloʊs, ðəɾ ə mæn dʒʌs kəd nɑt də wɪθaʊɾ ə wʊmən tə teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪm ən kip ɪm aʊɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl. wɝst ʌv ɔl wɝ ðoʊz u pɔz θɔtfəli əɾ əbaʊt ðət pɔɪnt, ðən æskt wɪð ɪlæbɹət kæʒəɑlnəs ɪɡzækli haʊ oʊld i wɑz naʊ.

Rand stepped along just as quickly as Tam, perhaps even more so. He was sometimes cornered when Tam was not around, with no way to escape outside of rudeness. Herded onto a stool by the kitchen fire, he would be fed pastries or honeycakes or meatpies. And always the goodwife's eyes weighed and measured him as neatly as any merchant's scales and tapes while she told him that what he was eating was not nearly so good as her widowed sister's cooking, or her next-to-eldest cousin's. Tam was certainly not getting any younger, she would say. It was good that he had loved his wife so - it boded well for the next woman in his life - but he had mourned long enough. Tam needed a good woman. It was a simple fact, she would say, or something very close, that a man just could not do without a woman to take care of him and keep him out of trouble. Worst of all were those who paused thoughtfully at about that point, then asked with elaborate casualness exactly how old he was now.

laɪk moʊs tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk, ɹænd hæɾ ə stʃɹɔŋ stʌbɝn stʃɹik. aʊtsaɪɾɝz səmtaɪmz sɛɾ ɪt wɑz ðə pɹaɪm tʃɹeɪɾ ə pipəl ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ðət ðeɪ kəd ɡɪv mjulz lɛsənz ən titʃ stoʊnz. ðə ɡʊdwaɪvz wɝ faɪn ən kaɪnli wɪmən fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt, bʌɾ i heɪɾəd biɪŋ pʊʃt ɪndə ɛniθɪŋ, ən ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪm fil əz ɪf i wɝ biɪŋ pɹɑɾɪd wɪð stɪks. soʊ hi wɔk fæst, ən wɪʃt tæm wəd hɝi bɛlə əlɔŋ.

Like most Two Rivers folk, Rand had a strong stubborn streak. Outsiders sometimes said it was the prime trait of people in the Two Rivers, that they could give mules lessons and teach stones. The goodwives were fine and kindly women for the most part, but he hated being pushed into anything, and they made him feel as if he were being prodded with sticks. So he walked fast, and wished Tam would hurry Bela along.

sun ðə stʃɹiɾ oʊpən ɑntu ðə ɡɹin, ə bɹɔɾ ɪkspæns ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə vɪlədʒ. juʒəwəli kʌvɝd wɪð θɪk ɡɹæs, ðə ɡɹin ðɪs spɹɪŋ ʃoʊɾ oʊnli ə fju fɹɛʃ pætʃəz əmʌŋ ðə jɛloʊɪʃ bɹaʊn ə dɛd ɡɹæs ən ðə blæk ə bɛɹ ɝθ. ə dʌbəl hændfʊl ʌv ɡis wɑɾəld əbaʊt, biɾəli aɪɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn bʌt nɑt faɪndɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ wɝθ pɛkɪŋ, ən sʌmwʌn hæd tɛðɝɾ ə mɪlkoʊ tə kɹɑp ðə spɑɹs ɡɹoʊθ.

Soon the street opened onto the Green, a broad expanse in the middle of the village. Usually covered with thick grass, the Green this spring showed only a few fresh patches among the yellowish brown of dead grass and the black of bare earth. A double handful of geese waddled about, beadily eyeing the ground but not finding anything worth pecking, and someone had tethered a milkcow to crop the sparse growth.

təwɔɹd ðə wɛst ɛn ə ðə ɡɹin, ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪtsɛlf ɡʌʃt aʊɾ ʌv ə loʊ stoʊn aʊtkɹɑp ɪn ə floʊ ðət nɛvɝ feɪld, ə floʊ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə nɑk ə mæn daʊn ən swiɾ ɪnʌf tə dʒʌstəfaɪ ɪts neɪm ə dʌzən taɪmz oʊvɝ. fɹəm ðə spɹɪŋ ðə ɹæpədli waɪɾənɪŋ waɪnspɹɪŋ wɔɾɝ ɹæn swɪfli ɔf tə ði ist, wɪloʊz dɑɾɪŋ ɪts bæŋks ɔl ðə weɪ tə mæstɝ θeɪnz mɪl ən bɪɑnd, əntɪl ɪt splɪɾ ɪndə dʌzənz ə stʃɹimz ɪn ðə swɑmpi dɛpθs ə ðə wɔɾɝwʊd. tu loʊ, ɹeɪl fʊtbɹɪdʒəz kɹɔs ðə klɪɹ stʃɹim ət ðə ɡɹin, ən wʌn bɹɪdʒ waɪɾɝ ðən ði ʌðɝz ən staʊɾ ɪnʌf tə bɛɹ wæɡənz. ðə wæɡən bɹɪdʒ mɑɹkt wɛɹ ðə nɔɹθ ɹoʊd, kʌmɪŋ daʊn fɹəm tɛɹən fɛɹi ən wɑtʃ hɪl, bɪkeɪm ði oʊld ɹoʊd, liɾɪŋ tə dɛvən ɹaɪd. aʊtsaɪɾɝz səmtaɪmz faʊn ɪt fʌni ðət ðə ɹoʊd hæd wʌn neɪm tə ðə nɔɹθ ən ənʌðɝ tə ðə saʊθ, bʌt ðət wɑz ðə weɪ ɪt hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn, əz fɑɹ əz ɛniwʌn ɪn ɛmənz fil nu, ən ðət wɑz ðæt. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf ɹizən fəɹ tu ɹɪvɝz pipəl.

Toward the west end of the Green, the Winespring itself gushed out of a low stone outcrop in a flow that never failed, a flow strong enough to knock a man down and sweet enough to justify its name a dozen times over. From the spring the rapidly widening Winespring Water ran swiftly off to the east, willows dotting its banks all the way to Master Thane's mill and beyond, until it split into dozens of streams in the swampy depths of the Waterwood. Two low, railed footbridges crossed the clear stream at the Green, and one bridge wider than the others and stout enough to bear wagons. The Wagon Bridge marked where the North Road, coming down from Taren Ferry and Watch Hill, became the Old Road, leading to Deven Ride. Outsiders sometimes found it funny that the road had one name to the north and another to the south, but that was the way it had always been, as far as anyone in Emond's Field knew, and that was that. It was a good enough reason for Two Rivers people.

ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə bɹɪdʒəz, ðə maʊnz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪldɪŋ fəɹ ðə bɛl taɪn faɪɝz, θɹi kɛɹfəl stæks ə lɔɡz ɔlmoʊst əz bɪɡ əz haʊsəz. ðeɪ hæd tə bi ɑn klɪɹd dɝt, ʌv kɔɹs, nɑɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹin, ivən spɑɹs əz ɪt wɑz. wʌɾ ə fɛstəvəl dɪd nɑt teɪk pleɪs ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝz wəd hæpən ɑn ðə ɡɹin.

On the far side of the bridges, the mounds were already building for the Bel Tine fires, three careful stacks of logs almost as big as houses. They had to be on cleared dirt, of course, not on the Green, even sparse as it was. What of Festival did not take place around the fires would happen on the Green.

nɪɹ ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ə skɔɹ ʌv oʊldɝ wɪmən sæŋ sɔfli əz ðeɪ ɪɹɛktəd ðə spɹɪŋ poʊl. ʃɔɹn ʌv ɪts bɹæntʃəz, ðə stʃɹeɪt, slɛndɝ tʃɹʌŋk ʌv ə fɝ tʃɹi stʊd tɛn fit haɪ ivən ɪn ðə hoʊl ðeɪ hæd dʌɡ fəɹ ɪt. ə nɑɾ ʌv ɡɝlz tu jʌŋ tə wɛɹ ðɛɹ hɛɹ bɹeɪɾɪd sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ən wɑtʃt ɛnviəsli, əkeɪʒənəli sɪŋɪŋ snætʃɪz ə ðə sɔŋ ðə wɪmən sæŋ.

Near the Winespring a score of older women sang softly as they erected the Spring Pole. Shorn of its branches, the straight, slender trunk of a fir tree stood ten feet high even in the hole they had dug for it. A knot of girls too young to wear their hair braided sat cross-legged and watched enviously, occasionally singing snatches of the song the women sang.

tæm klʌkt ət bɛlə əz ɪf tə meɪk əɹ spiɾ əɹ peɪs, ðoʊ ʃi ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt, ən ɹænd stuɾiəsli kɛpt ɪz aɪz fɹəm wʌt ðə wɪmən wɝ duɪŋ. ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ðə mɛn wəd pɹitɛn tə bi sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn ðə poʊl, ðən ət nun ði ənmɛɹid wɪmən wəd dæns ðə poʊl, ɛntwaɪnɪŋ ɪt wɪð lɔŋ, kʌlɝd ɹɪbənz waɪl ði ənmɛɹid mɛn sæŋ. noʊ wʌn nu wən ðə kʌstəm bɪɡæn əɹ waɪ - ɪt wɑz ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ðət wɑz ðə weɪ ɪt hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ən ɪkskjus tə sɪŋ ən dæns, ən noʊbɑdi ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz niɾəd mʌtʃ ɪkskjus fəɹ ðæt.

Tam clucked at Bela as if to make her speed her pace, though she ignored it, and Rand studiously kept his eyes from what the women were doing. In the morning the men would pretend to be surprised to find the Pole, then at noon the unmarried women would dance the Pole, entwining it with long, colored ribbons while the unmarried men sang. No one knew when the custom began or why - it was another thing that was the way it had always been - but it was an excuse to sing and dance, and nobody in the Two Rivers needed much excuse for that.

ðə hoʊl deɪ ʌv bɛl taɪn wəd bi teɪkən ʌp wɪð sɪŋɪŋ ən dænsɪŋ ən fistɪŋ, wɪð taɪm aʊt fəɹ fʊtʃɹɑsəz, ən kɑntɛsts ɪn ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiθɪŋ. pɹaɪzəz wəd bi ɡɪvən nɑɾ oʊnli ɪn ɑɹtʃɝi, bʌt fəɹ ðə bɛst wɪð ðə slɪŋ, ən ðə kɔɹɾɝstæf. ðəɹ wəd bi kəntɛsts ət sɑlvɪŋ ɹɪɾəlz ən pʌzəlz, ət ðə ɹoʊp tʌɡ, ən lɪftɪŋ ən tɔsɪŋ weɪts, pɹaɪzəz fəɹ ðə bɛst sɪŋɝ, ðə bɛs dænsɝ ən ðə bɛs fɪɾəl pleɪɝ, fəɹ ðə kwɪkɪs tə ʃɪɹ ə ʃip, ivən ðə bɛst ət boʊlz, ən ət dɑɹts.

The whole day of Bel Tine would be taken up with singing and dancing and feasting, with time out for footraces, and contests in almost everything. Prizes would be given not only in archery, but for the best with the sling, and the quarterstaff. There would be contests at solving riddles and puzzles, at the rope tug, and lifting and tossing weights, prizes for the best singer, the best dancer and the best fiddle player, for the quickest to shear a sheep, even the best at bowls, and at darts.

bɛl taɪn wɑz səpoʊz tə kʌm wən spɹɪŋ hæd wɛl ən tʃɹuli ɝaɪvd, ðə fɝs læmz bɔɹn ən ðə fɝs kɹɑp ʌp. ivən wɪð ðə koʊl hæŋɪŋ ɑn, ðoʊ, noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛni aɪdiə ʌv pʊɾɪŋ ɪɾ ɔf. ɛvɹiwʌn kəd juz ə lɪɾəl sɪŋɪŋ ən dænsɪŋ. ən tə tɑp ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɪf ðə ɹumɝz kəd bi bɪlivd, ə ɡɹæn dɪspleɪ ʌv faɪɹwɝks wɑz plæn fəɹ ðə ɡɹin - ɪf ðə fɝs pɛdlɝ ə ðə jɪɹ əpɪɹɾ ɪn taɪm, ʌv kɔɹs. ðət hæd bɪn kɑzɪŋ kənsɪɾɝəbəl tɔk; ɪt wɑz tɛn jɪɹz sɪns ðə læst sətʃ dɪspleɪ, ən ðət wɑz stɪl tɔkt əbaʊt.

Bel Tine was supposed to come when spring had well and truly arrived, the first lambs born and the first crop up. Even with the cold hanging on, though, no one had any idea of putting it off. Everyone could use a little singing and dancing. And to top everything, if the rumors could be believed, a grand display of fireworks was planned for the Green - if the first peddler of the year appeared in time, of course. That had been causing considerable talk; it was ten years since the last such display, and that was still talked about.

ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn stʊɾ ət ði ist ɛn ə ðə ɡɹin, hɑɹd bɪsaɪd ðə wæɡən bɹɪdʒ. ðə fɝs flɔɹ ə ði ɪn wɑz ɹɪvɝ ɹɑk, ðoʊ ðə faʊndeɪʃən wɑz ʌv oʊldɝ stoʊn səm sɛd keɪm fɹəm ðə maʊntənz. ðə waɪtwɑʃt sɛkən stɔɹi - wɛɹ bɹændəlwɪn ælvɪɹ, ði ɪnkipɝ ən meɪɝ ʌv ɛmənz fil fəɹ ðə pæs twɛnti jɪɹz, lɪvd ɪn ðə bæk wɪð ɪz waɪf ən dɔɾɝz - dʒʌɾɪd aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə loʊɝ flɔɹ ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊnd. ɹɛd ɹuf taɪl, ði oʊnli sətʃ ɹuf ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ, ɡlɪɾɝd ɪn ðə wik sʌnlaɪt, ən smoʊk dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm θɹi ʌv ði ɪnz dʌzən tɔl tʃɪmniz.

The Winespring Inn stood at the east end of the Green, hard beside the Wagon Bridge. The first floor of the inn was river rock, though the foundation was of older stone some said came from the mountains. The whitewashed second story - where Brandelwyn al'Vere, the innkeeper and Mayor of Emond's Field for the past twenty years, lived in the back with his wife and daughters - jutted out over the lower floor all the way around. Red roof tile, the only such roof in the village, glittered in the weak sunlight, and smoke drifted from three of the inn's dozen tall chimneys.

ət ðə saʊθ ɛn ə ði ɪn, əweɪ fɹəm ðə stʃɹim, stʃɹɛtʃt ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ʌv ə mʌtʃ lɑɹdʒɝ stoʊn faʊndeɪʃən, wʌns pɑɹɾ ə ði ɪn - əɹ soʊ ɪt wɑz sɛd. ə hjudʒ oʊk ɡɹu ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt naʊ, wɪð ə boʊl θɝɾi peɪsɪz ɝaʊn ən spɹɛɾɪŋ bɹæntʃəz əz θɪk əz ə mæn. ɪn ðə sʌmɝ, bɹæn ælvɪɹ sɛt teɪbəlz ən bɛntʃɪz ʌndɝ ðoʊz bɹæntʃəz, ʃeɪɾi wɪð livz ðɛn, wɛɹ pipəl kəɾ ɛndʒɔɪ ə kʌp ən ə kulɪŋ bɹiz waɪl ðeɪ tɔkt əɹ pɝhæps sɛɾ aʊɾ ə bɔɹd fəɹ ə ɡeɪm ə stoʊnz.

At the south end of the inn, away from the stream, stretched the remains of a much larger stone foundation, once part of the inn - or so it was said. A huge oak grew in the middle of it now, with a bole thirty paces around and spreading branches as thick as a man. In the summer, Bran al'Vere set tables and benches under those branches, shady with leaves then, where people could enjoy a cup and a cooling breeze while they talked or perhaps set out a board for a game of stones.

"hɪɹ wi ɑɹ, læd." tæm ɹitʃt fəɹ bɛləz hɑɹnəs, bʌt ʃi stɑpt ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn bɪfɔɹ ɪz hæn tʌtʃt lɛðɝ. "noʊz ðə weɪ bɛɾɝ ðən aɪ du," hi tʃʌkəld.

"Here we are, lad." Tam reached for Bela's harness, but she stopped in front of the inn before his hand touched leather. "Knows the way better than I do," he chuckled.

əz ðə læs kɹik ə ði æksəl feɪɾəd, bɹæn ælvɪɹ əpɪɹd fɹəm ði ɪn, simɪŋ əz ɔlweɪz tə stɛp tu laɪtli fəɹ ə mæn ə hɪz ɡɝθ, nɪɹli dʌbəl ðəɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn ɛls ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ. ə smaɪl splɪɾ ɪz ɹaʊn feɪs, wɪtʃ wɑz tɑp baɪ ə spɑɹs fɹɪnʒ ʌv ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ. ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ɪn ɪz ʃɝtslivz dɪspaɪt ðə tʃɪl, wɪð ə spɑtləs waɪɾ eɪpɹən ɹæpt ɝaʊn hɪm. ə sɪlvɝ mədæljən ɪn ðə fɔɹm ʌv ə sɛɾ ə bæləns skeɪlz hʌŋ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst.

As the last creak of the axle faded, Bran al'Vere appeared from the inn, seeming as always to step too lightly for a man of his girth, nearly double that of anyone else in the village. A smile split his round face, which was topped by a sparse fringe of gray hair. The innkeeper was in his shirtsleeves despite the chill, with a spotless white apron wrapped around him. A silver medallion in the form of a set of balance scales hung on his chest.

ðə mədæljən, əlɔŋ wɪð ðə fʊl-saɪz sɛɾ ə skeɪlz juz tə weɪ ðə kɔɪnz ə ðə mɝtʃəns u keɪm daʊn fɹəm bɛɹlən fəɹ wʊl əɹ təbæk, wɑz ðə sɪmbəl ə ðə meɪɝz ɔfəs. bɹæn oʊnli wɔɹ ɪt fəɹ dilɪŋ wɪð ðə mɝtʃəns ən fəɹ fɛstəvəl fistdeɪz, ən wɛɾɪŋz. hi hæɾ ɪɾ ɑn ə deɪ ɝli naʊ, bʌt ðət naɪt wɑz wɪntɝnaɪt, ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ bɛl taɪn, wən ɛvɹi wʌn wəd vɪzət bæk ən fɔɹθ ɔlmoʊs ðə hoʊl naɪt lɔŋ ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ smɔl ɡɪfs, hævɪŋ ə baɪt tə iɾ ən ə tʌtʃ tə dʒɹɪŋk əɾ ɛvɹi haʊs. æftɝ ðə wɪntɝ, ɹænd θɔt, hi pɹɑbli kənsɪɾɝz wɪntɝnaɪɾ ɪkskjus ɪnʌf nɑt tə weɪɾ əntɪl təmɑɹoʊ.

The medallion, along with the full-size set of scales used to weigh the coins of the merchants who came down from Baerlon for wool or tabac, was the symbol of the Mayor's office. Bran only wore it for dealing with the merchants and for festival feastdays, and weddings. He had it on a day early now, but that night was Winternight, the night before Bel Tine, when every one would visit back and forth almost the whole night long exchanging small gifts, having a bite to eat and a touch to drink at every house. After the winter, Rand thought, he probably considers Winternight excuse enough not to wait until tomorrow.

"tæm," ðə meɪɝ ʃaʊɾəd əz i hɝid təwɔɹd ðɛm. "ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn mi, ɪts ɡʊd tə si jə ət læst. ən ju, ɹænd. haʊ ɑɹ ju, maɪ bɔɪ?"

"Tam," the Mayor shouted as he hurried toward them. "The Light shine on me, it's good to see you at last. And you, Rand. How are you, my boy?"

"faɪn, mæstɝ ælvɪɹ," ɹænd sɛd. "æn ju, sɝ?" bʌt bɹænz ətɛnʃən wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi bæk ɑn tæm.

"Fine, Master al'Vere," Rand said. "And you, sir?" But Bran's attention was already back on Tam.

"aɪ wɑz ɔlmoʊs bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk jə wʊdn bi bɹɪŋɪŋ jəɹ bɹændi ðɪs jɪɹ. juv nɛvɝ weɪɾəd soʊ leɪt bɪfɔɹ."

"I was almost beginning to think you wouldn't be bringing your brandy this year. You've never waited so late before."

"aɪv noʊ laɪkɪŋ fəɹ livɪŋ ðə fɑɹm ðiz deɪz, bɹæn," tæm ɹɪplaɪd. "nɑt wɪð ðə wʊlvz ðə weɪ ðeɪ ɑɹ. ən ðə wɛðɝ."

"I've no liking for leaving the farm these days, Bran," Tam replied. "Not with the wolves the way they are. And the weather."

bɹæn hæɹəmft. "aɪ kəd wɪʃ sʌmbɑɾi wɑntəd tə tɔk əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ bɪsaɪdz ðə wɛðɝ. ɛvɹiwʌn kəmpleɪnz əbaʊɾ ɪt, ən foʊk u ʃəd noʊ bɛɾɝ ɪkspɛk mi tə sɛɾ ɪt ɹaɪt. aɪv dʒʌst spɛn twɛnti mɪnəts ɪkspleɪnɪŋ tə mɪstʃɹəs ɑldənəl ðəɾ aɪ kən də nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə stɔɹks. ðoʊ wʌt ʃi ɪkspɛktəd mi tə du. . . ." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

Bran harrumphed. "I could wish somebody wanted to talk about something besides the weather. Everyone complains about it, and folk who should know better expect me to set it right. I've just spent twenty minutes explaining to Mistress al'Donel that I can do nothing about the storks. Though what she expected me to do. . . ." He shook his head.

"æn ɪl oʊmən," ə skɹætʃi vɔɪs ənaʊnst, "noʊ stɔɹks nɛstɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹuftɑps ət bɛl taɪn." sɛn bui, əz nɑɹld ən dɑɹk əz ən oʊld ɹut, mɑɹtʃt ʌp tə tæm ən bɹæn ən lin ɑn ɪz wɔkɪŋ stæf, nɪɹ əz tɔl əz i wɑz ən dʒʌst əz nɑɹld. hi tʃɹaɪd tə fɪks boʊθ mɛn ət wʌns wɪð ə biɾi aɪ. "ðɛɹz wɝs tə kʌm, jə mɑɹk maɪ wɝdz."

"An ill omen," a scratchy voice announced, "no storks nesting on the rooftops at Bel Tine." Cenn Buie, as gnarled and dark as an old root, marched up to Tam and Bran and leaned on his walking staff, near as tall as he was and just as gnarled. He tried to fix both men at once with a beady eye. "There's worse to come, you mark my words."

"hæv jə bɪkʌm ə suθseɪɝ, ðɛn, ɪntɝpɹɛɾɪŋ oʊmənz?" tæm æsk dʒɹaɪli. "ɔɹ dʒju lɪsən tə ðə wɪnd, laɪk ə wɪzdəm? ðɛɹz sɝɾənli ɪnʌf ʌv ɪt. səm ɝɪdʒəneɪɾɪŋ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm hɪɹ."

"Have you become a soothsayer, then, interpreting omens?" Tam asked dryly. "Or do you listen to the wind, like a Wisdom? There's certainly enough of it. Some originating not far from here."

"mɑk ɪf jə wɪl," sɛn mʌɾɝd, "bʌɾ ɪf ɪt dʌznt wɔɹm ɪnʌf fəɹ kɹɑps tə spɹaʊt sun, mɔɹ ðən wʌn ɹut sɛlɝ wɪl kʌm ʌp ɛmpti bɪfɔɹ ðɛɹz ə hɑɹvəst. baɪ nɛkst wɪntɝ ðəɹ meɪ bi nʌθɪŋ lɛft əlaɪv ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz bʌt wʊlvz ən ɹeɪvənz. ɪf ɪts nɛkst wɪntɝ əɾ ɔl. meɪbi ɪɾəl stɪl bi ðɪs wɪntɝ."

"Mock if you will," Cenn muttered, "but if it doesn't warm enough for crops to sprout soon, more than one root cellar will come up empty before there's a harvest. By next winter there may be nothing left alive in the Two Rivers but wolves and ravens. If it is next winter at all. Maybe it will still be this winter."

"naʊ wʌɾ ɪz ðət səpoʊz tə min?" bɹæn sɛd ʃɑɹpli.

"Now what is that supposed to mean?" Bran said sharply.

sɛn ɡeɪv əm ə saʊɝ lʊk. "aɪv nɑt mʌtʃ ɡʊd tə seɪ əbaʊt nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə. jə noʊ ðæt. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ʃiz tu jʌŋ tə - noʊ mæɾɝ. ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl simz tə əbdʒɛk tə ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl ivən tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs, ðoʊ ðeɪ ɪntɝfɪɹ ɪn aʊɝz wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ wɑn tə, wɪtʃ ɪz moʊst ə ðə taɪm, əɹ soʊ ɪt simz tə - "

Cenn gave them a sour look. "I've not much good to say about Nynaeve al'Meara. You know that. For one thing, she's too young to - No matter. The Women's Circle seems to object to the Village Council even talking about their business, though they interfere in ours whenever they want to, which is most of the time, or so it seems to - "

"sɛn," tæm bɹoʊk ɪn, "ɪz ðəɹ ə pɔɪn tə ðɪs?"

"Cenn," Tam broke in, "is there a point to this?"

"ðɪs ɪz ðə pɔɪnt, ælθɹ. æsk ðə wɪzdəm wən ðə wɪntɝ wɪl ɛnd, ən ʃi wɔks əweɪ. meɪbi ʃi dʌznt wɑnə tɛl əs wʌt ʃi hɪɹz ɑn ðə wɪnd. meɪbi wʌt ʃi hɪɹz ɪz ðət ðə wɪntɝ woʊn ɛnd. meɪbi ɪts dʒʌs gɑnə ɡoʊ ɑn biɪŋ wɪntɝ əntɪl ðə wil tɝnz ən ði eɪdʒ ɛnz. ðɛɹz jəɹ pɔɪnt."

"This is the point, al'Thor. Ask the Wisdom when the winter will end, and she walks away. Maybe she doesn't want to tell us what she hears on the wind. Maybe what she hears is that the winter won't end. Maybe it's just going to go on being winter until the Wheel turns and the Age ends. There's your point."

"meɪbi ʃip wɪl flaɪ," tæm ɹitɔɹɾɪd, ən bɹæn θɹu ʌp ɪz hænz.

"Maybe sheep will fly," Tam retorted, and Bran threw up his hands.

"ðə laɪt pɹətɛk mi fɹəm fulz. jə sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl, sɛn, ən naʊ jəɹ spɹɛɾɪŋ ðət kɑplɪn tɔk. wɛl, jə lɪsən tə mi. wɪv ɪnʌf pɹɑbləmz wɪθaʊt. . . ."

"The Light protect me from fools. You sitting on the Village Council, Cenn, and now you're spreading that Coplin talk. Well, you listen to me. We have enough problems without. . . ."

ə kwɪk tʌɡ ət ɹændz sliv ən ə vɔɪs pɪtʃt loʊ, fəɹ ɪz ɪɹ əloʊn, dɪstʃɹæktəɾ ɪm fɹəm ði oʊldɝ mɛnz tɔk. "kʌm ɑn, ɹænd, waɪl ðəɹ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ. bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ pʊt jə tə wɝk."

A quick tug at Rand's sleeve and a voice pitched low, for his ear alone, distracted him from the older men's talk. "Come on, Rand, while they're arguing. Before they put you to work."

ɹænd ɡlæns daʊn, ən hæd tə ɡɹɪn. mæt kɔθən kɹaʊtʃt bɪsaɪd ðə kɑɹt soʊ tæm ən bɹæn ən sɛn kəd nɑt si hɪm, hɪz wɪɹi bɑɾi kəntɔɹɾəd laɪk ə stɔɹk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɛn ɪtsɛlf dʌbəl.

Rand glanced down, and had to grin. Mat Cauthon crouched beside the cart so Tam and Bran and Cenn could not see him, his wiry body contorted like a stork trying to bend itself double.

mæts bɹaʊn aɪz twɪŋkəld wɪð mɪstʃəf, əz juʒəwəl. "dæv ən aɪ kɑɾ ə bɪɡ oʊl bædʒɝ, ɔl ɡɹaʊtʃi ət biɪŋ pʊld aʊɾ ə hɪz dɛn. wɝ gɑnə lɛɾ ɪt lus ɑn ðə ɡɹin ən wɑtʃ ðə ɡɝlz ɹʌn."

Mat's brown eyes twinkled with mischief, as usual. "Dav and I caught a big old badger, all grouchy at being pulled out of his den. We're going to let it loose on the Green and watch the girls run."

ɹændz smaɪl bɹɔɾənd; ɪt dɪd nɑt saʊn əz mʌtʃ laɪk fʌn tə hɪm əz ɪt wəɾ əv ə jɪɹ əɹ tu bæk, bʌt mæt nɛvɝ sim tə ɡɹoʊ ʌp. hi tʊk ə kwɪk lʊk əɾ ɪz fɑðɝ - ðə mɛn hæd ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ stɪl, ɔl θɹi tɔkɪŋ ət wʌns - ðən loʊɝɾ ɪz oʊn vɔɪs. "aɪ pɹɑməs tə ənloʊd ðə saɪɾɝ. aɪ kən mit jə leɪɾɝ, ðoʊ."

Rand's smile broadened; it did not sound as much like fun to him as it would have a year or two back, but Mat never seemed to grow up. He took a quick look at his father - the men had their heads together still, all three talking at once - then lowered his own voice. "I promised to unload the cider. I can meet you later, though."

mæt ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz skaɪwɝd. "toʊɾɪŋ bæɹəlz! bɝn mi, aɪd ɹæðɝ pleɪ stoʊnz wɪð maɪ beɪbi sɪstɝ. wɛl, aɪ noʊ ʌv bɛɾɝ θɪŋz ðən ə bædʒɝ. wɪv stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. læst ivnɪŋ - "

Mat rolled his eyes skyward. "Toting barrels! Burn me, I'd rather play stones with my baby sister. Well, I know of better things than a badger. We have strangers in the Two Rivers. Last evening - "

fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɹænd stɑp bɹiðɪŋ. "ə mæn ɑn hɔɹsbæk?" hi æskt ɪntɛnli. "ə mæn ɪn ə blæk kloʊk, ɑn ə blæk hɔɹs? ən ɪz kloʊk dʌzn muv ɪn ðə wɪnd?"

For an instant Rand stopped breathing. "A man on horseback?" he asked intently. "A man in a black cloak, on a black horse? And his cloak doesn't move in the wind?"

mæt swɑloʊɾ ɪz ɡɹɪn, ən ɪz vɔɪs dʒɹɑp tə ən ivən hɔɹsɝ wɪspɝ. "ju sɔ hɪm, tu? aɪ θɔɾ aɪ wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn. doʊn læf, ɹænd, bʌɾ i skɛɹd mi."

Mat swallowed his grin, and his voice dropped to an even hoarser whisper. "You saw him, too? I thought I was the only one. Don't laugh, Rand, but he scared me."

"aɪm nɑt læfɪŋ. hi skɛɹd mi, tu. aɪ kəd swɛɹ i heɪɾəd mi, ðəɾ i wɑntəd tə kɪl mi." ɹænd ʃɪvɝd. əntɪl ðət deɪ hi hæd nɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn wɑntɪŋ tə kɪl hɪm, ɹɪli wɑntɪŋ tə kɪl hɪm. ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ dʒʌs dɪd nɑt hæpən ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ə fɪstfaɪt, meɪbi, əɹ ə ɹɛslɪŋ mætʃ, bʌt nɑt kɪlɪŋ.

"I'm not laughing. He scared me, too. I could swear he hated me, that he wanted to kill me." Rand shivered. Until that day he had never thought of anyone wanting to kill him, really wanting to kill him. That sort of thing just did not happen in the Two Rivers. A fistfight, maybe, or a wrestling match, but not killing.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt heɪɾɪŋ, ɹænd, bʌɾ i wɑz skɛɹi ɪnʌf ɛniweɪ. ɔl i dɪd wɑz sɪɾ ɑn ɪz hɔɹs lʊkɪŋ ət mi, dʒʌst aʊtsaɪd ðə vɪlədʒ, bʌɾ aɪv nɛvɝ bɪn soʊ fɹaɪɾənd ɪn maɪ laɪf. wɛl, aɪ lʊkt əweɪ, dʒʌs fəɹ ə moʊmənt - ɪt wɑzn izi, maɪn jə - ðən wən aɪ lʊk bæk hid vænɪʃt. blʌɾ ən æʃəz! θɹi deɪz, ɪts bɪn, ən aɪ kən hɑɹdli stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm. aɪ kip lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ maɪ ʃoʊldɝ." mæt ətɛmptəɾ ə læf ðət keɪm aʊɾ əz ə kɹoʊk. "fʌni haʊ biɪŋ skɛɹd teɪks ju. jə θɪŋk stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz. aɪ æktʃəli  θɔt - dʒʌs fəɹ ə mɪnət, maɪnd - ɪt maɪt bi ðə dɑɹk wʌn." hi tʃɹaɪɾ ənʌðɝ læf, bʌt noʊ saʊn əɾ ɔl keɪm aʊt ðɪs taɪm.

"I don't know about hating, Rand, but he was scary enough anyway. All he did was sit on his horse looking at me, just outside the village, but I've never been so frightened in my life. Well, I looked away, just for a moment - it wasn't easy, mind you - then when I looked back he'd vanished. Blood and ashes! Three days, it's been, and I can hardly stop thinking about him. I keep looking over my shoulder." Mat attempted a laugh that came out as a croak. "Funny how being scared takes you. You think strange things. I actually thought - just for a minute, mind - it might be the Dark One." He tried another laugh, but no sound at all came out this time.

ɹænd tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. əz mʌtʃ tə ɹimaɪn hɪmsɛlf əz fəɹ ɛni ʌðɝ ɹizən, hi sɛd baɪ ɹoʊt, "ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ɔl ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ baʊn ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, bɪɑn ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, baʊn baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ət ðə moʊmən ə kɹieɪʃən, baʊn əntɪl ði ɛn ə taɪm. ðə hæn ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ʃɛltɝz ðə wɝld, ən ðə laɪt ʃaɪnz ɑn əs ɔl." hi dʒɹu ənʌðɝ bɹɛθ ən wɛn ɑn. "bɪsaɪdz, ɪf i wɑz fɹi, wʌt wəd ðə ʃɛpɝɾ ə ðə naɪt bi duɪŋ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑtʃɪŋ fɑɹmbɔɪz?"

Rand took a deep breath. As much to remind himself as for any other reason, he said by rote, "The Dark One and all of the Forsaken are bound in Shayol Ghul, beyond the Great Blight, bound by the Creator at the moment of Creation, bound until the end of time. The hand of the Creator shelters the world, and the Light shines on us all." He drew another breath and went on. "Besides, if he was free, what would the Shepherd of the Night be doing in the Two Rivers watching farmboys?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ. bʌɾ aɪ də noʊ ðət ɹaɪɾɝ wɑz . . . ivəl. doʊn læf. əl teɪk oʊθ ɑn ɪt. meɪbi ɪt wɑz ðə dʒɹæɡən."

"I don't know. But I do know that rider was . . . evil. Don't laugh. I'll take oath on it. Maybe it was the Dragon."

"jɔɹ dʒʌs fʊl ə tʃɪɹfəl θɔts, ɑɹən ju?" ɹænd mʌɾɝd. "ju saʊnd wɝs ðən sɛn."

"You're just full of cheerful thoughts, aren't you?" Rand muttered. "You sound worse than Cenn."

"maɪ mʌðɝ ɔlweɪz sɛd ðə fɔɹseɪkən wəd kʌm fəɹ mi ɪf aɪ dɪdn mɛn maɪ weɪz. ɪf aɪ ɛvɝ sɔ ɛnibəɾi hu lʊk laɪk ɪʃəml, əɹ eɪdʒɪnɝ, ɪt wɑz hɪm."

"My mother always said the Forsaken would come for me if I didn't mend my ways. If I ever saw anybody who looked like Ishamael, or Aginor, it was him."

"ɛvɹibɑɾiz mʌðɝ skɛɹɾ əm wɪð ðə fɔɹseɪkən," ɹænd sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "bʌt moʊst ɡɹoʊ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. waɪ nɑt ðə ʃæɾoʊmən, waɪl jəɹ əbaʊɾ ɪt?"

"Everybody's mother scared them with the Forsaken," Rand said dryly, "but most grow out of it. Why not the Shadowman, while you're about it?"

mæt ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "aɪ hævən bɪn soʊ skɛɹd sɪns. . . . noʊ, aɪv nɛvɝ bɪn ðət skɛɹd, ən aɪ doʊn maɪn ædmɪɾɪŋ ɪt."

Mat glared at him. "I haven't been so scared since. . . . No, I've never been that scared, and I don't mind admitting it."

"mi, iðɝ. maɪ fɑðɝ θɪŋks aɪ wɑz dʒʌmpɪŋ ət ʃædoʊz ʌndɝ ðə tʃɹiz."

"Me, either. My father thinks I was jumping at shadows under the trees."

mæt nɑɾəd ɡlʌmli ən lin bæk əɡɛns ðə kɑɹt wil. "soʊ dʌz maɪ dɑ. aɪ toʊl dæv, ən ɛləm daʊtʃɹi. ðeɪv bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ laɪk hɔks ɛvɝ sɪns, bʌt ðeɪ hævən sin ɛniθɪŋ. naʊ ɛləm θɪŋks aɪ wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃɹɪk hɪm. dæv θɪŋks hiz daʊn fɹəm tɛɹən fɛɹi - ə ʃipstilɝ, əɹ ə tʃɪkɪnθif. ə tʃɪkɪnθif!" hi læpst ɪndə əfɹʌntɪd saɪləns.

Mat nodded glumly and leaned back against the cart wheel. "So does my da. I told Dav, and Elam Dowtry. They've been watching like hawks ever since, but they haven't seen anything. Now Elam thinks I was trying to trick him. Dav thinks he's down from Taren Ferry - a sheepstealer, or a chickenthief. A chickenthief!" He lapsed into affronted silence.

"ɪts pɹɑbli ɔl fulɪʃnəs ɛniweɪ," ɹænd sɛd faɪnəli. "meɪbi hiz dʒʌst ə ʃipstilɝ." hi tʃɹaɪd tə pɪktʃɝ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz laɪk pɪktʃɝɪŋ ə wʊlf teɪkɪŋ ðə kæts pleɪs ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə maʊs hoʊl.

"It's probably all foolishness anyway," Rand said finally. "Maybe he is just a sheepstealer." He tried to picture it, but it was like picturing a wolf taking the cat's place in front of a mouse hole.

"wɛl, aɪ dɪdn laɪk ðə weɪ hi lʊkt ət mi. ən niðɝ dɪd ju, nɑɾ ɪf haʊ jə dʒʌmpt ət mi ɪz ɛni ɡaɪd. wi ɔt tə tɛl sʌmwʌn."

"Well, I didn't like the way he looked at me. And neither did you, not if how you jumped at me is any guide. We ought to tell someone."

"wi ɔlɹɛɾi hæv, mæt, boʊθ ʌv ʌs, ən wi wɝn bɪlivd. kən jə ɪmædʒən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns mæstɝ ælvɪɹ əbaʊt ðɪs fɛloʊ, wɪθaʊɾ ɪm siɪŋ hɪm? hid sɛn əs ɔf tə nɪneɪiv tə si ɪf wi wɝ sɪk."

"We already have, Mat, both of us, and we weren't believed. Can you imagine trying to convince Master al'Vere about this fellow, without him seeing him? He'd send us off to Nynaeve to see if we were sick."

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ tu ʌv ʌs, naʊ. noʊbɑdi kəd bɪliv wi boʊθ ɪmædʒən ɪt."

"There are two of us, now. Nobody could believe we both imagined it."

ɹænd ɹʌb ðə tɑp ə hɪz hɛd bɹɪskli, wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt tə seɪ. mæt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə baɪwɝɾ ɝaʊn ðə vɪlədʒ. fju pipəl hæɾ ɪskeɪpt ɪz pɹæŋks. naʊ hɪz neɪm keɪm ʌp wɛnɛvɝ ə wɑʃlaɪn dʒɹɑp ðə lɔnʒɹi ɪn ðə dɝɾ əɹ ə lus sæɾəl ɡɝθ dəpɑzɪɾɪd ə fɑɹmɝ ɪn ðə ɹoʊd. mæt dɪd nɑɾ ivən əv tə bi ɛniwɛɹ ɝaʊnd. hɪz səpɔɹt maɪt bi wɝs ðən nʌn.

Rand rubbed the top of his head briskly, wondering what to say. Mat was something of a byword around the village. Few people had escaped his pranks. Now his name came up whenever a washline dropped the laundry in the dirt or a loose saddle girth deposited a farmer in the road. Mat did not even have to be anywhere around. His support might be worse than none.

æftɝ ə moʊmən ɹænd sɛd, "jɔɹ fɑðɝ wəd bɪliv jə pʊt mi ʌp tə ɪt, ən maɪn. . . ." hi lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə kɑɹt tə wɛɹ tæm ən bɹæn ən sɛn hæd bɪn tɔkɪŋ, ən faʊn hɪmsɛlf stɛɹɪŋ ɪz fɑðɝ ɪn ði aɪz. ðə meɪɝ wɑz stɪl lɛktʃɝɪŋ sɛn, hu tʊk ɪt naʊ ɪn sʌlən saɪləns.

After a moment Rand said, "Your father would believe you put me up to it, and mine. . . ." He looked over the cart to where Tam and Bran and Cenn had been talking, and found himself staring his father in the eyes. The Mayor was still lecturing Cenn, who took it now in sullen silence.

"ɡʊd mɔɹnɪŋ, meɪtʃɹim," tæm sɛd bɹaɪtli, hɛftɪŋ wʌn ə ðə bɹændi kæsks ʌp ɑntu ðə saɪɾ ə ðə kɑɹt. "aɪ si juv kʌm tə hɛlp ɹænd ənloʊd ðə saɪɾɝ. ɡʊd læd."

"Good morning, Matrim," Tam said brightly, hefting one of the brandy casks up onto the side of the cart. "I see you've come to help Rand unload the cider. Good lad."

mæt lɛp tə hɪz fiɾ ət ðə fɝst wɝɾ ən bɪɡæn bækɪŋ əweɪ. "ɡʊd mɔɹnɪŋ tə ju, mæstɝ ælθɹ. ən tə ju, mæstɝ ælvɪɹ. mæstɝ bui. meɪ ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ju. maɪ dɑ sɛn mi tə - "

Mat leaped to his feet at the first word and began backing away. "Good morning to you, Master al'Thor. And to you, Master al'Vere. Master Buie. May the Light shine on you. My da sent me to - "

"noʊ daʊɾ i dɪd," tæm sɛd. "ænd noʊ daʊt, sɪns jə ɑɹ ə læɾ u dʌz ɪz tʃɔɹz ɹaɪɾ ɔf, juv fɪnɪʃt ðə tæsk ɔlɹɛɾi. wɛl, ðə kwɪkɝ jə lædz ɡɛt ðə saɪɾɝ ɪndə mæstɝ ælvɪɹz sɛlɝ, ðə kwɪkɝ jə kən si ðə ɡlimən."

"No doubt he did," Tam said. "And no doubt, since you are a lad who does his chores right off, you've finished the task already. Well, the quicker you lads get the cider into Master al'Vere's cellar, the quicker you can see the gleeman."

"ɡlimən!" mæt ɪkskleɪmd, stɑpɪŋ dɛɾ ɪn ɪz fʊtstɛps, ət ðə seɪm ɪnstən ðət ɹænd æskt, "wɛn wɪl i ɡɛt hɪɹ?"

"Gleeman!" Mat exclaimed, stopping dead in his footsteps, at the same instant that Rand asked, "When will he get here?"

ɹænd kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ oʊnli tu ɡlimən kʌmɪŋ ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪn ɪz hoʊl laɪf, ən fəɹ wʌn ə ðoʊz i hæd bɪn jʌŋ ɪnʌf tə sɪɾ ɑn tæmz ʃoʊldɝz tə wɑtʃ. tə hæv wʌn ðəɹ æktʃəli  dʊɹɪŋ bɛl taɪn, wɪð ɪz hɑɹp ən ɪz fluɾ ən ɪz stɔɹiz ən ɔl. . . . ɛmənz fild wəd stɪl bi tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðɪs fɛstəvəl tɛn jɪɹz ɔf, ivən ɪf ðəɹ wɝ nɑɾ ɛni faɪɹwɝks.

Rand could remember only two gleemen coming into the Two Rivers in his whole life, and for one of those he had been young enough to sit on Tam's shoulders to watch. To have one there actually during Bel Tine, with his harp and his flute and his stories and all. . . . Emond's Field would still be talking about this Festival ten years off, even if there were not any fireworks.

"fulɪʃnəs," sɛn ɡɹʌmbəld, bʌt fɛl saɪlən əɾ ə lʊk fɹəm bɹæn ðət hæɾ ɔl ðə weɪɾ ə ðə meɪɝz ɔfəs ɪn ɪt.

"Foolishness," Cenn grumbled, but fell silent at a look from Bran that had all the weight of the Mayor's office in it.

tæm lin əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ə ðə kɑɹt, juzɪŋ ðə bɹændi kæsk əz ə pɹɑp fəɹ ɪz ɑɹm. "jɛs, ə ɡlimən, ən ɔlɹɛɾi hɪɹ. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə mæstɝ ælvɪɹ, hiz ɪn ə ɹum ɪn ði ɪn ɹaɪt naʊ."

Tam leaned against the side of the cart, using the brandy cask as a prop for his arm. "Yes, a gleeman, and already here. According to Master al'Vere, he's in a room in the inn right now."

"ɝaɪvd ɪn ðə dɛɾ ə naɪt, hi dɪd." ði ɪnkipɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn dɪsəpɹuvəl. "paʊndɪɾ ɑn ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ tɪl i woʊk ðə hoʊl fæmli. ɪf nɑt fəɹ fɛstəvəl, aɪɾ əv toʊld ɪm tə steɪbəl ɪz oʊn hɔɹs ən slip ɪn ðə stɔl wɪð ɪt, ɡlimən əɹ nɑt. ɪmædʒən kʌmɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹk laɪk ðæt."

"Arrived in the dead of night, he did." The innkeeper shook his head in disapproval. "Pounded on the front door till he woke the whole family. If not for Festival, I'd have told him to stable his own horse and sleep in the stall with it, gleeman or not. Imagine coming in the dark like that."

ɹænd stɛɹd wʌndɝɪŋli. noʊ wʌn tʃɹævəl bɪɑn ðə vɪlədʒ baɪ naɪt, nɑt ðiz deɪz, sɝɾənli nɑɾ əloʊn. ðə θætʃɝ ɡɹʌmbəld ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ əɡɛn, tu loʊ ðɪs taɪm fəɹ ɹænd tə ʌndɝstæn mɔɹ ðən ə wɝɾ əɹ tu. "mædmæn" ən "ənnætʃɹəl."

Rand stared wonderingly. No one traveled beyond the village by night, not these days, certainly not alone. The thatcher grumbled under his breath again, too low this time for Rand to understand more than a word or two. "Madman" and "unnatural."

"hi dʌznt wɛɹ ə blæk kloʊk, dʌz hi?" mæt æsk sʌɾənli.

"He doesn't wear a black cloak, does he?" Mat asked suddenly.

bɹænz bɛli ʃʊk wɪð ɪz tʃʌkəl. "blæk! hɪz kloʊk ɪz laɪk ɛvɹi ɡlimənz kloʊk aɪv ɛvɝ sin. mɔɹ pætʃəz ðən kloʊk, ən mɔɹ kʌlɝz ðən jə kən θɪŋk ʌv."

Bran's belly shook with his chuckle. "Black! His cloak is like every gleeman's cloak I've ever seen. More patches than cloak, and more colors than you can think of."

ɹænd stɑɹɾəld hɪmsɛlf baɪ læfɪŋ aʊt laʊd, ə læf ə pjʊɹ ɹɪlif. ðə mɛnəsɪŋ blæk-klæd ɹaɪɾɝ əz ə ɡlimən wɑz ə ɹɪdɪkjələs noʊʃən, bʌt. . . . hi klæpt ə hæn oʊvɝ ɪz maʊθ ɪn ɪmbɛɹəsmənt.

Rand startled himself by laughing out loud, a laugh of pure relief. The menacing black-clad rider as a gleeman was a ridiculous notion, but. . . . He clapped a hand over his mouth in embarrassment.

"ju si, tæm," bɹæn sɛd. "ðɛɹz bɪn lɪɾəl ɪnʌf læftɝ ɪn ðɪs vɪlədʒ sɪns wɪntɝ keɪm. naʊ ivən ðə ɡlimənz kloʊk bɹɪŋz ə læf. ðəɾ əloʊn ɪz wɝθ ði ɪkspɛns ə bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪm daʊn fɹəm bɛɹlən."

"You see, Tam," Bran said. "There's been little enough laughter in this village since winter came. Now even the gleeman's cloak brings a laugh. That alone is worth the expense of bringing him down from Baerlon."

"seɪ wʌt jə wɪl," sɛn spoʊk ʌp sʌɾənli. "aɪ stɪl seɪ ɪts ə fulɪʃ weɪst ə mʌni. ən ðoʊz faɪɹwɝks jə ɔl ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn sɛndɪŋ ɔf fɔɹ."

"Say what you will," Cenn spoke up suddenly. "I still say it's a foolish waste of money. And those fireworks you all insisted on sending off for."

"soʊ ðəɹ ɑɹ faɪɹwɝks," mæt sɛd, bʌt sɛn wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn.

"So there are fireworks," Mat said, but Cenn went right on.

"ðeɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn hɪɹ ə mʌnθ əɡoʊ wɪð ðə fɝs pɛdlɝ ə ðə jɪɹ, bʌt ðəɹ hæzən bɪn ə pɛdlɝ, hæz ðɛɹ? ɪf i dʌzn kʌm baɪ təmɑɹoʊ, wʌɾ ɑɹ wi gɑnə də wɪð ðɛm? hoʊld ənʌðɝ fɛstəvəl dʒʌs tə sɛɾ əm ɔf? ðæts ɪf i ivən bɹɪŋz ðɛm, ʌv kɔɹs."

"They should have been here a month ago with the first peddler of the year, but there hasn't been a peddler, has there? If he doesn't come by tomorrow, what are we going to do with them? Hold another Festival just to set them off? That's if he even brings them, of course."

"sɛn" - tæm saɪd - "juv əz mʌtʃ tʃɹʌst əz ə tɛɹən fɛɹi mæn."

"Cenn" - Tam sighed - "you've as much trust as a Taren Ferry man."

"wɛɹ ɪz hi, ðɛn? tɛl mi ðæt, ælθɹ."

"Where is he, then? Tell me that, al'Thor."

"waɪ dɪdn jə tɛl ʌs?" mæt dɪmændəɾ ɪn ən əɡɹivd vɔɪs. "ðə hoʊl vɪlədʒ wʊɾə hæɾ əz mʌtʃ fʌn wɪð ðə weɪɾɪŋ əz wɪð ðə ɡlimən. əɹ ɔlmoʊst, ɛniweɪ. jə kən si haʊ ɛvɹibɑɾiz bɪn oʊvɝ dʒʌst ə ɹumɝ ə faɪɹwɝks."

"Why didn't you tell us?" Mat demanded in an aggrieved voice. "The whole village would have had as much fun with the waiting as with the gleeman. Or almost, anyway. You can see how everybody's been over just a rumor of fireworks."

"aɪ kən si," bɹæn ɹɪplaɪd wɪð ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk ət ðə θætʃɝ. "æn ɪf aɪ nu fəɹ ʃʊɹ haʊ ðət ɹumɝ stɑɹɾəd . . . ɪf aɪ θɔt, fəɹ ɪnstəns, ðət sʌmbɑɾi hæd bɪn kəmpleɪnɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ mʌtʃ θɪŋz kɑst wɛɹ pipəl kəd hɪɹ ɪm wən ðə θɪŋz ɑɹ səpoʊz tə bi sikɹət. . . ."

"I can see," Bran replied with a sidelong look at the thatcher. "And if I knew for sure how that rumor started . . . if I thought, for instance, that somebody had been complaining about how much things cost where people could hear him when the things are supposed to be secret. . . ."

sɛn klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "maɪ boʊnz ɑɹ tu oʊl fəɹ ðɪs wɪnd. ɪf jə doʊn maɪnd, əl dʒʌst si ɪf mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ woʊn fɪks mi səm mʌld waɪn tə teɪk ðə tʃɪl ɔf. meɪɝ. ælθɹ." hi wɑz hɛɾəd fəɹ ði ɪn bɪfɔɹ i fɪnɪʃt, ən əz ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɪm, bɹæn saɪd.

Cenn cleared his throat. "My bones are too old for this wind. If you don't mind, I'll just see if Mistress al'Vere won't fix me some mulled wine to take the chill off. Mayor. Al'Thor." He was headed for the inn before he finished, and as the door swung shut behind him, Bran sighed.

"səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk nɪneɪiv ɪz ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt. . . . wɛl, ðæts nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt naʊ. jə jʌŋ fɛloʊz θɪŋk fəɹ ə mɪnət. ɛvɹiwʌnz ɪksaɪɾəd əbaʊt ðə faɪɹwɝks, tʃɹu, ən ðæts oʊnli əɾ ə ɹumɝ. θɪŋk haʊ ðəl bi ɪf ðə pɛdlɝ dʌznt ɡɛt hɪɹ ɪn taɪm, æftɝ ɔl ðɛɹ æntɪsəpeɪɾɪŋ. ən wɪð ðə wɛðɝ ðə weɪ ɪɾ ɪz, hu noʊz wən hɪl kʌm. ðeɪd bi fɪfti taɪmz əz ɪksaɪɾəd əbaʊɾ ə ɡlimən."

"Sometimes I think Nynaeve is right about. . . . Well, that's not important now. You young fellows think for a minute. Everyone's excited about the fireworks, true, and that's only at a rumor. Think how they'll be if the peddler doesn't get here in time, after all their anticipating. And with the weather the way it is, who knows when he will come. They'd be fifty times as excited about a gleeman."

"æn fil fɪfti taɪmz əz bæɾ ɪf i hædn kʌm," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. "ivən bɛl taɪn maɪt nɑt də mʌtʃ fəɹ pipəlz spɪɹəts æftɝ ðæt."

"And feel fifty times as bad if he hadn't come," Rand said slowly. "Even Bel Tine might not do much for people's spirits after that."

"ju hæv ə hɛɾ ɑn jəɹ ʃoʊldɝz wən jə tʃuz tə juz ɪt," bɹæn sɛd. "hil fɑloʊ jə ɑn ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl wʌn deɪ, tæm. mɑɹk maɪ wɝdz. hi kʊdn də mʌtʃ wɝs ɹaɪt naʊ ðən sʌmwʌn aɪ kəd neɪm."

"You have a head on your shoulders when you choose to use it," Bran said. "He'll follow you on the Village Council one day, Tam. Mark my words. He couldn't do much worse right now than someone I could name."

"nʌn ə ðɪs ɪz ənloʊɾɪŋ ðə kɑɹt," tæm sɛd bɹɪskli, hændɪŋ ðə fɝs kæsk ə bɹændi tə ðə meɪɝ. "aɪ wɑn ə wɔɹm faɪɝ, maɪ paɪp, ən ə mʌɡ ʌv jəɹ ɡʊɾ eɪl." hi hɔɪstəd ðə sɛkən bɹændi kæsk ɑntu hɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "aɪm ʃʊɹ ɹænd wɪl θæŋk jə fəɹ jəɹ hɛlp, meɪtʃɹim. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ðə sunɝ ðə saɪɾɝ ɪz ɪn ðə sɛlɝ. . . ."

"None of this is unloading the cart," Tam said briskly, handing the first cask of brandy to the Mayor. "I want a warm fire, my pipe, and a mug of your good ale." He hoisted the second brandy cask onto his shoulder. "I'm sure Rand will thank you for your help, Matrim. Remember, the sooner the cider is in the cellar. . . ."

əz tæm ən bɹæn dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪndə ði ɪn, ɹænd lʊkt əɾ ɪz fɹɛnd. "ju doʊn əv tə hɛlp. dæv woʊn kip ðət bædʒɝ lɔŋ."

As Tam and Bran disappeared into the inn, Rand looked at his friend. "You don't have to help. Dav won't keep that badger long."

"oʊ, waɪ nɑt?" mæt sɛd ɹɪzaɪnədli. "laɪk jəɹ dɑ sɛd, ðə kwɪkɝ ɪts ɪn ðə sɛlɝ. . . ." pɪkɪŋ ʌp wʌn ə ðə kæsks ə saɪɾɝ ɪn boʊθ ɑɹmz, hi hɝid təwɔɹd ði ɪn ɪn ə hæf tʃɹɑt. "meɪbi ɛɡwin ɪz ɝaʊnd. wɑtʃɪŋ jə stɛɹ əɾ əɹ laɪk ə pɑliækst ɑks wɪl bi əz ɡʊɾ əz ə bædʒɝ ɛni deɪ."

"Oh, why not?" Mat said resignedly. "Like your da said, the quicker it's in the cellar. . . ." Picking up one of the casks of cider in both arms, he hurried toward the inn in a half trot. "Maybe Egwene is around. Watching you stare at her like a poleaxed ox will be as good as a badger any day."

ɹænd pɔzd ɪn ði ækt ə pʊɾɪŋ ɪz baʊ ən kwɪvɝ ɪn ðə bæk ə ðə kɑɹt. hi ɹɪli hæd mænədʒ tə pʊɾ ɛɡwin aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd. ðət wɑz ənjuʒəwəl ɪn ɪtsɛlf. bʌt ʃi wəd laɪkli bi ɝaʊn ði ɪn sʌmwɛɹ. ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ tʃæns i kəɾ əvɔɪd hɝ. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪt hæd bɪn wiks sɪns i sɔ hɝ læst.

Rand paused in the act of putting his bow and quiver in the back of the cart. He really had managed to put Egwene out of his mind. That was unusual in itself. But she would likely be around the inn somewhere. There was not much chance he could avoid her. Of course, it had been weeks since he saw her last.

"wɛl?" mæt kɔl fɹəm ðə fɹʌn ə ði ɪn. "aɪ dɪdn seɪ aɪ wəd də ɪt baɪ maɪsɛlf. jə ɑɹən ɑn ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl jɛt."

"Well?" Mat called from the front of the inn. "I didn't say I would do it by myself. You aren't on the Village Council yet."

wɪð ə stɑɹt, ɹænd tʊk ʌp ə kæsk ən fɑloʊd. pɝhæps ʃi wəd nɑt bi ðəɹ æftɝ ɔl. ɑdli, ðət pɑsəbɪləɾi dɪd nɑt meɪk ɪm fil ɛni bɛɾɝ.

With a start, Rand took up a cask and followed. Perhaps she would not be there after all. Oddly, that possibility did not make him feel any better.


tʃæptɝ tu


CHAPTER 2

stʃɹeɪnʒɝz


Strangers

wən ɹænd ən mæt kæɹid ðə fɝs bæɹəlz θɹu ðə kɑmən ɹum, mæstɝ ælvɪɹ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi fɪlɪŋ ə pɛɹ ə mʌɡz wɪð ɪz bɛs bɹaʊn eɪl, hɪz oʊn meɪk, fɹəm wʌn ə ðə kæsks ɹækt əɡɛnst wʌn wɔl. skɹætʃ, ði ɪnz jɛloʊ kæt, kɹaʊtʃt ətɑp ɪt wɪð ɪz aɪz kloʊzd ən ɪz teɪl ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪz fit. tæm stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə bɪɡ faɪɝpleɪs ə ɹɪvɝ ɹɑk, θʌmɪŋ ə lɔŋ-stɛm paɪp fʊl ə təbæk fɹəm ə pɑlɪʃt kænəstɝ ði ɪnkipɝ ɔlweɪz kɛpt ɑn ðə pleɪn stoʊn mæntəl. ðə faɪɝpleɪs stʃɹɛtʃt hæf ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə bɪɡ, skwɛɹ ɹum, wɪð ə lɪntəl əz haɪ əz ə mænz ʃoʊldɝ, ən ðə kɹæklɪŋ bleɪz ɑn ðə hɑɹθ væŋkwɪʃt ðə tʃɪl aʊtsaɪd.

When Rand and Mat carried the first barrels through the common room, Master al'Vere was already filling a pair of mugs with his best brown ale, his own make, from one of the casks racked against one wall. Scratch, the inn's yellow cat, crouched atop it with his eyes closed and his tail wrapped around his feet. Tam stood in front of the big fireplace of river rock, thumbing a long-stemmed pipe full of tabac from a polished canister the innkeeper always kept on the plain stone mantel. The fireplace stretched half the length of the big, square room, with a lintel as high as a man's shoulder, and the crackling blaze on the hearth vanquished the chill outside.

ət ðət taɪm ə ðə bɪzi deɪ bɪfɔɹ fɛstəvəl, ɹænd ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ bɹæn ən ɪz fɑðɝ ən ðə kæt, bʌt fɔɹ mɔɹ mɛmbɝz ə ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl, ɪnkluɾɪŋ sɛn, sæɾ ɪn haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝ, mʌɡz ɪn hæn ən blu-ɡɹeɪ paɪpsmoʊk ɹɛðɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz. fəɹ wʌns nʌn ə ðə stoʊnz bɔɹdz wɝ ɪn jus, ən ɔl ə bɹænz bʊks stʊɾ aɪɾəl ɑn ðə ʃɛlf ɑpəzət ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ðə mɛn dɪd nɑɾ ivən tɔk, piɹɪŋ saɪlənli ɪndə ðɛɹ eɪl əɹ tæpɪŋ paɪpɛstəmz əɡɛns ðɛɹ tiθ ɪn ɪmpeɪʃəns, əz ðeɪ weɪɾəd fəɹ tæm ən bɹæn tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm.

At that time of the busy day before Festival, Rand expected to find the common room empty except for Bran and his father and the cat, but four more members of the Village Council, including Cenn, sat in high-backed chairs in front of the fire, mugs in hand and blue-gray pipesmoke wreathing their heads. For once none of the stones boards were in use, and all of Bran's books stood idle on the shelf opposite the fireplace. The men did not even talk, peering silently into their ale or tapping pipestems against their teeth in impatience, as they waited for Tam and Bran to join them.

wɝi wɑz nɑɾ ənkɑmən fəɹ ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl ðiz deɪz, nɑɾ ɪn ɛmənz fild, ən laɪkli nɑɾ ɪn wɑtʃ hɪl, əɹ dɛvən ɹaɪd. əɹ ivən tɛɹən fɛɹi, ðoʊ hu nu wʌt tɛɹən fɛɹi foʊk ɹɪli θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ?

Worry was not uncommon for the Village Council these days, not in Emond's Field, and likely not in Watch Hill, or Deven Ride. Or even Taren Ferry, though who knew what Taren Ferry folk really thought about anything?

oʊnli tu ʌv ðə mɛn bɪfɔɹ ðə faɪɝ, hɹəl luhən, ðə blæksmɪθ, ən dʒɑn θeɪn, ðə mɪlɝ, soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlænst ət ðə bɔɪz əz ðeɪ ɛntɝd. mæstɝ luhən, ðoʊ, meɪɾ ɪt mɔɹ ðən ə ɡlæns. ðə blæksmɪθs ɑɹmz wɝ əz bɪɡ əz moʊs mɛnz lɛɡz, ɹoʊpt wɪð hɛvi mʌsəl, ən i stɪl wɔɹ ɪz lɔŋ lɛðɝ eɪpɹən əz ɪf i hæd hɝid tə ðə miɾɪŋ stʃɹeɪt fɹəm ðə fɔɹdʒ. hɪz fɹaʊn tʊk əm boʊθ ɪn, ðən i stʃɹeɪɾənd ɝaʊn ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ dɪlɪbɝətli, tɝnɪŋ ɪz ətɛnʃən bæk tə ən oʊvɝ-stuɾiəs tæmpɪŋ ə hɪz paɪp wɪð ə θɪk θʌm.

Only two of the men before the fire, Haral Luhhan, the blacksmith, and Jon Thane, the miller, so much as glanced at the boys as they entered. Master Luhhan, though, made it more than a glance. The blacksmith's arms were as big as most men's legs, roped with heavy muscle, and he still wore his long leather apron as if he had hurried to the meeting straight from the forge. His frown took them both in, then he straightened around in his chair deliberately, turning his attention back to an over-studious tamping of his pipe with a thick thumb.

kjʊɹiəs, ɹænd sloʊd, ðən bɛɹli bɪt bæk ə jɛlp əz mæt kɪkt ɪz æŋkəl. hɪz fɹɛnd nɑɾəd ɪnsɪstənli təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹweɪ ət ðə bæk ə ðə kɑmən ɹum ən hɝiɾ ɑn wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ. lɪmpɪŋ slaɪtli, ɹænd fɑloʊd lɛs kwɪkli.

Curious, Rand slowed, then barely bit back a yelp as Mat kicked his ankle. His friend nodded insistently toward the doorway at the back of the common room and hurried on without waiting. Limping slightly, Rand followed less quickly.

"wʌt wɑz ðəɾ əbaʊt?" hi dɪmændəɾ əz sun əz i wɑz ɪn ðə hɔl ðət lɛd tə ðə kɪtʃən. "ju ɔlmoʊs bɹoʊk maɪ - "

"What was that about?" he demanded as soon as he was in the hall that led to the kitchen. "You almost broke my - "

"ɪts oʊld luhən," mæt sɛd, piɹɪŋ pæst ɹændz ʃoʊldɝ ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum. "aɪ θɪŋk i sʌspɛks aɪ wɑz ðə wʌn u - " hi kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli əz mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ bʌsəld aʊɾ ə ðə kɪtʃən, ði ɝoʊmə ʌv fɹɛʃ-beɪk bɹɛd wɑftɪŋ əhɛɾ ə hɝ.

"It's old Luhhan," Mat said, peering past Rand's shoulder into the common room. "I think he suspects I was the one who - " He cut off abruptly as Mistress al'Vere bustled out of the kitchen, the aroma of fresh-baked bread wafting ahead of her.

ðə tʃɹeɪ ɪn əɹ hænz kæɹid səm ə ðə kɹʌsti loʊvz fəɹ wɪtʃ ʃi wɑz feɪməs ɝaʊn ɛmənz fild, əz wɛl əz pleɪts ə pɪkəlz ən tʃiz. ðə fud ɹimaɪndəd ɹænd əbɹʌpli ðəɾ i hæɾ iɾən oʊnli ən ɛn ə bɹɛd bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ ðə fɑɹm ðət mɔɹnɪŋ. hɪz stʌmək ɡeɪv ən ɪmbɛɹəsɪŋ ɹʌmbəl.

The tray in her hands carried some of the crusty loaves for which she was famous around Emond's Field, as well as plates of pickles and cheese. The food reminded Rand abruptly that he had eaten only an end of bread before leaving the farm that morning. His stomach gave an embarrassing rumble.

ə slɛndɝ wʊmən, wɪð əɹ θɪk bɹeɪɾ ʌv ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ pʊld oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ, mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ smaɪld ɪn ə mʌðɝli fæʃən ðət tʊk ɪn boʊθ ə ðɛm. "ðɛɹ ɪz mɔɹ ə ðɪs ɪn ðə kɪtʃən, ɪf jə tu ɑɹ hʌŋɡɹi, ən aɪ nɛvɝ nu bɔɪz jəɹ eɪdʒ u wɝnt. əɹ ɛni ʌðɝ eɪdʒ, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ɪf jə pɹəfɝ, aɪm beɪkɪŋ hʌnikeɪks ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ."

A slender woman, with her thick braid of graying hair pulled over one shoulder, Mistress al'Vere smiled in a motherly fashion that took in both of them. "There is more of this in the kitchen, if you two are hungry, and I never knew boys your age who weren't. Or any other age, for that matter. If you prefer, I'm baking honeycakes this morning."

ʃi wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju mɛɹid wɪmən ɪn ði ɛɹiə hu nɛvɝ tʃɹaɪd tə pleɪ mætʃmeɪkɝ wɪð tæm. təwɔɹd ɹænd əɹ mʌðɝlaɪnəs ɪkstɛndəd tə wɔɹm smaɪlz ən ə kwɪk snæk wɛnɛvɝ i keɪm baɪ ði ɪn, bʌt ʃi dɪɾ əz mʌtʃ fəɹ ɛvɹi jʌŋ mæn ɪn ði ɛɹiə. ɪf ʃi əkeɪʒənəli lʊkt əɾ ɪm əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə də mɔɹ, ət list ʃi tʊk ɪt noʊ fɝðɝ ðən lʊks, fəɹ wɪtʃ i wɑz dipli ɡɹeɪtfəl.

She was one of the few married women in the area who never tried to play matchmaker with Tam. Toward Rand her motherliness extended to warm smiles and a quick snack whenever he came by the inn, but she did as much for every young man in the area. If she occasionally looked at him as if she wanted to do more, at least she took it no further than looks, for which he was deeply grateful.

wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə ɹɪplaɪ ʃi swɛpt ɑn ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum. ɪmiɾiətli ðəɹ wɑz ðə saʊn ə tʃɛɹz skɹeɪpɪŋ ɑn ðə flɔɹ əz ðə mɛn ɡɑt tə ðɛɹ fit, ən ɪkskleɪmɪŋz oʊvɝ ðə smɛl ə ðə bɹɛd. ʃi wɑz izəli ðə bɛs kʊk ɪn ɛmənz fild, ən nɑɾ ə mæn fəɹ maɪlz ɝaʊn bʌɾ iɡɝli lɛpt əɾ ə tʃæns tə pʊɾ ɪz fiɾ ʌndɝ əɹ teɪbəl.

Without waiting for a reply she swept on into the common room. Immediately there was the sound of chairs scraping on the floor as the men got to their feet, and exclaimings over the smell of the bread. She was easily the best cook in Emond's Field, and not a man for miles around but eagerly leaped at a chance to put his feet under her table.

"hʌnikeɪks," mæt sɛd, smækɪŋ ɪz lɪps.

"Honeycakes," Mat said, smacking his lips.

"æftɝ," ɹænd toʊld ɪm fɝmli, "ɔɹ wɪl nɛvɝ ɡɛt dʌn."

"After," Rand told him firmly, "or we'll never get done."

ə læmp hʌŋ oʊvɝ ðə sɛlɝ stɛɹz, dʒʌs bɪsaɪd ðə kɪtʃən dɔɹ, ən ənʌðɝ meɪɾ ə bɹaɪt pul ɪn ðə stoʊn-wɔld ɹum bɪniθ ði ɪn, bænɪʃɪŋ ɔl bʌɾ ə lɪɾəl dɪmnəs ɪn ðə fɝθəs kɔɹnɝz. wʊɾən ɹæks əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz ən əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ hɛl kæsks ə bɹændi ən saɪɾɝ, ən lɑɹdʒɝ bæɹəlz ʌv eɪl ən waɪn, səm wɪð tæps dʒɹɪvən ɪn. mɛni ʌv ðə waɪn bæɹəlz wɝ mɑɹkt wɪð tʃɑk ɪn bɹæn ælvɪɹz hænd, ɡɪvɪŋ ðə jɪɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn bɑt, wʌt pɛdlɝ hæd bɹɔt ðɛm, ən ɪn wɪtʃ sɪɾi ðeɪ hæd bɪn meɪd, bʌɾ ɔl ə ði eɪl ən bɹændi wɑz ðə meɪk ə tu ɹɪvɝz fɑɹmɝz əɹ ə bɹæn hɪmsɛlf. pɛdlɝz, ən ivən mɝtʃəns, səmtaɪmz bɹɔt bɹændi əɹ eɪl fɹəm aʊtsaɪd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɛvɝ əz ɡʊɾ ən kɑs ði ɝθ, bɪsaɪdz, ən noʊbɑdi ɛvɝ dʒɹæŋk ɪt mɔɹ ðən wʌns.

A lamp hung over the cellar stairs, just beside the kitchen door, and another made a bright pool in the stone-walled room beneath the inn, banishing all but a little dimness in the furthest corners. Wooden racks along the walls and across the floor held casks of brandy and cider, and larger barrels of ale and wine, some with taps driven in. Many of the wine barrels were marked with chalk in Bran al'Vere's hand, giving the year they had been bought, what peddler had brought them, and in which city they had been made, but all of the ale and brandy was the make of Two Rivers farmers or of Bran himself. Peddlers, and even merchants, sometimes brought brandy or ale from outside, but it was never as good and cost the earth, besides, and nobody ever drank it more than once.

"naʊ," ɹænd sɛd, əz ðeɪ sɛt ðɛɹ kæsks ɪn ðə ɹæks, "wʌt dɪd jə də ðət juv tə əvɔɪd mæstɝ luhən?"

"Now," Rand said, as they set their casks in the racks, "what did you do that you have to avoid Master Luhhan?"

mæt ʃɹʌɡd. "nʌθɪŋ, ɹɪli. aɪ toʊld eɪɾən ɑlkɑɹ ən səm ə hɪz snɑt-noʊz fɹɛnz - juɪn fɪŋɡɝ ən dæɡ kɑplɪn - ðət səm fɑɹmɝz hæd sin ɡoʊs haʊnz, bɹiðɪŋ faɪɝ ən ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðə wʊdz. ðeɪ eɪɾ ɪɾ ʌp laɪk klɑɾəd kɹim."

Mat shrugged. "Nothing, really. I told Adan al'Caar and some of his snot-nosed friends - Ewin Finngar and Dag Coplin - that some farmers had seen ghost hounds, breathing fire and running through the woods. They ate it up like clotted cream."

"æn mæstɝ luhən ɪz mæɾ ət jə fəɹ ðæt?" ɹænd sɛd daʊtfəli.

"And Master Luhhan is mad at you for that?" Rand said doubtfully.

"nɑɾ ɪɡzækli." mæt pɔzd, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ju si, aɪ kʌvɝd tu ʌv ɪz dɑɡz wɪð flaʊɝ, soʊ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl waɪt. ðən aɪ lɛɾ əm lus nɪɹ dæɡz haʊs. haʊ wɑz aɪ tə noʊ ðeɪd ɹʌn stʃɹeɪt hoʊm? ɪt ɹɪli ɪzən maɪ fɔlt. ɪf mɪstʃɹəs luhən hædn lɛf ðə dɔɹ oʊpən ðeɪ kʊdn əv ɡɑɾən ɪnsaɪd. ɪɾ ɪzən laɪk aɪ ɪntɛndəd tə ɡɛt flaʊɝ ɔl oʊvɝ əɹ haʊs." hi ɡeɪv ə bɑɹk ə læftɝ. "aɪ hɪɹ ʃi tʃeɪst oʊld luhən ən ðə dɑɡz, ɔl θɹi, aʊɾ ə ðə haʊs wɪð ə bɹum."

"Not exactly." Mat paused, then shook his head. "You see, I covered two of his dogs with flour, so they were all white. Then I let them loose near Dag's house. How was I to know they'd run straight home? It really isn't my fault. If Mistress Luhhan hadn't left the door open they couldn't have gotten inside. It isn't like I intended to get flour all over her house." He gave a bark of laughter. "I hear she chased old Luhhan and the dogs, all three, out of the house with a broom."

ɹænd wɪnst ən læft ət ðə seɪm taɪm. "ɪf aɪ wɝ ju, aɪd wɝi mɔɹ əbaʊɾ ælsbɛt luhən ðən əbaʊt ðə blæksmɪθ. ʃiz ɔlmoʊst əz stʃɹɔŋ, ən əɹ tɛmpɝ ɪz ə lɑt wɝs. noʊ mæɾɝ, ðoʊ. ɪf jə wɔk fæst, meɪbi hi woʊnt noʊɾəs ju." mæts ɪkspɹɛʃən sɛɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɹænd wɑz fʌni.

Rand winced and laughed at the same time. "If I were you, I'd worry more about Alsbet Luhhan than about the blacksmith. She's almost as strong, and her temper is a lot worse. No matter, though. If you walk fast, maybe he won't notice you." Mat's expression said he did not think Rand was funny.

wən ðeɪ wɛn bæk θɹu ðə kɑmən ɹum, ðoʊ, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid fəɹ mæt tə hɝi. ðə sɪks mɛn hæd ðɛɹ tʃɛɹz ɪn ə taɪt nɑt bɪfɔɹ ðə faɪɝpleɪs. wɪð ɪz bæk tə ðə faɪɝ, tæm wɑz spikɪŋ ɪn ə loʊ vɔɪs, ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ linɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə lɪsən, soʊ ɪntɛn ɑn ɪz wɝdz ðeɪ wəd laɪkli nɑɾ əv noʊɾəst ɪf ə flɑk ə ʃip hæd bɪn dʒɹɪvən θɹu. ɹænd wɑntəd tə muv kloʊsɝ, tə hɪɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, bʌt mæt plʌkt əɾ ɪz sliv ən ɡeɪv ɪm ən æɡənaɪz lʊk. wɪð ə saɪ hi fɑloʊd mæt aʊt tə ðə kɑɹt.

When they went back through the common room, though, there was no need for Mat to hurry. The six men had their chairs in a tight knot before the fireplace. With his back to the fire, Tam was speaking in a low voice, and the others were leaning forward to listen, so intent on his words they would likely not have noticed if a flock of sheep had been driven through. Rand wanted to move closer, to hear what they were talking about, but Mat plucked at his sleeve and gave him an agonized look. With a sigh he followed Mat out to the cart.

ɑn ðɛɹ ɹɪtɝn tə ðə hɔlweɪ ðeɪ faʊn ə tʃɹeɪ baɪ ðə tɑp ə ðə stɛps, ən hɑt hʌnikeɪks fɪlɪŋ ðə hɔl wɪð ðɛɹ swiɾ ɝoʊmə. ðəɹ wɝ tu mʌɡz, əz wɛl, ən ə pɪtʃɝ ə stimɪŋ mʌl saɪɾɝ. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz oʊn ædmənɪʃən əbaʊt weɪɾɪŋ əntɪl leɪɾɝ ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf meɪkɪŋ ðə læs tu tʃɹɪps bɪtwin kɑɹɾ ən sɛlɝ waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒʌɡəl ə kæsk ən ə paɪpɪŋ hʌnikeɪk.

On their return to the hallway they found a tray by the top of the steps, and hot honeycakes filling the hall with their sweet aroma. There were two mugs, as well, and a pitcher of steaming mulled cider. Despite his own admonition about waiting until later Rand found himself making the last two trips between cart and cellar while trying to juggle a cask and a piping honeycake.

sɛɾɪŋ ɪz faɪnəl kæsk ɪn ðə ɹæks, hi waɪp kɹʌmz fɹəm ɪz maʊθ waɪl mæt wɑz ənbɝɾənɪŋ hɪmsɛlf, ðən sɛd, "naʊ fəɹ ðə ɡli - "

Setting his final cask in the racks, he wiped crumbs from his mouth while Mat was unburdening himself, then said, "Now for the glee - "

fit klæɾɝd ɑn ðə stɛɹz, ən juɪn fɪŋɡɝ hæf fɛl ɪndə ðə sɛlɝ ɪn ɪz heɪst, hɪz pʌdʒi feɪs ʃaɪnɪŋ wɪð iɡɝnəs tə ɪmpɑɹɾ ɪz nuz. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ." hi kɑɾ ɪz bɹɛθ ən ɡeɪv mæt ə ɹaɪ lʊk. "aɪ hævən sin ɛni ɡoʊs haʊnz, bʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ sʌmbɑɾi flaʊɝd mæstɝ luhənz dɑɡz. aɪ hɪɹ mɪstʃɹəs luhən əz aɪdiəz u tə lʊk fɔɹ, tu."

Feet clattered on the stairs, and Ewin Finngar half fell into the cellar in his haste, his pudgy face shining with eagerness to impart his news. "There are strangers in the village." He caught his breath and gave Mat a wry look. "I haven't seen any ghost hounds, but I hear somebody floured Master Luhhan's dogs. I hear Mistress Luhhan has ideas who to look for, too."

ðə jɪɹz sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ ɹænd ən mæt fɹəm juɪn, oʊnli fɔɹtin, wɝ juʒəwəli mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə ɡɪv ʃɔɹt ʃɹɪf tə ɛniθɪŋ i hæd tə seɪ. ðɪs taɪm ðeɪ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wʌn stɑɹɾəld ɡlæns, ðən boʊθ wɝ tɔkɪŋ ət wʌns.

The years separating Rand and Mat from Ewin, only fourteen, were usually more than enough for them to give short shrift to anything he had to say. This time they exchanged one startled glance, then both were talking at once.

"ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ?" ɹænd æskt. "nɑɾ ɪn ðə wʊdz?"

"In the village?" Rand asked. "Not in the woods?"

ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə hɪm mæt æɾəd, "wɑz ɪz kloʊk blæk? kəd jə si hɪz feɪs?"

Right on top of him Mat added, "Was his cloak black? Could you see his face?"

juɪn lʊkt ənsɝteɪnli fɹəm wʌn ə ðɛm tə ði ʌðɝ, ðən spoʊk kwɪkli wən mæt tʊk ə θɹɛɾənɪŋ stɛp. "ʌv kɔɹs aɪ kəd si hɪz feɪs. ən ɪz kloʊk ɪz ɡɹin. əɹ meɪbi ɡɹeɪ. ɪt tʃeɪnʒəz. ɪt simz tə feɪɾ ɪndə wɛɹɛvɝ hiz stændɪŋ. səmtaɪmz jə doʊn si hɪm ivən wən jə lʊk ɹaɪɾ ət hɪm, nɑɾ ənlɛs i muvz. ən hɝz ɪz blu, laɪk ðə skaɪ, ən tɛn taɪmz fænsiɝ ðən ɛni fistdeɪ kloʊðz aɪ ɛvɝ sɔ. ʃiz tɛn taɪmz pɹɪɾiɝ ðən ɛnibəɾi aɪ ɛvɝ sɔ, tu. ʃiz ə haɪ-bɔɹn leɪɾi, laɪk ɪn ðə stɔɹiz. ʃi mʌs bi."

Ewin looked uncertainly from one of them to the other, then spoke quickly when Mat took a threatening step. "Of course I could see his face. And his cloak is green. Or maybe gray. It changes. It seems to fade into wherever he's standing. Sometimes you don't see him even when you look right at him, not unless he moves. And hers is blue, like the sky, and ten times fancier than any feastday clothes I ever saw. She's ten times prettier than anybody I ever saw, too. She's a high-born lady, like in the stories. She must be."

"hɝ?" ɹænd sɛd. "hu ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?" hi stɛɹɾ ət mæt, hu hæd pʊt boʊθ hænz ɑn tɑp ə hɪz hɛɾ ən skwizd ɪz aɪz ʃʌt.

"Her?" Rand said. "Who are you talking about?" He stared at Mat, who had put both hands on top of his head and squeezed his eyes shut.

"ðeɪɹ ðə wʌnz aɪ mɛn tə tɛl jə əbaʊt," mæt mʌɾɝd, "bɪfɔɹ jə ɡɑt mi ɔf ɑntu - " hi kʌɾ ɔf, oʊpənɪŋ ɪz aɪz fəɹ ə ʃɑɹp ɡlæns ət juɪn. "ðeɪ ɝaɪv læst ivnɪŋ," mæt wɛn ɑn æftɝ ə moʊmənt, "æn tʊk ɹumz hɪɹ ət ði ɪn. aɪ sɔ ðɛm ɹaɪɾ ɪn. ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ɹænd. aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ hɔɹsəz soʊ tɔl, əɹ soʊ slik. ðeɪ lʊk laɪk ðeɪ kəd ɹʌn fɝɛvɝ. aɪ θɪŋk i wɝks fəɹ hɝ."

"They're the ones I meant to tell you about," Mat muttered, "before you got me off onto - " He cut off, opening his eyes for a sharp glance at Ewin. "They arrived last evening," Mat went on after a moment, "and took rooms here at the inn. I saw them ride in. Their horses, Rand. I never saw horses so tall, or so sleek. They look like they could run forever. I think he works for her."

"ɪn sɝvəs," juɪn bɹoʊk ɪn. "ðeɪ kɔl ɪt biɪŋ ɪn sɝvəs, ɪn ðə stɔɹiz."

"In service," Ewin broke in. "They call it being in service, in the stories."

mæt kəntɪnjuɾ əz ɪf juɪn hæd nɑt spoʊkən. "ɛniweɪ, hi dɪfɝz tə hɝ, dʌz wʌt ʃi sɛz. oʊnli hi ɪzən laɪk ə haɪɝd mæn. ə soʊlʒɝ, meɪbi. ðə weɪ hi wɛɹz ɪz sɔɹd, ɪts pɑɹɾ ə hɪm, laɪk ɪz hæn əɹ ɪz fʊt. hi meɪks ðə mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz lʊk laɪk kɝ dɑɡz. ən hɝ, ɹænd. aɪ nɛvɝ ivən ɪmædʒən ɛniwʌn laɪk hɝ. ʃiz aʊɾ ʌv ə ɡlimənz stɔɹi. ʃiz laɪk . . . laɪk. . . ." hi pɔz tə ɡɪv juɪn ə saʊɝ lʊk. ". . . laɪk ə haɪ-bɔɹn leɪɾi," hi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ə saɪ.

Mat continued as if Ewin had not spoken. "Anyway, he defers to her, does what she says. Only he isn't like a hired man. A soldier, maybe. The way he wears his sword, it's part of him, like his hand or his foot. He makes the merchants' guards look like cur dogs. And her, Rand. I never even imagined anyone like her. She's out of a gleeman's story. She's like . . . like. . . ." He paused to give Ewin a sour look. ". . . Like a high-born lady," he finished with a sigh.

"bʌɾ u ɑɹ ðeɪ?" ɹænd æskt. ɪksɛp fəɹ mɝtʃəns, wʌns ə jɪɹ tə baɪ təbæk ən wʊl, ən ðə pɛdlɝz, aʊtsaɪɾɝz nɛvɝ keɪm ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, əɹ əz ɡʊɾ əz nɛvɝ. meɪbi ət tɛɹən fɛɹi, bʌt nɑt ðɪs fɑɹ saʊθ. moʊst ə ðə mɝtʃəns ən pɛdlɝz hæd bɪn kʌmɪŋ fəɹ jɪɹz, tu, soʊ ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɹɪli kaʊn əz stʃɹeɪnʒɝz. dʒʌst aʊtsaɪɾɝz. ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd faɪv jɪɹz sɪns ðə læs taɪm ə ɹil stʃɹeɪnʒɝ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ɛmənz fild, ən i hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd fɹəm səm sɔɹɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl ʌp ɪn bɛɹlən ðət noʊbɑdi ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ ʌndɝstʊd. hi hæd nɑt steɪd lɔŋ. "wʌt də ðeɪ wɑnt?"

"But who are they?" Rand asked. Except for merchants, once a year to buy tabac and wool, and the peddlers, outsiders never came into the Two Rivers, or as good as never. Maybe at Taren Ferry, but not this far south. Most of the merchants and peddlers had been coming for years, too, so they did not really count as strangers. Just outsiders. It was a good five years since the last time a real stranger appeared in Emond's Field, and he had been trying to hide from some sort of trouble up in Baerlon that nobody in the village understood. He had not stayed long. "What do they want?"

"wʌt də ðeɪ wɑnt?" mæt ɪkskleɪmd. "aɪ doʊn kɛɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɑnt. stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, ɹænd, ən stʃɹeɪnʒɝz laɪk jə nɛvɝ ivən dʒɹimd ʌv. θɪŋk ʌv ɪt!"

"What do they want?" Mat exclaimed. "I don't care what they want. Strangers, Rand, and strangers like you never even dreamed of. Think of it!"

ɹænd oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ðən kloʊzd ɪt wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ. ðə blæk-kloʊkt ɹaɪɾɝ hæɾ ɪm əz nɝvəs əz ə kæɾ ɪn ə dɔɡ ɹʌn. ɪt dʒʌst sim laɪk ən ɑfəl koʊɪnsɪɾəns, θɹi stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɝaʊn ðə vɪlədʒ ət ðə seɪm taɪm. θɹi ɪf ðɪs fɛloʊz kloʊk ðət tʃeɪnʒd kʌlɝz nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd tə blæk.

Rand opened his mouth, then closed it without speaking. The black-cloaked rider had him as nervous as a cat in a dog run. It just seemed like an awful coincidence, three strangers around the village at the same time. Three if this fellow's cloak that changed colors never changed to black.

"hɝ neɪm ɪz mɔɪɹeɪn," juɪn sɛɾ ɪndə ðə moʊməntɛɹi saɪləns. "aɪ hɝɾ ɪm seɪ ɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn, hi kɔl hɝ. ðə leɪɾi mɔɪɹeɪn. hɪz neɪm ɪz læn. ðə wɪzdəm meɪ nɑt laɪk hɝ, bʌɾ aɪ du."

"Her name is Moiraine," Ewin said into the momentary silence. "I heard him say it. Moiraine, he called her. The Lady Moiraine. His name is Lan. The Wisdom may not like her, but I do."

"wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk nɪneɪiv dɪslaɪks hɝ?" ɹænd sɛd.

"What makes you think Nynaeve dislikes her?" Rand said.

"ʃi æsk ðə wɪzdəm fəɹ dɝɛkʃənz ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ," juɪn sɛd, "æn kɔld əɹ 'tʃaɪld.' " ɹænd ən mæt boʊθ wɪsəl sɔfli θɹu ðɛɹ tiθ, ən juɪn tʃɹɪpt oʊvɝ ɪz tʌŋ ɪn ɪz heɪs tə ɪkspleɪn. "ðə leɪɾi mɔɪɹeɪn dɪdnt noʊ ʃi wɑz ðə wɪzdəm. ʃi əpɑlədʒaɪzd wən ʃi faʊn aʊt. ʃi dɪd. ən æsk səm kwɛstʃənz əbaʊɾ ɝbz, ən əbaʊɾ u ɪz u ɝaʊn ɛmənz fild, dʒʌst əz ɹɪspɛkfəli əz ɛni wʊmən ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ - mɔɹ soʊ ðən sʌm. ʃiz ɔlweɪz æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz, əbaʊt haʊ oʊl pipəl ɑɹ, ən haʊ lɔŋ ðeɪv lɪvd wɛɹ ðeɪ lɪv, ən . . . oʊ, aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɔl. ɛniweɪ, nɪneɪiv ænsɝd laɪk ʃid bɪɾən ə ɡɹin switbɛɹi. ðɛn, wən ðə leɪɾi mɔɪɹeɪn wɔkt əweɪ, nɪneɪiv stɛɹɾ æftɝ əɹ laɪk, laɪk . . . wɛl, ɪt wɑzn fɹɛnli, aɪ kən tɛl jə ðæt."

"She asked the Wisdom for directions this morning," Ewin said, "and called her 'child.' " Rand and Mat both whistled softly through their teeth, and Ewin tripped over his tongue in his haste to explain. "The Lady Moiraine didn't know she was the Wisdom. She apologized when she found out. She did. And asked some questions about herbs, and about who is who around Emond's Field, just as respectfully as any woman in the village - more so than some. She's always asking questions, about how old people are, and how long they've lived where they live, and . . . oh, I don't know what all. Anyway, Nynaeve answered like she'd bitten a green sweetberry. Then, when the Lady Moiraine walked away, Nynaeve stared after her like, like . . . well, it wasn't friendly, I can tell you that."

"ɪz ðəɾ ɔl?" ɹænd sɛd. "ju noʊ nɪneɪivz tɛmpɝ. wən sɛn bui kɔld əɹ ə tʃaɪld læs jɪɹ, ʃi θʌmpt ɪm ɑn ðə hɛd wɪð əɹ stɪk, ən hiz ɑn ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl, ən oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi hɝ ɡɹændfɑðɝ, bɪsaɪdz. ʃi flɛɹz ʌp əɾ ɛniθɪŋ, ən nɛvɝ steɪz æŋɡɹi pæs tɝnɪŋ ɝaʊnd."

"Is that all?" Rand said. "You know Nynaeve's temper. When Cenn Buie called her a child last year, she thumped him on the head with her stick, and he's on the Village Council, and old enough to be her grandfather, besides. She flares up at anything, and never stays angry past turning around."

"ðæts tu lɔŋ fəɹ mi," juɪn mʌɾɝd.

"That's too long for me," Ewin muttered.

"aɪ doʊn kɛɹ u nɪneɪiv θʌmps" - mæt tʃɔɹɾəld - "soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪɾ ɪzən mi. ðɪs ɪz gɑnə bi ðə bɛs bɛl taɪn ɛvɝ. ə ɡlimən, ə leɪɾi - hu kəɾ æsk fəɹ mɔɹ? hu nidz faɪɹwɝks?"

"I don't care who Nynaeve thumps" - Mat chortled - "so long as it isn't me. This is going to be the best Bel Tine ever. A gleeman, a lady - who could ask for more? Who needs fireworks?"

"ə ɡlimən?" juɪn sɛd, hɪz vɔɪs ɹaɪzɪŋ ʃɑɹpli.

"A gleeman?" Ewin said, his voice rising sharply.

"kʌm ɑn, ɹænd," mæt wɛn ɑn, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə jʌŋɡɝ bɔɪ. "wɝ dʌn hɪɹ. juv tə si ðɪs fɛloʊ."

"Come on, Rand," Mat went on, ignoring the younger boy. "We're done here. You have to see this fellow."

hi baʊndəɾ ʌp ðə stɛɹz, wɪð juɪn skɹæmbəlɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪm kɔlɪŋ, "ɪz ðəɹ ɹɪli ə ɡlimən, mæt? ðɪs ɪzən laɪk ðə ɡoʊs haʊnz, ɪz ɪt? əɹ ðə fɹɑɡz?"

He bounded up the stairs, with Ewin scrambling behind him calling, "Is there really a gleeman, Mat? This isn't like the ghost hounds, is it? Or the frogs?"

ɹænd pɔz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə tɝn daʊn ðə læmp, ðən hɝiɾ æftɝ ðɛm.

Rand paused long enough to turn down the lamp, then hurried after them.

ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum ɹoʊən hʌm ən səmɛl kɹeɪ hæd dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝz ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝ, soʊ ðət ði ɪntaɪɝ vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl wɑz ðɛɹ. bɹæn ælvɪɹ spoʊk naʊ, hɪz nɔɹməli blʌf vɔɪs pɪtʃt soʊ loʊ ðəɾ oʊnli ə ɹʌmbəlɪŋ mɝmɝ tʃɹævəl bɪɑn ðə kloʊs-ɡæðɝd tʃɛɹz. ðə meɪɝ ɛmfəsaɪzd ɪz wɝdz baɪ tæpɪŋ ə θɪk fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ ɪndə ðə pɑm ə hɪz ʌðɝ hænd, ən aɪɾ itʃ mæn ɪn tɝn. ðeɪ ɔl nɑɾəd ɪn əɡɹimənt wɪð wʌtɛvɝ i wɑz seɪɪŋ, ðoʊ sɛn mɔɹ ɹɪlʌktənli ðən ðə ɹɛst.

In the common room Rowan Hum and Samel Crawe had joined the others in front of the fire, so that the entire Village Council was there. Bran al'Vere spoke now, his normally bluff voice pitched so low that only a rumbling murmur traveled beyond the close-gathered chairs. The Mayor emphasized his words by tapping a thick forefinger into the palm of his other hand, and eyed each man in turn. They all nodded in agreement with whatever he was saying, though Cenn more reluctantly than the rest.

ðə weɪ ðə mɛn ɔl bʌt hʌɾəld təɡɛðɝ spoʊk mɔɹ pleɪnli ðən ə peɪntəd saɪn. wʌtɛvɝ ðeɪ wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, ɪt wɑz fəɹ ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl əloʊn, ət lis fəɹ naʊ. ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ əpɹiʃieɪt ɹænd tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɪsən ɪn. ɹɪlʌktənli hi pʊl hɪmsɛlf əweɪ. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ðə ɡlimən. ən ðiz stʃɹeɪnʒɝz.

The way the men all but huddled together spoke more plainly than a painted sign. Whatever they were talking about, it was for the Village Council alone, at least for now. They would not appreciate Rand trying to listen in. Reluctantly he pulled himself away. There was still the gleeman. And these strangers.

aʊtsaɪd, bɛlə ən ðə kɑɹt wɝ ɡɔn, teɪkən əweɪ baɪ hu əɹ tæd, ði ɪnz steɪbəlmən. mæt ən juɪn stʊd ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ ə fju peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ ə ði ɪn, ðɛɹ kloʊks wɪpɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd.

Outside, Bela and the cart were gone, taken away by Hu or Tad, the inn's stablemen. Mat and Ewin stood glaring at one another a few paces from the front door of the inn, their cloaks whipping in the wind.

"fɔɹ ðə læs taɪm," mæt bɑɹkt, "aɪ æm nɑt pleɪɪŋ ə tʃɹɪk ɑn ju. ðəɹ ɪz ə ɡlimən. naʊ ɡoʊ əweɪ. ɹænd, wɪl jə tɛl ðɪs wʊlhɛɾ aɪm tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ soʊ hɪl liv mi əloʊn?"

"For the last time," Mat barked, "I am not playing a trick on you. There is a gleeman. Now go away. Rand, will you tell this woolhead I am telling the truth so he'll leave me alone?"

pʊlɪŋ ɪz kloʊk təɡɛðɝ, ɹænd stɛp fɔɹwɝd tə səpɔɹt mæt, bʌt wɝdz daɪɾ əz ðə hɛɹz stɝɾ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk. hi wɑz biɪŋ wɑtʃt əɡɛn. ɪt wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm ðə filɪŋ ðə hʊɾɪd ɹaɪɾɝ hæd ɡɪvən hɪm, bʌt niðɝ wɑz ɪt plɛzənt, ɪspɛʃli soʊ sun æftɝ ðəɾ ɪnkaʊntɝ.

Pulling his cloak together, Rand stepped forward to support Mat, but words died as the hairs stirred on the back of his neck. He was being watched again. It was far from the feeling the hooded rider had given him, but neither was it pleasant, especially so soon after that encounter.

ə kwɪk lʊk əbaʊt ðə ɡɹin ʃoʊɾ ɪm oʊnli wʌɾ i hæd sin bɪfɔɹ - tʃɪlʒɹən pleɪɪŋ, pipəl pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ fɛstəvəl, ən noʊ wʌn mɔɹ ðən ɡlænsɪŋ ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən. ðə spɹɪŋ poʊl stʊɾ əloʊn, naʊ, weɪɾɪŋ. bʌsəl ən tʃaɪldɪʃ ʃaʊts fɪl ðə saɪd stʃɹits. ɔl wɑz əz ɪt ʃəd bi. ɪksɛp ðəɾ i wɑz biɪŋ wɑtʃt.

A quick look about the Green showed him only what he had seen before - children playing, people preparing for Festival, and no one more than glancing in his direction. The Spring Pole stood alone, now, waiting. Bustle and childish shouts filled the side streets. All was as it should be. Except that he was being watched.

ðən sʌmθɪŋ lɛɾ ɪm tə tɝn ɝaʊnd, tə ɹeɪz ɪz aɪz. ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ði ɪnz taɪl ɹuf pɝtʃt ə lɑɹdʒ ɹeɪvən, sweɪɪŋ ə lɪɾəl ɪn ðə ɡʌstɪŋ wɪn fɹəm ðə maʊntənz. ɪts hɛd wɑz kɑk tə wʌn saɪd, ən wʌn biɾi, blæk aɪ wɑz foʊkəst . . . ɑn hɪm, hi θɔt. hi swɑloʊd, ən sʌɾənli æŋɡɝ flɪkɝɾ ɪn hɪm, hɑɾ ən ʃɑɹp.

Then something led him to turn around, to raise his eyes. On the edge of the inn's tile roof perched a large raven, swaying a little in the gusting wind from the mountains. Its head was cocked to one side, and one beady, black eye was focused . . . on him, he thought. He swallowed, and suddenly anger flickered in him, hot and sharp.

"fɪlθi kɛɹiən iɾɝ," hi mʌɾɝd.

"Filthy carrion eater," he muttered.

"aɪ æm taɪɝɾ ə biɪŋ stɛɹɾ æt," mæt ɡɹaʊld, ən ɹænd ɹilaɪzd ɪz fɹɛn hæd stɛpt ʌp bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ən wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə ɹeɪvən, tu.

"I am tired of being stared at," Mat growled, and Rand realized his friend had stepped up beside him and was frowning at the raven, too.

ðeɪ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə ɡlæns, ðən əz wʌn ðɛɹ hænz dɑɹɾɪd fəɹ ɹɑks.

They exchanged a glance, then as one their hands darted for rocks.

ðə tu stoʊnz flu tʃɹu . . . ən ðə ɹeɪvən stɛpt əsaɪd; ðə stoʊnz wɪsəl θɹu ðə speɪs wɛɹ ɪt hæd bɪn. flʌfɪŋ ɪts wɪŋz wʌns, ɪt kɑkt ɪts hɛɾ əɡɛn, fɪksɪŋ əm wɪð ə dɛd blæk aɪ, ʌnəfɹeɪd, ɡɪvɪŋ noʊ saɪn ðəɾ ɛniθɪŋ hæd hæpənd.

The two stones flew true . . . and the raven stepped aside; the stones whistled through the space where it had been. Fluffing its wings once, it cocked its head again, fixing them with a dead black eye, unafraid, giving no sign that anything had happened.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə bɝɾ ɪn kɑnstɝneɪʃən. "dɪd jə ɛvɝ si ə ɹeɪvən də ðæt?" hi æskt kwaɪətli.

Rand stared at the bird in consternation. "Did you ever see a raven do that?" he asked quietly.

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹeɪvən. "nɛvɝ. nɔɹ ɛni ʌðɝ bɝd, iðɝ."

Mat shook his head without looking away from the raven. "Never. Nor any other bird, either."

"ə vaɪl bɝd," keɪm ə wʊmənz vɔɪs fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðɛm, məloʊɾiəs dɪspaɪɾ ɛkoʊz ə dɪsteɪst, "tə bi mɪstʃɹʌstɪɾ ɪn ðə bɛst ə taɪmz."

"A vile bird," came a woman's voice from behind them, melodious despite echoes of distaste, "to be mistrusted in the best of times."

wɪð ə ʃɹɪl kɹaɪ ðə ɹeɪvən lɔntʃt ɪtsɛlf ɪndə ði ɛɹ soʊ vaɪələnli ðət tu blæk fɛðɝz dʒɹɪftəd daʊn fɹəm ðə ɹufs ɛdʒ.

With a shrill cry the raven launched itself into the air so violently that two black feathers drifted down from the roof's edge.

stɑɹɾəld, ɹænd ən mæt twɪstəd tə fɑloʊ ðə bɝdz swɪft flaɪt, oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹin ən təwɔɹd ðə klaʊd-tɪp maʊntənz ə mɪst, tɔl bɪɑn ðə wɛstwʊd, əntɪl ɪt dwɪndəl tə ə spɛk ɪn ðə wɛst, ðən vænɪʃt fɹəm vju.

Startled, Rand and Mat twisted to follow the bird's swift flight, over the Green and toward the cloud-tipped Mountains of Mist, tall beyond the Westwood, until it dwindled to a speck in the west, then vanished from view.

ɹændz ɡeɪz fɛl tə ðə wʊmən u hæd spoʊkən. ʃi, tu, hæd bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ ðə flaɪɾ ə ðə ɹeɪvən, bʌt naʊ ʃi tɝn bæk, ən əɹ aɪz mɛt hɪz. hi kəɾ oʊnli stɛɹ. ðɪs hæd tə bi ðə leɪɾi mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ʃi wɑz ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət mæt ən juɪn hæd sɛd, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ən mɔɹ.

Rand's gaze fell to the woman who had spoken. She, too, had been watching the flight of the raven, but now she turned back, and her eyes met his. He could only stare. This had to be the Lady Moiraine, and she was everything that Mat and Ewin had said, everything and more.

wən i hæd hɝd ʃi kɔl nɪneɪiv tʃaɪld, hi hæd pɪktʃɝɾ əɹ əz oʊld, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt. ət list, hi kəd nɑt pʊɾ ɛni eɪdʒ tə hɝ əɾ ɔl. ət fɝst i θɔt ʃi wɑz əz jʌŋ əz nɪneɪiv, bʌt ðə lɔŋɡɝ i lʊk ðə mɔɹ i θɔt ʃi wɑz oʊldɝ ðən ðæt. ðəɹ wɑz ə mətʃʊɹəɾi əbaʊɾ əɹ lɑɹdʒ, dɑɹk aɪz, ə hɪn ə noʊɪŋ ðət noʊ wʌn cʊɾə ɡɑɾən jʌŋ. fəɹ ən ɪnstən i θɔt ðoʊz aɪz wɝ dip pulz əbaʊt tə swɑloʊ hɪm ʌp. ɪt wɑz pleɪn waɪ mæt ən juɪn neɪmd əɹ ə leɪɾi fɹəm ə ɡlimənz teɪl, tu. ʃi hɛl hɝsɛlf wɪð ə ɡɹeɪs ən ɛɹ ə kəmæn ðət meɪɾ ɪm fil ɑkwɝɾ ən stʌmbəl-fʊɾɪd. ʃi wɑz bɛɹli tɔl ɪnʌf tə kʌm ʌp tə hɪz tʃɛst, bʌɾ əɹ pɹɛzəns wɑz sətʃ ðəɾ əɹ haɪt sim ðə pɹɑpɝ wʌn, ən i fɛlt ənɡeɪnli ɪn ɪz tælnəs.

When he had heard she called Nynaeve child, he had pictured her as old, but she was not. At least, he could not put any age to her at all. At first he thought she was as young as Nynaeve, but the longer he looked the more he thought she was older than that. There was a maturity about her large, dark eyes, a hint of knowing that no one could have gotten young. For an instant he thought those eyes were deep pools about to swallow him up. It was plain why Mat and Ewin named her a lady from a gleeman's tale, too. She held herself with a grace and air of command that made him feel awkward and stumble-footed. She was barely tall enough to come up to his chest, but her presence was such that her height seemed the proper one, and he felt ungainly in his tallness.

ɔltəɡɛðɝ ʃi wɑz laɪk noʊ wʌn i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ. ðə waɪd hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk fɹeɪmd əɹ feɪs ən dɑɹk hɛɹ, hæŋɪŋ ɪn sɑft ɹɪŋləts. hi hæd nɛvɝ sin ə ɡɹoʊn wʊmən wɪð əɹ hɛɹ ənbɹeɪɾɪd; ɛvɹi ɡɝl ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz weɪɾəd iɡɝli fəɹ ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl ə hɝ vɪlədʒ tə seɪ ʃi wɑz oʊld ɪnʌf tə wɛɹ ə bɹeɪd. hɝ kloʊðz wɝ dʒʌst əz stʃɹeɪnʒ. hɝ kloʊk wɑz skaɪ-blu vɛlvət, wɪð θɪk sɪlvɝ ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝi, livz ən vaɪnz ən flaʊɝz, ɔl əlɔŋ ði ɛdʒəz. hɝ dʒɹɛs ɡlim feɪnli əz ʃi muvd, ə dɑɹkɝ blu ðən ðə kloʊk, ən slæʃt wɪð kɹim. ə nɛkləs ə hɛvi ɡoʊld lɪŋks hʌŋ ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, waɪl ənʌðɝ ɡoʊl tʃeɪn, dɛləkəɾ ən fæsən ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, səpɔɹɾəd ə smɔl, spɑɹklɪŋ blu stoʊn ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə hɝ fɔɹhɛd. ə waɪd bɛlt ʌv woʊvən ɡoʊld ɪnsɝkəld əɹ weɪst, ən ɑn ðə sɛkən fɪŋɡɝ ə hɝ lɛf hænd wɑz ə ɡoʊld ɹɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə sɝpən baɪɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl. hi hæd sɝɾənli nɛvɝ sin ə ɹɪŋ laɪk ðæt, ðoʊ hi ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt, ən ivən oʊldɝ sɪmbəl fəɹ ɪtɝnəɾi ðən ðə wil ə taɪm.

Altogether she was like no one he had ever seen before. The wide hood of her cloak framed her face and dark hair, hanging in soft ringlets. He had never seen a grown woman with her hair unbraided; every girl in the Two Rivers waited eagerly for the Women's Circle of her village to say she was old enough to wear a braid. Her clothes were just as strange. Her cloak was sky-blue velvet, with thick silver embroidery, leaves and vines and flowers, all along the edges. Her dress gleamed faintly as she moved, a darker blue than the cloak, and slashed with cream. A necklace of heavy gold links hung around her neck, while another gold chain, delicate and fastened in her hair, supported a small, sparkling blue stone in the middle of her forehead. A wide belt of woven gold encircled her waist, and on the second finger of her left hand was a gold ring in the shape of a serpent biting its own tail. He had certainly never seen a ring like that, though he recognized the Great Serpent, an even older symbol for eternity than the Wheel of Time.

fænsiɝ ðən ɛni fistdeɪ kloʊðz, juɪn hæd sɛd, ən i wɑz ɹaɪt. noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ dʒɹɛs laɪk ðəɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. nɑɾ ɛvɝ.

Fancier than any feastday clothes, Ewin had said, and he was right. No one ever dressed like that in the Two Rivers. Not ever.

"ɡʊd mɔɹnɪŋ, mɪstʃɹəs . . . ɑ . . . leɪɾi mɔɪɹeɪn," ɹænd sɛd. hɪz feɪs ɡɹu hɑɾ əɾ ɪz tʌŋz fʌmbəlɪŋ.

"Good morning, Mistress . . . ah . . . Lady Moiraine," Rand said. His face grew hot at his tongue's fumbling.

"ɡʊd mɔɹnɪŋ, leɪɾi mɔɪɹeɪn," mæt ɛkoʊd sʌmwʌt mɔɹ smuðli, bʌɾ oʊnli ə lɪɾəl.

"Good morning, Lady Moiraine," Mat echoed somewhat more smoothly, but only a little.

ʃi smaɪld, ən ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛniθɪŋ i maɪt də fəɹ hɝ, sʌmθɪŋ ðət wəd ɡɪv ɪm ən ɪkskjus tə steɪ nɪɹ hɝ. hi nu ʃi wɑz smaɪlɪŋ əɾ ɔl ə ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪt simd mɛn fəɹ ɪm əloʊn. ɪt ɹɪli wɑz dʒʌs laɪk siɪŋ ə ɡlimənz teɪl kʌm tə laɪf. mæt hæɾ ə fulɪʃ ɡɹɪn ɑn ɪz feɪs.

She smiled, and Rand found himself wondering if there was anything he might do for her, something that would give him an excuse to stay near her. He knew she was smiling at all of them, but it seemed meant for him alone. It really was just like seeing a gleeman's tale come to life. Mat had a foolish grin on his face.

"ju noʊ maɪ neɪm," ʃi sɛd, saʊndɪŋ dɪlaɪɾəd. əz ɪf əɹ pɹɛzəns, haʊɛvɝ bɹif, wəd nɑt bi ðə tɔk ə ðə vɪlədʒ fəɹ ə jɪɹ! "bʌt jə mʌs kɔl mi mɔɪɹeɪn, nɑt leɪɾi. ən wʌɾ ɑɹ jəɹ neɪmz?"

"You know my name," she said, sounding delighted. As if her presence, however brief, would not be the talk of the village for a year! "But you must call me Moiraine, not lady. And what are your names?"

juɪn lɛp fɔɹwɝd bɪfɔɹ iðɝ ə ði ʌðɝz kəd spik. "maɪ neɪm ɪz juɪn fɪŋɡɝ, maɪ leɪɾi. aɪ toʊld əm jəɹ neɪm; ðæts haʊ ðeɪ noʊ. aɪ hɝd læn seɪ ɪt, bʌɾ aɪ wɑzn ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ. noʊ wʌn laɪk jə hæz ɛvɝ kʌm tə ɛmənz fild, bɪfɔɹ. ðɛɹz ə ɡlimən ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ fəɹ bɛl taɪn, tu. ən tənaɪɾ ɪz wɪntɝnaɪt. wɪl jə kʌm tə maɪ haʊs? maɪ mʌðɝ əz æpəl keɪks."

Ewin leaped forward before either of the others could speak. "My name is Ewin Finngar, my lady. I told them your name; that's how they know. I heard Lan say it, but I wasn't eavesdropping. No one like you has ever come to Emond's Field, before. There's a gleeman in the village for Bel Tine, too. And tonight is Winternight. Will you come to my house? My mother has apple cakes."

"aɪ ʃæl əv tə si," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd, pʊɾɪŋ ə hæn ɑn juɪnz ʃoʊldɝ. hɝ aɪz twɪŋkəld wɪð əmjuzmənt, ðoʊ ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ ʌðɝ saɪn ʌv ɪt. "aɪ də nɑt noʊ haʊ wɛl aɪ kəd kəmpiɾ əɡɛnst ə ɡlimən, juɪn. bʌt jə mʌst ɔl kɔl mi mɔɪɹeɪn." ʃi lʊkt ɪkspɛktənli ət ɹænd ən mæt.

"I shall have to see," she replied, putting a hand on Ewin's shoulder. Her eyes twinkled with amusement, though she gave no other sign of it. "I do not know how well I could compete against a gleeman, Ewin. But you must all call me Moiraine." She looked expectantly at Rand and Mat.

"aɪm meɪtʃɹim kɔθən, luiziænə . . . ɑ . . . mɔɪɹeɪn," mæt sɛd. hi meɪɾ ə stɪf, dʒɝkɪŋ baʊ, ðən wɛn ɹɛɾ ɪn ðə feɪs əz i stʃɹeɪɾənd.

"I'm Matrim Cauthon, La . . . ah . . . Moiraine," Mat said. He made a stiff, jerking bow, then went red in the face as he straightened.

ɹænd hæd bɪn wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf i ʃəd də sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹt, ðə weɪ mɛn dɪɾ ɪn stɔɹiz, bʌt wɪð mæts ɪɡzæmpəl, hi mɪɹli spoʊk ɪz neɪm. ət list i dɪd nɑt stʌmbəl oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn tʌŋ ðɪs taɪm.

Rand had been wondering if he should do something of the sort, the way men did in stories, but with Mat's example, he merely spoke his name. At least he did not stumble over his own tongue this time.

mɔɪɹeɪn lʊk fɹəm ɪm tə mæt ən bæk əɡɛn. ɹænd θɔɾ əɹ smaɪl, ə bɛɹ kɝv ə ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ maʊθ, wɑz naʊ ðə sɔɹɾ ɛɡwin wɔɹ wən ʃi hæɾ ə sikɹət. "aɪ meɪ hæv səm smɔl tæsks tə bi dʌn fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm waɪl aɪm ɪn ɛmənz fild," ʃi sɛd. "pɝhæps jə wəd bi wɪlɪŋ tə əsɪs mi?" ʃi læft əz ðɛɹ əsɛns tʌmbəld oʊvɝ wʌn ənʌðɝ. "hɪɹ," ʃi sɛd, ən ɹænd wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd wən ʃi pɹɛst ə kɔɪn ɪndə hɪz pɑm, kloʊzɪŋ ɪz hæn taɪtli ɝaʊn ɪt wɪð boʊθ ə hɝz.

Moiraine looked from him to Mat and back again. Rand thought her smile, a bare curve of the corners of her mouth, was now the sort Egwene wore when she had a secret. "I may have some small tasks to be done from time to time while I am in Emond's Field," she said. "Perhaps you would be willing to assist me?" She laughed as their assents tumbled over one another. "Here," she said, and Rand was surprised when she pressed a coin into his palm, closing his hand tightly around it with both of hers.

"ðɛɹz noʊ nid," hi bɪɡæn, bʌt ʃi weɪvd əsaɪɾ ɪz pɹoʊɾɛst əz ʃi ɡeɪv juɪn ə kɔɪn əz wɛl, ðən pɹɛs mæts hæn ɝaʊnd wʌn ðə seɪm weɪ ʃi hæd ɹænz.

"There's no need," he began, but she waved aside his protest as she gave Ewin a coin as well, then pressed Mat's hand around one the same way she had Rand's.

"ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ ɪz," ʃi sɛd. "ju kænɑt bi ɪkspɛktəd tə wɝk fəɹ nʌθɪŋ. kənsɪɾɝ ðɪs ə toʊkən, ən kip ɪt wɪð ju, soʊ jəl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət juv əɡɹid tə kʌm tə mi wən aɪ æsk ɪt. ðəɹ ɪz ə bɑn bɪtwin əs naʊ."

"Of course, there is," she said. "You cannot be expected to work for nothing. Consider this a token, and keep it with you, so you will remember that you have agreed to come to me when I ask it. There is a bond between us now."

"aɪl nɛvɝ fɝɡɛt," juɪn paɪpt ʌp.

"I'll never forget," Ewin piped up.

"leɪɾɝ wi mʌs tɔk," ʃi sɛd, "æn jə mʌs tɛl mi ɔl əbaʊt jʊɹsɛlvz."

"Later we must talk," she said, "and you must tell me all about yourselves."

"leɪɾi . . . aɪ min, mɔɪɹeɪn?" ɹænd æsk hɛzɪɾəntli əz ʃi tɝn əweɪ. ʃi stɑpt ən lʊk bæk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ən i hæd tə swɑloʊ bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "waɪ hæv jə kʌm tə ɛmənz fild?" hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz əntʃeɪnʒd, bʌt sʌɾənli hi wɪʃt i hæd nɑɾ æskt, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑɾ əv sɛd waɪ. hi ɹʌʃt tə ɪkspleɪn hɪmsɛlf, ɛniweɪ. "aɪ doʊn min tə bi ɹud. ɪm sɑɹi. ɪts dʒʌs ðət noʊ wʌn kʌmz ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪksɛp ðə mɝtʃəns, ən pɛdlɝz wən ðə snoʊ ɪzən tu dip tə ɡɛt daʊn fɹəm bɛɹlən. ɔlmoʊs noʊ wʌn. sɝɾənli noʊ wʌn laɪk ju. ðə mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz səmtaɪmz seɪ ðɪs ɪz ðə bæk ɛn ə fɝɛvɝ, ən aɪ səpoʊz ɪt mʌst sim ðət weɪ tə ɛniwʌn fɹəm aʊtsaɪd. aɪ dʒʌst wʌndɝd."

"Lady . . . I mean, Moiraine?" Rand asked hesitantly as she turned away. She stopped and looked back over her shoulder, and he had to swallow before going on. "Why have you come to Emond's Field?" Her expression was unchanged, but suddenly he wished he had not asked, though he could not have said why. He rushed to explain himself, anyway. "I don't mean to be rude. I'm sorry. It's just that no one comes into the Two Rivers except the merchants, and peddlers when the snow isn't too deep to get down from Baerlon. Almost no one. Certainly no one like you. The merchants' guards sometimes say this is the back end of forever, and I suppose it must seem that way to anyone from outside. I just wondered."

hɝ smaɪl dɪd feɪd ðɛn, sloʊli, əz ɪf sʌmθɪŋ hæd bɪn ɹɪkɔl tə hɝ. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi mɪɹli lʊkt ət hɪm. "aɪ æm ə stuɾənt ə hɪstɝi," ʃi sɛɾ ət læst, "ə kəlɛktɝ ʌv oʊl stɔɹiz. ðɪs pleɪs jə kɔl ðə tu ɹɪvɝz əz ɔlweɪz ɪntʃɹəstəd mi. səmtaɪmz aɪ stʌɾi ðə stɔɹiz ʌv wʌt hæpən hɪɹ lɔŋ əɡoʊ, hɪɹ ən əɾ ʌðɝ pleɪsəz."

Her smile did fade then, slowly, as if something had been recalled to her. For a moment she merely looked at him. "I am a student of history," she said at last, "a collector of old stories. This place you call the Two Rivers has always interested me. Sometimes I study the stories of what happened here long ago, here and at other places."

"stɔɹiz?" ɹænd sɛd. "wʌɾ ɛvɝ hæpən ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz tə ɪntʃɹəst sʌmwʌn laɪk - aɪ min, wʌt cʊɾə hæpən hɪɹ?"

"Stories?" Rand said. "What ever happened in the Two Rivers to interest someone like - I mean, what could have happened here?"

"ænd wʌɾ ɛls wəd jə kɔl ɪt bɪsaɪd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz?" mæt æɾəd. "ðæts wʌɾ ɪts ɔlweɪz bɪn kɔld."

"And what else would you call it beside the Two Rivers?" Mat added. "That's what it has always been called."

"æz ðə wil ə taɪm tɝnz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, hæf tə hɝsɛlf ən wɪð ə dɪstən lʊk ɪn əɹ aɪz, "pleɪsəz wɛɹ mɛni neɪmz. mɛn wɛɹ mɛni neɪmz, mɛni feɪsəz. dɪfɹən feɪsəz, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ðə seɪm mæn. jɛt noʊ wʌn noʊz ðə ɡɹeɪt pæɾɝn ðə wil wivz, əɹ ivən ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ. wi kən oʊnli wɑtʃ, ən stʌɾi, ən hoʊp."

"As the Wheel of Time turns," Moiraine said, half to herself and with a distant look in her eyes, "places wear many names. Men wear many names, many faces. Different faces, but always the same man. Yet no one knows the Great Pattern the Wheel weaves, or even the Pattern of an Age. We can only watch, and study, and hope."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, əneɪbəl tə seɪ ə wɝd, ivən tə æsk wʌt ʃi mɛnt. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd mɛn fəɹ əm tə hɪɹ. ði ʌðɝ tu wɝ dʒʌst əz tʌŋ-taɪd, hi noʊɾəst. juɪnz maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən.

Rand stared at her, unable to say a word, even to ask what she meant. He was not sure she had meant for them to hear. The other two were just as tongue-tied, he noticed. Ewin's mouth hung open.

mɔɪɹeɪn foʊkəst ɑn əm əɡɛn, ən ɔl θɹi ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl ʃeɪk əz ɪf weɪkɪŋ ʌp. "leɪɾɝ wɪl tɔk," ʃi sɛd. nʌn ə ðɛm sɛɾ ə wɝd. "leɪɾɝ." ʃi muvd ɑn təwɔɹd ðə wæɡən bɹɪdʒ, əpɪɹɪŋ tə ɡlaɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹæðɝ ðən wɔk, hɝ kloʊk spɹɛɾɪŋ ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɝ laɪk wɪŋz.

Moiraine focused on them again, and all three gave a little shake as if waking up. "Later we will talk," she said. None of them said a word. "Later." She moved on toward the Wagon Bridge, appearing to glide over the ground rather than walk, her cloak spreading on either side of her like wings.

əz ʃi lɛft, ə tɔl mæn ɹænd hæd nɑt noʊɾəst bɪfɔɹ muvd əweɪ fɹəm ðə fɹʌn ə ði ɪn ən fɑloʊd hɝ, wʌn hæn ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ðə lɔŋ hɪlt ʌv ə sɔɹd. hɪz kloʊðz wɝ ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪɪʃ ɡɹin ðət wʊɾə feɪɾəd ɪndə lif əɹ ʃædoʊ, ən ɪz kloʊk swɝl θɹu ʃeɪdz ʌv ɡɹeɪ ən ɡɹin ən bɹaʊn əz ɪt ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðə wɪnd. ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst sim tə dɪsəpɪɹ ət taɪmz, ðət kloʊk, feɪɾɪŋ ɪndə wʌtɛvɝ leɪ bɪɑn ɪt. hɪz hɛɹ wɑz lɔŋ, ən ɡɹeɪ ət ðə tɛmpəlz, hɛl bæk fɹəm ɪz feɪs baɪ ə nɛɹoʊ lɛðɝ hɛdbænd. ðət feɪs wɑz meɪd fɹəm stoʊni pleɪnz ən æŋɡəlz, wɛðɝd bʌɾ ənlaɪn dɪspaɪt ðə ɡɹeɪ ɪn ɪz hɛɹ. wən i muvd, ɹænd kəd θɪŋk ə nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ə wʊlf.

As she left, a tall man Rand had not noticed before moved away from the front of the inn and followed her, one hand resting on the long hilt of a sword. His clothes were a dark grayish green that would have faded into leaf or shadow, and his cloak swirled through shades of gray and green and brown as it shifted in the wind. It almost seemed to disappear at times, that cloak, fading into whatever lay beyond it. His hair was long, and gray at the temples, held back from his face by a narrow leather headband. That face was made from stony planes and angles, weathered but unlined despite the gray in his hair. When he moved, Rand could think of nothing but a wolf.

ɪn pæsɪŋ ðə θɹi juðz ɪz ɡeɪz ɹæn oʊvɝ ðɛm, aɪz əz koʊld ən blu əz ə mɪdwɪntɝ dɔn. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf i wɝ weɪɪŋ əm ɪn ɪz maɪnd, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ɑn ɪz feɪs ʌv wʌt ðə skeɪlz toʊl hɪm. hi kwɪkən ɪz peɪs əntɪl i kɑɾ ʌp tə mɔɪɹeɪn, ðən sloʊd tə wɔk baɪ hɝ ʃoʊldɝ, bɛndɪŋ tə spik tə hɝ. ɹænd lɛɾ aʊɾ ə bɹɛθ i hæd nɑt ɹilaɪzd i hæd bɪn hoʊldɪŋ.

In passing the three youths his gaze ran over them, eyes as cold and blue as a midwinter dawn. It was as if he were weighing them in his mind, and there was no sign on his face of what the scales told him. He quickened his pace until he caught up to Moiraine, then slowed to walk by her shoulder, bending to speak to her. Rand let out a breath he had not realized he had been holding.

"ðæt wɑz læn," juɪn sɛd θɹoʊəɾəli, əz ɪf hi, tu, hæd bɪn hoʊldɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ. ɪt hæd bɪn ðət kaɪndə lʊk. "aɪl bɛt hiz ə wɔɹɾɝ."

"That was Lan," Ewin said throatily, as if he, too, had been holding his breath. It had been that kind of look. "I'll bet he's a Warder."

"doʊn bi ə ful." mæt læft, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə ʃeɪki læf. "wɔɹɾɝz ɑɹ dʒʌst ɪn stɔɹiz. ɛniweɪ, wɔɹɾɝz əv sɔɹdz ən ɑɹmɝ kʌvɝɾ ɪn ɡoʊld ən dʒuəlz, ən spɛn ɔl ðɛɹ taɪm ʌp nɔɹθ, ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, faɪɾɪŋ ivəl ən tʃɹɑləks ən sʌtʃ."

"Don't be a fool." Mat laughed, but it was a shaky laugh. "Warders are just in stories. Anyway, Warders have swords and armor covered in gold and jewels, and spend all their time up north, in the Great Blight, fighting evil and Trollocs and such."

"hi kəd bi ə wɔɹɾɝ," juɪn ɪnsɪstəd.

"He could be a Warder," Ewin insisted.

"dɪd jə si ɛni ɡoʊld əɹ dʒuəlz ɑn hɪm?" mæt skɔft. "du wɪv tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz? wɪv ʃip. aɪ wʌndɝ wʌt kəɾ ɛvɝ əv hæpən hɪɹ tə ɪntʃɹəst sʌmwʌn laɪk hɝ."

"Did you see any gold or jewels on him?" Mat scoffed. "Do we have Trollocs in the Two Rivers? We have sheep. I wonder what could ever have happened here to interest someone like her."

"sʌmθɪŋ kəd hæv," ɹænd ænsɝd sloʊli. "ðeɪ seɪ ði ɪnz bɪn hɪɹ fəɹ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz, meɪbi mɔɹ."

"Something could have," Rand answered slowly. "They say the inn's been here for a thousand years, maybe more."

"ə θaʊzən jɪɹz ə ʃip," mæt sɛd.

"A thousand years of sheep," Mat said.

"ə sɪlvɝ pɛni!" juɪn bɝst aʊt. "ʃi ɡeɪv mi ə hoʊl sɪlvɝ pɛni! θɪŋk wʌɾ aɪ kən baɪ wən ðə pɛdlɝ kʌmz."

"A silver penny!" Ewin burst out. "She gave me a whole silver penny! Think what I can buy when the peddler comes."

ɹænd oʊpən ɪz hæn tə lʊk ət ðə kɔɪn ʃi hæd ɡɪvən hɪm, ən ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑpt ɪɾ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. hi dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə fæt sɪlvɝ kɔɪn wɪð ðə ɹeɪzd ɪmədʒ ʌv ə wʊmən bælənsɪŋ ə sɪŋɡəl fleɪm ɑn əɹ ʌptɝn hænd, bʌɾ i hæd wɑtʃt waɪl bɹæn ælvɪɹ weɪɾ aʊt ðə kɔɪnz mɝtʃəns bɹɔt fɹəm ə dʌzən lænz, ən i hæɾ ən aɪdiə ʌv ɪts vælju. ðət mʌtʃ sɪlvɝ wəd baɪ ə ɡʊd hɔɹs ɛniwɛɹ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, wɪð səm lɛft oʊvɝ.

Rand opened his hand to look at the coin she had given him, and almost dropped it in surprise. He did not recognize the fat silver coin with the raised image of a woman balancing a single flame on her upturned hand, but he had watched while Bran al'Vere weighed out the coins merchants brought from a dozen lands, and he had an idea of its value. That much silver would buy a good horse anywhere in the Two Rivers, with some left over.

hi lʊkt ət mæt ən sɔ ðə seɪm stʌn ɪkspɹɛʃən i nu mʌs bi ɑn ɪz oʊn feɪs. tɪltɪŋ ɪz hæn soʊ mæt kəd si ðə kɔɪn bʌt nɑt juɪn, hi ɹeɪzd ə kwɛstʃənɪŋ aɪbɹaʊ. mæt nɑɾəd, ən fəɹ ə mɪnət ðeɪ stɛɹɾ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn pɝplɛkst wʌndɝ.

He looked at Mat and saw the same stunned expression he knew must be on his own face. Tilting his hand so Mat could see the coin but not Ewin, he raised a questioning eyebrow. Mat nodded, and for a minute they stared at one another in perplexed wonder.

"wʌt kaɪndə tʃɔɹz dʌz ʃi hæv?" ɹænd æsk faɪnəli.

"What kind of chores does she have?" Rand asked finally.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," mæt sɛd fɝmli, "æn aɪ doʊn kɛɹ. aɪ woʊn spɛn ɪt, iðɝ. ivən wən ðə pɛdlɝ kʌmz." wɪð ðəɾ i θɹʌst ɪz kɔɪn ɪndə hɪz koʊt pɑkət.

"I don't know," Mat said firmly, "and I don't care. I won't spend it, either. Even when the peddler comes." With that he thrust his coin into his coat pocket.

nɑɾɪŋ, ɹænd sloʊli dɪd ðə seɪm wɪð hɪz. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ waɪ, bʌt sʌmhaʊ wʌt mæt sɛd simd ɹaɪt. ðə kɔɪn ʃəd nɑt bi spɛnt. nɑt wən ɪt keɪm fɹəm hɝ. hi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls sɪlvɝ wɑz ɡʊd fɔɹ, bʌt. . . .

Nodding, Rand slowly did the same with his. He was not sure why, but somehow what Mat said seemed right. The coin should not be spent. Not when it came from her. He could not think of anything else silver was good for, but. . . .

"du jə θɪŋk aɪ ʃəd kip maɪn, tu?" æŋɡwɪʃt ɪndɪsɪʒən peɪntəd juɪnz feɪs.

"Do you think I should keep mine, too?" Anguished indecision painted Ewin's face.

"nɑɾ ənlɛs jə wɑn tə," mæt sɛd.

"Not unless you want to," Mat said.

"aɪ θɪŋk ʃi ɡeɪv ɪt tə jə tə spɛnd," ɹænd sɛd.

"I think she gave it to you to spend," Rand said.

juɪn lʊkt əɾ ɪz kɔɪn, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ən stʌf ðə sɪlvɝ pɛni ɪndə hɪz pɑkət. "aɪl kip ɪt," hi sɛd mɔɹnfəli.

Ewin looked at his coin, then shook his head and stuffed the silver penny into his pocket. "I'll keep it," he said mournfully.

"ðɛɹz stɪl ðə ɡlimən," ɹænd sɛd, ən ðə jʌŋɡɝ bɔɪ bɹaɪɾənd.

"There's still the gleeman," Rand said, and the younger boy brightened.

"ɪf i ɛvɝ weɪks ʌp," mæt æɾəd.

"If he ever wakes up," Mat added.

"ɹænd," juɪn æskt, "ɪz ðəɹ ə ɡlimən?"

"Rand," Ewin asked, "is there a gleeman?"

"jul si," ɹænd ænsɝd wɪð ə læf. ɪt wɑz klɪɹ juɪn wəd nɑt bɪliv əntɪl i sɛɾ aɪz ɑn ðə ɡlimən. "hi hæz tə kʌm daʊn sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ."

"You'll see," Rand answered with a laugh. It was clear Ewin would not believe until he set eyes on the gleeman. "He has to come down sooner or later."

ʃaʊɾɪŋ dʒɹɪftəɾ əkɹɔs ðə wæɡən bɹɪdʒ, ən wən ɹænd lʊk tə si wʌt wɑz kɑzɪŋ ɪt, hɪz læftɝ bɪkeɪm hoʊlhɑɹɾɪd. ə mɪlɪŋ kɹaʊɾ ə vɪlɪdʒɝz, fɹəm ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹɾ oʊlstɝz tə tɑdlɝz bɛɹli eɪbəl tə wɔk, ɛskɔɹɾɪd ə tɔl wæɡən təwɔɹd ðə bɹɪdʒ, ə hjudʒ wæɡən dʒɹɔn baɪ eɪt hɔɹsəz, ði aʊtsaɪɾ ʌv ɪts ɹaʊndəd kænvəs kʌvɝ hʌŋ əbaʊt wɪð bʌndəlz laɪk bʌntʃəz ʌv ɡɹeɪps. ðə pɛdlɝ hæd kʌm ət læst. stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ən ə ɡlimən, faɪɹwɝks ən ə pɛdlɝ. ɪt wɑz gɑnə bi ðə bɛs bɛl taɪn ɛvɝ.

Shouting drifted across the Wagon Bridge, and when Rand looked to see what was causing it, his laughter became wholehearted. A milling crowd of villagers, from gray-haired oldsters to toddlers barely able to walk, escorted a tall wagon toward the bridge, a huge wagon drawn by eight horses, the outside of its rounded canvas cover hung about with bundles like bunches of grapes. The peddler had come at last. Strangers and a gleeman, fireworks and a peddler. It was going to be the best Bel Tine ever.


tʃæptɝ θɹi


CHAPTER 3

ðə pɛdlɝ


The Peddler

klʌstɝz ə pɑts klæɾɝd ən bæŋd əz ðə pɛdlɝz wæɡən ɹʌmbəld oʊvɝ ðə hɛvi tɪmbɝz ə ðə wæɡən bɹɪdʒ. stɪl sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə klaʊɾ ə vɪlɪdʒɝz ən fɑɹmɝz kʌm fəɹ fɛstəvəl, ðə pɛdlɝ ɹeɪn ɪz hɔɹsəz tə ə stɑp ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn. fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən pipəl stʃɹim tə swɛl ðə nʌmbɝz ɝaʊn ðə ɡɹeɪt wæɡən, ɪts wilz tɔlɝ ðən ɛni ʌv ðə pipəl wɪð ðɛɹ aɪz fæsən tə ðə pɛdlɝ əbʌv əm ɑn ðə wæɡən sit.

Clusters of pots clattered and banged as the peddler's wagon rumbled over the heavy timbers of the Wagon Bridge. Still surrounded by a cloud of villagers and farmers come for Festival, the peddler reined his horses to a stop in front of the inn. From every direction people streamed to swell the numbers around the great wagon, its wheels taller than any of the people with their eyes fastened to the peddler above them on the wagon seat.

ðə mæn ɑn ðə wæɡən wɑz pdən feɪn, ə peɪl, skɪni fɛloʊ wɪð ɡæŋli ɑɹmz ən ə mæsɪv bik ʌv ə noʊz. feɪn, ɔlweɪz smaɪlɪŋ ən læfɪŋ əz ɪf i nu ə dʒoʊk ðət noʊ wʌn ɛls nu, hæd dʒɹɪvən ɪz wæɡən ən tim ɪndə ɛmənz fild ɛvɹi spɹɪŋ fəɹ əz lɔŋ əz ɹænd kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ.

The man on the wagon was Padan Fain, a pale, skinny fellow with gangly arms and a massive beak of a nose. Fain, always smiling and laughing as if he knew a joke that no one else knew, had driven his wagon and team into Emond's Field every spring for as long as Rand could remember.

ðə dɔɹ ə ði ɪn flu oʊpən ivən əz ðə tim hɔltəɾ ɪn ə dʒæŋɡəl ə hɑɹnəs, ən ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl əpɪɹd, lɛd baɪ mæstɝ ælvɪɹ ən tæm. ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt aʊt dɪlɪbɝətli, ivən sɛn bui, əmɪɾ ɔl ði ɪksaɪɾəd ʃaʊɾɪŋ ə ði ʌðɝz fəɹ pɪnz əɹ leɪs əɹ bʊks əɹ ə dʌzən ʌðɝ θɪŋz. ɹɪlʌktənli ðə kɹaʊd pɑɹɾəd tə lɛɾ əm tə ðə fɔɹ, ɛvɹiwʌn kloʊzɪŋ ɪn kwɪkli bɪhaɪn ən nɛvɝ stɑpɪŋ ðɛɹ kɔlɪŋ tə ðə pɛdlɝ. moʊst ʌv ɔl, ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz kɔl fəɹ nuz.

The door of the inn flew open even as the team halted in a jangle of harness, and the Village Council appeared, led by Master al'Vere and Tam. They marched out deliberately, even Cenn Buie, amid all the excited shouting of the others for pins or lace or books or a dozen other things. Reluctantly the crowd parted to let them to the fore, everyone closing in quickly behind and never stopping their calling to the peddler. Most of all, the villagers called for news.

ɪn ði aɪz ə ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz, niɾəlz ən ti ən ðə laɪk wɝ noʊ mɔɹ ðən hæf ðə fɹeɪɾ ɪn ə pɛdlɝz wæɡən. ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz ɪmpɔɹɾənt wɑz wɝɾ ʌv aʊtsaɪd, nuz ə ðə wɝl bɪɑn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. səm pɛdlɝz sɪmpli toʊld wʌt ðeɪ nu, θɹoʊɪŋ ɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn ə hip, ə paɪl ə ɹʌbɪʃ wɪð wɪtʃ ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi bɑðɝd. ʌðɝz hæd tə hæv ɛvɹi wɝd dʒɹæɡd aʊɾ ə ðɛm, spikɪŋ ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli, wɪð ə bæd ɡɹeɪs. feɪn, haʊɛvɝ, spoʊk fɹili ɪf ɔfən tizəŋli, ən spʌn aʊt ðə tɛlɪŋ, meɪkɪŋ ə ʃoʊ tə ɹaɪvəl ə ɡlimən. hi ɛndʒɔɪd biɪŋ ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ətɛnʃən, stʃɹʌɾɪŋ ɝaʊn laɪk ən ʌndɝ-saɪzd ɹustɝ, wɪð ɛvɹi aɪ ɑn hɪm. ɪɾ əkɝd tə ɹænd ðət feɪn maɪt nɑt bi bɛs pliz tə faɪn ə ɹil ɡlimən ɪn ɛmənz fild.

In the eyes of the villagers, needles and tea and the like were no more than half the freight in a peddler's wagon. Every bit as important was word of outside, news of the world beyond the Two Rivers. Some peddlers simply told what they knew, throwing it out in a heap, a pile of rubbish with which they could not be bothered. Others had to have every word dragged out of them, speaking grudgingly, with a bad grace. Fain, however, spoke freely if often teasingly, and spun out the telling, making a show to rival a gleeman. He enjoyed being the center of attention, strutting around like an under-sized rooster, with every eye on him. It occurred to Rand that Fain might not be best pleased to find a real gleeman in Emond's Field.

ðə pɛdlɝ ɡeɪv ðə kaʊnsəl ən vɪlɪdʒɝz əlaɪk ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm ətɛnʃən əz i fʌst wɪð taɪɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz ɔf dʒʌst soʊ, wɪtʃ wɑz tə seɪ hɑɹdli ɛni ətɛnʃən əɾ ɔl. hi nɑɾəd kæʒəwəli ət noʊ wʌn ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ. hi smaɪld wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ, ən weɪvd æbsənli tə pipəl wɪð hum i wɑz pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli fɹɛnli, ðoʊ hɪz fɹɛnlinɪs hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn ʌv ə pɪkjuljɝli dɪstən kaɪnd, bækslæpɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ kloʊs.

The peddler gave the Council and villagers alike exactly the same attention as he fussed with tying his reins off just so, which was to say hardly any attention at all. He nodded casually at no one in particular. He smiled without speaking, and waved absently to people with whom he was particularly friendly, though his friendliness had always been of a peculiarly distant kind, backslapping without ever getting close.

ðə dɪmænz fəɹ ɪm tə spik ɡɹu laʊɾɝ, bʌt feɪn weɪɾəd, fɪdlɪŋ wɪð smɔl tæsks əbaʊt ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz sit, fəɹ ðə kɹaʊɾ ən ði æntɪsəpeɪʃən tə ɹitʃ ðə saɪz i wɑntəd. ðə kaʊnsəl əloʊn kɛp saɪlənt. ðeɪ meɪnteɪn ðə dɪɡnəɾi bɪfɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ pəzɪʃən, bʌɾ ɪnkɹisɪŋ klaʊdz ə paɪpsmoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ əbʌv ðɛɹ hɛdz ʃoʊd ði ɛfɝɾ ʌv ɪt.

The demands for him to speak grew louder, but Fain waited, fiddling with small tasks about the driver's seat, for the crowd and the anticipation to reach the size he wanted. The Council alone kept silent. They maintained the dignity befitting their position, but increasing clouds of pipesmoke rising above their heads showed the effort of it.

ɹænd ən mæt ɛdʒd ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd, ɡɛɾɪŋ əz kloʊs tə ðə wæɡən əz ðeɪ kʊd. ɹænd wʊɾə stɑp hæfweɪ, bʌt mæt ɹɪəl θɹu ðə pɹɛs, pʊlɪŋ ɹænd bɪhaɪn hɪm, əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn ðə kaʊnsəl.

Rand and Mat edged into the crowd, getting as close to the wagon as they could. Rand would have stopped halfway, but Mat wriggled through the press, pulling Rand behind him, until they were right behind the Council.

"aɪ hæd bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ jə wɝ gɑnə steɪ aʊɾ ɑn ðə fɑɹm θɹu ðə hoʊl fɛstəvəl," pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə ʃaʊɾəd ət ɹænd oʊvɝ ðə klæmɝ. hæf ə hɛd ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən ɹænd, ðə kɝli-hɛɹd blæksmɪθs əpɹɛntəs wɑz soʊ stɑki əz tə sim ə mæn ən ə hæf waɪd, wɪð ɑɹmz ən ʃoʊldɝz θɪk ɪnʌf tə ɹaɪvəl ðoʊz ə mæstɝ luhən hɪmsɛlf. hi kəɾ izəli hæv pʊʃt θɹu ðə θɹɔŋ, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪz weɪ. hi pɪkt ɪz pæθ kɛɹfəli, ɔfɝɪŋ əpɑlədʒiz tə pipəl u hæɾ oʊnli hæf ə maɪn tə noʊɾəs ɛniθɪŋ bʌt ðə pɛdlɝ. hi meɪd ði əpɑlədʒiz ɛniweɪ, ən tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə dʒɑsəl ɛniwʌn əz i wɝk θɹu ðə kɹaʊd tə ɹænd ən mæt. "ɪmædʒən ɪt," hi sɛd wən i faɪnəli ɹitʃt ðɛm. "bɛl taɪn ən ə pɛdlɝ, boʊθ təɡɛðɝ. əl bɛt ðəɹ ɹɪli ɑɹ faɪɹwɝks."

"I had been thinking you were going to stay out on the farm through the whole Festival," Perrin Aybara shouted at Rand over the clamor. Half a head shorter than Rand, the curly-haired blacksmith's apprentice was so stocky as to seem a man and a half wide, with arms and shoulders thick enough to rival those of Master Luhhan himself. He could easily have pushed through the throng, but that was not his way. He picked his path carefully, offering apologies to people who had only half a mind to notice anything but the peddler. He made the apologies anyway, and tried not to jostle anyone as he worked through the crowd to Rand and Mat. "Imagine it," he said when he finally reached them. "Bel Tine and a peddler, both together. I'll bet there really are fireworks."

"ju doʊnt noʊ ə kɔɹɾɝ ʌv ɪt." mæt læft.

"You don't know a quarter of it." Mat laughed.

pɛɹɪn aɪɾ ɪm səspɪʃəsli, ðən lʊkt ə kwɛstʃən ət ɹænd.

Perrin eyed him suspiciously, then looked a question at Rand.

"ɪts tʃɹu," ɹænd ʃaʊɾəd, ðən dʒɛstʃɝɾ ət ðə ɡɹoʊɪŋ mæs ə pipəl, ɔl ɡɪvɪŋ vɔɪs. "leɪɾɝ. əl ɪkspleɪn leɪɾɝ. leɪɾɝ, aɪ sɛd!"

"It's true," Rand shouted, then gestured at the growing mass of people, all giving voice. "Later. I'll explain later. Later, I said!"

ət ðət moʊmən pdən feɪn stʊɾ ʌp ɑn ðə wæɡən sit, ən ðə kɹaʊd kwaɪəɾəd ɪn ən ɪnstənt. ɹændz læst wɝdz ɪksploʊɾəd ɪndə ʌɾɝ saɪləns, kætʃɪŋ ðə pɛdlɝ wɪð ən ɑɹm ɹeɪz dʒɹəmæɾɪkli ən ɪz maʊθ oʊpən. ɛvɹibɑɾi tɝn tə stɛɹ ət ɹænd. ðə boʊni lɪɾəl mæn ɑn ðə wæɡən, pɹipɛɹd tə hæv ɛvɹiwʌn hæŋɪŋ ɑn ɪz fɝst wɝdz, ɡeɪv ɹænd ə ʃɑɹp, sɝtʃɪŋ lʊk.

At that moment Padan Fain stood up on the wagon seat, and the crowd quieted in an instant. Rand's last words exploded into utter silence, catching the peddler with an arm raised dramatically and his mouth open. Everybody turned to stare at Rand. The bony little man on the wagon, prepared to have everyone hanging on his first words, gave Rand a sharp, searching look.

ɹændz feɪs ɹɛɾənd, ən i wɪʃt i wɝ juɪnz saɪz soʊ hi dɪd nɑt stæn aʊt soʊ klɪɹli. hɪz fɹɛnz ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli, tu. ɪt hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ðə jɪɹ bɪfɔɹ ðət feɪn hæd teɪkən noʊɾəs ə ðɛm fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ əm əz mɛn. feɪn dɪd nɑt juʒəwəli hæv taɪm fəɹ ɛniwʌn tu jʌŋ tə baɪ ə ɡʊd dil ə θɪŋz ɔf ɪz wæɡən. ɹænd hoʊpt i hæd nɑt bɪn ɹɛləɡeɪɾɪd tə ə tʃaɪld əɡɛn ɪn ðə pɛdlɝz aɪz.

Rand's face reddened, and he wished he were Ewin's size so he did not stand out so clearly. His friends shifted uncomfortably, too. It had only been the year before that Fain had taken notice of them for the first time, acknowledging them as men. Fain did not usually have time for anyone too young to buy a good deal of things off his wagon. Rand hoped he had not been relegated to a child again in the peddler's eyes.

wɪð ə laʊd hæɹəmf, feɪn tʌɡd əɾ ɪz hɛvi kloʊk. "noʊ, nɑt leɪɾɝ," ðə pɛdlɝ dɪkleɪmd, wʌns mɔɹ θɹoʊɪŋ ʌp ə hænd ɡɹænli. "aɪ wɪl bi tɛlɪŋ jə naʊ." əz i spoʊk i meɪd bɹɔd dʒɛstʃɝz, kæstɪŋ ɪz wɝdz oʊvɝ ðə kɹaʊd. "ju ɑɹ θɪŋkɪŋ juv hæd tʃɹʌbəlz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɑɹ ju? wɛl, ɔl ðə wɝld əz tʃɹʌbəlz, fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt saʊθ tə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, fɹəm ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən ɪn ðə wɛs tə ði il weɪst ɪn ði ist. ən ivən bɪɑnd. ðə wɪntɝ wɑz hɑɹʃɝ ðən juv ɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ, koʊld ɪnʌf tə dʒɛl jəɹ blʌɾ ən kɹæk jəɹ boʊnz? ! wɪntɝ wɑz koʊld ən hɑɹʃ ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz ðeɪd bi kɔlɪŋ jəɹ wɪntɝ spɹɪŋ. bʌt spɹɪŋ dʌz nɑt kʌm, jə seɪ? wʊlvz əv kɪl jəɹ ʃip? pɝhæps wʊlvz əv ətæk mɛn? ɪz ðət ðə weɪ ʌv ɪt? wɛl, naʊ. spɹɪŋ ɪz leɪɾ ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ðəɹ ɑɹ wʊlvz ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ɔl hʌŋɡɹi fəɹ ɛni flɛʃ ðeɪ kən sɪŋk ə tuθ ɪntu, bi ɪt ʃip əɹ kaʊ əɹ mæn. bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ θɪŋz wɝs ðən wʊlvz əɹ wɪntɝ. ðəɹ ɑɹ ðoʊz u wəd bi ɡlæd tə hæv oʊnli jəɹ lɪɾəl tʃɹʌbəlz." hi pɔzd ɪkspɛktənli.

With a loud harrumph, Fain tugged at his heavy cloak. "No, not later," the peddler declaimed, once more throwing up a hand grandly. "I will be telling you now." As he spoke he made broad gestures, casting his words over the crowd. "You are thinking you have had troubles in the Two Rivers, are you? Well, all the world has troubles, from the Great Blight south to the Sea of Storms, from the Aryth Ocean in the west to the Aiel Waste in the east. And even beyond. The winter was harsher than you've ever seen before, cold enough to jell your blood and crack your bones? Ahhh! Winter was cold and harsh everywhere. In the Borderlands they'd be calling your winter spring. But spring does not come, you say? Wolves have killed your sheep? Perhaps wolves have attacked men? Is that the way of it? Well, now. Spring is late everywhere. There are wolves everywhere, all hungry for any flesh they can sink a tooth into, be it sheep or cow or man. But there are things worse than wolves or winter. There are those who would be glad to have only your little troubles." He paused expectantly.

"wʌt kəd bi wɝs ðən wʊlvz kɪlɪŋ ʃip, ən mɛn?" sɛn bui dɪmændəd. ʌðɝz mʌɾɝd ɪn səpɔɹt.

"What could be worse than wolves killing sheep, and men?" Cenn Buie demanded. Others muttered in support.

"mɛn kɪlɪŋ mɛn." ðə pɛdlɝz ɹɪplaɪ, ɪn pɔɹtɛntəs toʊnz, bɹɔt ʃɑk mɝmɝz ðəɾ ɪnkɹist əz i wɛn ɑn. "ɪɾ ɪz wɔɹ wʌn min. ðəɹ ɪz wɔɹ ɪn ɡildən, wɔɹ ən mædnəs. ðə snoʊz ə ðə dælɪn fɔɹəst ɑɹ ɹɛd wɪð ðə blʌɾ ə mɛn. ɹeɪvənz ən ðə kɹaɪz ə ɹeɪvənz fɪl ði ɛɹ. ɑɹmiz mɑɹtʃ tə ɡildən. neɪʃənz, ɡɹeɪt haʊsəz ən ɡɹeɪt mɛn, sɛn ðɛɹ soʊlʒɝz tə faɪt."

"Men killing men." The peddler's reply, in portentous tones, brought shocked murmurs that increased as he went on. "It is war I mean. There is war in Ghealdan, war and madness. The snows of the Dhallin Forest are red with the blood of men. Ravens and the cries of ravens fill the air. Armies march to Ghealdan. Nations, great houses and great men, send their soldiers to fight."

"wɔɹ?" mæstɝ ælvɪɹz maʊθ fɪɾ ɔkwɝdli ɝaʊn ði ʌnfəmɪljɝ wɝd. noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz hæɾ ɛvɝ hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ə wɔɹ. "waɪ ɑɹ ðeɪ hævɪŋ ə wɔɹ?"

"War?" Master al'Vere's mouth fit awkwardly around the unfamiliar word. No one in the Two Rivers had ever had anything to do with a war. "Why are they having a war?"

feɪn ɡɹɪnd, ən ɹænd hæd ðə filɪŋ i wɑz mɑkɪŋ ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz' aɪsəleɪʃən fɹəm ðə wɝld, ən ðɛɹ ɪɡnɝəns. ðə pɛdlɝ lin fɔɹwɝɾ əz ɪf i wɝ əbaʊt tə ɪmpɑɹɾ ə sikɹət tə ðə meɪɝ, bʌɾ ɪz wɪspɝ wɑz mɛn tə kæɹi ən dɪd. "ðə stændɝɾ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən əz bɪn ɹeɪzd, ən mɛn flɑk tə əpoʊz. ən tə səpɔɹt."

Fain grinned, and Rand had the feeling he was mocking the villagers' isolation from the world, and their ignorance. The peddler leaned forward as if he were about to impart a secret to the Mayor, but his whisper was meant to carry and did. "The standard of the Dragon has been raised, and men flock to oppose. And to support."

wʌn lɔŋ ɡæsp lɛft ɛvɹi θɹoʊt təɡɛðɝ, ən ɹænd ʃɪvɝɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf.

One long gasp left every throat together, and Rand shivered in spite of himself.

"ðə dʒɹæɡən!" sʌmwʌn moʊnd. "ðə dɑɹk wʌnz lus ɪn ɡildən!"

"The Dragon!" someone moaned. "The Dark One's loose in Ghealdan!"

"nɑt ðə dɑɹk wʌn," hɹəl luhən ɡɹaʊld. "ðə dʒɹæɡənz nɑt ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ən ðɪs ɪz ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, ɛniweɪ."

"Not the Dark One," Haral Luhhan growled. "The Dragon's not the Dark One. And this is a false Dragon, anyway."

"lɛts hɪɹ wʌt mæstɝ feɪn əz tə seɪ," ðə meɪɝ sɛd, bʌt noʊ wʌn wəd bi kwaɪəɾəd ðəɾ izəli. pipəl kɹaɪɾ aʊt fɹəm ɛvɹi saɪd, mɛn ən wɪmən ʃaʊɾɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌn ənʌðɝ.

"Let's hear what Master Fain has to say," the Mayor said, but no one would be quieted that easily. People cried out from every side, men and women shouting over one another.

"dʒʌst əz bæɾ əz ðə dɑɹk wʌn!"

"Just as bad as the Dark One!"

"ðə dʒɹæɡən bɹoʊk ðə wɝld, dɪdn hi?"

"The Dragon broke the world, didn't he?"

"hi stɑɹɾəd ɪt! hi kɑz ðə taɪm ə mædnəs!"

"He started it! He caused the Time of Madness!"

"ju noʊ ðə pɹɑfəsiz! wən ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz ɹibɔɹn, jəɹ wɝs naɪtmɛɹz wɪl sim laɪk jəɹ fɑndəs dʒɹimz!"

"You know the prophecies! When the Dragon is reborn, your worst nightmares will seem like your fondest dreams!"

"hiz dʒʌst ənʌðɝ fɔls dʒɹæɡən. hi mʌs bi!"

"He's just another false Dragon. He must be!"

"wʌt dɪfɝəns dʌz ðət meɪk? jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə læs fɔls dʒɹæɡən. hi stɑɹɾəd ə wɔɹ, tu. θaʊzənz daɪd, ɪzən ðət ɹaɪt, feɪn? hi leɪd sidʒ tə ɪljən."

"What difference does that make? You remember the last false Dragon. He started a war, too. Thousands died, isn't that right, Fain? He laid siege to Illian."

"ɪts ivəl taɪmz! noʊ wʌn kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn fəɹ twɛnti jɪɹz, ən naʊ θɹi ɪn ðə læs faɪv jɪɹz. ivəl taɪmz! lʊk ət ðə wɛðɝ!"

"It's evil times! No one claiming to be the Dragon Reborn for twenty years, and now three in the last five years. Evil times! Look at the weather!"

ɹænd ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn. mæts aɪz ʃoʊn wɪð ɪksaɪtmənt, bʌt pɛɹɪn wɔɹ ə wɝid fɹaʊn. ɹænd kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɹi teɪl i hæd hɝɾ əbaʊt ðə mɛn u neɪm ðɛmsɛlvz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl pɹuvən ðɛmsɛlvz fɔls dʒɹæɡənz baɪ daɪɪŋ əɹ dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ wɪθaʊt fʊlfɪlɪŋ ɛni ʌv ðə pɹɑfəsiz, wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf. hoʊl neɪʃənz tɔɹn baɪ bæɾəl, ən sɪɾiz ən taʊnz pʊt tə ðə tɔɹtʃ. ðə dɛd fɛl laɪk ɔɾəm livz, ən ɹɛfjudʒiz klɔɡd ðə ɹoʊdz laɪk ʃip ɪn ə pɛn. soʊ ðə pɛdlɝz sɛd, ən ðə mɝtʃəns, ən noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪð ɛni sɛns daʊɾɪd ɪt. ðə wɝld wəɾ ɛnd, soʊ səm sɛd, wən ðə ɹil dʒɹæɡən wɑz bɔɹn əɡɛn.

Rand exchanged looks with Mat and Perrin. Mat's eyes shone with excitement, but Perrin wore a worried frown. Rand could remember every tale he had heard about the men who named themselves the Dragon Reborn, and if they had all proven themselves false Dragons by dying or disappearing without fulfilling any of the prophecies, what they had done was bad enough. Whole nations torn by battle, and cities and towns put to the torch. The dead fell like autumn leaves, and refugees clogged the roads like sheep in a pen. So the peddlers said, and the merchants, and no one in the Two Rivers with any sense doubted it. The world would end, so some said, when the real Dragon was born again.

"stɑp ðɪs!" ðə meɪɝ ʃaʊɾəd. "bi kwaɪət! stɑp wɝkɪŋ jʊɹsɛlvz tə ə læðɝ aʊɾ ə jəɹ oʊn ɪmædʒəneɪʃənz. lɛt mæstɝ feɪn tɛl əs əbaʊt ðɪs fɔls dʒɹæɡən." ðə pipəl bɪɡæn tə kwaɪəɾən, bʌt sɛn bui ɹəfjuz tə bi saɪlənt.

"Stop this!" the Mayor shouted. "Be quiet! Stop working yourselves to a lather out of your own imaginations. Let Master Fain tell us about this false Dragon." The people began to quieten, but Cenn Buie refused to be silent.

"ɪz ðɪs ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən?" ðə θætʃɝ æsk saʊɝli.

"Is this a false Dragon?" the thatcher asked sourly.

mæstɝ ælvɪɹ blɪŋkt əz ɪf teɪkən baɪ sɝpɹaɪz, ðən snæpt, "doʊn bi ən oʊl ful, sɛn!" bʌt sɛn hæd kɪndəl ðə kɹaʊɾ əɡɛn.

Master al'Vere blinked as if taken by surprise, then snapped, "Don't be an old fool, Cenn!" But Cenn had kindled the crowd again.

"hi kæn bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn! laɪt hɛlp ʌs, hi kæn bi!"

"He can't be the Dragon Reborn! Light help us, he can't be!"

"ju oʊl ful, bui! jə wɑn bæd lʌk, doʊn ju?"

"You old fool, Buie! You want bad luck, don't you?"

"bi neɪmɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, nɛkst! jəɹ teɪkən baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən, sɛn bui! tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɹɪŋ əs ɔl hɑɹm!"

"Be naming the Dark One, next! You're taken by the Dragon, Cenn Buie! Trying to bring us all harm!"

sɛn lʊkt ɝaʊn dɪfaɪənli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɛɹ daʊn ðə ɡlaʊɝz, ən ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs. "aɪ dɪdn hɪɹ feɪn seɪ ðɪs wɑz ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. dɪd ju? juz jəɹ aɪz! wɛɹ ɑɹ ðə kɹɑps ðət ʃəd bi ni haɪ əɹ bɛɾɝ? waɪ ɪz ɪt stɪl wɪntɝ wən spɹɪŋ ʃəd bi hɪɹ ə mʌnθ?" ðəɹ wɝ æŋɡɹi ʃaʊts fəɹ sɛn tə hoʊld ɪz tʌŋ. "aɪ wɪl nɑt bi saɪlənt! aɪv noʊ laɪkɪŋ fəɹ ðɪs tɔk, iðɝ, bʌɾ aɪ woʊn haɪd maɪ hɛɾ ʌndɝ ə bæskət tɪl ə tɛɹən fɛɹi mæn kʌmz tə kʌt maɪ θɹoʊt. ən aɪ woʊn dæŋɡəl ɑn feɪnz plɛʒɝ, nɑt ðɪs taɪm. spik ɪɾ aʊt pleɪn, pɛdlɝ. wʌɾ əv jə hɝd? ɛ? ɪz ðɪs mæn ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən?"

Cenn looked around defiantly, trying to stare down the glowers, and raised his voice. "I didn't hear Fain say this was a false Dragon. Did you? Use your eyes! Where are the crops that should be knee high or better? Why is it still winter when spring should be here a month?" There were angry shouts for Cenn to hold his tongue. "I will not be silent! I've no liking for this talk, either, but I won't hide my head under a basket till a Taren Ferry man comes to cut my throat. And I won't dangle on Fain's pleasure, not this time. Speak it out plain, peddler. What have you heard? Eh? Is this man a false Dragon?"

ɪf feɪn wɑz pɝtɝbd baɪ ðə nuz i bɹɔɾ əɹ ði ʌpsɛɾ i hæd kɑzd, hi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ʌv ɪt. hi mɪɹli ʃɹʌɡd ən leɪɾ ə skɪni fɪŋɡɝ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɪz noʊz. "æz tə ðæt, naʊ, hu kən seɪ əntɪl ɪts oʊvɝ ən dʌn?" hi pɔzd wɪð wʌn ə hɪz sikɹəɾɪv ɡɹɪnz, ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz aɪz oʊvɝ ðə kɹaʊɾ əz ɪf ɪmædʒənɪŋ haʊ ðeɪ wəd ɹiækt ən faɪndɪŋ ɪt fʌni. "aɪ də noʊ," hi sɛd, tu kæʒəwəli, "ðæɾ i kən wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ði ʌðɝz kʊdnt. bʌɾ i kən tʃænəl. ðə ɡɹaʊn oʊpənz bɪniθ ɪz ɛnəmiz' fit, ən stʃɹɔŋ wɔlz kɹʌmbəl əɾ ɪz ʃaʊt. laɪtnɪŋ kʌmz wən i kɔlz ən stʃɹaɪks wɛɹ i pɔɪns. ðəɾ aɪv hɝd, ən fɹəm mɛn aɪ bɪliv."

If Fain was perturbed by the news he brought or the upset he had caused, he gave no sign of it. He merely shrugged and laid a skinny finger alongside his nose. "As to that, now, who can say until it is over and done?" He paused with one of his secretive grins, running his eyes over the crowd as if imagining how they would react and finding it funny. "I do know," he said, too casually, "that he can wield the One Power. The others couldn't. But he can channel. The ground opens beneath his enemies' feet, and strong walls crumble at his shout. Lightning comes when he calls and strikes where he points. That I've heard, and from men I believe."

ə stʌn saɪləns fɛl. ɹænd lʊkt əɾ ɪz fɹɛnz. pɛɹɪn sim tə bi siɪŋ θɪŋz i dɪd nɑt laɪk, bʌt mæt stɪl lʊkt ɪksaɪɾəd.

A stunned silence fell. Rand looked at his friends. Perrin seemed to be seeing things he did not like, but Mat still looked excited.

tæm, hɪz feɪs oʊnli ə lɪɾəl lɛs kəmpoʊz ðən juʒəwəl, dʒɹu ðə meɪɝ kloʊs, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəd spik juɪn fɪŋɡɝ bɝst aʊt.

Tam, his face only a little less composed than usual, drew the Mayor close, but before he could speak Ewin Finngar burst out.

"hil ɡoʊ mæɾ ən daɪ! ɪn ðə stɔɹiz, mɛn u tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ ɔlweɪz ɡoʊ mæd, ən ðən weɪst əweɪ ən daɪ. oʊnli wɪmən kən tʌtʃ ɪt. dʌzn i noʊ ðæt?" hi dʌkt ʌndɝ ə kʌf fɹəm mæstɝ bui.

"He'll go mad and die! In the stories, men who channel the Power always go mad, and then waste away and die. Only women can touch it. Doesn't he know that?" He ducked under a cuff from Master Buie.

"ɪnʌf ə ðət fɹəm ju, bɔɪ." sɛn ʃʊk ə nɑɹl fɪst ɪn juɪnz feɪs. "ʃoʊ ə pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛkt ən liv ðɪs tə jəɹ ɛldɝz. ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪð ju!"

"Enough of that from you, boy." Cenn shook a gnarled fist in Ewin's face. "Show a proper respect and leave this to your elders. Get away with you!"

"hoʊl stɛɾi, sɛn," tæm ɡɹaʊld. "ðə bɔɪ ɪz dʒʌs kjʊɹiəs. ðɛɹz noʊ niɾ ə ðɪs fulɪʃnəs fɹəm ju."

"Hold steady, Cenn," Tam growled. "The boy is just curious. There's no need of this foolishness from you."

"æk jəɹ eɪdʒ," bɹæn æɾəd. "æn fəɹ wʌns ɹɪmɛmbɝ jəɹ ə mɛmbɝ ə ðə kaʊnsəl."

"Act your age," Bran added. "And for once remember you're a member of the Council."

sɛnz ɹɪŋkəl feɪs ɡɹu dɑɹkɝ wɪð ɛvɹi wɝd fɹəm tæm ən ðə meɪɝ, əntɪl ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊs pɝpəl. "ju noʊ wʌt kaɪndə wɪmən hiz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt. stɑp fɹaʊnɪŋ ət mi, luhən, ən ju, tu, kɹeɪ. ðɪs ɪz ə disən vɪlədʒ ə disən foʊk, ən ɪts bæɾ ɪnʌf tə hæv feɪn hɪɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt fɔls dʒɹæɡənz juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ wɪθaʊt ðɪs dʒɹæɡən-pəzɛs ful ʌv ə bɔɪ bɹɪŋɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪndə ɪt. səm θɪŋz dʒʌst ʃʊdn bi tɔkt əbaʊt, ən aɪ doʊn kɛɹ ɪf jəl bi lɛɾɪŋ ðət ful ɡlimən tɛl ɛni kaɪndə teɪl i wɑns. ɪɾ ɪzən ɹaɪɾ əɹ disənt."

Cenn's wrinkled face grew darker with every word from Tam and the Mayor, until it was almost purple. "You know what kind of women he's talking about. Stop frowning at me, Luhhan, and you, too, Crawe. This is a decent village of decent folk, and it's bad enough to have Fain here talking about false Dragons using the Power without this Dragon-possessed fool of a boy bringing Aes Sedai into it. Some things just shouldn't be talked about, and I don't care if you will be letting that fool gleeman tell any kind of tale he wants. It isn't right or decent."

"aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ əɹ hɝɾ əɹ smɛld ɛniθɪŋ ðət kʊdn bi tɔkt əbaʊt," tæm sɛd, bʌt feɪn wɑz nɑt fɪnɪʃt.

"I never saw or heard or smelled anything that couldn't be talked about," Tam said, but Fain was not finished.

"ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪndə ɪt," ðə pɛdlɝ spoʊk ʌp. "ə pɑɹɾi ʌv əm əz ɹɪɾən saʊθ fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn. sɪns i kən wil ðə paʊɝ, nʌn bʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kən dɪfit hɪm, fəɹ ɔl ðə bæɾəlz ðeɪ faɪt, əɹ dil wɪð ɪm wʌns hiz dɪfiɾəd. ɪf hiz dɪfiɾəd."

"The Aes Sedai are already into it," the peddler spoke up. "A party of them has ridden south from Tar Valon. Since he can wield the Power, none but Aes Sedai can defeat him, for all the battles they fight, or deal with him once he's defeated. If he is defeated."

sʌmwʌn ɪn ðə kɹaʊd moʊn əlaʊd, ən ivən tæm ən bɹæn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ənizi fɹaʊnz. hʌɾəlz ə vɪlɪdʒɝz klʌmp təɡɛðɝ, ən səm pʊl ðɛɹ kloʊks taɪɾɝ ɝaʊn ðɛmsɛlvz, ðoʊ ðə wɪn hæɾ æktʃəli  lɛsənd.

Someone in the crowd moaned aloud, and even Tam and Bran exchanged uneasy frowns. Huddles of villagers clumped together, and some pulled their cloaks tighter around themselves, though the wind had actually lessened.

"ʌv kɔɹs, hɪl bi dɪfiɾəd," sʌmwʌn ʃaʊɾəd.

"Of course, he'll be defeated," someone shouted.

"ðeɪɹ ɔlweɪz biɾən ɪn ði ɛnd, fɔls dʒɹæɡənz."

"They're always beaten in the end, false Dragons."

"hi hæz tə bi dɪfiɾəd, dʌzn hi?"

"He has to be defeated, doesn't he?"

"wʌɾ ɪf i ɪzənt?"

"What if he isn't?"

tæm hæd faɪnəli mænədʒ tə spik kwaɪətli ɪndə ðə meɪɝz ɪɹ, ən bɹæn, nɑɾɪŋ fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm ən ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə hʌbəb ɝaʊn ðɛm, weɪɾəd əntɪl i wɑz fɪnɪʃt bɪfɔɹ ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz oʊn vɔɪs.

Tam had finally managed to speak quietly into the Mayor's ear, and Bran, nodding from time to time and ignoring the hubbub around them, waited until he was finished before raising his own voice.

"ɔl ə jə lɪsən. bi kwaɪəɾ ən lɪsən!" ðə ʃaʊɾɪŋ daɪd tə ə mɝmɝ əɡɛn. "ðɪs ɡoʊz bɪɑn mɪɹ nuz fɹəm aʊtsaɪd. ɪt mʌs bi dɪskʌs baɪ ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl. mæstɝ feɪn, ɪf jəl dʒɔɪn əs ɪnsaɪd ði ɪn, wɪv kwɛstʃənz tə æsk."

"All of you listen. Be quiet and listen!" The shouting died to a murmur again. "This goes beyond mere news from outside. It must be discussed by the Village Council. Master Fain, if you will join us inside the inn, we have questions to ask."

"ə ɡʊd mʌɡ ʌv hɑt mʌld waɪn wəd nɑt ɡoʊ fɑɹ əmɪs wɪð mi dʒʌs naʊ," ðə pɛdlɝ ɹɪplaɪd wɪð ə tʃʌkəl. hi dʒʌmp daʊn fɹəm ðə wæɡən, dʌstɪɾ ɪz hænz ɑn ɪz koʊt, ən tʃɪɹfəli ɹaɪɾɪd ɪz kloʊk. "wɪl jə bi lʊkɪŋ æftɝ maɪ hɔɹsəz, ɪf jə pliz?"

"A good mug of hot mulled wine would not go far amiss with me just now," the peddler replied with a chuckle. He jumped down from the wagon, dusted his hands on his coat, and cheerfully righted his cloak. "Will you be looking after my horses, if you please?"

"aɪ wɑnə hɪɹ wʌt hiz tə seɪ!" mɔɹ ðən wʌn vɔɪs wɑz ɹeɪzd ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst.

"I want to hear what he has to say!" More than one voice was raised in protest.

"ju kæn teɪk ɪm ɔf! maɪ waɪf sɛn mi tə baɪ pɪnz!" ðət wɑz wɪt kɔŋɡɝ; hi hʌntʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ət ðə stɛɹz səm ə ði ʌðɝz ɡeɪv hɪm, bʌɾ i hɛld ɪz ɡɹaʊnd.

"You can't take him off! My wife sent me to buy pins!" That was Wit Congar; he hunched his shoulders at the stares some of the others gave him, but he held his ground.

"wiv ə ɹaɪt tə æsk kwɛstʃənz, tu," sʌmbɑɾi bæk ɪn ðə kɹaʊd ʃaʊɾəd. "aɪ - "

"We've a right to ask questions, too," somebody back in the crowd shouted. "I - "

"bi saɪlənt!" ðə meɪɝ ɹɔɹd, pɹədusɪŋ ə stɑɹɾəld hʌʃ. "wɛn ðə kaʊnsəl əz æskt ɪts kwɛstʃənz, mæstɝ feɪn wɪl bi bæk tə tɛl jə ɔl ɪz nuz. ən tə sɛl jə hɪz pɑts ən pɪnz. hu! tæd! steɪbəl mæstɝ feɪnz hɔɹsəz."

"Be silent!" the Mayor roared, producing a startled hush. "When the Council has asked its questions, Master Fain will be back to tell you all his news. And to sell you his pots and pins. Hu! Tad! Stable Master Fain's horses."

tæm ən bɹæn muvd ɪn ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə pɛdlɝ, ðə ɹɛst ə ðə kaʊnsəl ɡæðɝd bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən ðə hoʊl klʌstɝ swɛpt ɪndə ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn, fɝmli ʃʌɾɪŋ ðə dɔɹ ɪn ðə feɪsəz ə ðoʊz u tʃɹaɪd tə kɹaʊɾ ɪnsaɪɾ æftɝ ðɛm. paʊndɪŋ ɑn ðə dɔɹ bɹɔɾ oʊnli ə sɪŋɡəl ʃaʊt fɹəm ðə meɪɝ.

Tam and Bran moved in on either side of the peddler, the rest of the Council gathered behind them, and the whole cluster swept into the Winespring Inn, firmly shutting the door in the faces of those who tried to crowd inside after them. Pounding on the door brought only a single shout from the Mayor.

"ɡoʊ hoʊm!"

"Go home!"

pipəl mɪld ɝaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt wʌt ðə pɛdlɝ hæd sɛd, ən wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt, ən wʌt kwɛstʃənz ðə kaʊnsəl wɑz æskɪŋ, ən waɪ ðeɪ ʃəd bi əlaʊd tə lɪsən ən æsk kwɛstʃənz ə ðɛɹ oʊn. səm pɪɹɾ ɪn θɹu ðə fɹʌnt wɪndoʊz ə ði ɪn, ən ə fju ivən kwɛstʃən hu ən tæd, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm klɪɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə noʊ. ðə tu stɑləd steɪbəlmən dʒʌst ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪn ɹɪplaɪ ən wɛn ɑn məθɑɾɪkəli ɹimuvɪŋ ðə timz hɑɹnəs. wʌn baɪ wʌn ðeɪ lɛd feɪnz hɔɹsəz əweɪ ænd, wən ðə læst wɑz ɡɔn, dɪd nɑt ɹɪtɝn.

People milled around in front of the inn muttering about what the peddler had said, and what it meant, and what questions the Council was asking, and why they should be allowed to listen and ask questions of their own. Some peered in through the front windows of the inn, and a few even questioned Hu and Tad, though it was far from clear what they were supposed to know. The two stolid stablemen just grunted in reply and went on methodically removing the team's harness. One by one they led Fain's horses away and, when the last was gone, did not return.

ɹænd ɪɡnɔɹd ðə kɹaʊd. hi tʊk ə siɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ði oʊl stoʊn faʊndeɪʃən, ɡæðɝɾ ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn hɪm, ən stɛɹɾ ət ði ɪn dɔɹ. ɡildən. tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðə vɛɹi neɪmz wɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ ən ɪksaɪɾɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ pleɪsəz i nu oʊnli fɹəm pɛdlɝz' nuz, ən teɪlz toʊl baɪ mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz. ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɔɹz ən fɔls dʒɹæɡənz: ðoʊz wɝ ðə stʌf ə stɔɹiz toʊld leɪɾ ət naɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, wɪð wʌn kændəl meɪkɪŋ stʃɹeɪnʒ ʃeɪps ɑn ðə wɔl ən ðə wɪn haʊlɪŋ əɡɛns ðə ʃʌɾɝz. ɑn ðə hoʊl, hi bɪlivd i wəd ɹæðɝ əv blɪzɝdz ən wʊlvz. stɪl, ɪt mʌs bi dɪfɹən aʊt ðɛɹ, bɪɑn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, laɪk lɪvɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə ɡlimənz teɪl. ən ædvɛntʃɝ. wʌn lɔŋ ædvɛntʃɝ. ə hoʊl laɪftaɪm ʌv ɪt.

Rand ignored the crowd. He took a seat on the edge of the old stone foundation, gathered his cloak around him, and stared at the inn door. Ghealdan. Tar Valon. The very names were strange and exciting. They were places he knew only from peddlers' news, and tales told by merchants' guards. Aes Sedai and wars and false Dragons: those were the stuff of stories told late at night in front of the fireplace, with one candle making strange shapes on the wall and the wind howling against the shutters. On the whole, he believed he would rather have blizzards and wolves. Still, it must be different out there, beyond the Two Rivers, like living in the middle of a gleeman's tale. An adventure. One long adventure. A whole lifetime of it.

sloʊli ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz dɪspɝst, stɪl mʌɾɝɪŋ ən ʃeɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz. wɪt kɔŋɡɝ pɔz tə stɛɹ ɪndə ðə naʊ-əbændənd wæɡən əz ðoʊ hi maɪt faɪn ənʌðɝ pɛdlɝ hɪɾən ɪnsaɪd. faɪnəli oʊnli ə fju ʌv ðə jʌŋɡɝ foʊk wɝ lɛft. mæt ən pɛɹɪn dʒɹɪftəɾ oʊvɝ tə wɛɹ ɹænd sæt.

Slowly the villagers dispersed, still muttering and shaking their heads. Wit Congar paused to stare into the now-abandoned wagon as though he might find another peddler hidden inside. Finally only a few of the younger folk were left. Mat and Perrin drifted over to where Rand sat.

"aɪ doʊn si haʊ ðə ɡlimən kəd bit ðɪs," mæt sɛɾ ɪksaɪɾədli. "aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf wi maɪt ɡɛt tə si ðɪs fɔls dʒɹæɡən?"

"I don't see how the gleeman could beat this," Mat said excitedly. "I wonder if we might get to see this false Dragon?"

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz ʃæɡi hɛd. "aɪ doʊnt wɑnə si hɪm. sʌmwɛɹ ɛls, meɪbi, bʌt nɑɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. nɑɾ ɪf ɪt minz wɔɹ."

Perrin shook his shaggy head. "I don't want to see him. Somewhere else, maybe, but not in the Two Rivers. Not if it means war."

"nɑɾ ɪf ɪt minz ɛɛs sədaɪ hɪɹ, iðɝ," ɹænd æɾəd. "ɔɹ əv jə fɝɡɑɾən u kɑz ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ? ðə dʒɹæɡən meɪ hæv stɑɹɾəd ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ hu æktʃəli  bɹoʊk ðə wɝld."

"Not if it means Aes Sedai here, either," Rand added. "Or have you forgotten who caused the Breaking? The Dragon may have started it, but it was Aes Sedai who actually broke the world."

"aɪ hɝɾ ə stɔɹi wʌns," mæt sɛd sloʊli, "fɹʌm ə wʊl-baɪɝz ɡɑɹd. hi sɛd ðə dʒɹæɡən wəd bi ɹibɔɹn ɪn mænkaɪnz ɡɹeɪɾəst aʊɝ ə nid, ən seɪv əs ɔl."

"I heard a story once," Mat said slowly, "from a wool-buyer's guard. He said the Dragon would be reborn in mankind's greatest hour of need, and save us all."

"wɛl, hi wɑz ə ful ɪf i bɪliv ðæt," pɛɹɪn sɛd fɝmli. "æn jə wɝ ə ful tə lɪsən." hi dɪd nɑt saʊn æŋɡɹi; hi wɑz sloʊ tə æŋɡɝ. bʌɾ i səmtaɪmz ɡɑɾ ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd wɪð mæts kwɪksɪlvɝ fænsiz, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə tʌtʃ ə ðəɾ ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "aɪ səpoʊz i kleɪmd wiɾ ɔl lɪv ɪn ə nu eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz æftɝwɝdz, tu."

"Well, he was a fool if he believed that," Perrin said firmly. "And you were a fool to listen." He did not sound angry; he was slow to anger. But he sometimes got exasperated with Mat's quicksilver fancies, and there was a touch of that in his voice. "I suppose he claimed we'd all live in a new Age of Legends afterwards, too."

"aɪ dɪdn seɪ aɪ bɪlivd ɪt," mæt pɹətɛstəd. "aɪ dʒʌs hɝɾ ɪt. nɪneɪiv dɪd, tu, ən aɪ θɔt ʃi wɑz gɑnə skɪn mi ən ðə ɡɑɹd boʊθ. hi sɛd - ðə ɡɑɹd dɪd - ðəɾ ə lɑɾ ə pipəl də bɪliv, oʊnli ðəɹ əfɹeɪd tə seɪ soʊ, əfɹeɪɾ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. hi wʊdn seɪ ɛni mɔɹ æftɝ nɪneɪiv lɪɾ ɪndə ʌs. ʃi toʊl ðə mɝtʃənt, ən i sɛɾ ɪt wɑz ðə ɡɑɹdz læs tʃɹɪp wɪð hɪm."

"I didn't say I believed it," Mat protested. "I just heard it. Nynaeve did, too, and I thought she was going to skin me and the guard both. He said - the guard did - that a lot of people do believe, only they're afraid to say so, afraid of the Aes Sedai or the Children of the Light. He wouldn't say any more after Nynaeve lit into us. She told the merchant, and he said it was the guard's last trip with him."

"ə ɡʊd θɪŋ, tu," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðə dʒɹæɡən gɑnə seɪv ʌs? saʊnz laɪk kɑplɪn tɔk tə mi."

"A good thing, too," Perrin said. "The Dragon going to save us? Sounds like Coplin talk to me."

"wʌt kaɪndə nid wəd bi ɡɹeɪɾ ɪnʌf ðət wid wɑn ðə dʒɹæɡən tə seɪv əs fɹəm ɪt?" ɹænd mjuzd. "æz wɛl æsk fəɹ hɛlp fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

"What kind of need would be great enough that we'd want the Dragon to save us from it?" Rand mused. "As well ask for help from the Dark One."

"hi dɪdn seɪ," mæt ɹɪplaɪɾ ənkʌmftəbli. "æn i dɪdn mɛnʃən ɛni nu eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. hi sɛd ðə wɝld wəd bi tɔɹn əpɑɹt baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡənz kʌmɪŋ."

"He didn't say," Mat replied uncomfortably. "And he didn't mention any new Age of Legends. He said the world would be torn apart by the Dragon's coming."

"ðæt wəd ʃʊɹli seɪv ʌs," pɛɹɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ənʌðɝ bɹeɪkɪŋ."

"That would surely save us," Perrin said dryly. "Another Breaking."

"bɝn mi!" mæt ɡɹaʊld. "aɪm oʊnli tɛlɪŋ jə wʌt ðə ɡɑɹd sɛd."

"Burn me!" Mat growled. "I'm only telling you what the guard said."

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ dʒʌs hoʊp ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðɪs dʒɹæɡən, fɔls əɹ nɑt, steɪ wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ. meɪbi ðət weɪ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪl bi spɛɹd."

Perrin shook his head. "I just hope the Aes Sedai and this Dragon, false or not, stay where they are. Maybe that way the Two Rivers will be spared."

"ju θɪŋk ðəɹ ɹɪli dɑɹkfɹɛnz?" mæt wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ θɔtfəli.

"You think they're really Darkfriends?" Mat was frowning thoughtfully.

"hu?" ɹænd æskt.

"Who?" Rand asked.

"ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Aes Sedai."

ɹænd ɡlænst ət pɛɹɪn, hu ʃɹʌɡd. "ðə stɔɹiz," hi bɪɡæn sloʊli, bʌt mæt kʌɾ ɪm ɔf.

Rand glanced at Perrin, who shrugged. "The stories," he began slowly, but Mat cut him off.

"nɑɾ ɔl ðə stɔɹiz seɪ ðeɪ sɝv ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ɹænd."

"Not all the stories say they serve the Dark One, Rand."

"laɪt, mæt," ɹænd sɛd, "ðeɪ kɑz ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ. wʌt mɔɹ dʒju wɑnt?"

"Light, Mat," Rand said, "they caused the Breaking. What more do you want?"

"aɪ səpoʊz." mæt saɪd, bʌt ðə nɛks moʊmən i wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ əɡɛn. "oʊl bili kɔŋɡɝ sɛz ðeɪ doʊn ɪɡzɪst. ɛɛs sədaɪ. dɑɹkfɹɛnz. sɛz ðəɹ dʒʌst stɔɹiz. hi sɛz i dʌzn bɪliv ɪn ðə dɑɹk wʌn, iðɝ."

"I suppose." Mat sighed, but the next moment he was grinning again. "Old Bili Congar says they don't exist. Aes Sedai. Darkfriends. Says they're just stories. He says he doesn't believe in the Dark One, either."

pɛɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd. "kɑplɪn tɔk fɹəm ə kɔŋɡɝ. wʌɾ ɛls kən jə ɪkspɛkt?"

Perrin snorted. "Coplin talk from a Congar. What else can you expect?"

"oʊl bili neɪm ðə dɑɹk wʌn. əl bɛt jə dɪdnt noʊ ðæt."

"Old Bili named the Dark One. I'll bet you didn't know that."

"laɪt!" ɹænd bɹiðd.

"Light!" Rand breathed.

mæts ɡɹɪn bɹɔɾənd. "ɪt wɑz læst spɹɪŋ, dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ðə kʌtwɝm ɡɑɾ ɪndə hɪz filz ən noʊbɑdi ɛlsəz. ɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ɪz haʊs keɪm daʊn wɪð jɛloʊaɪ fivɝ. aɪ hɝɾ ɪm də ɪt. hi stɪl sɛz i dʌzn bɪliv, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ aɪ æsk ɪm tə neɪm ðə dɑɹk wʌn naʊ, hi θɹoʊz sʌmθɪŋ ət mi."

Mat's grin broadened. "It was last spring, just before the cutworm got into his fields and nobody else's. Right before everybody in his house came down with yelloweye fever. I heard him do it. He still says he doesn't believe, but whenever I ask him to name the Dark One now, he throws something at me."

"ju ɑɹ dʒʌst stupəɾ ɪnʌf tə də ðæt, ɑɹən ju, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən?" nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə stɛpt ɪndə ðɛɹ hʌɾəl, ðə dɑɹk bɹeɪd pʊld oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ɔlmoʊs bɹɪsəlɪŋ wɪð æŋɡɝ. ɹænd skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fit. slɛndɝ ən bɛɹli tɔlɝ ðən mæts ʃoʊldɝ, ət ðə moʊmən ðə wɪzdəm sim tɔlɝ ðən ɛni ʌv ðɛm, ən ɪt dɪd nɑt mæɾɝ ðət ʃi wɑz jʌŋ ən pɹɪɾi. "aɪ səspɛktəd sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹɾ əbaʊt bili kɔŋɡɝ ət ðə taɪm, bʌɾ aɪ θɔt jə ət lis hæd mɔɹ sɛns ðən tə tʃɹaɪ tɔntɪŋ ɪm ɪndə sətʃ ə θɪŋ. jə meɪ bi oʊld ɪnʌf tə bi mɛɹid, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən, bʌɾ ɪn tʃɹuθ jə ʃʊdn bi ɔf jəɹ mʌðɝz eɪpɹən stʃɹɪŋz. ðə nɛks θɪŋ, jəl bi neɪmɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn jɝsɛlf."

"You are just stupid enough to do that, aren't you, Matrim Cauthon?" Nynaeve al'Meara stepped into their huddle, the dark braid pulled over her shoulder almost bristling with anger. Rand scrambled to his feet. Slender and barely taller than Mat's shoulder, at the moment the Wisdom seemed taller than any of them, and it did not matter that she was young and pretty. "I suspected something of the sort about Bili Congar at the time, but I thought you at least had more sense than to try taunting him into such a thing. You may be old enough to be married, Matrim Cauthon, but in truth you shouldn't be off your mother's apron strings. The next thing, you'll be naming the Dark One yourself."

"noʊ, wɪzdəm," mæt pɹətɛstəd, lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf i wəd ɹæðɝ bi ɛniwɛɹ ɛls ðən ðɛɹ. "ɪt wɑz oʊl bɪl - aɪ min, mæstɝ kɔŋɡɝ, nɑt mi! blʌɾ ən æʃəz, aɪ - "

"No, Wisdom," Mat protested, looking as if he would rather be anywhere else than there. "It was old Bil - I mean, Master Congar, not me! Blood and ashes, I - "

"wɑtʃ jəɹ tʌŋ, meɪtʃɹim!"

"Watch your tongue, Matrim!"

ɹænd stʊɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾɝ, ðoʊ hɝ ɡlɛɹ wɑz nɑt dɝɛktəɾ ət hɪm. pɛɹɪn lʊkt ikwəli əbæʃt. leɪɾɝ wʌn əɹ ənʌðɝ ə ðɛm wəɾ ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli kəmpleɪn əbaʊt biɪŋ skoʊldəd baɪ ə wʊmən nɑɾ ɔl ðət mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ðən ðɛmsɛlvz - sʌmwʌn ɔlweɪz dɪɾ æftɝ wʌn ə nɪneɪivz skoʊldɪŋz, ɪf nɛvɝ ɪn əɹ hɪɹɪŋ - bʌt ðə ɡæp ɪn eɪdʒəz ɔlweɪz simd mɔɹ ðən waɪɾ ɪnʌf wən feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð hɝ. ɪspɛʃli ɪf ʃi wɑz æŋɡɹi. ðə stɪk ɪn əɹ hænd wɑz θɪk ət wʌn ɛn ən ə slɛndɝ swɪtʃ ət ði ʌðɝ, ən ʃi wɑz laɪəbəl tə ɡɪv ə fleɪl tə ɛnibəɾi ʃi θɔt wɑz æktɪŋ ðə ful - hɛɾ əɹ hænz əɹ lɛɡz - noʊ mæɾɝ ðɛɹ eɪdʒ əɹ pəzɪʃən.

Rand stood up straighter, though her glare was not directed at him. Perrin looked equally abashed. Later one or another of them would almost certainly complain about being scolded by a woman not all that much older than themselves - someone always did after one of Nynaeve's scoldings, if never in her hearing - but the gap in ages always seemed more than wide enough when face-to-face with her. Especially if she was angry. The stick in her hand was thick at one end and a slender switch at the other, and she was liable to give a flail to anybody she thought was acting the fool - head or hands or legs - no matter their age or position.

ðə wɪzdəm soʊ hɛld ɪz ətɛnʃən ðəɾ ət fɝst ɹænd feɪl tə si ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. wən i ɹilaɪzd ɪz mɪsteɪk, hi bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk əbaʊt livɪŋ noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt nɪneɪiv wəd seɪ əɹ də leɪɾɝ.

The Wisdom so held his attention that at first Rand failed to see she was not alone. When he realized his mistake, he began to think about leaving no matter what Nynaeve would say or do later.

ɛɡwin stʊɾ ə fju peɪsɪz bɪhaɪn ðə wɪzdəm, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪntɛnli. ʌv ə haɪt wɪð nɪneɪiv, ən wɪð ðə seɪm dɑɹk kʌlɝɪŋ, ʃi kəɾ ət ðət moʊmən əv bɪn ə ɹəflɛkʃən ə nɪneɪivz mud, ɑɹmz kɹɔs bɪniθ əɹ bɹɛsts, maʊθ taɪt wɪð dɪsəpɹuvəl. ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ sɑft ɡɹeɪ kloʊk ʃeɪɾɪd əɹ feɪs, ən əɹ bɪɡ bɹaʊn aɪz hɛl noʊ læftɝ naʊ.

Egwene stood a few paces behind the Wisdom, watching intently. Of a height with Nynaeve, and with the same dark coloring, she could at that moment have been a reflection of Nynaeve's mood, arms crossed beneath her breasts, mouth tight with disapproval. The hood of her soft gray cloak shaded her face, and her big brown eyes held no laughter now.

ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛni fɛɹnəs, hi θɔt ðət biɪŋ tu jɪɹz oʊldɝ ðən əɹ ʃəd ɡɪv ɪm səm ædvæntɪdʒ, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt ðə weɪ ʌv ɪt. ət ðə bɛst ə taɪmz i wɑz nɛvɝ vɛɹi nɪmbəl wɪð ɪz tʌŋ wən tɔkɪŋ tə ɛni ʌv ðə vɪlədʒ ɡɝlz, nɑt laɪk pɛɹɪn, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ɪm ðəɾ ɪntɛn lʊk, wɪð əɹ aɪz əz waɪɾ əz ðeɪ wəd ɡoʊ, əz ɪf ɛvɹi læst aʊns ə hɝ ətɛnʃən wɑz ɑn hɪm, hi dʒʌs kəd nɑt sim tə meɪk ðə wɝdz ɡoʊ wɛɹ i wɑntəd. pɝhæps i kəd ɡɛɾ əweɪ əz sun əz nɪneɪiv fɪnɪʃt. bʌɾ i nu hi wəd nɑt, ivən ɪf i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ.

If there was any fairness, he thought that being two years older than her should give him some advantage, but that was not the way of it. At the best of times he was never very nimble with his tongue when talking to any of the village girls, not like Perrin, but whenever Egwene gave him that intent look, with her eyes as wide as they would go, as if every last ounce of her attention was on him, he just could not seem to make the words go where he wanted. Perhaps he could get away as soon as Nynaeve finished. But he knew he would not, even if he did not understand why.

"ɪf jə ɑɹ dʌn stɛɹɪŋ laɪk ə munstʃɹʌk læm, ɹænd ælθɹ," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "pɝhæps jə kən tɛl mi waɪ jə wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ ivən jə θɹi ɡɹeɪt bʊlkɑlvz ɔt tə hæv sɛns ɪnʌf tə kip aʊɾ ə jəɹ maʊðz."

"If you are done staring like a moonstruck lamb, Rand al'Thor," Nynaeve said, "perhaps you can tell me why you were talking about something even you three great bullcalves ought to have sense enough to keep out of your mouths."

ɹænd ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən pʊld ɪz aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ɛɡwin; ʃi hæd ɡɹoʊn ə dɪskənsɝɾɪŋ smaɪl wən ðə wɪzdəm bɪɡæn spikɪŋ. nɪneɪivz vɔɪs wɑz tɑɹt, bʌt ʃi hæd ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋz ʌv ə noʊɪŋ smaɪl ɑn əɹ feɪs, tu - əntɪl mæt læft əlaʊd. ðə wɪzdəmz smaɪl vænɪʃt, ən ðə lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv mæt kʌɾ ɪz læftɝ ɔf ɪn ə stʃɹæŋɡəl kɹoʊk.

Rand gave a start and pulled his eyes away from Egwene; she had grown a disconcerting smile when the Wisdom began speaking. Nynaeve's voice was tart, but she had the beginnings of a knowing smile on her face, too - until Mat laughed aloud. The Wisdom's smile vanished, and the look she gave Mat cut his laughter off in a strangled croak.

"wɛl, ɹænd?" nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"Well, Rand?" Nynaeve said.

aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ hi sɔ ɛɡwin stɪl smaɪlɪŋ. wʌt dʌz ʃi θɪŋk ɪz soʊ fʌni? "ɪt wɑz nætʃɹəl ɪnʌf tə tɔk ʌv ɪt, wɪzdəm," hi sɛd hɝidli. "ðə pɛdlɝ - pdən feɪn . . . ɑ . . . mæstɝ feɪn - bɹɔt nuz ʌv ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɪn ɡildən, ən ə wɔɹ, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə kaʊnsəl θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪnʌf tə tɔk tə hɪm. wʌɾ ɛls wəd wi bi tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?"

Out of the corner of his eye he saw Egwene still smiling. What does she think is so funny? "It was natural enough to talk of it, Wisdom," he said hurriedly. "The peddler - Padan Fain . . . ah . . . Master Fain - brought news of a false Dragon in Ghealdan, and a war, and Aes Sedai. The Council thought it was important enough to talk to him. What else would we be talking about?"

nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "soʊ ðæts waɪ ðə pɛdlɝz wæɡən stænz əbændənd. aɪ hɝd pipəl ɹʌʃɪŋ tə miɾ ɪt, bʌɾ aɪ kʊdn liv mɪstʃɹəs aɪɛlɪn tɪl əɹ fivɝ bɹoʊk. ðə kaʊnsəl ɪz kwɛstʃənɪŋ ðə pɛdlɝ əbaʊt wʌts hæpənɪŋ ɪn ɡildən, ɑɹ ðeɪ? ɪf aɪ noʊ ðɛm, ðəɹ æskɪŋ ɔl ðə ɹɔŋ kwɛstʃənz ən nʌn ə ðə ɹaɪt wʌnz. ɪɾəl teɪk ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl tə faɪn aʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl." sɛɾəlɪŋ əɹ kloʊk fɝmli ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz ʃi dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪndə ði ɪn.

Nynaeve shook her head. "So that's why the peddler's wagon stands abandoned. I heard people rushing to meet it, but I couldn't leave Mistress Ayellin till her fever broke. The Council is questioning the peddler about what's happening in Ghealdan, are they? If I know them, they're asking all the wrong questions and none of the right ones. It will take the Women's Circle to find out anything useful." Settling her cloak firmly on her shoulders she disappeared into the inn.

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt fɑloʊ ðə wɪzdəm. əz ði ɪn dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪnd nɪneɪiv, ðə jʌŋɡɝ wʊmən keɪm tə stæn ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹænd. ðə fɹaʊnz wɝ ɡɔn fɹəm əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ əɹ ənblɪŋkɪŋ stɛɹ meɪɾ ɪm ənizi. hi lʊk tə hɪz fɹɛnz, bʌt ðeɪ muvd əweɪ, ɡɹɪnɪŋ bɹɔdli əz ðeɪ əbændən hɪm.

Egwene did not follow the Wisdom. As the inn door closed behind Nynaeve, the younger woman came to stand in front of Rand. The frowns were gone from her face, but her unblinking stare made him uneasy. He looked to his friends, but they moved away, grinning broadly as they abandoned him.

"ju ʃʊdn lɛt mæt ɡɛt jə mɪkst ʌp ɪn ɪz fulɪʃnəs, ɹænd," ɛɡwin sɛd, əz sɑləm əz ə wɪzdəm hɝsɛlf, ðən əbɹʌpli ʃi ɡɪɡəld. "aɪ hævən sin jə lʊk laɪk ðət sɪns sɛn bui kɑt jə ən mæt ʌp ɪn ɪz æpəl tʃɹiz wən jə wɝ tɛn."

"You shouldn't let Mat get you mixed up in his foolishness, Rand," Egwene said, as solemn as a Wisdom herself, then abruptly she giggled. "I haven't seen you look like that since Cenn Buie caught you and Mat up in his apple trees when you were ten."

hi ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fiɾ ən ɡlænst əɾ ɪz fɹɛnz. ðeɪ stʊd nɑt fɑɹ əweɪ, mæt dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ ɪksaɪɾədli əz i tɔkt.

He shifted his feet and glanced at his friends. They stood not far away, Mat gesturing excitedly as he talked.

"wɪl jə dæns wɪð mi təmɑɹoʊ?" ðət wɑz nɑt wʌɾ i hæd mɛn tə seɪ. hi dɪd wɑnə dæns wɪð hɝ, bʌɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm i wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ soʊ lɪɾəl əz ði ənkʌmftəɹbəl weɪ hi wɑz ʃʊɹ tə fil waɪl i wɑz wɪð hɝ. ðə weɪ hi fɛlt ɹaɪt ðɛn.

"Will you dance with me tomorrow?" That was not what he had meant to say. He did want to dance with her, but at the same time he wanted nothing so little as the uncomfortable way he was sure to feel while he was with her. The way he felt right then.

ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ maʊθ kwɝkt ʌp ɪn ə smɔl smaɪl. "ɪn ði æftɝnun," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ wɪl bi bɪzi ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ."

The corners of her mouth quirked up in a small smile. "In the afternoon," she said. "I will be busy in the morning."

fɹəm ði ʌðɝz keɪm pɛɹɪnz ɛkskləmeɪʃən. "ə ɡlimən!"

From the others came Perrin's exclamation. "A gleeman!"

ɛɡwin tɝn təwɔɹd ðɛm, bʌt ɹænd pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm. "bɪzi? haʊ?"

Egwene turned toward them, but Rand put a hand on her arm. "Busy? How?"

dɪspaɪt ðə tʃɪl ʃi pʊʃt bæk ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk ən wɪð əpɛɹən kæʒəɑlnəs pʊld əɹ hɛɹ fɔɹwɝɾ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ðə læs taɪm i hæd sin hɝ, hɝ hɛɹ hæd hʌŋ ɪn dɑɹk weɪvz bɪloʊ hɝ ʃoʊldɝz, wɪð oʊnli ə ɹɛd ɹɪbən kipɪŋ ɪt bæk fɹəm əɹ feɪs; naʊ ɪt wɑz wɝkt ɪndə ə lɔŋ bɹeɪd.

Despite the chill she pushed back the hood of her cloak and with apparent casualness pulled her hair forward over her shoulder. The last time he had seen her, her hair had hung in dark waves below her shoulders, with only a red ribbon keeping it back from her face; now it was worked into a long braid.

hi stɛɹɾ ət ðət bɹeɪɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə vaɪpɝ, ðən stoʊl ə ɡlæns ət ðə spɹɪŋ poʊl, stændɪŋ əloʊn ɑn ðə ɡɹin naʊ, ɹɛɾi fəɹ təmɑɹoʊ. ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ənmɛɹid wɪmən ə mɛɹɪdʒəbəl eɪdʒ wəd dæns ðə poʊl. hi swɑloʊd hɑɹd. sʌmhaʊ, ɪt hæd nɛvɝ əkɝd tə hɪm ðət ʃi wəd ɹitʃ mɛɹɪdʒəbəl eɪdʒ ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðəɾ i dɪd.

He stared at that braid as if it were a viper, then stole a glance at the Spring Pole, standing alone on the Green now, ready for tomorrow. In the morning unmarried women of marriageable age would dance the Pole. He swallowed hard. Somehow, it had never occurred to him that she would reach marriageable age at the same time that he did.

"dʒʌs kəz sʌmwʌn ɪz oʊld ɪnʌf tə mɛɹi," hi mʌɾɝd, "dʌzn min ðeɪ ʃʊd. nɑt ɹaɪɾ əweɪ."

"Just because someone is old enough to marry," he muttered, "doesn't mean they should. Not right away."

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt. əɹ ɛvɝ, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ."

"Of course not. Or ever, for that matter."

ɹænd blɪŋkt. "ɛvɝ?"

Rand blinked. "Ever?"

"eɪ wɪzdəm ɔlmoʊs nɛvɝ mɛɹiz. nɪneɪiv əz bɪn titʃɪŋ mi, jə noʊ. ʃi sɛz aɪ hæv ə tælənt, ðəɾ aɪ kən lɝn tə lɪsən tə ðə wɪnd. nɪneɪiv sɛz nɑɾ ɔl wɪsdəmz kæn, ivən ɪf ðeɪ seɪ ðeɪ du."

"A Wisdom almost never marries. Nynaeve has been teaching me, you know. She says I have a talent, that I can learn to listen to the wind. Nynaeve says not all Wisdoms can, even if they say they do."

"wɪzdəm!" hi huɾɪd. hi feɪl tə noʊɾəs ðə deɪnʒɝəs ɡlɪn ɪn əɹ aɪ. "nɪneɪiv wɪl bi wɪzdəm hɪɹ fəɹ ənʌðɝ fɪfti jɪɹz ət list. pɹɑbli mɔɹ. ɑɹ jə gɑnə spɛn ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ laɪf əz əɹ əpɹɛntəs?"

"Wisdom!" he hooted. He failed to notice the dangerous glint in her eye. "Nynaeve will be Wisdom here for another fifty years at least. Probably more. Are you going to spend the rest of your life as her apprentice?"

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ vɪlədʒəz," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd hiɾɪdli. "nɪneɪiv sɛz ðə vɪlədʒəz nɔɹθ ə ðə tɛɹən ɔlweɪz tʃuz ə wɪzdəm fɹəm əweɪ. ðeɪ θɪŋk ɪt stɑps əɹ fɹəm hævɪŋ feɪvɹɪts əmʌŋ ðə vɪlədʒ foʊk."

"There are other villages," she replied heatedly. "Nynaeve says the villages north of the Taren always choose a Wisdom from away. They think it stops her from having favorites among the village folk."

hɪz əmjuzmən mɛltəɾ əz fæst əz ɪt hæd kʌm. "aʊtsaɪd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz? aɪd nɛvɝ si jə əɡɛn."

His amusement melted as fast as it had come. "Outside the Two Rivers? I'd never see you again."

"æn jə wʊdn laɪk ðæt? juv nɑt ɡɪvən ɛni saɪn leɪtli ðət jud kɛɹ wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ."

"And you wouldn't like that? You have not given any sign lately that you'd care one way or another."

"noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ livz ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," hi wɛn ɑn. "meɪbi sʌmbɑɾi fɹəm tɛɹən fɛɹi, bʌt ðəɹ ɔl stʃɹeɪnʒ ɛniweɪ. hɑɹdli laɪk tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk əɾ ɔl."

"No one ever leaves the Two Rivers," he went on. "Maybe somebody from Taren Ferry, but they're all strange anyway. Hardly like Two Rivers folk at all."

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd saɪ. "wɛl, meɪbi aɪm stʃɹeɪnʒ, tu. meɪbi aɪ wɑnə si səm ə ðə pleɪsəz aɪ hɪɹ əbaʊɾ ɪn ðə stɔɹiz. hæv jə ɛvɝ θɔɾ ə ðæt?"

Egwene gave an exasperated sigh. "Well, maybe I'm strange, too. Maybe I want to see some of the places I hear about in the stories. Have you ever thought of that?"

"ʌv kɔɹs aɪ hæv. aɪ deɪdʒɹim səmtaɪmz, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ ðə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin deɪdʒɹimz ən wʌts ɹil."

"Of course I have. I daydream sometimes, but I know the difference between daydreams and what's real."

"æn aɪ də nɑt?" ʃi sɛd fjʊɹiəsli, ən pɹɑmpli tɝn əɹ bæk ɑn hɪm.

"And I do not?" she said furiously, and promptly turned her back on him.

"ðæt wɑznt wʌɾ aɪ mɛnt. aɪ wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt mi. ɛɡwin?"

"That wasn't what I meant. I was talking about me. Egwene?"

ʃi dʒɝkt əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn hɝ, ə wɔl tə ʃʌɾ ɪm ɔf, ən stɪfli wɔkt ə fju peɪsɪz əweɪ. hi ɹʌbd ɪz hɛɾ ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. haʊ tə ɪkspleɪn? ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi hæd skwiz minɪŋz fɹəm ɪz wɝdz ðəɾ i nɛvɝ nu wɝ ɪn ðɛm. ɪn əɹ pɹɛzən mud, ə mɪsstɛp wəɾ oʊnli meɪk mæɾɝz wɝs, ən i wɑz fɛɹli ʃʊɹ ðət nɪɹli ɛniθɪŋ i sɛd wəd bi ə mɪsstɛp.

She jerked her cloak around her, a wall to shut him off, and stiffly walked a few paces away. He rubbed his head in frustration. How to explain? This was not the first time she had squeezed meanings from his words that he never knew were in them. In her present mood, a misstep would only make matters worse, and he was fairly sure that nearly anything he said would be a misstep.

mæt ən pɛɹɪn keɪm bæk ðɛn. ɛɡwin ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛɹ kʌmɪŋ. ðeɪ lʊkt əɾ əɹ hɛzɪɾəntli, ðən kɹaʊɾəd kloʊs tə ɹænd.

Mat and Perrin came back then. Egwene ignored their coming. They looked at her hesitantly, then crowded close to Rand.

"mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ə kɔɪn, tu," mæt sɛd. "dʒʌs laɪk aʊɝz." hi pɔz bɪfɔɹ æɾɪŋ, "æn i sɔ ðə ɹaɪɾɝ."

"Moiraine gave Perrin a coin, too," Mat said. "Just like ours." He paused before adding, "And he saw the rider."

"wɛɹ?" ɹænd dɪmændəd. "wɛn? dɪɾ ɛnibəɾi ɛls si hɪm? dɪd jə tɛl ɛniwʌn?"

"Where?" Rand demanded. "When? Did anybody else see him? Did you tell anyone?"

pɛɹɪn ɹeɪz bɹɔd hænz ɪn ə sloʊɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ. "wʌn kwɛstʃən əɾ ə taɪm. aɪ sɔ hɪm ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə vɪlədʒ, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə smɪθi, dʒʌst ət twaɪlaɪt jɛstɝdeɪ. ɡeɪv mi ðə ʃɪvɝz, hi dɪd. aɪ toʊl mæstɝ luhən, oʊnli noʊbɑdi wɑz ðəɹ wən i lʊkt. hi sɛɾ aɪ wɑz siɪŋ ʃædoʊz. bʌɾ i kæɹiɾ ɪz bɪɡəs hæmɝ ɝaʊnd wɪð ɪm waɪl wi wɝ bæŋkɪŋ ðə fɔɹdʒ-faɪɝ ən pʊɾɪŋ ðə tulz ʌp. hiz nɛvɝ dʌn ðət bɪfɔɹ."

Perrin raised broad hands in a slowing gesture. "One question at a time. I saw him on the edge of the village, watching the smithy, just at twilight yesterday. Gave me the shivers, he did. I told Master Luhhan, only nobody was there when he looked. He said I was seeing shadows. But he carried his biggest hammer around with him while we were banking the forge-fire and putting the tools up. He's never done that before."

"soʊ hi bɪliv ju," ɹænd sɛd, bʌt pɛɹɪn ʃɹʌɡd.

"So he believed you," Rand said, but Perrin shrugged.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ. aɪ æskt ɪm waɪ hi wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ðə hæmɝ ɪf ɔl aɪ sɔ wɑz ʃædoʊz, ən i sɛd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt wʊlvz ɡɛɾɪŋ boʊld ɪnʌf tə kʌm ɪndə ðə vɪlədʒ. meɪbi hi θɔt ðæts wʌɾ aɪ sɔ, bʌɾ i ɔt tə noʊ aɪ kən tɛl ðə dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ə wʊlf ən ə mæn ɑn hɔɹsbæk, ivən ət dʌsk. aɪ noʊ wʌɾ aɪ sɔ, ən noʊbɑdi ɪz gɑnə meɪk mi bɪliv dɪfɹənt."

"I don't know. I asked him why he was carrying the hammer if all I saw was shadows, and he said something about wolves getting bold enough to come into the village. Maybe he thought that's what I saw, but he ought to know I can tell the difference between a wolf and a man on horseback, even at dusk. I know what I saw, and nobody is going to make me believe different."

"aɪ bɪliv ju," ɹænd sɛd. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ, aɪ sɔ hɪm, tu." pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ə sæɾəsfaɪd ɡɹʌnt, əz ɪf i hæd nɑt bɪn ʃʊɹ ə ðæt.

"I believe you," Rand said. "Remember, I saw him, too." Perrin gave a satisfied grunt, as if he had not been sure of that.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt?" ɛɡwin dɪmændəd sʌɾənli.

"What are you talking about?" Egwene demanded suddenly.

ɹænd sʌɾənli wɪʃt i hæd spoʊkən mɔɹ kwaɪətli. hi wəɾ əv ɪf i hæd ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz lɪsnɪŋ. mæt ən pɛɹɪn, ɡɹɪnɪŋ laɪk fulz, fɛl ɔl oʊvɝ ðɛmsɛlvz tɛlɪŋ əɹ ə ðɛɹ ɪnkaʊntɝz wɪð ðə blæk-kloʊkt ɹaɪɾɝ, bʌt ɹænd kɛp saɪlənt. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ i nu wʌt ʃi wəd seɪ wən ðeɪ wɝ dʌn.

Rand suddenly wished he had spoken more quietly. He would have if he had realized she was listening. Mat and Perrin, grinning like fools, fell all over themselves telling her of their encounters with the black-cloaked rider, but Rand kept silent. He was sure he knew what she would say when they were done.

"nɪneɪiv wɑz ɹaɪt," ɛɡwin ənaʊns tə ðə skaɪ wən ðə tu juðz fɛl saɪlənt. "nʌn ə jə ɪz ɹɛɾi tə bi ɔf liɾɪŋ stʃɹɪŋz. pipəl də ɹaɪd hɔɹsəz, jə noʊ. ðət dʌzn meɪk əm mɑnstɝz aʊɾ ʌv ə ɡlimənz teɪl." ɹænd nɑɾəd tə hɪmsɛlf; ɪt wɑz dʒʌst əz i hæd θɔt. ʃi ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn hɪm. "æn juv bɪn spɹɛɾɪŋ ðiz teɪlz. səmtaɪmz juv noʊ sɛns, ɹænd ælθɹ. ðə wɪntɝ əz bɪn fɹaɪɾənɪŋ ɪnʌf wɪθaʊt jə ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt skɛɹɪŋ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən."

"Nynaeve was right," Egwene announced to the sky when the two youths fell silent. "None of you is ready to be off leading strings. People do ride horses, you know. That doesn't make them monsters out of a gleeman's tale." Rand nodded to himself; it was just as he had thought. She rounded on him. "And you've been spreading these tales. Sometimes you have no sense, Rand al'Thor. The winter has been frightening enough without you going about scaring the children."

ɹænd ɡeɪv ə saʊɝ ɡɹɪmɑs. "aɪ hævən spɹɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ, ɛɡwin. bʌɾ aɪ sɔ wʌɾ aɪ sɔ, ən ɪt wɑz noʊ fɑɹmɝ aʊt lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə stʃɹeɪd kaʊ."

Rand gave a sour grimace. "I haven't spread anything, Egwene. But I saw what I saw, and it was no farmer out looking for a strayed cow."

ɛɡwin dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ʃi hæd bɪn gɑnə seɪ vænɪʃt əz ðə dɔɹ ə ði ɪn oʊpən ən ə mæn wɪð ʃæɡi waɪt hɛɹ keɪm hɝiɪŋ aʊɾ əz ɪf pɝsud.

Egwene drew a deep breath and opened her mouth, but whatever she had been going to say vanished as the door of the inn opened and a man with shaggy white hair came hurrying out as if pursued.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹ


CHAPTER 4

ðə ɡlimən


The Gleeman

ðə dɔɹ ə ði ɪn bæŋd ʃʌt bɪhaɪn ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn, ən i spʌn ɝaʊn tə ɡlɛɹ əɾ ɪt. lin, hi wʊɾə bɪn tɔl ɪf nɑt fəɹ ə stup tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz, bʌɾ i muvd ɪn ə spɹaɪ fæʃən ðət bɪlaɪɾ ɪz əpɛɹən eɪdʒ. hɪz kloʊk simd ə mæs ə pætʃəz, ɪn ɑd ʃeɪps ən saɪzəz, flʌɾɝɪŋ wɪð ɛvɹi bɹɛθ ʌv ɛɹ, pætʃəz ɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd kʌlɝz. ɪt wɑz ɹɪli kwaɪt θɪk, ɹænd sɔ, dɪspaɪt wʌt mæstɝ ælvɪɹ hæd sɛd, wɪð ðə pætʃəz mɪɹli soʊn ɑn laɪk dɛkɝeɪʃənz.

The door of the inn banged shut behind the white-haired man, and he spun around to glare at it. Lean, he would have been tall if not for a stoop to his shoulders, but he moved in a spry fashion that belied his apparent age. His cloak seemed a mass of patches, in odd shapes and sizes, fluttering with every breath of air, patches in a hundred colors. It was really quite thick, Rand saw, despite what Master al'Vere had said, with the patches merely sewn on like decorations.

"ðə ɡlimən!" ɛɡwin wɪspɝɾ ɪksaɪɾədli.

"The gleeman!" Egwene whispered excitedly.

ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn wɝld, kloʊk flɛɹɪŋ. hɪz lɔŋ koʊt hæɾ ɑd, bæɡi slivz ən bɪɡ pɑkəts. θɪk mʌstæʃɪz, əz snoʊi əz ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz hɛd, kwɪvɝɾ ɝaʊn ɪz maʊθ, ən ɪz feɪs wɑz nɑɹld laɪk ə tʃɹi ðət hæd sin hɑɹd taɪmz. hi dʒɛstʃɝɾ ɪmpɪɹiəsli ət ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz wɪð ə lɔŋ-stɛm paɪp, ɔɹnətli kɑɹvd, ðət tʃɹeɪld ə wɪsp ə smoʊk. blu aɪz pɪɹɾ aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ bʊʃi waɪt bɹaʊz, dʒɹɪlɪŋ ɪndə wʌtɛvɝ i lʊkt æt.

The white-haired man whirled, cloak flaring. His long coat had odd, baggy sleeves and big pockets. Thick mustaches, as snowy as the hair on his head, quivered around his mouth, and his face was gnarled like a tree that had seen hard times. He gestured imperiously at Rand and the others with a long-stemmed pipe, ornately carved, that trailed a wisp of smoke. Blue eyes peered out from under bushy white brows, drilling into whatever he looked at.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə mænz aɪz ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ət ðə ɹɛst ə hɪm. ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz hæd dɑɹk aɪz, ən soʊ dɪd moʊst ə ðə mɝtʃəns, ən ðɛɹ ɡɑɹdz, ən ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. ðə kɔŋɡɝz ən ðə kɑplɪnz hæd meɪd fʌn ə hɪm fəɹ ɪz ɡɹeɪ aɪz, əntɪl ðə deɪ hi faɪnəli pʌntʃt juɑl kɑplɪn ɪn ðə noʊz; ðə wɪzdəm hæd ʃʊɹli ɡɑɾən ɑntu hɪm fəɹ ðæt. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə pleɪs wɛɹ noʊbɑdi hæd dɑɹk aɪz. meɪbi læn kʌmz fɹəm ðɛɹ, tu.

Rand stared at the man's eyes almost as much as at the rest of him. Everybody in the Two Rivers had dark eyes, and so did most of the merchants, and their guards, and everyone else he had ever seen. The Congars and the Coplins had made fun of him for his gray eyes, until the day he finally punched Ewal Coplin in the nose; the Wisdom had surely gotten onto him for that. He wondered if there was a place where nobody had dark eyes. Maybe Lan comes from there, too.

"wʌt sɔɹɾ ə pleɪs ɪz ðɪs?" ðə ɡlimən dɪmændəɾ ɪn ə dip vɔɪs ðət saʊndəɾ ɪn səm weɪ lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ðəɾ ʌv ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi mæn. ivən ɪn ði oʊpən ɛɹ ɪt sim tə fɪl ə ɡɹeɪt ɹum ən ɹɛzəneɪt fɹəm ðə wɔlz. "ðə joʊkəlz ɪn ðət vɪlədʒ ɑn ðə hɪl tɛl mi aɪ kən ɡɛt hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk, nɪɡlɛktɪŋ tə seɪ ðət ðət wɑz oʊnli ɪf aɪ lɛft wɛl bɪfɔɹ nun. wən aɪ faɪnəli də ɝaɪv, tʃɪl tə ðə boʊn ən ɹɛɾi fəɹ ə wɔɹm bɛd, jəɹ ɪnkipɝ ɡɹʌmbəlz əbaʊt ði aʊɝ əz ɪf aɪ wɝ ə wɑndɝɪŋ swɪnhɝɾ ən jəɹ vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl hædn bɛɡd mi tə dɪspleɪ maɪ ɑɹɾ ət ðɪs fɛstəvəl ə jʊɹz. ən i nɛvɝ ivən toʊl mi hi wɑz ðə meɪɝ." hi sloʊd fəɹ ə bɹɛθ, teɪkɪŋ əm ɔl ɪn wɪð ə ɡlɛɹ, bʌɾ i wɑz ɔf əɡɛn ɑn ði ɪnstənt. "wɛn aɪ keɪm daʊnstɛɹz tə smoʊk maɪ paɪp bɪfɔɹ ðə faɪɝ ən əv ə mʌɡ ʌv eɪl, ɛvɹi mæn ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum stɛɹz ət mi əz ɪf aɪ wɝ ɪz lis feɪvɹɪt bɹʌðɝ-ɪn-lɔ sikɪŋ tə bɑɹoʊ mʌni. wʌn oʊld ɡɹændfɑðɝ stɑɹts ɹæntɪŋ ət mi əbaʊt ðə kaɪndə stɔɹiz aɪ ʃəɾ əɹ ʃəd nɑt tɛl, ðən ə ɡɝl-tʃaɪld ʃaʊts ət mi tə ɡɛɾ aʊt, ən θɹɛɾənz mi wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt klʌb wən aɪ doʊn muv kwɪkli ɪnʌf fəɹ hɝ. hu ɛvɝ hɝɾ ə tʃɹiɾɪŋ ə ɡlimən soʊ?"

"What sort of place is this?" the gleeman demanded in a deep voice that sounded in some way larger than that of an ordinary man. Even in the open air it seemed to fill a great room and resonate from the walls. "The yokels in that village on the hill tell me I can get here before dark, neglecting to say that that was only if I left well before noon. When I finally do arrive, chilled to the bone and ready for a warm bed, your innkeeper grumbles about the hour as if I were a wandering swineherd and your Village Council hadn't begged me to display my art at this festival of yours. And he never even told me he was the Mayor." He slowed for a breath, taking them all in with a glare, but he was off again on the instant. "When I came downstairs to smoke my pipe before the fire and have a mug of ale, every man in the common room stares at me as if I were his least favorite brother-in-law seeking to borrow money. One old grandfather starts ranting at me about the kind of stories I should or should not tell, then a girl-child shouts at me to get out, and threatens me with a great club when I don't move quickly enough for her. Who ever heard of treating a gleeman so?"

ɛɡwinz feɪs wɑz ə stʌɾi, hɝ ɡɑɡəl-aɪɾ əmeɪz əɾ ə ɡlimən ɪn ðə flɛʃ mɑɹd baɪ ə dɪzaɪɝ tə dɪfɛnd nɪneɪiv.

Egwene's face was a study, her goggle-eyed amaze at a gleeman in the flesh marred by a desire to defend Nynaeve.

"jɔɹ pɑɹɾən, mæstɝ ɡlimən," ɹænd sɛd. hi nu hi wɑz ɡɹɪnɪŋ fulɪʃli, hɪmsɛlf. "ðæt wɑz əɹ wɪzdəm, ən - "

"Your pardon, Master Gleeman," Rand said. He knew he was grinning foolishly, himself. "That was our Wisdom, and - "

"ðæt pɹɪɾi lɪɾəl slɪp ʌv ə ɡɝl?" ðə ɡlimən ɪkskleɪmd. "ə vɪlədʒ wɪzdəm? waɪ, əɾ əɹ eɪdʒ ʃi ʃəd bɛɾɝ bi flɝɾɪŋ wɪð ðə jʌŋ mɛn ðən fɔɹtɛlɪŋ ðə wɛðɝ ən kjʊɹɪŋ ðə sɪk."

"That pretty little slip of a girl?" the gleeman exclaimed. "A village Wisdom? Why, at her age she should better be flirting with the young men than foretelling the weather and curing the sick."

ɹænd ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli. hi hoʊp nɪneɪiv nɛvɝ oʊvɝhɝd ðə mænz əpɪnjən. ət list, nɑɾ əntɪl i hæd dʌn wɪð ɪz pɝfɔɹmɪŋ. pɛɹɪn wɪnst ət ðə ɡlimənz wɝdz, ən mæt wɪsəl saʊnləsli, əz ɪf boʊθ hæd hæd ðə seɪm θɔɾ əz i hæd.

Rand shifted uncomfortably. He hoped Nynaeve never overheard the man's opinion. At least, not until he had done with his performing. Perrin winced at the gleeman's words, and Mat whistled soundlessly, as if both had had the same thought as he had.

"ðə mɛn wɝ ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl," ɹænd wɛn ɑn. "aɪm ʃʊɹ ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd noʊ dɪskɔɝɾɪsi. jə si, wi dʒʌs lɝn ðɛɹz ə wɔɹ ɪn ɡildən, ən ə mæn kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðə kaʊnsəl ɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪɾ ɪf wi maɪt bi ɪn deɪnʒɝ hɪɹ."

"The men were the Village Council," Rand went on. "I'm sure they intended no discourtesy. You see, we just learned there's a war in Ghealdan, and a man claiming to be the Dragon Reborn. A false Dragon. Aes Sedai are riding there from Tar Valon. The Council is trying to decide if we might be in danger here."

"oʊl nuz, ivən ɪn bɛɹlən," ðə ɡlimən sɛd dɪsmɪsɪvli, "æn ðəɾ ɪz ðə læs pleɪs ɪn ðə wɝl tə hɪɹ ɛniθɪŋ." hi pɔzd, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə vɪlədʒ, ən dʒɹaɪli æɾəd, "ɔlmoʊs ðə læs pleɪs." ðən ɪz aɪz fɛl ɑn ðə wæɡən ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn, stændɪŋ əloʊn naʊ, wɪð ɪts ʃæfs ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "soʊ. aɪ θɔɾ aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz pdən feɪn ɪn ðɛɹ." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz stɪl dip, bʌt ðə ɹɛzənəns hæd ɡɔn, ɹipleɪs baɪ skɔɹn. "feɪn wɑz ɔlweɪz wʌn tə kæɹi bæd nuz kwɪkli, ən ðə wɝs, ðə fæstɝ. ðɛɹz mɔɹ ɹeɪvən ɪn ɪm ðən mæn."

"Old news, even in Baerlon," the gleeman said dismissively, "and that is the last place in the world to hear anything." He paused, looking around the village, and dryly added, "Almost the last place." Then his eyes fell on the wagon in front of the inn, standing alone now, with its shafts on the ground. "So. I thought I recognized Padan Fain in there." His voice was still deep, but the resonance had gone, replaced by scorn. "Fain was always one to carry bad news quickly, and the worse, the faster. There's more raven in him than man."

"mæstɝ feɪn əz kʌm ɔfən tə ɛmənz fild, mæstɝ ɡlimən," ɛɡwin sɛd, ə hɪn ə dɪsəpɹuvəl faɪnəli bɹeɪkɪŋ θɹu hɝ dɪlaɪt. "hi ɪz ɔlweɪz fʊl ə læftɝ, ən i bɹɪŋz mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɡʊd nuz ðən bæd."

"Master Fain has come often to Emond's Field, Master Gleeman," Egwene said, a hint of disapproval finally breaking through her delight. "He is always full of laughter, and he brings much more good news than bad."

ðə ɡlimən aɪɾ əɹ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən smaɪl bɹɔdli. "naʊ jəɹ ə lʌvli læs. jə ʃʊɾə ɹoʊz bʌdz ɪn jəɹ hɛɹ. ənfɔɹtʃənətli, aɪ kænɑt pʊl ɹoʊzɪz fɹəm ði ɛɹ, nɑt ðɪs jɪɹ, bʌt haʊ wəd jə laɪk tə stæn bɪsaɪd mi təmɑɹoʊ fəɹ ə pɑɹɾ ə maɪ pɝfɔɹməns? hæn mi maɪ flut wən aɪ wɑn ɪt, ən sɝɾən ʌðɝ æpɝæɾəs. aɪ ɔlweɪz tʃuz ðə pɹɪɾiəst ɡɝl aɪ kən faɪn əz maɪ əsɪstənt."

The gleeman eyed her for a moment, then smiled broadly. "Now you're a lovely lass. You should have rose buds in your hair. Unfortunately, I cannot pull roses from the air, not this year, but how would you like to stand beside me tomorrow for a part of my performance? Hand me my flute when I want it, and certain other apparatus. I always choose the prettiest girl I can find as my assistant."

pɛɹɪn snɪkɝd, ən mæt, hu hæd bɪn snɪkɝɪŋ, læft aʊt laʊd. ɹænd blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz; ɛɡwin wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, ən i hæd nɑɾ ivən smaɪld. ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd ɝaʊn ən spoʊk ɪn ə tu-kɑm vɔɪs.

Perrin snickered, and Mat, who had been snickering, laughed out loud. Rand blinked in surprise; Egwene was glaring at him, and he had not even smiled. She straightened around and spoke in a too-calm voice.

"θæŋk ju, mæstɝ ɡlimən. aɪ wəd bi hæpi tə əsɪs ju."

"Thank you, Master Gleeman. I would be happy to assist you."

"tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn," ðə ɡlimən sɛd. ðeɪ stɛɹd. "maɪ neɪm ɪz tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn, nɑt mæstɝ ɡlimən." hi hɪtʃt ðə mʌltəhud kloʊk ʌp ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ən əbɹʌpli hɪz vɔɪs wʌns mɔɹ sim tə ɹɪvɝbɝəɾ ɪn ə ɡɹeɪt hɔl. "wʌns ə kɔɹtbɑɝd, aɪm naʊ ɪndid ɹɪzən tə ði ɪɡzɔltɪd ɹæŋk ə mæstɝ ɡlimən, jɛt maɪ neɪm ɪz pleɪn tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn, ən ɡlimən ɪz ðə sɪmpəl taɪɾəl ɪn wɪtʃ aɪ ɡlɔɹi." ən i swɛpt ə baʊ soʊ ɪlæbɹət wɪð flɝɪʃəz ə hɪz kloʊk ðət mæt klæpt ən ɛɡwin mɝmɝɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾɪvli.

"Thom Merrilin," the gleeman said. They stared. "My name is Thom Merrilin, not Master Gleeman." He hitched the multihued cloak up on his shoulders, and abruptly his voice once more seemed to reverberate in a great hall. "Once a Courtbard, I am now indeed risen to the exalted rank of Master Gleeman, yet my name is plain Thom Merrilin, and gleeman is the simple title in which I glory." And he swept a bow so elaborate with flourishes of his cloak that Mat clapped and Egwene murmured appreciatively.

"mæstɝ . . . ɑ . . . mæstɝ mɛɹɪlɪn," mæt sɛd, ənʃʊɹ ɪɡzækli wʌt fɔɹm ʌv ədʒɹɛs tə teɪk aʊɾ ʌv wʌt tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn hæd sɛd, "wʌɾ ɪz hæpənɪŋ ɪn ɡildən? dʒju noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðɪs fɔls dʒɹæɡən? əɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"Master . . . ah . . . Master Merrilin," Mat said, unsure exactly what form of address to take out of what Thom Merrilin had said, "what is happening in Ghealdan? Do you know anything about this false Dragon? Or the Aes Sedai?"

"du aɪ lʊk laɪk ə pɛdlɝ, bɔɪ?" ðə ɡlimən ɡɹʌmbəld, tæpɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz paɪp ɑn ðə hil ə hɪz pɑm. hi meɪd ðə paɪp dɪsəpɪɹ sʌmwɛɹ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz kloʊk, əɹ ɪz koʊt; ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛɹ ɪt hæd ɡɔn əɹ haʊ. "aɪ æm ə ɡlimən, nɑɾ ə nuzəmɔŋɡɝ. ən aɪ meɪk ə pɔɪn ə nɛvɝ noʊɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. mʌtʃ seɪfɝ ðət weɪ."

"Do I look like a peddler, boy?" the gleeman grumbled, tapping out his pipe on the heel of his palm. He made the pipe disappear somewhere inside his cloak, or his coat; Rand was not sure where it had gone or how. "I am a gleeman, not a newsmonger. And I make a point of never knowing anything about Aes Sedai. Much safer that way."

"bʌt ðə wɔɹ," mæt bɪɡæn iɡɝli, oʊnli tə bi kʌɾ ɔf baɪ mæstɝ mɛɹɪlɪn.

"But the war," Mat began eagerly, only to be cut off by Master Merrilin.

"ɪn wɔɹz, bɔɪ, fulz kɪl ʌðɝ fulz fəɹ fulɪʃ kɑzəz. ðæts ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə noʊ. aɪm hɪɹ fəɹ maɪ ɑɹt." sʌɾənli hi θɹʌst ə fɪŋɡɝ ət ɹænd. "ju, læd. jəɹ ə tɔl wʌn. nɑt wɪð jəɹ fʊl ɡɹoʊθ ɑn jə jɛt, bʌɾ aɪ daʊt ðɛɹz ənʌðɝ mæn ɪn ðə dɪstʃɹɪkt wɪð jəɹ haɪt. nɑt mɛni ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ wɪð aɪz ðət kʌlɝ, iðɝ, əl weɪdʒɝ. ðə pɔɪn ɪz, jəɹ ən æks hændəl əkɹɔs ðə ʃoʊldɝz ən əz tɔl əz ən ilmən. wʌts jəɹ neɪm, læd?"

"In wars, boy, fools kill other fools for foolish causes. That's enough for anyone to know. I am here for my art." Suddenly he thrust a finger at Rand. "You, lad. You're a tall one. Not with your full growth on you yet, but I doubt there's another man in the district with your height. Not many in the village with eyes that color, either, I'll wager. The point is, you're an axe handle across the shoulders and as tall as an Aielman. What's your name, lad?"

ɹænd ɡeɪv ɪt hɛzɪɾəntli, nɑt ʃʊɹ wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðə mæn wɑz meɪkɪŋ fʌn ə hɪm, bʌt ðə ɡlimən hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi tɝn ɪz ətɛnʃən tə pɛɹɪn. "æn juv ɔlmoʊs ðə saɪz ʌv ən oʊɡiɝ. kloʊs ɪnʌf. haʊ ɑɹ jə kɔld?"

Rand gave it hesitantly, not sure whether or not the man was making fun of him, but the gleeman had already turned his attention to Perrin. "And you have almost the size of an Ogier. Close enough. How are you called?"

"nɑɾ ənlɛs aɪ stæn ɑn maɪ oʊn ʃoʊldɝz." pɛɹɪn læft. "aɪm əfɹeɪd ɹænd ən aɪ ɑɹ dʒʌst ɔɹɾənɛɹi foʊk, mæstɝ mɛɹɪlɪn, nɑt meɪd-ʌp kɹitʃɝz fɹəm jəɹ stɔɹiz. aɪm pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə."

"Not unless I stand on my own shoulders." Perrin laughed. "I'm afraid Rand and I are just ordinary folk, Master Merrilin, not made-up creatures from your stories. I'm Perrin Aybara."

tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn tʌɡd ət wʌn ə hɪz mʌstæʃɪz. "wɛl, naʊ. meɪd-ʌp kɹitʃɝz fɹəm maɪ stɔɹiz. ɪz ðət wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ? jə lædz ɑɹ waɪdli tʃɹævəld, ðɛn, ɪt simz."

Thom Merrilin tugged at one of his mustaches. "Well, now. Made-up creatures from my stories. Is that what they are? You lads are widely traveled, then, it seems."

ɹænd kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt, sɝɾən ðeɪ wɝ ðə bʌɾ ʌv ə dʒoʊk, naʊ, bʌt pɛɹɪn spoʊk ʌp.

Rand kept his mouth shut, certain they were the butt of a joke, now, but Perrin spoke up.

"wiv ɔl ʌv əs bɪn əz fɑɹ əz wɑtʃ hɪl, ən dɛvən ɹaɪd. nɑt mɛni ɝaʊn hɪɹ əv ɡɔn əz fɑɹ." hi wɑz nɑt boʊstɪŋ; pɛɹɪn sɛldəm dɪd. hi wɑz dʒʌs tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ.

"We've all of us been as far as Watch Hill, and Deven Ride. Not many around here have gone as far." He was not boasting; Perrin seldom did. He was just telling the truth.

"wiv ɔl sin ðə maɪɹ, tu," mæt æɾəd, ən i dɪd saʊn boʊsfəl. "ðæts ðə swɑmp ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə wɔɾɝwʊd. noʊbɑdi əɾ ɔl ɡoʊz ðəɹ - ɪts fʊl ə kwɪksænz ən bɑɡz - ɪksɛpt ʌs. ən noʊbɑdi ɡoʊz tə ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, iðɝ, bʌt wi dɪd, wʌns. tə ðə fʊɾ ə ðɛm, ɛniweɪ."

"We've all seen the Mire, too," Mat added, and he did sound boastful. "That's the swamp at the far end of the Waterwood. Nobody at all goes there - it's full of quicksands and bogs - except us. And nobody goes to the Mountains of Mist, either, but we did, once. To the foot of them, anyway."

"æz fɑɹ əz ðæt?" ðə ɡlimən mɝmɝd, bɹʌʃɪŋ əɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz naʊ kəntɪnjuəli. ɹænd θɔɾ i wɑz haɪɾɪŋ ə smaɪl, ən i sɔ ðət pɛɹɪn wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ.

"As far as that?" the gleeman murmured, brushing at his mustaches now continually. Rand thought he was hiding a smile, and he saw that Perrin was frowning.

"ɪts bæd lʌk tə ɛntɝ ðə maʊntənz," mæt sɛd, əz ɪf i hæd tə dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf fəɹ nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ fɝðɝ. "ɛvɹibɑɾi noʊz ðæt."

"It's bad luck to enter the mountains," Mat said, as if he had to defend himself for not going further. "Everybody knows that."

"ðæts dʒʌs fulɪʃnəs, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən," ɛɡwin kʌɾ ɪn æŋɡɹəli. "nɪneɪiv sɛz. . . ." ʃi bɹoʊk ɔf, hɝ tʃiks tɝnɪŋ pɪŋk, ən ðə lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn wɑz nɑɾ əz fɹɛnli əz ɪt hæd bɪn. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt ɹaɪt tə meɪk. . . . ɪɾ ɪzənt. . . ." hɝ feɪs wɛn ɹɛɾɝ, ən ʃi fɛl saɪlənt. mæt blɪŋkt, əz ɪf i wɑz dʒʌst ɡɛɾɪŋ ə səspɪʃən ʌv wʌt hæd bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn.

"That's just foolishness, Matrim Cauthon," Egwene cut in angrily. "Nynaeve says. . . ." She broke off, her cheeks turning pink, and the look she gave Thom Merrilin was not as friendly as it had been. "It is not right to make. . . . It isn't. . . ." Her face went redder, and she fell silent. Mat blinked, as if he was just getting a suspicion of what had been going on.

"jɔɹ ɹaɪt, tʃaɪld," ðə ɡlimən sɛd kɑntʃɹɪtli. "aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz hʌmbli. aɪm hɪɹ tə ɛntɝteɪn. ɑ, maɪ tʌŋ əz ɔlweɪz ɡɑɾən mi ɪndə tʃɹʌbəl."

"You're right, child," the gleeman said contritely. "I apologize humbly. I am here to entertain. Aah, my tongue has always gotten me into trouble."

"meɪbi wi hævən tʃɹævəld əz fɑɹ əz ju," pɛɹɪn sɛd flætli, "bʌt wʌt dʌz haʊ tɔl ɹænd ɪz əv tə də wɪð ɛniθɪŋ?"

"Maybe we haven't traveled as far as you," Perrin said flatly, "but what does how tall Rand is have to do with anything?"

"dʒʌs ðɪs, læd. ə lɪɾəl leɪɾɝ əl lɛt jə tʃɹaɪ tə pɪk mi ʌp, bʌt jə woʊn bi eɪbəl tə lɪf maɪ fit fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd. nɑt ju, nɔɹ jəɹ tɔl fɹɛn ðəɹ - ɹænd, ɪz ɪt? - nɔɹ ɛni ʌðɝ mæn. naʊ wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ə ðæt?"

"Just this, lad. A little later I will let you try to pick me up, but you won't be able to lift my feet from the ground. Not you, nor your tall friend there - Rand, is it? - nor any other man. Now what do you think of that?"

pɛɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd ə læf. "aɪ θɪŋk aɪ kən lɪf jə ɹaɪt naʊ." bʌt wən i stɛp fɔɹwɝd tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn moʊʃən ɪm bæk.

Perrin snorted a laugh. "I think I can lift you right now." But when he stepped forward Thom Merrilin motioned him back.

"leɪɾɝ, læd, leɪɾɝ. wən ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ foʊk tə wɑtʃ. ən ɑɹɾəst nidz ən ɑɾiəns."

"Later, lad, later. When there are more folk to watch. An artist needs an audience."

ə skɔɹ ə foʊk hæd ɡæðɝɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹin sɪns ðə ɡlimən əpɪɹd fɹəm ði ɪn, jʌŋ mɛn ən wɪmən daʊn tə tʃɪlʒɹən u pikt, waɪd-aɪɾ ən saɪlənt, fɹəm bɪhaɪn ði oʊldɝ ɔnlʊkɝz. ɔl lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mɝækjələs θɪŋz fɹəm ðə ɡlimən. ðə waɪt-hɛɹd mæn lʊkt əm oʊvɝ - hi əpɪɹd tə bi kaʊntɪŋ əm - ðən ɡeɪv ə slaɪt ʃeɪk ə hɪz hɛɾ ən saɪd.

A score of folk had gathered on the Green since the gleeman appeared from the inn, young men and women down to children who peeked, wide-eyed and silent, from behind the older onlookers. All looked as if they were waiting for miraculous things from the gleeman. The white-haired man looked them over - he appeared to be counting them - then gave a slight shake of his head and sighed.

"aɪ səpoʊz aɪ hæd bɛɾɝ ɡɪv jə ə smɔl sæmpəl. soʊ jə kən ɹʌn tɛl ði ʌðɝz. ɛ? dʒʌst ə teɪst ʌv wʌt jəl si təmɑɹoʊ ət jəɹ fɛstəvəl."

"I suppose I had better give you a small sample. So you can run tell the others. Eh? Just a taste of what you'll see tomorrow at your festival."

hi tʊk ə stɛp bæk, ən sʌɾənli lɛpt ɪndə ði ɛɹ, twɪstɪŋ ən sʌmɝsɔltɪŋ tə læn feɪsɪŋ əm ətɑp ði oʊl stoʊn faʊndeɪʃən. mɔɹ ðən ðæt, θɹi bɔlz - ɹɛd, waɪt, ən blæk - bɪɡæn dænsɪŋ bɪtwin ɪz hænz ivən əz i lændəd.

He took a step back, and suddenly leaped into the air, twisting and somersaulting to land facing them atop the old stone foundation. More than that, three balls - red, white, and black - began dancing between his hands even as he landed.

ə sɑf saʊn keɪm fɹəm ðə wɑtʃɝz, hæf əstɑnɪʃmənt, hæf sæɾəsfækʃən. ivən ɹænd fɝɡɑɾ ɪz ɪɹɪteɪʃən. hi flæʃt ɛɡwin ə ɡɹɪn ən ɡɑɾ ə dɪlaɪɾəd wʌn ɪn ɹɪtɝn, ðən boʊθ tɝn tə stɛɹ ʌnəbæʃɪdli ət ðə ɡlimən.

A soft sound came from the watchers, half astonishment, half satisfaction. Even Rand forgot his irritation. He flashed Egwene a grin and got a delighted one in return, then both turned to stare unabashedly at the gleeman.

"ju wɑn stɔɹiz?" tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn dɪkleɪmd. "aɪ hæv stɔɹiz, ən əl ɡɪv əm tə ju. əl meɪk əm kʌm əlaɪv bɪfɔɹ jəɹ aɪz." ə blu bɔl dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝz fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ, ðən ə ɡɹin wʌn, ən ə jɛloʊ. "teɪlz ʌv ɡɹeɪt wɔɹz ən ɡɹeɪt hɪɹoʊz, fəɹ ðə mɛn ən bɔɪz. fəɹ ðə wɪmən ən ɡɝlz, ði ɪntaɪɝ əptʃɹɪdʒən saɪkəl. teɪlz ʌv ɑɹɾɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ tænɹəl, ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ ðə haɪ kɪŋ, hu wʌns ɹuld ɔl ðə lænz fɹəm ði il weɪs tə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, ən ivən bɪɑnd. wʌnʒɹəs stɔɹiz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pipəl ən stʃɹeɪnʒ lænz, ʌv ðə ɡɹin mæn, ʌv wɔɹɾɝz ən tʃɹɑləks, ʌv oʊɡiɝ ən il. ðə θaʊzən teɪlz ʌv ænlə, ðə waɪz kaʊnsəlɝ. 'jeɪɛm ðə dʒaɪənt-sleɪɝ.' haʊ susə teɪm dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ. 'mɑɹə ən ðə θɹi fulɪʃ kɪŋz.' "

"You want stories?" Thom Merrilin declaimed. "I have stories, and I will give them to you. I will make them come alive before your eyes." A blue ball joined the others from somewhere, then a green one, and a yellow. "Tales of great wars and great heroes, for the men and boys. For the women and girls, the entire Aptarigine Cycle. Tales of Artur Paendrag Tanreall, Artur Hawkwing, Artur the High King, who once ruled all the lands from the Aiel Waste to the Aryth Ocean, and even beyond. Wondrous stories of strange people and strange lands, of the Green Man, of Warders and Trollocs, of Ogier and Aiel. The Thousand Tales of Anla, the Wise Counselor. 'Jaem the Giant-Slayer.' How Susa Tamed Jain Farstrider. 'Mara and the Three Foolish Kings.' "

"tɛl əs əbaʊt lɛn," ɛɡwin kɔld. "haʊ hi flu tə ðə mun ɪn ðə bɛli ʌv ən iɡəl meɪɾ ə faɪɝ. tɛl əbaʊɾ ɪz dɔɾɝ sæljə wɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə stɑɹz."

"Tell us about Lenn," Egwene called. "How he flew to the moon in the belly of an eagle made of fire. Tell about his daughter Salya walking among the stars."

ɹænd lʊkt əɾ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, bʌt ʃi simd ɪntɛn ɑn ðə ɡlimən. ʃi hæd nɛvɝ laɪk stɔɹiz əbaʊɾ ædvɛntʃɝz ən lɔŋ dʒɝniz. hɝ feɪvɹɪts wɝ ɔlweɪz ðə fʌni wʌnz, əɹ stɔɹiz əbaʊt wɪmən aʊtwɪɾɪŋ pipəl u wɝ səpoʊz tə bi smɑɹɾɝ ðən ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi hæɾ æsk fəɹ teɪlz əbaʊt lɛn ən sæljə tə pʊɾ ə bɝ ʌndɝ ɪz ʃɝt. ʃʊɹli ʃi kəd si ðə wɝld aʊtsaɪd wɑz noʊ pleɪs fəɹ tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk. lɪsnɪŋ tə teɪlz ʌv ædvɛntʃɝz, ivən dʒɹimɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛm, wɑz wʌn θɪŋ; hævɪŋ əm teɪk pleɪs ɝaʊn jə wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ ɛls əɡɛn.

Rand looked at her out of the corner of his eye, but she seemed intent on the gleeman. She had never liked stories about adventures and long journeys. Her favorites were always the funny ones, or stories about women outwitting people who were supposed to be smarter than everyone else. He was sure she had asked for tales about Lenn and Salya to put a burr under his shirt. Surely she could see the world outside was no place for Two Rivers folk. Listening to tales of adventures, even dreaming about them, was one thing; having them take place around you would be something else again.

"oʊl stɔɹiz, ðoʊz," tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn sɛd, ən əbɹʌpli hi wɑz dʒʌɡəlɪŋ θɹi kʌlɝd bɔlz wɪð itʃ hænd. "stɔɹiz fɹəm ði eɪdʒ bɪfɔɹ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, səm seɪ. pɝhæps ivən oʊldɝ. bʌɾ aɪ hæv ɔl stɔɹiz, maɪn jə naʊ, ʌv eɪdʒəz ðət wɝ ən wɪl bi. eɪdʒəz wən mɛn ɹul ðə hɛvənz ən ðə stɑɹz, ən eɪdʒəz wən mæn ɹoʊmd əz bɹʌðɝ tə ði ænəməlz. eɪdʒəz ʌv wʌndɝ, ən eɪdʒəz ə hɔɹɝ. eɪdʒəz ɛndəd baɪ faɪɝ ɹeɪnɪŋ fɹəm ðə skaɪz, ən eɪdʒəz dum baɪ snoʊ ən aɪs kʌvɝɪŋ læn ən si. aɪ hæv ɔl stɔɹiz, ən əl tɛl ɔl stɔɹiz. teɪlz ə mɑsk ðə dʒaɪənt, wɪð ɪz læns ə faɪɝ ðət kəd ɹitʃ ɝaʊn ðə wɝld, ən ɪz wɔɹz wɪð ɛlzbɛt, ðə kwin ʌv ɔl. teɪlz ə məɾɝisi ðə hilɝ, mʌðɝ ə ðə wʌnʒɹəs ɪndiænə."

"Old stories, those," Thom Merrilin said, and abruptly he was juggling three colored balls with each hand. "Stories from the Age before the Age of Legends, some say. Perhaps even older. But I have all stories, mind you now, of Ages that were and will be. Ages when men ruled the heavens and the stars, and Ages when man roamed as brother to the animals. Ages of wonder, and Ages of horror. Ages ended by fire raining from the skies, and Ages doomed by snow and ice covering land and sea. I have all stories, and I will tell all stories. Tales of Mosk the Giant, with his Lance of fire that could reach around the world, and his wars with Elsbet, the Queen of All. Tales of Materese the Healer, Mother of the Wondrous Ind."

ðə bɔlz naʊ dæns bɪtwin tɑmz hænz ɪn tu ɪntɝtwaɪnɪŋ sɝkəlz. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz ɔlmoʊst ə tʃænt, ən i tɝn sloʊli əz i spoʊk, əz ɪf sɝveɪɪŋ ði ɔnlʊkɝz tə ɡeɪdʒ ɪz ɪfɛkt. "aɪ wɪl tɛl jə ʌv ði ɛn ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ʌv ðə dʒɹæɡən, ən ɪz ətɛmp tə fɹi ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪndə ðə wɝld ə mɛn. əl tɛl ə ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, wən ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃæɾɝd ðə wɝld; ʌv ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, wən mɛn bæɾəld tʃɹɑləks fəɹ ɹul ə ði ɝθ; ʌv ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, wən mɛn bæɾəld mɛn ən ðə neɪʃənz ʌv əɹ deɪ wɝ ɹɔt. əl tɛl ði ædvɛntʃɝz ə mɛn ən wɪmən, ɹɪtʃ ən pʊɹ, ɡɹeɪɾ ən smɔl, pɹaʊɾ ən hʌmbəl. ðə sidʒ ə ðə pɪlɝz ə ðə skaɪ. 'haʊ ɡʊdwaɪf kɑɹəl kjʊɹɾ əɹ hʌzbən ə snɔɹɪŋ.' kɪŋ dæɹɪθ ən ðə fɔl ə ðə haʊs ʌv - "

The balls now danced between Thom's hands in two intertwining circles. His voice was almost a chant, and he turned slowly as he spoke, as if surveying the onlookers to gauge his effect. "I will tell you of the end of the Age of Legends, of the Dragon, and his attempt to free the Dark One into the world of men. I will tell of the Time of Madness, when Aes Sedai shattered the world; of the Trolloc Wars, when men battled Trollocs for rule of the earth; of the War of the Hundred Years, when men battled men and the nations of our day were wrought. I will tell the adventures of men and women, rich and poor, great and small, proud and humble. The Siege of the Pillars of the Sky. 'How Goodwife Karil Cured Her Husband of Snoring.' King Darith and the Fall of the House of - "

əbɹʌpli ðə floʊ ʌv wɝdz ən ðə dʒʌɡəlɪŋ əlaɪk stɑpt. tɑm sɪmpli snætʃt ðə bɔlz fɹəm ði ɛɹ ən stɑp tɔkɪŋ. ənnoʊɾɪst baɪ ɹænd, mɔɪɹeɪn hæd dʒɔɪn ðə lɪsənɝz. læn wɑz əɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ðoʊ hi hæd tə lʊk twaɪs tə si ðə mæn. fəɹ ə moʊmən tɑm lʊkt ət mɔɪɹeɪn saɪdweɪz, hɪz feɪs ən bɑɾi stɪl ɪksɛp fəɹ meɪkɪŋ ðə bɔlz dɪsəpɪɹ ɪndə hɪz kəpeɪʃəs koʊt slivz. ðən i baʊd tə hɝ, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz kloʊk waɪd. "jɔɹ pɑɹɾən, bʌt jə ɑɹ ʃʊɹli nɑt fɹəm ðɪs dɪstʃɹɪkt?"

Abruptly the flow of words and the juggling alike stopped. Thom simply snatched the balls from the air and stopped talking. Unnoticed by Rand, Moiraine had joined the listeners. Lan was at her shoulder, though he had to look twice to see the man. For a moment Thom looked at Moiraine sideways, his face and body still except for making the balls disappear into his capacious coat sleeves. Then he bowed to her, holding his cloak wide. "Your pardon, but you are surely not from this district?"

"leɪɾi!" juɪn hɪs fɪɹsli. "ðə leɪɾi mɔɪɹeɪn."

"Lady!" Ewin hissed fiercely. "The Lady Moiraine."

tɑm blɪŋkt, ðən baʊɾ əɡɛn, mɔɹ dipli. "jɔɹ pɑɹɾən əɡɛn . . . ɑ, leɪɾi. aɪ mɛnt noʊ dɪsɹɪspɛkt."

Thom blinked, then bowed again, more deeply. "Your pardon again . . . ah, Lady. I meant no disrespect."

mɔɪɹeɪn meɪɾ ə smɔl weɪvɪŋ-əweɪ dʒɛstʃɝ. "nʌn wɑz pɝsivd, mæstɝ bɑɹd. ən maɪ neɪm ɪz sɪmpli mɔɪɹeɪn. aɪm ɪndiɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ hɪɹ, ə tʃɹævəlɝ laɪk jɝsɛlf, fɑɹ fɹəm hoʊm ən əloʊn. ðə wɝl kən bi ə deɪnʒɝəs pleɪs wən wʌn ɪz ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ."

Moiraine made a small waving-away gesture. "None was perceived, Master Bard. And my name is simply Moiraine. I am indeed a stranger here, a traveler like yourself, far from home and alone. The world can be a dangerous place when one is a stranger."

"ðə leɪɾi mɔɪɹeɪn kəlɛks stɔɹiz," juɪn pʊɾ ɪn. "stɔɹiz əbaʊt θɪŋz ðət hæpən ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ðoʊ aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɛvɝ hæpən hɪɹ tə meɪk ə stɔɹi ʌv."

"The Lady Moiraine collects stories," Ewin put in. "Stories about things that happened in the Two Rivers. Though I don't know what ever happened here to make a story of."

"aɪ tʃɹʌs jəl laɪk maɪ stɔɹiz, əz wɛl . . . mɔɪɹeɪn." tɑm wɑtʃt əɹ wɪð ɑbviəs wɛɹinɪs. hi lʊk nɑt bɛs pliz tə faɪn əɹ ðɛɹ. sʌɾənli ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌt sɔɹɾ ʌv ɛntɝteɪnmən ə leɪɾi laɪk əɹ maɪt bi ɔfɝɾ ɪn ə sɪɾi laɪk bɛɹlən, əɹ keɪɛmlɪn. ʃʊɹli ɪt kəd nɑt bi ɛniθɪŋ bɛɾɝ ðən ə ɡlimən.

"I trust you will like my stories, as well . . . Moiraine." Thom watched her with obvious wariness. He looked not best pleased to find her there. Suddenly Rand wondered what sort of entertainment a lady like her might be offered in a city like Baerlon, or Caemlyn. Surely it could not be anything better than a gleeman.

"ðæɾ ɪz ə mæɾɝ ə teɪst, mæstɝ bɑɹd," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "sʌm stɔɹiz aɪ laɪk, ən səm aɪ də nɑt."

"That is a matter of taste, Master Bard," Moiraine replied. "Some stories I like, and some I do not."

tɑmz baʊ wɑz ɪz dipəs jɛt, bɛndɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ bɑɾi pɛɹəlɛl tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, nʌn ə maɪ stɔɹiz wɪl dɪspliz. ɔl wɪl pliz ən ɛntɝteɪn. ən jə də mi tu mʌtʃ ɑnɝ. aɪm ə sɪmpəl ɡlimən; ðəɾ ən nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ."

Thom's bow was his deepest yet, bending his long body parallel to the ground. "I assure you, none of my stories will displease. All will please and entertain. And you do me too much honor. I am a simple gleeman; that and nothing more."

mɔɪɹeɪn ænsɝɾ ɪz baʊ wɪð ə ɡɹeɪʃəs nɑd. fəɹ ən ɪnstənt ʃi simd ivən mɔɹ ðə leɪɾi juɪn hæd neɪm hɝ, æksɛptɪŋ ən ɔfɝɪŋ fɹəm wʌn ə hɝ sʌbʒɪkts. ðən ʃi tɝn əweɪ, ən læn fɑloʊd, ə wʊlf hilɪŋ ə ɡlaɪɾɪŋ swɑn. tɑm stɛɹɾ æftɝ ðɛm, bʊʃi bɹaʊz dʒɹɔn daʊn, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz wɪð ə nʌkəl, əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ hæfweɪ ʌp ðə ɡɹin. hiz nɑt plizd əɾ ɔl, ɹænd θɔt.

Moiraine answered his bow with a gracious nod. For an instant she seemed even more the lady Ewin had named her, accepting an offering from one of her subjects. Then she turned away, and Lan followed, a wolf heeling a gliding swan. Thom stared after them, bushy brows drawn down, stroking his long mustaches with a knuckle, until they were halfway up the Green. He's not pleased at all, Rand thought.

"ɑɹ jə gɑnə dʒʌɡəl səm mɔɹ, naʊ?" juɪn dɪmændəd.

"Are you going to juggle some more, now?" Ewin demanded.

"it faɪɝ," mæt ʃaʊɾəd. "aɪ wɑnə si jə it faɪɝ."

"Eat fire," Mat shouted. "I want to see you eat fire."

"ðə hɑɹp!" ə vɔɪs kɹaɪd fɹəm ðə kɹaʊd. "pleɪ ðə hɑɹp!" sʌmwʌn ɛls kɔl fəɹ ðə flut.

"The harp!" a voice cried from the crowd. "Play the harp!" Someone else called for the flute.

ət ðət moʊmən ðə dɔɹ ə ði ɪn oʊpən ən ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl tʃɹʌndəld aʊt, nɪneɪiv ɪn ðɛɹ mɪdst. pdən feɪn wɑz nɑt wɪð ðɛm, ɹænd sɔ; əpɛɹənli ðə pɛdlɝ hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə wɔɹm kɑmən ɹum wɪð ɪz mʌld waɪn.

At that moment the door of the inn opened and the Village Council trundled out, Nynaeve in their midst. Padan Fain was not with them, Rand saw; apparently the peddler had decided to remain in the warm common room with his mulled wine.

mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt "ə stʃɹɔŋ bɹændi," tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn əbɹʌpli dʒʌmp daʊn fɹəm ði oʊl faʊndeɪʃən. hi ɪɡnɔɹd ðə kɹaɪz ə ðoʊz u hæd bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, pɹɛsɪŋ ɪnsaɪd pæs ðə kaʊnsəlɝz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ wɛl aʊɾ ə ðə dɔɹweɪ.

Muttering about "a strong brandy," Thom Merrilin abruptly jumped down from the old foundation. He ignored the cries of those who had been watching him, pressing inside past the Councilors before they were well out of the doorway.

"ɪz i səpoʊz tə bi ə ɡlimən əɹ ə kɪŋ?" sɛn bui æskt ɪn ənɔɪd toʊnz. "ə weɪst ʌv ɡʊd mʌni, ɪf jə æsk mi."

"Is he supposed to be a gleeman or a king?" Cenn Buie asked in annoyed tones. "A waste of good money, if you ask me."

bɹæn ælvɪɹ hæf tɝn æftɝ ðə ɡlimən, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðæt mæn meɪ bi mɔɹ tʃɹʌbəl ðən hiz wɝθ."

Bran al'Vere half turned after the gleeman, then shook his head. "That man may be more trouble than he's worth."

nɪneɪiv, bɪzi ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn hɝ, snɪf laʊdli. "wɝi əbaʊt ðə ɡlimən ɪf jə wɑnt, bɹændəlwɪn ælvɪɹ. ət lis hiz ɪn ɛmənz fild, wɪtʃ ɪz mɔɹ ðən jə kən seɪ fəɹ ðɪs fɔls dʒɹæɡən. bʌɾ əz lɔŋ əz jə ɑɹ wɝiɪŋ, ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝz hɪɹ u ʃəɾ ɪksaɪt jəɹ wɝi."

Nynaeve, busy gathering her cloak around her, sniffed loudly. "Worry about the gleeman if you want, Brandelwyn al'Vere. At least he is in Emond's Field, which is more than you can say for this false Dragon. But as long as you are worrying, there are others here who should excite your worry."

"ɪf jə pliz, wɪzdəm," bɹæn sɛd stɪfli, "kaɪnli liv u ʃəd wɝi mi tə maɪ dəsaɪɾɪŋ. mɪstʃɹəs mɔɪɹeɪn ən mæstɝ læn ɑɹ ɡɛsts ɪn maɪ ɪn, ən disənt, ɹɪspɛktəbəl foʊk, soʊ aɪ seɪ. niðɝ ə ðɛm əz kɔl mi ə ful ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə hoʊl kaʊnsəl. niðɝ ə ðɛm əz toʊl ðə kaʊnsəl ɪt hæzən ə fʊl sɛɾ ʌv wɪts əmʌŋ ðɛm."

"If you please, Wisdom," Bran said stiffly, "kindly leave who should worry me to my deciding. Mistress Moiraine and Master Lan are guests in my inn, and decent, respectable folk, so I say. Neither of them has called me a fool in front of the whole Council. Neither of them has told the Council it hasn't a full set of wits among them."

"ɪt simz maɪ ɛstəmət wɑz tu haɪ baɪ hæf," nɪneɪiv ɹitɔɹɾɪd. ʃi stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ wɪθaʊɾ ə bækwɝd ɡlæns, livɪŋ bɹænz dʒɔ wɝkɪŋ əz i sɝtʃt fəɹ ə ɹɪplaɪ.

"It seems my estimate was too high by half," Nynaeve retorted. She strode away without a backward glance, leaving Bran's jaw working as he searched for a reply.

ɛɡwin lʊkt ət ɹænd əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə spik, ðən dɑɹɾɪd æftɝ ðə wɪzdəm ɪnstɛd. ɹænd nu ðəɹ mʌs bi səm weɪ tə stɑp əɹ fɹəm livɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, bʌt ði oʊnli weɪ hi kəd θɪŋk ʌv wɑz nɑt wʌn i wɑz pɹipɛɹd tə teɪk, ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ. ən ʃi hæɾ əz mʌtʃ əz sɛd ʃi wɑz nɑt wɪlɪŋ əɾ ɔl, wɪtʃ meɪɾ ɪm fil ivən wɝs.

Egwene looked at Rand as if she were going to speak, then darted after the Wisdom instead. Rand knew there must be some way to stop her from leaving the Two Rivers, but the only way he could think of was not one he was prepared to take, even if she was willing. And she had as much as said she was not willing at all, which made him feel even worse.

"ðæt jʌŋ wʊmən wɑns ə hʌzbənd," sɛn bui ɡɹaʊld, baʊnsɪŋ ɑn ɪz toʊz. hɪz feɪs wɑz pɝpəl, ən ɡɛɾɪŋ dɑɹkɝ. "ʃi læks pɹɑpɝ ɹɪspɛkt. wɝ ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl, nɑt bɔɪz ɹeɪkɪŋ əɹ jɑɹd, ən - "

"That young woman wants a husband," Cenn Buie growled, bouncing on his toes. His face was purple, and getting darker. "She lacks proper respect. We're the Village Council, not boys raking her yard, and - "

ðə meɪɝ bɹið hɛvəli θɹu hɪz noʊz, ən sʌɾənli ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ði oʊl θætʃɝ. "bi kwaɪət, sɛn! stɑp æktɪŋ laɪk ə blæk-veɪld il!" ðə skɪni mæn fɹoʊz ɑn ɪz toʊz ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. ðə meɪɝ nɛvɝ lɛɾ ɪz tɛmpɝ ɡɛt ðə bɛst ə hɪm. bɹæn ɡlɛɹd. "bɝn mi, bʌt wɪv bɛɾɝ θɪŋz tə bi əbaʊt ðən ðɪs fulɪʃnəs. əɹ dʒju ɪntɛn tə pɹuv nɪneɪiv ɹaɪt?" wɪð ðəɾ i stʌmp bæk ɪndə ði ɪn ən slæm ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

The Mayor breathed heavily through his nose, and suddenly rounded on the old thatcher. "Be quiet, Cenn! Stop acting like a black-veiled Aiel!" The skinny man froze on his toes in astonishment. The Mayor never let his temper get the best of him. Bran glared. "Burn me, but we have better things to be about than this foolishness. Or do you intend to prove Nynaeve right?" With that he stumped back into the inn and slammed the door behind him.

ðə kaʊnsəl mɛmbɝz ɡlænst ət sɛn, ðən muvd ɔf ɪn ðɛɹ sɛpɹət dɝɛkʃənz. ɔl bʌt hɹəl luhən, hu əkʌmpənid ðə stoʊni-vɪsɪdʒ θætʃɝ, tɔkɪŋ kwaɪətli. ðə blæksmɪθ wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn u kəɾ ɛvɝ ɡɛt sɛn tə si ɹizən.

The Council members glanced at Cenn, then moved off in their separate directions. All but Haral Luhhan, who accompanied the stony-visaged thatcher, talking quietly. The blacksmith was the only one who could ever get Cenn to see reason.

ɹænd wɛn tə miɾ ɪz fɑðɝ, ən ɪz fɹɛnz tʃɹeɪld æftɝ hɪm.

Rand went to meet his father, and his friends trailed after him.

"aɪv nɛvɝ sin mæstɝ ælvɪɹ soʊ mæd," wɑz ðə fɝs θɪŋ ɹænd sɛd, ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪm ə dɪsɡʌstəd lʊk fɹəm mæt.

"I've never seen Master al'Vere so mad," was the first thing Rand said, getting him a disgusted look from Mat.

"ðə meɪɝ ən ðə wɪzdəm sɛldəm əɡɹi," tæm sɛd, "æn ðeɪ əɡɹid lɛs ðən juʒəwəl tədeɪ. ðæts ɔl. ɪts ðə seɪm ɪn ɛvɹi vɪlədʒ."

"The Mayor and the Wisdom seldom agree," Tam said, "and they agreed less than usual today. That's all. It's the same in every village."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən?" mæt æskt, ən pɛɹɪn æɾəd iɡɝ mɝmɝz. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"What about the false Dragon?" Mat asked, and Perrin added eager murmurs. "What about the Aes Sedai?"

tæm ʃʊk ɪz hɛd sloʊli. "mæstɝ feɪn nu lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi toʊld. ət list, lɪɾəl ʌv ɪntʃɹəs tə ʌs. bæɾəlz wʌn əɹ lɔst. sɪɾiz teɪkən ən ɹəteɪkən. ɔl ɪn ɡildən, θæŋk ðə laɪt. ɪt hæzən spɹɛd, əɹ hæd nɑt ðə læs mæstɝ feɪn nu."

Tam shook his head slowly. "Master Fain knew little more than he had already told. At least, little of interest to us. Battles won or lost. Cities taken and retaken. All in Ghealdan, thank the Light. It hasn't spread, or had not the last Master Fain knew."

"bæɾəlz ɪntʃɹəs mi," mæt sɛd, ən pɛɹɪn æɾəd, "wʌt dɪɾ i seɪ əbaʊt ðɛm?"

"Battles interest me," Mat said, and Perrin added, "What did he say about them?"

"bæɾəlz doʊn ɪntʃɹəs mi, meɪtʃɹim," tæm sɛd. "bʌɾ aɪm ʃʊɹ hɪl bi ɡlæd tə tɛl jə ɔl əbaʊɾ əm leɪɾɝ. wʌt dʌz ɪntʃɹəs mi ɪz ðət wi ʃʊdn əv tə wɝi əbaʊɾ əm hɪɹ, əz fɑɹ əz ðə kaʊnsəl kən tɛl. wi kən si noʊ ɹizən fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə kʌm hɪɹ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ saʊθ. ən əz fəɹ ðə ɹɪtɝn dʒɝni, ðeɪ ɑɹən laɪkli tə wɑnə kɹɔs ðə fɔɹəst ə ʃædoʊz ən swɪm ðə waɪt ɹɪvɝ."

"Battles don't interest me, Matrim," Tam said. "But I'm sure he will be glad to tell you all about them later. What does interest me is that we shouldn't have to worry about them here, as far as the Council can tell. We can see no reason for Aes Sedai to come here on their way south. And as for the return journey, they aren't likely to want to cross the Forest of Shadows and swim the White River."

ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz tʃʌkəld ət ði aɪdiə. ðəɹ wɝ θɹi ɹizənz waɪ noʊ wʌn keɪm ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪksɛp fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ, baɪ weɪ ʌv tɛɹən fɛɹi. ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, ɪn ðə wɛst, wɝ ðə fɝst, ʌv kɔɹs, ən ðə maɪɹ blɑk ði is dʒʌst əz ɪfɛktɪvli. tə ðə saʊθ wɑz ðə waɪt ɹɪvɝ, wɪtʃ ɡɑɾ ɪts neɪm fɹəm ðə weɪ ɹɑks ən boʊldɝz tʃɝn ɪts swɪft wɔɾɝz tə fɹɔθ. ən bɪɑn ðə waɪt leɪ ðə fɔɹəst ə ʃædoʊz. fju tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk hæɾ ɛvɝ kɹɔs ðə waɪt, ən fjuɝ stɪl ɹɪtɝn ɪf ðeɪ dɪd. ɪt wɑz dʒɛnɝəli əɡɹid, ðoʊ, ðət ðə fɔɹəst ə ʃædoʊz stʃɹɛtʃt saʊθ fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz əɹ mɔɹ wɪθaʊɾ ə ɹoʊɾ əɹ ə vɪlədʒ, bʌt wɪð plɛnti ʌv wʊlvz ən bɛɹz.

Rand and the others chuckled at the idea. There were three reasons why no one came into the Two Rivers except from the north, by way of Taren Ferry. The Mountains of Mist, in the west, were the first, of course, and the Mire blocked the east just as effectively. To the south was the White River, which got its name from the way rocks and boulders churned its swift waters to froth. And beyond the White lay the Forest of Shadows. Few Two Rivers folk had ever crossed the White, and fewer still returned if they did. It was generally agreed, though, that the Forest of Shadows stretched south for a hundred miles or more without a road or a village, but with plenty of wolves and bears.

"soʊ ðæts ən ɛn tə ɪt fəɹ ʌs," mæt sɛd. hi saʊndəɾ ət list ə lɪɾəl dɪsəpɔɪntɪd.

"So that's an end to it for us," Mat said. He sounded at least a little disappointed.

"nɑt kwaɪt," tæm sɛd. "deɪ æftɝ təmɑɹoʊ wɪl sɛn mɛn tə dɛvən ɹaɪɾ ən wɑtʃ hɪl, ən tɛɹən fɛɹi, tu, tə ɝeɪnʒ fəɹ ə wɑtʃ tə bi kɛpt. ɹaɪɾɝz əlɔŋ ðə waɪɾ ən ðə tɛɹən, boʊθ, ən pətʃɹoʊlz bɪtwin. ɪt ʃəd bi dʌn tədeɪ, bʌɾ oʊnli ðə meɪɝ əɡɹiz wɪð mi. ðə ɹɛs kæn si æskɪŋ ɛniwʌn tə spɛn bɛl taɪn ɔf ɹaɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"Not quite," Tam said. "Day after tomorrow we will send men to Deven Ride and Watch Hill, and Taren Ferry, too, to arrange for a watch to be kept. Riders along the White and the Taren, both, and patrols between. It should be done today, but only the Mayor agrees with me. The rest can't see asking anyone to spend Bel Tine off riding across the Two Rivers."

"bʌɾ aɪ θɔt jə sɛd wi dɪdn əv tə wɝi," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən tæm ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"But I thought you said we didn't have to worry," Perrin said, and Tam shook his head.

"aɪ sɛd ʃəd nɑt, bɔɪ, nɑt dɪd nɑt. aɪv sin mɛn daɪ kəz ðeɪ wɝ ʃʊɹ ðət wʌt ʃəd nɑt hæpən, wəd nɑt. bɪsaɪdz, ðə faɪɾɪŋ wɪl stɝ ʌp ɔl sɔɹts ə pipəl. moʊst wɪl dʒʌs bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn seɪfti, bʌɾ ʌðɝz wɪl bi lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə weɪ tə pɹɑfət fɹəm ðə kənfjuʒən. wɪl ɔfɝ ɛni ʌv ðə fɝst ə hɛlpɪŋ hænd, bʌt wi mʌs bi ɹɛɾi tə sɛn ðə sɛkən taɪp ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ."

"I said should not, boy, not did not. I've seen men die because they were sure that what should not happen, would not. Besides, the fighting will stir up all sorts of people. Most will just be trying to find safety, but others will be looking for a way to profit from the confusion. We'll offer any of the first a helping hand, but we must be ready to send the second type on their way."

əbɹʌpli mæt spoʊk ʌp. "kæn wi bi pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt? aɪ wɑn tə, ɛniweɪ. jə noʊ aɪ kən ɹaɪɾ əz wɛl əz ɛniwʌn ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ."

Abruptly Mat spoke up. "Can we be part of it? I want to, anyway. You know I can ride as well as anyone in the village."

"ju wɑn ə fju wiks ə koʊld, bɔɹɾəm, ən slipɪŋ ɹʌf?" tæm tʃʌkəld. "laɪkli ðæts ɔl ðəɹ wɪl bi tə ɪt. aɪ hoʊp ðæts ɔl. wɝ wɛl aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ ivən fəɹ ɹɛfjudʒiz. bʌt jə kən spik tə mæstɝ ælvɪɹ ɪf jəɹ maɪn ɪz meɪɾ ʌp. ɹænd, ɪts taɪm fəɹ əs tə bi ɡɛɾɪŋ bæk tə ðə fɑɹm."

"You want a few weeks of cold, boredom, and sleeping rough?" Tam chuckled. "Likely that's all there will be to it. I hope that's all. We're well out of the way even for refugees. But you can speak to Master al'Vere if your mind is made up. Rand, it's time for us to be getting back to the farm."

ɹænd blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "aɪ θɔt wi wɝ steɪɪŋ fəɹ wɪntɝnaɪt."

Rand blinked in surprise. "I thought we were staying for Winternight."

"θɪŋz nid siɪŋ tə ət ðə fɑɹm, ən aɪ nid jə wɪð mi."

"Things need seeing to at the farm, and I need you with me."

"ivən soʊ, wi doʊn əv tə liv fəɹ aʊɝz jɛt. ən aɪ wɑnə vɑləntɪɹ fəɹ ðə pətʃɹoʊlz, tu."

"Even so, we don't have to leave for hours yet. And I want to volunteer for the patrols, too."

"wi ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ naʊ," hɪz fɑðɝ ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə toʊn ðət bɹʊk noʊ ɑɹɡjəmənt. ɪn ə sɑftɝ vɔɪs i æɾəd, "wil bi bæk təmɑɹoʊ ɪn plɛnti ʌv taɪm fəɹ jə tə spik tə ðə meɪɝ. ən plɛnti ʌv taɪm fəɹ fɛstəvəl, tu. faɪv mɪnəts, naʊ, ðən mit mi ɪn ðə steɪbəl."

"We are going now," his father replied in a tone that brooked no argument. In a softer voice he added, "We'll be back tomorrow in plenty of time for you to speak to the Mayor. And plenty of time for Festival, too. Five minutes, now, then meet me in the stable."

"ɑɹ jə gɑnə dʒɔɪn ɹænd ən mi ɑn ðə wɑtʃ?" mæt æsk pɛɹɪn əz tæm lɛft. "aɪl bɛt ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs ɛvɝ hæpən ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz bɪfɔɹ. waɪ, ɪf wi ɡɛɾ ʌp tə ðə tɛɹən, wi maɪɾ ivən si soʊlʒɝz, əɹ u noʊz wʌt. ivən tɪŋkɝz."

"Are you going to join Rand and me on the watch?" Mat asked Perrin as Tam left. "I'll bet there's nothing like this ever happened in the Two Rivers before. Why, if we get up to the Taren, we might even see soldiers, or who knows what. Even Tinkers."

"aɪ ɪkspɛkt aɪ wɪl," pɛɹɪn sɛd sloʊli, "ɪf mæstɝ luhən dʌznt nid mi, ðəɾ ɪz."

"I expect I will," Perrin said slowly, "if Master Luhhan doesn't need me, that is."

"ðə wɔɹ ɪz ɪn ɡildən," ɹænd snæpt. wɪð ən ɛfɝɾ i loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "ðə wɔɹ ɪz ɪn ɡildən, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ ðə laɪt noʊz wɛɹ, bʌt nʌn ʌv ɪts hɪɹ. ðə mæn ɪn ðə blæk kloʊk ɪz, əɹ əv jə fɝɡɑɾən ɪm ɔlɹɛɾi?" ði ʌðɝz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɪmbɛɹəs lʊks.

"The war is in Ghealdan," Rand snapped. With an effort he lowered his voice. "The war is in Ghealdan, and the Aes Sedai are the Light knows where, but none of it is here. The man in the black cloak is, or have you forgotten him already?" The others exchanged embarrassed looks.

"sɑɹi, ɹænd," mæt mʌɾɝd. "bʌɾ ə tʃæns tə də sʌmθɪŋ bɪsaɪdz mɪlk maɪ dɑz kaʊz dʌzn kʌm əlɔŋ vɛɹi ɔfən." hi stʃɹeɪɾənd ʌndɝ ðɛɹ stɑɹɾəld stɛɹz. "wɛl, aɪ də mɪlk ðɛm, ən ɛvɹi deɪ, tu."

"Sorry, Rand," Mat muttered. "But a chance to do something besides milk my da's cows doesn't come along very often." He straightened under their startled stares. "Well, I do milk them, and every day, too."

"ðə blæk ɹaɪɾɝ," ɹænd ɹimaɪndəd ðɛm. "wʌɾ ɪf i hɝts sʌmbɑɾi?"

"The black rider," Rand reminded them. "What if he hurts somebody?"

"meɪbi hiz ə ɹɛfjʊdʒi fɹəm ðə wɔɹ," pɛɹɪn sɛd daʊtfəli.

"Maybe he's a refugee from the war," Perrin said doubtfully.

"wʌtɛvɝ i ɪz," mæt sɛd, "ðə wɑtʃ wɪl faɪn hɪm."

"Whatever he is," Mat said, "the watch will find him."

"meɪbi," ɹænd sɛd, "bʌɾ i simz tə dɪsəpɪɹ wən i wɑns tə. ɪt maɪt bi bɛɾɝ ɪf ðeɪ nu tə lʊk fəɹ hɪm."

"Maybe," Rand said, "but he seems to disappear when he wants to. It might be better if they knew to look for him."

"wil tɛl mæstɝ ælvɪɹ wən wi vɑləntɪɹ fəɹ ðə pətʃɹoʊlz," mæt sɛd, "hil tɛl ðə kaʊnsəl, ən ðəl tɛl ðə wɑtʃ."

"We'll tell Master al'Vere when we volunteer for the patrols," Mat said, "he'll tell the Council, and they'll tell the watch."

"ðə kaʊnsəl!" pɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "wid bi lʌki ɪf ðə meɪɝ dɪdn læf aʊt laʊd. mæstɝ luhən ən ɹændz fɑðɝ ɔlɹɛɾi θɪŋk ðə tu ʌv əs ɑɹ dʒʌmpɪŋ ət ʃædoʊz."

"The Council!" Perrin said incredulously. "We'd be lucky if the Mayor didn't laugh out loud. Master Luhhan and Rand's father already think the two of us are jumping at shadows."

ɹænd saɪd. "ɪf wɝ gɑnə də ɪt, wi maɪɾ əz wɛl də ɪt naʊ. hi woʊn læf ɛni laʊɾɝ tədeɪ ðən hɪl təmɑɹoʊ."

Rand sighed. "If we're going to do it, we might as well do it now. He won't laugh any louder today than he will tomorrow."

"meɪbi," pɛɹɪn sɛd wɪð ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlæns ət mæt, "wi ʃəd tʃɹaɪ faɪndɪŋ səm ʌðɝz huv sin hɪm. wɪl si dʒʌst əbaʊɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ tənaɪt." mæts skaʊl dipənd, bʌɾ i stɪl dɪd nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ. ɔl ə ðɛm ʌndɝstʊd ðət pɛɹɪn mɛn ðeɪ ʃəd faɪnd wɪtnəsəz u wɝ mɔɹ ɹɪlaɪəbəl ðən mæt. "hi woʊn læf ɛni laʊɾɝ təmɑɹoʊ," pɛɹɪn æɾəd wən ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "æn aɪd dʒʌst əz sun əv sʌmbɑɾi ɛls wɪð əs wən wi ɡoʊ tə hɪm. hæf ðə vɪlədʒ wəd sut mi faɪn."

"Maybe," Perrin said with a sidelong glance at Mat, "we should try finding some others who've seen him. We'll see just about everybody in the village tonight." Mat's scowl deepened, but he still did not say anything. All of them understood that Perrin meant they should find witnesses who were more reliable than Mat. "He won't laugh any louder tomorrow," Perrin added when Rand hesitated. "And I'd just as soon have somebody else with us when we go to him. Half the village would suit me fine."

ɹænd nɑɾəd sloʊli. hi kəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hɪɹ mæstɝ ælvɪɹ læfɪŋ. mɔɹ wɪtnəsəz sɝɾənli kəd nɑt hɝt. ən ɪf θɹi ʌv əm hæd sin ðə fɛloʊ, ʌðɝz hæd tə hæv, tu. ðeɪ mʌs hæv. "təmɑɹoʊ, ðɛn. jə tu faɪn huɛvɝ jə kən tənaɪt, ən təmɑɹoʊ wi ɡoʊ tə ðə meɪɝ. æftɝ ðæt. . . ." ðeɪ lʊkt əɾ ɪm saɪlənli, noʊ wʌn ɹeɪzɪŋ ðə kwɛstʃən ʌv wʌt hæpən ɪf ðeɪ kəd nɑt faɪn ɛniwʌn ɛls u hæd sin ðə blæk-kloʊk mæn. ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz klɪɹ ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz, ðoʊ, ən i hæd noʊ ænsɝ. hi saɪd hɛvəli. "aɪd bɛɾɝ ɡoʊ, naʊ. maɪ fɑðɝ wɪl bi wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf aɪ fɛl ɪndə ə hoʊl."

Rand nodded slowly. He could already hear Master al'Vere laughing. More witnesses certainly could not hurt. And if three of them had seen the fellow, others had to have, too. They must have. "Tomorrow, then. You two find whoever you can tonight, and tomorrow we go to the Mayor. After that. . . ." They looked at him silently, no one raising the question of what happened if they could not find anyone else who had seen the black-cloaked man. The question was clear in their eyes, though, and he had no answer. He sighed heavily. "I'd better go, now. My father will be wondering if I fell into a hole."

fɑloʊd baɪ ðɛɹ ɡʊdbaɪz, hi tʃɹɑɾəd ɝaʊn tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd wɛɹ ðə haɪ-wil kɑɹt stʊd pɹɑpt ɑn ɪts ʃæfs.

Followed by their goodbyes, he trotted around to the stableyard where the high-wheeled cart stood propped on its shafts.

ðə steɪbəl wɑz ə lɔŋ, nɛɹoʊ bɪldɪŋ, tɑp baɪ ə haɪ-pikt, θætʃt ɹuf. stɔlz, ðɛɹ flɔɹz kʌvɝd wɪð stʃɹɔ, fɪl boʊθ saɪdz ə ðə dɪm ɪntɪɹiɝ, lɪɾ oʊnli baɪ ði oʊpən dʌbəl dɔɹz əɾ iðɝ ɛnd. ðə pɛdlɝz tim mʌntʃt ðɛɹ oʊts ɪn eɪt stɔlz, ən mæstɝ ælvɪɹz mæsɪv dɝənz, ðə tim i haɪɝɾ aʊt wən fɑɹmɝz hæd hɔlɪŋ bɪɑn ði əbɪləɾiz ə ðɛɹ oʊn hɔɹsəz, fɪl sɪks mɔɹ, bʌɾ oʊnli θɹi ʌðɝz wɝ ɑkjəpaɪd. ɹænd θɔɾ i kəd mætʃ ʌp hɔɹs ən ɹaɪɾɝ wɪð noʊ tʃɹʌbəl. ðə tɔl, dip-tʃɛstəd blæk stæljən ðət swʌŋ ʌp ɪz hɛd fɪɹsli hæd tə bi lænz. ðə slik waɪt mɛɹ wɪð ən ɑɹtʃt nɛk, hɝ kwɪk stɛps əz ɡɹeɪsfəl əz ə ɡɝl dænsɪŋ, ivən ɪn ðə stɔl, kəɾ oʊnli bɪlɔŋ tə mɔɪɹeɪn. ən ðə θɝɾ ʌnfəmɪljɝ hɔɹs, ə ɹeɪnʒi, slæb-saɪɾəd ɡɛldɪŋ ʌv ə dʌsti bɹaʊn, fɪt tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn pɝfəkli.

The stable was a long, narrow building, topped by a high-peaked, thatched roof. Stalls, their floors covered with straw, filled both sides of the dim interior, lit only by the open double doors at either end. The peddler's team munched their oats in eight stalls, and Master al'Vere's massive Dhurrans, the team he hired out when farmers had hauling beyond the abilities of their own horses, filled six more, but only three others were occupied. Rand thought he could match up horse and rider with no trouble. The tall, deep-chested black stallion that swung up his head fiercely had to be Lan's. The sleek white mare with an arched neck, her quick steps as graceful as a girl dancing, even in the stall, could only belong to Moiraine. And the third unfamiliar horse, a rangy, slab-sided gelding of a dusty brown, fit Thom Merrilin perfectly.

tæm stʊɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪɹ ə ðə steɪbəl, hoʊldɪŋ bɛlə baɪ ə lɛd ɹoʊp ən spikɪŋ kwaɪətli tə hu ən tæd. bɪfɔɹ ɹænd hæd teɪkən tu stɛps ɪndə ðə steɪbəl ɪz fɑðɝ nɑɾəd tə ðə steɪbəlmən ən bɹɔt bɛlə aʊt, wɝdləsli ɡæðɝɪŋ ʌp ɹænd əz i wɛnt.

Tam stood in the rear of the stable, holding Bela by a lead rope and speaking quietly to Hu and Tad. Before Rand had taken two steps into the stable his father nodded to the stablemen and brought Bela out, wordlessly gathering up Rand as he went.

ðeɪ hɑɹnəs ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ ɪn saɪləns. tæm əpɪɹd soʊ dip ɪn θɔt ðət ɹænd hɛld ɪz tʌŋ. hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns ɪz fɑðɝ əbaʊt ðə blæk-kloʊkt ɹaɪɾɝ, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə meɪɝ. təmɑɹoʊ wəɾ əv tə bi taɪm ɪnʌf, wən mæt ən ðə ɹɛs hæd faʊn ʌðɝz u hæd sin ðə mæn. ɪf ðeɪ faʊn ʌðɝz.

They harnessed the shaggy mare in silence. Tam appeared so deep in thought that Rand held his tongue. He did not really look forward to trying to convince his father about the black-cloaked rider, much less the Mayor. Tomorrow would have to be time enough, when Mat and the rest had found others who had seen the man. If they found others.

əz ðə kɑɹt lɝtʃt ɪndə moʊʃən, ɹænd tʊk ɪz baʊ ən kwɪvɝ fɹəm ðə bæk, ɔkwɝdli bɛltɪŋ ðə kwɪvɝ əɾ ɪz weɪst əz i hæf tʃɹɑɾəd əlɔŋsaɪd. wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə læst ɹoʊ ʌv haʊsəz ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ, hi nɑkt ən æɹoʊ, kæɹiɪŋ ɪt hæf ɹeɪzd ən pɑɹtli dʒɹɔn. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə si ɪksɛp moʊsli lifləs tʃɹiz, bʌɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz taɪɾənd. ðə blæk ɹaɪɾɝ kəd bi ɑn əm bɪfɔɹ iðɝ ə ðɛm nu ɪt. ðəɹ maɪt nɑt bi taɪm tə dʒɹɔ ðə baʊ ɪf i wɑz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæfweɪ tə ɪt.

As the cart lurched into motion, Rand took his bow and quiver from the back, awkwardly belting the quiver at his waist as he half trotted alongside. When they reached the last row of houses in the village, he nocked an arrow, carrying it half raised and partly drawn. There was nothing to see except mostly leafless trees, but his shoulders tightened. The black rider could be on them before either of them knew it. There might not be time to draw the bow if he was not already halfway to it.

hi nu hi kəd nɑt kip ʌp ðə tɛnʃən ɑn ðə bɑstʃɹɪŋ fəɹ lɔŋ. hi hæd meɪd ðə baʊ hɪmsɛlf, ən tæm wɑz wʌn ə ðə fju ʌðɝz ɪn ðə dɪstʃɹɪkt u kəɾ ivən dʒɹɔ ɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə tʃik. hi kæst ɝaʊn fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə teɪk ɪz maɪn ɔf θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə dɑɹk ɹaɪɾɝ. sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə fɔɹəst, ðɛɹ kloʊks flæpɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd, ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi.

He knew he could not keep up the tension on the bowstring for long. He had made the bow himself, and Tam was one of the few others in the district who could even draw it all the way to the cheek. He cast around for something to take his mind off thinking about the dark rider. Surrounded by the forest, their cloaks flapping in the wind, it was not easy.

"fɑðɝ," hi sɛd faɪnəli, "aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd waɪ ðə kaʊnsəl hæd tə kwɛstʃən pdən feɪn." wɪð ən ɛfɝɾ i tʊk ɪz aɪz ɔf ðə wʊdz ən lʊkt əkɹɔs bɛlə ət tæm. "ɪt simz tə mi, ðə dɪsɪʒən jə ɹitʃt cʊɾə bɪn meɪd ɹaɪɾ ɑn ðə spɑt. ðə meɪɝ fɹaɪɾənd ɛvɹibɑɾi hæf aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ wɪts, tɔkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən hɪɹ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"Father," he said finally, "I don't understand why the Council had to question Padan Fain." With an effort he took his eyes off the woods and looked across Bela at Tam. "It seems to me, the decision you reached could have been made right on the spot. The Mayor frightened everybody half out of their wits, talking about Aes Sedai and the false Dragon here in the Two Rivers."

"pipəl ɑɹ fʌni, ɹænd. ðə bɛst ə ðɛm ɑɹ. teɪk hɹəl luhən. mæstɝ luhən ɪz ə stʃɹɔŋ mæn, ən ə bɹeɪv wʌn, bʌɾ i kæn bɛɹ tə si bʊtʃɝɪŋ dʌn. tɝnz peɪl əz ə ʃit."

"People are funny, Rand. The best of them are. Take Haral Luhhan. Master Luhhan is a strong man, and a brave one, but he can't bear to see butchering done. Turns pale as a sheet."

"wʌt dʌz ðəɾ əv tə də wɪð ɛniθɪŋ? ɛvɹibɑɾi noʊz mæstɝ luhən kæn stæn ðə saɪɾ ə blʌd, ən noʊbɑdi bʌt ðə kɑplɪnz ən ðə kɔŋɡɝz θɪŋks ɛniθɪŋ ʌv ɪt."

"What does that have to do with anything? Everybody knows Master Luhhan can't stand the sight of blood, and nobody but the Coplins and the Congars thinks anything of it."

"dʒʌs ðɪs, læd. pipəl doʊn ɔlweɪz θɪŋk əɹ bɪheɪv ðə weɪ jə maɪt bɪliv ðeɪ wʊd. ðoʊz foʊk bæk ðəɹ . . . lɛt ðə heɪl bit ðɛɹ kɹɑps ɪndə ðə mʌd, ən ðə wɪn teɪk ɔf ɛvɹi ɹuf ɪn ðə dɪstʃɹɪkt, ən ðə wʊlvz kɪl hæf ðɛɹ laɪvstɑk, ən ðəl ɹoʊl ʌp ðɛɹ slivz ən stɑɹt fɹəm skɹætʃ. ðəl ɡɹʌmbəl, bʌt ðeɪ woʊnt weɪst ɛni taɪm wɪð ɪt. bʌt jə ɡɪv əm dʒʌs ðə θɔɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɪn ɡildən, ən sun ɪnʌf ðəl stɑɹt θɪŋkɪŋ ðət ɡildən ɪz nɑt ðət fɑɹ ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə fɔɹəst ə ʃædoʊz, ən ə stʃɹeɪt laɪn fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn tə ɡildən wʊdn pæs ðət mʌtʃ tə ði ist ʌv ʌs. əz ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wʊdn teɪk ðə ɹoʊd θɹu keɪɛmlɪn ən luɡɹɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə tʃɹævlɪŋ kɹɔs-kʌntʃɹi! baɪ təmɑɹoʊ mɔɹnɪŋ hæf ðə vɪlədʒ wʊɾə bɪn ʃʊɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ wɔɹ wɑz əbaʊt tə dɪsɛn ɑn ʌs. ɪt wəd teɪk wiks tə əndu. ə faɪn bɛl taɪn ðət wəd meɪk. soʊ bɹæn ɡeɪv əm ði aɪdiə bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəd ɡɛɾ ɪt fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz.

"Just this, lad. People don't always think or behave the way you might believe they would. Those folk back there . . . let the hail beat their crops into the mud, and the wind take off every roof in the district, and the wolves kill half their livestock, and they'll roll up their sleeves and start from scratch. They'll grumble, but they won't waste any time with it. But you give them just the thought of Aes Sedai and a false Dragon in Ghealdan, and soon enough they'll start thinking that Ghealdan is not that far the other side of the Forest of Shadows, and a straight line from Tar Valon to Ghealdan wouldn't pass that much to the east of us. As if the Aes Sedai wouldn't take the road through Caemlyn and Lugard instead of traveling cross-country! By tomorrow morning half the village would have been sure the entire war was about to descend on us. It would take weeks to undo. A fine Bel Tine that would make. So Bran gave them the idea before they could get it for themselves.

"ðeɪv sin ðə kaʊnsəl teɪk ðə pɹɑbləm ʌndɝ kənsɪɾɝeɪʃən, ən baɪ naʊ ðəl bi hɪɹɪŋ wʌt wi dɪsaɪɾɪd. ðeɪ tʃoʊz əs fəɹ ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl kəz ðeɪ tʃɹʌst wi kən ɹizən θɪŋz aʊɾ ɪn ðə bɛst weɪ fəɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi. ðeɪ tʃɹʌst əɹ əpɪnjənz. ivən sɛnz, wɪtʃ dʌzn seɪ mʌtʃ fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs, aɪ səpoʊz. əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt, ðəl hɪɹ ðəɹ ɪzən ɛniθɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊt, ən ðəl bɪliv ɪt. ɪts nɑt ðət ðeɪ kʊdn ɹitʃ ðə seɪm kənkluʒən, əɹ wəd nɑt, ɪvɛntʃəwəli, bʌt ðɪs weɪ wi woʊn əv fɛstəvəl ɹuənd, ən noʊbɑdi hæz tə spɛnd wiks wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ ðəɾ ɪzən laɪkli tə hæpən. ɪf ɪt dʌz, əɡɛnst ɔl ɑdz . . . wɛl, ðə pətʃɹoʊlz wɪl ɡɪv əs ɪnʌf wɔɹnɪŋ tə də wʌt wi kæn. aɪ tʃɹuli doʊn θɪŋk ɪɾəl kʌm tə ðæt, ðoʊ."

"They've seen the Council take the problem under consideration, and by now they'll be hearing what we decided. They chose us for the Village Council because they trust we can reason things out in the best way for everybody. They trust our opinions. Even Cenn's, which doesn't say much for the rest of us, I suppose. At any rate, they will hear there isn't anything to worry about, and they'll believe it. It is not that they couldn't reach the same conclusion, or would not, eventually, but this way we won't have Festival ruined, and nobody has to spend weeks worrying about something that isn't likely to happen. If it does, against all odds . . . well, the patrols will give us enough warning to do what we can. I truly don't think it will come to that, though."

ɹænd pʌft aʊɾ ɪz tʃiks. əpɛɹənli, biɪŋ ɑn ðə kaʊnsəl wɑz mɔɹ kɑmpləkeɪɾəd ðən i hæd bɪlivd. ðə kɑɹt ɹʌmbəld ɑn əlɔŋ ðə kwɔɹi ɹoʊd.

Rand puffed out his cheeks. Apparently, being on the Council was more complicated than he had believed. The cart rumbled on along the Quarry Road.

"dɪɾ ɛniwʌn bɪsaɪdz pɛɹɪn si ðɪs stʃɹeɪnʒ ɹaɪɾɝ?" tæm æskt.

"Did anyone besides Perrin see this strange rider?" Tam asked.

"mæt dɪd, bʌt - " ɹænd blɪŋkt, ðən stɛɹɾ əkɹɔs bɛləz bæk əɾ ɪz fɑðɝ. "ju bɪliv mi? aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ bæk. aɪ hæv tə tɛl ðɛm." tæmz ʃaʊt hɔltəɾ ɪm əz i tɝn tə ɹʌn bæk tə ðə vɪlədʒ.

"Mat did, but - " Rand blinked, then stared across Bela's back at his father. "You believe me? I have to go back. I have to tell them." Tam's shout halted him as he turned to run back to the village.

"hoʊld, læd, hoʊld! dʒju θɪŋk aɪ weɪɾəd ðɪs lɔŋ tə spik fəɹ noʊ ɹizən?"

"Hold, lad, hold! Do you think I waited this long to speak for no reason?"

ɹɪlʌktənli ɹænd kɛpt ɑn bɪsaɪd ðə kɑɹt, stɪl kɹikɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪhaɪn peɪʃən bɛlə. "wʌt meɪd jə tʃeɪnʒ jəɹ maɪnd? waɪ kæn aɪ tɛl ði ʌðɝz?"

Reluctantly Rand kept on beside the cart, still creaking along behind patient Bela. "What made you change your mind? Why can't I tell the others?"

"ðeɪl noʊ sun ɪnʌf. ət list, pɛɹɪn wɪl. mæt, ɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ ʌv. wɝd mʌs bi ɡɑɾən tə ðə fɑɹmz əz bɛst ɪt kæn, bʌɾ ɪn ənʌðɝ aʊɝ ðəɹ woʊn bi ɛniwʌn ɪn ɛmənz fild əbʌv sɪkstin, ðoʊz u kən bi ɹispɑnsəbəl əbaʊɾ ɪt, ət list, hu dʌznt noʊ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ɪz skʌlkɪŋ ɝaʊn ən laɪkli nɑt ðə sɔɹt jə wəɾ ɪnvaɪt tə fɛstəvəl. ðə wɪntɝ əz bɪn bæɾ ɪnʌf wɪθaʊt ðɪs tə skɛɹ ðə jʌŋ wʌnz."

"They'll know soon enough. At least, Perrin will. Mat, I'm not sure of. Word must be gotten to the farms as best it can, but in another hour there won't be anyone in Emond's Field above sixteen, those who can be responsible about it, at least, who doesn't know a stranger is skulking around and likely not the sort you would invite to Festival. The winter has been bad enough without this to scare the young ones."

"fɛstəvəl?" ɹænd sɛd. "ɪf jə hæd sin ɪm jə wʊdnt wɑn ɪm kloʊsɝ ðən tɛn maɪlz. ə hʌnʒɹəd, meɪbi."

"Festival?" Rand said. "If you had seen him you wouldn't want him closer than ten miles. A hundred, maybe."

"pɝhæps soʊ," tæm sɛd plɑtʃədli. "hi kəd bi dʒʌst ə ɹɛfjʊdʒi fɹəm ðə tʃɹʌbəlz ɪn ɡildən, əɹ mɔɹ laɪkli ə θif u θɪŋks ðə pɪkɪŋz wɪl bi iziɝ hɪɹ ðən ɪn bɛɹlən əɹ tɛɹən fɛɹi. ivən soʊ, noʊ wʌn ɝaʊn hɪɹ əz soʊ mʌtʃ ðeɪ kən əfɔɹd tə hæv ɪt stoʊlən. ɪf ðə mæn ɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪskeɪp ðə wɔɹ . . . wɛl, ðæts stɪl noʊ ɪkskjus fəɹ skɛɹɪŋ pipəl. wʌns ðə wɑtʃ ɪz maʊntəd, ɪt ʃəɾ iðɝ faɪn ɪm əɹ fɹaɪɾən ɪm ɔf."

"Perhaps so," Tam said placidly. "He could be just a refugee from the troubles in Ghealdan, or more likely a thief who thinks the pickings will be easier here than in Baerlon or Taren Ferry. Even so, no one around here has so much they can afford to have it stolen. If the man is trying to escape the war . . . well, that's still no excuse for scaring people. Once the watch is mounted, it should either find him or frighten him off."

"aɪ hoʊp ɪt fɹaɪɾənz ɪm ɔf. bʌt waɪ dʒju bɪliv mi naʊ, wən jə dɪdn ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ?"

"I hope it frightens him off. But why do you believe me now, when you didn't this morning?"

"aɪ hæd tə bɪliv maɪ oʊn aɪz ðɛn, læd, ən aɪ sɔ nʌθɪŋ." tæm ʃʊk ɪz ɡɹɪzəl hɛd. "oʊnli jʌŋ mɛn si ðɪs fɛloʊ, ɪt simz. wən hɹəl luhən mɛnʃən pɛɹɪn dʒʌmpɪŋ ʃædoʊz, ðoʊ, ɪɾ ɔl keɪm aʊt. dʒɑn θeɪnz oʊldəst sʌn sɔ hɪm, tu, ən soʊ dɪd səmɛl kɹeɪz bɔɪ, bænʒɹi. wɛl, wən fɔɹ ə jə seɪ juv sin ə θɪŋ - ən sɑləd lædz, ɔl - wi stɑɹt θɪŋkɪŋ meɪbi ɪts ðəɹ wɛðɝ wi kən si ɪɾ əɹ nɑt. ɔl ɪksɛp sɛn, ʌv kɔɹs. ɛniweɪ, ðæts waɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ hoʊm. wɪð boʊθ ʌv əs əweɪ, ðɪs stʃɹeɪnʒɝ kəd bi ʌp tə ɛni kaɪndə mɪstʃəf ðɛɹ. ɪf nɑt fəɹ fɛstəvəl, aɪ wʊdn kʌm bæk təmɑɹoʊ, iðɝ. bʌt wi kæn meɪk aʊɝsɛlvz pɹɪznɝz ɪn əɹ oʊn hoʊmz dʒʌs kəz ðɪs fɛloʊ ɪz lɝkɪŋ əbaʊt."

"I had to believe my own eyes then, lad, and I saw nothing." Tam shook his grizzled head. "Only young men see this fellow, it seems. When Haral Luhhan mentioned Perrin jumping shadows, though, it all came out. Jon Thane's oldest son saw him, too, and so did Samel Crawe's boy, Bandry. Well, when four of you say you've seen a thing - and solid lads, all - we start thinking maybe it's there whether we can see it or not. All except Cenn, of course. Anyway, that's why we're going home. With both of us away, this stranger could be up to any kind of mischief there. If not for Festival, I wouldn't come back tomorrow, either. But we can't make ourselves prisoners in our own homes just because this fellow is lurking about."

"aɪ dɪdnt noʊ əbaʊt bæn əɹ lɛm," ɹænd sɛd. "ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə meɪɝ təmɑɹoʊ, bʌt wi wɝ wɝiɾ i wʊdn bɪliv ʌs, iðɝ."

"I didn't know about Ban or Lem," Rand said. "The rest of us were going to the Mayor tomorrow, but we were worried he wouldn't believe us, either."

"ɡɹeɪ hɛɹz doʊn min əɹ bɹeɪnz əv kɝɾəld," tæm sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "soʊ jə kip ə ʃɑɹp aɪ. meɪbi əl kætʃ saɪɾ ə hɪm, tu, ɪf i ʃoʊz ʌp əɡɛn."

"Gray hairs don't mean our brains have curdled," Tam said dryly. "So you keep a sharp eye. Maybe I'll catch sight of him, too, if he shows up again."

ɹænd sɛɾəld daʊn tə də dʒʌs ðæt. hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪz stɛp fɛlt laɪɾɝ. ðə nɑts wɝ ɡɔn fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. hi wɑz stɪl skɛɹd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ bæɾ əz ɪt hæd bɪn. tæm ən i wɝ dʒʌst əz əloʊn ɑn ðə kwɔɹi ɹoʊɾ əz ðeɪ hæd bɪn ðət mɔɹnɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪn səm weɪ hi fɛlt əz ɪf ði ɪntaɪɝ vɪlədʒ wɝ wɪð ðɛm. ðəɾ ʌðɝz nu ən bɪliv meɪɾ ɔl ðə dɪfɝəns. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ðə blæk-kloʊk hɔɹsmən kəd də ðət ðə pipəl ʌv ɛmənz fil kəd nɑt hændəl təɡɛðɝ.

Rand settled down to do just that. He was surprised to realize that his step felt lighter. The knots were gone from his shoulders. He was still scared, but it was not so bad as it had been. Tam and he were just as alone on the Quarry Road as they had been that morning, but in some way he felt as if the entire village were with them. That others knew and believed made all the difference. There was nothing the black-cloaked horseman could do that the people of Emond's Field could not handle together.


tʃæptɝ faɪv


CHAPTER 5

wɪntɝnaɪt


Winternight

ðə sʌn stʊd hæfweɪ daʊn fɹəm ɪts nundeɪ haɪ baɪ ðə taɪm ðə kɑɹt ɹitʃt ðə fɑɹmhaʊs. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə bɪɡ haʊs, nɑt nɪɹli soʊ lɑɹdʒ əz səm ə ðə spɹɔlɪŋ fɑɹmhaʊsəz tə ði ist, dwɛlɪŋz ðət hæd ɡɹoʊn oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz tə hoʊld ɪntaɪɝ fæmliz. ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ðəɾ ɔfən ɪnkluɾəd θɹi əɹ fɔɹ dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz ʌndɝ wʌn ɹuf, ɪnkluɾɪŋ æns, ʌŋkəlz, kʌzənz, ən nɛfjuz. tæm ən ɹænd wɝ kənsɪɾɝd aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi əz mʌtʃ fəɹ biɪŋ tu mɛn lɪvɪŋ əloʊn əz fəɹ fɑɹmɪŋ ɪn ðə wɛstwʊd.

The sun stood halfway down from its noonday high by the time the cart reached the farmhouse. It was not a big house, not nearly so large as some of the sprawling farmhouses to the east, dwellings that had grown over the years to hold entire families. In the Two Rivers that often included three or four generations under one roof, including aunts, uncles, cousins, and nephews. Tam and Rand were considered out of the ordinary as much for being two men living alone as for farming in the Westwood.

hɪɹ moʊst ə ðə ɹumz wɝ ɑn wʌn flɔɹ, ə nit ɹɛktæŋɡəl wɪð noʊ wɪŋz əɹ ədɪʃənz. tu bɛdʒɹumz ən ən æɾɪk stɔɹɹum fɪɾəd ʌp ʌndɝ ðə stipli sləp θætʃ. ɪf ðə waɪtwɑʃ wɑz ɔl bʌt ɡɔn fɹəm ðə staʊt wʊɾən wɔlz æftɝ ðə wɪntɝ stɔɹmz, ðə haʊs wɑz stɪl ɪn ə taɪɾi steɪɾ ə ɹɪpɛɹ, ðə θætʃ taɪtli mɛndɪɾ ən ðə dɔɹz ən ʃʌɾɝz wɛl-hʌŋ ən snʌɡ-fɪɾɪŋ.

Here most of the rooms were on one floor, a neat rectangle with no wings or additions. Two bedrooms and an attic storeroom fitted up under the steeply sloped thatch. If the whitewash was all but gone from the stout wooden walls after the winter storms, the house was still in a tidy state of repair, the thatch tightly mended and the doors and shutters well-hung and snug-fitting.

haʊs, bɑɹn, ən stoʊn ʃip pɛn fɔɹm ðə pɔɪns ʌv ə tʃɹaɪæŋɡəl ɝaʊn ðə fɑɹmjɑɹd, wɛɹ ə fju tʃɪkənz hæd vɛntʃɝɾ aʊt tə skɹætʃ ət ðə koʊld ɡɹaʊnd. ən oʊpən ʃɪɹɪŋ ʃɛɾ ən ə stoʊn dɪpɪŋ tʃɹɔf stʊd nɛks tə ðə ʃip pɛn. hɑɹd baɪ ðə filz bɪtwin ðə fɑɹmjɑɹɾ ən ðə tʃɹiz lum ðə tɔl koʊn ʌv ə taɪt-wɔl kjʊɹɪŋ ʃɛd. fju fɑɹmɝz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz kəd meɪk də wɪθaʊt boʊθ wʊl ən təbæk tə sɛl wən ðə mɝtʃəns keɪm.

House, barn, and stone sheep pen formed the points of a triangle around the farmyard, where a few chickens had ventured out to scratch at the cold ground. An open shearing shed and a stone dipping trough stood next to the sheep pen. Hard by the fields between the farmyard and the trees loomed the tall cone of a tight-walled curing shed. Few farmers in the Two Rivers could make do without both wool and tabac to sell when the merchants came.

wən ɹænd tʊk ə lʊk ɪn ðə stoʊn pɛn, ðə hɛvi-hɔɹn hɝd ɹæm lʊk bæk ət hɪm, bʌt moʊst ə ðə blæk-feɪs flɑk ɹɪmeɪn plɑtʃədli wɛɹ ðeɪ leɪ, əɹ stʊd wɪð ðɛɹ hɛdz ɪn ðə fid tʃɹɔf. ðɛɹ koʊts wɝ θɪk ən kɝli, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl tu koʊl fəɹ ʃɪɹɪŋ.

When Rand took a look in the stone pen, the heavy-horned herd ram looked back at him, but most of the black-faced flock remained placidly where they lay, or stood with their heads in the feed trough. Their coats were thick and curly, but it was still too cold for shearing.

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðə blæk-kloʊk mæn keɪm hɪɹ," ɹænd kɔl tə hɪz fɑðɝ, hu wɑz wɔkɪŋ sloʊli ɝaʊn ðə fɑɹmhaʊs, spɪɹ hɛld ət ðə ɹɛɾi, ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪntɛnli. "ðə ʃip wʊdn bi soʊ sɛɾəld ɪf ðət wʌn hæd bɪn ɝaʊnd."

"I don't think the black-cloaked man came here," Rand called to his father, who was walking slowly around the farmhouse, spear held at the ready, examining the ground intently. "The sheep wouldn't be so settled if that one had been around."

tæm nɑɾəd bʌt dɪd nɑt stɑp. wən i hæd meɪɾ ə kəmplit sɝkəɾ ə ðə haʊs, hi dɪd ðə seɪm ɝaʊn ðə bɑɹn ən ðə ʃip pɛn, stɪl stʌɾiɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hi ivən tʃɛk ðə smoʊkhaʊs ən ðə kjʊɹɪŋ ʃɛd. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə bʌkəɾ ʌv wɔɾɝ fɹəm ðə wɛl, hi fɪld ə kʌp hænd, snɪf ðə wɔɾɝ, ən dʒɪnʒɝli tʌtʃt ɪt wɪð ðə tɪp ə hɪz tʌŋ. əbɹʌpli hi bɑɹkt ə læf, ðən dʒɹæŋk ɪt daʊn ɪn ə kwɪk ɡʌlp.

Tam nodded but did not stop. When he had made a complete circuit of the house, he did the same around the barn and the sheep pen, still studying the ground. He even checked the smokehouse and the curing shed. Drawing a bucket of water from the well, he filled a cupped hand, sniffed the water, and gingerly touched it with the tip of his tongue. Abruptly he barked a laugh, then drank it down in a quick gulp.

"aɪ səpoʊz i dɪdnt," hi toʊld ɹænd, waɪpɪŋ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz koʊt fɹʌnt. "ɔl ðɪs əbaʊt mɛn ən hɔɹsəz aɪ kæn si əɹ hɪɹ dʒʌs meɪks mi lʊk kɹɔsweɪz əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ." hi ɛmptid ðə wɛl wɔɾɝ ɪndə ənʌðɝ bʌkəɾ ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə haʊs, ðə bʌkəɾ ɪn wʌn hæn ən ɪz spɪɹ ɪn ði ʌðɝ. "aɪl stɑɹt səm stu fəɹ sʌpɝ. ən əz lɔŋ əz wɝ hɪɹ, wi maɪɾ əz wɛl ɡɛt kɑɾ ʌp ɑn ə fju tʃɔɹz."

"I suppose he didn't," he told Rand, wiping his hand on his coat front. "All this about men and horses I can't see or hear just makes me look crossways at everything." He emptied the well water into another bucket and started for the house, the bucket in one hand and his spear in the other. "I'll start some stew for supper. And as long as we're here, we might as well get caught up on a few chores."

ɹænd ɡɹɪməst, ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ wɪntɝnaɪɾ ɪn ɛmənz fild. bʌt tæm wɑz ɹaɪt. ɝaʊn ə fɑɹm ðə wɝk nɛvɝ ɹɪli ɡɑt dʌn; əz sun əz wʌn θɪŋ wɑz fɪnɪʃt tu mɔɹ ɔlweɪz niɾəd duɪŋ. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əbaʊɾ ɪt, bʌt kɛpt ɪz baʊ ən kwɪvɝ kloʊs ət hænd. ɪf ðə dɑɹk ɹaɪɾɝ dɪɾ əpɪɹ, hi hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə feɪsɪŋ ɪm wɪð nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ə hoʊ.

Rand grimaced, regretting Winternight in Emond's Field. But Tam was right. Around a farm the work never really got done; as soon as one thing was finished two more always needed doing. He hesitated about it, but kept his bow and quiver close at hand. If the dark rider did appear, he had no intention of facing him with nothing but a hoe.

fɝst wɑz stɑbəlɪŋ bɛlə. wʌns i hæɾ ənhɑɹnəst əɹ ən pʊɾ əɹ ɪndə ə stɔl ɪn ðə bɑɹn nɛks tə ðɛɹ kaʊ, hi sɛɾ ɪz kloʊk əsaɪɾ ən ɹʌb ðə mɛɹ daʊn wɪð hænfəlz ə dʒɹaɪ stʃɹɔ, ðən kɝiɾ əɹ wɪð ə pɛɹ ə bɹʌʃɪz. klaɪmɪŋ ðə nɛɹoʊ læɾɝ tə ðə lɔft, hi pɪtʃt daʊn heɪ fəɹ əɹ fid. hi fɛtʃt ə skupfəl ʌv oʊts fəɹ əɹ əz wɛl, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl ɪnʌf lɛft ən maɪt bi noʊ mɔɹ fəɹ ə lɔŋ waɪl ənlɛs ðə wɛðɝ wɔɹm sun. ðə kaʊ hæd bɪn mɪlk ðət mɔɹnɪŋ bɪfɔɹ fɝs laɪt, ɡɪvɪŋ ə kɔɹɾɝ ə hɝ juʒəwəl jild; ʃi sim tə bi dʒɹaɪɪŋ ʌp əz ðə wɪntɝ hʌŋ ɑn.

First was stabling Bela. Once he had unharnessed her and put her into a stall in the barn next to their cow, he set his cloak aside and rubbed the mare down with handfuls of dry straw, then curried her with a pair of brushes. Climbing the narrow ladder to the loft, he pitched down hay for her feed. He fetched a scoopful of oats for her as well, though there was little enough left and might be no more for a long while unless the weather warmed soon. The cow had been milked that morning before first light, giving a quarter of her usual yield; she seemed to be drying up as the winter hung on.

ɪnʌf fid hæd bɪn lɛf tə si ðə ʃip fəɹ tu deɪz - ðeɪ ʃʊɾə bɪn ɪn ðə pæstʃɝ baɪ naʊ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌn wɝθ kɔlɪŋ ɪt soʊ - bʌɾ i tɑpt ɔf ðɛɹ wɔɾɝ. wʌtɛvɝ ɛɡz hæd bɪn leɪd niɾəd tə bi ɡæðɝd, tu. ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli θɹi. ðə hɛnz sim tə bi ɡɛɾɪŋ klɛvɝɝ ət haɪɾɪŋ ðɛm.

Enough feed had been left to see the sheep for two days - they should have been in the pasture by now, but there was none worth calling it so - but he topped off their water. Whatever eggs had been laid needed to be gathered, too. There were only three. The hens seemed to be getting cleverer at hiding them.

hi wɑz teɪkɪŋ ə hoʊ tə ðə vɛdʒtəbəl ɡɑɹɾən bɪhaɪn ðə haʊs wən tæm keɪm aʊɾ ən sɛɾəld ɑn ə bɛntʃ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə bɑɹn tə mɛn hɑɹnəs, pɹɑpɪŋ ɪz spɪɹ bɪsaɪd hɪm. ɪt meɪd ɹænd fil bɛɾɝ əbaʊt ðə baʊ laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪz kloʊk ə peɪs fɹəm wɛɹ i stʊd.

He was taking a hoe to the vegetable garden behind the house when Tam came out and settled on a bench in front of the barn to mend harness, propping his spear beside him. It made Rand feel better about the bow lying on his cloak a pace from where he stood.

fju widz hæd pʊʃt əbʌv ɡɹaʊnd, bʌt mɔɹ widz ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. ðə kæbɪdʒɪz wɝ stʌntɪd, bɛɹli ə spɹaʊɾ ə ðə binz əɹ piz ʃoʊd, ən ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə saɪn ʌv ə bit. nɑɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ hæd bɪn plæntəd, ʌv kɔɹs; oʊnli pɑɹt, ɪn hoʊps ðə koʊl maɪt bɹeɪk ɪn taɪm tə meɪk ə kɹɑp ə səm kaɪn bɪfɔɹ ðə sɛlɝ wɑz ɛmpti. ɪt dɪd nɑt teɪk lɔŋ tə fɪnɪʃ hoʊɪŋ, wɪtʃ wʊɾə suɾəd ɪm dʒʌs faɪn ɪn jɪɹz pæst, bʌt naʊ hi wʌndɝd wʌt ðeɪ wəd də ɪf nʌθɪŋ keɪm ʌp ðɪs jɪɹ. nɑɾ ə plɛzən θɔt. ən ðəɹ wɑz stɪl faɪɝwʊd tə splɪt.

Few weeds had pushed above ground, but more weeds than anything else. The cabbages were stunted, barely a sprout of the beans or peas showed, and there was not a sign of a beet. Not everything had been planted, of course; only part, in hopes the cold might break in time to make a crop of some kind before the cellar was empty. It did not take long to finish hoeing, which would have suited him just fine in years past, but now he wondered what they would do if nothing came up this year. Not a pleasant thought. And there was still firewood to split.

ɪt sim tə ɹænd laɪk jɪɹz sɪns ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn faɪɝwʊd tə splɪt. bʌt kəmpleɪnɪŋ wəd nɑt kip ðə haʊs wɔɹm, soʊ hi fɛtʃt ði æks, pɹɑpt ʌp baʊ ən kwɪvɝ bɪsaɪd ðə tʃɑpɪŋ blɑk, ən ɡɑt tə wɝk. paɪn fəɹ ə kwɪk, hɑt fleɪm, ən oʊk fəɹ lɔŋ bɝnɪŋ. bɪfɔɹ lɔŋ i wɑz wɔɹm ɪnʌf tə pʊɾ ɪz koʊɾ əsaɪd. wən ðə paɪl ə splɪt wʊd ɡɹu bɪɡ ɪnʌf, hi stækt ɪɾ əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ə ðə haʊs, bɪsaɪɾ ʌðɝ stæks ɔlɹɛɾi ðɛɹ. moʊst ɹitʃt ɔl ðə weɪ tə ði ivz. juʒəwəli baɪ ðɪs taɪm ə jɪɹ ðə wʊdpəlz wɝ smɔl ən fju, bʌt nɑt ðɪs jɪɹ. tʃɑp ən stæk, tʃɑp ən stæk, hi lɔs hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə ɹɪðəm ə ði æks ən ðə moʊʃənz ə stækɪŋ wʊd. tæmz hæn ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bɹɔɾ ɪm bæk tə wɛɹ i wɑz, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən i blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz.

It seemed to Rand like years since there had not been firewood to split. But complaining would not keep the house warm, so he fetched the axe, propped up bow and quiver beside the chopping block, and got to work. Pine for a quick, hot flame, and oak for long burning. Before long he was warm enough to put his coat aside. When the pile of split wood grew big enough, he stacked it against the side of the house, beside other stacks already there. Most reached all the way to the eaves. Usually by this time of year the woodpiles were small and few, but not this year. Chop and stack, chop and stack, he lost himself in the rhythm of the axe and the motions of stacking wood. Tam's hand on his shoulder brought him back to where he was, and for a moment he blinked in surprise.

ɡɹeɪ twaɪlaɪt hæd kʌm ɑn waɪl i wɝkt, ən ɔlɹɛɾi ɪt wɑz feɪɾɪŋ kwɪkli təwɔɹd naɪt. ðə fʊl mun stʊd wɛl əbʌv ðə tʃɹitɑps, ʃɪmɝɪŋ peɪl ən bʌlʒɪŋ əz ɪf əbaʊt tə fɔl ɑn ðɛɹ hɛdz. ðə wɪn hæd ɡɹoʊn koʊldɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɪz noʊɾɪsɪŋ, tu, ən tæɾɝd klaʊdz skʌɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə dɑɹklɪŋ skaɪ.

Gray twilight had come on while he worked, and already it was fading quickly toward night. The full moon stood well above the treetops, shimmering pale and bulging as if about to fall on their heads. The wind had grown colder without his noticing, too, and tattered clouds scudded across the darkling sky.

"lɛts wɑʃ ʌp, læd, ən si əbaʊt səm sʌpɝ. aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi kæɹiɾ ɪn wɔɾɝ fəɹ hɑt bæθs bɪfɔɹ slip."

"Let's wash up, lad, and see about some supper. I've already carried in water for hot baths before sleep."

"ɛniθɪŋ hɑt saʊnz ɡʊd tə mi," ɹænd sɛd, snætʃɪŋ ʌp ɪz kloʊk ən tɔsɪŋ ɪt ɹaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. swɛt soʊkt ɪz ʃɝt, ən ðə wɪnd, fɝɡɑɾən ɪn ðə hiɾ ə swɪŋɪŋ ði æks, sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɹiz ɪt naʊ ðəɾ i hæd stɑpt wɝk. hi staɪfəld ə jɔn, ʃɪvɝɪŋ əz i ɡæðɝd ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz θɪŋz. "æn slip, tu, fəɹ ðæt. aɪ maɪt dʒʌst slip ɹaɪt θɹu fɛstəvəl."

"Anything hot sounds good to me," Rand said, snatching up his cloak and tossing it round his shoulders. Sweat soaked his shirt, and the wind, forgotten in the heat of swinging the axe, seemed to be trying to freeze it now that he had stopped work. He stifled a yawn, shivering as he gathered the rest of his things. "And sleep, too, for that. I might just sleep right through Festival."

"wʊd jə kɛɹ tə meɪk ə smɔl weɪdʒɝ əbaʊt ðæt?" tæm smaɪld, ən ɹænd hæd tə ɡɹɪn bæk. hi wəd nɑt mɪs bɛl taɪn ɪf i hæd hæd noʊ slip ɪn ə wik. noʊ wʌn wʊd.

"Would you care to make a small wager about that?" Tam smiled, and Rand had to grin back. He would not miss Bel Tine if he had had no sleep in a week. No one would.

tæm hæd bɪn ɪkstʃɹævəɡənt wɪð ðə kændəlz, ən ə faɪɝ kɹækəld ɪn ðə bɪɡ stoʊn faɪɝpleɪs, soʊ ðət ðə meɪn ɹum hæɾ ə wɔɹm, tʃɪɹfəl fil tə ɪt. ə bɹɔɾ oʊeɪkən teɪbəl wɑz ðə meɪn fitʃɝ ə ðə ɹum ʌðɝ ðən ðə faɪɝpleɪs, ə teɪbəl lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə siɾ ə dʌzən əɹ mɔɹ, ðoʊ ðəɹ hæd sɛldəm bɪn soʊ mɛni ɝaʊn ɪt sɪns ɹændz mʌðɝ daɪd. ə fju kæbənəts ən tʃɛsts, moʊst ə ðɛm skɪlfəli meɪd baɪ tæm hɪmsɛlf, laɪn ðə wɔlz, ən haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹz stʊɾ ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl. ðə kʊʃən tʃɛɹ ðət tæm kɔld ɪz ɹiɾɪŋ tʃɛɹ sæɾ æŋɡəl bɪfɔɹ ðə fleɪmz. ɹænd pɹəfɝd tə də hɪz ɹiɾɪŋ stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɑn ðə ɹʌɡ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝ. ðə ʃɛlf ə bʊks baɪ ðə dɔɹ wɑz nɑt nɪɹli əz lɔŋ əz ðə wʌn ət ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn, bʌt bʊks wɝ hɑɹd tə kʌm baɪ. fju pɛdlɝz kæɹid mɔɹ ðən ə hændfʊl, ən ðoʊz hæd tə bi stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ əmʌŋ ɛvɹiwʌn u wɑntəd ðɛm.

Tam had been extravagant with the candles, and a fire crackled in the big stone fireplace, so that the main room had a warm, cheerful feel to it. A broad oaken table was the main feature of the room other than the fireplace, a table long enough to seat a dozen or more, though there had seldom been so many around it since Rand's mother died. A few cabinets and chests, most of them skillfully made by Tam himself, lined the walls, and high-backed chairs stood around the table. The cushioned chair that Tam called his reading chair sat angled before the flames. Rand preferred to do his reading stretched out on the rug in front of the fire. The shelf of books by the door was not nearly as long as the one at the Winespring Inn, but books were hard to come by. Few peddlers carried more than a handful, and those had to be stretched out among everyone who wanted them.

ɪf ðə ɹum dɪd nɑt lʊk kwaɪt soʊ fɹɛʃli skɹʌbd əz moʊs fɑɹm waɪvz kɛp ðɛɹ hoʊmz - tæmz paɪpɝæk ən ðə tʃɹævəlz ə dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ sæɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, waɪl ənʌðɝ wʊd-baʊn bʊk ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ðə kʊʃən ə hɪz ɹiɾɪŋ tʃɛɹ; ə bɪɾ ə hɑɹnəs tə bi mɛndɪd leɪ ɑn ðə bɛntʃ baɪ ðə faɪɝpleɪs, ən səm ʃɝts tə bi dɑɹn meɪɾ ə hip ɑn ə tʃɛɹ - ɪf nɑt kwaɪt soʊ spɑtləs, ɪt wɑz stɪl klin ən niɾ ɪnʌf, wɪð ə lɪvd-ɪn lʊk ðət wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz wɔɹmɪŋ ən kʌmfɝɾɪŋ əz ðə faɪɝ. hɪɹ, ɪt wɑz pɑsəbəl tə fɝɡɛt ðə tʃɪl bɪɑn ðə wɔlz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ fɔls dʒɹæɡən hɪɹ. noʊ wɔɹz əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. noʊ mɛn ɪn blæk kloʊks. ði ɝoʊmə fɹəm ðə stupɑt hæŋɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə faɪɝ pɝmieɪɾɪd ðə ɹum, ən fɪld ɹænd wɪð ɹævənəs hʌŋɡɝ.

If the room did not look quite so freshly scrubbed as most farm wives kept their homes - Tam's piperack and The Travels of Jain Farstrider sat on the table, while another wood-bound book rested on the cushion of his reading chair; a bit of harness to be mended lay on the bench by the fireplace, and some shirts to be darned made a heap on a chair - if not quite so spotless, it was still clean and neat enough, with a lived-in look that was almost as warming and comforting as the fire. Here, it was possible to forget the chill beyond the walls. There was no false Dragon here. No wars or Aes Sedai. No men in black cloaks. The aroma from the stewpot hanging over the fire permeated the room, and filled Rand with ravenous hunger.

hɪz fɑðɝ stɝd ðə stupɑt wɪð ə lɔŋ-hændəld wʊɾən spun, ðən tʊk ə teɪst. "ə lɪɾəl waɪl lɔŋɡɝ."

His father stirred the stewpot with a long-handled wooden spoon, then took a taste. "A little while longer."

ɹænd hɝid tə wɑʃ ɪz feɪs ən hænz; ðəɹ wɑz ə pɪtʃɝ ən beɪsən ɑn ðə wɑʃstæn baɪ ðə dɔɹ. ə hɑt bæθ wɑz wʌɾ i wɑntəd, tə teɪk əweɪ ðə swɛɾ ən soʊk ðə tʃɪl aʊt, bʌt ðət wəd kʌm wən ðəɹ hæd bɪn taɪm tə hit ðə bɪɡ kɛɾəl ɪn ðə bæk ɹum.

Rand hurried to wash his face and hands; there was a pitcher and basin on the washstand by the door. A hot bath was what he wanted, to take away the sweat and soak the chill out, but that would come when there had been time to heat the big kettle in the back room.

tæm ɹuɾəd ɝaʊn ɪn ə kæbənəɾ ən keɪm ʌp wɪð ə ki əz lɔŋ əz ɪz hænd. hi twɪstəɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə bɪɡ aɪɝn lɑk ɑn ðə dɔɹ. ət ɹændz kwɛstʃənɪŋ lʊk i sɛd, "bɛs tə bi seɪf. meɪbi aɪm teɪkɪŋ ə fænsi, əɹ meɪbi ðə wɛðɝ ɪz blækɪŋ maɪ mud, bʌt. . . ." hi saɪɾ ən baʊns ðə ki ɑn ɪz pɑm. "aɪl si tə ðə bæk dɔɹ," hi sɛd, ən dɪsəpɪɹd təwɔɹd ðə bæk ə ðə haʊs.

Tam rooted around in a cabinet and came up with a key as long as his hand. He twisted it in the big iron lock on the door. At Rand's questioning look he said, "Best to be safe. Maybe I'm taking a fancy, or maybe the weather is blacking my mood, but. . . ." He sighed and bounced the key on his palm. "I'll see to the back door," he said, and disappeared toward the back of the house.

ɹænd kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ iðɝ dɔɹ ɛvɝ biɪŋ lɑkt. noʊ wʌn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz lɑk dɔɹz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid. əntɪl naʊ, ət list.

Rand could not remember either door ever being locked. No one in the Two Rivers locked doors. There was no need. Until now, at least.

fɹəm oʊvɝhɛd, fɹəm tæmz bɛdʒɹum, keɪm ə skɹeɪpɪŋ, əz ə sʌmθɪŋ biɪŋ dʒɹæɡd əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ. ɹænd fɹaʊnd. ənlɛs tæm hæd sʌɾənli dɪsaɪɾɪd tə muv ðə fɝnɪtʃɝ ɝaʊnd, hi kəɾ oʊnli bi pʊlɪŋ aʊt ði oʊl tʃɛst i kɛpt ʌndɝ ɪz bɛd. ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ðət hæd nɛvɝ bɪn dʌn ɪn ɹændz mɛmɹi.

From overhead, from Tam's bedroom, came a scraping, as of something being dragged across the floor. Rand frowned. Unless Tam had suddenly decided to move the furniture around, he could only be pulling out the old chest he kept under his bed. Another thing that had never been done in Rand's memory.

hi fɪld ə smɔl kɛɾəl wɪð wɔɾɝ fəɹ ti ən hʌŋ ɪt fɹəm ə hʊk oʊvɝ ðə faɪɝ, ðən sɛt ðə teɪbəl. hi hæd kɑɹv ðə boʊlz ən spunz hɪmsɛlf. ðə fɹʌnt ʃʌɾɝz hæd nɑt jɛt bɪn kloʊzd, ən fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm i pɪɹɾ aʊt, bʌt fʊl naɪt hæd kʌm ən ɔl i kəd si wɝ mun ʃædoʊz. ðə dɑɹk ɹaɪɾɝ kəd bi aʊt ðəɹ izəli ɪnʌf, bʌɾ i tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðæt.

He filled a small kettle with water for tea and hung it from a hook over the fire, then set the table. He had carved the bowls and spoons himself. The front shutters had not yet been closed, and from time to time he peered out, but full night had come and all he could see were moon shadows. The dark rider could be out there easily enough, but he tried not to think about that.

wən tæm keɪm bæk, ɹænd stɛɹɾ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ə θɪk bɛl slæntəɾ ɝaʊn tæmz weɪst, ən fɹəm ðə bɛl hʌŋ ə sɔɹd, wɪð ə bɹɑnz hɛɹən ɑn ðə blæk skæbɝɾ ən ənʌðɝ ɑn ðə lɔŋ hɪlt. ði oʊnli mɛn ɹænd hæɾ ɛvɝ sin wɛɹɪŋ sɔɹdz wɝ ðə mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz. ən læn, ʌv kɔɹs. ðəɾ ɪz fɑðɝ maɪɾ oʊn wʌn hæd nɛvɝ ivən əkɝd tə hɪm. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə hɛɹənz, ðə sɔɹd lʊkt ə ɡʊd dil laɪk lænz sɔɹd.

When Tam came back, Rand stared in surprise. A thick belt slanted around Tam's waist, and from the belt hung a sword, with a bronze heron on the black scabbard and another on the long hilt. The only men Rand had ever seen wearing swords were the merchants' guards. And Lan, of course. That his father might own one had never even occurred to him. Except for the herons, the sword looked a good deal like Lan's sword.

"wɛɹ dɪd ðət kʌm fɹʌm?" hi æskt. "dɪd jə ɡɛɾ ɪt fɹəm ə pɛdlɝ? haʊ mʌtʃ dɪɾ ɪt kɑst?"

"Where did that come from?" he asked. "Did you get it from a peddler? How much did it cost?"

sloʊli tæm dʒɹu ðə wɛpən; faɪɹlaɪt pleɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə ɡlimɪŋ lɛŋθ. ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl laɪk ðə pleɪn, ɹʌf bleɪdz ɹænd hæd sin ɪn ðə hænz ə mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz. noʊ dʒɛmz əɹ ɡoʊld ədɔɹn ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt simd ɡɹæn tə hɪm, nʌnðəlɛs. ðə bleɪd, vɛɹi slaɪtli kɝvd ən ʃɑɹp ɑn oʊnli wʌn ɛdʒ, bɔɹ ənʌðɝ hɛɹən ɛtʃt ɪndə ðə stil. ʃɔɹt kwɪlənz, wɝk tə lʊk laɪk bɹeɪd, flæŋk ðə hɪlt. ɪt simd ɔlmoʊs fɹædʒəl kəmpɛɹd wɪð ðə sɔɹdz ə ðə mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz; moʊst ə ðoʊz wɝ dʌbəl-ɛdʒd, ən θɪk ɪnʌf tə tʃɑp daʊn ə tʃɹi.

Slowly Tam drew the weapon; firelight played along the gleaming length. It was nothing at all like the plain, rough blades Rand had seen in the hands of merchants' guards. No gems or gold adorned it, but it seemed grand to him, nonetheless. The blade, very slightly curved and sharp on only one edge, bore another heron etched into the steel. Short quillons, worked to look like braid, flanked the hilt. It seemed almost fragile compared with the swords of the merchants' guards; most of those were double-edged, and thick enough to chop down a tree.

"aɪ ɡɑɾ ɪɾ ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ," tæm sɛd, "ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm hɪɹ. ən aɪ peɪɾ ɪntaɪɝli tu mʌtʃ; tu kɑpɝz ɪz tu mʌtʃ fəɹ wʌn ə ðiz. jəɹ mʌðɝ dɪdn əpɹuv, bʌt ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz waɪzɝ ðən aɪ. aɪ wɑz jʌŋ ðɛn, ən ɪt simd wɝθ ðə pɹaɪs ət ðə taɪm. ʃi ɔlweɪz wɑntəd mi tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt, ən mɔɹ ðən wʌns aɪv θɔt ʃi wɑz ɹaɪt, ðəɾ aɪ ʃəd dʒʌst ɡɪv ɪɾ əweɪ."

"I got it a long time ago," Tam said, "a long way from here. And I paid entirely too much; two coppers is too much for one of these. Your mother didn't approve, but she was always wiser than I. I was young then, and it seemed worth the price at the time. She always wanted me to get rid of it, and more than once I've thought she was right, that I should just give it away."

ɹəflɛktəd faɪɝ meɪd ðə bleɪd sim əfleɪm. ɹænd stɑɹɾəd. hi hæɾ ɔfən deɪdʒɹimd əbaʊɾ oʊnɪŋ ə sɔɹd. "ɡɪv ɪɾ əweɪ? haʊ kəd jə ɡɪv ə sɔɹd laɪk ðəɾ əweɪ?"

Reflected fire made the blade seem aflame. Rand started. He had often daydreamed about owning a sword. "Give it away? How could you give a sword like that away?"

tæm snɔɹɾɪd. "nɑt mʌtʃ jus ɪn hɝɾɪŋ ʃip, naʊ ɪz ɪt? kæn plaʊ ə fild əɹ hɑɹvəst ə kɹɑp wɪð ɪt." fəɹ ə lɔŋ mɪnəɾ i stɛɹɾ ət ðə sɔɹɾ əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ wɪð sətʃ ə θɪŋ. ət læst i lɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɛvi saɪ. "bʌɾ ɪf aɪm nɑt dʒʌs teɪkən baɪ ə blæk fænsi, ɪf əɹ lʌk ɹʌnz saʊɝ, meɪbi ɪn ðə nɛks fju deɪz wɪl bi ɡlæɾ aɪ tʌkt ɪɾ ɪn ðəɾ oʊl tʃɛst, ɪnstɛd." hi slɪd ðə sɔɹd smuðli bæk ɪndə ɪts ʃiθ ən waɪpt ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz ʃɝt wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs. "ðə stu ʃəd bi ɹɛɾi. əl dɪʃ ɪɾ aʊt waɪl jə fɪks ðə ti."

Tam snorted. "Not much use in herding sheep, now is it? Can't plow a field or harvest a crop with it." For a long minute he stared at the sword as if wondering what he was doing with such a thing. At last he let out a heavy sigh. "But if I am not just taken by a black fancy, if our luck runs sour, maybe in the next few days we'll be glad I tucked it in that old chest, instead." He slid the sword smoothly back into its sheath and wiped his hand on his shirt with a grimace. "The stew should be ready. I'll dish it out while you fix the tea."

ɹænd nɑɾəd ən ɡɑt ðə ti kænəstɝ, bʌɾ i wɑntəd tə noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. waɪ wəd tæm əv bɑɾ ə sɔɹd? hi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən. ən wɛɹ hæd tæm kʌm baɪ ɪt? haʊ fɑɹ əweɪ? noʊ wʌn ɛvɝ lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz; əɹ vɛɹi fju, ət list. hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz veɪɡli səpoʊzd ɪz fɑðɝ mʌst əv ɡɔn aʊtsaɪd - hɪz mʌðɝ hæd bɪn ən aʊtləndɝ - bʌɾ ə sɔɹd . . . ? hi hæɾ ə lɑɾ ə kwɛstʃənz tə æsk wʌns ðeɪ hæd sɛɾəld ət ðə teɪbəl.

Rand nodded and got the tea canister, but he wanted to know everything. Why would Tam have bought a sword? He could not imagine. And where had Tam come by it? How far away? No one ever left the Two Rivers; or very few, at least. He had always vaguely supposed his father must have gone outside - his mother had been an outlander - but a sword . . . ? He had a lot of questions to ask once they had settled at the table.

ðə ti wɔɾɝ wɑz bɔɪlɪŋ fɪɹsli, ən i hæd tə ɹæp ə klɔθ ɝaʊn ðə kɛɾəlz hændəl tə lɪft ɪɾ ɔf ðə hʊk. hit soʊk θɹu ɪmiɾiətli. əz i stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm ðə faɪɝ, ə hɛvi θʌmp ət ðə dɔɹ ɹæɾəld ðə lɑk. ɔl θɔts ə ðə sɔɹd, əɹ ðə hɑt kɛɾəl ɪn ɪz hænd, flu əweɪ.

The tea water was boiling fiercely, and he had to wrap a cloth around the kettle's handle to lift it off the hook. Heat soaked through immediately. As he straightened from the fire, a heavy thump at the door rattled the lock. All thoughts of the sword, or the hot kettle in his hand, flew away.

"wʌn ə ðə neɪbɝz," hi sɛɾ ənsɝteɪnli. "mæstɝ daʊtʃɹi wɑntɪŋ tə bɑɹoʊ. . . ." bʌt ðə daʊtʃɹi fɑɹm, ðɛɹ nɪɹəs neɪbɝ, wɑz ən aʊɝ əweɪ ivən ɪn ðə deɪlaɪt, ən ɔɹən daʊtʃɹi, ʃeɪmləs bɑɹoʊɝ ðəɾ i wɑz, wɑz stɪl nɑt laɪkli tə liv ɪz haʊs baɪ dɑɹk.

"One of the neighbors," he said uncertainly. "Master Dautry wanting to borrow. . . ." But the Dautry farm, their nearest neighbor, was an hour away even in the daylight, and Oren Dautry, shameless borrower that he was, was still not likely to leave his house by dark.

tæm sɔfli pleɪs ðə stu-fɪl boʊlz ɑn ðə teɪbəl. sloʊli hi muvd əweɪ fɹəm ðə teɪbəl. boʊθ ə hɪz hænz ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk - " hi bɪɡæn, ən ðə dɔɹ bɝst oʊpən, pisəz ə ði aɪɝn lɑk spɪnɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ.

Tam softly placed the stew-filled bowls on the table. Slowly he moved away from the table. Both of his hands rested on his sword hilt. "I don't think - " he began, and the door burst open, pieces of the iron lock spinning across the floor.

ə fɪɡjɝ fɪl ðə dɔɹweɪ, bɪɡɝ ðən ɛni mæn ɹænd hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, ə fɪɡjɝ ɪn blæk meɪl ðət hʌŋ tə hɪz niz, wɪð spaɪks ət ɹɪsts ən ɛlboʊz ən ʃoʊldɝz. wʌn hæn klʌtʃt ə hɛvi, saɪð-laɪk sɔɹd; ði ʌðɝ hænd wɑz flʌŋ ʌp bɪfɔɹ ɪz aɪz əz ɪf tə ʃild əm fɹəm ðə laɪt.

A figure filled the doorway, bigger than any man Rand had ever seen, a figure in black mail that hung to his knees, with spikes at wrists and elbows and shoulders. One hand clutched a heavy, scythe-like sword; the other hand was flung up before his eyes as if to shield them from the light.

ɹænd fɛl ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋz ʌv ən ɑd sɔɹɾ ə ɹɪlif. huɛvɝ ðɪs wɑz, ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə blæk-kloʊkt ɹaɪɾɝ. ðən i sɔ ðə kɝld ɹæmz hɔɹnz ɑn ðə hɛd ðət bɹʌʃt ðə tɑp ə ðə dɔɹweɪ, ən wɛɹ maʊθ ən noʊz ʃʊɾə bɪn wɑz ə hɛɹi mʌzəl. hi tʊk ɪn ɔl ʌv ɪɾ ɪn ðə speɪs ʌv wʌn dip bɹɛθ ðəɾ i lɛɾ aʊɾ ɪn ə tɛɹəfaɪd jɛl æz, wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, hi hɝl ðə hɑt kɛɾəl ət ðət hæf-hjumən hɛd.

Rand felt the beginnings of an odd sort of relief. Whoever this was, it was not the black-cloaked rider. Then he saw the curled ram's horns on the head that brushed the top of the doorway, and where mouth and nose should have been was a hairy muzzle. He took in all of it in the space of one deep breath that he let out in a terrified yell as, without thinking, he hurled the hot kettle at that half-human head.

ðə kɹitʃɝ ɹɔɹd, pɑɹt skɹim ə peɪn, pɑɹɾ ænəməl snɑɹl, əz bɔɪlɪŋ wɔɾɝ splæʃt oʊvɝ ɪts feɪs. ivən əz ðə kɛɾəl stʃɹʌk, tæmz sɔɹd flæʃt. ðə ɹɔɹ əbɹʌpli bɪkeɪm ə ɡɝɡəl, ən ðə hjudʒ ʃeɪp tɑpəl bæk. bɪfɔɹ ɪt fɪnɪʃt fɔlɪŋ, ənʌðɝ wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə klɔ ɪts weɪ pæst. ɹænd ɡlɪmpst ə mɪsʃeɪpən hɛd tɑp baɪ spaɪk-laɪk hɔɹnz bɪfɔɹ tæm stʃɹʌk əɡɛn, ən tu hjudʒ bɑɾiz blɑk ðə dɔɹ. hi ɹilaɪzd ɪz fɑðɝ wɑz ʃaʊɾɪŋ ət hɪm.

The creature roared, part scream of pain, part animal snarl, as boiling water splashed over its face. Even as the kettle struck, Tam's sword flashed. The roar abruptly became a gurgle, and the huge shape toppled back. Before it finished falling, another was trying to claw its way past. Rand glimpsed a misshapen head topped by spike-like horns before Tam struck again, and two huge bodies blocked the door. He realized his father was shouting at him.

"ɹʌn, læd! haɪɾ ɪn ðə wʊdz!" ðə bɑɾiz ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ dʒɝkt əz ʌðɝz aʊtsaɪd tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl əm klɪɹ. tæm θɹʌst ə ʃoʊldɝ ʌndɝ ðə mæsɪv teɪbəl; wɪð ə ɡɹʌn i hivd ɪɾ oʊvɝ ətɑp ðə tæŋɡəl. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ tu mɛni tə hoʊld! aʊt ðə bæk! ɡoʊ! ɡoʊ! əl fɑloʊ!"

"Run, lad! Hide in the woods!" The bodies in the doorway jerked as others outside tried to pull them clear. Tam thrust a shoulder under the massive table; with a grunt he heaved it over atop the tangle. "There are too many to hold! Out the back! Go! Go! I'll follow!"

ivən əz ɹænd tɝn əweɪ, ʃeɪm fɪld ɪm ðəɾ i oʊbeɪd soʊ kwɪkli. hi wɑntəd tə steɪ ən hɛlp ɪz fɑðɝ, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən haʊ, bʌt fɪɹ hæɾ ɪm baɪ ðə θɹoʊt, ən ɪz lɛɡz muvd ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn. hi dæʃt fɹəm ðə ɹum, təwɔɹd ðə bæk ə ðə haʊs, əz fæst əz i hæɾ ɛvɝ ɹʌn ɪn ɪz laɪf. kɹæʃɪz ən ʃaʊts fɹəm ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ pɝsud hɪm.

Even as Rand turned away, shame filled him that he obeyed so quickly. He wanted to stay and help his father, though he could not imagine how, but fear had him by the throat, and his legs moved on their own. He dashed from the room, toward the back of the house, as fast as he had ever run in his life. Crashes and shouts from the front door pursued him.

hi hæɾ ɪz hænz ɑn ðə bɑɹ əkɹɔs ðə bæk dɔɹ wən ɪz aɪ fɛl ɑn ði aɪɝn lɑk ðət wɑz nɛvɝ lɑkt. ɪksɛp ðət tæm hæd dʌn dʒʌs ðət tənaɪt. lɛɾɪŋ ðə bɑɹ steɪ wɛɹ ɪt wɑz, hi dɑɹɾɪd tə ə saɪd wɪndoʊ, flʌŋ ʌp ðə sæʃ ən θɹu bæk ðə ʃʌɾɝz. naɪt hæd ɹipleɪs twaɪlaɪt kəmplitli. ðə fʊl mun ən dʒɹɪftɪŋ klaʊdz meɪd dæpəld ʃædoʊz tʃeɪs wʌn ənʌðɝ əkɹɔs ðə fɑɹmjɑɹd.

He had his hands on the bar across the back door when his eye fell on the iron lock that was never locked. Except that Tam had done just that tonight. Letting the bar stay where it was, he darted to a side window, flung up the sash and threw back the shutters. Night had replaced twilight completely. The full moon and drifting clouds made dappled shadows chase one another across the farmyard.

ʃædoʊz, hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf. oʊnli ʃædoʊz. ðə bæk dɔɹ kɹikt əz sʌmwʌn aʊtsaɪd, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ, tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ ɪɾ oʊpən. hɪz maʊθ wɛn dʒɹaɪ. ə kɹæʃ ʃʊk ðə dɔɹ ɪn ɪts fɹeɪm ən lɛn ɪm spid; hi slɪp θɹu ðə wɪndoʊ laɪk ə hɛɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɡɹaʊnd, ən kaʊɝɾ əɡɛns ðə saɪɾ ə ðə haʊs. ɪnsaɪd ðə ɹum, wʊd splɪntɝd laɪk θʌndɝ.

Shadows, he told himself. Only shadows. The back door creaked as someone outside, or something, tried to push it open. His mouth went dry. A crash shook the door in its frame and lent him speed; he slipped through the window like a hare going to ground, and cowered against the side of the house. Inside the room, wood splintered like thunder.

hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf ʌp tə ə kɹaʊtʃ, meɪd hɪmsɛlf pɪɹ ɪnsaɪd, dʒʌst wɪð wʌn aɪ, dʒʌst ət ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə wɪndoʊ. ɪn ðə dɑɹk i kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt mʌtʃ, bʌt mɔɹ ðən i ɹɪli wɑntəd tə si. ðə dɔɹ hʌŋ əskju, ən ʃæɾoʊd ʃeɪps muv kɔʃəsli ɪndə ðə ɹum, tɔkɪŋ ɪn loʊ, ɡʌɾɝəl vɔɪsəz. ɹænd ʌndɝstʊd nʌn ʌv wʌt wɑz sɛd; ðə læŋɡwədʒ saʊndəd hɑɹʃ, ənsuɾɪd tə ə hjumən tʌŋ. æksiz ən spɪɹz ən spaɪk θɪŋz dʌli ɹəflɛktəd stʃɹeɪ ɡlɪmɝz ə munlaɪt. buts skɹeɪpt ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹɪðmɪk klɪk, əz ə hʊvz, əz wɛl.

He forced himself up to a crouch, made himself peer inside, just with one eye, just at the corner of the window. In the dark he could not make out much, but more than he really wanted to see. The door hung askew, and shadowed shapes moved cautiously into the room, talking in low, guttural voices. Rand understood none of what was said; the language sounded harsh, unsuited to a human tongue. Axes and spears and spiked things dully reflected stray glimmers of moonlight. Boots scraped on the floor, and there was a rhythmic click, as of hooves, as well.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə wɝk mɔɪstʃɝ bæk ɪndə hɪz maʊθ. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip, ɹæɡəd bɹɛθ, hi ʃaʊɾəd əz laʊdli əz i kʊd. "ðeɪɹ kʌmɪŋ ɪn ðə bæk!" ðə wɝdz keɪm aʊɾ ɪn ə kɹoʊk, bʌɾ ət lis ðeɪ keɪm aʊt. hi hæd nɑt bɪn ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wʊd. "ɪm aʊtsaɪd! ɹʌn, fɑðɝ!" wɪð ðə læst wɝɾ i wɑz spɹɪntɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə fɑɹmhaʊs.

He tried to work moisture back into his mouth. Drawing a deep, ragged breath, he shouted as loudly as he could. "They're coming in the back!" The words came out in a croak, but at least they came out. He had not been sure they would. "I'm outside! Run, father!" With the last word he was sprinting away from the farmhouse.

kɔɹs-vɔɪst ʃaʊts ɪn ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ tʌŋ ɹeɪdʒ fɹəm ðə bæk ɹum. ɡlæs ʃæɾɝd, laʊɾ ən ʃɑɹp, ən sʌmθɪŋ θʌddɪd hɛvəli tə ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi ɡɛst wʌn ə ðɛm hæd bɹoʊkən θɹu ðə wɪndoʊ ɹæðɝ ðən tʃɹaɪ tə skwiz θɹu ði oʊpənɪŋ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt lʊk bæk tə si ɪf i wɑz ɹaɪt. laɪk ə fɑks ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm haʊnz i dɑɹɾɪd ɪndə ðə nɪɹəs mun-kæst ʃædoʊz əz ɪf hɛɾəd fəɹ ðə wʊdz, ðən dʒɹɑp tə hɪz bɛli ən slaɪðɝd bæk tə ðə bɑɹn ən ɪts lɑɹdʒɝ, dipɝ ʃædoʊz. sʌmθɪŋ fɛl əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ən i θɹæʃt əbaʊt, nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪɾ əɹ ɪskeɪp, əntɪl i ɹilaɪzd i wɑz ɡɹæplɪŋ wɪð ðə nu hoʊ hændəl tæm hæd bɪn ʃeɪpɪŋ.

Coarse-voiced shouts in the strange tongue raged from the back room. Glass shattered, loud and sharp, and something thudded heavily to the ground behind him. He guessed one of them had broken through the window rather than try to squeeze through the opening, but he did not look back to see if he was right. Like a fox running from hounds he darted into the nearest moon-cast shadows as if headed for the woods, then dropped to his belly and slithered back to the barn and its larger, deeper shadows. Something fell across his shoulders, and he thrashed about, not sure if he was trying to fight or escape, until he realized he was grappling with the new hoe handle Tam had been shaping.

ɪɾiət! fəɹ ə moʊmən i leɪ ðɛɹ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɑp pæntɪŋ. kɑplɪn ful ɪɾiət! ət læst i kɹɔld ɑn əlɔŋ ðə bæk ə ðə bɑɹn, dʒɹæɡɪŋ ðə hoʊ hændəl wɪð hɪm. ɪt wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən nʌθɪŋ. kɔʃəsli hi lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ ət ðə fɑɹmjɑɹɾ ən ðə haʊs.

Idiot! For a moment he lay there, trying to stop panting. Coplin fool idiot! At last he crawled on along the back of the barn, dragging the hoe handle with him. It was not much, but it was better than nothing. Cautiously he looked around the corner at the farmyard and the house.

ʌv ðə kɹitʃɝ ðət hæd dʒʌmpt aʊɾ æftɝ ɪm ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn. ɪt kəd bi ɛniwɛɹ. hʌntɪŋ hɪm, ʃʊɹli. ivən kɹipɪŋ ʌp ɑn ɪm ət ðət vɛɹi moʊmənt.

Of the creature that had jumped out after him there was no sign. It could be anywhere. Hunting him, surely. Even creeping up on him at that very moment.

fɹaɪɾənd blits fɪl ðə ʃip pɛn tə hɪz lɛft; ðə flɑk mɪld əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ən ɪskeɪp. ʃæɾoʊd ʃeɪps flɪkɝɾ ɪn ðə laɪɾəd fɹʌnt wɪndoʊz ə ðə haʊs, ən ðə klæʃ ə stil ɑn stil ɹæŋ θɹu ðə dɑɹknəs. sʌɾənli wʌn ə ðə wɪndoʊz bɝst aʊtwɝɾ ɪn ə ʃaʊɝ ʌv ɡlæs ən wʊɾ əz tæm lɛp θɹu ɪt, sɔɹd stɪl ɪn hænd. hi lændəɾ ɑn ɪz fit, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə haʊs i dæʃt təwɔɹd ðə bæk ʌv ɪt, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə mɑnstʃɹəs θɪŋz skɹæmbəlɪŋ æftɝ ɪm θɹu ðə bɹoʊkən wɪndoʊ ən ðə dɔɹweɪ.

Frightened bleats filled the sheep pen to his left; the flock milled as if trying to find an escape. Shadowed shapes flickered in the lighted front windows of the house, and the clash of steel on steel rang through the darkness. Suddenly one of the windows burst outward in a shower of glass and wood as Tam leaped through it, sword still in hand. He landed on his feet, but instead of running away from the house he dashed toward the back of it, ignoring the monstrous things scrambling after him through the broken window and the doorway.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif. waɪ wɑz i nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ? ðən i ʌndɝstʊd. tæm hæd læs hɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs fɹəm ðə ɹɪɹ ə ðə haʊs. "fɑðɝ!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "aɪm oʊvɝ hɪɹ!"

Rand stared in disbelief. Why was he not trying to get away? Then he understood. Tam had last heard his voice from the rear of the house. "Father!" he shouted. "I'm over here!"

ɪn mɪd-stʃɹaɪd tæm wɝld, nɑt ɹʌnɪŋ təwɔɹd ɹænd, bʌɾ əɾ ən æŋɡəl əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. "ɹʌn, læd!" hi ʃaʊɾəd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ əz ɪf tə sʌmwʌn əhɛɾ ə hɪm. "haɪd!" ə dʌzən hjudʒ fɔɹmz stʃɹimd æftɝ hɪm, hɑɹʃ ʃaʊts ən ʃɹɪl haʊlz ʃɪvɝɪŋ ði ɛɹ.

In mid-stride Tam whirled, not running toward Rand, but at an angle away from him. "Run, lad!" he shouted, gesturing with the sword as if to someone ahead of him. "Hide!" A dozen huge forms streamed after him, harsh shouts and shrill howls shivering the air.

ɹænd pʊl bæk ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊz bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɹn. ðəɹ i kəd nɑt bi sin fɹəm ðə haʊs, ɪn keɪs ɛni ʌv ðə kɹitʃɝz wɝ stɪl ɪnsaɪd. hi wɑz seɪf; fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ət list. bʌt nɑt tæm. tæm, hu wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lid ðoʊz θɪŋz əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. hɪz hænz taɪɾənd ɑn ðə hoʊ hændəl, ən i hæd tə klɛntʃ ɪz tiθ tə stɑp ə sʌɾən læf. ə hoʊ hændəl. feɪsɪŋ wʌn ə ðoʊz kɹitʃɝz wɪð ə hoʊ hændəl wəd nɑt bi mʌtʃ laɪk pleɪɪŋ ət kɔɹɾɝstɑfs wɪð pɛɹɪn. bʌɾ i kəd nɑt lɛt tæm feɪs wʌt wɑz tʃeɪsɪŋ ɪm əloʊn.

Rand pulled back into the shadows behind the barn. There he could not be seen from the house, in case any of the creatures were still inside. He was safe; for the moment, at least. But not Tam. Tam, who was trying to lead those things away from him. His hands tightened on the hoe handle, and he had to clench his teeth to stop a sudden laugh. A hoe handle. Facing one of those creatures with a hoe handle would not be much like playing at quarterstaffs with Perrin. But he could not let Tam face what was chasing him alone.

"ɪf aɪ muv laɪk aɪ wɑz stɔkɪŋ ə ɹæbət," hi wɪspɝd tə hɪmsɛlf, "ðeɪl nɛvɝ hɪɹ mi, əɹ si mi." ði ɪɹi kɹaɪz ɛkoʊɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, ən i tʃɹaɪd tə swɑloʊ. "mɔɹ laɪk ə pæk ə stɑɹvɪŋ wʊlvz." saʊnləsli hi slɪpt əweɪ fɹəm ðə bɑɹn, təwɔɹd ðə fɔɹəst, ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə hoʊ hændəl soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪz hænz hɝt.

"If I move like I was stalking a rabbit," he whispered to himself, "they'll never hear me, or see me." The eerie cries echoed in the darkness, and he tried to swallow. "More like a pack of starving wolves." Soundlessly he slipped away from the barn, toward the forest, gripping the hoe handle so hard that his hands hurt.

ət fɝst, wən ðə tʃɹiz sɝaʊndəd hɪm, hi tʊk kʌmfɝt fɹəm ðɛm. ðeɪ hɛlp haɪɾ ɪm fɹəm wʌtɛvɝ ðə kɹitʃɝz wɝ ðət hæɾ ətæk ðə fɑɹm. əz i kɹɛp θɹu ðə wʊdz, ðoʊ, mun ʃædoʊz ʃɪftəd, ən ɪt bɪɡæn tə sim əz ɪf ðə dɑɹknəs ə ðə fɔɹəs tʃeɪnʒd ən muvd, tu. tʃɹiz lumd mælɛvələnli; bɹæntʃəz ɹɪθ təwɔɹd hɪm. bʌt wɝ ðeɪ dʒʌs tʃɹiz ən bɹæntʃəz? hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs hɪɹ ðə ɡɹoʊlɪŋ tʃʌkəlz staɪfəld ɪn ðɛɹ θɹoʊts waɪl ðeɪ weɪɾəd fəɹ hɪm. ðə haʊlz ə tæmz pɝsuɝz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɪl ðə naɪt, bʌɾ ɪn ðə saɪləns ðət ɹipleɪst əm i flɪntʃt ɛvɹi taɪm ðə wɪn skɹeɪpt wʌn lɪm əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ. loʊɝ ən loʊɝ i kɹaʊtʃt, ən muv mɔɹ ən mɔɹ sloʊli. hi hɑɹdli dɛɹd tə bɹið fəɹ fɪɹ i maɪt bi hɝd.

At first, when the trees surrounded him, he took comfort from them. They helped hide him from Whatever the creatures were that had attacked the farm. As he crept through the woods, though, moon shadows shifted, and it began to seem as if the darkness of the forest changed and moved, too. Trees loomed malevolently; branches writhed toward him. But were they just trees and branches? He could almost hear the growling chuckles stifled in their throats while they waited for him. The howls of Tam's pursuers no longer filled the night, but in the silence that replaced them he flinched every time the wind scraped one limb against another. Lower and lower he crouched, and moved more and more slowly. He hardly dared to breathe for fear he might be heard.

sʌɾənli ə hæn kloʊzd oʊvɝ ɪz maʊθ fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, ən ən aɪɝn ɡɹɪp sizd ɪz ɹɪst. fɹæntəkəli hi klɔɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ wɪð ɪz fɹi hæn fəɹ səm hoʊld ɑn ði ətækɝ.

Suddenly a hand closed over his mouth from behind, and an iron grip seized his wrist. Frantically he clawed over his shoulder with his free hand for some hold on the attacker.

"doʊn bɹeɪk maɪ nɛk, læd," keɪm tæmz hɔɹs wɪspɝ.

"Don't break my neck, lad," came Tam's hoarse whisper.

ɹɪlif flʌɾəd hɪm, tɝnɪŋ ɪz mʌsəlz tə wɔɾɝ. wən ɪz fɑðɝ ɹilist ɪm i fɛl tə hɪz hænz ən niz, ɡæspɪŋ əz ɪf i hæd ɹʌn fəɹ maɪlz. tæm dʒɹɑp daʊn bɪsaɪd hɪm, linɪŋ ɑn wʌn ɛlboʊ.

Relief flooded him, turning his muscles to water. When his father released him he fell to his hands and knees, gasping as if he had run for miles. Tam dropped down beside him, leaning on one elbow.

"aɪ wʊdn əv tʃɹaɪd ðəɾ ɪf aɪ hæd θɔt haʊ mʌtʃ juv ɡɹoʊn ɪn ðə læs fju jɪɹz," tæm sɛd sɔfli. hɪz aɪz ʃɪftəd kɑnstənli əz i spoʊk, kipɪŋ ə ʃɑɹp wɑtʃ ɑn ðə dɑɹknəs. "bʌɾ aɪ hæd tə meɪk ʃʊɹ jə dɪdn spik aʊt. səm tʃɹɑləks kən hɪɹ laɪk ə dɔɡ. meɪbi bɛɾɝ."

"I wouldn't have tried that if I had thought how much you've grown in the last few years," Tam said softly. His eyes shifted constantly as he spoke, keeping a sharp watch on the darkness. "But I had to make sure you didn't speak out. Some Trollocs can hear like a dog. Maybe better."

"bʌt tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ dʒʌst. . . ." ɹænd lɛt ðə wɝdz tʃɹeɪl ɔf. nɑt dʒʌst ə stɔɹi, nɑɾ æftɝ tənaɪt. ðoʊz θɪŋz kəd bi tʃɹɑləks əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf fəɹ ɔl i nu. "ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ?" hi wɪspɝd. "aɪ min . . . tʃɹɑləks?"

"But Trollocs are just. . . ." Rand let the words trail off. Not just a story, not after tonight. Those things could be Trollocs or the Dark One himself for all he knew. "Are you sure?" he whispered. "I mean . . . Trollocs?"

"aɪm ʃʊɹ. ðoʊ wʌt bɹɔɾ əm tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. . . . aɪ nɛvɝ sɔ wʌn bɪfɔɹ tənaɪt, bʌɾ aɪv tɔkt wɪð mɛn u hæv, soʊ aɪ noʊ ə lɪɾəl. meɪbi ɪnʌf tə kip əs əlaɪv. lɪsən kloʊsli. eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk kən si bɛɾɝ ðən ə mæn ɪn ðə dɑɹk, bʌt bɹaɪt laɪts blaɪn ðɛm, fəɹ ə taɪm ət list. ðət meɪ bi ði oʊnli ɹizən wi ɡɑɾ əweɪ fɹəm soʊ mɛni. səm kən tʃɹæk baɪ sɛn əɹ saʊnd, bʌt ðəɹ sɛd tə bi leɪzi. ɪf wi kən kip aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ hænz lɔŋ ɪnʌf, ðeɪ ʃəd ɡɪv ʌp."

"I'm sure. Though what brought them to the Two Rivers. . . . I never saw one before tonight, but I've talked with men who have, so I know a little. Maybe enough to keep us alive. Listen closely. A Trolloc can see better than a man in the dark, but bright lights blind them, for a time at least. That may be the only reason we got away from so many. Some can track by scent or sound, but they're said to be lazy. If we can keep out of their hands long enough, they should give up."

ðət meɪd ɹænd fil oʊnli ə lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ. "ɪn ðə stɔɹiz ðeɪ heɪt mɛn, ən sɝv ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

That made Rand feel only a little better. "In the stories they hate men, and serve the Dark One."

"ɪf ɛniθɪŋ bɪlɔŋz ɪn ðə ʃɛpɝɾ ə ðə naɪts flɑks, læd, ɪts tʃɹɑləks. ðeɪ kɪl fəɹ ðə plɛʒɝ ə kɪlɪŋ, soʊ aɪv bɪn toʊld. bʌt ðæts ði ɛn ə maɪ nɑlədʒ, ɪksɛp ðət ðeɪ kænɑt bi tʃɹʌstɪɾ ənlɛs ðəɹ əfɹeɪɾ ə ju, ən ðən nɑt fɑɹ."

"If anything belongs in the Shepherd of the Night's flocks, lad, it is Trollocs. They kill for the pleasure of killing, so I've been told. But that's the end of my knowledge, except that they cannot be trusted unless they're afraid of you, and then not far."

ɹænd ʃɪvɝd. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i wəd wɑnə miɾ ɛniwʌn ə tʃɹɑlɑk wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ʌv. "du jə θɪŋk ðəɹ stɪl hʌntɪŋ fəɹ ʌs?"

Rand shivered. He did not think he would want to meet anyone a Trolloc was afraid of. "Do you think they're still hunting for us?"

"meɪbi, meɪbi nɑt. ðeɪ doʊn sim vɛɹi smɑɹt. wʌns wi ɡɑɾ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst, aɪ sɛn ðə wʌnz æftɝ mi ɔf təwɔɹd ðə maʊntənz wɪθaʊt mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl." tæm fʌmbəld əɾ ɪz ɹaɪt saɪd, ðən pʊɾ ɪz hæn kloʊs tə hɪz feɪs. "bɛst ækt əz ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ, ðoʊ."

"Maybe, maybe not. They don't seem very smart. Once we got into the forest, I sent the ones after me off toward the mountains without much trouble." Tam fumbled at his right side, then put his hand close to his face. "Best act as if they are, though."

"jɔɹ hɝt."

"You're hurt."

"kip jəɹ vɔɪs daʊn. ɪts dʒʌst ə skɹætʃ, ən ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ tə bi dʌn əbaʊɾ ɪt naʊ, ɛniweɪ. ət lis ðə wɛðɝ simz tə bi wɔɹmɪŋ." hi leɪ bæk wɪð ə hɛvi saɪ. "pɝhæps ɪt woʊn bi tu bæd spɛndɪŋ ðə naɪɾ aʊt."

"Keep your voice down. It's just a scratch, and there is nothing to be done about it now, anyway. At least the weather seems to be warming." He lay back with a heavy sigh. "Perhaps it won't be too bad spending the night out."

ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪn ɹænd hæd dʒʌs bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ fɑn θɔts ə hɪz koʊɾ ən kloʊk. ðə tʃɹiz kʌt ðə wɝst ə ðə wɪnd, bʌt wʌt ɡʌstɪd θɹu stɪl slaɪs laɪk ə fɹoʊzən naɪf. hɛzɪɾəntli hi tʌtʃt tæmz feɪs, ən wɪnst. "jɔɹ ɑn faɪɝ. aɪ hæv tə ɡɛt jə tə nɪneɪiv."

In the back of his mind Rand had just been thinking fond thoughts of his coat and cloak. The trees cut the worst of the wind, but what gusted through still sliced like a frozen knife. Hesitantly he touched Tam's face, and winced. "You're on fire. I have to get you to Nynaeve."

"ɪn ə bɪt, læd."

"In a bit, lad."

"wi doʊn əv ɛni taɪm tə weɪst. ɪts ə lɔŋ weɪ ɪn ðə dɑɹk." hi skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fiɾ ən tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl ɪz fɑðɝ ʌp. ə ɡɹoʊn bɛɹli staɪfəl baɪ tæmz klɛntʃt tiθ meɪd ɹænd heɪstəli iz ɪm bæk daʊn.

"We don't have any time to waste. It's a long way in the dark." He scrambled to his feet and tried to pull his father up. A groan barely stifled by Tam's clenched teeth made Rand hastily ease him back down.

"lɛt mi ɹɛst ə waɪl, bɔɪ. aɪm taɪɝd."

"Let me rest a while, boy. I'm tired."

ɹænd paʊndɪɾ ɪz fɪst ɑn ɪz θaɪ. snʌɡ ɪn ðə fɑɹmhaʊs, wɪð ə faɪɝ ən blæŋkəts, plɛnti ʌv wɔɾɝ ən wɪloʊbɑɹk, hi maɪɾ əv bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə weɪt fəɹ deɪbɹeɪk bɪfɔɹ hɪtʃɪŋ bɛlə ən teɪkɪŋ tæm ɪndə ðə vɪlədʒ. hɪɹ wɑz noʊ faɪɝ, noʊ blæŋkəts, noʊ kɑɹt, ən noʊ bɛlə. bʌt ðoʊz θɪŋz wɝ stɪl bæk ət ðə haʊs. ɪf i kəd nɑt kæɹi tæm tə ðɛm, pɝhæps i kəd bɹɪŋ səm ə ðɛm, ət list, tə tæm. ɪf ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ ɡɔn. ðeɪ hæd tə ɡoʊ sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ.

Rand pounded his fist on his thigh. Snug in the farmhouse, with a fire and blankets, plenty of water and willowbark, he might have been willing to wait for daybreak before hitching Bela and taking Tam into the village. Here was no fire, no blankets, no cart, and no Bela. But those things were still back at the house. If he could not carry Tam to them, perhaps he could bring some of them, at least, to Tam. If the Trollocs were gone. They had to go sooner or later.

hi lʊkt ət ðə hoʊ hændəl, ðən dʒɹɑpt ɪt. ɪnstɛɾ i dʒɹu tæmz sɔɹd. ðə bleɪd ɡlim dʌli ɪn ðə peɪl munlaɪt. ðə lɔŋ hɪl fɛlt ɑɾ ɪn ɪz hænd; ðə weɪɾ ən hɛft wɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ. hi slæʃt ət ði ɛɹ ə fju taɪmz bɪfɔɹ stɑpɪŋ wɪð ə saɪ. slæʃɪŋ əɾ ɛɹ wɑz izi. ɪf i hæd tə də ɪɾ əɡɛnst ə tʃɹɑlɑk i wɑz ʃʊɹli dʒʌst əz laɪkli tə ɹʌn ɪnstɛd, əɹ fɹiz stɪf soʊ hi kəd nɑt muv əɾ ɔl əntɪl ðə tʃɹɑlɑk swʌŋ wʌn ə ðoʊz ɑd sɔɹdz ænd. . . . stɑp ɪt! ɪts nɑt hɛlpɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ!

He looked at the hoe handle, then dropped it. Instead he drew Tam's sword. The blade gleamed dully in the pale moonlight. The long hilt felt odd in his hand; the weight and heft were strange. He slashed at the air a few times before stopping with a sigh. Slashing at air was easy. If he had to do it against a Trolloc he was surely just as likely to run instead, or freeze stiff so he could not move at all until the Trolloc swung one of those odd swords and. . . . Stop it! It's not helping anything!

əz i stɑɹɾəd tə ɹaɪz, tæm kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹm. "wɛɹ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ?"

As he started to rise, Tam caught his arm. "Where are you going?"

"wi nid ðə kɑɹt," hi sɛd dʒɛnli. "æn blæŋkəts." hi wɑz ʃɑkt ət haʊ izəli hi pʊld ɪz fɑðɝz hæn fɹəm ɪz sliv. "ɹɛst, ən əl bi bæk."

"We need the cart," he said gently. "And blankets." He was shocked at how easily he pulled his father's hand from his sleeve. "Rest, and I'll be back."

"kɛɹfəl," tæm bɹiðd.

"Careful," Tam breathed.

hi kəd nɑt si tæmz feɪs ɪn ðə munlaɪt, bʌɾ i kəd fil ɪz aɪz ɑn hɪm. "aɪ wɪl bi." əz kɛɹfəl əz ə maʊs ɪksplɔɹɪŋ ə hɔks nɛst, hi θɔt.

He could not see Tam's face in the moonlight, but he could feel his eyes on him. "I will be." As careful as a mouse exploring a hawk's nest, he thought.

əz saɪlənli əz ənʌðɝ ʃædoʊ, hi slɪɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. hi θɔɾ ʌv ɔl ðə taɪmz i hæd pleɪd tæɡ ɪn ðə wʊdz wɪð ɪz fɹɛnz əz tʃɪlʒɹən, stɔkɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ, stʃɹeɪnɪŋ nɑt tə bi hɝɾ əntɪl i pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn sʌmwʌnz ʃoʊldɝ. sʌmhaʊ hi kəd nɑt meɪk ðɪs sim ðə seɪm.

As silently as another shadow, he slid into the darkness. He thought of all the times he had played tag in the woods with his friends as children, stalking one another, straining not to be heard until he put a hand on someone's shoulder. Somehow he could not make this seem the same.

kɹipɪŋ fɹəm tʃɹi tə tʃɹi, hi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ə plæn, bʌt baɪ ðə taɪm i ɹitʃt ði ɛdʒ ə ðə wʊdz i hæd meɪɾ ən dɪskɑɹɾɪd tɛn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ dɪpɛndəɾ ɑn wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ stɪl ðɛɹ. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn, hi kəd sɪmpli wɔk ʌp tə ðə haʊs ən teɪk wʌɾ i niɾəd. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ stɪl ðɛɹ. . . . ɪn ðət keɪs, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt bʌt ɡoʊ bæk tə tæm. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk ɪt, bʌɾ i kəd də tæm noʊ ɡʊd baɪ ɡɛɾɪŋ kɪld.

Creeping from tree to tree, he tried to make a plan, but by the time he reached the edge of the woods he had made and discarded ten. Everything depended on whether or not the Trollocs were still there. If they were gone, he could simply walk up to the house and take what he needed. If they were still there. . . . In that case, there was nothing for it but go back to Tam. He did not like it, but he could do Tam no good by getting killed.

hi pɪɹd təwɔɹd ðə fɑɹm bɪldɪŋz. ðə bɑɹn ən ðə ʃip pɛn wɝ oʊnli dɑɹk ʃeɪps ɪn ðə munlaɪt. laɪt spɪl fɹəm ðə fɹʌnt wɪndoʊz ə ðə haʊs, ðoʊ, ən θɹu ði oʊpən fɹʌn dɔɹ. dʒʌs ðə kændəlz fɑðɝ lɪt, əɹ ɑɹ ðəɹ tʃɹɑləks weɪɾɪŋ?

He peered toward the farm buildings. The barn and the sheep pen were only dark shapes in the moonlight. Light spilled from the front windows of the house, though, and through the open front door. Just the candles father lit, or are there Trollocs waiting?

hi dʒʌmp kənvʌlsɪvli əɾ ə naɪthɔks ɹiɾi kɹaɪ, ðən sæɡd əɡɛnst ə tʃɹi, ʃeɪkɪŋ. ðɪs wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪm noʊwɛɹ. dʒɹɑpɪŋ tə hɪz bɛli, hi bɪɡæn tə kɹɔl, hoʊldɪŋ ðə sɔɹɾ ɔkwɝdli bɪfɔɹ hɪm. hi kɛpt ɪz tʃɪn ɪn ðə dɝɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə bæk ə ðə ʃip pɛn.

He jumped convulsively at a nighthawk's reedy cry, then sagged against a tree, shaking. This was getting him nowhere. Dropping to his belly, he began to crawl, holding the sword awkwardly before him. He kept his chin in the dirt all the way to the back of the sheep pen.

kɹaʊtʃt əɡɛns ðə stoʊn wɔl, hi lɪsənd. nɑɾ ə saʊn dɪstɝb ðə naɪt. kɛɹfəli hi izd ʌp ɪnʌf tə lʊk oʊvɝ ðə wɔl. nʌθɪŋ muvd ɪn ðə fɑɹmjɑɹd. noʊ ʃædoʊz flɪkɝɾ əɡɛns ðə lɪt wɪndoʊz ə ðə haʊs, əɹ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ. bɛlə ən ðə kɑɹt fɝst, əɹ ðə blæŋkəts ən ʌðɝ θɪŋz. ɪt wɑz ðə laɪt ðət dɪsaɪɾɪd hɪm. ðə bɑɹn wɑz dɑɹk. ɛniθɪŋ kəd bi weɪɾɪŋ ɪnsaɪd, ən i wəɾ əv noʊ weɪ ʌv noʊɪŋ əntɪl ɪt wɑz tu leɪt. ət list i wəd bi eɪbəl tə si wʌt wɑz ɪnsaɪd ðə haʊs.

Crouched against the stone wall, he listened. Not a sound disturbed the night. Carefully he eased up enough to look over the wall. Nothing moved in the farmyard. No shadows flickered against the lit windows of the house, or in the doorway. Bela and the cart first, or the blankets and other things. It was the light that decided him. The barn was dark. Anything could be waiting inside, and he would have no way of knowing until it was too late. At least he would be able to see what was inside the house.

əz i stɑɹɾəd tə loʊɝ hɪmsɛlf əɡɛn, hi stɑp sʌɾənli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saʊnd. moʊst ə ðə ʃip maɪɾ əv sɛɾəld daʊn ɔlɹɛɾi ən ɡɔn bæk tə slip, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz nɑt laɪkli, bʌɾ ə fju wɝ ɔlweɪz əweɪk ivən ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə naɪt, ɹʌslɪŋ əbaʊt, bliɾɪŋ naʊ ən əɡɛn. hi kəd bɛɹli meɪk aʊt ðə ʃæɾoʊi maʊnz ə ʃip ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. wʌn leɪ ɔlmoʊs bɪniθ hɪm.

As he started to lower himself again, he stopped suddenly. There was no sound. Most of the sheep might have settled down already and gone back to sleep, though it was not likely, but a few were always awake even in the middle of the night, rustling about, bleating now and again. He could barely make out the shadowy mounds of sheep on the ground. One lay almost beneath him.

tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk noʊ nɔɪz, hi hɔɪstəd hɪmsɛlf ɑntu ðə wɔl əntɪl i kəd stʃɹɛtʃ aʊɾ ə hæn tə ðə dɪm ʃeɪp. hɪz fɪŋɡɝz tʌtʃt kɝli wʊl, ðən wɛtnəs; ðə ʃip dɪd nɑt muv. bɹɛθ lɛft ɪm ɪn ə ɹʌʃ əz i pʊʃt bæk, ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðə sɔɹɾ əz i fɛl tə ðə ɡɹaʊn aʊtsaɪd ðə pɛn. ðeɪ kɪl fəɹ fʌn. ʃɑkəli hi skɹʌb ðə wɛtnəs fɹəm ɪz hæn ɪn ðə dɝt.

Trying to make no noise, he hoisted himself onto the wall until he could stretch out a hand to the dim shape. His fingers touched curly wool, then wetness; the sheep did not move. Breath left him in a rush as he pushed back, almost dropping the sword as he fell to the ground outside the pen. They kill for fun. Shakily he scrubbed the wetness from his hand in the dirt.

fɪɹsli hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf ðət nʌθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd. ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd dʌn ðɛɹ bʊtʃɝi ən ɡɔn. ɹɪpiɾɪŋ ðəɾ ɪn ɪz maɪnd, hi kɹɔld ɑn əkɹɔs ðə fɑɹmjɑɹd, kipɪŋ əz loʊ əz i kʊd, bʌt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə wɑtʃ ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, tu. hi hæd nɛvɝ θɔɾ i wəɾ ɛnvi ən ɝθwɝm.

Fiercely he told himself that nothing had changed. The Trollocs had done their butchery and gone. Repeating that in his mind, he crawled on across the farmyard, keeping as low as he could, but trying to watch every direction, too. He had never thought he would envy an earthworm.

ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə haʊs i leɪ kloʊs bɪsaɪd ðə wɔl, bɪniθ ðə bɹoʊkən wɪndoʊ, ən lɪsənd. ðə dʌl θəɾɪŋ ə blʌɾ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz wɑz ðə laʊɾəst saʊn i hɝd. sloʊli hi ɹɪɹɾ ʌp ən pɪɹɾ ɪnsaɪd.

At the front of the house he lay close beside the wall, beneath the broken window, and listened. The dull thudding of blood in his ears was the loudest sound he heard. Slowly he reared up and peered inside.

ðə stupɑt leɪ ʌpsaɪd daʊn ɪn ði æʃəz ɑn ðə hɑɹθ. splɪntɝd, bɹoʊkən wʊd lɪɾɝd ðə ɹum; nɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl pis ə fɝnɪtʃɝ ɹɪmeɪn hoʊl. ivən ðə teɪbəl ɹɛstəɾ əɾ ən æŋɡəl, tu lɛɡz hæk tə ɹʌf stʌbz. ɛvɹi dʒɹɔɹ hæd bɪn pʊld aʊɾ ən smæʃt; ɛvɹi kʌbɝɾ ən kæbənət stʊɾ oʊpən, mɛni dɔɹz hæŋɪŋ baɪ wʌn hɪnʒ. ðɛɹ kɑntɛns wɝ stʃɹun oʊvɝ ðə ɹɛkədʒ, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz dʌstɪd wɪð waɪt. flaʊɝ ən sɔlt, tə dʒʌdʒ fɹəm ðə slæʃt sæks tɔs daʊn baɪ ðə faɪɝpleɪs. fɔɹ twɪstəd bɑɾiz meɪɾ ə tæŋɡəl ɪn ðə ɹɛmnəns ə ðə fɝnɪʃɪŋz. tʃɹɑləks.

The stewpot lay upside down in the ashes on the hearth. Splintered, broken wood littered the room; not a single piece of furniture remained whole. Even the table rested at an angle, two legs hacked to rough stubs. Every drawer had been pulled out and smashed; every cupboard and cabinet stood open, many doors hanging by one hinge. Their contents were strewn over the wreckage, and everything was dusted with white. Flour and salt, to judge from the slashed sacks tossed down by the fireplace. Four twisted bodies made a tangle in the remnants of the furnishings. Trollocs.

ɹænd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd wʌn baɪ ɪts ɹæmz hɔɹnz. ði ʌðɝz wɝ mʌtʃ ðə seɪm, ivən ɪn ðɛɹ dɪfɝənsɪz, ə ɹipʌlsɪv mɛlæŋ ə hjumən feɪsəz dɪstɔɹɾəd baɪ mʌzəlz, hɔɹnz, fɛðɝz, ən fɝ. ðɛɹ hænz, ɔlmoʊs hjumən, oʊnli meɪɾ ɪt wɝs. tu wɔɹ buts; ði ʌðɝz hæd hʊvz. hi wɑtʃt wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ əntɪl ɪz aɪz bɝnd. nʌn ə ðə tʃɹɑləks muvd. ðeɪ hæd tə bi dɛd. ən tæm wɑz weɪɾɪŋ.

Rand recognized one by its ram's horns. The others were much the same, even in their differences, a repulsive melange of human faces distorted by muzzles, horns, feathers, and fur. Their hands, almost human, only made it worse. Two wore boots; the others had hooves. He watched without blinking until his eyes burned. None of the Trollocs moved. They had to be dead. And Tam was waiting.

hi ɹæn ɪn θɹu ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ ən stɑpt, ɡæɡɪŋ ət ðə stɛntʃ. ə steɪbəl ðət hæd nɑt bɪn mʌkt aʊɾ ɪn mʌnθs wɑz ði oʊnli θɪŋ i kəd θɪŋk ə ðət maɪt kʌm kloʊs tə mætʃɪŋ ɪt. vaɪl smɪɹz dɪfaɪl ðə wɔlz. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɹið θɹu hɪz maʊθ, hi hɝidli bɪɡæn poʊkɪŋ θɹu ðə mɛs ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə wɔɾɝbæɡ ɪn wʌn ə ðə kʌbɝdz.

He ran in through the front door and stopped, gagging at the stench. A stable that had not been mucked out in months was the only thing he could think of that might come close to matching it. Vile smears defiled the walls. Trying to breathe through his mouth, he hurriedly began poking through the mess on the floor. There had been a waterbag in one of the cupboards.

ə skɹeɪpɪŋ saʊn bɪhaɪn ɪm sɛn ə tʃɪl tə hɪz mɛɹoʊ, ən i spʌn, ɔlmoʊs fɔlɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ə ðə teɪbəl. hi kɑt hɪmsɛlf, ən moʊn bɪhaɪn tiθ ðət wʊɾə tʃæɾɝd hæɾ i nɑt hæɾ əm klɛntʃt əntɪl ɪz dʒɔ ætʃt.

A scraping sound behind him sent a chill to his marrow, and he spun, almost falling over the remains of the table. He caught himself, and moaned behind teeth that would have chattered had he not had them clenched until his jaw ached.

wʌn ə ðə tʃɹɑləks wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ tə ɪts fit. ə wʊlfs mʌzəl dʒʌɾɪd aʊt bɪloʊ sʌŋkən aɪz. flæt, ɪmoʊʃənləs aɪz, ən ɔl tu hjumən. hɛɹi, pɔɪntəɾ ɪɹz twɪtʃt ɪnsɛsənli. ɪt stɛpt oʊvɝ wʌn ʌv ɪts dɛd kəmpænjənz ɑn ʃɑɹp ɡoʊt hʊvz. ðə seɪm blæk meɪl ði ʌðɝz wɔɹ ɹæspt əɡɛns lɛðɝ tʃɹaʊzɝz, ən wʌn ə ðə hjudʒ, saɪð-kɝv sɔɹdz swʌŋ əɾ ɪts saɪd.

One of the Trollocs was getting to its feet. A wolf's muzzle jutted out below sunken eyes. Flat, emotionless eyes, and all too human. Hairy, pointed ears twitched incessantly. It stepped over one of its dead companions on sharp goat hooves. The same black mail the others wore rasped against leather trousers, and one of the huge, scythe-curved swords swung at its side.

ɪt mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ, ɡʌɾɝəl ən ʃɑɹp, ðən sɛd, "ʌðɝz ɡoʊ əweɪ. nɑɹɡ steɪ. nɑɹɡ smɑɹt." ðə wɝdz wɝ dɪstɔɹɾəd ən hɑɹd tə ʌndɝstænd, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ə maʊθ nɛvɝ mɛn fəɹ hjumən spitʃ. ɪts toʊn wɑz mɛn tə bi suðɪŋ, hi θɔt, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt teɪk ɪz aɪz ɔf ðə steɪn tiθ, lɔŋ ən ʃɑɹp, ðət flæʃt ɛvɹi taɪm ðə kɹitʃɝ spoʊk. "nɑɹɡ noʊ səm kʌm bæk sʌmtaɪm. nɑɹɡ weɪt. jə noʊ nid sɔɹd. pʊt sɔɹd daʊn."

It muttered something, guttural and sharp, then said, "Others go away. Narg stay. Narg smart." The words were distorted and hard to understand, coming from a mouth never meant for human speech. Its tone was meant to be soothing, he thought, but he could not take his eyes off the stained teeth, long and sharp, that flashed every time the creature spoke. "Narg know some come back sometime. Narg wait. You no need sword. Put sword down."

əntɪl ðə tʃɹɑlɑk spoʊk ɹænd hæd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i hɛl tæmz sɔɹd weɪvɝɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪm ɪn boʊθ hænz, ɪts pɔɪn eɪmd ət ðə hjudʒ kɹitʃɝ. ɪt taʊɝd hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz əbʌv hɪm, wɪð ə tʃɛst ən ɑɹmz tə dwɔɹf mæstɝ luhən.

Until the Trolloc spoke Rand had not realized that he held Tam's sword wavering before him in both hands, its point aimed at the huge creature. It towered head and shoulders above him, with a chest and arms to dwarf Master Luhhan.

"nɑɹɡ noʊ hɝt." ɪt tʊk ə stɛp kloʊsɝ, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ. "ju pʊt sɔɹd daʊn." ðə dɑɹk hɛɹ ɑn ðə bæks ʌv ɪts hænz wɑz θɪk, laɪk fɝ.

"Narg no hurt." It took a step closer, gesturing. "You put sword down." The dark hair on the backs of its hands was thick, like fur.

"steɪ bæk," ɹænd sɛd, wɪʃɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs wɝ stɛɾiɝ. "waɪ dɪd jə də ðɪs? waɪ?"

"Stay back," Rand said, wishing his voice were steadier. "Why did you do this? Why?"

"lʒə deɪɛɡ ɹɑɡdə!" ðə snɑɹl kwɪkli bɪkeɪm ə tuθi smaɪl. "pʊt sɔɹd daʊn. nɑɹɡ noʊ hɝt. mɹdʒɹɑl wɑn tɔk ju." ə flæʃ ʌv ɪmoʊʃən kɹɔs ðə dɪstɔɹɾəd feɪs. fɪɹ. "ʌðɝz kʌm bæk, jə tɔk mɹdʒɹɑl." ɪt tʊk ənʌðɝ stɛp, wʌn bɪɡ hæn kʌmɪŋ tə ɹɛst ɑn ɪts oʊn sɔɹd hɪlt. "ju pʊt sɔɹd daʊn."

"Vlja daeg roghda!" The snarl quickly became a toothy smile. "Put sword down. Narg no hurt. Myrddraal want talk you." A flash of emotion crossed the distorted face. Fear. "Others come back, you talk Myrddraal." It took another step, one big hand coming to rest on its own sword hilt. "You put sword down."

ɹænd wɛɾ ɪz lɪps. mɹdʒɹɑl! ðə wɝst ə ðə stɔɹiz wɑz wɔkɪŋ tənaɪt. ɪf ə feɪd wɑz kʌmɪŋ, ɪt meɪɾ ə tʃɹɑlɑk peɪl baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən. hi hæd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ. bʌɾ ɪf ðə tʃɹɑlɑk dʒɹu ðət mæsɪv bleɪɾ i wəd nɑɾ əv ə tʃæns. hi fɔɹst ɪz lɪps ɪndə ə ʃeɪki smaɪl. "ɔl ɹaɪt." ɡɹɪp taɪɾənɪŋ ɑn ðə sɔɹd, hi lɛt boʊθ hænz dʒɹɑp tə hɪz saɪdz. "aɪl tɔk."

Rand wet his lips. Myrddraal! The worst of the stories was walking tonight. If a Fade was coming, it made a Trolloc pale by comparison. He had to get away. But if the Trolloc drew that massive blade he would not have a chance. He forced his lips into a shaky smile. "All right." Grip tightening on the sword, he let both hands drop to his sides. "I'll talk."

ðə wʊlf-smaɪl bɪkeɪm ə snɑɹl, ən ðə tʃɹɑlɑk lʌnʒd fəɹ hɪm. ɹænd hæd nɑt θɔɾ ɛniθɪŋ ðət bɪɡ kəd muv soʊ fæst. dɛspɝətli hi bɹɔɾ ɪz sɔɹɾ ʌp. ðə mɑnstʃɹəs bɑɾi kɹæʃt ɪndə hɪm, slæmɪŋ ɪm əɡɛns ðə wɔl. bɹɛθ lɛft ɪz lʌŋz ɪn wʌn ɡæsp. hi fɔt fəɹ ɛɹ əz ðeɪ fɛl tə ðə flɔɹ təɡɛðɝ, ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ɑn tɑp. fɹæntəkəli hi stʃɹʌɡəl bɪniθ ðə kɹʌʃɪŋ weɪt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə əvɔɪd θɪk hænz ɡɹoʊpɪŋ fəɹ hɪm, ən snæpɪŋ dʒɔz.

The wolf-smile became a snarl, and the Trolloc lunged for him. Rand had not thought anything that big could move so fast. Desperately he brought his sword up. The monstrous body crashed into him, slamming him against the wall. Breath left his lungs in one gasp. He fought for air as they fell to the floor together, the Trolloc on top. Frantically he struggled beneath the crushing weight, trying to avoid thick hands groping for him, and snapping jaws.

əbɹʌpli ðə tʃɹɑlɑk spæzmd ən wɑz stɪl. bæɾɝd ən bɹuzd, hæf sʌfəkeɪɾɪd baɪ ðə bʌlk ɑn tɑp ə hɪm, fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd kəɾ oʊnli laɪ ðəɹ ɪn dɪsbɪlif. kwɪkli hi keɪm tə hɪz sɛnsɪz, ðoʊ, ɪnʌf tə ɹɪð aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə bɑɾi, ət list. ən bɑɾi ɪt wɑz. ðə blʌɾid bleɪɾ ə tæmz sɔɹd stʊɾ aʊt fɹəm ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑks bæk. hi hæd ɡɑɾən ɪɾ ʌp ɪn taɪm æftɝ ɔl. blʌd kʌvɝd ɹændz hænz, əz wɛl, ən meɪɾ ə blækɪʃ smɪɹ əkɹɔs ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz ʃɝt. hɪz stʌmək tʃɝnd, ən i swɑloʊd hɑɹd tə kip fɹəm biɪŋ sɪk. hi ʃʊk əz hɑɹɾ əz i hæɾ ɪn ðə wɝst ə hɪz fɪɹ, bʌt ðɪs taɪm ɪn ɹɪlif ət stɪl biɪŋ əlaɪv.

Abruptly the Trolloc spasmed and was still. Battered and bruised, half suffocated by the bulk on top of him, for a moment Rand could only lie there in disbelief. Quickly he came to his senses, though, enough to writhe out from under the body, at least. And body it was. The bloodied blade of Tam's sword stood out from the center of the Trolloc's back. He had gotten it up in time after all. Blood covered Rand's hands, as well, and made a blackish smear across the front of his shirt. His stomach churned, and he swallowed hard to keep from being sick. He shook as hard as he had in the worst of his fear, but this time in relief at still being alive.

ʌðɝz kʌm bæk, ðə tʃɹɑlɑk hæd sɛd. ði ʌðɝ tʃɹɑləks wəd bi ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə fɑɹmhaʊs. ən ə mɹdʒɹɑl, ə feɪd. ðə stɔɹiz sɛd feɪdz wɝ twɛnti fit tɔl, wɪð aɪz ə faɪɝ, ən ðeɪ ɹoʊd ʃædoʊz laɪk hɔɹsəz. wən ə feɪd tɝn saɪdweɪz, ɪt dɪsəpɪɹd, ən noʊ wɔl kəd stɑp ðɛm. hi hæd tə də wʌɾ i hæd kʌm fɔɹ, ən ɡɛɾ əweɪ kwɪkli.

Others come back, the Trolloc had said. The other Trollocs would be returning to the farmhouse. And a Myrddraal, a Fade. The stories said Fades were twenty feet tall, with eyes of fire, and they rode shadows like horses. When a Fade turned sideways, it disappeared, and no wall could stop them. He had to do what he had come for, and get away quickly.

ɡɹʌntɪŋ wɪð ði ɛfɝɾ i hiv ðə tʃɹɑlɑks bɑɾi oʊvɝ tə ɡɛt tə ðə sɔɹd - ən ɔlmoʊst ɹæn wən oʊpən aɪz stɛɹɾ ət hɪm. ɪt tʊk ɪm ə mɪnət tə ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ stɛɹɪŋ θɹu ðə ɡleɪz ə dɛθ.

Grunting with the effort he heaved the Trolloc's body over to get to the sword - and almost ran when open eyes stared at him. It took him a minute to realize they were staring through the glaze of death.

hi waɪpt ɪz hænz ɑn ə tæɾɝd ɹæɡ - ɪt hæd bɪn wʌn ə tæmz ʃɝts oʊnli ðət mɔɹnɪŋ - ən tʌɡd ðə bleɪd fɹi. klinɪŋ ðə sɔɹd, hi ɹɪlʌktənli dʒɹɑp ðə ɹæɡ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ nitnəs, hi θɔt wɪð ə læf ðəɾ i hæd tə klæmp ɪz tiθ ʃʌt tə stɑp. hi dɪd nɑt si haʊ ðeɪ kəɾ ɛvɝ klin ðə haʊs wɛl ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪt tə bi lɪvd ɪn əɡɛn. ðə hɔɹəbəl stɛntʃ hæd pɹɑbli ɔlɹɛɾi soʊkt ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ðə tɪmbɝz. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm tə θɪŋk ə ðæt. noʊ taɪm fəɹ nitnəs. noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ, meɪbi.

He wiped his hands on a tattered rag - it had been one of Tam's shirts only that morning - and tugged the blade free. Cleaning the sword, he reluctantly dropped the rag on the floor. There was no time for neatness, he thought with a laugh that he had to clamp his teeth shut to stop. He did not see how they could ever clean the house well enough for it to be lived in again. The horrible stench had probably already soaked right into the timbers. But there was no time to think of that. No time for neatness. No time for anything, maybe.

hi wɑz ʃʊɹ i wɑz fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ɛni nʌmbɝ ə θɪŋz ðeɪ wəd nid, bʌt tæm wɑz weɪɾɪŋ, ən ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ kʌmɪŋ bæk. hi ɡæðɝd wʌɾ i kəd θɪŋk ʌv ɑn ðə ɹʌn. blæŋkəts fɹəm ðə bɛdʒɹumz əpstɛɹz, ən klin klɔθs tə bændɪdʒ tæmz waʊnd. ðɛɹ kloʊks ən koʊts. ə wɔɾɝbæɡ ðəɾ i kæɹid wən i tʊk ðə ʃip tə pæstʃɝ. ə klin ʃɝt. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wən i wəɾ əv taɪm tə tʃeɪnʒ, bʌɾ i wɑntəd tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz blʌd-smɪɹd ʃɝɾ ət ðə fɝst ɑpɝtunəɾi. ðə smɔl bæɡz ʌv wɪloʊbɑɹk ən ðɛɹ ʌðɝ mɛɾəsənz wɝ pɑɹɾ ʌv ə dɑɹk, mʌɾi-lʊkɪŋ paɪl i kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ hɪmsɛlf tə tʌtʃ.

He was sure he was forgetting any number of things they would need, but Tam was waiting, and the Trollocs were coming back. He gathered what he could think of on the run. Blankets from the bedrooms upstairs, and clean cloths to bandage Tam's wound. Their cloaks and coats. A waterbag that he carried when he took the sheep to pasture. A clean shirt. He did not know when he would have time to change, but he wanted to get out of his blood-smeared shirt at the first opportunity. The small bags of willowbark and their other medicines were part of a dark, muddy-looking pile he could not bring himself to touch.

wʌn bʌkəɾ ə ðə wɔɾɝ tæm hæd bɹɔɾ ɪn stɪl stʊd baɪ ðə faɪɝpleɪs, mɝækjələsli ənspɪld ən əntʌtʃt. hi fɪl ðə wɔɾɝbæɡ fɹəm ɪt, ɡeɪv ɪz hænz ə heɪsti wɑʃ ɪn ðə ɹɛst, ən meɪd wʌn mɔɹ kwɪk sɝtʃ fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ i maɪɾ əv fɝɡɑɾən. hi faʊn ɪz baʊ əmʌŋ ðə ɹɛkədʒ, bɹoʊkən klinli ɪn tu ət ðə θɪkəs pɔɪnt. hi ʃʌɾɝəd əz i lɛt ðə pisəz fɔl. wʌɾ i hæd ɡæðɝɾ ɔlɹɛɾi wəɾ əv tə du, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd. kwɪkli hi paɪld ɛvɹiθɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə dɔɹ.

One bucket of the water Tam had brought in still stood by the fireplace, miraculously unspilled and untouched. He filled the waterbag from it, gave his hands a hasty wash in the rest, and made one more quick search for anything he might have forgotten. He found his bow among the wreckage, broken cleanly in two at the thickest point. He shuddered as he let the pieces fall. What he had gathered already would have to do, he decided. Quickly he piled everything outside the door.

ðə læs θɪŋ bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ ðə haʊs, hi dʌɡ ə ʃʌɾɝd læntɝn fɹəm ðə mɛs ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ɪt stɪl hɛld ɔɪl. laɪɾɪŋ ɪt fɹəm wʌn ə ðə kændəlz, hi kloʊz ðə ʃʌɾɝz - pɑɹtli əɡɛns ðə wɪnd, bʌt moʊsli tə kip fɹəm dʒɹɔɪŋ ətɛnʃən - ən hɝiɾ aʊtsaɪd wɪð ðə læntɝn ɪn wʌn hæn ən ðə sɔɹɾ ɪn ði ʌðɝ. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i wəd faɪn ɪn ðə bɑɹn. ðə ʃip pɛn kɛpt ɪm fɹəm hoʊpɪŋ tu mʌtʃ. bʌɾ i niɾəd ðə kɑɹt tə ɡɛt tæm tə ɛmənz fild, ən fəɹ ðə kɑɹɾ i niɾəd bɛlə. nəsɛsəɾi meɪɾ ɪm hoʊp ə lɪɾəl.

The last thing before leaving the house, he dug a shuttered lantern from the mess on the floor. It still held oil. Lighting it from one of the candles, he closed the shutters - partly against the wind, but mostly to keep from drawing attention - and hurried outside with the lantern in one hand and the sword in the other. He was not sure what he would find in the barn. The sheep pen kept him from hoping too much. But he needed the cart to get Tam to Emond's Field, and for the cart he needed Bela. Necessity made him hope a little.

ðə bɑɹn dɔɹz stʊɾ oʊpən, wʌn kɹikɪŋ ɑn ɪts hɪnʒɪz əz ɪt ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðə wɪnd. ði ɪntɪɹiɝ lʊkt əz ɪɾ ɔlweɪz hæd, ət fɝst. ðən ɪz aɪz fɛl ɑn ɛmpti stɔlz, ðə stɔl dɔɹz ɹɪp fɹəm ðɛɹ hɪnʒɪz. bɛlə ən ðə kaʊ wɝ ɡɔn. kwɪkli hi wɛn tə ðə bæk ə ðə bɑɹn. ðə kɑɹt leɪ ɑn ɪts saɪd, hæf ðə spoʊks bɹoʊkən aʊɾ ʌv ɪts wilz. wʌn ʃæft wɑz oʊnli ə fʊt-lɔŋ stʌmp.

The barn doors stood open, one creaking on its hinges as it shifted in the wind. The interior looked as it always had, at first. Then his eyes fell on empty stalls, the stall doors ripped from their hinges. Bela and the cow were gone. Quickly he went to the back of the barn. The cart lay on its side, half the spokes broken out of its wheels. One shaft was only a foot-long stump.

ðə dɪspɛɹ i hæd bɪn hoʊldɪŋ ət beɪ fɪl hɪm. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i kəd kæɹi tæm əz fɑɹ əz ðə vɪlədʒ ivən ɪf ɪz fɑðɝ kəd bɛɹ tə bi kæɹid. ðə peɪn ʌv ɪt maɪt kɪl tæm mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən ðə fivɝ. stɪl, ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli tʃæns lɛft. hi hæd dʌn ɔl i kəd də hɪɹ. əz i tɝn tə ɡoʊ, hɪz aɪz fɛl ɑn ðə hækt-ɔf kɑɹt ʃæf laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə stʃɹɔ-stʃɹun flɔɹ. sʌɾənli hi smaɪld.

The despair he had been holding at bay filled him. He was not sure he could carry Tam as far as the village even if his father could bear to be carried. The pain of it might kill Tam more quickly than the fever. Still, it was the only chance left. He had done all he could do here. As he turned to go, his eyes fell on the hacked-off cart shaft lying on the straw-strewn floor. Suddenly he smiled.

hɝidli hi sɛt ðə læntɝn ən ðə sɔɹɾ ɑn ðə stʃɹɔ-kʌvɝd flɔɹ, ən ɪn ðə nɛkst ɪnstən i wɑz ɹɛslɪŋ wɪð ðə kɑɹt, tɪpɪŋ ɪt bæk oʊvɝ tə fɔl əpɹaɪt wɪð ə snæp ə mɔɹ bɹeɪkɪŋ spoʊks, ðən θɹoʊɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ɪndə ɪt tə hiv ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ði ʌndæmədʒd ʃæf stʊd stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt. snætʃɪŋ ʌp ðə sɔɹɾ i hækt ət ðə wɛl-sizən æʃ. tə hɪz pliz sɝpɹaɪz ɡɹeɪt tʃɪps flu wɪð ɪz stʃɹoʊks, ən i kʌt θɹu əz kwɪkli əz i kəɾ əv wɪð ə ɡʊɾ æks.

Hurriedly he set the lantern and the sword on the straw-covered floor, and in the next instant he was wrestling with the cart, tipping it back over to fall upright with a snap of more breaking spokes, then throwing his shoulder into it to heave it over on the other side. The undamaged shaft stood straight out. Snatching up the sword he hacked at the well-seasoned ash. To his pleased surprise great chips flew with his strokes, and he cut through as quickly as he could have with a good axe.

wən ðə ʃæft fɛl fɹi, hi lʊkt ət ðə sɔɹd bleɪɾ ɪn wʌndɝ. ivən ðə bɛst-ʃɑɹpən æks wʊɾə dʌl tʃɑpɪŋ θɹu ðət hɑɹd, eɪdʒd wʊd, bʌt ðə sɔɹd lʊkt əz bɹaɪtli ʃɑɹp əz ɛvɝ. hi tʌtʃt ði ɛdʒ wɪð ɪz θʌm, ðən heɪstəli stʌk ɪɾ ɪn ɪz maʊð. ðə bleɪd wɑz stɪl ɹeɪzɝ-ʃɑɹp.

When the shaft fell free, he looked at the sword blade in wonder. Even the best-sharpened axe would have dulled chopping through that hard, aged wood, but the sword looked as brightly sharp as ever. He touched the edge with his thumb, then hastily stuck it in his mouth. The blade was still razor-sharp.

bʌɾ i hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ wʌndɝ. bloʊɪŋ aʊt ðə læntɝn - ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə hæv ðə bɑɹn bɝn daʊn ɑn tɑp ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls - hi ɡæðɝɾ ʌp ðə ʃæfs ən ɹæn bæk tə ɡɛt wʌɾ i hæd lɛft ət ðə haʊs.

But he had no time for wonder. Blowing out the lantern - there was no need to have the barn burn down on top of everything else - he gathered up the shafts and ran back to get what he had left at the house.

ɔltəɡɛðɝ ɪt meɪɾ ən ɑkwɝd bɝɾən. nɑɾ ə hɛvi wʌn, bʌt hɑɹd tə bæləns ən mænədʒ, ðə kɑɹt ʃæfs ʃɪftɪŋ ən twɪstɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz əz i stʌmbəld əkɹɔs ðə plaʊd fild. wʌns bæk ɪn ðə fɔɹəs ðeɪ wɝ ivən wɝs, kætʃɪŋ ɑn tʃɹiz ən nɑkɪŋ ɪm hæf ɔf ɪz fit. ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn iziɝ tə dʒɹæɡ, bʌt ðət wəd liv ə klɪɹ tʃɹeɪl bɪhaɪn hɪm. hi ɪntɛndəd tə weɪɾ əz lɔŋ əz pɑsəbəl bɪfɔɹ duɪŋ ðæt.

Altogether it made an awkward burden. Not a heavy one, but hard to balance and manage, the cart shafts shifting and twisting in his arms as he stumbled across the plowed field. Once back in the forest they were even worse, catching on trees and knocking him half off his feet. They would have been easier to drag, but that would leave a clear trail behind him. He intended to wait as long as possible before doing that.

tæm wɑz ɹaɪt wɛɹ i hæd lɛf hɪm, simɪŋli əslip. hi hoʊpt ɪt wɑz slip. sʌɾənli fɪɹfəl, hi dʒɹɑpt ɪz bɝɾənz ən pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɪz fɑðɝz feɪs. tæm stɪl bɹiðd, bʌt ðə fivɝ wɑz wɝs.

Tam was right where he had left him, seemingly asleep. He hoped it was sleep. Suddenly fearful, he dropped his burdens and put a hand to his father's face. Tam still breathed, but the fever was worse.

ðə tʌtʃ ɹaʊz tæm, bʌɾ oʊnli ɪndə ə heɪzi weɪkfəlnəs. "ɪz ðət ju, bɔɪ?" hi bɹiðd. "wɝiɾ əbaʊt ju. dʒɹimz ə deɪz ɡɔn. naɪtmɛɹz." mɝmɝɪŋ sɔfli, hi dʒɹɪftəɾ ɔf əɡɛn.

The touch roused Tam, but only into a hazy wakefulness. "Is that you, boy?" he breathed. "Worried about you. Dreams of days gone. Nightmares." Murmuring softly, he drifted off again.

"doʊnt wɝi," ɹænd sɛd. hi leɪ tæmz koʊɾ ən kloʊk oʊvɝ ɪm tə kip ɔf ðə wɪnd. "aɪl ɡɛt jə tə nɪneɪiv dʒʌst əz kwɪk əz aɪ kæn." əz i wɛn ɑn, əz mʌtʃ tə ɹiəʃʊɹ hɪmsɛlf əz fəɹ tæmz bɛnəfɪt, hi pild ɔf ɪz blʌdsteɪnd ʃɝt, hɑɹdli ivən noʊɾɪsɪŋ ðə koʊld ɪn ɪz heɪs tə bi ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt, ən hɝidli pʊld ɑn ðə klin wʌn. θɹoʊɪŋ ɪz oʊld ʃɝɾ əweɪ meɪɾ ɪm fil əz ɪf i hæd dʒʌs hæɾ ə bæθ. "wil bi seɪf ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ ɪn noʊ taɪm, ən ðə wɪzdəm wɪl sɛɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹaɪt. jəl si. ɛvɹiθɪŋz gɑnə bi ɔl ɹaɪt."

"Don't worry," Rand said. He lay Tam's coat and cloak over him to keep off the wind. "I'll get you to Nynaeve just as quick as I can." As he went on, as much to reassure himself as for Tam's benefit, he peeled off his bloodstained shirt, hardly even noticing the cold in his haste to be rid of it, and hurriedly pulled on the clean one. Throwing his old shirt away made him feel as if he had just had a bath. "We'll be safe in the village in no time, and the Wisdom will set everything right. You'll see. Everything's going to be all right."

ðət θɔt wɑz laɪk ə bikən əz i pʊld ɑn ɪz koʊɾ ən bɛn tə tɛn tæmz waʊnd. ðeɪ wəd bi seɪf wʌns ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə vɪlədʒ, ən nɪneɪiv wəd kjʊɹ tæm. hi dʒʌs hæd tə ɡɛɾ ɪm ðɛɹ.

That thought was like a beacon as he pulled on his coat and bent to tend Tam's wound. They would be safe once they reached the village, and Nynaeve would cure Tam. He just had to get him there.


tʃæptɝ sɪks


CHAPTER 6

ðə wɛstwʊd


The Westwood

ɪn ðə munlaɪt ɹænd kəd nɑt ɹɪli si wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, bʌt tæmz waʊn sim tə bi oʊnli ə ʃæloʊ ɡæʃ əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪbz, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ðə pɑm ə hɪz hænd. hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif. hi hæd sin ɪz fɑðɝ teɪk mɔɹ ʌv ən ɪnʒɝi ðən ðəɾ ən nɑɾ ivən stɑp wɝk ɪksɛp tə wɑʃ ɪɾ ɔf. heɪstəli hi sɝtʃt tæm fɹəm hɛd tə fʊt fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ bæɾ ɪnʌf tə əkaʊn fəɹ ðə fivɝ, bʌt ðə wʌn kʌt wɑz ɔl i kəd faɪnd.

In the moonlight Rand could not really see what he was doing, but Tam's wound seemed to be only a shallow gash along the ribs, no longer than the palm of his hand. He shook his head in disbelief. He had seen his father take more of an injury than that and not even stop work except to wash it off. Hastily he searched Tam from head to foot for something bad enough to account for the fever, but the one cut was all he could find.

smɔl əz ɪt wɑz, ðət loʊn kʌt wɑz stɪl ɡɹeɪv ɪnʌf; ðə flɛʃ ɝaʊn ɪt bɝn tə ðə tʌtʃ. ɪt wɑz ivən hɑɾɝ ðən ðə ɹɛst ə tæmz bɑɾi, ən ðə ɹɛst ə hɪm wɑz hɑɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɹændz dʒɔz klɛntʃ. ə skɔldɪŋ fivɝ laɪk ðət kəd kɪl, əɹ liv ə mæn ə hʌsk ʌv wʌɾ i hæd wʌns bɪn. hi soʊkt ə klɔθ wɪð wɔɾɝ fɹəm ðə skɪn ən leɪɾ ɪɾ əkɹɔs tæmz fɔɹhɛd.

Small as it was, that lone cut was still grave enough; the flesh around it burned to the touch. It was even hotter than the rest of Tam's body, and the rest of him was hot enough to make Rand's jaws clench. A scalding fever like that could kill, or leave a man a husk of what he had once been. He soaked a cloth with water from the skin and laid it across Tam's forehead.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə bi dʒɛntəl əbaʊt wɑʃɪŋ ən bændeɪdʒɪŋ ðə ɡæʃ ɑn ɪz fɑðɝz ɹɪbz, bʌt sɑft ɡɹoʊnz stɪl ɪntɝʌptɪd tæmz loʊ mʌɾɝɪŋ. stɑɹk bɹæntʃəz lumd ɝaʊn ðɛm, θɹɛɾənɪŋ əz ðeɪ ʃɪftəɾ əz ɪn ðə wɪnd. ʃʊɹli ðə tʃɹɑləks wəd ɡoʊ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ wən ðeɪ feɪl tə faɪn tæm ən hɪm, wən ðeɪ keɪm bæk tə ðə fɑɹmhaʊs ən faʊn ɪt stɪl ɛmpti. hi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf bɪliv ɪt, bʌt ðə wɔntən dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ət ðə haʊs, ðə sɛnsləsnəs ʌv ɪt, lɛf lɪɾəl ɹum fəɹ bɪlif ə ðət sɔɹt. bɪlivɪŋ ðeɪ wəd ɡɪv ʌp ʃɔɹɾ ə kɪlɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðeɪ kəd faɪnd wɑz deɪnʒɝəs, ə fulɪʃ tʃæns i kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd tə teɪk.

He tried to be gentle about washing and bandaging the gash on his father's ribs, but soft groans still interrupted Tam's low muttering. Stark branches loomed around them, threatening as they shifted as in the wind. Surely the Trollocs would go on their way when they failed to find Tam and him, when they came back to the farmhouse and found it still empty. He tried to make himself believe it, but the wanton destruction at the house, the senselessness of it, left little room for belief of that sort. Believing they would give up short of killing everyone and everything they could find was dangerous, a foolish chance he could not afford to take.

tʃɹɑləks. laɪɾ əbʌv, tʃɹɑləks! kɹitʃɝz aʊɾ ʌv ə ɡlimənz teɪl kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə naɪt tə bæʃ ɪn ðə dɔɹ. ən ə feɪd. laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn mi, ə feɪd!

Trollocs. Light above, Trollocs! Creatures out of a gleeman's tale coming out of the night to bash in the door. And a Fade. Light shine on me, a Fade!

əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ði əntaɪɾ ɛnz ə ðə bændɪdʒ ɪn moʊʃənləs hænz. fɹoʊzən laɪk ə ɹæbət ðæts sin ə hɔks ʃædoʊ, hi θɔt skɔɹnfəli. wɪð ən æŋɡɹi ʃeɪk ə hɪz hɛɾ i fɪnɪʃt taɪɪŋ ðə bændɪdʒ ɝaʊn tæmz tʃɛst.

Abruptly he realized he was holding the untied ends of the bandage in motionless hands. Frozen like a rabbit that's seen a hawk's shadow, he thought scornfully. With an angry shake of his head he finished tying the bandage around Tam's chest.

noʊɪŋ wʌɾ i hæd tə du, ivən ɡɛɾɪŋ ɑn wɪð ɪt, dɪd nɑt stɑp ɪm biɪŋ əfɹeɪd. wən ðə tʃɹɑləks keɪm bæk ðeɪ wəd ʃʊɹli bɪɡɪn sɝtʃɪŋ ðə fɔɹəst ɝaʊn ðə fɑɹm fəɹ səm tʃɹeɪs ə ðə pipəl u hæɾ ɪskeɪp ðɛm. ðə bɑɾi ʌv ðə wʌn i hæd kɪld wəd tɛl əm ðoʊz pipəl wɝ nɑt fɑɹ ɔf. hu nu wʌɾ ə feɪd wəd du, əɹ kəd du? ɑn tɑp ə ðæt, hɪz fɑðɝz kɑmɛn əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks' hɪɹɪŋ wɑz əz laʊɾ ɪn ɪz maɪn əz ɪf tæm hæd dʒʌst sɛɾ ɪt. hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɹɪzɪstɪŋ ði ɝdʒ tə pʊɾ ə hæn oʊvɝ tæmz maʊθ, tə stɪl ɪz ɡɹoʊnz ən mɝmɝz. səm tʃɹæk baɪ sɛnt. wʌt kən aɪ də əbaʊt ðæt? nʌθɪŋ. hi kəd nɑt weɪs taɪm wɝiɪŋ oʊvɝ pɹɑbləmz i kəd də nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt.

Knowing what he had to do, even getting on with it, did not stop him being afraid. When the Trollocs came back they would surely begin searching the forest around the farm for some trace of the people who had escaped them. The body of the one he had killed would tell them those people were not far off. Who knew what a Fade would do, or could do? On top of that, his father's comment about Trollocs' hearing was as loud in his mind as if Tam had just said it. He found himself resisting the urge to put a hand over Tam's mouth, to still his groans and murmurs. Some track by scent. What can I do about that? Nothing. He could not waste time worrying over problems he could do nothing about.

"ju hæv tə kip kwaɪət," hi wɪspɝɾ ɪn ɪz fɑðɝz ɪɹ. "ðə tʃɹɑləks wɪl bi bæk."

"You have to keep quiet," he whispered in his father's ear. "The Trollocs will be back."

tæm spoʊk ɪn hʌʃt, hɔɹs toʊnz. "jɔɹ stɪl lʌvli, kɛɹi. stɪl lʌvli əz ə ɡɝl."

Tam spoke in hushed, hoarse tones. "You're still lovely, Kari. Still lovely as a girl."

ɹænd ɡɹɪməst. hɪz mʌðɝ hæd bɪn dɛd fɪftin jɪɹz. ɪf tæm bɪlivd ʃi wɑz stɪl əlaɪv, ðən ðə fivɝ wɑz ivən wɝs ðən ɹænd hæd θɔt. haʊ kəɾ i bi kɛp fɹəm spikɪŋ, naʊ ðət saɪləns maɪt min laɪf?

Rand grimaced. His mother had been dead fifteen years. If Tam believed she was still alive, then the fever was even worse than Rand had thought. How could he be kept from speaking, now that silence might mean life?

"mʌðɝ wɑns jə tə bi kwaɪət," ɹænd wɪspɝd. hi pɔz tə klɪɹ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ʌv ə sʌɾən taɪtnəs. ʃi hæd hæd dʒɛntəl hænz; hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət mʌtʃ. "kɛɹi wɑns jə tə bi kwaɪət. hɪɹ. dʒɹɪŋk."

"Mother wants you to be quiet," Rand whispered. He paused to clear his throat of a sudden tightness. She had had gentle hands; he remembered that much. "Kari wants you to be quiet. Here. Drink."

tæm ɡʌlp θɝstəli fɹəm ðə wɔɾɝskɪn, bʌɾ æftɝ ə fju swɑloʊz i tɝn ɪz hɛɾ əsaɪɾ ən bɪɡæn mɝmɝɪŋ sɔfli əɡɛn, tu loʊ fəɹ ɹænd tə ʌndɝstænd. hi hoʊpt ɪt wɑz tu loʊ tə bi hɝd baɪ hʌntɪŋ tʃɹɑləks, tu.

Tam gulped thirstily from the waterskin, but after a few swallows he turned his head aside and began murmuring softly again, too low for Rand to understand. He hoped it was too low to be heard by hunting Trollocs, too.

heɪstəli hi ɡɑɾ ɑn wɪð wʌt wɑz niɾəd. θɹi ʌv ðə blæŋkəts i woʊv ɝaʊn ən bɪtwin ðə ʃæfs kʌt fɹəm ðə kɑɹt, kɑntʃɹaɪvɪŋ ə meɪkʃɪf lɪɾɝ. hi wəɾ oʊnli bi eɪbəl tə kæɹi wʌn ɛnd, lɛɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝ dʒɹæɡ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, bʌɾ ɪt wəɾ əv tə du. fɹəm ðə læs blæŋkəɾ i kʌɾ ə lɔŋ stʃɹɪp wɪð ɪz bɛl naɪf, ðən taɪd wʌn ɛn ə ðə stʃɹɪp tə itʃ ə ðə ʃæfs.

Hastily he got on with what was needed. Three of the blankets he wove around and between the shafts cut from the cart, contriving a makeshift litter. He would only be able to carry one end, letting the other drag on the ground, but it would have to do. From the last blanket he cut a long strip with his belt knife, then tied one end of the strip to each of the shafts.

əz dʒɛnli əz i kʊd, hi lɪftəd tæm ɑntu ðə lɪɾɝ, wɪnsɪŋ wɪð ɛvɹi moʊn. hɪz fɑðɝ hæɾ ɔlweɪz simd ɪndəstʃɹʌktɪbəl. nʌθɪŋ kəd hɑɹm hɪm; nʌθɪŋ kəd stɑp hɪm, əɹ ivən sloʊ hɪm daʊn. fəɹ ɪm tə bi ɪn ðɪs kəndɪʃən ɔlmoʊst ɹɑbd ɹænd ʌv wʌt kɝədʒ i hæd mænədʒ tə ɡæðɝ. bʌɾ i hæd tə kip ɑn. ðət wɑz ɔl ðət kɛpt ɪm muvɪŋ. hi hæd tə.

As gently as he could, he lifted Tam onto the litter, wincing with every moan. His father had always seemed indestructible. Nothing could harm him; nothing could stop him, or even slow him down. For him to be in this condition almost robbed Rand of what courage he had managed to gather. But he had to keep on. That was all that kept him moving. He had to.

wən tæm faɪnəli leɪ ɑn ðə lɪɾɝ, ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən tʊk ðə sɔɹd bɛl fɹəm ɪz fɑðɝz weɪst. wən i fæsən ɪɾ ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf, ɪt fɛlt ɑd ðɛɹ; ɪt meɪɾ ɪm fil ɑd. bɛlt ən ʃiθ ən sɔɹd təɡɛðɝ oʊnli weɪɾ ə fju paʊnz, bʌt wən i ʃiðd ðə bleɪɾ ɪt sim tə dʒɹæɡ əɾ ɪm laɪk ə ɡɹeɪt weɪt.

When Tam finally lay on the litter, Rand hesitated, then took the sword belt from his father's waist. When he fastened it around himself, it felt odd there; it made him feel odd. Belt and sheath and sword together only weighed a few pounds, but when he sheathed the blade it seemed to drag at him like a great weight.

æŋɡɹəli hi bɪɹeɪɾɪd hɪmsɛlf. ðɪs wɑz noʊ taɪm əɹ pleɪs fəɹ fulɪʃ fænsiz. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə bɪɡ naɪf. haʊ mɛni taɪmz hæɾ i deɪdʒɹimd əbaʊt wɛɹɪŋ ə sɔɹɾ ən hævɪŋ ædvɛntʃɝz? ɪf i kəd kɪl wʌn tʃɹɑlɑk wɪð ɪt, hi kəd ʃʊɹli faɪɾ ɔf ɛni ʌðɝz əz wɛl. oʊnli, hi nu ɔl tu wɛl ðət wʌt hæd hæpən ɪn ðə fɑɹmhaʊs hæd bɪn ðə pjʊɹəs lʌk. ən ɪz deɪdʒɹim ædvɛntʃɝz hæd nɛvɝ ɪnkluɾəd ɪz tiθ tʃæɾɝɪŋ, əɹ ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ɪz laɪf θɹu ðə naɪt, əɹ ɪz fɑðɝ ət ðə pɔɪn ə dɛθ.

Angrily he berated himself. This was no time or place for foolish fancies. It was only a big knife. How many times had he daydreamed about wearing a sword and having adventures? If he could kill one Trolloc with it, he could surely fight off any others as well. Only, he knew all too well that what had happened in the farmhouse had been the purest luck. And his daydream adventures had never included his teeth chattering, or running for his life through the night, or his father at the point of death.

heɪstəli hi tʌk ðə læs blæŋkəɾ ɝaʊn tæm, ən leɪd ðə wɔɾɝskɪn ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə klɔθs bɪsaɪɾ ɪz fɑðɝ ɑn ðə lɪɾɝ. wɪð ə dip bɹɛθ i nɛl bɪtwin ðə ʃæfs ən lɪftəd ðə stʃɹɪp ə blæŋkəɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. ɪt sɛɾəld əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹmz. wən i ɡɹɪp ðə ʃæfs ən stʃɹeɪɾənd, moʊst ə ðə weɪt wɑz ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ɪt dɪd nɑt sim laɪk vɛɹi mʌtʃ. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ə smuð peɪs, hi sɛɾ aʊt fəɹ ɛmənz fild, ðə lɪɾɝ skɹeɪpɪŋ əlɔŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Hastily he tucked the last blanket around Tam, and laid the waterskin and the rest of the cloths beside his father on the litter. With a deep breath he knelt between the shafts and lifted the strip of blanket over his head. It settled across his shoulders and under his arms. When he gripped the shafts and straightened, most of the weight was on his shoulders. It did not seem like very much. Trying to keep a smooth pace, he set out for Emond's Field, the litter scraping along behind him.

hi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə meɪk ɪz weɪ tə ðə kwɔɹi ɹoʊɾ ən fɑloʊ ðət tə ðə vɪlədʒ. ðə deɪnʒɝ wəɾ ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli bi ɡɹeɪɾɝ əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd, bʌt tæm wəd ɹəsiv noʊ hɛlp əɾ ɔl ɪf i ɡɑɾ əm lɔs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ɪz weɪ θɹu ðə wʊdz ən ðə dɑɹk.

He had already decided to make his way to the Quarry Road and follow that to the village. The danger would almost certainly be greater along the road, but Tam would receive no help at all if he got them lost trying to find his way through the woods and the dark.

ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs i wɑz ɔlmoʊst aʊɾ ɑntu ðə kwɔɹi ɹoʊd bɪfɔɹ i nu ɪt. wən i ɹilaɪzd wɛɹ i wɑz, hɪz θɹoʊt taɪɾənd laɪk ə fɪst. hɝidli hi tɝn ðə lɪɾɝ ɝaʊn ən dʒɹæɡd ɪt bæk ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz ə weɪ, ðən stɑp tə kætʃ ɪz bɹɛθ ən lɛɾ ɪz hɑɹt stɑp paʊndɪŋ. stɪl pæntɪŋ, hi tɝn ist, təwɔɹɾ ɛmənz fild.

In the darkness he was almost out onto the Quarry Road before he knew it. When he realized where he was, his throat tightened like a fist. Hurriedly he turned the litter around and dragged it back into the trees a way, then stopped to catch his breath and let his heart stop pounding. Still panting, he turned east, toward Emond's Field.

tʃɹævlɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz wɑz mɔɹ dɪfəkəl ðən teɪkɪŋ tæm daʊn ðə ɹoʊd, ən ðə naɪt ʃʊɹli dɪd nɑt hɛlp, bʌt ɡoʊɪŋ aʊɾ ɑntu ðə ɹoʊɾ ɪtsɛlf wəd bi mædnəs. ði aɪdiə wɑz tə ɹitʃ ðə vɪlədʒ wɪθaʊt miɾɪŋ ɛni tʃɹɑləks; wɪθaʊɾ ivən siɪŋ ɛni, ɪf i hæɾ ɪz wɪʃ. hi hæd tə əsum ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ stɪl hʌntɪŋ ðɛm, ən sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ðeɪ wəd ɹilaɪz ðə tu hæd sɛɾ ɔf fəɹ ðə vɪlədʒ. ðət wɑz ðə moʊs laɪkli pleɪs tə ɡoʊ, ən ðə kwɔɹi ɹoʊd ðə moʊs laɪkli ɹut. ɪn tʃɹuθ, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf kloʊsɝ tə ðə ɹoʊd ðən i laɪkt. ðə naɪɾ ən ðə ʃædoʊz ʌndɝ ðə tʃɹiz simd ɑfli bɛɹ kʌvɝ ɪn wɪtʃ tə haɪd fɹəm ði aɪz ʌv ɛniwʌn tʃɹævlɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪt.

Traveling through the trees was more difficult than taking Tam down the road, and the night surely did not help, but going out onto the road itself would be madness. The idea was to reach the village without meeting any Trollocs; without even seeing any, if he had his wish. He had to assume the Trollocs were still hunting them, and sooner or later they would realize the two had set off for the village. That was the most likely place to go, and the Quarry Road the most likely route. In truth, he found himself closer to the road than he liked. The night and the shadows under the trees seemed awfully bare cover in which to hide from the eyes of anyone traveling along it.

munlaɪt fɪltɝɪŋ θɹu bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz ɡeɪv oʊnli ɪnʌf ɪluməneɪʃən tə ful ɪz aɪz ɪndə θɪŋkɪŋ ðeɪ sɔ wʌt wɑz ʌndɝfʊt. ɹuts θɹɛɾənd tə tʃɹɪp ɪm əɾ ɛvɹi stɛp, oʊl bɹæmbəlz snæɡd ɪz lɛɡz, ən sʌɾən dɪps əɹ ɹaɪzəz ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊn hæɾ ɪm hæf fɔlɪŋ əz ɪz fʊt mɛt nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ɛɹ wɛɹ i ɪkspɛktəd fɝm ɝθ, əɹ stʌmbəlɪŋ wən ɪz toʊ stʃɹʌk dɝt waɪl stɪl muvɪŋ fɔɹwɝd. tæmz mʌɾɝɪŋz bɹoʊk ɪndə ə ʃɑɹp ɡɹoʊn wɛnɛvɝ wʌn ə ðə ʃæfs bʌmp tu kwɪkli oʊvɝ ɹuɾ əɹ ɹɑk.

Moonlight filtering through bare branches gave only enough illumination to fool his eyes into thinking they saw what was underfoot. Roots threatened to trip him at every step, old brambles snagged his legs, and sudden dips or rises in the ground had him half falling as his foot met nothing but air where he expected firm earth, or stumbling when his toe struck dirt while still moving forward. Tam's mutterings broke into a sharp groan whenever one of the shafts bumped too quickly over root or rock.

ənsɝɾənti meɪɾ ɪm pɪɹ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs əntɪl ɪz aɪz bɝnd, lɪsən əz i hæd nɛvɝ lɪsən bɪfɔɹ. ɛvɹi skɹeɪp ə bɹæntʃ əɡɛns bɹæntʃ, ɛvɹi ɹʌsəl ə paɪn niɾəlz, bɹɔɾ ɪm tə ə hɔlt, ɪɹz stʃɹeɪnɪŋ, hɑɹdli dɛɹɪŋ tə bɹið fəɹ fɪɹ i maɪt nɑt hɪɹ səm wɔɹnɪŋ saʊnd, fəɹ fɪɹ i maɪt hɪɹ ðət saʊnd. oʊnli wən i wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðə wɪnd wəɾ i ɡoʊ ɑn.

Uncertainty made him peer into the darkness until his eyes burned, listen as he had never listened before. Every scrape of branch against branch, every rustle of pine needles, brought him to a halt, ears straining, hardly daring to breathe for fear he might not hear some warning sound, for fear he might hear that sound. Only when he was sure it was just the wind would he go on.

sloʊli wɪɹinəs kɹɛpt ɪndə hɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz, dʒɹɪvən hoʊm baɪ ə naɪt wɪn ðət mɑkt ɪz kloʊk ən koʊt. ðə weɪɾ ə ðə lɪɾɝ, soʊ lɪɾəl ət ðə stɑɹt, naʊ tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl ɪm tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hɪz stʌmbəlz wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɔl fɹəm tʃɹɪpɪŋ. ði ɔlmoʊs kɑnstən stʃɹʌɡəl nɑt tə fɔl tʊk əz mʌtʃ aʊɾ ə hɪm əz dɪd ði æktʃəwəl wɝk ə pʊlɪŋ ðə lɪɾɝ. hi hæd bɪn ʌp bɪfɔɹ dɔn tə bɪɡɪn ɪz tʃɔɹz, ən ivən wɪð ðə tʃɹɪp tə ɛmənz fild i hæd dʌn ɔlmoʊst ə fʊl deɪz wɝk. ɑn ɛni nɔɹməl naɪɾ i wəd bi ɹɛstɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə faɪɝpleɪs, ɹɛɾɪŋ wʌn ə tæmz smɔl kəlɛkʃən ə bʊks bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə bɛd. ðə ʃɑɹp tʃɪl soʊkt ɪndə hɪz boʊnz, ən ɪz stʌmək ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ðəɾ i hæd hæd nʌθɪŋ tə it sɪns mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹz hʌnikeɪks.

Slowly weariness crept into his arms and legs, driven home by a night wind that mocked his cloak and coat. The weight of the litter, so little at the start, now tried to pull him to the ground. His stumbles were no longer all from tripping. The almost constant struggle not to fall took as much out of him as did the actual work of pulling the litter. He had been up before dawn to begin his chores, and even with the trip to Emond's Field he had done almost a full day's work. On any normal night he would be resting before the fireplace, reading one of Tam's small collection of books before going to bed. The sharp chill soaked into his bones, and his stomach reminded him that he had had nothing to eat since Mistress al'Vere's honeycakes.

hi mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf, æŋɡɹi ət nɑt teɪkɪŋ səm fuɾ ət ðə fɑɹm. ə fju mɪnəts mɔɹ kəd nɑɾ əv meɪɾ ɛni dɪfɝəns. ə fju mɪnəts tə faɪn səm bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz. ðə tʃɹɑləks wəd nɑɾ əv kʌm bæk ɪn dʒʌst ə fju mɪnəts mɔɹ. əɹ dʒʌs ðə bɹɛd. ʌv kɔɹs, mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ wəɾ ɪnsɪst ɑn pʊɾɪŋ ə hɑt mil ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm wʌns ðeɪ ɹitʃt ði ɪn. ə stimɪŋ pleɪɾ ə hɝ θɪk læm stu, pɹɑbli. ən səm ə ðət bɹɛd ʃi hæd bɪn beɪkɪŋ. ən lɑts ə hɑt ti.

He muttered to himself, angry at not taking some food at the farm. A few minutes more could not have made any difference. A few minutes to find some bread and cheese. The Trollocs would not have come back in just a few minutes more. Or just the bread. Of course, Mistress al'Vere would insist on putting a hot meal in front of him once they reached the inn. A steaming plate of her thick lamb stew, probably. And some of that bread she had been baking. And lots of hot tea.

"ðeɪ keɪm oʊvɝ ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl laɪk ə flʌd," tæm sɛd sʌɾənli, ɪn ə stʃɹɔŋ, æŋɡɹi vɔɪs, "ænd wɑʃt ðə lænd wɪð blʌd. haʊ mɛni daɪd fəɹ leɪmənz sɪn?"

"They came over the Dragonwall like a flood," Tam said suddenly, in a strong, angry voice, "and washed the land with blood. How many died for Laman's sin?"

ɹænd ɔlmoʊs fɛl fɹəm sɝpɹaɪz. wɛɹəli hi loʊɝd ðə lɪɾɝ tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ən əntæŋɡəl hɪmsɛlf. ðə stʃɹɪp ə blæŋkət lɛft ə bɝnɪŋ ɡɹuv ɪn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ʃɹʌɡɪŋ tə wɝk ðə nɑts aʊt, hi nɛl bɪsaɪd tæm. fʌmbəlɪŋ fəɹ ðə wɔɾɝbæɡ, hi pɪɹd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ veɪnli ɪn ðə dɪm munlaɪt tə si ʌp ən daʊn ðə ɹoʊd, nɑt twɛnti peɪsɪz əweɪ. nʌθɪŋ muv ðəɹ bʌt ʃædoʊz. nʌθɪŋ bʌt ʃædoʊz.

Rand almost fell from surprise. Wearily he lowered the litter to the ground and untangled himself. The strip of blanket left a burning groove in his shoulders. Shrugging to work the knots out, he knelt beside Tam. Fumbling for the waterbag, he peered through the trees, trying vainly in the dim moonlight to see up and down the road, not twenty paces away. Nothing moved there but shadows. Nothing but shadows.

"ðɛɹ ɪzən ɛni flʌɾ ə tʃɹɑləks, fɑðɝ. nɑt naʊ, ɛniweɪ. wɪl bi seɪf ɪn ɛmənz fil sun. dʒɹɪŋk ə lɪɾəl wɔɾɝ."

"There isn't any flood of Trollocs, father. Not now, anyway. We'll be safe in Emond's Field soon. Drink a little water."

tæm bɹʌʃt əsaɪd ðə wɔɾɝbæɡ wɪð ən ɑɹm ðət sim tə hæv ɹiɡeɪn ɔl ʌv ɪts stʃɹɛŋkθ. hi sizd ɹændz kɑlɝ, pʊlɪŋ ɪm kloʊs ɪnʌf tə fil ðə hiɾ ə hɪz fɑðɝz fivɝ ɪn ɪz oʊn tʃik. "ðeɪ kɔld əm sævədʒəz," tæm sɛɾ ɝdʒənli. "ðə fulz sɛd ðeɪ kəd bi swɛpt əsaɪd laɪk ɹʌbɪʃ. haʊ mɛni bæɾəlz lɔst, haʊ mɛni sɪɾiz bɝnd, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ feɪs ðə tʃɹuθ? bɪfɔɹ ðə neɪʃənz stʊd təɡɛðɝ əɡɛns ðɛm?" hi lust ɪz hoʊld ɑn ɹænd, ən sædnəs fɪld ɪz vɔɪs. "ðə fild ət mɛɹəθ kɑɹpəɾɪd wɪð ðə dɛd, ən noʊ saʊn bʌt ðə kɹaɪz ə ɹeɪvənz ən ðə bʌzɪŋ ə flaɪz. ðə tɑpləs taʊɝz ə kɛɹhin bɝnɪŋ ɪn ðə naɪt laɪk tɔɹtʃɪz. ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz ðeɪ bɝn ən slu bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ tɝn bæk. ɔl ðə weɪ tə - "

Tam brushed aside the waterbag with an arm that seemed to have regained all of its strength. He seized Rand's collar, pulling him close enough to feel the heat of his father's fever in his own cheek. "They called them savages," Tam said urgently. "The fools said they could be swept aside like rubbish. How many battles lost, how many cities burned, before they faced the truth? Before the nations stood together against them?" He loosed his hold on Rand, and sadness filled his voice. "The field at Marath carpeted with the dead, and no sound but the cries of ravens and the buzzing of flies. The topless towers of Cairhien burning in the night like torches. All the way to the Shining Walls they burned and slew before they were turned back. All the way to - "

ɹænd klæmpt ə hæn oʊvɝ ɪz fɑðɝz maʊð. ðə saʊn keɪm əɡɛn, ə ɹɪðmɪk θəɾɪŋ, dɝɛkʃənləs ɪn ðə tʃɹiz, feɪɾɪŋ ðən ɡɹoʊɪŋ stʃɹɔŋɝ əɡɛn əz ðə wɪnd ʃɪftəd. fɹaʊnɪŋ, hi tɝn ɪz hɛd sloʊli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪsaɪd fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt keɪm. ə flɪkɝ ə moʊʃən kɑt ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, ən ɪn ən ɪnstən i wɑz kɹaʊtʃt oʊvɝ tæm. hi wɑz stɑɹɾəld tə fil ðə hɪlt ə ðə sɔɹd klʌtʃt taɪɾ ɪn ɪz hænd, bʌt moʊst ə hɪm kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ðə kwɔɹi ɹoʊɾ əz ɪf ðə ɹoʊd wɝ ði oʊnli ɹil θɪŋ ɪn ði ɪntaɪɝ wɝld.

Rand clamped a hand over his father's mouth. The sound came again, a rhythmic thudding, directionless in the trees, fading then growing stronger again as the wind shifted. Frowning, he turned his head slowly, trying to decide from where it came. A flicker of motion caught the corner of his eye, and in an instant he was crouched over Tam. He was startled to feel the hilt of the sword clutched tight in his hand, but most of him concentrated on the Quarry Road as if the road were the only real thing in the entire world.

weɪvɝɪŋ ʃædoʊz tə ði ist sloʊli ɹizɑlv ðɛmsɛlvz ɪndə ə hɔɹs ən ɹaɪɾɝ fɑloʊɾ ʌp ðə ɹoʊd baɪ tɔl, bʌlki ʃeɪps tʃɹɑɾɪŋ tə kip ʌp wɪð ði ænəməl. ðə peɪl laɪɾ ə ðə mun ɡlɪɾɝd fɹəm spɪɹhɛdz ən æks bleɪdz. ɹænd nɛvɝ ivən kənsɪɾɝd ðət ðeɪ maɪt bi vɪlɪdʒɝz kʌmɪŋ tə hɛlp. hi nu wʌt ðeɪ wɝ. hi kəd fil ɪt, laɪk ɡɹɪt skɹeɪpɪŋ ɪz boʊnz, ivən bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ dʒɹu kloʊs ɪnʌf fəɹ munlaɪt tə ɹɪvil ðə hʊɾɪd kloʊk swɑðɪŋ ðə hɔɹsmən, ə kloʊk ðət hʌŋ ʌndɪstɝbd baɪ ðə wɪnd. ɔl ə ðə ʃeɪps əpɪɹd blæk ɪn ðə naɪt, ən ðə hɔɹsəz hʊvz meɪd ðə seɪm saʊnz ðəɾ ɛni ʌðɝz wʊd, bʌt ɹænd nu ðɪs hɔɹs fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ.

Wavering shadows to the east slowly resolved themselves into a horse and rider followed up the road by tall, bulky shapes trotting to keep up with the animal. The pale light of the moon glittered from spearheads and axe blades. Rand never even considered that they might be villagers coming to help. He knew what they were. He could feel it, like grit scraping his bones, even before they drew close enough for moonlight to reveal the hooded cloak swathing the horseman, a cloak that hung undisturbed by the wind. All of the shapes appeared black in the night, and the horse's hooves made the same sounds that any other's would, but Rand knew this horse from any other.

bɪhaɪn ðə dɑɹk ɹaɪɾɝ keɪm naɪtmɛɹ fɔɹmz wɪð hɔɹnz ən mʌzəlz ən biks, tʃɹɑləks ɪn ə dʌbəl faɪl, ɔl ɪn stɛps, buts ən hʊvz stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊn ət ðə seɪm ɪnstən əz ɪf oʊbeɪɪŋ ə sɪŋɡəl maɪnd. ɹænd kaʊntəd twɛnti əz ðeɪ ɹæn pæst. hi wʌndɝd wʌt kaɪndə mæn wəd dɛɹ tɝn ɪz bæk ɑn soʊ mɛni tʃɹɑləks. əɹ ɑn wʌn, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

Behind the dark rider came nightmare forms with horns and muzzles and beaks, Trollocs in a double file, all in steps, boots and hooves striking the ground at the same instant as if obeying a single mind. Rand counted twenty as they ran past. He wondered what kind of man would dare turn his back on so many Trollocs. Or on one, for that matter.

ðə tʃɹɑɾɪŋ kɑləm dɪsəpɪɹd wɛstwɝd, θʌmpɪŋ fʊtfɔlz feɪɾɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs, bʌt ɹænd ɹɪmeɪnd wɛɹ i wɑz, nɑt muvɪŋ ə mʌsəl ɪksɛp tə bɹið. sʌmθɪŋ toʊld ɪm tə bi sɝɾən, æbsəlutli sɝɾən, ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ i muvd. ət lɔŋ læst i dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən bɪɡæn tə stʃɹeɪɾən.

The trotting column disappeared westward, thumping footfalls fading into the darkness, but Rand remained where he was, not moving a muscle except to breathe. Something told him to be certain, absolutely certain, they were gone before he moved. At long last he drew a deep breath and began to straighten.

ðɪs taɪm ðə hɔɹs meɪd noʊ saʊn əɾ ɔl. ɪn ɪɹi saɪləns ðə dɑɹk ɹaɪɾɝ ɹɪtɝnd, hɪz ʃæɾoʊi maʊn stɑpɪŋ ɛvɹi fju stɛps əz ɪt wɔk sloʊli bæk daʊn ðə ɹoʊd. ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd haɪɝ, moʊnɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz; ðə hɔɹsmənz kloʊk leɪ stɪl əz dɛθ. wɛnɛvɝ ðə hɔɹs hɔltəd, ðət hʊɾɪd hɛd swʌŋ fɹəm saɪd tə saɪɾ əz ðə ɹaɪɾɝ pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst, sɝtʃɪŋ. ɪɡzækli ɑpəzət ɹænd ðə hɔɹs stɑpt əɡɛn, ðə ʃæɾoʊd oʊpənɪŋ ə ðə hʊd tɝnɪŋ təwɔɹd wɛɹ i kɹaʊtʃt əbʌv ɪz fɑðɝ.

This time the horse made no sound at all. In eerie silence the dark rider returned, his shadowy mount stopping every few steps as it walked slowly back down the road. The wind gusted higher, moaning through the trees; the horseman's cloak lay still as death. Whenever the horse halted, that hooded head swung from side to side as the rider peered into the forest, searching. Exactly opposite Rand the horse stopped again, the shadowed opening of the hood turning toward where he crouched above his father.

ɹændz hæn taɪɾənd kənvʌlsɪvli ɑn ðə sɔɹd hɪlt. hi fɛl ðə ɡeɪz, dʒʌst əz i hæd ðət mɔɹnɪŋ, ən ʃɪvɝɾ əɡɛn fɹəm ðə heɪtʃɹəɾ ivən ɪf i kəd nɑt si ɪt. ðət ʃɹaʊɾɪd mæn heɪɾəd ɛvɹiwʌn ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət lɪvd. dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld wɪnd, swɛt biɾɪd ɑn ɹændz feɪs.

Rand's hand tightened convulsively on the sword hilt. He felt the gaze, just as he had that morning, and shivered again from the hatred even if he could not see it. That shrouded man hated everyone and everything, everything that lived. Despite the cold wind, sweat beaded on Rand's face.

ðən ðə hɔɹs wɑz muvɪŋ ɑn, ə fju saʊnləs stɛps ən stɑp, əntɪl ɔl ɹænd kəd si wɑz ə bɛɹli dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃəbəl blɝ ɪn ðə naɪt fɑɹ daʊn ðə ɹoʊd. ɪt cʊɾə bɪn ɛniθɪŋ, bʌɾ i hæd nɑt teɪkən ɪz aɪz ɔf ɪt fəɹ ə sɛkənd. ɪf i lɔst ɪt, hi wɑz əfɹeɪd ðə nɛks taɪm i sɔ ðə blæk-kloʊkt ɹaɪɾɝ maɪt bi wən ðət saɪlən hɔɹs wɑz ɑn tɑp ə hɪm.

Then the horse was moving on, a few soundless steps and stop, until all Rand could see was a barely distinguishable blur in the night far down the road. It could have been anything, but he had not taken his eyes off it for a second. If he lost it, he was afraid the next time he saw the black-cloaked rider might be when that silent horse was on top of him.

əbɹʌpli ðə ʃædoʊ wɑz ɹʌʃɪŋ bæk, pæsɪŋ ɪm ɪn ə saɪlənt ɡæləp. ðə ɹaɪɾɝ lʊkt oʊnli əhɛɾ ə hɪm əz i spɛd wɛstwɝɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt, təwɔɹd ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst. təwɔɹd ðə fɑɹm.

Abruptly the shadow was rushing back, passing him in a silent gallop. The rider looked only ahead of him as he sped westward into the night, toward the Mountains of Mist. Toward the farm.

ɹænd sæɡd, ɡʌlpɪŋ ɛɹ ən skɹʌbɪŋ koʊl swɛɾ ɔf ɪz feɪs wɪð ɪz sliv. hi dɪd nɑt kɛɹ ɛni mɔɹ əbaʊt waɪ ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd kʌm. ɪf i nɛvɝ faʊn aʊt waɪ, ðət wəd bi faɪn, dʒʌst əz lɔŋ əz ɪt wɑz ɔl ɛndəd.

Rand sagged, gulping air and scrubbing cold sweat off his face with his sleeve. He did not care any more about why the Trollocs had come. If he never found out why, that would be fine, just as long as it was all ended.

wɪð ə ʃeɪk i ɡæðɝd hɪmsɛlf, heɪstəli tʃɛkɪŋ ɪz fɑðɝ. tæm wɑz stɪl mɝmɝɪŋ, bʌt soʊ sɔfli ɹænd kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt ðə wɝdz. hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɪv ɪm ə dʒɹɪŋk, bʌt ðə wɔɾɝ spɪld oʊvɝ ɪz fɑðɝz tʃɪn. tæm kɔft ən tʃoʊkt ɑn ðə tʃɹɪkəl ðət meɪɾ ɪɾ ɪndə hɪz maʊθ, ðən bɪɡæn mʌɾɝɪŋ əɡɛn əz ɪf ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn ɛni ɪntɝʌpʃən.

With a shake he gathered himself, hastily checking his father. Tam was still murmuring, but so softly Rand could not make out the words. He tried to give him a drink, but the water spilled over his father's chin. Tam coughed and choked on the trickle that made it into his mouth, then began muttering again as if there had not been any interruption.

ɹænd splæʃt ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ wɔɾɝ ɑn ðə klɔθ ɑn tæmz fɔɹhɛd, pʊʃt ðə wɔɾɝbæɡ bæk ɑn ðə lɪɾɝ, ən skɹæmbəl bɪtwin ðə ʃæfs əɡɛn.

Rand splashed a little more water on the cloth on Tam's forehead, pushed the waterbag back on the litter, and scrambled between the shafts again.

hi stɑɹɾəd aʊɾ əz ɪf i hæd hæɾ ə ɡʊd naɪts slip, bʌt ðə nu stʃɹɛŋkθ dɪd nɑt læs lɔŋ. fɪɹ mæskt ɪz taɪɹədnəs ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, bʌt ðoʊ ðə fɪɹ ɹɪmeɪnd, ðə mæsk mɛltəɾ əweɪ kwɪkli. sun i wɑz bæk tə stʌmbəlɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ hʌŋɡɝ ən eɪkɪŋ mʌsəlz. hi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn pʊɾɪŋ wʌn fʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ʌðɝ wɪθaʊt tʃɹɪpɪŋ.

He started out as if he had had a good night's sleep, but the new strength did not last long. Fear masked his tiredness in the beginning, but though the fear remained, the mask melted away quickly. Soon he was back to stumbling forward, trying to ignore hunger and aching muscles. He concentrated on putting one foot in front of the other without tripping.

ɪn ɪz maɪn i pɪktʃɝɾ ɛmənz fild, ʃʌɾɝz θɹoʊn bæk ən ðə haʊsəz lɪt fəɹ wɪntɝnaɪt, pipəl ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɡɹiɾɪŋz əz ðeɪ pæs bæk ən fɔɹθ ɑn ðɛɹ vɪzəts, fɪɾəlz fɪlɪŋ ðə stʃɹits wɪð "jeɪɛmz fɑli" ən "hɛɹən ɑn ðə wɪŋ." hɹəl luhən wəɾ əv wʌn tu mɛni bɹændiz ən stɑɹt sɪŋɪŋ "ðə wɪn ɪn ðə bɑɹli" ɪn ə vɔɪs laɪk ə bʊlfɹɑɡ - hi ɔlweɪz dɪd - əntɪl ɪz waɪf mænədʒ tə ʃʌʃ hɪm, ən sɛn bui wəd dɪsaɪd tə pɹuv i kəd stɪl dæns əz wɛl əz ɛvɝ, ən mæt wəɾ əv sʌmθɪŋ plæn ðət wəd nɑt kwaɪt hæpən ðə weɪ hi ɪntɛndəd, ən ɛvɹibɑɾi wəd noʊ hi wɑz ɹispɑnsəbəl ivən ɪf noʊ wʌn kəd pɹuv ɪt. hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst smaɪl θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt haʊ ɪt wəd bi.

In his mind he pictured Emond's Field, shutters thrown back and the houses lit for Winternight, people shouting greetings as they passed back and forth on their visits, fiddles filling the streets with "Jaem's Folly" and "Heron on the Wing." Haral Luhhan would have one too many brandies and start singing "The Wind in the Barley" in a voice like a bullfrog - he always did - until his wife managed to shush him, and Cenn Buie would decide to prove he could still dance as well as ever, and Mat would have something planned that would not quite happen the way he intended, and everybody would know he was responsible even if no one could prove it. He could almost smile thinking about how it would be.

æftɝ ə taɪm tæm spoʊk ʌp əɡɛn.

After a time Tam spoke up again.

"ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə. ɪts sɛɾ ɪt meɪks noʊ sid, bʌt ðeɪ bɹɔɾ ə kʌɾɪŋ tə kɛɹhin, ə sæpəlɪŋ. ə ɹɔɪəl ɡɪft ʌv wʌndɝ fəɹ ðə kɪŋ." ðoʊ hi saʊndəɾ æŋɡɹi, hi wɑz bɛɹli laʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɹænd tə ʌndɝstænd. ɛniwʌn u kəd hɪɹ ɪm wəd bi eɪbəl tə hɪɹ ðə lɪɾɝ skɹeɪpɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊnd, tu. ɹænd kɛpt ɑn, oʊnli hæf lɪsnɪŋ. "ðeɪ nɛvɝ meɪk pis. nɛvɝ. bʌt ðeɪ bɹɔɾ ə sæpəlɪŋ, əz ə saɪn ə pis. faɪv hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ɪt ɡɹu. faɪv hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ə pis wɪð ðoʊz u meɪk noʊ pis wɪð stʃɹeɪnʒɝz. waɪ dɪɾ i kʌɾ ɪt daʊn? waɪ? blʌd wɑz ðə pɹaɪs fəɹ ɑvɛndɔɹɑldɛɹə. blʌd ðə pɹaɪs fəɹ leɪmənz pɹaɪd." hi feɪɾəd ɔf ɪndə mʌɾɝɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ.

"Avendesora. It's said it makes no seed, but they brought a cutting to Cairhien, a sapling. A royal gift of wonder for the king." Though he sounded angry, he was barely loud enough for Rand to understand. Anyone who could hear him would be able to hear the litter scraping across the ground, too. Rand kept on, only half listening. "They never make peace. Never. But they brought a sapling, as a sign of peace. Five hundred years it grew. Five hundred years of peace with those who make no peace with strangers. Why did he cut it down? Why? Blood was the price for Avendoraldera. Blood the price for Laman's pride." He faded off into muttering once more.

taɪɹədli ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌt fivɝ-dʒɹim tæm kəd bi hævɪŋ naʊ. ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə. ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf wɑz səpoʊz tə hæv ɔl sɔɹts ə mɝækjələs kwɑləɾiz, bʌt nʌn ə ðə stɔɹiz mɛnʃən ɛni sæpəlɪŋ, əɹ ɛni "ðeɪ." ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə wʌn, ən ðət bɪlɔŋ tə ðə ɡɹin mæn.

Tiredly Rand wondered what fever-dream Tam could be having now. Avendesora. The Tree of Life was supposed to have all sorts of miraculous qualities, but none of the stories mentioned any sapling, or any "they." There was only the one, and that belonged to the Green Man.

oʊnli ðət mɔɹnɪŋ i maɪɾ əv fɛl fulɪʃ ət mjuzɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹin mæn ən ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf. ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli stɔɹiz. ɑɹ ðeɪ? tʃɹɑləks wɝ dʒʌst stɔɹiz ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. meɪbi ɔl ðə stɔɹiz wɝ əz ɹil əz ðə nuz ðə pɛdlɝz ən mɝtʃəns bɹɔɾ ɔl ðə ɡlimənz teɪlz ən ɔl ðə stɔɹiz toʊld ət naɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. nɛkst i maɪɾ æktʃəli  mit ðə ɡɹin mæn, əɹ ən oʊɡiɝ dʒaɪənt, əɹ ə waɪld, blæk-veɪld ilmən.

Only that morning he might have felt foolish at musing over the Green Man and the Tree of Life. They were only stories. Are they? Trollocs were just stories this morning. Maybe all the stories were as real as the news the peddlers and merchants brought all the gleeman's tales and all the stories told at night in front of the fireplace. Next he might actually meet the Green Man, or an Ogier giant, or a wild, black-veiled Aielman.

tæm wɑz tɔkɪŋ əɡɛn, hi ɹilaɪzd, səmtaɪmz oʊnli mɝmɝɪŋ, səmtaɪmz laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə ʌndɝstænd. fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm i stɑp tə pæn fəɹ bɹɛθ, ðən wɛn ɑn əz ɪf i θɔɾ i hæd bɪn spikɪŋ ðə hoʊl taɪm.

Tam was talking again, he realized, sometimes only murmuring, sometimes loud enough to understand. From time to time he stopped to pant for breath, then went on as if he thought he had been speaking the whole time.

". . . bæɾəlz ɑɹ ɔlweɪz hɑt, ivən ɪn ðə snoʊ. swɛt hit. blʌd hit. oʊnli dɛθ ɪz kul. sloʊp ə ðə maʊntən . . . oʊnli pleɪs dɪdn stɪŋk ə dɛθ. hæd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm smɛl ʌv ɪt . . . saɪɾ ʌv ɪt. . . . hɝɾ ə beɪbi kɹaɪ. ðɛɹ wɪmən faɪɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə mɛn, səmtaɪmz, bʌt waɪ ðeɪ hæd lɛɾ əɹ kʌm, aɪ doʊnt . . . ɡeɪv bɝθ ðəɹ əloʊn, bɪfɔɹ ʃi daɪɾ ə hɝ wunz. . . . kʌvɝd ðə tʃaɪld wɪð əɹ kloʊk, bʌt ðə wɪnd . . . bloʊn ðə kloʊk əweɪ. . . . tʃaɪld, blu wɪð ðə koʊld. ʃʊɾə bɪn dɛd, tu. . . . kɹaɪɪŋ ðɛɹ. kɹaɪɪŋ ɪn ðə snoʊ. aɪ kʊdn dʒʌs liv ə tʃaɪld. . . . noʊ tʃɪlʒɹən ʌv əɹ oʊn. . . . ɔlweɪz nu jə wɑntəd tʃɪlʒɹən. aɪ nu jud teɪk ɪt tə jəɹ hɑɹt, kɛɹi. jɛs, læs. ɹænd ɪz ə ɡʊd neɪm. ə ɡʊd neɪm."

". . . battles are always hot, even in the snow. Sweat heat. Blood heat. Only death is cool. Slope of the mountain . . . only place didn't stink of death. Had to get away from smell of it . . . sight of it. . . . heard a baby cry. Their women fight alongside the men, sometimes, but why they had let her come, I don't . . . gave birth there alone, before she died of her wounds. . . . covered the child with her cloak, but the wind . . . blown the cloak away. . . . child, blue with the cold. Should have been dead, too. . . . crying there. Crying in the snow. I couldn't just leave a child. . . . no children of our own. . . . always knew you wanted children. I knew you'd take it to your heart, Kari. Yes, lass. Rand is a good name. A good name."

sʌɾənli ɹændz lɛɡz lɔs ðə lɪɾəl stʃɹɛŋkθ ðeɪ hæd. stʌmbəlɪŋ, hi fɛl tə hɪz niz. tæm moʊnd wɪð ðə dʒoʊlt, ən ðə stʃɹɪp ə blæŋkət kʌɾ ɪndə ɹændz ʃoʊldɝz, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑɾ əwɛɹ ʌv iðɝ. ɪf ə tʃɹɑlɑk hæd lɛpt ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm ɹaɪt ðɛn, hi wəd dʒʌst əv stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt. hi lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət tæm, hu hæd sʌŋk bæk ɪndə wɝdləs mɝmɝz. fivɝ-dʒɹimz, hi θɔt dʌli. fivɝz ɔlweɪz bɹɔt bæd dʒɹimz, ən ðɪs wɑz ə naɪt fəɹ naɪtmɛɹz ivən wɪθaʊɾ ə fivɝ.

Suddenly Rand's legs lost the little strength they had. Stumbling, he fell to his knees. Tam moaned with the jolt, and the strip of blanket cut into Rand's shoulders, but he was not aware of either. If a Trolloc had leaped up in front of him right then, he would just have stared at it. He looked over his shoulder at Tam, who had sunk back into wordless murmurs. Fever-dreams, he thought dully. Fevers always brought bad dreams, and this was a night for nightmares even without a fever.

"ju ɑɹ maɪ fɑðɝ," hi sɛɾ əlaʊd, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ bæk ə hæn tə tʌtʃ tæm, "æn aɪm - " ðə fivɝ wɑz wɝs. mʌtʃ wɝs.

"You are my father," he said aloud, stretching back a hand to touch Tam, "and I am - " The fever was worse. Much worse.

ɡɹɪmli hi stʃɹʌɡəl tə hɪz fit. tæm mɝmɝd sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt ɹænd ɹəfjuz tə lɪsən tə ɛni mɔɹ. θɹoʊɪŋ ɪz weɪɾ əɡɛns ði ɪmpɹəvaɪz hɑɹnəs i tʃɹaɪd tə pʊɾ ɔl ə hɪz maɪn ɪndə teɪkɪŋ wʌn lɛɾən stɛp æftɝ ənʌðɝ, ɪndə ɹitʃɪŋ ðə seɪfti ʌv ɛmənz fild. bʌɾ i kəd nɑt stɑp ði ɛkoʊ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪnd. hiz maɪ fɑðɝ. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə fivɝ-dʒɹim. hiz maɪ fɑðɝ. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə fivɝ-dʒɹim. laɪt, hu æm aɪ?

Grimly he struggled to his feet. Tam murmured something, but Rand refused to listen to any more. Throwing his weight against the improvised harness he tried to put all of his mind into taking one leaden step after another, into reaching the safety of Emond's Field. But he could not stop the echo in the back of his mind. He's my father. It was just a fever-dream. He's my father. It was just a fever-dream. Light, who am I?


tʃæptɝ sɛvən


CHAPTER 7

aʊɾ ə ðə wʊdz


Out of the Woods

ɡɹeɪ fɝs laɪt keɪm waɪl ɹænd stɪl tʃɹʌdʒ θɹu ðə fɔɹəst. ət fɝst i dɪd nɑt ɹɪli si. wən i faɪnəli dɪd, hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə feɪɾɪŋ dɑɹknəs ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɪz aɪz toʊl hɪm, hi kəd hɑɹdli bɪliv i hæd spɛn ɔl naɪt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃɹævəl ðə dɪstəns fɹəm ðə fɑɹm tə ɛmənz fild. ʌv kɔɹs, ðə kwɔɹi ɹoʊd baɪ deɪ, ɹɑks ən ɔl, wɑz ə fɑɹ kɹaɪ fɹəm ðə wʊdz baɪ naɪt. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ɪt sim deɪz sɪns i hæd sin ðə blæk-kloʊkt ɹaɪɾɝ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd, wiks sɪns i ən tæm hæd ɡɔn ɪn fəɹ ðɛɹ sʌpɝ. hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɛl ðə stʃɹɪp ə klɔθ dɪɡɪŋ ɪndə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz, bʌt ðən i fɛl nʌθɪŋ ɪn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ɪksɛp nʌmnəs, nɔɹ ɪn ɪz fit, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ɪn bɪtwin, ɪt wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ. hɪz bɹɛθ keɪm ɪn leɪbɝd pæns ðət hæd lɔŋ sɪns sɛɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən lʌŋz tə bɝnɪŋ, ən hʌŋɡɝ twɪstəɾ ɪz stʌmək ɪndə kwizi sɪknəs.

Gray first light came while Rand still trudged through the forest. At first he did not really see. When he finally did, he stared at the fading darkness in surprise. No matter what his eyes told him, he could hardly believe he had spent all night trying to travel the distance from the farm to Emond's Field. Of course, the Quarry Road by day, rocks and all, was a far cry from the woods by night. On the other hand, it seemed days since he had seen the black-cloaked rider on the road, weeks since he and Tam had gone in for their supper. He no longer felt the strip of cloth digging into his shoulders, but then he felt nothing in his shoulders except numbness, nor in his feet, for that matter. In between, it was another matter. His breath came in labored pants that had long since set his throat and lungs to burning, and hunger twisted his stomach into queasy sickness.

tæm hæd fɔlən saɪlən səm taɪm bɪfɔɹ. ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ lɔŋ ɪt hæd bɪn sɪns ðə mɝmɝz sist, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt dɛɹ hɔl naʊ tə tʃɛk ɑn tæm. ɪf i stɑpt i wəd nɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə stɑɹɾ aʊɾ əɡɛn. ɛniweɪ, wʌtɛvɝ tæmz kəndɪʃən, hi kəd də nʌθɪŋ bɪɑnd wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ. ði oʊnli hoʊp leɪ əhɛd, ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ. hi tʃɹaɪd wɛɹəli tə ɪnkɹis ɪz peɪs, bʌɾ ɪz wʊɾən lɛɡz kəntɪnjud ðɛɹ sloʊ plɑd. hi bɛɹli ivən noʊɾəst ðə koʊld, əɹ ðə wɪnd.

Tam had fallen silent some time before. Rand was not sure how long it had been since the murmurs ceased, but he did not dare halt now to check on Tam. If he stopped he would never be able to force himself to start out again. Anyway, Whatever Tam's condition, he could do nothing beyond what he was doing. The only hope lay ahead, in the village. He tried wearily to increase his pace, but his wooden legs continued their slow plod. He barely even noticed the cold, or the wind.

veɪɡli hi kɑt ðə smɛl ʌv wʊdzmoʊk. ət list i wɑz ɔlmoʊs ðəɹ ɪf i kəd smɛl ðə vɪlədʒ tʃɪmniz. ə taɪɝd smaɪl hæɾ oʊnli bɪɡʌn ɑn ɪz feɪs, ðoʊ, wən ɪt tɝn tə ə fɹaʊn. smoʊk leɪ hɛvi ɪn ði ɛɹ - tu hɛvi. wɪð ðə wɛðɝ, ə faɪɝ maɪt wɛl bi bleɪzɪŋ ɑn ɛvɹi hɑɹθ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ, bʌt ðə smoʊk wɑz stɪl tu stʃɹɔŋ. ɪn ɪz maɪn i sɔ əɡɛn ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑn ðə ɹoʊd. tʃɹɑləks kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ði ist, fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃən ʌv ɛmənz fild. hi pɪɹɾ əhɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk aʊt ðə fɝs haʊsəz, ən ɹɛɾi tə ʃaʊt fəɹ hɛlp ət ðə fɝst saɪɾ ʌv ɛniwʌn, ivən sɛn bui əɹ wʌn ə ðə kɑplɪnz. ə smɔl vɔɪs ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd toʊld ɪm tə hoʊp sʌmwʌn ðəɹ kəd stɪl ɡɪv hɛlp.

Vaguely he caught the smell of woodsmoke. At least he was almost there if he could smell the village chimneys. A tired smile had only begun on his face, though, when it turned to a frown. Smoke lay heavy in the air - too heavy. With the weather, a fire might well be blazing on every hearth in the village, but the smoke was still too strong. In his mind he saw again the Trollocs on the road. Trollocs coming from the east, from the direction of Emond's Field. He peered ahead, trying to make out the first houses, and ready to shout for help at the first sight of anyone, even Cenn Buie or one of the Coplins. A small voice in the back of his head told him to hope someone there could still give help.

sʌɾənli ə haʊs bɪkeɪm vɪzəbəl θɹu ðə læs bɛɹ-bɹæntʃt tʃɹiz, ən ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə kip ɪz fit muvɪŋ. hoʊp tɝnɪŋ tə ʃɑɹp dɪspɛɹ, hi stæɡɝɾ ɪndə ðə vɪlədʒ.

Suddenly a house became visible through the last bare-branched trees, and it was all he could do to keep his feet moving. Hope turning to sharp despair, he staggered into the village.

tʃɑɹd paɪlz ə ɹʌbəl stʊɾ ɪn ðə pleɪsəz ə hæf ðə haʊsəz ʌv ɛmənz fild. sʊt-koʊɾəd bɹɪk tʃɪmniz θɹʌs laɪk dɝɾi fɪŋɡɝz fɹəm hips ə blækən tɪmbɝz. θɪn wɪsps ə smoʊk stɪl ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə ɹuənz. ɡɹaɪmi-feɪs vɪlɪdʒɝz, səm jɛɾ ɪn ðɛɹ naɪt kloʊðz, poʊk θɹu ði æʃəz, hɪɹ pʊlɪŋ fɹi ə kʊkpɑt, ðəɹ sɪmpli pɹɑɾɪŋ fɔɹlɔɹnli ət ðə ɹɛkədʒ wɪð ə stɪk. wʌt lɪɾəl hæd bɪn ɹɛskjud fɹəm ðə fleɪmz dɑɾəd ðə stʃɹits; tɔl mɪɹɝz ən pɑlɪʃt saɪdbɔɹdz ən haɪtʃəsts stʊɾ ɪn ðə dʌst əmʌŋ tʃɛɹz ən teɪbəlz bɛɹiɾ ʌndɝ bɛɾɪŋ, kʊkɪŋ jutɛnsəlz, ən miɡɝ paɪlz ə kloʊðɪŋ ən pɝsənəl bɪlɔŋɪŋz.

Charred piles of rubble stood in the places of half the houses of Emond's Field. Soot-coated brick chimneys thrust like dirty fingers from heaps of blackened timbers. Thin wisps of smoke still rose from the ruins. Grimy-faced villagers, some yet in their night clothes, poked through the ashes, here pulling free a cookpot, there simply prodding forlornly at the wreckage with a stick. What little had been rescued from the flames dotted the streets; tall mirrors and polished sideboards and highchests stood in the dust among chairs and tables buried under bedding, cooking utensils, and meager piles of clothing and personal belongings.

ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən sim skæɾɝd ət ɹændəm θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ. faɪv haʊsəz mɑɹtʃt əntʌtʃt ɪn wʌn ɹoʊ, waɪl ɪn ənʌðɝ pleɪs ə loʊn sɝvaɪvɝ stʊd sɝaʊndəd baɪ dɛsəleɪʃən.

The destruction seemed scattered at random through the village. Five houses marched untouched in one row, while in another place a lone survivor stood surrounded by desolation.

ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ wɔɾɝ, ðə θɹi hjudʒ bɛl taɪn bɑnfaɪɝz ɹɔɹd, tɛndəd baɪ ə klʌstɝ ə mɛn. θɪk kɑləmz ə blæk smoʊk bɛnt nɔɹθwɝd wɪð ðə wɪnd, flɛk baɪ kɛɹləs spɑɹks. wʌn ə mæstɝ ælvɪɹz dɝən stæljənz wɑz dʒɹæɡɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ ɹænd kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹaʊn təwɔɹd ðə wæɡən bɹɪdʒ, ən ðə fleɪmz.

On the far side of the Winespring Water, the three huge Bel Tine bonfires roared, tended by a cluster of men. Thick columns of black smoke bent northward with the wind, flecked by careless sparks. One of Master al'Vere's Dhurran stallions was dragging something Rand could not make out over the ground toward the Wagon Bridge, and the flames.

bɪfɔɹ i wɑz wɛl aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz, ə suɾi-feɪst hɹəl luhən hɝid tə hɪm, klʌtʃɪŋ ə wʊdzmənz æks ɪn wʌn θɪk-fɪŋɡɝd hænd. ðə bɝli blæksmɪθs æʃ-smɪɹd naɪtʃɝt hʌŋ tə hɪz buts, ði æŋɡɹi ɹɛd wɛlt ʌv ə bɝn əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst ʃoʊɪŋ θɹu ə ɹæɡəd tɛɹ. hi dʒɹɑp tə wʌn ni bɪsaɪd ðə lɪɾɝ. tæmz aɪz wɝ kloʊzd, ən ɪz bɹiðɪŋ keɪm loʊ ən hɑɹd.

Before he was well out of the trees, a sooty-faced Haral Luhhan hurried to him, clutching a woodsman's axe in one thick-fingered hand. The burly blacksmith's ash-smeared nightshirt hung to his boots, the angry red welt of a burn across his chest showing through a ragged tear. He dropped to one knee beside the litter. Tam's eyes were closed, and his breathing came low and hard.

"tʃɹɑləks, bɔɪ?" mæstɝ luhən æskt ɪn ə smoʊk-hɔɹs vɔɪs. "hɪɹ, tu. hɪɹ, tu. wɛl, wi meɪ hæv bɪn lʌkiɝ ðən ɛniwʌn əz ə ɹaɪt tə bi, ɪf jə kən kɹɛɾət ɪt. hi nidz ðə wɪzdəm. naʊ wɛɹ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɪz ʃi? ɛɡwin!"

"Trollocs, boy?" Master Luhhan asked in a smoke-hoarse voice. "Here, too. Here, too. Well, we may have been luckier than anyone has a right to be, if you can credit it. He needs the Wisdom. Now where in the Light is she? Egwene!"

ɛɡwin, ɹʌnɪŋ baɪ wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz fʊl ə bɛdʃits tɔɹn ɪndə bændədʒəz, lʊkt ɝaʊn əɾ əm wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ. hɝ aɪz stɛɹɾ ət sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə fɑɹ dɪstəns; dɑɹk sɝkəlz meɪɾ əm əpɪɹ ivən lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ðeɪ æktʃəli  wɝ. ðən ʃi sɔ ɹænd ən stɑpt, dʒɹɔɪŋ ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ. "oʊ, noʊ, ɹænd, nɑt jəɹ fɑðɝ? ɪz i . . . ? kʌm, əl teɪk jə tə nɪneɪiv."

Egwene, running by with her arms full of bedsheets torn into bandages, looked around at them without slowing. Her eyes stared at something in the far distance; dark circles made them appear even larger than they actually were. Then she saw Rand and stopped, drawing a shuddering breath. "Oh, no, Rand, not your father? Is he . . . ? Come, I'll take you to Nynaeve."

ɹænd wɑz tu taɪɝd, tu stʌnd, tə spik. ɔl θɹu ðə naɪɾ ɛmənz fil hæd bɪn ə heɪvən, wɛɹ i ən tæm wəd bi seɪf. naʊ ɔl i kəd sim tə də wɑz stɛɹ ɪn dɪsmeɪ əɾ əɹ smoʊk-steɪn dʒɹɛs. hi noʊɾəst ɑd dɪteɪlz əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðə bʌɾənz daʊn ðə bæk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs wɝ dʌn ʌp kɹʊkədli. ən əɹ hænz wɝ klin. hi wʌndɝd waɪ hɝ hænz wɝ klin wən smʌdʒɪz ə sʊt mɑɹkt əɹ tʃiks.

Rand was too tired, too stunned, to speak. All through the night Emond's Field had been a haven, where he and Tam would be safe. Now all he could seem to do was stare in dismay at her smoke-stained dress. He noticed odd details as if they were very important. The buttons down the back of her dress were done up crookedly. And her hands were clean. He wondered why her hands were clean when smudges of soot marked her cheeks.

mæstɝ luhən sim tə ʌndɝstænd wʌt hæd kʌm oʊvɝ hɪm. leɪɪŋ ɪz æks əkɹɔs ðə ʃæfs, ðə blæksmɪθ pɪkt ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ ə ðə lɪɾɝ ən ɡeɪv ɪɾ ə dʒɛntəl pʊʃ, pɹɑɾɪŋ ɪm tə fɑloʊ ɛɡwin. hi stʌmbəld æftɝ əɹ əz ɪf wɔkɪŋ ɪn ɪz slip. bɹifli hi wʌndɝd haʊ mæstɝ luhən nu ðə kɹitʃɝz wɝ tʃɹɑləks, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə fliɾɪŋ θɔt. ɪf tæm kəd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðɛm, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən waɪ hɹəl luhən kəd nɑt.

Master Luhhan seemed to understand what had come over him. Laying his axe across the shafts, the blacksmith picked up the rear of the litter and gave it a gentle push, prodding him to follow Egwene. He stumbled after her as if walking in his sleep. Briefly he wondered how Master Luhhan knew the creatures were Trollocs, but it was a fleeting thought. If Tam could recognize them, there was no reason why Haral Luhhan could not.

"ɔl ðə stɔɹiz ɑɹ ɹil," hi mʌɾɝd.

"All the stories are real," he muttered.

"soʊ ɪt simz, læd," ðə blæksmɪθ sɛd. "soʊ ɪt simz."

"So it seems, lad," the blacksmith said. "So it seems."

ɹænd oʊnli hæf hɝd. hi wɑz kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn fɑloʊɪŋ ɛɡwinz slɛndɝ ʃeɪp. hi hæd pʊl hɪmsɛlf təɡɛðɝ dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə wɪʃ ʃi wəd hɝi, ðoʊ ɪn tʃɹuθ ʃi wɑz kipɪŋ əɹ peɪs tə wʌt ðə tu mɛn kəd mænədʒ wɪð ðɛɹ bɝɾən. ʃi lɛɾ əm hæfweɪ daʊn ðə ɡɹin, tə ðə kɔldɝ haʊs. tʃɑɹ blækən ði ɛdʒəz ʌv ɪts θætʃ, ən smʌt steɪn ðə waɪtwɑʃt wɔlz. ʌv ðə haʊsəz ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ oʊnli ðə faʊndeɪʃən stoʊnz wɝ lɛft, ən tu paɪlz ʌv æʃ ən bɝn tɪmbɝz. wʌn hæd bɪn ðə haʊs ə bɛɹɪn θeɪn, wʌn ə ðə mɪlɝz bɹʌðɝz. ði ʌðɝ hæd bɪn eɪbəl kɔθənz. mæts fɑðɝ. ivən ðə tʃɪmniz hæd tɑpəld.

Rand only half heard. He was concentrating on following Egwene's slender shape. He had pulled himself together just enough to wish she would hurry, though in truth she was keeping her pace to what the two men could manage with their burden. She led them halfway down the Green, to the Calder house. Char blackened the edges of its thatch, and smut stained the whitewashed walls. Of the houses on either side only the foundation stones were left, and two piles of ash and burned timbers. One had been the house of Berin Thane, one of the miller's brothers. The other had been Abell Cauthon's. Mat's father. Even the chimneys had toppled.

"weɪt hɪɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd, ən ɡeɪv əm ə lʊk əz ɪf ɪkspɛktɪŋ ən ænsɝ. wən ðeɪ oʊnli stʊd ðɛɹ, ʃi mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ, ðən dæʃt ɪnsaɪd.

"Wait here," Egwene said, and gave them a look as if expecting an answer. When they only stood there, she muttered something under her breath, then dashed inside.

"mæt," ɹænd sɛd. "ɪz i . . . ?"

"Mat," Rand said. "Is he . . . ?"

"hiz əlaɪv," ðə blæksmɪθ sɛd. hi sɛt daʊn ɪz ɛn ə ðə lɪɾɝ ən stʃɹeɪɾənd sloʊli. "aɪ sɔ hɪm ə lɪɾəl waɪl əɡoʊ. ɪts ə wʌndɝ ɛni ʌv əs ɑɹ əlaɪv. ðə weɪ ðeɪ keɪm æftɝ maɪ haʊs, ən ðə fɔɹdʒ, juɾ əv θɔɾ aɪ hæd ɡoʊld ən dʒuəlz ɪn ðɛɹ. ælsbɛt kɹækt wʌnz skʌl wɪð ə fɹaɪɪŋ pæn. ʃi tʊk wʌn lʊk ət ði æʃəz ʌv əɹ haʊs ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ ən sɛɾ aʊt hʌntɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə vɪlədʒ wɪð ðə bɪɡəs hæmɝ ʃi kəd dɪɡ aʊɾ ʌv wʌts lɛft ə ðə fɔɹdʒ, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs ɛni ʌv əm hɪɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ. aɪ kəɾ ɔlmoʊs pɪɾi ðə θɪŋ ɪf ʃi faɪnz wʌn." hi nɑɾəd tə ðə kɔldɝ haʊs. "mɪstʃɹəs kɔldɝ ən ə fju ʌðɝz tʊk ɪn səm ə ðoʊz u wɝ hɝt, ðə wʌnz wɪð noʊ hoʊm ə ðɛɹ oʊn stɪl stændɪŋ. wən ðə wɪzdəmz sin tæm, wɪl faɪn ɪm ə bɛd. ði ɪn, meɪbi. ðə meɪɝ ɔfɝɾ ɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi, bʌt nɪneɪiv sɛd ðə hɝt foʊk wəd hil bɛɾɝ ɪf ðəɹ wɝn soʊ mɛni ʌv əm təɡɛðɝ."

"He's alive," the blacksmith said. He set down his end of the litter and straightened slowly. "I saw him a little while ago. It's a wonder any of us are alive. The way they came after my house, and the forge, you'd have thought I had gold and jewels in there. Alsbet cracked one's skull with a frying pan. She took one look at the ashes of our house this morning and set out hunting around the village with the biggest hammer she could dig out of what's left of the forge, just in case any of them hid instead of running away. I could almost pity the thing if she finds one." He nodded to the Calder house. "Mistress Calder and a few others took in some of those who were hurt, the ones with no home of their own still standing. When the Wisdom's seen Tam, we'll find him a bed. The inn, maybe. The Mayor offered it already, but Nynaeve said the hurt folk would heal better if there weren't so many of them together."

ɹænd sæŋk tə hɪz niz. ʃɹʌɡɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz blæŋkət hɑɹnəs, hi wɛɹəli bɪzid hɪmsɛlf wɪð tʃɛkɪŋ tæmz kʌvɝz. tæm nɛvɝ muvd əɹ meɪɾ ə saʊnd, ivən wən ɹændz wʊɾən hænz dʒɑsəl hɪm. bʌɾ i wɑz stɪl bɹiðɪŋ, ət list. maɪ fɑðɝ. ði ʌðɝ wɑz dʒʌs ðə fivɝ tɔkɪŋ. "wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ kʌm bæk?" hi sɛd dʌli.

Rand sank to his knees. Shrugging out of his blanket harness, he wearily busied himself with checking Tam's covers. Tam never moved or made a sound, even when Rand's wooden hands jostled him. But he was still breathing, at least. My father. The other was just the fever talking. "What if they come back?" he said dully.

"ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz," mæstɝ luhən sɛɾ ənizəli. "ɪf ðeɪ kʌm bæk. . . . wɛl, ðəɹ ɡɔn, naʊ. soʊ wi pɪk ʌp ðə pisəz, bɪld ʌp wʌts bɪn tɔɹn daʊn." hi saɪd, hɪz feɪs ɡoʊɪŋ slæk əz i nʌkəl ðə smɔl ə hɪz bæk. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɹænd ɹilaɪz ðət ðə hɛvisɛt mæn wɑz əz taɪɝɾ əz i wɑz hɪmsɛlf, ɪf nɑt mɔɹ soʊ. ðə blæksmɪθ lʊkt ət ðə vɪlədʒ, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "aɪ doʊn səpoʊz tədeɪ wɪl bi mʌtʃ ʌv ə bɛl taɪn. bʌt wɪl meɪk ɪt θɹu. wi ɔlweɪz hæv." əbɹʌpli hi tʊk ʌp ɪz æks, ən ɪz feɪs fɝmd. "ðɛɹz wɝk weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mi. doʊn jə wɝi, læd. ðə wɪzdəm wɪl teɪk ɡʊd kɛɹ ə hɪm, ən ðə laɪt wɪl teɪk kɛɹ ʌv əs ɔl. ən ɪf ðə laɪt dʌznt, wɛl, wɪl dʒʌs teɪk kɛɹ ʌv aʊɝsɛlvz. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, wɝ tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk."

"The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills," Master Luhhan said uneasily. "If they come back. . . . Well, they're gone, now. So we pick up the pieces, build up what's been torn down." He sighed, his face going slack as he knuckled the small of his back. For the first time Rand realized that the heavyset man was as tired as he was himself, if not more so. The blacksmith looked at the village, shaking his head. "I don't suppose today will be much of a Bel Tine. But we'll make it through. We always have." Abruptly he took up his axe, and his face firmed. "There's work waiting for me. Don't you worry, lad. The Wisdom will take good care of him, and the Light will take care of us all. And if the Light doesn't, well, we'll just take care of ourselves. Remember, we're Two Rivers folk."

stɪl ɑn ɪz niz, ɹænd lʊkt ət ðə vɪlədʒ əz ðə blæksmɪθ wɔkt əweɪ, ɹɪli lʊk fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. mæstɝ luhən wɑz ɹaɪt, hi θɔt, ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt sɝpɹaɪz baɪ wʌɾ i sɔ. pipəl stɪl dʌɡ ɪn ðə ɹuənz ə ðɛɹ hoʊmz, bʌɾ ivən ɪn ðə ʃɔɹt taɪm i hæd bɪn ðəɹ mɔɹ ə ðɛm hæd bɪɡʌn tə muv wɪð ə sɛns ə pɝpəs. hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil ðə ɡɹoʊɪŋ dɪtɝməneɪʃən. bʌɾ i wʌndɝd. ðeɪ hæd sin tʃɹɑləks; hæd ðeɪ sin ðə blæk-kloʊkt ɹaɪɾɝ? hæd ðeɪ fɛlt ɪz heɪtʃɹəd?

Still on his knees, Rand looked at the village as the blacksmith walked away, really looked for the first time. Master Luhhan was right, he thought, and was surprised that he was not surprised by what he saw. People still dug in the ruins of their homes, but even in the short time he had been there more of them had begun to move with a sense of purpose. He could almost feel the growing determination. But he wondered. They had seen Trollocs; had they seen the black-cloaked rider? Had they felt his hatred?

nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə kɔldɝ haʊs, ən i spɹæŋ tə hɪz fit. əɹ ɹæðɝ, hi tʃɹaɪd tə spɹɪŋ tə hɪz fit; ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ʌv ə stʌmbəlɪŋ lɝtʃ ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs pʊɾ ɪm ɑn ɪz feɪs ɪn ðə dʌst.

Nynaeve and Egwene appeared from the Calder house, and he sprang to his feet. Or rather, he tried to spring to his feet; it was more of a stumbling lurch that almost put him on his face in the dust.

ðə wɪzdəm dʒɹɑp tə hɝ niz bɪsaɪd ðə lɪɾɝ wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɡlæns. hɝ feɪs ən dʒɹɛs wɝ ivən dɝɾiɝ ðən ɛɡwinz, ən ðə seɪm dɑɹk sɝkəlz laɪn əɹ aɪz, ðoʊ hɝ hænz, tu, wɝ klin. ʃi fɛl tæmz feɪs ən θʌmd oʊpən ɪz aɪlɪdz. wɪð ə fɹaʊn ʃi pʊl daʊn ðə kʌvɝɪŋz ən iz ðə bændɪdʒ əsaɪd tə lʊk ət ðə waʊnd. bɪfɔɹ ɹænd kəd si wʌt leɪ ʌndɝniθ ʃi hæd ɹipleɪs ðə wɑɾəd klɔθ. saɪɪŋ, ʃi smuðd ðə blæŋkəɾ ən kloʊk bæk ʌp tə tæmz nɛk wɪð ə dʒɛntəl tʌtʃ, əz ɪf tʌkɪŋ ə tʃaɪld ɪn fəɹ ðə naɪt.

The Wisdom dropped to her knees beside the litter without giving him so much as a glance. Her face and dress were even dirtier than Egwene's, and the same dark circles lined her eyes, though her hands, too, were clean. She felt Tam's face and thumbed open his eyelids. With a frown she pulled down the coverings and eased the bandage aside to look at the wound. Before Rand could see what lay underneath she had replaced the wadded cloth. Sighing, she smoothed the blanket and cloak back up to Tam's neck with a gentle touch, as if tucking a child in for the night.

"ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ aɪ kən du," ʃi sɛd. ʃi hæd tə pʊɾ əɹ hænz ɑn əɹ niz tə stʃɹeɪɾən ʌp. "aɪm sɑɹi, ɹænd."

"There's nothing I can do," she said. She had to put her hands on her knees to straighten up. "I'm sorry, Rand."

fəɹ ə moʊmən i stʊd, nɑɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ, əz ʃi stɑɹɾəd bæk tə ðə haʊs, ðən i skɹæmbəld æftɝ əɹ ən pʊld əɹ ɝaʊn tə feɪs hɪm. "hiz daɪɪŋ," hi kɹaɪd.

For a moment he stood, not understanding, as she started back to the house, then he scrambled after her and pulled her around to face him. "He's dying," he cried.

"aɪ noʊ," ʃi sɛd sɪmpli, ən i sæɡd wɪð ðə mæɾɝ-ʌv-fæktnəs ʌv ɪt.

"I know," she said simply, and he sagged with the matter-of-factness of it.

"ju hæv tə də sʌmθɪŋ. juv tə. jəɹ ðə wɪzdəm."

"You have to do something. You have to. You're the Wisdom."

peɪn twɪstəɾ əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ oʊnli fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ðən ʃi wɑz ɔl hɑloʊ-aɪd ɹizɑlv əɡɛn, hɝ vɔɪs ɪmoʊʃənləs ən fɝm. "jɛs, aɪ æm. aɪ noʊ wʌɾ aɪ kən də wɪð maɪ mɛɾəsənz, ən aɪ noʊ wən ɪts tu leɪt. doʊn jə θɪŋk aɪ wəd də sʌmθɪŋ ɪf aɪ kʊd? bʌɾ aɪ kænt. aɪ kænt, ɹænd. ən ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝz u nid mi. pipəl aɪ kən hɛlp."

Pain twisted her face, but only for an instant, then she was all hollow-eyed resolve again, her voice emotionless and firm. "Yes, I am. I know what I can do with my medicines, and I know when it's too late. Don't you think I would do something if I could? But I can't. I can't, Rand. And there are others who need me. People I can help."

"aɪ bɹɔɾ ɪm tə jə əz kwɪkli əz aɪ kʊd," hi mʌmbəld. ivən wɪð ðə vɪlədʒ ɪn ɹuənz, ðəɹ hæd bɪn ðə wɪzdəm fəɹ hoʊp. wɪð ðət ɡɔn, hi wɑz ɛmpti.

"I brought him to you as quickly as I could," he mumbled. Even with the village in ruins, there had been the Wisdom for hope. With that gone, he was empty.

"aɪ noʊ jə dɪd," ʃi sɛd dʒɛnli. ʃi tʌtʃt ɪz tʃik wɪð əɹ hænd. "ɪɾ ɪzən jəɹ fɔlt. jə dɪd ðə bɛst ɛniwʌn kʊd. aɪm sɑɹi, ɹænd, bʌɾ aɪ hæv ʌðɝz tə tɛn tə. əɹ tʃɹʌbəlz ɑɹ dʒʌs bɪɡɪnɪŋ, aɪm əfɹeɪd."

"I know you did," she said gently. She touched his cheek with her hand. "It isn't your fault. You did the best anyone could. I am sorry, Rand, but I have others to tend to. Our troubles are just beginning, I'm afraid."

veɪkənli hi stɛɹɾ æftɝ əɹ əntɪl ðə dɔɹ ə ðə haʊs kloʊz bɪhaɪn hɝ. hi kəd nɑt meɪk ɛni θɔt kʌm ɪksɛp ðət ʃi wəd nɑt hɛlp.

Vacantly he stared after her until the door of the house closed behind her. He could not make any thought come except that she would not help.

sʌɾənli hi wɑz nɑk bæk ə stɛp əz ɛɡwin kænən ɪndə hɪm, θɹoʊɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɪm. hɝ hʌɡ wɑz hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə bɹɪŋ ə ɡɹʌn fɹəm ɪm ɛni ʌðɝ taɪm; naʊ hi oʊnli lʊk saɪlənli ət ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪnd wɪtʃ ɪz hoʊps hæd vænɪʃt.

Suddenly he was knocked back a step as Egwene cannoned into him, throwing her arms around him. Her hug was hard enough to bring a grunt from him any other time; now he only looked silently at the door behind which his hopes had vanished.

"aɪm soʊ sɑɹi, ɹænd," ʃi sɛɾ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst. "laɪt, aɪ wɪʃ ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ aɪ kəd du."

"I'm so sorry, Rand," she said against his chest. "Light, I wish there was something I could do."

nʌmbli hi pʊɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝ. "aɪ noʊ. aɪ . . . aɪ hæv tə də sʌmθɪŋ, ɛɡwin. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt, bʌɾ aɪ kæn dʒʌs lɛt hɪm. . . ." hɪz vɔɪs bɹoʊk, ən ʃi hʌɡd ɪm hɑɹɾɝ.

Numbly he put his arms around her. "I know. I . . . I have to do something, Egwene. I don't know what, but I can't just let him. . . ." His voice broke, and she hugged him harder.

"ɛɡwin!" ət nɪneɪivz ʃaʊt fɹəm ðə haʊs, ɛɡwin dʒʌmpt. "ɛɡwin, aɪ nid ju! ən wɑʃ jəɹ hænz əɡɛn!"

"Egwene!" At Nynaeve's shout from the house, Egwene jumped. "Egwene, I need you! And wash your hands again!"

ʃi pʊʃt hɝsɛlf fɹi fɹəm ɹændz ɑɹmz. "ʃi nidz maɪ hɛlp, ɹænd."

She pushed herself free from Rand's arms. "She needs my help, Rand."

"ɛɡwin!"

"Egwene!"

hi θɔɾ i hɝɾ ə sɑb əz ʃi spʌn əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. ðən ʃi wɑz ɡɔn, ən i wɑz lɛft əloʊn bɪsaɪd ðə lɪɾɝ. fəɹ ə moʊmən i lʊk daʊn ət tæm, filɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌt hɑloʊ hɛlpləsnəs. sʌɾənli hɪz feɪs hɑɹɾənd. "ðə meɪɝ wɪl noʊ wʌt tə du," hi sɛd, lɪftɪŋ ðə ʃæfs wʌns mɔɹ. "ðə meɪɝ wɪl noʊ." bɹæn ælvɪɹ ɔlweɪz nu wʌt tə du. wɪð wɪɹi ɑbstənəsi hi sɛɾ aʊt fəɹ ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn.

He thought he heard a sob as she spun away from him. Then she was gone, and he was left alone beside the litter. For a moment he looked down at Tam, feeling nothing but hollow helplessness. Suddenly his face hardened. "The Mayor will know what to do," he said, lifting the shafts once more. "The Mayor will know." Bran al'Vere always knew what to do. With weary obstinacy he set out for the Winespring Inn.

ənʌðɝ ə ðə dɝən stæljənz pæs hɪm, ɪts hɑɹnəs stʃɹæps taɪɾ ɝaʊn ði æŋkəlz ʌv ə bɪɡ ʃeɪp dʒɹeɪpt wɪð ə dɝɾi blæŋkət. ɑɹmz kʌvɝd wɪð kɔɹs hɛɹ dʒɹæɡd ɪn ðə dɝt bɪhaɪn ðə blæŋkət, ən wʌn kɔɹnɝ wɑz pʊʃt ʌp tə ɹɪvil ə ɡoʊts hɔɹn. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz noʊ pleɪs fəɹ stɔɹiz tə bɪkʌm hɔɹəbli ɹil. ɪf tʃɹɑləks bɪlɔŋd ɛniwɛɹ ɪt wɑz ɪn ðə wɝld aʊtsaɪd, fəɹ pleɪsəz wɛɹ ðeɪ hæɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən fɔls dʒɹæɡənz ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌɾ ɛls kʌm tə laɪf aʊɾ ə ðə teɪlz ʌv ɡlimən. nɑt ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. nɑɾ ɛmənz fild.

Another of the Dhurran stallions passed him, its harness straps tied around the ankles of a big shape draped with a dirty blanket. Arms covered with coarse hair dragged in the dirt behind the blanket, and one corner was pushed up to reveal a goat's horn. The Two Rivers was no place for stories to become horribly real. If Trollocs belonged anywhere it was in the world outside, for places where they had Aes Sedai and false Dragons and the Light alone knew what else come to life out of the tales of gleemen. Not the Two Rivers. Not Emond's Field.

əz i meɪɾ ɪz weɪ daʊn ðə ɡɹin, pipəl kɔl tə hɪm, səm fɹəm ðə ɹuənz ə ðɛɹ hoʊmz, æskɪŋ ɪf ðeɪ kəd hɛlp. hi hɝɾ əm oʊnli əz mɝmɝz ɪn ðə bækɡɹaʊnd, ivən wən ðeɪ wɔkt əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɪm fəɹ ə dɪstəns əz ðeɪ spoʊk. wɪθaʊt ɹɪli θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪɾ i mænədʒd wɝdz ðət sɛɾ i niɾəd noʊ hɛlp, ðəɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz biɪŋ teɪkən kɛɹ ʌv. wən ðeɪ lɛf hɪm, wɪð wɝid lʊks, ən səmtaɪmz ə kɑmɛn əbaʊt sɛndɪŋ nɪneɪiv tə hɪm, hi noʊɾəst ðət dʒʌst əz lɪɾəl. ɔl i lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi əwɛɹ ʌv wɑz ðə pɝpəs i hæd fɪkst ɪn ɪz hɛd. bɹæn ælvɪɹ kəd də sʌmθɪŋ tə hɛlp tæm. wʌt ðət kəd bi hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə dwɛl ɑn. bʌt ðə meɪɝ wəd bi eɪbəl tə də sʌmθɪŋ, tə θɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ.

As he made his way down the Green, people called to him, some from the ruins of their homes, asking if they could help. He heard them only as murmurs in the background, even when they walked alongside him for a distance as they spoke. Without really thinking about it he managed words that said he needed no help, that everything was being taken care of. When they left him, with worried looks, and sometimes a comment about sending Nynaeve to him, he noticed that just as little. All he let himself be aware of was the purpose he had fixed in his head. Bran al'Vere could do something to help Tam. What that could be he tried not to dwell on. But the Mayor would be able to do something, to think of something.

ði ɪn hæɾ ɔlmoʊs kəmplitli ɪskeɪp ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ðət hæd teɪkən hæf ðə vɪlədʒ. ə fju skɔɹk mɑɹks mɑɹɾ ɪts wɔlz, bʌt ðə ɹɛd ɹuf taɪlz ɡlɪɾɝd ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪɾ əz bɹaɪtli əz ɛvɝ. ɔl ðət wɑz lɛft ə ðə pɛdlɝz wæɡən, ðoʊ, wɝ blækən aɪɝn wil-ɹɪmz linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə tʃɑɹd wæɡən bɑks, naʊ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ðə bɪɡ ɹaʊn hups ðət hæd hɛld ʌp ðə kænvəs kʌvɝ slæntəd kɹeɪzəli, itʃ əɾ ə dɪfɹən æŋɡəl.

The inn had almost completely escaped the destruction that had taken half the village. A few scorch marks marred its walls, but the red roof tiles glittered in the sunlight as brightly as ever. All that was left of the peddler's wagon, though, were blackened iron wheel-rims leaning against the charred wagon box, now on the ground. The big round hoops that had held up the canvas cover slanted crazily, each at a different angle.

tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ði oʊl faʊndeɪʃən stoʊnz, kɛɹfəli snɪpɪŋ sɪŋʒd ɛdʒəz fɹəm ðə pætʃəz ɑn ɪz kloʊk wɪð ə pɛɹ ə smɔl sɪzɝz. hi sɛt daʊn kloʊk ən sɪzɝz wən ɹænd dʒɹu nɪɹ. wɪθaʊɾ æskɪŋ ɪf ɹænd niɾəd əɹ wɑntəd hɛlp, hi hɑp daʊn ən pɪkt ʌp ðə bæk ə ðə lɪɾɝ.

Thom Merrilin sat cross-legged on the old foundation stones, carefully snipping singed edges from the patches on his cloak with a pair of small scissors. He set down cloak and scissors when Rand drew near. Without asking if Rand needed or wanted help, he hopped down and picked up the back of the litter.

"ɪnsaɪd? ʌv kɔɹs, ʌv kɔɹs. doʊn jə wɝi, bɔɪ. jəɹ wɪzdəm wɪl teɪk kɛɹ ə hɪm. aɪv wɑtʃt əɹ wɝk, sɪns læs naɪt, ən ʃiz ə dɛf tʌtʃ ən ə ʃʊɹ skɪl. ɪt kəd bi ə lɑt wɝs. səm daɪd læs naɪt. nɑt mɛni, pɝhæps, bʌɾ ɛni əɾ ɔl ɑɹ tu mɛni fəɹ mi. oʊl feɪn dʒʌs dɪsəpɪɹd, ən ðæts ðə wɝst ʌv ɔl. tʃɹɑləks wɪl iɾ ɛniθɪŋ. jə ʃəd θæŋk ðə laɪt jəɹ fɑðɝz stɪl hɪɹ, ən əlaɪv fəɹ ðə wɪzdəm tə hil."

"Inside? Of course, of course. Don't you worry, boy. Your Wisdom will take care of him. I've watched her work, since last night, and she has a deft touch and a sure skill. It could be a lot worse. Some died last night. Not many, perhaps, but any at all are too many for me. Old Fain just disappeared, and that's the worst of all. Trollocs will eat anything. You should thank the Light your father's still here, and alive for the Wisdom to heal."

ɹænd blɑɾɪd aʊt ðə wɝdz - hiz maɪ fɑðɝ! - ɹədusɪŋ ðə vɔɪs tə minɪŋləs saʊn ðəɾ i noʊɾəst noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə flaɪz bʌzɪŋ. hi kəd nɑt bɛɹ ɛni mɔɹ sɪmpəθi, ɛni mɔɹ ətɛmps tə bust ɪz spɪɹəts. nɑt naʊ. nɑɾ əntɪl bɹæn ælvɪɹ toʊld ɪm haʊ tə hɛlp tæm.

Rand blotted out the words - He is my father! - reducing the voice to meaningless sound that he noticed no more than a fly's buzzing. He could not bear any more sympathy, any more attempts to boost his spirits. Not now. Not until Bran al'Vere told him how to help Tam.

sʌɾənli hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf feɪsɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ skɹɔld ɑn ði ɪn dɔɹ, ə kɝvɪŋ laɪn skɹætʃt wɪð ə tʃɑɹd stɪk, ə tʃɑɹkoʊl tɪɹdʒɹɑp bælənst ɑn ɪts pɔɪnt. soʊ mʌtʃ hæd hæpən ðəɾ ɪt hɑɹdli sɝpɹaɪzd ɪm tə faɪn ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ mɑɹkt ɑn ðə dɔɹ ə ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn. waɪ ɛniwʌn wəd wɑnə əkjuz ði ɪnkipɝ əɹ ɪz fæmli ʌv ivəl, əɹ bɹɪŋ ði ɪn bæd lʌk, wɑz bɪɑn hɪm, bʌt ðə naɪt hæd kənvɪnst ɪm ʌv wʌn θɪŋ. ɛniθɪŋ wɑz pɑsəbəl. ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl.

Suddenly he found himself facing something scrawled on the inn door, a curving line scratched with a charred stick, a charcoal teardrop balanced on its point. So much had happened that it hardly surprised him to find the Dragon's Fang marked on the door of the Winespring Inn. Why anyone would want to accuse the innkeeper or his family of evil, or bring the inn bad luck, was beyond him, but the night had convinced him of one thing. Anything was possible. Anything at all.

əɾ ə pʊʃ fɹəm ðə ɡlimən i lɪftəd ðə lætʃ, ən wɛn ɪn.

At a push from the gleeman he lifted the latch, and went in.

ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ bɹæn ælvɪɹ, ən koʊld, tu, fəɹ noʊ wʌn hæd faʊn taɪm tə leɪ ə faɪɝ. ðə meɪɝ sæɾ ət wʌn ə ðə teɪbəlz, dɪpɪŋ ɪz pɛn ɪn ən ɪŋkwɛl wɪð ə fɹaʊn ə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs ən ɪz ɡɹeɪ-fɹɪn hɛd bɛn oʊvɝ ə ʃiɾ ə pɑɹtʃmənt. naɪtʃɝt tʌk heɪstəli ɪndə hɪz tʃɹaʊzɝz ən bæɡɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz kənsɪɾɝəbəl weɪst, hi æbsənli skɹætʃt ət wʌn bɛɹ fʊt wɪð ðə toʊz ə ði ʌðɝ. hɪz fit wɝ dɝɾi, əz ɪf i hæd bɪn aʊtsaɪd mɔɹ ðən wʌns wɪθaʊt bɑðɝɪŋ əbaʊt buts, dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld. "wʌts jəɹ tʃɹʌbəl?" hi dɪmændəd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ʌp. "bi kwɪk wɪð ɪt. aɪ hæv tu dʌzən θɪŋz tə də ɹaɪt ðɪs mɪnət, ən mɔɹ ðət ʃʊɾə bɪn dʌn ən aʊɝ əɡoʊ. soʊ aɪ hæv lɪɾəl taɪm əɹ peɪʃəns. wɛl? aʊt wɪð ɪt!"

The common room was empty except for Bran al'Vere, and cold, too, for no one had found time to lay a fire. The Mayor sat at one of the tables, dipping his pen in an inkwell with a frown of concentration on his face and his gray-fringed head bent over a sheet of parchment. Nightshirt tucked hastily into his trousers and bagging around his considerable waist, he absently scratched at one bare foot with the toes of the other. His feet were dirty, as if he had been outside more than once without bothering about boots, despite the cold. "What's your trouble?" he demanded without looking up. "Be quick with it. I have two dozen things to do right this minute, and more that should have been done an hour ago. So I have little time or patience. Well? Out with it!"

"mæstɝ ælvɪɹ?" ɹænd sɛd. "ɪts maɪ fɑðɝ."

"Master al'Vere?" Rand said. "It's my father."

ðə meɪɝz hɛd dʒɝkt ʌp. "ɹænd? tæm!" hi θɹu daʊn ðə pɛn ən nɑkt oʊvɝ ɪz tʃɛɹ əz i lɛpt ʌp. "pɝhæps ðə laɪt hæzən əbændən əs ɔltəɡɛðɝ. aɪ wɑz əfɹeɪd jə wɝ boʊθ dɛd. bɛlə ɡæləpt ɪndə ðə vɪlədʒ ən aʊɝ æftɝ ðə tʃɹɑləks lɛft, læðɝɾ ən bloʊɪŋ əz ɪf ʃid ɹʌn ɔl ðə weɪ fɹəm ðə fɑɹm, ən aɪ θɔt. . . . noʊ taɪm fəɹ ðæt, naʊ. wɪl teɪk ɪm əpstɛɹz." hi siz ðə ɹɪɹ ə ðə lɪɾɝ, ʃoʊldɝɪŋ ðə ɡlimən aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. "ju ɡoʊ ɡɛt ðə wɪzdəm, mæstɝ mɛɹɪlɪn. ən tɛl əɹ aɪ sɛd hɝi, əɹ əl noʊ ðə ɹizən waɪ! ɹɛst izi, tæm. wɪl sun əv jə ɪn ə ɡʊd, sɑf bɛd. ɡoʊ, ɡlimən, ɡoʊ!"

The Mayor's head jerked up. "Rand? Tam!" He threw down the pen and knocked over his chair as he leaped up. "Perhaps the Light hasn't abandoned us altogether. I was afraid you were both dead. Bela galloped into the village an hour after the Trollocs left, lathered and blowing as if she'd run all the way from the farm, and I thought. . . . No time for that, now. We'll take him upstairs." He seized the rear of the litter, shouldering the gleeman out of the way. "You go get the Wisdom, Master Merrilin. And tell her I said hurry, or I'll know the reason why! Rest easy, Tam. We'll soon have you in a good, soft bed. Go, gleeman, go!"

tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn vænɪʃt θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ bɪfɔɹ ɹænd kəd spik. "nɪneɪiv wʊdn də ɛniθɪŋ. ʃi sɛd ʃi kʊdn hɛlp hɪm. aɪ nu . . . aɪ hoʊp jud θɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ."

Thom Merrilin vanished through the doorway before Rand could speak. "Nynaeve wouldn't do anything. She said she couldn't help him. I knew . . . I hoped you'd think of something."

mæstɝ ælvɪɹ lʊkt ət tæm mɔɹ ʃɑɹpli, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wi wɪl si, bɔɪ. wɪl si." bʌɾ i noʊ lɔŋɡɝ saʊndəd kɑnfəɾənt. "lɛts ɡɛɾ ɪm ɪndə ə bɛd. hi kən ɹɛst izi, ət list."

Master al'Vere looked at Tam more sharply, then shook his head. "We will see, boy. We will see." But he no longer sounded confident. "Let's get him into a bed. He can rest easy, at least."

ɹænd lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi pɹɑɾɪd təwɔɹd ðə stɛɹz ət ðə bæk ə ðə kɑmən ɹum. hi tʃɹaɪd hɑɹd tə kip ɪz sɝɾənti ðət sʌmhaʊ tæm wəd bi ɔl ɹaɪt, bʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn θɪn tə bɪɡɪn wɪð, hi ɹilaɪzd, ən ðə sʌɾən daʊɾ ɪn ðə meɪɝz vɔɪs ʃʊk hɪm.

Rand let himself be prodded toward the stairs at the back of the common room. He tried hard to keep his certainty that somehow Tam would be all right, but it had been thin to begin with, he realized, and the sudden doubt in the Mayor's voice shook him.

ɑn ðə sɛkən flɔɹ ə ði ɪn, ət ðə fɹʌnt, wɝ hæf ə dʌzən snʌɡ, wɛl-əpɔɪntəd ɹumz wɪð wɪndoʊz oʊvɝlʊkɪŋ ðə ɡɹin. moʊsli ðeɪ wɝ juz baɪ ðə pɛdlɝz, əɹ pipəl daʊn fɹəm wɑtʃ hɪl əɹ ʌp fɹəm dɛvən ɹaɪd, bʌt ðə mɝtʃəns u keɪm itʃ jɪɹ wɝ ɔfən sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn sətʃ kʌmftəɹbəl ɹumz. θɹi ʌv əm wɝ teɪkən naʊ, ən ðə meɪɝ hɝid ɹænd tə wʌn ə ði ənjuzd wʌnz.

On the second floor of the inn, at the front, were half a dozen snug, well-appointed rooms with windows overlooking the Green. Mostly they were used by the peddlers, or people down from Watch Hill or up from Deven Ride, but the merchants who came each year were often surprised to find such comfortable rooms. Three of them were taken now, and the Mayor hurried Rand to one of the unused ones.

kwɪkli ðə daʊn kʌmfɝɾɝ ən blæŋkəts wɝ stʃɹɪp bæk ɑn ðə waɪd bɛd, ən tæm wɑz tʃɹænsfɝd tə ðə θɪk fɛðɝ mætʃɹəs, wɪð ɡus-daʊn pɪloʊz tʌkt ʌndɝ ɪz hɛd. hi meɪd noʊ saʊn bɪɑn hɔɹs bɹiðɪŋ əz i wɑz muvd, nɑɾ ivən ə ɡɹoʊn, bʌt ðə meɪɝ bɹʌʃt əweɪ ɹændz kənsɝn, tɛlɪŋ ɪm tə sɛɾ ə faɪɝ tə teɪk ðə tʃɪl ɔf ðə ɹum. waɪl ɹænd dʌɡ wʊɾ ən kɪnlɪŋ fɹəm ðə wʊdbɑks nɛks tə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, bɹæn θɹu bæk ðə kɝɾənz ɑn ðə wɪndoʊ, lɛɾɪŋ ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt, ðən bɪɡæn tə dʒɛnli wɑʃ tæmz feɪs. baɪ ðə taɪm ðə ɡlimən ɹɪtɝnd, ðə bleɪz ɑn ðə hɑɹθ wɑz wɔɹmɪŋ ðə ɹum.

Quickly the down comforter and blankets were stripped back on the wide bed, and Tam was transferred to the thick feather mattress, with goose-down pillows tucked under his head. He made no sound beyond hoarse breathing as he was moved, not even a groan, but the Mayor brushed away Rand's concern, telling him to set a fire to take the chill off the room. While Rand dug wood and kindling from the woodbox next to the fireplace, Bran threw back the curtains on the window, letting in the morning light, then began to gently wash Tam's face. By the time the gleeman returned, the blaze on the hearth was warming the room.

"ʃi wɪl nɑt kʌm," tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn ənaʊnst əz i stɔkt ɪndə ðə ɹum. hi ɡlɛɹɾ ət ɹænd, hɪz bʊʃi waɪt bɹaʊz dʒɹɔɪŋ daʊn ʃɑɹpli. "ju dɪdn tɛl mi ʃi hæd sin ɪm ɔlɹɛɾi. ʃi ɔlmoʊs tʊk maɪ hɛɾ ɔf."

"She will not come," Thom Merrilin announced as he stalked into the room. He glared at Rand, his bushy white brows drawing down sharply. "You didn't tell me she had seen him already. She almost took my head off."

"aɪ θɔt . . . aɪ doʊnt noʊ . . . meɪbi ðə meɪɝ kəd də sʌmθɪŋ, kəd meɪk əɹ si. . . ." hænz klɛntʃt ɪn æŋkʃəs fɪsts, ɹænd tɝn fɹəm ðə faɪɝpleɪs tə bɹæn. "mæstɝ ælvɪɹ, wʌt kən aɪ du?" ðə ɹoʊtʌn mæn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd hɛlpləsli. hi leɪɾ ə fɹɛʃli dæmpən klɔθ ɑn tæmz fɔɹhɛɾ ən əvɔɪɾəd miɾɪŋ ɹændz aɪ. "aɪ kæn dʒʌst wɑtʃ ɪm daɪ, mæstɝ ælvɪɹ. aɪ hæv tə də sʌmθɪŋ." ðə ɡlimən ʃɪftəɾ əz ɪf tə spik. ɹænd ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ɪm iɡɝli. "du juv ən aɪdiə? əl tʃɹaɪ ɛniθɪŋ."

"I thought . . . I don't know . . . maybe the Mayor could do something, could make her see. . . ." Hands clenched in anxious fists, Rand turned from the fireplace to Bran. "Master al'Vere, what can I do?" The rotund man shook his head helplessly. He laid a freshly dampened cloth on Tam's forehead and avoided meeting Rand's eye. "I can't just watch him die, Master al'Vere. I have to do something." The gleeman shifted as if to speak. Rand rounded on him eagerly. "Do you have an idea? I'll try anything."

"aɪ wɑz dʒʌst wʌndɝɪŋ," tɑm sɛd, tæmpɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ-stɛm paɪp wɪð ɪz θʌm, "ɪf ðə meɪɝ nu hu skɹɔl ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ ɑn ɪz dɔɹ." hi pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə boʊl, ðən lʊkt ət tæm ən ɹipleɪs ði ənlɪt paɪp bɪtwin ɪz tiθ wɪð ə saɪ. "sʌmwʌn simz nɑt tə laɪk ɪm ɛnimɔɹ. əɹ meɪbi ɪts ɪz ɡɛsts ðeɪ doʊn laɪk."

"I was just wondering," Thom said, tamping his long-stemmed pipe with his thumb, "if the Mayor knew who scrawled the Dragon's Fang on his door." He peered into the bowl, then looked at Tam and replaced the unlit pipe between his teeth with a sigh. "Someone seems not to like him anymore. Or maybe it's his guests they don't like."

ɹænd ɡeɪv ɪm ə dɪsɡʌstəd lʊk ən tɝn əweɪ tə stɛɹ ɪndə ðə faɪɝ. hɪz θɔts dæns laɪk ðə fleɪmz, ən laɪk ðə fleɪmz ðeɪ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd fɪksədli ɑn wʌn θɪŋ. hi wəd nɑt ɡɪv ʌp. hi kəd nɑt dʒʌst stæn ðəɹ ən wɑtʃ tæm daɪ. maɪ fɑðɝ, hi θɔt fɪɹsli. maɪ fɑðɝ. wʌns ðə fivɝ wɑz ɡɔn, ðət kəd bi klɪɹɾ ʌp əz wɛl. bʌt ðə fivɝ fɝst. oʊnli, haʊ?

Rand gave him a disgusted look and turned away to stare into the fire. His thoughts danced like the flames, and like the flames they concentrated fixedly on one thing. He would not give up. He could not just stand there and watch Tam die. My father, he thought fiercely. My father. Once the fever was gone, that could be cleared up as well. But the fever first. Only, how?

bɹæn ælvɪɹz maʊθ taɪɾənd əz i lʊkt ət ɹændz bæk, ən ðə ɡlɛɹ i dɝɛktəɾ ət ðə ɡlimən wʊɾə ɡɪvən ə bɛɹ pɔz, bʌt tɑm dʒʌst weɪɾəd ɪkspɛktənli əz ɪf i hæd nɑt noʊɾəst ɪt.

Bran al'Vere's mouth tightened as he looked at Rand's back, and the glare he directed at the gleeman would have given a bear pause, but Thom just waited expectantly as if he had not noticed it.

"ɪts pɹɑbli ðə wɝk ʌv wʌn ə ðə kɔŋɡɝz, əɹ ə kɑplɪn," ðə meɪɝ sɛd faɪnəli, "ðoʊ ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz wɪtʃ. ðəɹ ə lɑɹdʒ bɹud, ən ɪf ðɛɹz ɪl tə bi sɛɾ ə sʌmwʌn, əɹ ivən ɪf ðəɹ ɪzənt, ðəl seɪ ɪt. ðeɪ meɪk sɛn bui saʊn hʌni-tʌŋd."

"It's probably the work of one of the Congars, or a Coplin," the Mayor said finally, "though the Light alone knows which. They're a large brood, and if there's ill to be said of someone, or even if there isn't, they'll say it. They make Cenn Buie sound honey-tongued."

"ðæt wæɡoʊnloʊɾ u keɪm ɪn dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ dɔn?" ðə ɡlimən æskt. "ðeɪ hædn soʊ mʌtʃ əz smɛld ə tʃɹɑlɑk, ən ɔl ðeɪ wɑntəd tə noʊ wɑz wən fɛstəvəl wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə stɑɹt, əz ɪf ðeɪ kʊdn si hæf ðə vɪlədʒ ɪn æʃəz."

"That wagonload who came in just before dawn?" the gleeman asked. "They hadn't so much as smelled a Trolloc, and all they wanted to know was when Festival was going to start, as if they couldn't see half the village in ashes."

mæstɝ ælvɪɹ nɑɾəd ɡɹɪmli. "wʌn bɹæntʃ ə ðə fæmli. bʌt nʌn ə ðɛm ɑɹ vɛɹi dɪfɹənt. ðət ful dɑɹl kɑplɪn spɛn hæf ðə naɪt dɪmændɪŋ aɪ pʊt mɪstʃɹəs mɔɪɹeɪn ən mæstɝ læn aʊɾ ə ði ɪn, aʊɾ ə ðə vɪlədʒ, əz ɪf ðəɹ wəd bi ɛni vɪlədʒ əɾ ɔl lɛft wɪθaʊt ðɛm."

Master al'Vere nodded grimly. "One branch of the family. But none of them are very different. That fool Darl Coplin spent half the night demanding I put Mistress Moiraine and Master Lan out of the inn, out of the village, as if there would be any village at all left without them."

ɹænd hæɾ oʊnli hæf lɪsən tə ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən, bʌt ðɪs læs tʌɡd ɪm tə spik. "wʌt dɪd ðeɪ du?"

Rand had only half listened to the conversation, but this last tugged him to speak. "What did they do?"

"waɪ, ʃi kɔl bɔl laɪtnɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə klɪɹ naɪt skaɪ," mæstɝ ælvɪɹ ɹɪplaɪd. "sɛn ɪt dɑɹɾɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət ðə tʃɹɑləks. juv sin tʃɹiz ʃæɾɝd baɪ ɪt. ðə tʃɹɑləks stʊɾ ɪt noʊ bɛɾɝ."

"Why, she called ball lightning out of a clear night sky," Master al'Vere replied. "Sent it darting straight at the Trollocs. You've seen trees shattered by it. The Trollocs stood it no better."

"mɔɪɹeɪn?" ɹænd sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, ən ðə meɪɝ nɑɾəd.

"Moiraine?" Rand said incredulously, and the Mayor nodded.

"mɪstʃɹəs mɔɪɹeɪn. ən mæstɝ læn wɑz ə wɝlwɪnd wɪð ðət sɔɹɾ ə hɪz. hɪz sɔɹd? ðə mæn hɪmsɛlf ɪz ə wɛpən, ən ɪn tɛn pleɪsəz ət wʌns, əɹ soʊ ɪt simd. bɝn mi, bʌɾ aɪ stɪl wʊdn bɪliv ɪɾ ɪf aɪ kʊdn stɛp aʊtsaɪɾ ən si. . . ." hi ɹʌbd ə hæn oʊvɝ ɪz bɔl hɛd. "wɪntɝnaɪt vɪzəts dʒʌs bɪɡɪnɪŋ, əɹ hænz fʊl ə pɹɛzəns ən hʌnikeɪks ən əɹ hɛdz fʊl ʌv waɪn, ðən ðə dɑɡz snɑɹlɪŋ, ən sʌɾənli ðə tu ʌv əm bɝst aʊɾ ə ði ɪn, ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ, ʃaʊɾɪŋ əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks. aɪ θɔt ðeɪd hæd tu mʌtʃ waɪn. æftɝ ɔl . . . tʃɹɑləks? ðɛn, bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn nu wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ, ðoʊz . . . ðoʊz θɪŋz wɝ ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə stʃɹits wɪð ʌs, slæʃɪŋ ət pipəl wɪð ðɛɹ sɔɹdz, tɔɹtʃɪŋ haʊsəz, haʊlɪŋ tə fɹiz ə mænz blʌd." hi meɪɾ ə saʊn ə dɪsɡʌst ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. "wi dʒʌst ɹæn laɪk tʃɪkənz wɪð ə fɑks ɪn ðə hɛnjɑɹd tɪl mæstɝ læn pʊt səm bækboʊn ɪndə ʌs."

"Mistress Moiraine. And Master Lan was a whirlwind with that sword of his. His sword? The man himself is a weapon, and in ten places at once, or so it seemed. Burn me, but I still wouldn't believe it if I couldn't step outside and see. . . ." He rubbed a hand over his bald head. "Winternight visits just beginning, our hands full of presents and honeycakes and our heads full of wine, then the dogs snarling, and suddenly the two of them burst out of the inn, running through the village, shouting about Trollocs. I thought they'd had too much wine. After all . . . Trollocs? Then, before anyone knew what was happening, those . . . those things were right in the streets with us, slashing at people with their swords, torching houses, howling to freeze a man's blood." He made a sound of disgust in his throat. "We just ran like chickens with a fox in the henyard till Master Lan put some backbone into us."

"noʊ nid tə bi soʊ hɑɹd," tɑm sɛd. "ju dɪɾ əz wɛl əz ɛniwʌn kʊd. nɑɾ ɛvɹi tʃɹɑlɑk laɪɪŋ aʊt ðəɹ fɛl tə ðə tu ʌv ðɛm."

"No need to be so hard," Thom said. "You did as well as anyone could. Not every Trolloc lying out there fell to the two of them."

"ʌm . . . jɛs, wɛl." mæstɝ ælvɪɹ ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk. "ɪts stɪl ɔlmoʊs tu mʌtʃ tə bɪliv. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ɛmənz fild. ən mæstɝ læn ɪz ə wɔɹɾɝ."

"Umm . . . yes, well." Master al'Vere gave himself a shake. "It's still almost too much to believe. An Aes Sedai in Emond's Field. And Master Lan is a Warder."

"æn ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ɹænd wɪspɝd. "ʃi kæn bi. aɪ tɔk tə hɝ. ʃi ɪzənt. . . . ʃi dʌznt. . . ."

"An Aes Sedai?" Rand whispered. "She can't be. I talked to her. She isn't. . . . She doesn't. . . ."

"dɪd jə θɪŋk ðeɪ wɔɹ saɪnz?" ðə meɪɝ sɛd ɹaɪli. " 'ɛɛs sədaɪ' peɪntəɾ əkɹɔs ðɛɹ bæks, ən meɪbi, 'deɪnʒɝ, steɪ əweɪ'?" sʌɾənli hi slæpt ɪz fɔɹhɛd. "ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪm ən oʊl ful, ən luzɪŋ maɪ wɪts. ðɛɹz ə tʃæns, ɹænd, ɪf jəɹ wɪlɪŋ tə teɪk ɪt. aɪ kæn tɛl jə tə də ɪt, ən aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf aɪɾ əv ðə nɝv, ɪf ɪt wɝ mi."

"Did you think they wore signs?" the Mayor said wryly. " 'Aes Sedai' painted across their backs, and maybe, 'Danger, stay away'?" Suddenly he slapped his forehead. "Aes Sedai. I'm an old fool, and losing my wits. There's a chance, Rand, if you're willing to take it. I can't tell you to do it, and I don't know if I'd have the nerve, if it were me."

"ə tʃæns?" ɹænd sɛd. "aɪl teɪk ɛni tʃæns, ɪf ɪɾəl hɛlp."

"A chance?" Rand said. "I'll take any chance, if it'll help."

"ɛɛs sədaɪ kən hil, ɹænd. bɝn mi, læd, juv hɝd ðə stɔɹiz. ðeɪ kən kjʊɹ wɛɹ mɛɾəsənz feɪl. ɡlimən, jə ʃʊɾə ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət bɛɾɝ ðən aɪ. ɡlimənz teɪlz ɑɹ fʊl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. waɪ dɪdn jə spik ʌp, ɪnstɛɾ ə lɛɾɪŋ mi fleɪl ɝaʊnd?"

"Aes Sedai can heal, Rand. Burn me, lad, you've heard the stories. They can cure where medicines fail. Gleeman, you should have remembered that better than I. Gleemen's tales are full of Aes Sedai. Why didn't you speak up, instead of letting me flail around?"

"ɪm ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ hɪɹ," tɑm sɛd, lʊkɪŋ lɔŋɪŋli əɾ ɪz ənlɪt paɪp, "ænd ɡʊdmən kɑplɪn ɪzən ði oʊnli wʌn u wɑns nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. bɛs ði aɪdiə keɪm fɹəm ju."

"I'm a stranger here," Thom said, looking longingly at his unlit pipe, "and Goodman Coplin isn't the only one who wants nothing to do with Aes Sedai. Best the idea came from you."

"æn ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɹænd mʌɾɝd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ðə wʊmən u hæd smaɪld əɾ ɪm fɪt ðə stɔɹiz. hɛlp fɹəm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz səmtaɪmz wɝs ðən noʊ hɛlp əɾ ɔl, soʊ ðə stɔɹiz sɛd, laɪk pɔɪzən ɪn ə paɪ, ən ðɛɹ ɡɪfs ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə hʊk ɪn ðɛm, laɪk fɪʃbət. sʌɾənli ðə kɔɪn ɪn ɪz pɑkət, ðə kɔɪn mɔɪɹeɪn hæd ɡɪvən hɪm, sim laɪk ə bɝnɪŋ koʊl. ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də nɑt tə ɹɪp ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz koʊɾ ən θɹoʊ ɪɾ aʊt ðə wɪndoʊ.

"An Aes Sedai," Rand muttered, trying to make the woman who had smiled at him fit the stories. Help from an Aes Sedai was sometimes worse than no help at all, so the stories said, like poison in a pie, and their gifts always had a hook in them, like fishbait. Suddenly the coin in his pocket, the coin Moiraine had given him, seemed like a burning coal. It was all he could do not to rip it out of his coat and throw it out the window.

"noʊbɑdi wɑns tə ɡɛɾ ɪnvɑlvd wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, læd," ðə meɪɝ sɛd sloʊli. "ɪɾ ɪz ði oʊnli tʃæns aɪ kən si, bʌɾ ɪts stɪl noʊ smɔl dɪsɪʒən. aɪ kænɑt meɪk ɪt fəɹ ju, bʌɾ aɪ hæv sin nʌθɪŋ bʌt ɡʊd fɹəm mɪstʃɹəs mɔɪɹeɪn . . . mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, aɪ ʃəd kɔl hɝ, aɪ səpoʊz. səmtaɪmz" - hi ɡeɪv ə minɪŋfəl lʊk ət tæm - "ju hæv tə teɪk ə tʃæns, ivən ɪf ɪts ə pʊɹ wʌn."

"Nobody wants to get involved with Aes Sedai, lad," the Mayor said slowly. "It is the only chance I can see, but it's still no small decision. I cannot make it for you, but I have seen nothing but good from Mistress Moiraine . . . Moiraine Sedai, I should call her, I suppose. Sometimes" - he gave a meaningful look at Tam - "you have to take a chance, even if it's a poor one."

"sʌm ə ðə stɔɹiz ɑɹ ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd, ɪn ə weɪ," tɑm æɾəd, əz ɪf ðə wɝdz wɝ biɪŋ dʒɹæɡd fɹəm hɪm. "sʌm ə ðɛm. bɪsaɪdz, bɔɪ, wʌt tʃɔɪs dʒju hæv?"

"Some of the stories are exaggerated, in a way," Thom added, as if the words were being dragged from him. "Some of them. Besides, boy, what choice do you have?"

"nʌn," ɹænd saɪd. tæm stɪl hæd nɑt muvd ə mʌsəl; hɪz aɪz wɝ sʌŋkən əz ɪf i hæd bɪn sɪk ə wik. "aɪl . . . əl ɡoʊ faɪn hɝ."

"None," Rand sighed. Tam still had not moved a muscle; his eyes were sunken as if he had been sick a week. "I'll . . . I'll go find her."

"ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə bɹɪdʒəz," ðə ɡlimən sɛd, "wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ . . . dɪspoʊzɪŋ ə ðə dɛd tʃɹɑləks. bʌt bi kɛɹfəl, bɔɪ. ɛɛs sədaɪ də wʌt ðeɪ də fəɹ ɹizənz ə ðɛɹ oʊn, ən ðeɪ ɑɹən ɔlweɪz ðə ɹizənz ʌðɝz θɪŋk."

"The other side of the bridges," the gleeman said, "where they are . . . disposing of the dead Trollocs. But be careful, boy. Aes Sedai do what they do for reasons of their own, and they aren't always the reasons others think."

ðə læst wɑz ə ʃaʊt ðət fɑloʊd ɹænd θɹu ðə dɔɹ. hi hæd tə hoʊld ɑntu ðə sɔɹd hɪl tə kip ðə skæbɝd fɹəm tæŋəlɪŋ ɪn ɪz lɛɡz əz i ɹæn, bʌɾ i wəd nɑt teɪk ðə taɪm tə ɹimuv ɪt. hi klæɾɝd daʊn ðə stɛɹz ən dæʃt aʊɾ ə ði ɪn, taɪɹədnəs fɝɡɑɾən fəɹ ðə moʊmənt. ə tʃæns fəɹ tæm, haʊɛvɝ smɔl, wɑz ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝkʌm ə naɪt wɪθaʊt slip, fəɹ ə taɪm ət list. ðət ðə tʃæns keɪm fɹəm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ wʌt ðə pɹaɪs ʌv ɪt maɪt bi, hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə kənsɪɾɝ. ən əz fəɹ æktʃəli  feɪsɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. . . . hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən tʃɹaɪd tə muv fæstɝ.

The last was a shout that followed Rand through the door. He had to hold onto the sword hilt to keep the scabbard from tangling in his legs as he ran, but he would not take the time to remove it. He clattered down the stairs and dashed out of the inn, tiredness forgotten for the moment. A chance for Tam, however small, was enough to overcome a night without sleep, for a time at least. That the chance came from an Aes Sedai, or what the price of it might be, he did not want to consider. And as for actually facing an Aes Sedai. . . . He took a deep breath and tried to move faster.

ðə bɑnfaɪɝz stʊd wɛl bɪɑn ðə læs haʊsəz tə ðə nɔɹθ, ɑn ðə wɛstwʊd saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd tə wɑtʃ hɪl. ðə wɪn stɪl kæɹid ði ɔɪli blæk kɑləmz ə smoʊk əweɪ fɹəm ðə vɪlədʒ, bʌɾ ivən soʊ ə sɪkli swit stɪŋk fɪl ði ɛɹ, laɪk ə ɹoʊs lɛft aʊɝz tu lɔŋ ɑn ðə spɪt. ɹænd ɡæɡd ət ðə smɛl, ðən swɑloʊd hɑɹd wən i ɹilaɪzd ɪts sɔɹs. ə faɪn θɪŋ tə də wɪð bɛl taɪn faɪɝz. ðə mɛn tɛndɪŋ ðə faɪɝz hæd klɔθs taɪɾ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ən maʊðz, bʌt ðɛɹ ɡɹɪməsɪz meɪɾ ɪt pleɪn ðə vɪnəɡɝ dæmpənɪŋ ðə klɔθs wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf. ivən ɪf ɪt dɪd kɪl ðə stɛntʃ, ðeɪ stɪl nu ðə stɛntʃ wɑz ðɛɹ, ən ðeɪ stɪl nu wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ.

The bonfires stood well beyond the last houses to the north, on the Westwood side of the road to Watch Hill. The wind still carried the oily black columns of smoke away from the village, but even so a sickly sweet stink filled the air, like a roast left hours too long on the spit. Rand gagged at the smell, then swallowed hard when he realized its source. A fine thing to do with Bel Tine fires. The men tending the fires had cloths tied over their noses and mouths, but their grimaces made it plain the vinegar dampening the cloths was not enough. Even if it did kill the stench, they still knew the stench was there, and they still knew what they were doing.

tu ʌv ðə mɛn wɝ əntiɪŋ ðə hɑɹnəs stʃɹæps ʌv wʌn ə ðə bɪɡ dɝənz fɹəm ə tʃɹɑlɑks æŋkəlz. læn, skwɑɾɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə bɑɾi, hæd tɔs bæk ðə blæŋkəɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪvil ðə tʃɹɑlɑks ʃoʊldɝz ən ɡoʊt-snaʊɾəd hɛd. əz ɹænd tʃɹɑɾəd ʌp ðə wɔɹɾɝ ənfæsən ə mɛɾəl bædʒ, ə blʌd-ɹɛɾ ɪnæməl tʃɹaɪɾənt, fɹəm wʌn spaɪkt ʃoʊldɝ ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑks ʃɝɾ ə blæk meɪl.

Two of the men were untying the harness straps of one of the big Dhurrans from a Trolloc's ankles. Lan, squatting beside the body, had tossed back the blanket enough to reveal the Trolloc's shoulders and goat-snouted head. As Rand trotted up the Warder unfastened a metal badge, a blood-red enameled trident, from one spiked shoulder of the Trolloc's shirt of black mail.

"koʊbəl," hi ənaʊnst. hi baʊns ðə bædʒ ɑn ɪz pɑm ən snætʃt ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ wɪð ə ɡɹaʊl. "ðæt meɪks sɛvən bænz soʊ fɑɹ."

"Ko'bal," he announced. He bounced the badge on his palm and snatched it out of the air with a growl. "That makes seven bands so far."

mɔɪɹeɪn, siɾəd kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns ɔf, ʃʊk əɹ hɛd taɪɹədli. ə wɔkɪŋ stæf, kʌvɝd fɹəm ɛn tə ɛn ɪn kɑɹvd vaɪnz ən flaʊɝz, leɪ əkɹɔs əɹ niz, ən əɹ dʒɹɛs hæd ðə ɹʌmpəld lʊk ə hævɪŋ bɪn wɔɹn tu lɔŋ. "sɛvən bænz. sɛvən! ðət mɛni hæv nɑɾ æktəd təɡɛðɝ sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. bæd nuz paɪlz ɑn bæd nuz. aɪm əfɹeɪd, læn. aɪ θɔt wi hæd ɡeɪn ə mɑɹtʃ, bʌt wi meɪ bi fɝðɝ bɪhaɪn ðən ɛvɝ."

Moiraine, seated cross-legged on the ground a short distance off, shook her head tiredly. A walking staff, covered from end to end in carved vines and flowers, lay across her knees, and her dress had the rumpled look of having been worn too long. "Seven bands. Seven! That many have not acted together since the Trolloc Wars. Bad news piles on bad news. I am afraid, Lan. I thought we had gained a march, but we may be further behind than ever."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, əneɪbəl tə spik. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf ðət ʃi wəd nɑt lʊk ɛni dɪfɹənt naʊ ðəɾ i nu hu . . . wʌɾ i wɑz lʊkɪŋ æt, ən tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz ʃi dɪd nɑt. ʃi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kwaɪt soʊ pɹɪstin, nɑt wɪð wɪsps ə hɝ hɛɹ stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz ən ə feɪn stʃɹik ə sʊɾ əkɹɔs əɹ noʊz, jɛt nɑt ɹɪli dɪfɹənt, iðɝ. ʃʊɹli ðəɹ mʌs bi sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə mɑɹk əɹ fəɹ wʌt ʃi wɑz. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, ɪf aʊtwɝɾ əpɪɹəns ɹəflɛktəd wʌt wɑz ɪnsaɪd, ən ɪf ðə stɔɹiz wɝ tʃɹu, ðən ʃi ʃəd lʊk kloʊsɝ tə ə tʃɹɑlɑk ðən tə ə mɔɹ ðən hænsəm wʊmən huz dɪɡnəɾi wɑz nɑt dɛntɪd baɪ sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə dɝt. ən ʃi kəd hɛlp tæm. wʌtɛvɝ ðə kɑst, ðəɹ wɑz ðət bɪfɔɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls.

Rand stared at her, unable to speak. An Aes Sedai. He had been trying to convince himself that she would not look any different now that he knew who . . . what he was looking at, and to his surprise she did not. She was no longer quite so pristine, not with wisps of her hair sticking out in all directions and a faint streak of soot across her nose, yet not really different, either. Surely there must be something about an Aes Sedai to mark her for what she was. On the other hand, if outward appearance reflected what was inside, and if the stories were true, then she should look closer to a Trolloc than to a more than handsome woman whose dignity was not dented by sitting in the dirt. And she could help Tam. Whatever the cost, there was that before anything else.

hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "mɪstʃɹəs mɔɪɹeɪn . . . aɪ min, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ." boʊθ tɝn tə lʊk ət hɪm, ən i fɹoʊz ʌndɝ əɹ ɡeɪz. nɑt ðə kɑm, smaɪlɪŋ ɡeɪz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɹəm ðə ɡɹin. hɝ feɪs wɑz taɪɝd, bʌɾ əɹ dɑɹk aɪz wɝ ə hɔks aɪz. ɛɛs sədaɪ. bɹeɪkɝz ə ðə wɝld. pʌpətiɹz u pʊl stʃɹɪŋz ən meɪd θɹoʊnz ən neɪʃənz dæns ɪn dɪzaɪnz oʊnli ðə wɪmən fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn nu.

He took a deep breath. "Mistress Moiraine . . . I mean, Moiraine Sedai." Both turned to look at him, and he froze under her gaze. Not the calm, smiling gaze he remembered from the Green. Her face was tired, but her dark eyes were a hawk's eyes. Aes Sedai. Breakers of the world. Puppeteers who pulled strings and made thrones and nations dance in designs only the women from Tar Valon knew.

"ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ laɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ mɝmɝd. ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs. "haʊ ɑɹ jəɹ dʒɹimz, ɹænd ælθɹ?"

"A little more light in the darkness," the Aes Sedai murmured. She raised her voice. "How are your dreams, Rand al'Thor?"

hi stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. "maɪ dʒɹimz?"

He stared at her. "My dreams?"

"ə naɪt laɪk ðət kən ɡɪv ə mæn bæd dʒɹimz, ɹænd. ɪf juv naɪtmɛɹz, jə mʌs tɛl mi ʌv ɪt. aɪ kən hɛlp wɪð bæd dʒɹimz, səmtaɪmz."

"A night like that can give a man bad dreams, Rand. If you have nightmares, you must tell me of it. I can help with bad dreams, sometimes."

"ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð maɪ. . . . ɪts maɪ fɑðɝ. hiz hɝt. ɪts nɑt mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ə skɹætʃ, bʌt ðə fivɝ ɪz bɝnɪŋ ɪm ʌp. ðə wɪzdəm woʊn hɛlp. ʃi sɛz ʃi kænt. bʌt ðə stɔɹiz - " ʃi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ, ən i stɑpt ən swɑloʊd hɑɹd. laɪt, ɪz ðəɹ ə stɔɹi wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛɹ ʃi ɪzən ə vɪlən? hi lʊkt ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ, bʌt læn əpɪɹd mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ðə dɛd tʃɹɑlɑk ðən ɪn ɛniθɪŋ ɹænd maɪt seɪ. fʌmbəlɪŋ ɪz weɪ ʌndɝ əɹ aɪz, hi wɛn ɑn. "aɪ . . . ɑ . . . ɪts sɛɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kən hil. ɪf jə kən hɛlp ɪm . . . ɛniθɪŋ jə kən də fəɹ ɪm . . . wʌtɛvɝ ðə kɑst. . . . aɪ min. . . ." hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən fɪnɪʃt ʌp ɪn ə ɹʌʃ. "aɪl peɪ ɛni pɹaɪs ɪn maɪ paʊɝ ɪf jə hɛlp hɪm. ɛniθɪŋ."

"There's nothing wrong with my. . . . It's my father. He's hurt. It's not much more than a scratch, but the fever is burning him up. The Wisdom won't help. She says she can't. But the stories - " She raised an eyebrow, and he stopped and swallowed hard. Light, is there a story with an Aes Sedai where she isn't a villain? He looked at the Warder, but Lan appeared more interested in the dead Trolloc than in anything Rand might say. Fumbling his way under her eyes, he went on. "I . . . ah . . . it's said Aes Sedai can heal. If you can help him . . . anything you can do for him . . . Whatever the cost. . . . I mean. . . ." He took a deep breath and finished up in a rush. "I'll pay any price in my power if you help him. Anything."

"ɛni pɹaɪs," mɔɪɹeɪn mjuzd, hæf tə hɝsɛlf. "wi wɪl spik ə pɹaɪsəz leɪɾɝ, ɹænd, ɪf əɾ ɔl. aɪ kən meɪk noʊ pɹɑməsəz. jəɹ wɪzdəm noʊz wʌt ʃiz əbaʊt. əl də wʌɾ aɪ kæn, bʌɾ ɪts bɪɑn maɪ paʊɝ tə stɑp ðə wil fɹəm tɝnɪŋ."

"Any price," Moiraine mused, half to herself. "We will speak of prices later, Rand, if at all. I can make no promises. Your Wisdom knows what she is about. I will do what I can, but it is beyond my power to stop the Wheel from turning."

"dɛθ kʌmz sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ tə ɛvɹiwʌn," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd ɡɹɪmli, "ənlɛs ðeɪ sɝv ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən oʊnli fulz ɑɹ wɪlɪŋ tə peɪ ðət pɹaɪs."

"Death comes sooner or later to everyone," the Warder said grimly, "unless they serve the Dark One, and only fools are willing to pay that price."

mɔɪɹeɪn meɪɾ ə klʌkɪŋ saʊnd. "du nɑt bi soʊ ɡlumi, læn. wɪv səm ɹizən tə sɛləbɹeɪt. ə smɔl wʌn, bʌɾ ə ɹizən." ʃi juz ðə stæf tə pʊl hɝsɛlf tə hɝ fit. "teɪk mi tə jəɹ fɑðɝ, ɹænd. əl hɛlp ɪm əz mʌtʃ əz aɪm eɪbəl. tu mɛni hɪɹ əv ɹəfjuz tə lemi hɛlp əɾ ɔl. ðeɪv hɝd ðə stɔɹiz, tu," ʃi æɾəd dʒɹaɪli.

Moiraine made a clucking sound. "Do not be so gloomy, Lan. We have some reason to celebrate. A small one, but a reason." She used the staff to pull herself to her feet. "Take me to your father, Rand. I will help him as much as I am able. Too many here have refused to let me help at all. They have heard the stories, too," she added dryly.

"hiz ət ði ɪn," ɹænd sɛd. "ðɪs weɪ. ən θæŋk ju. θæŋk ju!"

"He's at the inn," Rand said. "This way. And thank you. Thank you!"

ðeɪ fɑloʊd, bʌɾ ɪz peɪs tʊk ɪm kwɪkli əhɛd. hi sloʊɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli fəɹ əm tə kætʃ ʌp, ðən dɑɹɾɪd əhɛɾ əɡɛn ən hæd tə weɪɾ əɡɛn.

They followed, but his pace took him quickly ahead. He slowed impatiently for them to catch up, then darted ahead again and had to wait again.

"pliz hɝi," hi ɝdʒd, soʊ kɑɾ ʌp ɪn æktʃəli  ɡɛɾɪŋ hɛlp fəɹ tæm ðəɾ i nɛvɝ kənsɪɾɝd ðə təmɛɹəɾi ʌv pɹɑɾɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ðə fivɝ ɪz bɝnɪŋ ɪm ʌp."

"Please hurry," he urged, so caught up in actually getting help for Tam that he never considered the temerity of prodding an Aes Sedai. "The fever is burning him up."

læn ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "kæn jə si ʃiz taɪɝd? ivən wɪð ən æŋɡɹil, wʌt ʃi dɪd læs naɪt wɑz laɪk ɹʌnɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə vɪlədʒ wɪð ə sæk ə stoʊnz ɑn əɹ bæk. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðət jə ɑɹ wɝθ ɪt, ʃifɝɾɝ, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ʃi sɛz."

Lan glared at him. "Can't you see she's tired? Even with an angreal, what she did last night was like running around the village with a sack of stones on her back. I don't know that you are worth it, sheepherder, no matter what she says."

ɹænd blɪŋkt ən hɛld ɪz tʌŋ.

Rand blinked and held his tongue.

"dʒɛnli, maɪ fɹɛnd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ əɹ peɪs, ʃi ɹitʃt ʌp tə pæt ðə wɔɹɾɝz ʃoʊldɝ. hi taʊɝɾ oʊvɝ əɹ pɹoʊtɛktɪvli, əz ɪf i kəd ɡɪv əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ dʒʌs baɪ biɪŋ kloʊs. "ju θɪŋk oʊnli ʌv teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ ə mi. waɪ ʃəɾ i nɑt θɪŋk ðə seɪm ə hɪz fɑðɝ?" læn skaʊld, bʌt fɛl saɪlənt. "aɪ æm kʌmɪŋ əz kwɪkli əz aɪ kæn, ɹænd, aɪ pɹɑməs ju."

"Gently, my friend," Moiraine said. Without slowing her pace, she reached up to pat the Warder's shoulder. He towered over her protectively, as if he could give her strength just by being close. "You think only of taking care of me. Why should he not think the same of his father?" Lan scowled, but fell silent. "I am coming as quickly as I can, Rand, I promise you."

ðə fɪɹsnəs ə hɝ aɪz, əɹ ðə kɑm ə hɝ vɔɪs - nɑt dʒɛntəl, ɪɡzækli; mɔɹ fɝmli ɪn kəmænd - ɹænd dɪd nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ tə bɪliv. əɹ pɝhæps ðeɪ dɪd ɡoʊ təɡɛðɝ. ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi wɑz kəmɪɾəd, naʊ. hi mætʃt ɪz stʃɹaɪd tə ðɛɹz, ən tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ʌv wʌt ðə pɹaɪs maɪt bi ðət ðeɪ wəd tɔk əbaʊt leɪɾɝ.

The fierceness of her eyes, or the calm of her voice - not gentle, exactly; more firmly in command - Rand did not know which to believe. Or perhaps they did go together. Aes Sedai. He was committed, now. He matched his stride to theirs, and tried not to think of what the price might be that they would talk about later.


tʃæptɝ eɪt


CHAPTER 8

eɪ pleɪs ə seɪfti


A Place of Safety

waɪl i wɑz stɪl kʌmɪŋ θɹu ðə dɔɹ ɹændz aɪz wɛn tə hɪz fɑðɝ - hɪz fɑðɝ noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɛniwʌn sɛd. tæm hæd nɑt muvd ən ɪntʃ; hɪz aɪz wɝ stɪl ʃʌt, ən ɪz bɹɛθ keɪm ɪn leɪbɝd ɡæsps, loʊ ən ɹæspɪŋ. ðə waɪt-hɛɹd ɡlimən kʌɾ ɔf ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən wɪð ðə meɪɝ - hu wɑz bɛn oʊvɝ ðə bɛɾ əɡɛn, tɛndɪŋ tæm - ən ɡeɪv mɔɪɹeɪn ən ənizi lʊk. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm. ɪndid, ʃi ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪksɛp fəɹ tæm, bʌɾ əɾ ɪm ʃi stɛɹd wɪð ən ɪntɛn fɹaʊn.

While he was still coming through the door Rand's eyes went to his father - his father no matter what anyone said. Tam had not moved an inch; his eyes were still shut, and his breath came in labored gasps, low and rasping. The white-haired gleeman cut off a conversation with the Mayor - who was bent over the bed again, tending Tam - and gave Moiraine an uneasy look. The Aes Sedai ignored him. Indeed, she ignored everyone except for Tam, but at him she stared with an intent frown.

tɑm stʌk ɪz ənlɪt paɪp bɪtwin ɪz tiθ, ðən snætʃt ɪɾ aʊɾ əɡɛn ən ɡlaʊɝɾ əɾ ɪt. "mæn kænɑɾ ivən smoʊk ɪn pis," hi mʌɾɝd. "aɪ hæd bɛɾɝ meɪk ʃʊɹ səm fɑɹmɝ dʌzn stil maɪ kloʊk tə kip ɪz kaʊ wɔɹm. ət list aɪ kən əv maɪ paɪp aʊt ðɛɹ." hi hɝiɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum.

Thom stuck his unlit pipe between his teeth, then snatched it out again and glowered at it. "Man cannot even smoke in peace," he muttered. "I had better make sure some farmer doesn't steal my cloak to keep his cow warm. At least I can have my pipe out there." He hurried out of the room.

læn stɛɹɾ æftɝ hɪm, hɪz æŋɡjəlɝ feɪs əz ɪkspɹɛʃənləs əz ə ɹɑk. "aɪ də nɑt laɪk ðət mæn. ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm aɪ doʊn tʃɹʌst. aɪ dɪd nɑt si ə hɛɹ ə hɪm læs naɪt."

Lan stared after him, his angular face as expressionless as a rock. "I do not like that man. There is something about him I don't trust. I did not see a hair of him last night."

"hi wɑz ðɛɹ," bɹæn sɛd, wɑtʃɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn ənsɝteɪnli. "hi mʌst əv bɪn. hɪz kloʊk dɪd nɑt ɡɛt sɪŋʒd ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs."

"He was there," Bran said, watching Moiraine uncertainly. "He must have been. His cloak did not get singed in front of the fireplace."

ɹænd dɪd nɑt kɛɹ ɪf ðə ɡlimən hæd spɛn ðə naɪt haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə steɪbəl. "maɪ fɑðɝ?" hi sɛd tə mɔɪɹeɪn pliɾɪŋli.

Rand did not care if the gleeman had spent the night hiding in the stable. "My father?" he said to Moiraine pleadingly.

bɹæn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəd spik mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "liv mi wɪð hɪm, mæstɝ ælvɪɹ. ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ jə kən də hɪɹ naʊ ɪksɛpt ɡɛɾ ɪn maɪ weɪ."

Bran opened his mouth, but before he could speak Moiraine said, "Leave me with him, Master al'Vere. There is nothing you can do here now except get in my way."

fəɹ ə mɪnət bɹæn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, tɔɹn bɪtwin dɪslaɪk ə biɪŋ ɔɹɾɝd əbaʊɾ ɪn ɪz oʊn ɪn ən ɹɪlʌktəns tə dɪsəbeɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. faɪnəli, hi stʃɹeɪɾənd tə klæp ɹænd ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ. "kʌm əlɔŋ, bɔɪ. lɛɾ əs liv mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ tə hɝ . . . ɑ . . . hɝ. . . . ðɛɹz plɛnti jə kən ɡɪmi ə hænd wɪð daʊnstɛɹz. bɪfɔɹ jə noʊ ɪt tæm wɪl bi ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪz paɪp ən ə mʌɡ ʌv eɪl."

For a minute Bran hesitated, torn between dislike of being ordered about in his own inn and reluctance to disobey an Aes Sedai. Finally, he straightened to clap Rand on the shoulder. "Come along, boy. Let us leave Moiraine Sedai to her . . . ah . . . her. . . . There's plenty you can give me a hand with downstairs. Before you know it Tam will be shouting for his pipe and a mug of ale."

"kæn aɪ steɪ?" ɹænd spoʊk tə mɔɪɹeɪn, ðoʊ ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli sim tə bi əwɛɹ ʌv ɛniwʌn bɪsaɪdz tæm. bɹænz hæn taɪɾənd, bʌt ɹænd ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm. "pliz? əl kip aʊɾ ə jəɹ weɪ. jə woʊn ivən noʊ aɪm hɪɹ. hiz maɪ fɑðɝ," hi æɾəd wɪð ə fɪɹsnəs ðət stɑɹɾəld ɪm ən waɪɾənd ðə meɪɝz aɪz ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ɹænd hoʊp ði ʌðɝz pʊɾ ɪt daʊn tə taɪɹədnəs, əɹ ðə stʃɹeɪn ə dilɪŋ wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"Can I stay?" Rand spoke to Moiraine, though she did not really seem to be aware of anyone besides Tam. Bran's hand tightened, but Rand ignored him. "Please? I'll keep out of your way. You won't even know I am here. He's my father," he added with a fierceness that startled him and widened the Mayor's eyes in surprise. Rand hoped the others put it down to tiredness, or the strain of dealing with an Aes Sedai.

"jɛs, jɛs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. ʃi hæd tɔst əɹ kloʊk ən stæf kɛɹləsli əkɹɔs ði oʊnli tʃɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹum, ən naʊ ʃi pʊʃt ʌp ðə slivz ə hɝ ɡaʊn, bɛɹɪŋ əɹ ɑɹmz tə hɝ ɛlboʊz. hɝ ətɛnʃən nɛvɝ ɹɪli lɛf tæm, ivən waɪl ʃi spoʊk. "sɪɾ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ. ən ju, tu, læn." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd veɪɡli ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ʌv ə lɔŋ bɛntʃ əɡɛns ðə wɔl. hɝ aɪz tʃɹævəl sloʊli fɹəm tæmz fit tə hɪz hɛd, bʌt ɹænd hæd ðə pɹɪkli filɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ bɪɑn ɪm ɪn səm fæʃən. "ju meɪ tɔk ɪf jə wɪʃ," ʃi wɛn ɑn æbsənli, "bʌt də ɪt kwaɪətli. naʊ, jə ɡoʊ, mæstɝ ælvɪɹ. ðɪs ɪz ə sɪkɹum, nɑɾ ə ɡæðɝɪŋ hɔl. si ðəɾ aɪm nɑt dɪstɝbd."

"Yes, yes," Moiraine said impatiently. She had tossed her cloak and staff carelessly across the only chair in the room, and now she pushed up the sleeves of her gown, baring her arms to her elbows. Her attention never really left Tam, even while she spoke. "Sit over there. And you, too, Lan." She gestured vaguely in the direction of a long bench against the wall. Her eyes traveled slowly from Tam's feet to his head, but Rand had the prickly feeling that she was looking beyond him in some fashion. "You may talk if you wish," she went on absently, "but do it quietly. Now, you go, Master al'Vere. This is a sickroom, not a gathering hall. See that I am not disturbed."

ðə meɪɝ ɡɹʌmbəld ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, ðoʊ nɑt laʊdli ɪnʌf tə kætʃ əɹ ətɛnʃən, ʌv kɔɹs, skwizd ɹændz ʃoʊldɝ əɡɛn, ðən oʊbiɾiəntli, ɪf ɹɪlʌktənli, kloʊz ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

The Mayor grumbled under his breath, though not loudly enough to catch her attention, of course, squeezed Rand's shoulder again, then obediently, if reluctantly, closed the door behind him.

mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛl bɪsaɪd ðə bɛɾ ən ɹɛstəɾ əɹ hænz laɪtli ɑn tæmz tʃɛst. ʃi kloʊzd əɹ aɪz, ən fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm ʃi niðɝ muv nɔɹ meɪɾ ə saʊnd.

Muttering to herself, the Aes Sedai knelt beside the bed and rested her hands lightly on Tam's chest. She closed her eyes, and for a long time she neither moved nor made a sound.

ɪn ðə stɔɹiz ɛɛs sədaɪ wʌndɝz wɝ ɔlweɪz əkʌmpənid baɪ flæʃɪz ən θʌndɝklæps, əɹ ʌðɝ saɪnz tə ɪndəkeɪt maɪɾi wɝks ən ɡɹeɪt paʊɝz. ðə paʊɝ. ðə wʌn paʊɝ, dʒɹɔn fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ðət dʒɹoʊv ðə wil ə taɪm. ðət wɑz nɑt sʌmθɪŋ ɹænd wɑntəd tə θɪŋk əbaʊt, ðə paʊɝ ɪnvɑlvd wɪð tæm, hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə seɪm ɹum wɛɹ ðə paʊɝ maɪt bi juzd. ɪn ðə seɪm vɪlədʒ wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf. fəɹ ɔl i kəd tɛl, ðoʊ, mɔɪɹeɪn maɪt dʒʌst əz wɛl əv ɡɔn tə slip. bʌɾ i θɔt tæmz bɹiðɪŋ saʊndəɾ iziɝ. ʃi mʌs bi duɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. soʊ ɪntɛnt wɑz i ðəɾ i dʒʌmpt wən læn spoʊk sɔfli.

In the stories Aes Sedai wonders were always accompanied by flashes and thunderclaps, or other signs to indicate mighty works and great powers. The Power. The One Power, drawn from the True Source that drove the Wheel of Time. That was not something Rand wanted to think about, the Power involved with Tam, himself in the same room where the Power might be used. In the same village was bad enough. For all he could tell, though, Moiraine might just as well have gone to sleep. But he thought Tam's breathing sounded easier. She must be doing something. So intent was he that he jumped when Lan spoke softly.

"ðæɾ ɪz ə faɪn wɛpən jə wɛɹ. ɪz ðəɹ baɪ tʃæns ə hɛɹən ɑn ðə bleɪd, əz wɛl?"

"That is a fine weapon you wear. Is there by chance a heron on the blade, as well?"

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ, nɑt ɡɹæspɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz i wʌnhʌnʒɹədfɪftin wɑz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt. hi hæd kəmplitli fɝɡɑɾən tæmz sɔɹɾ ɪn ðə læðɝ ə dilɪŋ wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪt dɪd nɑt sim soʊ hɛvi ɛnimɔɹ. "jɛs, ðəɹ ɪz. wʌɾ ɪz ʃi duɪŋ?"

For a moment Rand stared at the Warder, not grasping what it was he 115 was talking about. He had completely forgotten Tam's sword in the lather of dealing with an Aes Sedai. It did not seem so heavy anymore. "Yes, there is. What is she doing?"

"aɪd nɑɾ əv θɔt tə faɪn ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹɾ ɪn ə pleɪs laɪk ðɪs," læn sɛd.

"I'd not have thought to find a heron-mark sword in a place like this," Lan said.

"ɪt bɪlɔŋz tə maɪ fɑðɝ." hi ɡlænst ət lænz sɔɹd, ðə hɪl dʒʌs vɪzəbəl ət ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz kloʊk; ðə tu sɔɹdz dɪd lʊk ə ɡʊd dil əlaɪk, ɪksɛp ðət noʊ hɛɹənz ʃoʊɾ ɑn ðə wɔɹɾɝz. hi swʌŋ ɪz aɪz bæk tə ðə bɛd. tæmz bɹiðɪŋ dɪd saʊn iziɝ; ðə ɹæsp wɑz ɡɔn. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. "hi bɑɾ ɪɾ ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ."

"It belongs to my father." He glanced at Lan's sword, the hilt just visible at the edge of his cloak; the two swords did look a good deal alike, except that no herons showed on the Warder's. He swung his eyes back to the bed. Tam's breathing did sound easier; the rasp was gone. He was sure of it. "He bought it a long time ago."

"stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋ fəɹ ə ʃifɝɾɝ tə baɪ."

"Strange thing for a sheepherder to buy."

ɹænd spɛɹɾ ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk fəɹ læn. fəɹ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ tə wʌndɝ əbaʊt ðə sɔɹd wɑz pɹaɪɪŋ. fəɹ ə wɔɹɾɝ tə də ɪt. . . . stɪl, hi fɛlt i hæd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ. "hi nɛvɝ hæɾ ɛni jus fəɹ ɪt, ðəɾ aɪ noʊ ʌv. hi sɛɾ ɪt hæd noʊ jus. əntɪl læs naɪt, ɛniweɪ. aɪ dɪdn ivən noʊ hi hæɾ ɪt tɪl ðɛn."

Rand spared a sidelong look for Lan. For a stranger to wonder about the sword was prying. For a Warder to do it. . . . Still, he felt he had to say something. "He never had any use for it, that I know of. He said it had no use. Until last night, anyway. I didn't even know he had it till then."

"hi kɔld ɪt jusləs, dɪd hi? hi mʌs nɑɾ ɔlweɪz əv θɔt soʊ." læn tʌtʃt ðə skæbɝɾ ət ɹændz weɪs bɹifli wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ pleɪsəz wɛɹ ðə hɛɹən ɪz ə sɪmbəl ə ðə mæstɝ sɔɝdzmən. ðət bleɪd mʌst əv tʃɹævəld ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɹoʊd tə ɛn ʌp wɪð ə ʃifɝɾɝ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"He called it useless, did he? He must not always have thought so." Lan touched the scabbard at Rand's waist briefly with one finger. "There are places where the heron is a symbol of the master swordsman. That blade must have traveled a strange road to end up with a sheepherder in the Two Rivers."

ɹænd ɪɡnɔɹd ði ənspoʊkən kwɛstʃən. mɔɪɹeɪn stɪl hæd nɑt muvd. wɑz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ? hi ʃɪvɝɾ ən ɹʌbd ɪz ɑɹmz, nɑt ʃʊɹ i ɹɪli wɑntəd tə noʊ wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Rand ignored the unspoken question. Moiraine still had not moved. Was the Aes Sedai doing anything? He shivered and rubbed his arms, not sure he really wanted to know what she was doing. An Aes Sedai.

ə kwɛstʃən ə hɪz oʊn pɑpt ɪndə hɪz hɛd ðɛn, wʌn i dɪd nɑt wɑnə æsk, wʌn i niɾəd ən ænsɝ tə. "ðə meɪɝ - " hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt, ən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ðə meɪɝ sɛd ði oʊnli ɹizən ðɛɹz ɛniθɪŋ lɛft ə ðə vɪlədʒ ɪz kəz ə jə ən hɝ." hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf lʊk ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ. "ɪf jə hæd bɪn toʊld əbaʊɾ ə mæn ɪn ðə wʊdz . . . ə mæn u meɪd pipəl əfɹeɪd dʒʌs baɪ lʊkɪŋ əɾ əm . . . wəd ðəɾ əv wɔɹn ju? ə mæn huz hɔɹs dʌzn meɪk ɛni nɔɪz? ən ðə wɪn dʌzn tʌtʃ ɪz kloʊk? wəd juv noʊn wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən? kəd jə ən mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ hæv stɑpt ɪɾ ɪf jud noʊn əbaʊt hɪm?"

A question of his own popped into his head then, one he did not want to ask, one he needed an answer to. "The Mayor - " He cleared his throat, and took a deep breath. "The Mayor said the only reason there's anything left of the village is because of you and her." He made himself look at the Warder. "If you had been told about a man in the woods . . . a man who made people afraid just by looking at them . . . would that have warned you? A man whose horse doesn't make any noise? And the wind doesn't touch his cloak? Would you have known what was going to happen? Could you and Moiraine Sedai have stopped it if you'd known about him?"

"nɑt wɪθaʊt hæf ə dʌzən ə maɪ sɪstɝz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, ən ɹænd stɑɹɾəd. ʃi stɪl nɛl baɪ ðə bɛd, bʌt ʃi hæd teɪkən əɹ hænz fɹəm tæm ən hæf tɝn tə feɪs ðə tu ʌv əm ɑn ðə bɛntʃ. hɝ vɔɪs nɛvɝ ɹeɪzd, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz pɪn ɹænd tə ðə wɔl. "hæɾ aɪ noʊn wən aɪ lɛf tɑɹ vəlɑn ðəɾ aɪ wəd faɪn tʃɹɑləks ən mɹdʒɹɑl hɪɹ, aɪ wʊɾə bɹɔt hæf ə dʌzən ə ðɛm, ə dʌzən, ɪf aɪ hæd tə dʒɹæɡ ðɛm baɪ ðə skɹʌfs ə ðɛɹ nɛks. baɪ maɪsɛlf, ə mʌnθs wɔɹnɪŋ wʊɾə meɪd lɪɾəl dɪfɝəns. pɝhæps nʌn. ðəɹ ɪz oʊnli soʊ mʌtʃ wʌn pɝsən kən du, ivən kɔlɪŋ ɑn ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən ðəɹ wɝ pɹɑbli wɛl oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd tʃɹɑləks skæɾɝd ɝaʊn ðɪs dɪstʃɹɪk læs naɪt. ən ɪntaɪɝ fɪst."

"Not without half a dozen of my sisters," Moiraine said, and Rand started. She still knelt by the bed, but she had taken her hands from Tam and half turned to face the two of them on the bench. Her voice never raised, but her eyes pinned Rand to the wall. "Had I known when I left Tar Valon that I would find Trollocs and Myrddraal here, I would have brought half a dozen of them, a dozen, if I had to drag them by the scruffs of their necks. By myself, a month's warning would have made little difference. Perhaps none. There is only so much one person can do, even calling on the One Power, and there were probably well over a hundred Trollocs scattered around this district last night. An entire fist."

"ɪt wəd stɪl əv bɪn ɡʊd tə noʊ," læn sɛd ʃɑɹpli, ðə ʃɑɹpnəs dɝɛktəɾ ət ɹænd. "wɛn dɪd jə si hɪm, ɪɡzækli, ən wɛɹ?"

"It would still have been good to know," Lan said sharply, the sharpness directed at Rand. "When did you see him, exactly, and where?"

"ðæts ə noʊ kɑnsəkwəns naʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "aɪ wɪl nɑɾ əv ðə bɔɪ θɪŋkɪŋ hiz tə bleɪm fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ wən hiz nɑt. aɪm əz mʌtʃ tə bleɪm. ðəɾ əkɝst ɹeɪvən jɛstɝdeɪ, ðə weɪ ɪt bɪheɪvd, ʃʊɾə wɔɹn mi. ən ju, tu, maɪ oʊl fɹɛnd." hɝ tʌŋ klɪkt æŋɡɹəli. "aɪ wɑz oʊvɝkɑnfɪɾənt tə ðə pɔɪn ʌv ɛɹəɡəns, ʃʊɹ ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ kəd nɑɾ əv spɹɛd soʊ fɑɹ. nɔɹ soʊ hɛvəli, nɑt jɛt. soʊ ʃʊɹ."

"That's of no consequence now," Moiraine said. "I will not have the boy thinking he is to blame for something when he is not. I am as much to blame. That accursed raven yesterday, the way it behaved, should have warned me. And you, too, my old friend." Her tongue clicked angrily. "I was overconfident to the point of arrogance, sure that the Dark One's touch could not have spread so far. Nor so heavily, not yet. So sure."

ɹænd blɪŋkt. "ðə ɹeɪvən? aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd."

Rand blinked. "The raven? I don't understand."

"kɛɹiən iɾɝz." lænz maʊθ twɪstəɾ ɪn dɪsteɪst. "ðə dɑɹk wʌnz mɪnjənz ɔfən faɪn spaɪz əmʌŋ kɹitʃɝz ðət fiɾ ɑn dɛθ. ɹeɪvənz ən kɹoʊz, meɪnli. ɹæts, ɪn ðə sɪɾiz, səmtaɪmz."

"Carrion eaters." Lan's mouth twisted in distaste. "The Dark One's minions often find spies among creatures that feed on death. Ravens and crows, mainly. Rats, in the cities, sometimes."

ə kwɪk ʃɪvɝ ɹæn θɹu ɹænd. ɹeɪvənz ən kɹoʊz əz spaɪz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn? ðəɹ wɝ ɹeɪvənz ən kɹoʊz ɛvɹiwɛɹ naʊ. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ, mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sɛd. ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑz ɔlweɪz ðəɹ - hi nu ðət - bʌɾ ɪf jə tʃɹaɪd tə wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt, tʃɹaɪd tə lɪv ə ɡʊd laɪf, ən dɪd nɑt neɪm hɪm, hi kəd nɑt hɑɹm ju. ðət wɑz wʌɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi bɪlivd, wʌɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi lɝnd wɪð ɪz mʌðɝz mɪlk. bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn sim tə bi seɪɪŋ. . . .

A quick shiver ran through Rand. Ravens and crows as spies of the Dark One? There were ravens and crows everywhere now. The Dark One's touch, Moiraine had said. The Dark One was always there - he knew that - but if you tried to walk in the Light, tried to live a good life, and did not name him, he could not harm you. That was what everybody believed, what everybody learned with his mother's milk. But Moiraine seemed to be saying. . . .

hɪz ɡlæns fɛl ɑn tæm, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls wɑz pʊʃt ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd. hɪz fɑðɝz feɪs wɑz noʊɾɪsəbli lɛs flʌʃt ðən ɪt hæd bɪn, ən ɪz bɹiðɪŋ saʊndəɾ ɔlmoʊs nɔɹməl. ɹænd wʊɾə lɛpt ʌp ɪf læn hæd nɑt kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹm. "juv dʌn ɪt."

His glance fell on Tam, and everything else was pushed right out of his head. His father's face was noticeably less flushed than it had been, and his breathing sounded almost normal. Rand would have leaped up if Lan had not caught his arm. "You've done it."

mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ən saɪd. "nɑt jɛt. aɪ hoʊp ɪts oʊnli nɑt jɛt. tʃɹɑlɑk wɛpənz ɑɹ meɪɾ ət fɔɹdʒɪz ɪn ðə væli kɔl θɑkændɑɹ, ɑn ðə vɛɹi sloʊps ə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ɪtsɛlf. səm ə ðɛm teɪk ə teɪn fɹəm ðət pleɪs, ə steɪn ʌv ivəl ɪn ðə mɛɾəl. ðoʊz teɪntɪd bleɪdz meɪk wunz ðət wɪl nɑt hil əneɪɾɪd, əɹ kɑz dɛdli fivɝz, stʃɹeɪnʒ sɪknəsəz ðət mɛɾəsənz kænɑt tʌtʃ. aɪ hæv suð jəɹ fɑðɝz peɪn, bʌt ðə mɑɹk, ðə teɪnt, ɪz stɪl ɪn hɪm. lɛft əloʊn, ɪɾəl ɡɹoʊ əɡɛn, ən kənsum hɪm."

Moiraine shook her head and sighed. "Not yet. I hope it is only not yet. Trolloc weapons are made at forges in the valley called Thakan'dar, on the very slopes of Shayol Ghul itself. Some of them take a taint from that place, a stain of evil in the metal. Those tainted blades make wounds that will not heal unaided, or cause deadly fevers, strange sicknesses that medicines cannot touch. I have soothed your father's pain, but the mark, the taint, is still in him. Left alone, it will grow again, and consume him."

"bʌt jə woʊn liv ɪɾ əloʊn." ɹændz wɝdz wɝ hæf pli, hæf kəmænd. hi wɑz ʃɑk tə ɹilaɪz i hæd spoʊkən tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ laɪk ðæt, bʌt ʃi sim nɑt tə noʊɾəs ɪz toʊn.

"But you won't leave it alone." Rand's words were half plea, half command. He was shocked to realize he had spoken to an Aes Sedai like that, but she seemed not to notice his tone.

"aɪ wɪl nɑt," ʃi əɡɹid sɪmpli. "aɪ æm vɛɹi taɪɝd, ɹænd, ən aɪ hæv hæd noʊ tʃæns tə ɹɛst sɪns læs naɪt. ɔɹɾənɛɹəli ɪt wəd nɑt mæɾɝ, bʌt fəɹ ðɪs kaɪndə hɝt. . . . ðɪs" - ʃi tʊk ə smɔl bʌndəl ʌv waɪt sɪlk fɹəm əɹ paʊtʃ - "ɪz ən æŋɡɹil." ʃi sɔ hɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən. "ju noʊ ʌv æŋɡɹil, ðɛn. ɡʊd."

"I will not," she agreed simply. "I am very tired, Rand, and I have had no chance to rest since last night. Ordinarily it would not matter, but for this kind of hurt. . . . This" - she took a small bundle of white silk from her pouch - "is an angreal." She saw his expression. "You know of angreal, then. Good."

ʌnkɑnʃəsli hi lin bæk, fɝðɝ əweɪ fɹəm əɹ ən wʌt ʃi hɛld. ə fju stɔɹiz mɛnʃən æŋɡɹil, ðoʊz ɹɛlɪks ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ juz tə pɝfɔɹm ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪɾəst wʌndɝz. hi wɑz stɑɹɾəld tə si hɝ ənɹæp ə smuð aɪvɝi fɪɡjɝin, eɪdʒ-dɑɹkən tə dip bɹaʊn. noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðən əɹ hænd, ɪt wɑz ə wʊmən ɪn floʊɪŋ ɹoʊbz, wɪð lɔŋ hɛɹ fɔlɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz.

Unconsciously he leaned back, further away from her and what she held. A few stories mentioned angreal, those relics of the Age of Legends that Aes Sedai used to perform their greatest wonders. He was startled to see her unwrap a smooth ivory figurine, age-darkened to deep brown. No longer than her hand, it was a woman in flowing robes, with long hair falling about her shoulders.

"wi hæv lɔs ðə meɪkɪŋ ə ðiz," ʃi sɛd. "soʊ mʌtʃ ɪz lɔst, pɝhæps nɛvɝ tə bi faʊn əɡɛn. soʊ fju ɹɪmeɪn, ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɔlmoʊs dɪd nɑɾ əlaʊ mi tə teɪk ðɪs wʌn. ɪts wɛl fəɹ ɛmənz fild, ən fəɹ jəɹ fɑðɝ, ðət ʃi dɪd ɡɪv əɹ pɝmɪʃən. bʌt jə mʌs nɑt hoʊp tu mʌtʃ. naʊ, ivən wɪð ɪt, aɪ kən də lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən aɪ kəɾ əv wɪθaʊɾ ɪt jɛstɝdeɪ, ən ðə teɪn ɪz stʃɹɔŋ. ɪts hæd taɪm tə fɛstɝ."

"We have lost the making of these," she said. "So much is lost, perhaps never to be found again. So few remain, the Amyrlin Seat almost did not allow me to take this one. It is well for Emond's Field, and for your father, that she did give her permission. But you must not hope too much. Now, even with it, I can do little more than I could have without it yesterday, and the taint is strong. It has had time to fester."

"ju kən hɛlp hɪm," ɹænd sɛd fɝvənli. "aɪ noʊ jə kæn."

"You can help him," Rand said fervently. "I know you can."

mɔɪɹeɪn smaɪld, ə bɛɹ kɝvɪŋ ə hɝ lɪps. "wi ʃæl si." ðən ʃi tɝn bæk tə tæm. wʌn hænd ʃi leɪɾ ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛd; ði ʌðɝ kʌp ði aɪvɝi fɪɡjɝ. aɪz kloʊzd, hɝ feɪs tʊk ɑn ə lʊk ə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən. ʃi skɛɹsli sim tə bɹið.

Moiraine smiled, a bare curving of her lips. "We shall see." Then she turned back to Tam. One hand she laid on his forehead; the other cupped the ivory figure. Eyes closed, her face took on a look of concentration. She scarcely seemed to breathe.

"ðæt ɹaɪɾɝ jə spoʊk ʌv," læn sɛd kwaɪətli, "ðə wʌn u meɪd jə əfɹeɪd - ðət wɑz ʃʊɹli ə mɹdʒɹɑl."

"That rider you spoke of," Lan said quietly, "the one who made you afraid - that was surely a Myrddraal."

"eɪ mɹdʒɹɑl!" ɹænd ɪkskleɪmd. "bʌt feɪdz ɑɹ twɛnti fit tɔl ænd. . . ." ðə wɝdz feɪɾəd əweɪ ʌndɝ ðə wɔɹɾɝz mɝθləs ɡɹɪn.

"A Myrddraal!" Rand exclaimed. "But Fades are twenty feet tall and. . . ." The words faded away under the Warder's mirthless grin.

"səmtaɪmz, ʃifɝɾɝ, stɔɹiz meɪk θɪŋz lɑɹdʒɝ ðən tʃɹuθ. bɪliv mi, ðə tʃɹuθ ɪz bɪɡ ɪnʌf wɪð ə hæfmən. hæfmən, lɝk, feɪd, ʃæɾoʊmən; ðə neɪm dɪpɛnz ɑn ðə læn jəɹ ɪn, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl min mɹdʒɹɑl. feɪdz ɑɹ tʃɹɑlɑk spɑn, θɹoʊbæks ɔlmoʊs tə ðə hjumən stɑk ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz juz tə meɪk ðə tʃɹɑləks. ɔlmoʊst. bʌɾ ɪf ðə hjumən stʃɹeɪn ɪz meɪd stʃɹɔŋɝ, soʊ ɪz ðə teɪn ðət twɪsts ðə tʃɹɑləks. hæfmən əv paʊɝz ʌv ə kaɪnd, ðə sɔɹt ðət stɛm fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌn. oʊnli ðə wikəst ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd feɪl tə bi ə mætʃ fəɹ ə feɪd, wʌn əɡɛnst wʌn, bʌt mɛni ə ɡʊd mæn ən tʃɹu hæz fɔlən tə ðɛm. sɪns ðə wɔɹz ðəɾ ɛndəd ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, sɪns ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɝ baʊnd, ðeɪv bɪn ðə bɹeɪn ðət tɛlz ðə tʃɹɑlɑk fɪsts wɛɹ tə stʃɹaɪk. ɪn ðə deɪz ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, hæfmən lɛd ðə tʃɹɑləks ɪn bæɾəl, ʌndɝ ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz."

"Sometimes, sheepherder, stories make things larger than truth. Believe me, the truth is big enough with a Halfman. Halfman, Lurk, Fade, Shadowman; the name depends on the land you're in, but they all mean Myrddraal. Fades are Trolloc spawn, throwbacks almost to the human stock the Dreadlords used to make the Trollocs. Almost. But if the human strain is made stronger, so is the taint that twists the Trollocs. Halfmen have powers of a kind, the sort that stem from the Dark One. Only the weakest Aes Sedai would fail to be a match for a Fade, one against one, but many a good man and true has fallen to them. Since the wars that ended the Age of Legends, since the Forsaken were bound, they have been the brain that tells the Trolloc fists where to strike. In the days of the Trolloc Wars, Halfmen led the Trollocs in battle, under the Dreadlords."

"hi skɛɹd mi," ɹænd sɛd feɪnli. "hi dʒʌs lʊkt ət mi, ænd. . . ." hi ʃɪvɝd.

"He scared me," Rand said faintly. "He just looked at me, and. . . ." He shivered.

"noʊ nid fəɹ ʃeɪm, ʃifɝɾɝ. ðeɪ skɛɹ mi, tu. aɪv sin mɛn u hæv bɪn soʊlʒɝz ɔl ðɛɹ lɪvz fɹiz laɪk ə bɝd feɪsɪŋ ə sneɪk wən ðeɪ kənfɹʌntəɾ ə hæfmən. ɪn ðə nɔɹθ, ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz əlɔŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, ðəɹ ɪz ə seɪɪŋ. ðə lʊk ə ði aɪləs ɪz fɪɹ."

"No need for shame, sheepherder. They scare me, too. I've seen men who have been soldiers all their lives freeze like a bird facing a snake when they confronted a Halfman. In the north, in the Borderlands along the Great Blight, there is a saying. The look of the Eyeless is fear."

"ði aɪləs?" ɹænd sɛd, ən læn nɑɾəd.

"The Eyeless?" Rand said, and Lan nodded.

"mɹdʒɹɑl si laɪk iɡəlz, ɪn dɑɹknəs əɹ ɪn laɪt, bʌt ðeɪv noʊ aɪz. aɪ kən θɪŋk ə fju θɪŋz mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən feɪsɪŋ ə mɹdʒɹɑl. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ ən aɪ boʊθ tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ðə wʌn ðət wɑz hɪɹ læs naɪt, ən wi feɪld ɛvɹi taɪm. hæfmən əv ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn lʌk."

"Myrddraal see like eagles, in darkness or in light, but they have no eyes. I can think of few things more dangerous than facing a Myrddraal. Moiraine Sedai and I both tried to kill the one that was here last night, and we failed every time. Halfmen have the Dark One's own luck."

ɹænd swɑloʊd. "eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk sɛd ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑntəd tə tɔk tə mi. aɪ dɪdnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt."

Rand swallowed. "A Trolloc said the Myrddraal wanted to talk to me. I didn't know what it meant."

lænz hɛd dʒɝkt ʌp; hɪz aɪz wɝ blu stoʊnz. "ju tɔk tə ə tʃɹɑlɑk?"

Lan's head jerked up; his eyes were blue stones. "You talked to a Trolloc?"

"nɑɾ ɪɡzækli," ɹænd stæmɝd. ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɡeɪz hɛld ɪm laɪk ə tʃɹæp. "ɪt tɔk tə mi. ɪt sɛɾ ɪt wʊdn hɝt mi, ðət ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑntəd tə tɔk tə mi. ðən ɪt tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mi." hi lɪkt ɪz lɪps ən ɹʌbd ɪz hæn əlɔŋ ðə nɑbi lɛðɝ ə ðə sɔɹd hɪlt. ɪn ʃɔɹt, tʃɑpi sɛntənsəz i ɪkspleɪn əbaʊt ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə fɑɹmhaʊs. "aɪ kɪld ɪt, ɪnstɛd," hi fɪnɪʃt. "baɪ æksəɾənt, ɹɪli. ɪt dʒʌmpt ət mi, ən aɪ hæd ðə sɔɹɾ ɪn maɪ hænd."

"Not exactly," Rand stammered. The Warder's gaze held him like a trap. "It talked to me. It said it wouldn't hurt me, that the Myrddraal wanted to talk to me. Then it tried to kill me." He licked his lips and rubbed his hand along the nobby leather of the sword hilt. In short, choppy sentences he explained about returning to the farmhouse. "I killed it, instead," he finished. "By accident, really. It jumped at me, and I had the sword in my hand."

lænz feɪs sɔfən slaɪtli, ɪf ɹɑk kəd bi sɛd tə sɑfən. "ivən soʊ, ðəɾ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ tə spik ʌv, ʃifɝɾɝ. əntɪl læs naɪt ðəɹ wɝ fju mɛn saʊθ ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz u kəd seɪ ðeɪ hæd sin ə tʃɹɑlɑk, mʌtʃ lɛs kɪld wʌn."

Lan's face softened slightly, if rock could be said to soften. "Even so, that is something to speak of, sheepherder. Until last night there were few men south of the Borderlands who could say they had seen a Trolloc, much less killed one."

"æn fjuɝ stɪl u hæv sleɪn ə tʃɹɑlɑk əloʊn ən əneɪɾɪd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd wɛɹəli. "ɪɾ ɪz dʌn, ɹænd. læn, hɛlp mi ʌp."

"And fewer still who have slain a Trolloc alone and unaided," Moiraine said wearily. "It is done, Rand. Lan, help me up."

ðə wɔɹɾɝ spɹæŋ tə hɝ saɪd, bʌɾ i wɑz noʊ kwɪkɝ ðən ɹænd dɑɹɾɪŋ tə ðə bɛd. tæmz skɪn wɑz kul tə ðə tʌtʃ, ðoʊ hɪz feɪs hæɾ ə peɪl, wɑʃt-aʊt lʊk, əz ɪf i hæd spɛn fɑɹ tu lɔŋ aʊɾ ə ðə sʌn. hɪz aɪz wɝ stɪl kloʊzd, bʌɾ i dʒɹu ðə dip bɹɛθs ə nɔɹməl slip.

The Warder sprang to her side, but he was no quicker than Rand darting to the bed. Tam's skin was cool to the touch, though his face had a pale, washed-out look, as if he had spent far too long out of the sun. His eyes were still closed, but he drew the deep breaths of normal sleep.

"hi wɪl bi ɔl ɹaɪt naʊ?" ɹænd æskt æŋkʃəsli.

"He will be all right now?" Rand asked anxiously.

"wɪð ɹɛst, jɛs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ə fju wiks ɪn bɛd, ən hɪl bi əz ɡʊɾ əz ɛvɝ." ʃi wɔkt ənstɛɾəli, dɪspaɪt hoʊldɪŋ lænz ɑɹm. hi swɛpt əɹ kloʊk ən stæf fɹəm ðə tʃɛɹ kʊʃən fəɹ əɹ tə sɪt, ən ʃi iz hɝsɛlf daʊn wɪð ə saɪ. wɪð ə sloʊ kɛɹ ʃi ɹiɹæp ði æŋɡɹil ən ɹɪtɝn ɪt tə hɝ paʊtʃ.

"With rest, yes," Moiraine said. "A few weeks in bed, and he will be as good as ever." She walked unsteadily, despite holding Lan's arm. He swept her cloak and staff from the chair cushion for her to sit, and she eased herself down with a sigh. With a slow care she rewrapped the angreal and returned it to her pouch.

ɹændz ʃoʊldɝz ʃʊk; hi bɪɾ ɪz lɪp tə kip fɹəm læfɪŋ. ət ðə seɪm taɪm i hæd tə skɹʌb ə hæn əkɹɔs ɪz aɪz tə klɪɹ əweɪ tɪɹz. "θæŋk ju."

Rand's shoulders shook; he bit his lip to keep from laughing. At the same time he had to scrub a hand across his eyes to clear away tears. "Thank you."

"ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz," mɔɪɹeɪn wɛn ɑn, "sʌm ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd fæn laɪf ən hɛlθ tə fleɪm ɪf oʊnli ðə smɔləst spɑɹk ɹɪmeɪnd. ðoʊz deɪz ɑɹ ɡɔn, ðoʊ - pɝhæps fɝɛvɝ. soʊ mʌtʃ wɑz lɔst; nɑt dʒʌs ðə meɪkɪŋ ʌv æŋɡɹil. soʊ mʌtʃ ðət kəd bi dʌn wɪtʃ wi dɛɹ nɑɾ ivən dʒɹim ʌv, ɪf wi ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪɾ əɾ ɔl. ðəɹ ɑɹ fɑɹ fjuɝ ʌv əs naʊ. səm tæləns ɑɹ ɔl bʌt ɡɔn, ən mɛni ðət ɹɪmeɪn sim wikɝ. naʊ ðəɹ mʌs bi boʊθ wɪl ən stʃɹɛŋkθ fəɹ ðə bɑɾi tə dʒɹɔ ɑn, əɹ ivən ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ʌv əs kən də nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv hilɪŋ. ɪts fɔɹtʃənət ðət jəɹ fɑðɝ ɪz ə stʃɹɔŋ mæn, boʊθ ɪn bɑɾi ən spɪɹət. əz ɪɾ ɪz, hi juzd ʌp mʌtʃ ə hɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ðə faɪt fəɹ laɪf, bʌɾ ɔl ðəɾ ɪz lɛf naʊ ɪz fəɹ ɪm tə ɹɪkupɝeɪt. ðət wɪl teɪk taɪm, bʌt ðə teɪn ɪz ɡɔn."

"In the Age of Legends," Moiraine went on, "some Aes Sedai could fan life and health to flame if only the smallest spark remained. Those days are gone, though - perhaps forever. So much was lost; not just the making of angreal. So much that could be done which we dare not even dream of, if we remember it at all. There are far fewer of us now. Some talents are all but gone, and many that remain seem weaker. Now there must be both will and strength for the body to draw on, or even the strongest of us can do nothing in the way of Healing. It is fortunate that your father is a strong man, both in body and spirit. As it is, he used up much of his strength in the fight for life, but all that is left now is for him to recuperate. That will take time, but the taint is gone."

"aɪ kən nɛvɝ ɹipeɪ ju," hi toʊld əɹ wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz fɹəm tæm, "bʌɾ ɛniθɪŋ aɪ kən də fəɹ ju, aɪ wɪl. ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl." hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə tɔk ə pɹaɪsəz, ðɛn, ən ɪz pɹɑməs. nilɪŋ bɪsaɪd tæm i mɛn ɪɾ ivən mɔɹ ðən bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl wɑz nɑɾ izi tə lʊk ət hɝ. "ɛniθɪŋ. əz lɔŋ əz ɪt dʌz nɑt hɝt ðə vɪlədʒ, əɹ maɪ fɹɛnz."

"I can never repay you," he told her without taking his eyes from Tam, "but anything I can do for you, I will. Anything at all." He remembered the talk of prices, then, and his promise. Kneeling beside Tam he meant it even more than before, but it still was not easy to look at her. "Anything. As long as it does not hurt the village, or my friends."

mɔɪɹeɪn ɹeɪzd ə hæn dɪsmɪsɪvli. "ɪf jə θɪŋk ɪts nɛsəsɛɹi. aɪ wəd laɪk tə tɔk wɪð ju, ɛniweɪ. jəl noʊ daʊt liv ət ðə seɪm taɪm wi du, ən wi kən spik ət lɛŋθ ðɛn."

Moiraine raised a hand dismissively. "If you think it is necessary. I would like to talk with you, anyway. You will no doubt leave at the same time we do, and we can speak at length then."

"liv!" hi ɪkskleɪmd, skɹæmbəlɪŋ tə hɪz fit. "ɪz ɪt ɹɪli ðət bæd? ɛvɹiwʌn lʊk tə mi əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɹɛɾi tə stɑɹt ɹibɪldɪŋ. wəɹ pɹɪɾi sɛɾəld foʊk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. noʊbɑdi ɛvɝ livz."

"Leave!" he exclaimed, scrambling to his feet. "Is it really that bad? Everyone looked to me as if they were ready to start rebuilding. We are pretty settled folk in the Two Rivers. Nobody ever leaves."

"ɹænd - "

"Rand - "

"ænd wɛɹ wəd wi ɡoʊ? pdən feɪn sɛd ðə wɛðɝ ɪz dʒʌst əz bæɾ ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɛls. hiz . . . hi wɑz . . . ðə pɛdlɝ. ðə tʃɹɑləks. . . ." ɹænd swɑloʊd, wɪʃɪŋ tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn hæd nɑt toʊld ɪm wʌt tʃɹɑləks eɪt. "ðə bɛst aɪ kən si tə də ɪz steɪ ɹaɪt hɪɹ wɛɹ wi bɪlɔŋ, ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən pʊt θɪŋz bæk təɡɛðɝ. wɪv kɹɑps ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən ɪts tə wɔɹm ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə ʃɪɹɪŋ, sun. aɪ doʊnt noʊ hu stɑɹɾəd ðɪs tɔk əbaʊt livɪŋ - wʌn ə ðə kɑplɪnz, əl bɛt - bʌt huɛvɝ ɪt wɑz - "

"And where would we go? Padan Fain said the weather is just as bad everywhere else. He's . . . he was . . . the peddler. The Trollocs. . . ." Rand swallowed, wishing Thom Merrilin had not told him what Trollocs ate. "The best I can see to do is stay right here where we belong, in the Two Rivers, and put things back together. We have crops in the ground, and it has to warm enough for the shearing, soon. I don't know who started this talk about leaving - one of the Coplins, I'll bet - but whoever it was - "

"ʃifɝɾɝ," læn bɹoʊk ɪn, "ju tɔk wən jə ʃəd bi lɪsnɪŋ."

"Sheepherder," Lan broke in, "you talk when you should be listening."

hi blɪŋkt ət boʊθ ə ðɛm. hi hæd bɪn hæf bæbəlɪŋ, hi ɹilaɪzd, ən i hæd ɹæmbəld ɑn waɪl ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə tɔk. waɪl ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃɹaɪd tə tɔk. hi wʌndɝd wʌt tə seɪ, haʊ tə əpɑlədʒaɪz, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn smaɪld waɪl i wɑz stɪl θɪŋkɪŋ.

He blinked at both of them. He had been half babbling, he realized, and he had rambled on while she tried to talk. While an Aes Sedai tried to talk. He wondered what to say, how to apologize, but Moiraine smiled while he was still thinking.

"aɪ ʌndɝstæn haʊ jə fil, ɹænd," ʃi sɛd, ən i hæd ði ənkʌmftəɹbəl filɪŋ ðət ʃi ɹɪli dɪd. "θɪŋk noʊ mɔɹ ʌv ɪt." hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd, ən ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "aɪ hæv hændəl ðɪs bædli, aɪ si. aɪ ʃəɾ əv ɹɛstəd, fɝst, aɪ səpoʊz. ɪts jə hu wɪl bi livɪŋ, ɹænd. jə hu mʌs liv, fəɹ ðə seɪk ə jəɹ vɪlədʒ."

"I understand how you feel, Rand," she said, and he had the uncomfortable feeling that she really did. "Think no more of it." Her mouth tightened, and she shook her head. "I have handled this badly, I see. I should have rested, first, I suppose. It is you who will be leaving, Rand. You who must leave, for the sake of your village."

"mi?" hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən tʃɹaɪɾ əɡɛn. "mi?" ɪt saʊndəɾ ə lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ðɪs taɪm. "waɪ də aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ? aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ɛni ʌv ðɪs. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə ɡoʊ ɛniwɛɹ."

"Me?" He cleared his throat and tried again. "Me?" It sounded a little better this time. "Why do I have to go? I don't understand any of this. I don't want to go anywhere."

mɔɪɹeɪn lʊkt ət læn, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ ənfoʊldəɾ ɪz ɑɹmz. hi lʊkt ət ɹænd fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz lɛðɝ hɛdbænd, ən ɹænd hæd ðə filɪŋ ə biɪŋ weɪɾ ɑn ɪnvɪzəbəl skeɪlz əɡɛn. "dɪd jə noʊ," læn sɛd sʌɾənli, "ðæt səm hoʊmz wɝ nɑɾ ətækt?"

Moiraine looked at Lan, and the Warder unfolded his arms. He looked at Rand from under his leather headband, and Rand had the feeling of being weighed on invisible scales again. "Did you know," Lan said suddenly, "that some homes were not attacked?"

"hæf ðə vɪlədʒ ɪz ɪn æʃəz," hi pɹətɛstəd, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ weɪvd ɪɾ əweɪ.

"Half the village is in ashes," he protested, but the Warder waved it away.

"sʌm haʊsəz wɝ oʊnli tɔɹtʃt tə kɹieɪt kənfjuʒən. ðə tʃɹɑləks ɪɡnɔɹɾ əm æftɝwɝdz, ən ðə pipəl u flɛd fɹəm əm əz wɛl, ənlɛs ðeɪ æktʃəli  ɡɑɾ ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ðə tʃɹu ətæk. moʊst ə ðə pipəl huv kʌm ɪn fɹəm ði aʊtlaɪɪŋ fɑɹmz nɛvɝ sɔ ə hɛɹ ʌv ə tʃɹɑlɑk, ən ðəɾ oʊnli əɾ ə dɪstəns. moʊs nɛvɝ nu ðəɹ wɑz ɛni tʃɹʌbəl əntɪl ðeɪ sɔ ðə vɪlədʒ."

"Some houses were only torched to create confusion. The Trollocs ignored them afterwards, and the people who fled from them as well, unless they actually got in the way of the true attack. Most of the people who've come in from the outlying farms never saw a hair of a Trolloc, and that only at a distance. Most never knew there was any trouble until they saw the village."

"aɪ dɪd hɪɹ əbaʊt dɑɹl kɑplɪn," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ səpoʊz ɪt dʒʌs dɪdn sɪŋk ɪn."

"I did hear about Darl Coplin," Rand said slowly. "I suppose it just didn't sink in."

"tu fɑɹmz wɝ ətækt," læn wɛn ɑn. "jʊɹz ən wʌn ʌðɝ. kəz ə bɛl taɪn ɛvɹiwʌn u lɪvd ət ðə sɛkən fɑɹm wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ. mɛni pipəl wɝ seɪv kəz ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑz ɪɡnɝən ə tu ɹɪvɝz kʌstəmz. fɛstəvəl ən wɪntɝnaɪt meɪɾ ɪts tæsk ɔl bʌɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt noʊ ðæt."

"Two farms were attacked," Lan went on. "Yours and one other. Because of Bel Tine everyone who lived at the second farm was already in the village. Many people were saved because the Myrddraal was ignorant of Two Rivers customs. Festival and Winternight made its task all but impossible, but it did not know that."

ɹænd lʊkt ət mɔɪɹeɪn, linɪŋ bæk ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ, bʌt ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ, oʊnli wɑtʃt hɪm, ə fɪŋɡɝ leɪɾ əkɹɔs əɹ lɪps. "aʊɝ fɑɹm, ən u ɛlsəz?" hi æsk faɪnəli.

Rand looked at Moiraine, leaning back in the chair, but she said nothing, only watched him, a finger laid across her lips. "Our farm, and who else's?" he asked finally.

"ði eɪbɑɹə fɑɹm," læn ɹɪplaɪd. "hɪɹ ɪn ɛmənz fild, ðeɪ stʃɹʌk fɝst ət ðə fɔɹdʒ, ən ðə blæksmɪθs haʊs, ən mæstɝ kɔθənz haʊs."

"The Aybara farm," Lan replied. "Here in Emond's Field, they struck first at the forge, and the blacksmith's house, and Master Cauthon's house."

ɹændz maʊθ wɑz sʌɾənli dʒɹaɪ. "ðæts kɹeɪzi," hi mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ aʊt, ðən dʒʌmpt əz mɔɪɹeɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd.

Rand's mouth was suddenly dry. "That's crazy," he managed to get out, then jumped as Moiraine straightened.

"nɑt kɹeɪzi, ɹænd," ʃi sɛd. "pɝpəsfəl. ðə tʃɹɑləks dɪd nɑt kʌm tə ɛmənz fil baɪ hæpənstæns, ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt də wʌt ðeɪ dɪd fəɹ ðə plɛʒɝ ə kɪlɪŋ ən bɝnɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ ðət dɪlaɪɾəd ðɛm. ðeɪ nu wʌt, əɹ ɹæðɝ hu, ðeɪ wɝ æftɝ. ðə tʃɹɑləks keɪm tə kɪl əɹ kæptʃɝ jʌŋ mɛn ʌv ə sɝɾən eɪdʒ u laɪv nɪɹ ɛmənz fild."

"Not crazy, Rand," she said. "Purposeful. The Trollocs did not come to Emond's Field by happenstance, and they did not do what they did for the pleasure of killing and burning, however much that delighted them. They knew what, or rather who, they were after. The Trollocs came to kill or capture young men of a certain age who live near Emond's Field."

"maɪ eɪdʒ?" ɹændz vɔɪs ʃʊk, ən i dɪd nɑt kɛɹ. "laɪt! mæt. wʌɾ əbaʊt pɛɹɪn?"

"My age?" Rand's voice shook, and he did not care. "Light! Mat. What about Perrin?"

"əlaɪv ən wɛl," mɔɪɹeɪn əʃʊɹd hɪm, "ɪf ə tʃɹaɪfəl suɾi."

"Alive and well," Moiraine assured him, "if a trifle sooty."

"bæn kɹeɪ ən lɛm θeɪn?"

"Ban Crawe and Lem Thane?"

"wɝ nɛvɝ ɪn ɛni deɪnʒɝ," læn sɛd. "æt list, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls."

"Were never in any danger," Lan said. "At least, no more than anyone else."

"bʌt ðeɪ sɔ ðə ɹaɪɾɝ, ðə feɪd, tu, ən ðəɹ ðə seɪm eɪdʒ əz aɪ æm."

"But they saw the rider, the Fade, too, and they're the same age as I am."

"mæstɝ kɹeɪz haʊs wɑz nɑɾ ivən dæmədʒd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "æn ðə mɪlɝ ən ɪz fæmli slɛp θɹu hæf ði ətæk bɪfɔɹ ðə nɔɪz woʊk ðɛm. bæn ɪz tɛn mʌnθs oʊldɝ ðən ju, ən lɛm eɪt mʌnθs jʌŋɡɝ." ʃi smaɪl dʒɹaɪli əɾ ɪz sɝpɹaɪz. "aɪ toʊl jə aɪ æskt kwɛstʃənz. ən aɪ ɔlsoʊ sɛd jʌŋ mɛn ʌv ə sɝɾən eɪdʒ. jə ən jəɹ tu fɹɛnz ɑɹ wɪðɪn wiks ʌv wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɪt wɑz jə θɹi ðə mɹdʒɹɑl sɔt, ən nʌn ʌðɝz."

"Master Crawe's house was not even damaged," Moiraine said, "and the miller and his family slept through half the attack before the noise woke them. Ban is ten months older than you, and Lem eight months younger." She smiled dryly at his surprise. "I told you I asked questions. And I also said young men of a certain age. You and your two friends are within weeks of one another. It was you three the Myrddraal sought, and none others."

ɹænd ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli, wɪʃɪŋ ʃi wəd nɑt lʊk əɾ ɪm laɪk ðæt, əz ɪf əɹ aɪz kəd pɪɹs ɪz bɹeɪn ən ɹɛd wʌt leɪ ɪn ɛvɹi kɔɹnɝ ʌv ɪt. "wʌt wəd ðeɪ wɑnt wɪð ʌs? wɝ dʒʌs fɑɹmɝz, ʃɛpɝdz."

Rand shifted uneasily, wishing she would not look at him like that, as if her eyes could pierce his brain and read what lay in every corner of it. "What would they want with us? We're just farmers, shepherds."

"ðæɾ ɪz ə kwɛstʃən ðəɾ əz noʊ ænsɝ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kwaɪətli, "bʌt ði ænsɝ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. tʃɹɑləks wɛɹ ðeɪv nɑt bɪn sin ɪn ɔlmoʊs tu θaʊzən jɪɹz tɛlz əs ðət mʌtʃ."

"That is a question that has no answer in the Two Rivers," Moiraine said quietly, "but the answer is important. Trollocs where they have not been seen in almost two thousand years tells us that much."

"lɑts ə stɔɹiz tɛl əbaʊt tʃɹɑlɑk ɹeɪdz," ɹænd sɛd stʌbɝnli. "wi dʒʌs nɛvɝ hæd wʌn hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ. wɔɹɾɝz faɪt tʃɹɑləks ɔl ðə taɪm."

"Lots of stories tell about Trolloc raids," Rand said stubbornly. "We just never had one here before. Warders fight Trollocs all the time."

læn snɔɹɾɪd. "bɔɪ, aɪ ɪkspɛk tə faɪt tʃɹɑləks əlɔŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, bʌt nɑt hɪɹ, nɪɹli sɪks hʌnʒɹəd liɡz tə ðə saʊθ. ðət wɑz əz hɑɾ ə ɹeɪd læs naɪɾ əz aɪɾ ɪkspɛk tə si ɪn ʃaɪnɝ, əɹ ɛni ʌv ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz."

Lan snorted. "Boy, I expect to fight Trollocs along the Great Blight, but not here, nearly six hundred leagues to the south. That was as hot a raid last night as I'd expect to see in Shienar, or any of the Borderlands."

"ɪn wʌn ə ju," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "ɔɹ ɔl θɹi, ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn fɪɹz."

"In one of you," Moiraine said, "or all three, there is something the Dark One fears."

"ðæt . . . ðæts ɪmpɑsəbəl." ɹænd stʌmbəl tə ðə wɪndoʊ ən stɛɹɾ aʊɾ ət ðə vɪlədʒ, ət ðə pipəl wɝkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə ɹuənz. "aɪ doʊn kɛɹ wʌts hæpənd, ðəɾ ɪz dʒʌst ɪmpɑsəbəl." sʌmθɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹin kɑɾ ɪz aɪ. hi stɛɹd, ðən ɹilaɪzd ɪt wɑz ðə blækən stʌmp ə ðə spɹɪŋ poʊl. ə faɪn bɛl taɪn, wɪð ə pɛdlɝ, ən ə ɡlimən, ən stʃɹeɪnʒɝz. hi ʃɪvɝd, ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd vaɪələnli. "noʊ. noʊ, aɪm ə ʃɛpɝd. ðə dɑɹk wʌn kæn bi ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn mi."

"That . . . that's impossible." Rand stumbled to the window and stared out at the village, at the people working among the ruins. "I don't care what's happened, that is just impossible." Something on the Green caught his eye. He stared, then realized it was the blackened stump of the Spring Pole. A fine Bel Tine, with a peddler, and a gleeman, and strangers. He shivered, and shook his head violently. "No. No, I'm a shepherd. The Dark One can't be interested in me."

"ɪt tʊk ə ɡɹeɪt dil ʌv ɛfɝt," læn sɛd ɡɹɪmli, "tə bɹɪŋ soʊ mɛni tʃɹɑləks soʊ fɑɹ wɪθaʊt ɹeɪzɪŋ ə hju ən kɹaɪ fɹəm ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz tə keɪɛmlɪn ən bɪɑnd. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu haʊ ðeɪ dɪɾ ɪt. dʒju ɹɪli bɪliv ðeɪ wɛn tə ɔl ðət bɑðɝ dʒʌs tə bɝn ə fju haʊsəz?"

"It took a great deal of effort," Lan said grimly, "to bring so many Trollocs so far without raising a hue and cry from the Borderlands to Caemlyn and beyond. I wish I knew how they did it. Do you really believe they went to all that bother just to burn a few houses?"

"ðeɪ wɪl bi bæk," mɔɪɹeɪn æɾəd.

"They will be back," Moiraine added.

ɹænd hæɾ ɪz maʊθ oʊpən tə ɑɹɡju wɪð læn, bʌt ðət bɹɔɾ ɪm ʌp ʃɔɹt. hi spʌn tə feɪs hɝ. "bæk? kæn jə stɑp ðɛm? jə dɪd læs naɪt, ən jə wɝ sɝpɹaɪzd, ðɛn. naʊ jə noʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ hɪɹ."

Rand had his mouth open to argue with Lan, but that brought him up short. He spun to face her. "Back? Can't you stop them? You did last night, and you were surprised, then. Now you know they are here."

"pɝhæps," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ kəd sɛn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn fəɹ səm ə maɪ sɪstɝz; ðeɪ maɪɾ əv taɪm tə meɪk ðə dʒɝni bɪfɔɹ wi nid ðɛm. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl noʊz aɪm hɪɹ, tu, ən ɪt pɹɑbli wɪl nɑɾ ətæk - nɑɾ oʊpənli, ət list - lækɪŋ ɹiɪnfɔɹsməns, mɔɹ mɹdʒɹɑl ən mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks. wɪð ɪnʌf ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɪnʌf wɔɹɾɝz, ðə tʃɹɑləks kən bi biɾən ɔf, ðoʊ aɪ kænɑt seɪ haʊ mɛni bæɾəlz ɪɾəl teɪk."

"Perhaps," Moiraine replied. "I could send to Tar Valon for some of my sisters; they might have time to make the journey before we need them. The Myrddraal knows I am here, too, and it probably will not attack - not openly, at least - lacking reinforcements, more Myrddraal and more Trollocs. With enough Aes Sedai and enough Warders, the Trollocs can be beaten off, though I cannot say how many battles it will take."

ə vɪʒən dænst ɪn ɪz hɛd, ʌv ɛmənz fild ɔl ɪn æʃəz. ɔl ðə fɑɹmz bɝnd. ən wɑtʃ hɪl, ən dɛvən ɹaɪd, ən tɛɹən fɛɹi. ɔl æʃəz ən blʌd. "noʊ," hi sɛd, ən fɛlt ə ɹɛntʃɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ əz ɪf i hæd lɔst ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn sʌmθɪŋ. "ðæts waɪ aɪ hæv tə liv, ɪzən ɪt? ðə tʃɹɑləks woʊn kʌm bæk ɪf aɪm nɑt hɪɹ." ə læs tʃɹeɪs ʌv ɑbstənəsi meɪɾ ɪm æd, "ɪf ðeɪ ɹɪli ɑɹ æftɝ mi."

A vision danced in his head, of Emond's Field all in ashes. All the farms burned. And Watch Hill, and Deven Ride, and Taren Ferry. All ashes and blood. "No," he said, and felt a wrenching inside as if he had lost his grip on something. "That's why I have to leave, isn't it? The Trollocs won't come back if I am not here." A last trace of obstinacy made him add, "If they really are after me."

mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪbɹaʊz ɹeɪzd əz ɪf ʃi wɝ sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt kənvɪnst, bʌt læn sɛd, "ɑɹ jə wɪlɪŋ tə bɛt jəɹ vɪlədʒ ɑn ɪt, ʃifɝɾɝ? jəɹ hoʊl tu ɹɪvɝz?"

Moiraine's eyebrows raised as if she were surprised that he was not convinced, but Lan said, "Are you willing to bet your village on it, sheepherder? Your whole Two Rivers?"

ɹændz stʌbɝnnəs feɪɾəd. "noʊ," hi sɛɾ əɡɛn, ən fɛl ðəɾ ɛmptinəs ɪnsaɪɾ əɡɛn, tu. "pɛɹɪn ən mæt əv tə ɡoʊ, tu, doʊn ðeɪ?" livɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. livɪŋ ɪz hoʊm ən ɪz fɑðɝ. ət lis tæm wəd ɡɛt bɛɾɝ. ət list i wəd bi eɪbəl tə hɪɹ ɪm seɪ ɔl ðəɾ ɑn ðə kwɔɹi ɹoʊd hæd bɪn nɑnsɛns. "wi kəd ɡoʊ tə bɛɹlən, aɪ səpoʊz, əɹ ivən keɪɛmlɪn. aɪv hɝd ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ pipəl ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ðən ɪn ðə hoʊl tu ɹɪvɝz. wid bi seɪf ðɛɹ." hi tʃɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə læf ðət saʊndəd hɑloʊ. "aɪ juz tə deɪdʒɹim əbaʊt siɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn. aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ ɪt wəd kʌm əbaʊt laɪk ðɪs."

Rand's stubbornness faded. "No," he said again, and felt that emptiness inside again, too. "Perrin and Mat have to go, too, don't they?" Leaving the Two Rivers. Leaving his home and his father. At least Tam would get better. At least he would be able to hear him say all that on the Quarry Road had been nonsense. "We could go to Baerlon, I suppose, or even Caemlyn. I've heard there are more people in Caemlyn than in the whole Two Rivers. We'd be safe there." He tried out a laugh that sounded hollow. "I used to daydream about seeing Caemlyn. I never thought it would come about like this."

ðəɹ wɑz ə lɔŋ saɪləns, ðən læn sɛd, "aɪ wəd nɑt kaʊn ɑn keɪɛmlɪn fəɹ seɪfti. ɪf ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑn jə bædli ɪnʌf, ðəl faɪn ə weɪ. wɔlz ɑɹ ə pʊɹ bɑɹ tə ə hæfmən. ən jə wəd bi ə ful nɑt tə bɪliv ðeɪ wɑn jə vɛɹi bædli ɪndid."

There was a long silence, then Lan said, "I would not count on Caemlyn for safety. If the Myrddraal want you badly enough, they will find a way. Walls are a poor bar to a Halfman. And you would be a fool not to believe they want you very badly indeed."

ɹænd θɔɾ ɪz spɪɹəts hæd sʌŋk əz loʊ əz ðeɪ pɑsəbli kʊd, bʌɾ ət ðət ðeɪ slɪd dipɝ.

Rand thought his spirits had sunk as low as they possibly could, but at that they slid deeper.

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə pleɪs ə seɪfti," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɔfli, ən ɹændz ɪɹz pɹɪkt ʌp tə lɪsən. "ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn jə wəd bi əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɔɹɾɝz. ivən dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ðə fɔɹsɪz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn fɪɹd tə ətæk ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz. ðə wʌn ətɛmpt wɑz ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪɾəst dɪfiɾ əntɪl ðə vɛɹi ɛnd. ən tɑɹ vəlɑn hoʊlz ɔl ðə nɑlədʒ wi ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv ɡæðɝd sɪns ðə taɪm ə mædnəs. səm fɹæɡməns ivən deɪt fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɪf ɛniwɛɹ, jəl bi eɪbəl tə lɝn waɪ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑn ju. waɪ ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz wɑns ju. ðəɾ aɪ kən pɹɑməs."

"There is a place of safety," Moiraine said softly, and Rand's ears pricked up to listen. "In Tar Valon you would be among Aes Sedai and Warders. Even during the Trolloc Wars the forces of the Dark One feared to attack the Shining Walls. The one attempt was their greatest defeat until the very end. And Tar Valon holds all the knowledge we Aes Sedai have gathered since the Time of Madness. Some fragments even date from the Age of Legends. In Tar Valon, if anywhere, you will be able to learn why the Myrddraal want you. Why the Father of Lies wants you. That I can promise."

ə dʒɝni ɔl ðə weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɑz ɔlmoʊs bɪɑn θɪŋkɪŋ. ə dʒɝni tə ə pleɪs wɛɹ i wəd bi sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʌv kɔɹs, mɔɪɹeɪn hæd hil tæm - əɹ ɪt lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi hæd, ət list - bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ɔl ðoʊz stɔɹiz. ɪt wɑz ənkʌmftəɹbəl ɪnʌf tə bi ɪn ə ɹum wɪð wʌn ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt tə bi ɪn ə sɪɾi fʊl ə ðɛm. . . . ən ʃi stɪl hæd nɑt dɪmændəɾ əɹ pɹaɪs. ðəɹ wɑz ɔlweɪz ə pɹaɪs, soʊ ðə stɔɹiz sɛd.

A journey all the way to Tar Valon was almost beyond thinking. A journey to a place where he would be surrounded by Aes Sedai. Of course, Moiraine had healed Tam - or it looked as if she had, at least - but there were all those stories. It was uncomfortable enough to be in a room with one Aes Sedai, but to be in a city full of them. . . . And she still had not demanded her price. There was always a price, so the stories said.

"haʊ lɔŋ wɪl maɪ fɑðɝ slip?" hi æskt ət læst. "aɪ . . . aɪ hæv tə tɛl hɪm. hi ʃʊdn dʒʌst weɪk ən faɪn mi ɡɔn." hi θɔɾ i hɝd læn ɡɪv ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif. hi lʊkt ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ kjʊɹiəsli, bʌt lænz feɪs wɑz əz ɪkspɹɛʃənləs əz ɛvɝ.

"How long will my father sleep?" he asked at last. "I . . . I have to tell him. He shouldn't just wake and find me gone." He thought he heard Lan give a sigh of relief. He looked at the Warder curiously, but Lan's face was as expressionless as ever.

"ɪɾ ɪz ənlaɪkli hɪl weɪk bɪfɔɹ wi dɪpɑɹt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "aɪ min tə ɡoʊ sun æftɝ fʊl dɑɹk. ivən ə sɪŋɡəl deɪ ʌv dɪleɪ kəd bi feɪɾəl. ɪɾəl bi bɛst ɪf jə liv ɪm ə noʊt."

"It is unlikely he will wake before we depart," Moiraine said. "I mean to go soon after full dark. Even a single day of delay could be fatal. It will be best if you leave him a note."

"ɪn ðə naɪt?" ɹænd sɛd daʊtfəli, ən læn nɑɾəd.

"In the night?" Rand said doubtfully, and Lan nodded.

"ðə hæfmən wɪl dɪskʌvɝ wəɹ ɡɔn sun ɪnʌf. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə meɪk θɪŋz ɛni iziɝ fəɹ ɪt ðən wi mʌst."

"The Halfman will discover we are gone soon enough. There is no need to make things any easier for it than we must."

ɹænd fʌst wɪð ɪz fɑðɝz blæŋkəts. ɪt wɑz ə vɛɹi lɔŋ weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. "ɪn ðət keɪs. . . . ɪn ðət keɪs, aɪ hæd bɛɾɝ ɡoʊ faɪn mæt ən pɛɹɪn."

Rand fussed with his father's blankets. It was a very long way to Tar Valon. "In that case. . . . In that case, I had better go find Mat and Perrin."

"aɪ wɪl ətɛn tə ðæt." mɔɪɹeɪn ɡɑt tə hɝ fit bɹɪskli ən dɑn əɹ kloʊk wɪð sʌɾənli ɹɪstɔɹd vɪɡɝ. ʃi pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən i tʃɹaɪd vɛɹi hɑɹd nɑt tə flɪntʃ. ʃi dɪd nɑt pɹɛs hɑɹd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ən aɪɝn ɡɹɪp ðət hɛld ɪm əz ʃʊɹli əz ə fɔɹk stɪk hɛld ə sneɪk. "ɪt wɪl bi bɛst ɪf wi kip ɔl ə ðɪs dʒʌst əmʌŋ ʌs. dʒju ʌndɝstænd? ðə seɪm wʌnz u pʊt ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ ɑn ði ɪn dɔɹ maɪt meɪk tʃɹʌbəl ɪf ðeɪ nu."

"I will attend to that." Moiraine got to her feet briskly and donned her cloak with suddenly restored vigor. She put a hand on his shoulder, and he tried very hard not to flinch. She did not press hard, but it was an iron grip that held him as surely as a forked stick held a snake. "It will be best if we keep all of this just among us. Do you understand? The same ones who put the Dragon's Fang on the inn door might make trouble if they knew."

"aɪ ʌndɝstænd." hi dʒɹu ə ɹɪliv bɹɛθ wən ʃi tʊk əɹ hæn əweɪ.

"I understand." He drew a relieved breath when she took her hand away.

"aɪ wɪl əv mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ bɹɪŋ jə sʌmθɪŋ tə it," ʃi wɛn ɑn dʒʌst əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt noʊɾəst ɪz ɹiækʃən. "ðɛn jə nid tə slip. ɪɾəl bi ə hɑɹd dʒɝni tənaɪɾ ivən ɪf jə ɑɹ ɹɛstəd."

"I will have Mistress al'Vere bring you something to eat," she went on just as if she had not noticed his reaction. "Then you need to sleep. It will be a hard journey tonight even if you are rested."

ðə dɔɹ kloʊz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən ɹænd stʊd lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət tæm - lʊkɪŋ ət tæm, bʌt siɪŋ nʌθɪŋ. nɑɾ əntɪl ðət vɛɹi mɪnət hæɾ i ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɛmənz fild wɑz ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm əz mʌtʃ əz i wɑz ə pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. hi ɹilaɪzd ɪt naʊ kəz i nu ðət wɑz wʌɾ i hæd fɛl tɛɹɪŋ lus. hi wɑz əpɑɹt fɹəm ðə vɪlədʒ, naʊ. ðə ʃɛpɝɾ ə ðə naɪt wɑntəd hɪm. ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl - hi wɑz oʊnli ə fɑɹmɝ - bʌt ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd kʌm, ən læn wɑz ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt wʌn θɪŋ. hi kəd nɑt ɹɪsk ðə vɪlədʒ ɑn ðə tʃæns mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ɹɔŋ. hi kəd nɑɾ ivən tɛl ɛniwʌn; ðə kɑplɪnz ɹɪli wəd meɪk tʃɹʌbəl əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt. hi hæd tə tʃɹʌst ən ɛɛs sədaɪ.

The door closed behind them, and Rand stood looking down at Tam - looking at Tam, but seeing nothing. Not until that very minute had he realized that Emond's Field was a part of him as much as he was a part of it. He realized it now because he knew that was what he had felt tearing loose. He was apart from the village, now. The Shepherd of the Night wanted him. It was impossible - he was only a farmer - but the Trollocs had come, and Lan was right about one thing. He could not risk the village on the chance Moiraine was wrong. He could not even tell anyone; the Coplins really would make trouble about something like that. He had to trust an Aes Sedai.

"doʊnt weɪk hɪm, naʊ," mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ sɛd, əz ðə meɪɝ ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ɪz waɪf ən hɪmsɛlf. ðə klɔθ-kʌvɝd tʃɹeɪ ʃi kæɹid ɡeɪv ɔf dɪlɪʃəs, wɔɹm smɛlz. ʃi sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə tʃɛst əɡɛns ðə wɔl, ðən fɝmli muvd ɹænd əweɪ fɹəm ðə bɛd.

"Don't wake him, now," Mistress al'Vere said, as the Mayor shut the door behind his wife and himself. The cloth-covered tray she carried gave off delicious, warm smells. She set it on the chest against the wall, then firmly moved Rand away from the bed.

"mɪstʃɹəs mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl mi wʌɾ i nidz," ʃi sɛd sɔfli, "æn ɪt dʌz nɑɾ ɪnklud jə fɔlɪŋ ɑn tɑp ə hɪm fɹəm ɪɡzɔstʃən. aɪv bɹɔt jə ə baɪt tə it. doʊn lɛɾ ɪt ɡɛt koʊld, naʊ."

"Mistress Moiraine told me what he needs," she said softly, "and it does not include you falling on top of him from exhaustion. I've brought you a bite to eat. Don't let it get cold, now."

"aɪ wɪʃ jə wʊdn kɔl əɹ ðæt," bɹæn sɛd pivɪʃli. "mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ ɪz pɹɑpɝ. ʃi maɪt ɡɛt mæd."

"I wish you wouldn't call her that," Bran said peevishly. "Moiraine Sedai is proper. She might get mad."

mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ ɡeɪv ɪm ə pæɾ ɑn ðə tʃik. "ju dʒʌs liv mi tə wɝi əbaʊt ðæt. ʃi ən aɪ hæɾ ə lɔŋ tɔk. ən kip jəɹ vɔɪs daʊn. ɪf jə weɪk tæm, jəl əv tə ænsɝ tə mi ən mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ." ʃi pʊɾ ən ɛmfəsəs ɑn mɔɪɹeɪnz taɪɾəl ðət meɪd bɹænz ɪnsɪstəns sim fulɪʃ. "ðə tu ʌv jə kip aʊɾ ə maɪ weɪ." wɪð ə fɑn smaɪl fəɹ əɹ hʌzbənd, ʃi tɝn tə ðə bɛɾ ən tæm.

Mistress al'Vere gave him a pat on the cheek. "You just leave me to worry about that. She and I had a long talk. And keep your voice down. If you wake Tam, you'll have to answer to me and Moiraine Sedai." She put an emphasis on Moiraine's title that made Bran's insistence seem foolish. "The two of you keep out of my way." With a fond smile for her husband, she turned to the bed and Tam.

mæstɝ ælvɪɹ ɡeɪv ɹænd ə fɹʌstʃɹeɪɾəd lʊk. "ʃiz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. hæf ðə wɪmən ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ ækt əz ɪf ʃi sɪts ɪn ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl, ən ðə ɹɛst əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ə tʃɹɑlɑk. nɑɾ ə wʌn ə ðɛm simz tə ɹilaɪz juv tə bi kɛɹfəl ɝaʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə mɛn meɪ kip lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ saɪdweɪz, bʌɾ ət lis ðeɪ ɑɹən duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪt pɹəvoʊk hɝ."

Master al'Vere gave Rand a frustrated look. "She's an Aes Sedai. Half the women in the village act as if she sits in the Women's Circle, and the rest as if she were a Trolloc. Not a one of them seems to realize you have to be careful around Aes Sedai. The men may keep looking at her sideways, but at least they aren't doing anything that might provoke her."

kɛɹfəl, ɹænd θɔt. ɪt wɑz nɑt tu leɪt tə stɑɹt biɪŋ kɛɹfəl. "mæstɝ ælvɪɹ," hi sɛd sloʊli, "du jə noʊ haʊ mɛni fɑɹmz wɝ ətækt?"

Careful, Rand thought. It was not too late to start being careful. "Master al'Vere," he said slowly, "do you know how many farms were attacked?"

"oʊnli tu ðəɾ aɪv hɝɾ ə soʊ fɑɹ, ɪnkluɾɪŋ jəɹ pleɪs." ðə meɪɝ pɔzd, fɹaʊnɪŋ, ðən ʃɹʌɡd. "ɪt dʌzn sim ɪnʌf, wɪð wʌt hæpən hɪɹ. aɪ ʃəd bi ɡlæɾ ʌv ɪt, bʌt. . . . wɛl, wɪl pɹɑbli hɪɹ ə mɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ðə deɪ ɪz aʊt."

"Only two that I've heard of so far, including your place." The Mayor paused, frowning, then shrugged. "It doesn't seem enough, with what happened here. I should be glad of it, but. . . . Well, we'll probably hear of more before the day is out."

ɹænd saɪd. noʊ nid tə æsk wɪtʃ fɑɹmz. "hɪɹ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ, dɪd ðeɪ. . . . aɪ min, wɑz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ tə ʃoʊ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ æftɝ?"

Rand sighed. No need to ask which farms. "Here in the village, did they. . . . I mean, was there anything to show what they were after?"

"æftɝ, bɔɪ? aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðət ðeɪ wɝ æftɝ ɛniθɪŋ, ɪksɛp meɪbi kɪlɪŋ əs ɔl. ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðə weɪ aɪ sɛd. ðə dɑɡz bɑɹkɪŋ, ən mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ ən læn ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ðə stʃɹits, ðən sʌmbɑɾi ʃaʊɾəd ðət mæstɝ luhənz haʊs ən ðə fɔɹdʒ wɝ ɑn faɪɝ. eɪbəl kɔθənz haʊs flɛɹɾ ʌp - ɑd ðæt; ɪts nɪɹli ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə vɪlədʒ. ɛniweɪ, ðə nɛks θɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ ɔl əmʌŋ ʌs. noʊ, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðeɪ wɝ æftɝ ɛniθɪŋ." hi ɡeɪv ən əbɹʌp bɑɹk ʌv ə læf, ən kʌɾ ɪt ʃɔɹt wɪð ə wɛɹi lʊk əɾ ɪz waɪf. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk ɝaʊn fɹəm tæm. "tə tɛl ðə tʃɹuθ," hi wɛn ɑn mɔɹ kwaɪətli, "ðeɪ simd ɔlmoʊst əz kənfjuzd əz wi wɝ. aɪ daʊt ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hɪɹ, əɹ ə wɔɹɾɝ."

"After, boy? I don't know that they were after anything, except maybe killing us all. It was just the way I said. The dogs barking, and Moiraine Sedai and Lan running through the streets, then somebody shouted that Master Luhhan's house and the forge were on fire. Abell Cauthon's house flared up - odd that; it's nearly in the middle of the village. Anyway, the next thing the Trollocs were all among us. No, I don't think they were after anything." He gave an abrupt bark of a laugh, and cut it short with a wary look at his wife. She did not look around from Tam. "To tell the truth," he went on more quietly, "they seemed almost as confused as we were. I doubt they expected to find an Aes Sedai here, or a Warder."

"aɪ səpoʊz nɑt," ɹænd sɛd, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ.

"I suppose not," Rand said, grimacing.

ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn hæd toʊl ðə tʃɹuθ əbaʊt ðæt, ʃi pɹɑbli hæd toʊl ðə tʃɹuθ əbaʊt ðə ɹɛst, tu. fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔɾ əbaʊɾ æskɪŋ ðə meɪɝz ædvaɪs, bʌt mæstɝ ælvɪɹ ɑbviəsli nu lɪɾəl mɔɹ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ. bɪsaɪdz, hi wɑz ɹɪlʌktən tə tɛl ivən ðə meɪɝ wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn - wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf i wɑz mɔɹ əfɹeɪɾ ə biɪŋ læft əɾ əɹ biɪŋ bɪlivd. hi ɹʌbd ə θʌm əɡɛns ðə hɪlt ə tæmz sɔɹd. hɪz fɑðɝ hæd bɪn aʊɾ ɪndə ðə wɝld; hi mʌs noʊ mɔɹ əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ðən ðə meɪɝ dɪd. bʌɾ ɪf tæm ɹɪli hæd bɪn aʊɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ðən meɪbi wʌɾ i hæd sɛɾ ɪn ðə wɛstwʊd. . . . hi skɹʌbd boʊθ hænz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ, skæɾɝɪŋ ðət laɪn ə θɔt.

If Moiraine had told the truth about that, she probably had told the truth about the rest, too. For a moment he thought about asking the Mayor's advice, but Master al'Vere obviously knew little more about Aes Sedai than anyone else in the village. Besides, he was reluctant to tell even the Mayor what was going on - what Moiraine said was going on. He was not sure if he was more afraid of being laughed at or being believed. He rubbed a thumb against the hilt of Tam's sword. His father had been out into the world; he must know more about Aes Sedai than the Mayor did. But if Tam really had been out of the Two Rivers, then maybe what he had said in the Westwood. . . . He scrubbed both hands through his hair, scattering that line of thought.

"ju nid slip, læd," ðə meɪɝ sɛd.

"You need sleep, lad," the Mayor said.

"jɛs, jə du," mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ æɾəd. "jɔɹ ɔlmoʊs fɔlɪŋ daʊn wɛɹ jə stænd."

"Yes, you do," Mistress al'Vere added. "You're almost falling down where you stand."

ɹænd blɪŋkt əɾ əɹ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. hi hæd nɑɾ ivən ɹilaɪzd ʃi hæd lɛft ɪz fɑðɝ. hi dɪd nid slip; dʒʌs ðə θɔt sɛɾ ɔf ə jɔn.

Rand blinked at her in surprise. He had not even realized she had left his father. He did need sleep; just the thought set off a yawn.

"ju kən teɪk ðə bɛɾ ɪn ðə nɛkst ɹum," ðə meɪɝ sɛd. "ðɛɹz ɔlɹɛɾi ə faɪɝ leɪd."

"You can take the bed in the next room," the Mayor said. "There's already a fire laid."

ɹænd lʊkt əɾ ɪz fɑðɝ; tæm wɑz stɪl dip ɪn slip, ən ðət meɪɾ ɪm jɔn əɡɛn. "aɪd ɹæðɝ steɪ ɪn hɪɹ, ɪf jə doʊn maɪnd. fəɹ wən i weɪks ʌp."

Rand looked at his father; Tam was still deep in sleep, and that made him yawn again. "I'd rather stay in here, if you don't mind. For when he wakes up."

sɪkɹum mæɾɝz wɝ ɪn mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹz pɹɑvəns, ən ðə meɪɝ lɛft ɪt tə hɝ. ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ nɑɾɪŋ. "bʌt jə lɛɾ ɪm weɪk ɑn ɪz oʊn. ɪf jə bɑðɝ ɪz slip. . . ." hi tʃɹaɪd tə seɪ hi wəd də əz ʃi ɔɹɾɝd, bʌt ðə wɝdz ɡɑt tæŋɡəld ɪn jɛɾ ənʌðɝ jɔn. ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd wɪð ə smaɪl. "ju wɪl bi əslip jɝsɛlf ɪn noʊ taɪm əɾ ɔl. ɪf jə mʌst steɪ, kɝl ʌp nɛks tə ðə faɪɝ. ən dʒɹɪŋk ə lɪɾəl ə ðət bif bɹɔθ bɪfɔɹ jə doʊz ɔf."

Sickroom matters were in Mistress al'Vere's province, and the Mayor left it to her. She hesitated only a moment before nodding. "But you let him wake on his own. If you bother his sleep. . . ." He tried to say he would do as she ordered, but the words got tangled in yet another yawn. She shook her head with a smile. "You will be asleep yourself in no time at all. If you must stay, curl up next to the fire. And drink a little of that beef broth before you doze off."

"aɪ wɪl," ɹænd sɛd. hi wʊɾə əɡɹid tə ɛniθɪŋ ðət kɛpt ɪm ɪn ðət ɹum. "æn aɪ woʊnt weɪk hɪm."

"I will," Rand said. He would have agreed to anything that kept him in that room. "And I won't wake him."

"si ðət jə də nɑt," mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ toʊld ɪm fɝmli, bʌt nɑɾ ɪn ən əŋkinli weɪ. "aɪl bɹɪŋ jə ʌp ə pɪloʊ ən səm blæŋkəts."

"See that you do not," Mistress al'Vere told him firmly, but not in an unkindly way. "I'll bring you up a pillow and some blankets."

wən ðə dɔɹ faɪnəli kloʊz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ɹænd dʒɹæɡd ðə loʊn tʃɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹum oʊvɝ bɪsaɪd ðə bɛɾ ən sæt daʊn wɛɹ i kəd wɑtʃ tæm. ɪt wɑz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl fəɹ mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ tə tɔk əbaʊt slip - hɪz dʒɔz kɹækt əz i staɪfəld ə jɔn - bʌɾ i kəd nɑt slip jɛt. tæm maɪt weɪk əɾ ɛni taɪm, ən meɪbi oʊnli steɪ əweɪk ə ʃɔɹt waɪl. ɹænd hæd tə bi weɪɾɪŋ wən i dɪd.

When the door finally closed behind them, Rand dragged the lone chair in the room over beside the bed and sat down where he could watch Tam. It was all very well for Mistress al'Vere to talk about sleep - his jaws cracked as he stifled a yawn - but he could not sleep yet. Tam might wake at any time, and maybe only stay awake a short while. Rand had to be waiting when he did.

hi ɡɹɪməst ən twɪstəɾ ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ, æbsənli ʃɪftɪŋ ðə sɔɹd hɪlt aʊɾ ə hɪz ɹɪbz. hi stɪl fɛl bækwɝɾ əbaʊt tɛlɪŋ ɛniwʌn wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sɛd, bʌt ðɪs wɑz tæm, æftɝ ɔl. ðɪs wɑz. . . . wɪθaʊt ɹilaɪzɪŋ ɪɾ i sɛɾ ɪz dʒɔ dətɝmənədli. maɪ fɑðɝ. aɪ kən tɛl maɪ fɑðɝ ɛniθɪŋ.

He grimaced and twisted in the chair, absently shifting the sword hilt out of his ribs. He still felt backward about telling anyone what Moiraine had said, but this was Tam, after all. This was. . . . Without realizing it he set his jaw determinedly. My father. I can tell my father anything.

hi twɪstəɾ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ɪn ðə tʃɛɹ ən pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛns ðə tʃɛɹbæk. tæm wɑz ɪz fɑðɝ, ən noʊbɑdi kəd tɛl ɪm wʌt tə seɪ əɹ nɑt seɪ tə hɪz fɑðɝ. hi dʒʌs hæd tə steɪ əweɪk əntɪl tæm woʊk ʌp. hi dʒʌs hæd tə. . . .

He twisted a little more in the chair and put his head against the chairback. Tam was his father, and nobody could tell him what to say or not say to his father. He just had to stay awake until Tam woke up. He just had to. . . .


tʃæptɝ naɪn


CHAPTER 9

tɛlɪŋz ə ðə wil


Tellings of the Wheel

ɹændz hɑɹt paʊndɪɾ əz i ɹæn, ən i stɛɹɾ ɪn dɪsmeɪ ət ðə bæɹən hɪlz sɝaʊndɪŋ hɪm. ðɪs wɑz nɑt dʒʌst ə pleɪs wɛɹ spɹɪŋ wɑz leɪɾ ɪn kʌmɪŋ; spɹɪŋ hæd nɛvɝ kʌm hɪɹ, ən nɛvɝ wəd kʌm. nʌθɪŋ ɡɹu ɪn ðə koʊl sɔɪl ðət kɹʌntʃt ʌndɝ ɪz buts, nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə bɪɾ ə laɪkən. hi skɹæmbəl pæs boʊldɝz, twaɪs əz tɔl əz i wɑz; dʌs koʊɾəd ðə stoʊn əz ɪf nɛvɝ ə dʒɹɑp ə ɹeɪn hæd tʌtʃt ɪt. ðə sʌn wɑz ə swoʊlən, blʌd-ɹɛd bɔl, mɔɹ faɪɝi ðən ɑn ðə hɑɾəst deɪ ʌv sʌmɝ ən bɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə sɪɹ ɪz aɪz, bʌɾ ɪt stʊd stɑɹk əɡɛnst ə lɛɾən kɑlʒɹən ʌv ə skaɪ wɛɹ klaʊdz ə ʃɑɹp blæk ən sɪlvɝ ɹɔɪld ən bɔɪld ɑn ɛvɹi hɝaɪzən. fəɹ ɔl ðə swɝlɪŋ klaʊdz, ðoʊ, noʊ bɹɛθ ə bɹiz stɝɾ əkɹɔs ðə lænd, ən dɪspaɪt ðə sʌlən sʌn ði ɛɹ bɝn koʊld laɪk ðə dɛpθs ʌv wɪntɝ.

Rand's heart pounded as he ran, and he stared in dismay at the barren hills surrounding him. This was not just a place where spring was late in coming; spring had never come here, and never would come. Nothing grew in the cold soil that crunched under his boots, not so much as a bit of lichen. He scrambled past boulders, twice as tall as he was; dust coated the stone as if never a drop of rain had touched it. The sun was a swollen, blood-red ball, more fiery than on the hottest day of summer and bright enough to sear his eyes, but it stood stark against a leaden cauldron of a sky where clouds of sharp black and silver roiled and boiled on every horizon. For all the swirling clouds, though, no breath of breeze stirred across the land, and despite the sullen sun the air burned cold like the depths of winter.

ɹænd lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ɔfən əz i ɹæn, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt si hɪz pɝsuɝz. oʊnli dɛsələt hɪlz ən dʒæɡd blæk maʊntənz, mɛni tɑp baɪ tɔl plumz ə dɑɹk smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ tə dʒɔɪn ðə mɪlɪŋ klaʊdz. ɪf i kəd nɑt si hɪz hʌntɝz, ðoʊ, hi kəd hɪɹ ðɛm, haʊlɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ɡʌɾɝəl vɔɪsəz ʃaʊɾɪŋ wɪð ðə ɡli ʌv ðə tʃeɪs, haʊlɪŋ wɪð ðə dʒɔɪ ʌv blʌd tə kʌm. tʃɹɑləks. kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ, ən ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɡɔn.

Rand looked over his shoulder often as he ran, but he could not see his pursuers. Only desolate hills and jagged black mountains, many topped by tall plumes of dark smoke rising to join the milling clouds. If he could not see his hunters, though, he could hear them, howling behind him, guttural voices shouting with the glee of the chase, howling with the joy of blood to come. Trollocs. Coming closer, and his strength was almost gone.

wɪð dɛspɹɪt heɪst i skɹæmbəl tə ðə tɑp ʌv ə naɪf-ɛdʒd ɹɪdʒ, ðən dʒɹɑp tə hɪz niz wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn. bɪloʊ hɪm ə ʃɪɹ ɹɑk wɔl fɛl əweɪ, ə θaʊzənd-fʊt klɪf plʌməɾɪŋ ɪndə ə væs kænjən. stimi mɪsts kʌvɝd ðə kænjən flɔɹ, ðɛɹ θɪk ɡɹeɪ sɝfəs ɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn ɡɹɪm weɪvz, ɹoʊlɪŋ ən bɹeɪkɪŋ əɡɛns ðə klɪf bɪniθ hɪm, bʌt mɔɹ sloʊli ðən ɛni oʊʃən weɪv hæɾ ɛvɝ muvd. pætʃəz ə fɑɡ ɡloʊd ɹɛd fəɹ ən ɪnstən əz ɪf ɡɹeɪt faɪɝz hæd sʌɾənli flɛɹd bɪniθ, ðən daɪd. θʌndɝ ɹʌmbəld ɪn ðə dɛpθs ə ðə væli, ən laɪtnɪŋ kɹækəl θɹu ðə ɡɹeɪ, səmtaɪmz stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ʌp ət ðə skaɪ.

With desperate haste he scrambled to the top of a knife-edged ridge, then dropped to his knees with a groan. Below him a sheer rock wall fell away, a thousand-foot cliff plummeting into a vast canyon. Steamy mists covered the canyon floor, their thick gray surface rolling in grim waves, rolling and breaking against the cliff beneath him, but more slowly than any ocean wave had ever moved. Patches of fog glowed red for an instant as if great fires had suddenly flared beneath, then died. Thunder rumbled in the depths of the valley, and lightning crackled through the gray, sometimes striking up at the sky.

ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə væli ɪtsɛlf ðət sæpt ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ ən fɪl ði ɛmpti speɪsəz lɛft wɪð hɛlpləsnəs. fɹəm ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə fjʊɹiəs veɪpɝz ə maʊntən θɹʌst ʌpwɝd, ə maʊntən tɔlɝ ðən ɛni hi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, ə maʊntən əz blæk əz ðə lɔs ʌv ɔl hoʊp. ðət blik stoʊn spaɪɹ, ə dæɡɝ stæbɪŋ ət ðə hɛvənz, wɑz ðə sɔɹs ə hɪz dɛsəleɪʃən. hi hæd nɛvɝ sin ɪt bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ i nu ɪt. ðə mɛmɹi ʌv ɪt flæʃt əweɪ laɪk kwɪksɪlvɝ wən i tʃɹaɪd tə tʌtʃ ɪt, bʌt ðə mɛmɹi wɑz ðɛɹ. hi nu ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ.

It was not the valley itself that sapped his strength and filled the empty spaces left with helplessness. From the center of the furious vapors a mountain thrust upward, a mountain taller than any he had ever seen in the Mountains of Mist, a mountain as black as the loss of all hope. That bleak stone spire, a dagger stabbing at the heavens, was the source of his desolation. He had never seen it before, but he knew it. The memory of it flashed away like quicksilver when he tried to touch it, but the memory was there. He knew it was there.

ənsin fɪŋɡɝz tʌtʃt hɪm, pʊld əɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒɹɔ hɪm tə ðə maʊntən. hɪz bɑɾi twɪtʃt, ɹɛɾi tə oʊbeɪ. hɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz stɪfən əz ɪf i θɔɾ i kəd dɪɡ hɪz fɪŋɡɝz ən toʊz ɪndə ðə stoʊn. ɡoʊsli stʃɹɪŋz ɛntwaɪn ɝaʊn ɪz hɑɹt, pʊlɪŋ ɪm kɔlɪŋ ɪm tə ðə spaɪɹ maʊntən. tɪɹz ɹæn daʊn ɪz feɪs, ən i sæɡd tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hi fɛlt ɪz wɪl dʒɹeɪnɪŋ əweɪ laɪk wɔɾɝ aʊɾ ʌv ə hoʊl bʌkət. dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ, ən i wəd ɡoʊ wɛɹ i wɑz kɔld. hi wəɾ oʊbeɪ, də əz i wɑz toʊld. əbɹʌpli hi dɪskʌvɝɾ ənʌðɝ ɪmoʊʃən: æŋɡɝ. pʊʃ hɪm, pʊl hɪm, hi wɑz nɑɾ ə ʃip tə bi pɹɑɾɪd ɪndə ə pɛn. ði æŋɡɝ skwizd ɪtsɛlf ɪndə wʌn hɑɹd nɑt, ən i klʌŋ tə ɪɾ əz i wʊɾə klʌŋ tə ə ɹæft ɪn ə flʌd.

Unseen fingers touched him, pulled at his arms and legs, trying to draw him to the mountain. His body twitched, ready to obey. His arms and legs stiffened as if he thought he could dig his fingers and toes into the stone. Ghostly strings entwined around his heart, pulling him calling him to the spire mountain. Tears ran down his face, and he sagged to the ground. He felt his will draining away like water out of a holed bucket. Just a little longer, and he would go where he was called. He would obey, do as he was told. Abruptly he discovered another emotion: anger. Push him, pull him, he was not a sheep to be prodded into a pen. The anger squeezed itself into one hard knot, and he clung to it as he would have clung to a raft in a flood.

sɝv mi, ə vɔɪs wɪspɝɾ ɪn ðə stɪlnəs ə hɪz maɪnd. ə fəmɪljɝ vɔɪs. ɪf i lɪsən hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf i wɑz ʃʊɹ i wəd noʊ ɪt. sɝv mi. hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd tə tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd. sɝv mi! hi ʃʊk ɪz fɪst ət ðə blæk maʊntən. "ðə laɪt kənsum ju, ʃeɪtɑn!"

Serve me, a voice whispered in the stillness of his mind. A familiar voice. If he listened hard enough he was sure he would know it. Serve me. He shook his head to try to get it out of his head. Serve me! He shook his fist at the black mountain. "The Light consume you, Shai'tan!"

əbɹʌpli ðə smɛl ə dɛθ leɪ θɪk ɝaʊn hɪm. ə fɪɡjɝ lumd oʊvɝ hɪm, ɪn ə kloʊk ðə kʌlɝ ə dʒɹaɪd blʌd, ə fɪɡjɝ wɪð ə feɪs. . . . hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə si ðə feɪs ðət lʊk daʊn ət hɪm. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk ə ðət feɪs. ɪt hɝt tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, tɝn ɪz maɪn tə ɛmbɝz. ə hæn ɹitʃt təwɔɹd hɪm. nɑt kɛɹɪŋ ɪf i fɛl oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ, hi θɹu hɪmsɛlf əweɪ. hi hæd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ. fɑɹ əweɪ. hi fɛl, fleɪlɪŋ ət ði ɛɹ, wɑntɪŋ tə skɹim, faɪndɪŋ noʊ bɹɛθ fəɹ skɹimɪŋ, noʊ bɹɛθ əɾ ɔl.

Abruptly the smell of death lay thick around him. A figure loomed over him, in a cloak the color of dried blood, a figure with a face. . . . He did not want to see the face that looked down at him. He did not want to think of that face. It hurt to think of it, turned his mind to embers. A hand reached toward him. Not caring if he fell over the edge, he threw himself away. He had to get away. Far away. He fell, flailing at the air, wanting to scream, finding no breath for screaming, no breath at all.

əbɹʌpli hi wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪn ðə bæɹən lænd, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɔlɪŋ. wɪntɝ-bɹaʊn ɡɹæs flæɾənd ʌndɝ ɪz buts; ɪt sim laɪk flaʊɝz. hi ɔlmoʊs læf tə si skæɾɝd tʃɹiz ən bʊʃəz, lifləs əz ðeɪ wɝ, dɑɾɪŋ ðə dʒɛnli ɹoʊlɪŋ pleɪn ðət naʊ sɝaʊndəd hɪm. ɪn ðə dɪstəns ɹɪɹɾ ə sɪŋɡəl maʊntən, ɪts pik bɹoʊkən ən splɪt, bʌt ðɪs maʊntən bɹɔt noʊ fɪɹ əɹ dɪspɛɹ. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə maʊntən, ðoʊ ɑdli aʊɾ ə pleɪs ðɛɹ, wɪð noʊ ʌðɝ ɪn saɪt.

Abruptly he was no longer in the barren land, no longer falling. Winter-brown grass flattened under his boots; it seemed like flowers. He almost laughed to see scattered trees and bushes, leafless as they were, dotting the gently rolling plain that now surrounded him. In the distance reared a single mountain, its peak broken and split, but this mountain brought no fear or despair. It was just a mountain, though oddly out of place there, with no other in sight.

ə bɹɔd ɹɪvɝ floʊd baɪ ðə maʊntən, ən ɑn ən aɪlən ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðət ɹɪvɝ wɑz ə sɪɾi sətʃ əz maɪt lɪv ɪn ə ɡlimənz teɪl, ə sɪɾi sɝaʊndəd baɪ haɪ wɔlz ɡlimɪŋ waɪɾ ən sɪlvɝ bɪniθ ðə wɔɹm sʌn. wɪð mɪŋɡəld ɹɪlif ən dʒɔɪ hi stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə wɔlz, fəɹ ðə seɪfti ən sɝɛnəɾi hi sʌmhaʊ nu hi wəd faɪn bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

A broad river flowed by the mountain, and on an island in the middle of that river was a city such as might live in a gleeman's tale, a city surrounded by high walls gleaming white and silver beneath the warm sun. With mingled relief and joy he started for the walls, for the safety and serenity he somehow knew he would find behind them.

əz i keɪm kloʊsɝ i meɪɾ aʊt sɔɹɪŋ taʊɝz, mɛni dʒɔɪn baɪ wʌnʒɹəs wɔkweɪz ðət spæn ði oʊpən ɛɹ. haɪ bɹɪdʒəz ɑɹtʃt fɹəm boʊθ bæŋks ə ðə ɹɪvɝ tə ði aɪlən sɪɾi. ivən əɾ ə dɪstəns i kəd si leɪsi stoʊnwɝk ɑn ðoʊz spænz, simɪŋli tu dɛləkət tə wɪθstæn ðə swɪft wɔɾɝz ðət ɹʌʃt bɪniθ ðɛm. bɪɑn ðoʊz bɹɪdʒəz leɪ seɪfti. sæŋktʃuɛɹi.

As he came closer he made out soaring towers, many joined by wondrous walkways that spanned the open air. High bridges arched from both banks of the river to the island city. Even at a distance he could see lacy stonework on those spans, seemingly too delicate to withstand the swift waters that rushed beneath them. Beyond those bridges lay safety. Sanctuary.

ʌv ə sʌɾən ə tʃɪl ɹæn əlɔŋ ɪz boʊnz; ən aɪsi klæmənəs sɛɾəld ɑn ɪz skɪn, ən ði ɛɹ ɝaʊn ɪm tɝn fɛɾəd ən dæŋk. wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk i ɹæn, ɹæn fɹəm ðə pɝsuɝ huz fɹizɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz bɹʌʃt ɪz bæk ən tʌɡd əɾ ɪz kloʊk, ɹæn fɹəm ðə laɪt-iɾɪŋ fɪɡjɝ wɪð ðə feɪs ðæt. . . . hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə feɪs, ɪksɛpt əz tɛɹɝ. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə feɪs. hi ɹæn, ən ðə ɡɹaʊn pæs bɪniθ ɪz fit, ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz ən flæt pleɪn . . . ən i wɑntəd tə haʊl laɪk ə dɔɡ ɡɔn mæd. ðə sɪɾi wɑz ɹɪsiɾɪŋ bɪfɔɹ hɪm. ðə hɑɹɾɝ i ɹæn, ðə fɝðɝ əweɪ dʒɹɪftəd ðə waɪt ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz ən heɪvən. ðeɪ ɡɹu smɔlɝ, ən smɔlɝ, əntɪl oʊnli ə peɪl spɛk ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən. ðə koʊl hæn ə hɪz pɝsuɝ klʌtʃt əɾ ɪz kɑlɝ. ɪf ðoʊz fɪŋɡɝz tʌtʃt ɪm i nu hi wəd ɡoʊ mæd. əɹ wɝs. mʌtʃ wɝs. ivən əz ðət ʃʊɹəɾi keɪm tə hɪm i tʃɹɪpt ən fɛl . . .

Of a sudden a chill ran along his bones; an icy clamminess settled on his skin, and the air around him turned fetid and dank. Without looking back he ran, ran from the pursuer whose freezing fingers brushed his back and tugged at his cloak, ran from the light-eating figure with the face that. . . . He could not remember the face, except as terror. He did not want to remember the face. He ran, and the ground passed beneath his feet, rolling hills and flat plain . . . and he wanted to howl like a dog gone mad. The city was receding before him. The harder he ran, the further away drifted the white shining walls and haven. They grew smaller, and smaller, until only a pale speck remained on the horizon. The cold hand of his pursuer clutched at his collar. If those fingers touched him he knew he would go mad. Or worse. Much worse. Even as that surety came to him he tripped and fell . . .

"nuuu!" hi skɹimd.

"Noooo!" he screamed.

. . . ən ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz smæk ðə bɹɛθ aʊɾ ə hɪm. wʌndɝɪŋli hi ɡɑt tə hɪz fit. hi stʊɾ ɑn ði əpɹoʊtʃɪz tə wʌn ə ðə mɑɹvələs bɹɪdʒəz i hæd sin ɹɪɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪvɝ. smaɪlɪŋ pipəl wɔk baɪ ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm, pipəl dʒɹɛst ɪn soʊ mɛni kʌlɝz ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ʌv ə fild ʌv waɪldflaʊɹz. səm ə ðɛm spoʊk tə hɪm, bʌɾ i kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, ðoʊ ðə wɝdz saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i ʃʊd. bʌt ðə feɪsəz wɝ fɹɛnli, ən ðə pipəl dʒɛstʃɝɾ ɪm ɔnwɝd, oʊvɝ ðə bɹɪdʒ wɪð ɪts ɪntʃɹəkət stoʊnwɝk, ɔnwɝd təwɔɹd ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ, sɪlvɝ-stʃɹikt wɔlz ən ðə taʊɝz bɪɑnd. təwɔɹd ðə seɪfti hi nu weɪɾəd ðɛɹ.

. . . and grunted as paving stones smacked the breath out of him. Wonderingly he got to his feet. He stood on the approaches to one of the marvelous bridges he had seen rearing over the river. Smiling people walked by on either side of him, people dressed in so many colors they made him think of a field of wildflowers. Some of them spoke to him, but he could not understand, though the words sounded as if he should. But the faces were friendly, and the people gestured him onward, over the bridge with its intricate stonework, onward toward the shining, silver-streaked walls and the towers beyond. Toward the safety he knew waited there.

hi dʒɔɪn ðə θɹɔŋ stʃɹimɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə bɹɪdʒ ən ɪndə ðə sɪɾi θɹu mæsɪv ɡeɪts sɛɾ ɪn tɔl, pɹɪstin wɔlz. wɪðɪn wɑz ə wʌndɝlænd wɛɹ ðə minəst stʃɹʌktʃɝ simd ə pæləs. ɪt wɑz əz ðoʊ ðə bɪldɝz hæd bɪn toʊl tə teɪk stoʊn ən bɹɪk ən taɪl ən kɹieɪt bjuɾi tə teɪk ðə bɹɛθ ə mɔɹɾəl mɛn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bɪldɪŋ, noʊ mɑnjəmən ðət dɪd nɑt meɪk ɪm stɛɹ wɪð ɡɑəlɪŋ aɪz. mjuzɪk dʒɹɪftəd daʊn ðə stʃɹits, ə hʌnʒɹəd dɪfɹən sɔŋz, bʌɾ ɔl blɛndɪŋ wɪð ðə klæmɝ ə ðə kɹaʊdz tə meɪk wʌn ɡɹænd, dʒɔɪəs hɑɹməni. ðə sɛns ə swit pɝfjumz ən ʃɑɹp spaɪsəz, ʌv wʌnʒɹəs fudz ən mɪɹiəd flaʊɝz, ɔl floʊɾəd ɪn ði ɛɹ, əz ɪf ɛvɹi ɡʊd smɛl ɪn ðə wɝld wɝ ɡæðɝd ðɛɹ.

He joined the throng streaming across the bridge and into the city through massive gates set in tall, pristine walls. Within was a wonderland where the meanest structure seemed a palace. It was as though the builders had been told to take stone and brick and tile and create beauty to take the breath of mortal men. There was no building, no monument that did not make him stare with goggling eyes. Music drifted down the streets, a hundred different songs, but all blending with the clamor of the crowds to make one grand, joyous harmony. The scents of sweet perfumes and sharp spices, of wondrous foods and myriad flowers, all floated in the air, as if every good smell in the world were gathered there.

ðə stʃɹit baɪ wɪtʃ i ɛntɝd ðə sɪɾi, bɹɔɾ ən peɪvd wɪð smuð, ɡɹeɪ stoʊn, stʃɹɛtʃt stʃɹeɪt bɪfɔɹ ɪm təwɔɹd ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə sɪɾi. əɾ ɪts ɛn lumd ə taʊɝ lɑɹdʒɝ ən tɔlɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ə taʊɝ əz waɪɾ əz fɹɛʃ-fɔlən snoʊ. ðət taʊɝ wɑz wɛɹ seɪfti leɪ, ən ðə nɑlədʒ i sɔt. bʌt ðə sɪɾi wɑz sətʃ əz i hæd nɛvɝ dʒɹimd ə siɪŋ. ʃʊɹli ɪt wəd nɑt mæɾɝ ɪf i dɪleɪd dʒʌst ə ʃɔɹt taɪm ɪn ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðə taʊɝ? hi tɝn əsaɪɾ ɑntu ə nɛɹoʊɝ stʃɹit, wɛɹ dʒʌɡəlɝz stʃɹoʊld əmʌŋ hɔkɝz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ fɹuts.

The street by which he entered the city, broad and paved with smooth, gray stone, stretched straight before him toward the center of the city. At its end loomed a tower larger and taller than any other in the city, a tower as white as fresh-fallen snow. That tower was where safety lay, and the knowledge he sought. But the city was such as he had never dreamed of seeing. Surely it would not matter if he delayed just a short time in going to the tower? He turned aside onto a narrower street, where jugglers strolled among hawkers of strange fruits.

əhɛɾ ə hɪm daʊn ðə stʃɹit wɑz ə snoʊ-waɪt taʊɝ. ðə seɪm taʊɝ. ɪn dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl waɪl, hi θɔt, ən ɹaʊndəɾ ənʌðɝ kɔɹnɝ. ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðɪs stʃɹit, tu, leɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ. stʌbɝnli hi tɝn ənʌðɝ kɔɹnɝ, ən ənʌðɝ, ən itʃ taɪm ði æləbæstɝ taʊɝ mɛɾ ɪz aɪz. hi spʌn tə ɹʌn əweɪ fɹəm ɪt . . . ən skɪɾəd tə ə hɔlt. bɪfɔɹ hɪm, ðə waɪt taʊɝ. hi wɑz əfɹeɪd tə lʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, əfɹeɪɾ ɪt wəd bi ðɛɹ, tu.

Ahead of him down the street was a snow-white tower. The same tower. In just a little while, he thought, and rounded another corner. At the far end of this street, too, lay the white tower. Stubbornly he turned another corner, and another, and each time the alabaster tower met his eyes. He spun to run away from it . . . and skidded to a halt. Before him, the white tower. He was afraid to look over his shoulder, afraid it would be there, too.

ðə feɪsəz ɝaʊn ɪm wɝ stɪl fɹɛnli, bʌt ʃæɾɝd hoʊp fɪld əm naʊ, hoʊp i hæd bɹoʊkən. stɪl ðə pipəl dʒɛstʃɝɾ ɪm fɔɹwɝd, pliɾɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝz. təwɔɹd ðə taʊɝ. ðɛɹ aɪz ʃoʊn wɪð dɛspɹɪt nid, ən oʊnli hi kəd fʊlfɪl ɪt, oʊnli hi kəd seɪv ðɛm.

The faces around him were still friendly, but shattered hope filled them now, hope he had broken. Still the people gestured him forward, pleading gestures. Toward the tower. Their eyes shone with desperate need, and only he could fulfill it, only he could save them.

vɛɹi wɛl, hi θɔt. ðə taʊɝ wɑz, æftɝ ɔl, wɛɹ i wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ.

Very well, he thought. The tower was, after all, where he wanted to go.

ivən əz i tʊk ɪz fɝst stɛp fɔɹwɝd dɪsəpɔɪnmənt feɪɾəd fɹəm ðoʊz əbaʊt hɪm, ən smaɪlz ɹɛðd ɛvɹi feɪs. ðeɪ muvd wɪð hɪm, ən smɔl tʃɪlʒɹən stʃɹuɾ ɪz pæθ wɪð flaʊɝ pɛɾəlz. hi lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ɪn kənfjuʒən, wʌndɝɪŋ u ðə flaʊɝz wɝ mɛn fɔɹ, bʌt bɪhaɪn ɪm wɝ oʊnli mɔɹ smaɪlɪŋ pipəl dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ ɪm ɑn. ðeɪ mʌs bi fəɹ mi, hi θɔt, ən wʌndɝd waɪ ðət sʌɾənli dɪd nɑt sim stʃɹeɪnʒ əɾ ɔl. bʌt wʌndɝmən læstəɾ oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ mɛltɪŋ əweɪ; ɔl wɑz əz ɪt ʃəd bi.

Even as he took his first step forward disappointment faded from those about him, and smiles wreathed every face. They moved with him, and small children strewed his path with flower petals. He looked over his shoulder in confusion, wondering who the flowers were meant for, but behind him were only more smiling people gesturing him on. They must be for me, he thought, and wondered why that suddenly did not seem strange at all. But wonderment lasted only a moment before melting away; all was as it should be.

fɝst wʌn, ðən ənʌðɝ ə ðə pipəl bɪɡæn tə sɪŋ, əntɪl ɛvɹi vɔɪs wɑz lɪftəɾ ɪn ə ɡlɔɹiəs ænθəm. hi stɪl kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðə wɝdz, bʌɾ ə dʌzən ɪntɝwivɪŋ hɑɹməniz ʃaʊɾəd dʒɔɪ ən sælveɪʃən. mjuzɪʃənz keɪpɝd θɹu ði ɑn-floʊɪŋ kɹaʊd, æɾɪŋ fluts ən hɑɹps ən dʒɹʌmz ɪn ə dʌzən saɪzəz tə ðə hɪm, ən ɔl ðə sɔŋz i hæd hɝd bɪfɔɹ blɛndəɾ ɪn wɪθaʊt sim. ɡɝlz dænst ɝaʊn hɪm, leɪɪŋ ɡɑɹlænz ə swit-smɛlɪŋ blɑsəmz əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, twaɪnɪŋ əm əbaʊɾ ɪz nɛk. ðeɪ smaɪld ət hɪm, ðɛɹ dɪlaɪt ɡɹoʊɪŋ wɪð ɛvɹi stɛp i tʊk. hi kəd nɑt hɛlp bʌt smaɪl bæk. hɪz fiɾ ɪtʃt tə dʒɔɪn ɪn ðɛɹ dæns, ən ivən əz i θɔɾ ʌv ɪɾ i wɑz dænsɪŋ, hɪz stɛps fɪɾɪŋ əz ɪf i hæd noʊn ɪɾ ɔl fɹəm bɝθ. hi θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən læft; hɪz fit wɝ laɪɾɝ ðən ðeɪ hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn, dænsɪŋ wɪð. . . . hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə neɪm, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt sim ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

First one, then another of the people began to sing, until every voice was lifted in a glorious anthem. He still could not understand the words, but a dozen interweaving harmonies shouted joy and salvation. Musicians capered through the on-flowing crowd, adding flutes and harps and drums in a dozen sizes to the hymn, and all the songs he had heard before blended in without seam. Girls danced around him, laying garlands of sweet-smelling blossoms across his shoulders, twining them about his neck. They smiled at him, their delight growing with every step he took. He could not help but smile back. His feet itched to join in their dance, and even as he thought of it he was dancing, his steps fitting as if he had known it all from birth. He threw back his head and laughed; his feet were lighter than they had ever been, dancing with. . . . He could not remember the name, but it did not seem important.

ɪts jəɹ dɛstəni, ə vɔɪs wɪspɝɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd, ən ðə wɪspɝ wɑz ə θɹɛɾ ɪn ðə piən.

It is your destiny, a voice whispered in his head, and the whisper was a thread in the paean.

kæɹiɪŋ ɪm laɪk ə twɪɡ ɑn ðə kɹɛst ʌv ə weɪv, ðə kɹaʊd floʊɾ ɪndə ə hjudʒ skwɛɹ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə sɪɾi, ən fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm i sɔ ðət ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɹoʊz fɹəm ə ɡɹeɪt pæləs ə peɪl mɑɹbəl, skʌlptɪd ɹæðɝ ðən bɪlt, kɝvɪŋ wɔlz ən swɛlɪŋ doʊmz ən dɛləkət spaɪɹz fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə skaɪ. ðə hoʊl ʌv ɪt meɪɾ ɪm ɡæsp ɪn ɑ. bɹɔd stɛɹz ə pɹɪstin stoʊn lɛɾ ʌp fɹəm ðə skwɛɹ, ən ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðoʊz stɛɹz ðə pipəl hɔltəd, bʌt ðɛɹ sɔŋ ɹoʊz ɛvɝ haɪɝ. ðə swɛlɪŋ vɔɪsəz buiɾ ɪz fit. jəɹ dɛstəni, ðə vɔɪs wɪspɝd, ɪnsɪstənt naʊ, iɡɝ.

Carrying him like a twig on the crest of a wave, the crowd flowed into a huge square in the middle of the city, and for the first time he saw that the white tower rose from a great palace of pale marble, sculpted rather than built, curving walls and swelling domes and delicate spires fingering the sky. The whole of it made him gasp in awe. Broad stairs of pristine stone led up from the square, and at the foot of those stairs the people halted, but their song rose ever higher. The swelling voices buoyed his feet. Your destiny, the voice whispered, insistent now, eager.

hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ dænst, bʌt niðɝ dɪɾ i stɑp. hi maʊntəd ðə stɛɹz wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən. ðɪs wɑz wɛɹ i bɪlɔŋd.

He no longer danced, but neither did he stop. He mounted the stairs without hesitation. This was where he belonged.

skɹɑlwɝk kʌvɝd ðə mæsɪv dɔɹz ət ðə tɑp ə ðə stɛɹz, kɑɹvɪŋz soʊ ɪntʃɹəkəɾ ən dɛləkət ðəɾ i kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən ə naɪf bleɪd faɪn ɪnʌf tə fɪt. ðə pɔɹɾəlz swʌŋ oʊpən, ən i wɛn ɪn. ðeɪ kloʊz bɪhaɪn ɪm wɪð ən ɛkoʊɪŋ kɹæʃ laɪk θʌndɝ.

Scrollwork covered the massive doors at the top of the stairs, carvings so intricate and delicate that he could not imagine a knife blade fine enough to fit. The portals swung open, and he went in. They closed behind him with an echoing crash like thunder.

"wi hæv bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ju," ðə mɹdʒɹɑl hɪst.

"We have been waiting for you," the Myrddraal hissed.

ɹænd sæt boʊlt əpɹaɪt, ɡæspɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ ən ʃɪvɝɪŋ, stɛɹɪŋ. tæm wɑz stɪl əslip ɑn ðə bɛd. sloʊli hɪz bɹiðɪŋ sloʊd. hæf-kənsum lɔɡz bleɪzd ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs wɪð ə ɡʊd bɛɾ ə koʊlz bɪlt ʌp ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝ-aɪɝnz; sʌmwʌn hæd bɪn ðəɹ tə tɛn ɪt waɪl i slɛpt. ə blæŋkət leɪ əɾ ɪz fit, wɛɹ ɪt hæd fɔlən wən i woʊk. ðə meɪkʃɪf lɪɾɝ wɑz ɡɔn, tu, ən ɪz ən tæmz kloʊks hæd bɪn hʌŋ baɪ ðə dɔɹ.

Rand sat bolt upright, gasping for breath and shivering, staring. Tam was still asleep on the bed. Slowly his breathing slowed. Half-consumed logs blazed in the fireplace with a good bed of coals built up around the fire-irons; someone had been there to tend it while he slept. A blanket lay at his feet, where it had fallen when he woke. The makeshift litter was gone, too, and his and Tam's cloaks had been hung by the door.

hi waɪp koʊl swɛt fɹəm ɪz feɪs wɪð ə hæn ðət wɑz nʌn tu stɛɾi ən wʌndɝɾ ɪf neɪmɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪn ə dʒɹim bɹɔɾ ɪz ətɛnʃən ðə seɪm weɪ ðət neɪmɪŋ ɪm əlaʊd dɪd.

He wiped cold sweat from his face with a hand that was none too steady and wondered if naming the Dark One in a dream brought his attention the same way that naming him aloud did.

twaɪlaɪt dɑɹkən ðə wɪndoʊ; ðə mun wɑz wɛl ʌp, ɹaʊn ən fæt, ən ivnɪŋ stɑɹz spɑɹkəld əbʌv ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst. hi hæd slɛp ðə deɪ əweɪ. hi ɹʌbd ə sɔɹ spɑɾ ɑn ɪz saɪd. əpɛɹənli hi hæd slɛpt wɪð ðə sɔɹd hɪl dʒæbɪŋ ɪm ɪn ðə ɹɪbz. bɪtwin ðəɾ ən ən ɛmpti stʌmək ən ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ, ɪt wɑz noʊ wʌndɝ i hæd hæd naɪtmɛɹz.

Twilight darkened the window; the moon was well up, round and fat, and evening stars sparkled above the Mountains of Mist. He had slept the day away. He rubbed a sore spot on his side. Apparently he had slept with the sword hilt jabbing him in the ribs. Between that and an empty stomach and the night before, it was no wonder he had had nightmares.

hɪz bɛli ɹʌmbəld, ən i ɡɑɾ ʌp stɪfli ən meɪɾ ɪz weɪ tə ðə teɪbəl wɛɹ mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ hæd lɛf ðə tʃɹeɪ. hi twɪtʃt əsaɪd ðə waɪt næpkɪn. dɪspaɪt ðə taɪm i hæd slɛpt, ðə bif bɹɔθ wɑz stɪl wɔɹm, ən soʊ wɑz ðə kɹʌsti bɹɛd. mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹz hænd wɑz pleɪn; ðə tʃɹeɪ hæd bɪn ɹipleɪst. wʌns ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd jə niɾəd ə hɑt mil, ʃi dɪd nɑt ɡɪv ʌp tɪl ɪt wɑz ɪnsaɪd ju.

His belly rumbled, and he got up stiffly and made his way to the table where Mistress al'Vere had left the tray. He twitched aside the white napkin. Despite the time he had slept, the beef broth was still warm, and so was the crusty bread. Mistress al'Vere's hand was plain; the tray had been replaced. Once she decided you needed a hot meal, she did not give up till it was inside you.

hi ɡʌlp daʊn səm bɹɔθ, ən ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə pʊt səm miɾ ən tʃiz bɪtwin tu pisəz ə bɹɛd bɪfɔɹ stʌfɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn ɪz maʊθ. teɪkɪŋ bɪɡ baɪts, hi wɛn bæk tə ðə bɛd.

He gulped down some broth, and it was all he could do to put some meat and cheese between two pieces of bread before stuffing it in his mouth. Taking big bites, he went back to the bed.

mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ hæɾ əpɛɹənli sin tə tæm, əz wɛl. tæm hæd bɪn ənʒɹəst, hɪz kloʊðz naʊ klin ən nitli foʊldəɾ ɑn ðə bɛdsaɪd teɪbəl, ən ə blæŋkət wɑz dʒɹɔn ʌp ʌndɝ ɪz tʃɪn. wən ɹænd tʌtʃt ɪz fɑðɝz fɔɹhɛd, tæm oʊpən ɪz aɪz.

Mistress al'Vere had apparently seen to Tam, as well. Tam had been undressed, his clothes now clean and neatly folded on the bedside table, and a blanket was drawn up under his chin. When Rand touched his father's forehead, Tam opened his eyes.

"ðɛɹ jə ɑɹ, bɔɪ. mɛɹɪn sɛd jə wɝ hɪɹ, bʌɾ aɪ kʊdn ivən sɪɾ ʌp tə si. ʃi sɛd jə wɝ tu taɪɝd fəɹ əɹ tə weɪk dʒʌst soʊ aɪ kəd lʊk ət ju. ivən bɹæn kænt ɡɛɾ ɝaʊn əɹ wən ʃiz əɹ maɪn sɛt."

"There you are, boy. Marin said you were here, but I couldn't even sit up to see. She said you were too tired for her to wake just so I could look at you. Even Bran can't get around her when she has her mind set."

tæmz vɔɪs wɑz wik, bʌɾ ɪz ɡeɪz wɑz klɪɹ ən stɛɾi. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ɹaɪt, ɹænd θɔt. wɪð ɹɛst i wəd bi əz ɡʊɾ əz ɛvɝ.

Tam's voice was weak, but his gaze was clear and steady. The Aes Sedai was right, Rand thought. With rest he would be as good as ever.

"kæn aɪ ɡɛt jə sʌmθɪŋ tə it? mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ lɛft ə tʃɹeɪ."

"Can I get you something to eat? Mistress al'Vere left a tray."

"ʃi fɛd mi ɔlɹɛɾi . . . ɪf jə kən kɔl ɪt ðæt. wʊdn lemi hæv ɛniθɪŋ bʌt bɹɔθ. haʊ kən ə mæn əvɔɪd bæd dʒɹimz wɪð nʌθɪŋ bʌt bɹɔθ ɪn hɪz. . . ." tæm fʌmbəld ə hæn fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə kʌvɝ ən tʌtʃt ðə sɔɹɾ ət ɹændz weɪst. "ðɛn ɪt wɑzn ə dʒɹim. wən mɛɹɪn toʊl mi aɪ wɑz sɪk, aɪ θɔɾ aɪ hæd bɪn. . . . bʌt jəɹ ɔl ɹaɪt. ðəɾ ɪz ɔl ðət mæɾɝz. wʌɾ ə ðə fɑɹm?"

"She fed me already . . . if you can call it that. Wouldn't let me have anything but broth. How can a man avoid bad dreams with nothing but broth in his. . . ." Tam fumbled a hand from under the cover and touched the sword at Rand's waist. "Then it wasn't a dream. When Marin told me I was sick, I thought I had been. . . . But you're all right. That is all that matters. What of the farm?"

ɹænd tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ðə tʃɹɑləks kɪl ðə ʃip. aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ tʊk ðə kaʊ, tu, ən ðə haʊs nidz ə ɡʊd klinɪŋ." hi mænədʒd ə wik smaɪl. "wi wɝ lʌkiɝ ðən sʌm. ðeɪ bɝn hæf ðə vɪlədʒ."

Rand took a deep breath. "The Trollocs killed the sheep. I think they took the cow, too, and the house needs a good cleaning." He managed a weak smile. "We were luckier than some. They burned half the village."

hi toʊl tæm ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət hæd hæpənd, əɹ ət lis moʊst ʌv ɪt. tæm lɪsən kloʊsli, ən æskt ʃɑɹp kwɛstʃənz, soʊ hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf hævɪŋ tə tɛl əbaʊt ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə ðə fɑɹmhaʊs fɹəm ðə wʊdz, ən ðət bɹɔɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk i hæd kɪld. hi hæd tə tɛl haʊ nɪneɪiv hæd sɛd tæm wɑz daɪɪŋ tə ɪkspleɪn waɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd tɛndəɾ ɪm ɪnstɛɾ ə ðə wɪzdəm. tæmz aɪz waɪɾənd ət ðæt, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ɛmənz fild. bʌt ɹænd kəd si noʊ nid tə ɡoʊ oʊvɝ ɛvɹi stɛp ə ðə dʒɝni fɹəm ðə fɑɹm, əɹ ɪz fɪɹz, əɹ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ɑn ðə ɹoʊd. sɝɾənli nɑɾ ɪz naɪtmɛɹz əz i slɛp baɪ ðə bɛd. ɪspɛʃli hi sɔ noʊ ɹizən tə mɛnʃən tæmz ɹæmbəlɪŋz ʌndɝ ðə fivɝ. nɑt jɛt. mɔɪɹeɪnz stɔɹi, ðoʊ: ðəɹ wɑz noʊ əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðæt.

He told Tam everything that had happened, or at least most of it. Tam listened closely, and asked sharp questions, so he found himself having to tell about returning to the farmhouse from the woods, and that brought in the Trolloc he had killed. He had to tell how Nynaeve had said Tam was dying to explain why the Aes Sedai had tended him instead of the Wisdom. Tam's eyes widened at that, an Aes Sedai in Emond's Field. But Rand could see no need to go over every step of the journey from the farm, or his fears, or the Myrddraal on the road. Certainly not his nightmares as he slept by the bed. Especially he saw no reason to mention Tam's ramblings under the fever. Not yet. Moiraine's story, though: there was no avoiding that.

"naʊ ðæts ə teɪl tə meɪk ə ɡlimən pɹaʊd," tæm mʌɾɝd wən i wɑz dʌn. "wʌt wəd tʃɹɑləks wɑnt wɪð jə bɔɪz? əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, laɪt hɛlp ʌs?"

"Now that's a tale to make a gleeman proud," Tam muttered when he was done. "What would Trollocs want with you boys? Or the Dark One, Light help us?"

"ju θɪŋk ʃi wɑz laɪɪŋ? mæstɝ ælvɪɹ sɛd ʃi wɑz tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ əbaʊɾ oʊnli tu fɑɹmz biɪŋ ətækt. ən əbaʊt mæstɝ luhənz haʊs, ən mæstɝ kɔθənz."

"You think she was lying? Master al'Vere said she was telling the truth about only two farms being attacked. And about Master Luhhan's house, and Master Cauthon's."

fəɹ ə moʊmən tæm leɪ saɪlən bɪfɔɹ seɪɪŋ, "tɛl mi wʌt ʃi sɛd. hɝ ɪɡzækt wɝdz, maɪnd, dʒʌst əz ʃi sɛd ðɛm."

For a moment Tam lay silent before saying, "Tell me what she said. Her exact words, mind, just as she said them."

ɹænd stʃɹʌɡəld. hu ɛvɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝd ði ɪɡzækt wɝdz ðeɪ hɝd? hi tʃuɾ əɾ ɪz lɪp ən skɹætʃt ɪz hɛd, ən bɪt baɪ bɪɾ i bɹɔɾ ɪɾ aʊt, əz nɪɹli əz i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ. "aɪ kæn θɪŋk ʌv ɛniθɪŋ ɛls," hi fɪnɪʃt. "sʌm ʌv ɪɾ aɪm nɑt tu ʃʊɹ ʃi dɪdn seɪ ə lɪɾəl dɪfɹənli, bʌɾ ɪts kloʊs, ɛniweɪ."

Rand struggled. Who ever remembered the exact words they heard? He chewed at his lip and scratched his head, and bit by bit he brought it out, as nearly as he could remember. "I can't think of anything else," he finished. "Some of it I'm not too sure she didn't say a little differently, but it's close, anyway."

"ɪts ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf. ɪts tə bi, dʌzn ɪt? jə si, læd, ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ tʃɹɪksəm. ðeɪ doʊn laɪ, nɑt ɹaɪɾ aʊt, bʌt ðə tʃɹuθ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tɛlz jə ɪz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ðə tʃɹuθ jə θɪŋk ɪɾ ɪz. jə teɪk kɛɹ ɝaʊn hɝ."

"It's good enough. It has to be, doesn't it? You see, lad, Aes Sedai are tricksome. They don't lie, not right out, but the truth an Aes Sedai tells you is not always the truth you think it is. You take care around her."

"aɪv hɝd ðə stɔɹiz," ɹænd ɹitɔɹɾɪd. "aɪm nɑɾ ə tʃaɪld."

"I've heard the stories," Rand retorted. "I'm not a child."

"soʊ jəɹ nɑt, soʊ jəɹ nɑt." tæm saɪd hɛvəli, ðən ʃɹʌɡd ɪn ənɔɪəns. "aɪ ʃəd bi ɡoʊɪŋ əlɔŋ wɪð ju, dʒʌs ðə seɪm. ðə wɝld aʊtsaɪd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz nʌθɪŋ laɪk ɛmənz fild."

"So you're not, so you're not." Tam sighed heavily, then shrugged in annoyance. "I should be going along with you, just the same. The world outside the Two Rivers is nothing like Emond's Field."

ðət wɑz ən oʊpənɪŋ tə æsk əbaʊt tæm ɡoʊɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ ən ɔl ðə ɹɛst ʌv ɪt, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑt teɪk ɪt. hɪz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən, ɪnstɛd. "dʒʌs laɪk ðæt? aɪ θɔt jə wəd tʃɹaɪ tə tɔk mi aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. aɪ θɔt juɾ əv ə hʌnʒɹəd ɹizənz aɪ ʃəd nɑt ɡoʊ." hi ɹilaɪzd i hæd bɪn hoʊpɪŋ tæm wəɾ əv ə hʌnʒɹəd ɹizənz, ən ɡʊd wʌnz.

That was an opening to ask about Tam going outside and all the rest of it, but Rand did not take it. His mouth fell open, instead. "Just like that? I thought you would try to talk me out of it. I thought you'd have a hundred reasons I should not go." He realized he had been hoping Tam would have a hundred reasons, and good ones.

"meɪbi nɑɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd," tæm sɛd wɪð ə snɔɹt, "bʌɾ ə fju dɪd kʌm tə maɪnd. oʊnli ðeɪ doʊn kaʊn fəɹ mʌtʃ. ɪf tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ æftɝ ju, jəl bi seɪfɝ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn ðən jə kəɾ ɛvɝ bi hɪɹ. dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ tə bi wɛɹi. ɛɛs sədaɪ də θɪŋz fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn ɹizənz, ən ðoʊz ɑɹ nɑɾ ɔlweɪz ðə ɹizənz jə θɪŋk."

"Maybe not a hundred," Tam said with a snort, "but a few did come to mind. Only they don't count for much. If Trollocs are after you, you will be safer in Tar Valon than you could ever be here. Just remember to be wary. Aes Sedai do things for their own reasons, and those are not always the reasons you think."

"ðə ɡlimən sɛd sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli.

"The gleeman said something like that," Rand said slowly.

"ðɛn i noʊz wʌt hiz tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt. jə lɪsən ʃɑɹp, θɪŋk dip, ən ɡɑɹd jəɹ tʌŋ. ðæts ɡʊɾ ædvaɪs fəɹ ɛni dilɪŋz bɪɑn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, bʌt moʊst ɪspɛʃli wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən wɪð wɔɹɾɝz. tɛl læn sʌmθɪŋ, ən juv əz ɡʊɾ əz toʊl mɔɪɹeɪn. ɪf hiz ə wɔɹɾɝ, ðən hiz bɑndəd tə hɝ əz ʃʊɹ əz ðə sʌn ɹoʊz ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, ən i woʊn kip mɛni sikɹəts fɹəm hɝ, ɪf ɛni."

"Then he knows what he's talking about. You listen sharp, think deep, and guard your tongue. That's good advice for any dealings beyond the Two Rivers, but most especially with Aes Sedai. And with Warders. Tell Lan something, and you've as good as told Moiraine. If he's a Warder, then he's bonded to her as sure as the sun rose this morning, and he won't keep many secrets from her, if any."

ɹænd nu lɪɾəl əbaʊt ðə bɑndɪŋ bɪtwin ɛɛs sədaɪ ən wɔɹɾɝz, ðoʊ ɪt pleɪɾ ə bɪɡ pɑɹɾ ɪn ɛvɹi stɔɹi əbaʊt wɔɹɾɝz i hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝd. ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə paʊɝ, ə ɡɪf tə ðə wɔɹɾɝ, əɹ meɪbi səm sɔɹɾ ʌv ɪkstʃeɪnʒ. ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɡɑɾ ɔl sɔɹts ə bɛnəfɪts, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə stɔɹiz. ðeɪ hil mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən ʌðɝ mɛn, ən kəd ɡoʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɪθaʊt fuɾ əɹ wɔɾɝ əɹ slip. səpoʊzədli ðeɪ kəd sɛns tʃɹɑləks, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ kloʊs ɪnʌf, ən ʌðɝ kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, tu, wɪtʃ ɪkspleɪn haʊ læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn hæd tʃɹaɪd tə wɔɹn ðə vɪlədʒ bɪfɔɹ ði ətæk. əz tə wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡɑɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt, ðə stɔɹiz wɝ saɪlənt, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə bɪliv ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɡɛt sʌmθɪŋ.

Rand knew little about the bonding between Aes Sedai and Warders, though it played a big part in every story about Warders he had ever heard. It was something to do with the Power, a gift to the Warder, or maybe some sort of exchange. The Warders got all sorts of benefits, according to the stories. They healed more quickly than other men, and could go longer without food or water or sleep. Supposedly they could sense Trollocs, if they were close enough, and other creatures of the Dark One, too, which explained how Lan and Moiraine had tried to warn the village before the attack. As to what the Aes Sedai got out of it, the stories were silent, but he was not about to believe they did not get something.

"aɪl bi kɛɹfəl," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ dʒʌst wɪʃ aɪ nu waɪ. ɪt dʌzn meɪk ɛni sɛns. waɪ mi? waɪ ʌs?"

"I'll be careful," Rand said. "I just wish I knew why. It doesn't make any sense. Why me? Why us?"

"aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu, tu, bɔɪ. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu." tæm saɪd hɛvəli. "wɛl, noʊ jus tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊɾ ə bɹoʊkən ɛɡ bæk ɪn ðə ʃɛl, aɪ səpoʊz. haʊ sun juv tə ɡoʊ? əl bi bæk ɑn maɪ fiɾ ɪn ə deɪ əɹ tu, ən wi kən si əbaʊt stɑɹɾɪŋ ə nu flɑk. ɔɹən daʊtʃɹi hæz səm ɡʊd stɑk i maɪt bi wɪlɪŋ tə pɑɹt wɪð, wɪð ðə pæstʃɝz ɔl ɡɔn, ən soʊ dʌz dʒɑn θeɪn."

"I wish I knew, too, boy. Blood and ashes, I wish I knew." Tam sighed heavily. "Well, no use trying to put a broken egg back in the shell, I suppose. How soon do you have to go? I'll be back on my feet in a day or two, and we can see about starting a new flock. Oren Dautry has some good stock he might be willing to part with, with the pastures all gone, and so does Jon Thane."

"mɔɪɹeɪn . . . ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd jə hæd tə steɪ ɪn bɛd. ʃi sɛd wiks." tæm oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, bʌt ɹænd wɛn ɑn. "ænd ʃi tɔk tə mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ."

"Moiraine . . . the Aes Sedai said you had to stay in bed. She said weeks." Tam opened his mouth, but Rand went on. "And she talked to Mistress al'Vere."

"oʊ. wɛl, meɪbi aɪ kən tɔk mɛɹɪn ɝaʊnd." tæm dɪd nɑt saʊn hoʊpfəl ʌv ɪt, ðoʊ. hi ɡeɪv ɹænd ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. "ðə weɪ jə əvɔɪɾəd ænsɝɪŋ minz juv tə liv sun. təmɑɹoʊ? əɹ tənaɪt?"

"Oh. Well, maybe I can talk Marin around." Tam did not sound hopeful of it, though. He gave Rand a sharp look. "The way you avoided answering means you have to leave soon. Tomorrow? Or tonight?"

"tənaɪt," ɹænd sɛd kwaɪətli, ən tæm nɑɾəd sædli.

"Tonight," Rand said quietly, and Tam nodded sadly.

"jɛs. wɛl, ɪf ɪt mʌs bi dʌn, bɛs nɑt tə dɪleɪ. bʌt wɪl si əbaʊt ðɪs 'wiks' bɪznəs." hi plʌkt əɾ ɪz blæŋkəts wɪð mɔɹ ɪɹɪteɪʃən ðən stʃɹɛŋkθ. "pɝhæps əl fɑloʊ ɪn ə fju deɪz ɛniweɪ. kætʃ jə ʌp ɑn ðə ɹoʊd. wɪl si ɪf mɛɹɪn kən kip mi ɪn bɛd wən aɪ wɑnə ɡɛɾ ʌp."

"Yes. Well, if it must be done, best not to delay. But we will see about this 'weeks' business." He plucked at his blankets with more irritation than strength. "Perhaps I'll follow in a few days anyway. Catch you up on the road. We will see if Marin can keep me in bed when I want to get up."

ðəɹ wɑz ə tæp ət ðə dɔɹ, ən læn stʌk ɪz hɛɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum. "seɪ jəɹ ɡʊdbaɪz kwɪkli, ʃifɝɾɝ, ən kʌm. ðəɹ meɪ bi tʃɹʌbəl."

There was a tap at the door, and Lan stuck his head into the room. "Say your goodbyes quickly, sheepherder, and come. There may be trouble."

"tʃɹʌbəl?" ɹænd sɛd, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡɹaʊld əɾ ɪm ɪmpeɪʃənli.

"Trouble?" Rand said, and the Warder growled at him impatiently.

"dʒʌs hɝi!"

"Just hurry!"

heɪstəli ɹænd snætʃt ʌp ɪz kloʊk. hi stɑɹɾəd tə əndu ðə sɔɹd bɛlt, bʌt tæm spoʊk ʌp.

Hastily Rand snatched up his cloak. He started to undo the sword belt, but Tam spoke up.

"kip ɪt. jəl pɹɑbli hæv mɔɹ niɾ ʌv ɪt ðən aɪ, ðoʊ, ðə laɪt wɪlɪŋ, niðɝ ʌv əs wɪl. teɪk kɛɹ, læd. jə hɪɹ?"

"Keep it. You will probably have more need of it than I, though, the Light willing, neither of us will. Take care, lad. You hear?"

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ lænz kəntɪnjud ɡɹaʊlz, ɹænd bɛn tə ɡɹæb tæm ɪn ə hʌɡ. "aɪ wɪl kʌm bæk. aɪ pɹɑməs jə ðæt."

Ignoring Lan's continued growls, Rand bent to grab Tam in a hug. "I will come back. I promise you that."

"ʌv kɔɹs jə wɪl." tæm læft. hi ɹɪtɝn ðə hʌɡ wikli, ən ɛndəd baɪ pæɾɪŋ ɹænd ɑn ðə bæk. "aɪ noʊ ðæt. ən əl əv twaɪs əz mɛni ʃip fəɹ jə tə tɛnd wən jə ɹɪtɝn. naʊ ɡoʊ, bɪfɔɹ ðət fɛloʊ dʌz hɪmsɛlf ən ɪnʒɝi."

"Of course you will." Tam laughed. He returned the hug weakly, and ended by patting Rand on the back. "I know that. And I'll have twice as many sheep for you to tend when you return. Now go, before that fellow does himself an injury."

ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə hæŋ bæk, tʃɹaɪd tə faɪn ðə wɝdz fəɹ ðə kwɛstʃən i dɪd nɑt wɑnə æsk, bʌt læn ɛntɝd ðə ɹum tə kætʃ ɪm baɪ ði ɑɹm ən pʊl ɪm ɪndə ðə hɔl. ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd dɑn ə dʌl ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin tunɪk ʌv oʊvɝlæpɪŋ mɛɾəl skeɪlz. hɪz vɔɪs ɹæspt wɪð ɪɹɪteɪʃən.

Rand tried to hang back, tried to find the words for the question he did not want to ask, but Lan entered the room to catch him by the arm and pull him into the hall. The Warder had donned a dull gray-green tunic of overlapping metal scales. His voice rasped with irritation.

"wi hæv tə hɝi. doʊn jə ʌndɝstæn ðə wɝd tʃɹʌbəl?"

"We have to hurry. Don't you understand the word trouble?"

aʊtsaɪd ðə ɹum mæt weɪɾəd, kloʊkt ən koʊɾəd ən kæɹiɪŋ ɪz baʊ. ə kwɪvɝ hʌŋ əɾ ɪz weɪst. hi wɑz ɹɑkɪŋ æŋkʃəsli ɑn ɪz hilz, ən i kɛpt ɡlænsɪŋ ɔf təwɔɹd ðə stɛɹz wɪð wʌt sim tə bi ikwəl pɑɹts ɪmpeɪʃəns ən fɪɹ. "ðɪs ɪzən mʌtʃ laɪk ðə stɔɹiz, ɹænd, ɪz ɪt?" hi sɛd hɔɹsli.

Outside the room Mat waited, cloaked and coated and carrying his bow. A quiver hung at his waist. He was rocking anxiously on his heels, and he kept glancing off toward the stairs with what seemed to be equal parts impatience and fear. "This isn't much like the stories, Rand, is it?" he said hoarsely.

"wʌt kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl?" ɹænd dɪmændəd, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɹæn əhɛɾ ə hɪm ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ænsɝɪŋ, teɪkɪŋ ðə stɛps daʊn tu əɾ ə taɪm. mæt dæʃt æftɝ ɪm wɪð kwɪk dʒɛstʃɝz fəɹ ɹænd tə fɑloʊ.

"What kind of trouble?" Rand demanded, but the Warder ran ahead of him instead of answering, taking the steps down two at a time. Mat dashed after him with quick gestures for Rand to follow.

ʃɹʌɡɪŋ ɪndə hɪz kloʊk, hi kɑɾ ʌp tə ðɛm daʊnstɛɹz. oʊnli ə fibəl laɪt fɪl ðə kɑmən ɹum; hæf ðə kændəlz hæd bɝn aʊɾ ən moʊst ə ðə ɹɛst wɝ ɡʌɾɝɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm. mæt stʊd nɛks tə wʌn ə ðə fɹʌnt wɪndoʊz, pipɪŋ aʊɾ əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə bi sin. læn hɛl ðə dɔɹ oʊpən ə kɹæk ən pɪɹɾ ɪndə ði ɪn jɑɹd.

Shrugging into his cloak, he caught up to them downstairs. Only a feeble light filled the common room; half the candles had burned out and most of the rest were guttering. It was empty except for the three of them. Mat stood next to one of the front windows, peeping out as if trying not to be seen. Lan held the door open a crack and peered into the inn yard.

wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ kəd bi wɑtʃɪŋ, ɹænd wɛn tə dʒɔɪn hɪm. ðə wɔɹɾɝ mʌɾɝd əɾ ɪm tə teɪk ə kɛɹ, bʌɾ i dɪɾ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ə tʃɹaɪfəl waɪɾɝ tə meɪk ɹum fəɹ ɹænd tə lʊk, tu.

Wondering what they could be watching, Rand went to join him. The Warder muttered at him to take a care, but he did open the door a trifle wider to make room for Rand to look, too.

ət fɝst i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪɡzækli wʌɾ i wɑz siɪŋ. ə kɹaʊɾ ə vɪlədʒ mɛn, səm θɹi dʌzən əɹ soʊ, klʌstɝd nɪɹ ðə bɝnd-aʊt hʌsk ə ðə pɛdlɝz wæɡən, naɪt pʊʃt bæk baɪ ðə tɔɹtʃɪz səm ə ðɛm kæɹid. mɔɪɹeɪn feɪs ðɛm, hɝ bæk tə ði ɪn, linɪŋ wɪð simɪŋ kæʒəɑlnəs ɑn əɹ wɔkɪŋ stæf. hɑɹi kɑplɪn stʊɾ ɪn ðə fɹʌn ə ðə kɹaʊd wɪð ɪz bɹʌðɝ, dɑɹl, ən bili kɔŋɡɝ. sɛn bui wɑz ðɛɹ, əz wɛl, lʊkɪŋ ənkʌmftəɹbəl. ɹænd wɑz stɑɹɾəld tə si hɑɹi ʃeɪk ɪz fɪst ət mɔɪɹeɪn.

At first he was not sure exactly what he was seeing. A crowd of village men, some three dozen or so, clustered near the burned-out husk of the peddler's wagon, night pushed back by the torches some of them carried. Moiraine faced them, her back to the inn, leaning with seeming casualness on her walking staff. Hari Coplin stood in the front of the crowd with his brother, Darl, and Bili Congar. Cenn Buie was there, as well, looking uncomfortable. Rand was startled to see Hari shake his fist at Moiraine.

"liv ɛmənz fild!" ðə saʊɝ-feɪs fɑɹmɝ ʃaʊɾəd. ə fju vɔɪsəz ɪn ðə kɹaʊɾ ɛkoʊd hɪm, bʌt hɛzɪɾəntli, ən noʊ wʌn pʊʃt fɔɹwɝd. ðeɪ maɪt bi wɪlɪŋ tə kənfɹʌn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fɹəm wɪðɪn ə kɹaʊd, bʌt nʌn ə ðɛm wɑntəd tə bi sɪŋɡəld aʊt. nɑt baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu hæɾ ɛvɹi ɹizən tə teɪk əfɛns.

"Leave Emond's Field!" the sour-faced farmer shouted. A few voices in the crowd echoed him, but hesitantly, and no one pushed forward. They might be willing to confront an Aes Sedai from within a crowd, but none of them wanted to be singled out. Not by an Aes Sedai who had every reason to take offense.

"ju bɹɔt ðoʊz mɑnstɝz!" dɑɹl ɹɔɹd. hi weɪvd ə tɔɹtʃ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, ən ðəɹ wɝ ʃaʊts ʌv, "ju bɹɔt ðɛm!" ən "ɪts jəɹ fɔlt!" lɛd baɪ hɪz kʌzən bili.

"You brought those monsters!" Darl roared. He waved a torch over his head, and there were shouts of, "You brought them!" and "It's your fault!" led by his cousin Bili.

hɑɹi ɛlboʊd sɛn bui, ən ði oʊl θætʃɝ pɝst ɪz lɪps ən ɡeɪv ɪm ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlɛɹ. "ðoʊz θɪŋz . . . ðoʊz tʃɹɑləks dɪdn əpɪɹ əntɪl æftɝ jə keɪm," sɛn mʌɾɝd, bɛɹli laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə bi hɝd. hi swʌŋ ɪz hɛd fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd dɔɹli əz ɪf wɪʃɪŋ i wɝ sʌmwɛɹ ɛls ən lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə weɪ tə ɡɛt ðɛɹ. "jɔɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. wi wɑnt nʌn ə jəɹ sɔɹɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ɛɛs sədaɪ bɹɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl ɑn ðɛɹ bæks. ɪf jə steɪ, jəl oʊnli bɹɪŋ mɔɹ."

Hari elbowed Cenn Buie, and the old thatcher pursed his lips and gave him a sidelong glare. "Those things . . . those Trollocs didn't appear until after you came," Cenn muttered, barely loud enough to be heard. He swung his head from side to side dourly as if wishing he were somewhere else and looking for a way to get there. "You're an Aes Sedai. We want none of your sort in the Two Rivers. Aes Sedai bring trouble on their backs. If you stay, you will only bring more."

hɪz spitʃ bɹɔt noʊ ɹɪspɑns fɹəm ðə ɡæðɝd vɪlɪdʒɝz, ən hɑɹi skaʊld ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. əbɹʌpli hi snætʃt dɑɹlz tɔɹtʃ ən ʃʊk ɪɾ ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən. "ɡɛɾ aʊt!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "ɔɹ wɪl bɝn jə aʊt!"

His speech brought no response from the gathered villagers, and Hari scowled in frustration. Abruptly he snatched Darl's torch and shook it in her direction. "Get out!" he shouted. "Or we'll burn you out!"

dɛd saɪləns fɛl, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə ʃʌflɪŋ ʌv ə fju fiɾ əz mɛn dʒɹu bæk. tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk kəd faɪt bæk ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ətækt, bʌt vaɪələns wɑz fɑɹ fɹəm kɑmən, ən θɹɛɾənɪŋ pipəl wɑz fɔɹən tə ðɛm, bɪɑn ði əkeɪʒənəl ʃeɪkɪŋ ʌv ə fɪst. sɛn bui, bili kɔŋɡɝ, ən ðə kɑplɪnz wɝ lɛft aʊt fɹʌn əloʊn. bili lʊkt əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə bæk əweɪ, tu.

Dead silence fell, except for the shuffling of a few feet as men drew back. Two Rivers folk could fight back if they were attacked, but violence was far from common, and threatening people was foreign to them, beyond the occasional shaking of a fist. Cenn Buie, Bili Congar, and the Coplins were left out front alone. Bili looked as if he wanted to back away, too.

hɑɹi ɡeɪv ən ənizi stɑɹɾ ət ðə læk ə səpɔɹt, bʌɾ i ɹəkʌvɝd kwɪkli. "ɡɛɾ aʊt!" hi ʃaʊɾəd əɡɛn, ɛkoʊd baɪ dɑɹl ænd, mɔɹ wikli, baɪ bili. hɑɹi ɡlɛɹɾ ət ði ʌðɝz. moʊst ə ðə kɹaʊd feɪl tə miɾ ɪz aɪ.

Hari gave an uneasy start at the lack of support, but he recovered quickly. "Get out!" he shouted again, echoed by Darl and, more weakly, by Bili. Hari glared at the others. Most of the crowd failed to meet his eye.

sʌɾənli bɹæn ælvɪɹ ən hɹəl luhən muvd aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz, stɑpɪŋ əpɑɹt fɹəm boʊθ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə kɹaʊd. ɪn wʌn hæn ðə meɪɝ kæʒəwəli kæɹid ðə bɪɡ wʊɾən mɔl i juz tə dʒɹaɪv spɪɡəts ɪndə kæsks. "dɪd sʌmwʌn sədʒɛs bɝnɪŋ maɪ ɪn?" hi æsk sɔfli.

Suddenly Bran al'Vere and Haral Luhhan moved out of the shadows, stopping apart from both the Aes Sedai and the crowd. In one hand the Mayor casually carried the big wooden maul he used to drive spigots into casks. "Did someone suggest burning my inn?" he asked softly.

ðə tu kɑplɪnz tʊk ə stɛp bæk, ən sɛn bui ɛdʒd əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm. bili kɔŋɡɝ daɪvd ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd. "nɑt ðæt," dɑɹl sɛd kwɪkli. "wi nɛvɝ sɛd ðæt, bɹæn . . . ɑ, meɪɝ."

The two Coplins took a step back, and Cenn Buie edged away from them. Bili Congar dived into the crowd. "Not that," Darl said quickly. "We never said that, Bran . . . ah, Mayor."

bɹæn nɑɾəd. "ðɛn pɝhæps aɪ hɝd jə θɹɛɾənɪŋ tə hɑɹm ɡɛsts ɪn maɪ ɪn?"

Bran nodded. "Then perhaps I heard you threatening to harm guests in my inn?"

"ʃiz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ," hɑɹi bɪɡæn æŋɡɹəli, bʌɾ ɪz wɝdz kʌɾ ɔf əz hɹəl luhən muvd.

"She's an Aes Sedai," Hari began angrily, but his words cut off as Haral Luhhan moved.

ðə blæksmɪθ sɪmpli stʃɹɛtʃt, θɹʌstɪŋ θɪk ɑɹmz oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, taɪɾənɪŋ mæsɪv fɪsts əntɪl ɪz nʌkəlz kɹækt, bʌt hɑɹi lʊkt ət ðə bɝli mæn əz ɪf wʌn ə ðoʊz fɪsts hæd bɪn ʃeɪkən ʌndɝ ɪz noʊz. hɹəl foʊldəɾ ɪz ɑɹmz əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst. "jɔɹ pɑɹɾən, hɑɹi. aɪ dɪd nɑt min tə kʌt jə ɔf. jə wɝ seɪɪŋ?"

The blacksmith simply stretched, thrusting thick arms over his head, tightening massive fists until his knuckles cracked, but Hari looked at the burly man as if one of those fists had been shaken under his nose. Haral folded his arms across his chest. "Your pardon, Hari. I did not mean to cut you off. You were saying?"

bʌt hɑɹi, ʃoʊldɝz hʌntʃt əz ðoʊ hi wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒɹɔ ɪndə hɪmsɛlf ən dɪsəpɪɹ, sim tə hæv nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ tə seɪ.

But Hari, shoulders hunched as though he were trying to draw into himself and disappear, seemed to have nothing more to say.

"aɪm sɝpɹaɪzd ət jə pipəl," bɹæn ɹʌmbəld. "pəɾ ɑlkɑɹ, jəɹ bɔɪz lɛɡ wɑz bɹoʊkən læs naɪt, bʌɾ aɪ sɔ hɪm wɔkɪŋ ɑn ɪt tədeɪ - kəz ə hɝ. juwɔɝd kændwɪn, jə wɝ laɪɪŋ ɑn jəɹ bɛli wɪð ə ɡæʃ daʊn jəɹ bæk laɪk ə fɪʃ fəɹ klinɪŋ, tɪl ʃi leɪd hænz ɑn ju. naʊ ɪt lʊks əz ɪf ɪt hæpən ə mʌnθ əɡoʊ, ən ənlɛs aɪ mɪsdaʊt ðɛɹəl bɛɹli bi ə skɑɹ. ən ju, sɛn." ðə θætʃɝ stɑɹɾəd tə feɪd bæk ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd, bʌt stɑpt, hɛld ənkʌmftəbli baɪ bɹænz ɡeɪz. "aɪd bi ʃɑk tə si ɛni mæn ɑn ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl hɪɹ, sɛn, bʌt jə moʊst ʌv ɔl. jəɹ ɑɹm wəd stɪl bi hæŋɪŋ jusləs ət jəɹ saɪd, ə mæs ə bɝnz ən bɹuzəz, ɪf nɑt fəɹ hɝ. ɪf juv noʊ ɡɹæɾətud, hæv jə noʊ ʃeɪm?"

"I'm surprised at you people," Bran rumbled. "Paet al'Caar, your boy's leg was broken last night, but I saw him walking on it today - because of her. Eward Candwin, you were lying on your belly with a gash down your back like a fish for cleaning, till she laid hands on you. Now it looks as if it happened a month ago, and unless I misdoubt there'll barely be a scar. And you, Cenn." The thatcher started to fade back into the crowd, but stopped, held uncomfortably by Bran's gaze. "I'd be shocked to see any man on the Village Council here, Cenn, but you most of all. Your arm would still be hanging useless at your side, a mass of burns and bruises, if not for her. If you have no gratitude, have you no shame?"

sɛn hæf lɪftəɾ ɪz ɹaɪt hænd, ðən lʊkt əweɪ fɹəm ɪɾ æŋɡɹəli. "aɪ kænɑt dɪnaɪ wʌt ʃi dɪd," hi mʌɾɝd, ən i dɪd saʊn əʃeɪmd. "ʃi hɛlp mi, ən ʌðɝz," hi wɛn ɑn ɪn ə pliɾɪŋ toʊn, "bʌt ʃiz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, bɹæn. ɪf ðoʊz tʃɹɑləks dɪdn kʌm kəz ə hɝ, waɪ dɪd ðeɪ kʌm? wi wɑnt noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. lɛɾ əm kip ðɛɹ tʃɹʌbəlz əweɪ fɹəm ʌs."

Cenn half lifted his right hand, then looked away from it angrily. "I cannot deny what she did," he muttered, and he did sound ashamed. "She helped me, and others," he went on in a pleading tone, "but she's an Aes Sedai, Bran. If those Trollocs didn't come because of her, why did they come? We want no part of Aes Sedai in the Two Rivers. Let them keep their troubles away from us."

ə fju mɛn, seɪfli bæk ɪn ðə kɹaʊd, ʃaʊɾəd ðɛn. "wi wɑnt noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃɹʌbəlz!" "sɛn əɹ əweɪ!" "dʒɹaɪv əɹ aʊt!" "waɪ dɪd ðeɪ kʌm ɪf nɑt kəz ə hɝ?"

A few men, safely back in the crowd, shouted then. "We want no Aes Sedai troubles!" "Send her away!" "Drive her out!" "Why did they come if not because of her?"

ə skaʊl ɡɹu ɑn bɹænz feɪs, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəd spik mɔɪɹeɪn sʌɾənli wɝld əɹ vaɪn-kɑɹv stæf əbʌv əɹ hɛd, spɪnɪŋ ɪt wɪð boʊθ hænz. ɹændz ɡæsp ɛkoʊd ðəɾ ə ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz, fəɹ ə hɪsɪŋ waɪt fleɪm flɛɹd fɹəm itʃ ɛn ə ðə stæf, stændɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt laɪk spɪɹpɔɪns dɪspaɪt ðə ɹɑdz wɝlɪŋ. ivən bɹæn ən hɹəl ɛdʒd əweɪ fɹəm hɝ. ʃi snæpt əɹ ɑɹmz daʊn stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt bɪfɔɹ hɝ, ðə stæf pɛɹəlɛl tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, bʌt ðə peɪl faɪɝ stɪl dʒɛɾɪd aʊt, bɹaɪɾɝ ðən ðə tɔɹtʃɪz. mɛn ʃaɪɾ əweɪ, hɛld ʌp hænz tə ʃil ðɛɹ aɪz fɹəm ðə peɪn ə ðət bɹɪljəns.

A scowl grew on Bran's face, but before he could speak Moiraine suddenly whirled her vine-carved staff above her head, spinning it with both hands. Rand's gasp echoed that of the villagers, for a hissing white flame flared from each end of the staff, standing straight out like spearpoints despite the rod's whirling. Even Bran and Haral edged away from her. She snapped her arms down straight out before her, the staff parallel to the ground, but the pale fire still jetted out, brighter than the torches. Men shied away, held up hands to shield their eyes from the pain of that brilliance.

"ɪz ðɪs wʌɾ æɛmənz blʌɾ əz kʌm tə?" ði ɛɛs sədaɪz vɔɪs wɑz nɑt laʊd, bʌɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝwɛlmd ɛvɹi ʌðɝ saʊnd. "lɪɾəl pipəl skwɑbəlɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɹaɪt tə haɪd laɪk ɹæbəts? juv fɝɡɑɾən u jə wɝ, fɝɡɑɾən wʌt jə wɝ, bʌɾ aɪ hæd hoʊp səm smɔl pɑɹt wɑz lɛft, səm mɛmɹi ɪn blʌɾ ən boʊn. səm ʃɹɛd tə stil jə fəɹ ðə lɔŋ naɪt kʌmɪŋ."

"Is this what Aemon's blood has come to?" The Aes Sedai's voice was not loud, but it overwhelmed every other sound. "Little people squabbling for the right to hide like rabbits? You have forgotten who you were, forgotten what you were, but I had hoped some small part was left, some memory in blood and bone. Some shred to steel you for the long night coming."

noʊ wʌn spoʊk. ðə tu kɑplɪnz lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ nɛvɝ wɑntəd tə oʊpən ðɛɹ maʊðz əɡɛn.

No one spoke. The two Coplins looked as if they never wanted to open their mouths again.

bɹæn sɛd, "fɝɡɑɾən u wi wɝ? wəɹ u wi ɔlweɪz əv bɪn. ɑnəs fɑɹmɝz ən ʃɛpɝdz ən kɹæfsmən. tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk."

Bran said, "Forgotten who we were? We are who we always have been. Honest farmers and shepherds and craftsmen. Two Rivers folk."

"tə ðə saʊθ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "laɪz ðə ɹɪvɝ jə kɔl ðə waɪt ɹɪvɝ, bʌt fɑɹ tə ði ist ə hɪɹ mɛn kɔl ɪt stɪl baɪ ɪts ɹaɪtfəl neɪm. meɪnɛðɹəndʒɹɛl. ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, wɔɾɝz ə ðə maʊntən hoʊm. spɑɹklɪŋ wɔɾɝz ðət wʌns kɔɹs θɹu ə læn ə bɹeɪvɝi ən bjuɾi. tu θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ meɪnɛðɹəndʒɹɛl floʊd baɪ ðə wɔlz ʌv ə maʊntən sɪɾi soʊ lʌvli tə bɪhoʊl ðəɾ oʊɡiɝ stoʊnmeɪsɑnz keɪm tə stɛɹ ɪn wʌndɝ. fɑɹmz ən vɪlədʒəz kʌvɝd ðɪs ɹidʒən, ən ðət jə kɔl ðə fɔɹəst ə ʃædoʊz, əz wɛl, ən bɪɑnd. bʌɾ ɔl ə ðoʊz foʊk θɔɾ ə ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðə pipəl ə ðə maʊntən hoʊm, ðə pipəl ə meɪnɛðɝən.

"To the south," Moiraine said, "lies the river you call the White River, but far to the east of here men call it still by its rightful name. Manetherendrelle. In the Old Tongue, Waters of the Mountain Home. Sparkling waters that once coursed through a land of bravery and beauty. Two thousand years ago Manetherendrelle flowed by the walls of a mountain city so lovely to behold that Ogier stonemasons came to stare in wonder. Farms and villages covered this region, and that you call the Forest of Shadows, as well, and beyond. But all of those folk thought of themselves as the people of the Mountain Home, the people of Manetheren.

"ðɛɹ kɪŋ wɑz æɛmən æl kɑɹ æl θɔɹɪn, æɛmən sʌn ə kɑɹ sʌn ə θɔɹɪn, ən ɛldʒɹin eɪ ɛlən eɪ kɑɹlən wɑz ɪz kwin. æɛmən, ə mæn soʊ fɪɹləs ðət ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst kɑmpləmən fəɹ kɝədʒ ɛni kəd ɡɪv, ivən əmʌŋ ɪz ɛnəmiz, wɑz tə seɪ ə mæn hæɾ æɛmənz hɑɹt. ɛldʒɹin, soʊ bjuɾəfəl ðəɾ ɪt wɑz sɛd ðə flaʊɝz blum tə meɪk əɹ smaɪl. bɹeɪvɝi ən bjuɾi ən wɪzdəm ən ə lʌv ðət dɛθ kəd nɑt sʌndɝ. wip, ɪf juv ə hɑɹt, fəɹ ðə lɔs ə ðɛm, fəɹ ðə lɔs ʌv ivən ðɛɹ mɛmɹi. wip, fəɹ ðə lɔs ə ðɛɹ blʌd."

"Their King was Aemon al Caar al Thorin, Aemon son of Caar son of Thorin, and Eldrene ay Ellan ay Carlan was his Queen. Aemon, a man so fearless that the greatest compliment for courage any could give, even among his enemies, was to say a man had Aemon's heart. Eldrene, so beautiful that it was said the flowers bloomed to make her smile. Bravery and beauty and wisdom and a love that death could not sunder. Weep, if you have a heart, for the loss of them, for the loss of even their memory. Weep, for the loss of their blood."

ʃi fɛl saɪlən ðɛn, bʌt noʊ wʌn spoʊk. ɹænd wɑz əz baʊn əz ði ʌðɝz ɪn ðə spɛl ʃi hæd kɹieɪɾəd. wən ʃi spoʊk əɡɛn, hi dʒɹæŋk ɪɾ ɪn, ən soʊ dɪd ðə ɹɛst.

She fell silent then, but no one spoke. Rand was as bound as the others in the spell she had created. When she spoke again, he drank it in, and so did the rest.

"fɔɹ nɪɹli tu sɛntʃɝiz ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz hæd ɹævɪdʒ ðə lɛŋθ ən bɹɛdθ ə ðə wɝld, ən wɛɹɛvɝ bæɾəlz ɹeɪdʒd, ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl bænɝ ə meɪnɛðɝən wɑz ɪn ðə fɔɹfɹʌnt. ðə mɛn ə meɪnɛðɝən wɝ ə θɔɹn tə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz fʊɾ ən ə bɹæmbəl tə hɪz hænd. sɪŋ ə meɪnɛðɝən, ðət wəd nɛvɝ bɛnd ni tə ðə ʃædoʊ. sɪŋ ə meɪnɛðɝən, ðə sɔɹd ðət kəd nɑt bi bɹoʊkən.

"For nearly two centuries the Trolloc Wars had ravaged the length and breadth of the world, and wherever battles raged, the Red Eagle banner of Manetheren was in the forefront. The men of Manetheren were a thorn to the Dark One's foot and a bramble to his hand. Sing of Manetheren, that would never bend knee to the Shadow. Sing of Manetheren, the sword that could not be broken.

"ðeɪ wɝ fɑɹ əweɪ, ðə mɛn ə meɪnɛðɝən, ɑn ðə fild ə bɛkɑɹ, kɔl ðə fild ə blʌd, wən nuz keɪm ðəɾ ə tʃɹɑlɑk ɑɹmi wɑz muvɪŋ əɡɛns ðɛɹ hoʊm. tu fɑɹ tə də ɛls bʌt weɪt tə hɪɹ ə ðɛɹ lænz dɛθ, fəɹ ðə fɔɹsɪz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn mɛn tə meɪk ən ɛn ə ðɛm. kɪl ðə maɪɾi oʊk baɪ hækɪŋ əweɪ ɪts ɹuts. tu fɑɹ tə də ɛls bʌt mɔɹn. bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ðə mɛn ə ðə maʊntən hoʊm.

"They were far away, the men of Manetheren, on the Field of Bekkar, called the Field of Blood, when news came that a Trolloc army was moving against their home. Too far to do else but wait to hear of their land's death, for the forces of the Dark One meant to make an end of them. Kill the mighty oak by hacking away its roots. Too far to do else but mourn. But they were the men of the Mountain Home.

"wɪθaʊt hɛzəteɪʃən, wɪθaʊt θɔt fəɹ ðə dɪstəns ðeɪ mʌs tʃɹævəl, ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt fɹəm ðə vɛɹi fild ə vɪktɝi, stɪl kʌvɝɾ ɪn dʌst ən swɛɾ ən blʌd. deɪ ən naɪt ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt, fəɹ ðeɪ hæd sin ðə hɔɹɝ ə tʃɹɑlɑk ɑɹmi lɛf bɪhaɪn ɪt, ən noʊ mæn ə ðɛm kəd slip waɪl sətʃ ə deɪnʒɝ θɹɛɾənd meɪnɛðɝən. ðeɪ muvd əz ɪf ðɛɹ fit hæd wɪŋz, mɑɹtʃɪŋ fɝðɝ ən fæstɝ ðən fɹɛnz hoʊpt əɹ ɛnəmiz fɪɹd ðeɪ kʊd. əɾ ɛni ʌðɝ deɪ ðət mɑɹtʃ əloʊn wʊɾə ɪnspaɪɝd sɔŋz. wən ðə dɑɹk wʌnz ɑɹmiz swup daʊn əpɑn ðə lænz ə meɪnɛðɝən, ðə mɛn ə ðə maʊntən hoʊm stʊd bɪfɔɹ ɪt, wɪð ðɛɹ bæks tə ðə tɛɹɛndʒɹɛl."

"Without hesitation, without thought for the distance they must travel, they marched from the very field of victory, still covered in dust and sweat and blood. Day and night they marched, for they had seen the horror a Trolloc army left behind it, and no man of them could sleep while such a danger threatened Manetheren. They moved as if their feet had wings, marching further and faster than friends hoped or enemies feared they could. At any other day that march alone would have inspired songs. When the Dark One's armies swooped down upon the lands of Manetheren, the men of the Mountain Home stood before it, with their backs to the Tarendrelle."

səm vɪlɪdʒɝ ɹeɪzd ə smɔl tʃɪɹ ðɛn, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn kɛpt ɑn əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt hɝd. "ðə hoʊs ðət feɪs ðə mɛn ə meɪnɛðɝən wɑz ɪnʌf tə dɔn ðə bɹeɪvəs hɑɹt. ɹeɪvənz blækən ðə skaɪ; tʃɹɑləks blækən ðə lænd. tʃɹɑləks ən ðɛɹ hjumən ælaɪz. tʃɹɑləks ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn tɛnz ə tɛnz ə θaʊzənz, ən dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz tə kəmænd. ət naɪt ðɛɹ kʊk-faɪɝz aʊtnʌmbɝd ðə stɑɹz, ən dɔn ɹɪvil ðə bænɝ ə bælzəmən ət ðɛɹ hɛd. bælzəmən, hɑɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk. ən eɪntʃənt neɪm fəɹ ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz. ðə dɑɹk wʌn kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn fɹi ʌv ɪz pɹɪzən ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, fəɹ ɪf i hæd bɪn, nɑɾ ɔl ðə fɔɹsɪz ə hjumənkaɪn təɡɛðɝ cʊɾə stʊɾ əɡɛns hɪm, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz paʊɝ ðɛɹ. dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz, ən səm ivəl ðət meɪd ðət laɪt-dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ bænɝ sim noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɹaɪɾ ən sɛn ə tʃɪl ɪndə ðə soʊlz ə ðə mɛn u feɪst ɪt.

Some villager raised a small cheer then, but Moiraine kept on as if she had not heard. "The host that faced the men of Manetheren was enough to daunt the bravest heart. Ravens blackened the sky; Trollocs blackened the land. Trollocs and their human allies. Trollocs and Darkfriends in tens of tens of thousands, and Dreadlords to command. At night their cook-fires outnumbered the stars, and dawn revealed the banner of Ba'alzamon at their head. Ba'alzamon, Heart of the Dark. An ancient name for the Father of Lies. The Dark One could not have been free of his prison at Shayol Ghul, for if he had been, not all the forces of humankind together could have stood against him, but there was power there. Dreadlords, and some evil that made that light-destroying banner seem no more than right and sent a chill into the souls of the men who faced it.

"jɛt, ðeɪ nu wʌt ðeɪ mʌs du. ðɛɹ hoʊmlæn leɪ dʒʌst əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðeɪ mʌs kip ðət hoʊst, ən ðə paʊɝ wɪð ɪt, fɹəm ðə maʊntən hoʊm. æɛmən hæd sɛn aʊt mɛsənʒɝz. eɪd wɑz pɹɑməst ɪf ðeɪ kəd hoʊl fəɹ bʌt θɹi deɪz ət ðə tɛɹɛndʒɹɛl. hoʊl fəɹ θɹi deɪz əɡɛnst ɑdz ðət ʃəɾ oʊvɝwɛlm əm ɪn ðə fɝst aʊɝ. jɛt sʌmhaʊ, θɹu blʌɾi əsɔlt ən dɛspɹɪt dɪfɛns, ðeɪ hɛl θɹu ən aʊɝ, ən ðə sɛkən aʊɝ, ən ðə θɝd. fəɹ θɹi deɪz ðeɪ fɔt, ən ðoʊ ðə læn bɪkeɪm ə bʊtʃɝz jɑɹd, noʊ kɹɔsɪŋ ə ðə tɛɹɛndʒɹɛl dɪd ðeɪ jild. baɪ ðə θɝd naɪt noʊ hɛlp hæd kʌm, ən noʊ mɛsənʒɝz, ən ðeɪ fɔɾ ɑn əloʊn. fəɹ sɪks deɪz. fəɹ naɪn. ən ɑn ðə tɛnθ deɪ æɛmən nu ðə bɪɾɝ teɪst ə bɪtʃɹeɪəl. noʊ hɛlp wɑz kʌmɪŋ, ən ðeɪ kəd hoʊl ðə ɹɪvɝ kɹɔsɪŋz noʊ mɔɹ."

"Yet, they knew what they must do. Their homeland lay just across the river. They must keep that host, and the power with it, from the Mountain Home. Aemon had sent out messengers. Aid was promised if they could hold for but three days at the Tarendrelle. Hold for three days against odds that should overwhelm them in the first hour. Yet somehow, through bloody assault and desperate defense, they held through an hour, and the second hour, and the third. For three days they fought, and though the land became a butcher's yard, no crossing of the Tarendrelle did they yield. By the third night no help had come, and no messengers, and they fought on alone. For six days. For nine. And on the tenth day Aemon knew the bitter taste of betrayal. No help was coming, and they could hold the river crossings no more."

"wʌt dɪd ðeɪ du?" hɑɹi dɪmændəd. tɔɹtʃfaɪɝz flɪkɝɾ ɪn ðə tʃɪl naɪt bɹiz, bʌt noʊ wʌn meɪɾ ə muv tə dʒɹɔ ə kloʊk taɪɾɝ.

"What did they do?" Hari demanded. Torchfires flickered in the chill night breeze, but no one made a move to draw a cloak tighter.

"æɛmən kɹɔs ðə tɛɹɛndʒɹɛl," mɔɪɹeɪn toʊl ðɛm, "dɪstʃɹɔɪɪŋ ðə bɹɪdʒəz bɪhaɪn hɪm. ən i sɛnt wɝd θɹuaʊɾ ɪz læn fəɹ ðə pipəl tə fli, fəɹ i nu ðə paʊɝz wɪð ðə tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹd wəd faɪn ə weɪ tə bɹɪŋ ɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ. ivən əz ðə wɝd wɛn aʊt, ðə tʃɹɑlɑk kɹɔsɪŋ bɪɡæn, ən ðə soʊlʒɝz ə meɪnɛðɝən tʊk ʌp ðə faɪɾ əɡɛn, tə baɪ wɪð ðɛɹ laɪvz wʌɾ aʊɝz ðeɪ kəd fəɹ ðɛɹ pipəl tə ɪskeɪp. fɹəm ðə sɪɾi ʌv meɪnɛðɝən, ɛldʒɹin ɔɹɡənaɪz ðə flaɪɾ ə hɝ pipəl ɪndə ðə dipəs fɔɹəsts ən ðə fæsnəs ə ðə maʊntənz.

"Aemon crossed the Tarendrelle," Moiraine told them, "destroying the bridges behind him. And he sent word throughout his land for the people to flee, for he knew the powers with the Trolloc horde would find a way to bring it across the river. Even as the word went out, the Trolloc crossing began, and the soldiers of Manetheren took up the fight again, to buy with their lives what hours they could for their people to escape. From the city of Manetheren, Eldrene organized the flight of her people into the deepest forests and the fastness of the mountains.

"bʌt səm dɪd nɑt fli. fɝst ɪn ə tʃɹɪkəl, ðən ə ɹɪvɝ, ðən ə flʌd, mɛn wɛnt, nɑt tə seɪfti, bʌt tə dʒɔɪn ði ɑɹmi faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðɛɹ lænd. ʃɛpɝdz wɪð baʊz, ən fɑɹmɝz wɪð pɪtʃfɔɹks, ən wʊdzmɪn wɪð æksiz. wɪmən wɛnt, tu, ʃoʊldɝɪŋ wʌt wɛpənz ðeɪ kəd faɪn ən mɑɹtʃɪŋ saɪd baɪ saɪd wɪð ðɛɹ mɛn. noʊ wʌn meɪd ðət dʒɝni hu dɪd nɑt noʊ ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ ɹɪtɝn. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðɛɹ lænd. ɪt hæd bɪn ðɛɹ fɑðɝz', ən ɪt wəd bi ðɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹənz, ən ðeɪ wɛn tə peɪ ðə pɹaɪs ʌv ɪt. nɑɾ ə stɛp ʌv ɡɹaʊnd wɑz ɡɪvən ʌp əntɪl ɪt wɑz soʊkt ɪn blʌd, bʌɾ ət ðə læs ði ɑɹmi ʌv meɪnɛðɝən wɑz dʒɹɪvən bæk, bæk tə hɪɹ, tə ðɪs pleɪs jə naʊ kɔl ɛmənz fild. ən hɪɹ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹdz sɝaʊndəd ðɛm."

"But some did not flee. First in a trickle, then a river, then a flood, men went, not to safety, but to join the army fighting for their land. Shepherds with bows, and farmers with pitchforks, and woodsmen with axes. Women went, too, shouldering what weapons they could find and marching side by side with their men. No one made that journey who did not know they would never return. But it was their land. It had been their fathers', and it would be their children's, and they went to pay the price of it. Not a step of ground was given up until it was soaked in blood, but at the last the army of Manetheren was driven back, back to here, to this place you now call Emond's Field. And here the Trolloc hordes surrounded them."

hɝ vɔɪs hɛl ðə saʊn ə koʊl tɪɹz. "tʃɹɑlɑk dɛɾ ən ðə kɔɹpsəz ə hjumən ɹɛnəɡeɪdz paɪld ʌp ɪn maʊnz, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz mɔɹ skɹæmbəld oʊvɝ ðoʊz tʃɑɹnəl hips ɪn weɪvz ə dɛθ ðət hæd noʊ ɛnd. ðəɹ kəd bi bʌt wʌn fɪnɪʃ. noʊ mæn əɹ wʊmən u hæd stʊd bɪniθ ðə bænɝ ə ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl ət ðət deɪz dɔnɪŋ stɪl lɪvd wən naɪt fɛl. ðə sɔɹd ðət kəd nɑt bi bɹoʊkən wɑz ʃæɾɝd.

Her voice held the sound of cold tears. "Trolloc dead and the corpses of human renegades piled up in mounds, but always more scrambled over those charnel heaps in waves of death that had no end. There could be but one finish. No man or woman who had stood beneath the banner of the Red Eagle at that day's dawning still lived when night fell. The sword that could not be broken was shattered.

"ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, əloʊn ɪn ði ɛmptid sɪɾi ʌv meɪnɛðɝən, ɛldʒɹin fɛlt æɛmən daɪ, ən əɹ hɑɹt daɪd wɪð hɪm. ən wɛɹ əɹ hɑɹt hæd bɪn wɑz lɛft oʊnli ə θɝs fəɹ vɛnʒəns, vɛnʒəns fəɹ əɹ lʌv, vɛnʒəns fəɹ əɹ pipəl ən əɹ lænd. dʒɹɪvən baɪ ɡɹif ʃi ɹitʃt aʊt tə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ən hɝl ðə wʌn paʊɝ ət ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ɑɹmi. ən ðəɹ ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz daɪd wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ stʊd, wɛðɝ ɪn ðɛɹ sikɹət kaʊnsəlz əɹ ɪɡzɔɹɾɪŋ ðɛɹ soʊlʒɝz. ɪn ðə pæsɪŋ ʌv ə bɹɛθ ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz ən ðə dʒɛnɝəlz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz hoʊs bɝst ɪndə fleɪm. faɪɝ kənsum ðɛɹ bɑɾiz, ən tɛɹɝ kənsum ðɛɹ dʒʌst-vɪktɔɹiəs ɑɹmi.

"In the Mountains of Mist, alone in the emptied city of Manetheren, Eldrene felt Aemon die, and her heart died with him. And where her heart had been was left only a thirst for vengeance, vengeance for her love, vengeance for her people and her land. Driven by grief she reached out to the True Source, and hurled the One Power at the Trolloc army. And there the Dreadlords died wherever they stood, whether in their secret councils or exhorting their soldiers. In the passing of a breath the Dreadlords and the generals of the Dark One's host burst into flame. Fire consumed their bodies, and terror consumed their just-victorious army.

"naʊ ðeɪ ɹæn laɪk bists bɪfɔɹ ə waɪldfaɪɝ ɪn ðə fɔɹəst, wɪð noʊ θɔt fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ɪskeɪp. nɔɹθ ən saʊθ ðeɪ flɛd. θaʊzənz dʒɹaʊn ətɛmptɪŋ tə kɹɔs ðə tɛɹɛndʒɹɛl wɪθaʊt ði eɪɾ ə ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz, ən ət ðə meɪnɛðɹəndʒɹɛl ðeɪ tɔɹ daʊn ðə bɹɪdʒəz ɪn ðɛɹ fɹaɪɾ ət wʌt maɪt bi fɑloʊɪŋ ðɛm. wɛɹ ðeɪ faʊn pipəl, ðeɪ slu ən bɝnd, bʌt tə fli wɑz ðə nid ðət ɡɹɪp ðɛm. əntɪl, ət læst, noʊ wʌn ə ðɛm ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə lænz ə meɪnɛðɝən. ðeɪ wɝ dɪspɝs laɪk dʌs bɪfɔɹ ðə wɝlwɪnd. ðə faɪnəl vɛnʒəns keɪm mɔɹ sloʊli, bʌɾ ɪt keɪm, wən ðeɪ wɝ hʌntəd daʊn baɪ ʌðɝ pipəlz, baɪ ʌðɝ ɑɹmiz ɪn ʌðɝ lænz. nʌn wɑz lɛft əlaɪv ə ðoʊz u dɪd mɝɾɝ əɾ æɛmənz fild.

"Now they ran like beasts before a wildfire in the forest, with no thought for anything but escape. North and south they fled. Thousands drowned attempting to cross the Tarendrelle without the aid of the Dreadlords, and at the Manetherendrelle they tore down the bridges in their fright at what might be following them. Where they found people, they slew and burned, but to flee was the need that gripped them. Until, at last, no one of them remained in the lands of Manetheren. They were dispersed like dust before the whirlwind. The final vengeance came more slowly, but it came, when they were hunted down by other peoples, by other armies in other lands. None was left alive of those who did murder at Aemon's Field.

"bʌt ðə pɹaɪs wɑz haɪ fəɹ meɪnɛðɝən. ɛldʒɹin hæd dʒɹɔn tə hɝsɛlf mɔɹ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðən ɛni hjumən kəɾ ɛvɝ hoʊp tə wild əneɪɾɪd. əz ði ɛnəmi dʒɛnɝəlz daɪd, soʊ dɪd ʃi daɪ, ən ðə faɪɝz ðət kənsumd əɹ kənsum ði ɛmpti sɪɾi ʌv meɪnɛðɝən, ivən ðə stoʊnz ʌv ɪt, daʊn tə ðə lɪvɪŋ ɹɑk ə ðə maʊntənz. jɛt ðə pipəl hæd bɪn seɪvd.

"But the price was high for Manetheren. Eldrene had drawn to herself more of the One Power than any human could ever hope to wield unaided. As the enemy generals died, so did she die, and the fires that consumed her consumed the empty city of Manetheren, even the stones of it, down to the living rock of the mountains. Yet the people had been saved.

"nʌθɪŋ wɑz lɛft ə ðɛɹ fɑɹmz, ðɛɹ vɪlədʒəz, əɹ ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi. səm wəd seɪ ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ lɛft fəɹ ðɛm, nʌθɪŋ bʌt tə fli tə ʌðɝ lænz, wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd bɪɡɪn ənu. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt seɪ soʊ. ðeɪ hæd peɪd sətʃ ə pɹaɪs ɪn blʌɾ ən hoʊp fəɹ ðɛɹ læn əz hæd nɛvɝ bɪn peɪd bɪfɔɹ, ən naʊ ðeɪ wɝ baʊn tə ðət sɔɪl baɪ taɪz stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən stil. ʌðɝ wɔɹz wəd ɹæk əm ɪn jɪɹz tə kʌm, əntɪl ət læs ðɛɹ kɔɹnɝ ə ðə wɝld wɑz fɝɡɑɾən ən ət læs ðeɪ hæd fɝɡɑɾən wɔɹz ən ðə weɪz ʌv wɔɹ. nɛvɝ əɡɛn dɪd meɪnɛðɝən ɹaɪz. ɪts sɔɹɪŋ spaɪɹz ən splæʃɪŋ faʊntənz bɪkeɪm əz ə dʒɹim ðət sloʊli feɪɾəd fɹəm ðə maɪnz ʌv ɪts pipəl. bʌt ðeɪ, ən ðɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹən, ən ðɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹənz tʃɪlʒɹən, hɛl ðə læn ðət wɑz ðɛɹz. ðeɪ hɛld ɪt wən ðə lɔŋ sɛntʃɝiz hæd wɑʃt ðə waɪ ʌv ɪt fɹəm ðɛɹ mɛmɹiz. ðeɪ hɛld ɪɾ əntɪl, tədeɪ, ðəɹ ɪz ju. wip fəɹ meɪnɛðɝən. wip fəɹ wʌɾ ɪz lɔs fɝɛvɝ."

"Nothing was left of their farms, their villages, or their great city. Some would say there was nothing left for them, nothing but to flee to other lands, where they could begin anew. They did not say so. They had paid such a price in blood and hope for their land as had never been paid before, and now they were bound to that soil by ties stronger than steel. Other wars would wrack them in years to come, until at last their corner of the world was forgotten and at last they had forgotten wars and the ways of war. Never again did Manetheren rise. Its soaring spires and splashing fountains became as a dream that slowly faded from the minds of its people. But they, and their children, and their children's children, held the land that was theirs. They held it when the long centuries had washed the why of it from their memories. They held it until, today, there is you. Weep for Manetheren. Weep for what is lost forever."

ðə faɪɝz ɑn mɔɪɹeɪnz stæf wɪŋkt aʊt, ən ʃi loʊɝɾ ɪt tə hɝ saɪɾ əz ɪf ɪt weɪɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd paʊnz. fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən ðə moʊn ə ðə wɪnd wɑz ði oʊnli saʊnd. ðən pəɾ ɑlkɑɹ ʃoʊldɝd pæs ðə kɑplɪnz.

The fires on Moiraine's staff winked out, and she lowered it to her side as if it weighed a hundred pounds. For a long moment the moan of the wind was the only sound. Then Paet al'Caar shouldered past the Coplins.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt jəɹ stɔɹi," ðə lɔŋ-dʒɔd fɑɹmɝ sɛd. "ɪm noʊ θɔɹn tə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz fʊt, nɔɹ ɛvɝ laɪkli tə bi, niðɝ. bʌt maɪ wɪl ɪz wɔkɪŋ kəz ə ju, ən fəɹ ðəɾ aɪm əʃeɪm tə bi hɪɹ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf jə kən fɝɡɪv mi, bʌt wɛðɝ jəl əɹ noʊ, əl bi ɡoʊɪŋ. ən fəɹ mi, jə kən steɪ ɪn ɛmənz fild əz lɔŋ əz jə laɪk."

"I don't know about your story," the long-jawed farmer said. "I'm no thorn to the Dark One's foot, nor ever likely to be, neither. But my Wil is walking because of you, and for that I am ashamed to be here. I don't know if you can forgive me, but whether you will or no, I'll be going. And for me, you can stay in Emond's Field as long as you like."

wɪð ə kwɪk dʌk ə hɪz hɛd, ɔlmoʊst ə baʊ, hi pʊʃt bæk θɹu ðə kɹaʊd. ʌðɝz bɪɡæn tə mʌɾɝ ðɛn, ɔfɝɪŋ ʃeɪməfeɪs pɛnɪɾəns bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ, tu, slɪpt əweɪ wʌn baɪ wʌn. ðə kɑplɪnz, saʊɝ-maʊðd ən skaʊlɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ, lʊkt ət ðə feɪsəz ɝaʊn əm ən vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə naɪt wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd. bili kɔŋɡɝ hæd dɪsəpɪɹɾ ivən bɪfɔɹ ɪz kʌzənz.

With a quick duck of his head, almost a bow, he pushed back through the crowd. Others began to mutter then, offering shamefaced penitence before they, too, slipped away one by one. The Coplins, sour-mouthed and scowling once more, looked at the faces around them and vanished into the night without a word. Bili Congar had disappeared even before his cousins.

læn pʊld ɹænd bæk ən ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ. "lɛts ɡoʊ, bɔɪ." ðə wɔɹɾɝ stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə bæk ə ði ɪn. "kʌm əlɔŋ, boʊθ ə ju. kwɪkli!"

Lan pulled Rand back and shut the door. "Let's go, boy." The Warder started for the back of the inn. "Come along, both of you. Quickly!"

ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ ə wʌndɝɪŋ ɡlæns wɪð mæt. waɪl mɔɪɹeɪn hæd bɪn tɛlɪŋ ðə stɔɹi, mæstɝ ælvɪɹz dɝənz kəd nɑɾ əv dʒɹæɡd ɪm əweɪ, bʌt naʊ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls hɛld ɪz fit. ðɪs wɑz ðə ɹil bɪɡɪnɪŋ, livɪŋ ði ɪn ən fɑloʊɪŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɪndə ðə naɪt. . . . hi ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf, ən tʃɹaɪd tə fɝm ɪz ɹizɑlv. hi hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs bʌt tə ɡoʊ, bʌɾ i wəd kʌm bæk tə ɛmənz fild, haʊɛvɝ fɑɹ əɹ lɔŋ ðɪs dʒɝni wɑz.

Rand hesitated, exchanging a wondering glance with Mat. While Moiraine had been telling the story, Master al'Vere's Dhurrans could not have dragged him away, but now something else held his feet. This was the real beginning, leaving the inn and following the Warder into the night. . . . He shook himself, and tried to firm his resolve. He had no choice but to go, but he would come back to Emond's Field, however far or long this journey was.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ?" læn æsk fɹəm ðə dɔɹ ðət lɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə bæk ə ðə kɑmən ɹum. wɪð ə stɑɹt mæt hɝid tə hɪm.

"What are you waiting for?" Lan asked from the door that led out of the back of the common room. With a start Mat hurried to him.

tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ i wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə ɡɹæn ædvɛntʃɝ, ɹænd fɑloʊɾ əm θɹu ðə dɑɹkən kɪtʃən ən aʊɾ ɪndə ðə steɪbliɑɹd.

Trying to convince himself that he was beginning a grand adventure, Rand followed them through the darkened kitchen and out into the stableyard.


tʃæptɝ tɛn


CHAPTER 10

livɛteɪkɪŋ


Leavetaking

ə sɪŋɡəl læntɝn, ɪts ʃʌɾɝz hæf kloʊzd, hʌŋ fɹəm ə neɪl ɑn ə stɔl poʊst, kæstɪŋ ə dɪm laɪt. dip ʃædoʊz swɑloʊd moʊst ə ðə stɔlz. əz ɹænd keɪm θɹu ðə dɔɹz fɹəm ðə steɪbliɑɹd, hɑɹɾ ɑn ðə hilz ə mæt ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ, pɛɹɪn lɛpt ʌp ɪn ə ɹʌsəl ə stʃɹɔ fɹəm wɛɹ i hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ wɪð ɪz bæk əɡɛnst ə stɔl dɔɹ. ə hɛvi kloʊk swɑð hɪm.

A single lantern, its shutters half closed, hung from a nail on a stall post, casting a dim light. Deep shadows swallowed most of the stalls. As Rand came through the doors from the stableyard, hard on the heels of Mat and the Warder, Perrin leaped up in a rustle of straw from where he had been sitting with his back against a stall door. A heavy cloak swathed him.

læn bɛɹli pɔz tə dɪmænd, "dɪd jə lʊk ðə weɪ aɪ toʊl ju, blæksmɪθ?"

Lan barely paused to demand, "Did you look the way I told you, blacksmith?"

"aɪ lʊkt," pɛɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ðɛɹz noʊbɑdi hɪɹ bʌɾ ʌs. waɪ wəɾ ɛnibəɾi haɪd - "

"I looked," Perrin replied. "There's nobody here but us. Why would anybody hide - "

"kɛɹ ən ə lɔŋ laɪf ɡoʊ təɡɛðɝ, blæksmɪθ." ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɹæn ə kwɪk aɪ ɝaʊn ðə ʃæɾoʊd steɪbəl ən ðə dipɝ ʃædoʊz ə ðə heɪlɔft əbʌv, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "noʊ taɪm," hi mʌɾɝd, hæf tə hɪmsɛlf. "hɝi, ʃi sɛz."

"Care and a long life go together, blacksmith." The Warder ran a quick eye around the shadowed stable and the deeper shadows of the hayloft above, then shook his head. "No time," he muttered, half to himself. "Hurry, she says."

əz ɪf tə suɾ ɪz wɝdz, hi stʃɹoʊd kwɪkli tə wɛɹ ðə faɪv hɔɹsəz stʊd tɛðɝd, bɹaɪɾəld ən sæɾəld ət ðə bæk ə ðə pul ə laɪt. tu wɝ ðə blæk stæljən ən waɪt mɛɹ ðət ɹænd hæd sin bɪfɔɹ. ði ʌðɝz, ɪf nɑt kwaɪt soʊ tɔl əɹ soʊ slik, sɝɾənli əpɪɹd tə bi əmʌŋ ðə bɛs ðə tu ɹɪvɝz hæd tə ɔfɝ. wɪð heɪsti kɛɹ læn bɪɡæn ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ sɪntʃɪz ən ɡɝθ stʃɹæps, ən ðə lɛðɝ taɪz ðət hɛl sæɾəlbæɡz, wɔɾɝ-skɪnz, ən blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊlz bɪhaɪn ðə sæɾəlz.

As if to suit his words, he strode quickly to where the five horses stood tethered, bridled and saddled at the back of the pool of light. Two were the black stallion and white mare that Rand had seen before. The others, if not quite so tall or so sleek, certainly appeared to be among the best the Two Rivers had to offer. With hasty care Lan began examining cinches and girth straps, and the leather ties that held saddlebags, water-skins, and blanketrolls behind the saddles.

ɹænd ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ʃeɪki smaɪlz wɪð ɪz fɹɛnz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ hɑɹd tə lʊk əz ɪf i ɹɪli wɑz iɡɝ tə bi ɔf.

Rand exchanged shaky smiles with his friends, trying hard to look as if he really was eager to be off.

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm mæt noʊɾəst ðə sɔɹɾ ət ɹændz weɪst, ən pɔɪntəd tə ɪt. "ju bɪkʌmɪŋ ə wɔɹɾɝ?" hi læft, ðən swɑloʊɾ ɪt wɪð ə kwɪk ɡlæns ət læn. ðə wɔɹɾɝ əpɛɹənli tʊk noʊ noʊɾəs. "ɔɹ ət list ə mɝtʃəns ɡɑɹd," mæt wɛn ɑn wɪð ə ɡɹɪn ðət simd oʊnli ə lɪɾəl fɔɹst. hi hɛftəɾ ɪz baʊ. "æn ɑnəs mænz wɛpən ɪzənt ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ hɪm."

For the first time Mat noticed the sword at Rand's waist, and pointed to it. "You becoming a Warder?" He laughed, then swallowed it with a quick glance at Lan. The Warder apparently took no notice. "Or at least a merchant's guard," Mat went on with a grin that seemed only a little forced. He hefted his bow. "An honest man's weapon isn't good enough for him."

ɹænd θɔɾ əbaʊt flɝɪʃɪŋ ðə sɔɹd, bʌt læn biɪŋ ðəɹ stɑp hɪm. ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz nɑɾ ivən lʊkɪŋ ɪn ɪz dɝɛkʃən, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə mæn wɑz əwɛɹ ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət wɛn ɑn ɝaʊn hɪm. ɪnstɛɾ i sɛd wɪð ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd kæʒəɑlnəs, "ɪt maɪt bi jusfəl," əz ɪf wɛɹɪŋ ə sɔɹd wɝ nʌθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi.

Rand thought about flourishing the sword, but Lan being there stopped him. The Warder was not even looking in his direction, but he was sure the man was aware of everything that went on around him. Instead he said with exaggerated casualness, "It might be useful," as if wearing a sword were nothing out of the ordinary.

pɛɹɪn muvd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk. ɹænd ɡlɪmpst ə waɪd lɛðɝ bɛlt ɛnsɝkəlɪŋ ði əpɹɛntəs blæksmɪθs weɪst, wɪð ðə hændəl ʌv ən æks θɹʌs θɹu ə lup ɑn ðə bɛlt.

Perrin moved, trying to hide something under his cloak. Rand glimpsed a wide leather belt encircling the apprentice blacksmith's waist, with the handle of an axe thrust through a loop on the belt.

"wʌt juv ðɛɹ?" hi æskt.

"What do you have there?" he asked.

"mɝtʃəns ɡɑɹd, ɪndid," mæt huɾɪd.

"Merchant's guard, indeed," Mat hooted.

ðə ʃæɡi-hɛɹd juθ ɡeɪv mæt ə fɹaʊn ðət sədʒɛstəɾ i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæd mɔɹ ðən ɪz fɛɹ ʃɛɹ ə dʒoʊkɪŋ, ðən saɪd hɛvəli ən tɔs bæk ɪz kloʊk tə ənkʌvɝ ði æks. ɪt wɑz noʊ kɑmən wʊdzmənz tul. ə bɹɔd hæf-mun bleɪɾ ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ə ðə hɛɾ ən ə kɝv spaɪk ɑn ði ʌðɝ meɪɾ ɪɾ ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz stʃɹeɪnʒ fəɹ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz əz ɹændz sɔɹd. pɛɹɪnz hæn ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ɪt wɪð ə sɛns ə fəmɪljɛɹəɾi, ðoʊ.

The shaggy-haired youth gave Mat a frown that suggested he had already had more than his fair share of joking, then sighed heavily and tossed back his cloak to uncover the axe. It was no common woodsman's tool. A broad half-moon blade on one side of the head and a curved spike on the other made it every bit as strange for the Two Rivers as Rand's sword. Perrin's hand rested on it with a sense of familiarity, though.

"mæstɝ luhən meɪɾ ɪɾ əbaʊt tu jɪɹz əɡoʊ, fəɹ ə wʊl-baɪɝz ɡɑɹd. bʌt wən ɪt wɑz dʌn ðə fɛloʊ wʊdn peɪ wʌɾ i hæɾ əɡɹid, ən mæstɝ luhən wəd nɑt teɪk lɛs. hi ɡeɪv ɪt tə mi wɛn" - hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt, ðən ʃɑt ɹænd ðə seɪm wɔɹnɪŋ fɹaʊn hid ɡɪvən mæt - "wɛn i faʊn mi pɹæktəsɪŋ wɪð ɪt. hi sɛɾ aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl əv ɪt sɪns i kʊdn meɪk ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl fɹəm ɪt."

"Master Luhhan made it about two years ago, for a wool-buyer's guard. But when it was done the fellow wouldn't pay what he had agreed, and Master Luhhan would not take less. He gave it to me when" - he cleared his throat, then shot Rand the same warning frown he'd given Mat - "when he found me practicing with it. He said I might as well have it since he couldn't make anything useful from it."

"pɹæktəsɪŋ," mæt snɪkɝd, bʌt hɛld ʌp ɪz hænz suðɪŋli wən pɛɹɪn ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd. "æz jə seɪ. ɪts dʒʌst əz wɛl wʌn ʌv əs noʊz haʊ tə juz ə ɹil wɛpən."

"Practicing," Mat snickered, but held up his hands soothingly when Perrin raised his head. "As you say. It's just as well one of us knows how to use a real weapon."

"ðæt baʊ ɪz ə ɹil wɛpən," læn sɛd sʌɾənli. hi pɹɑpt ən ɑɹm əkɹɔs ðə sæɾəl ə hɪz tɔl blæk ən ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əm ɡɹeɪvli. "soʊ ɑɹ ðə slɪŋz aɪv sin jə vɪlədʒ bɔɪz wɪð. dʒʌs kəz jə nɛvɝ juzd əm fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt hʌntɪŋ ɹæbəts əɹ tʃeɪsɪŋ ə wʊlf əweɪ fɹəm ðə ʃip meɪks noʊ dɪfɝəns. ɛniθɪŋ kən bi ə wɛpən, ɪf ðə mæn əɹ wʊmən u hoʊlz ɪts ðə nɝv ən wɪl tə meɪk ɪt soʊ. tʃɹɑləks əsaɪd, jə hæd bɛɾɝ əv ðət klɪɹ ɪn jəɹ maɪnz bɪfɔɹ wi liv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, bɪfɔɹ wi liv ɛmənz fild, ɪf jə wɑnə ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn əlaɪv."

"That bow is a real weapon," Lan said suddenly. He propped an arm across the saddle of his tall black and regarded them gravely. "So are the slings I've seen you village boys with. Just because you never used them for anything but hunting rabbits or chasing a wolf away from the sheep makes no difference. Anything can be a weapon, if the man or woman who holds it has the nerve and will to make it so. Trollocs aside, you had better have that clear in your minds before we leave the Two Rivers, before we leave Emond's Field, if you want to reach Tar Valon alive."

hɪz feɪs ən vɔɪs, koʊld əz dɛθ ən hɑɹɾ əz ə ɹʌf-hjun ɡɹeɪvstoʊn, staɪfəl ðɛɹ smaɪlz ən ðɛɹ tʌŋz. pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪməst ən pʊld ɪz kloʊk bæk oʊvɝ ði æks. mæt stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz fiɾ ən stɝd ðə stʃɹɔ ɑn ðə steɪbəl flɔɹ wɪð ɪz toʊ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡɹʌntɪɾ ən wɛn bæk tə hɪz tʃɛkɪŋ, ən ðə saɪləns lɛŋθənd.

His face and voice, cold as death and hard as a rough-hewn gravestone, stifled their smiles and their tongues. Perrin grimaced and pulled his cloak back over the axe. Mat stared at his feet and stirred the straw on the stable floor with his toe. The Warder grunted and went back to his checking, and the silence lengthened.

"ɪɾ ɪzən mʌtʃ laɪk ðə stɔɹiz," mæt sɛd, faɪnəli.

"It isn't much like the stories," Mat said, finally.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd saʊɝli. "tʃɹɑləks, ə wɔɹɾɝ, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. wʌt mɔɹ kəd jə æsk?"

"I don't know," Perrin said sourly. "Trollocs, a Warder, an Aes Sedai. What more could you ask?"

"ɛɛs sədaɪ," mæt wɪspɝd, saʊndɪŋ əz ɪf i wɝ sʌɾənli koʊld.

"Aes Sedai," Mat whispered, sounding as if he were suddenly cold.

"du jə bɪliv hɝ, ɹænd?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "aɪ min, wʌt wəd tʃɹɑləks wɑnt wɪð ʌs?"

"Do you believe her, Rand?" Perrin asked. "I mean, what would Trollocs want with us?"

əz wʌn, ðeɪ ɡlænst ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ. læn əpɪɹɾ əbzɔɹbd ɪn ðə waɪt mɛɹz sæɾəl ɡɝθ, bʌt ðə θɹi ʌv əm muv bæk təwɔɹd ðə steɪbəl dɔɹ, əweɪ fɹəm læn. ivən soʊ, ðeɪ hʌɾəld təɡɛðɝ ən spoʊk sɔfli.

As one, they glanced at the Warder. Lan appeared absorbed in the white mare's saddle girth, but the three of them moved back toward the stable door, away from Lan. Even so, they huddled together and spoke softly.

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ɪt ɹaɪɾ əbaʊɾ əɹ fɑɹmz biɪŋ ði oʊnli wʌnz ətækt. ən ðeɪ ətæk mæstɝ luhənz haʊs ən ðə fɔɹdʒ fɝst, hɪɹ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ. aɪ æsk ðə meɪɝ. ɪts əz izi tə bɪliv ðeɪ ɑɹ æftɝ əs əz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls aɪ kən θɪŋk ʌv." sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm.

Rand shook his head. "I don't know, but she had it right about our farms being the only ones attacked. And they attacked Master Luhhan's house and the forge first, here in the village. I asked the Mayor. It's as easy to believe they are after us as anything else I can think of." Suddenly he realized they were both staring at him.

"ju æsk ðə meɪɝ?" mæt sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "ʃi sɛd nɑt tə tɛl ɛnibəɾi."

"You asked the Mayor?" Mat said incredulously. "She said not to tell anybody."

"aɪ dɪdn tɛl ɪm waɪ aɪ wɑz æskɪŋ," ɹænd pɹətɛstəd. "du jə min jə dɪdn tɔk tə ɛnibəɾi əɾ ɔl? jə dɪdn lɛɾ ɛnibəɾi noʊ jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ?"

"I didn't tell him why I was asking," Rand protested. "Do you mean you didn't talk to anybody at all? You didn't let anybody know you're going?"

pɛɹɪn ʃɹʌɡd dɪfɛnsɪvli. "mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛd nɑɾ ɛnibəɾi."

Perrin shrugged defensively. "Moiraine Sedai said not anybody."

"wi lɛf noʊts," mæt sɛd. "fɔɹ əɹ fæmliz. ðəl faɪn əm ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. ɹænd, maɪ mʌðɝ θɪŋks tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪz ðə nɛks θɪŋ tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl." hi ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl læf tə ʃoʊ hi dɪd nɑt ʃɛɹ əɹ əpɪnjən. ɪt wɑz nɑt vɛɹi kənvɪnsɪŋ. "ʃid tʃɹaɪ tə lɑk mi ɪn ðə sɛlɝ ɪf ʃi bɪlivd aɪ wɑz ivən θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ ðɛɹ."

"We left notes," Mat said. "For our families. They'll find them in the morning. Rand, my mother thinks Tar Valon is the next thing to Shayol Ghul." He gave a little laugh to show he did not share her opinion. It was not very convincing. "She'd try to lock me in the cellar if she believed I was even thinking of going there."

"mæstɝ luhən ɪz stʌbɝn əz stoʊn," pɛɹɪn æɾəd, "æn mɪstʃɹəs luhən ɪz wɝs. ɪf jud sin əɹ dɪɡɪŋ θɹu wʌts lɛft ə ðə haʊs, seɪɪŋ ʃi hoʊp ðə tʃɹɑləks dɪd kʌm bæk soʊ ʃi kəd ɡɛɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ðɛm. . . ."

"Master Luhhan is stubborn as stone," Perrin added, "and Mistress Luhhan is worse. If you'd seen her digging through what's left of the house, saying she hoped the Trollocs did come back so she could get her hands on them. . . ."

"bɝn mi, ɹænd," mæt sɛd, "aɪ noʊ ʃiz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɔl, bʌt ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ ɹɪli hɪɹ. ʃi sɛd nɑt tə tɛl ɛnibəɾi. ɪf ən ɛɛs sədaɪ dʌznt noʊ wʌt tə də əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðɪs, hu dʌz?"

"Burn me, Rand," Mat said, "I know she's an Aes Sedai and all, but the Trollocs were really here. She said not to tell anybody. If an Aes Sedai doesn't know what to do about something like this, who does?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ." ɹænd ɹʌbd əɾ ɪz fɔɹhɛd. hɪz hɛd hɝt; hi kəd nɑt ɡɛt ðət dʒɹim aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd. "maɪ fɑðɝ bɪlivz hɝ. ət list, hi əɡɹid ðət wi hæd tə ɡoʊ."

"I don't know." Rand rubbed at his forehead. His head hurt; he could not get that dream out of his mind. "My father believes her. At least, he agreed that we had to go."

sʌɾənli mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ. "ju tɔk tə jəɹ fɑðɝ əbaʊt ðɪs dʒɝni?" ʃi wɑz kloʊðd ɪn dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ fɹəm hɛd tə fʊt, wɪð ə skɝt dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ əstʃɹaɪd, ən ðə sɝpən ɹɪŋ wɑz ði oʊnli ɡoʊld ʃi wɔɹ naʊ.

Suddenly Moiraine was in the doorway. "You talked to your father about this journey?" She was clothed in dark gray from head to foot, with a skirt divided for riding astride, and the serpent ring was the only gold she wore now.

ɹænd aɪɾ əɹ wɔkɪŋ stæf; dɪspaɪt ðə fleɪmz i hæd sin, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ə tʃæɹɪŋ, əɹ ivən sʊt. "aɪ kʊdnt ɡoʊ ɔf wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ ɪm noʊ."

Rand eyed her walking staff; despite the flames he had seen, there was no sign of charring, or even soot. "I couldn't go off without letting him know."

ʃi aɪɾ ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmənt wɪð pɝs lɪps bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ tə ði ʌðɝz. "æn dɪd jə ɔlsoʊ dɪsaɪd ðəɾ ə noʊt wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf?" mæt ən pɛɹɪn tɔkt ɑn tɑp ʌv itʃ ʌðɝ, əʃʊɹɪŋ əɹ ðeɪ hæɾ oʊnli lɛf noʊts, ðə weɪ ʃi hæd sɛd. nɑɾɪŋ, ʃi weɪvd əm tə saɪləns, ən ɡeɪv ɹænd ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. "wʌɾ ɪz dʌn ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi woʊvən ɪn ðə pæɾɝn. læn?"

She eyed him for a moment with pursed lips before turning to the others. "And did you also decide that a note was not enough?" Mat and Perrin talked on top of each other, assuring her they had only left notes, the way she had said. Nodding, she waved them to silence, and gave Rand a sharp look. "What is done is already woven in the Pattern. Lan?"

"ðə hɔɹsəz ɑɹ ɹɛɾi," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd, "ænd wɪv ɪnʌf pɹəvɪʒənz tə ɹitʃ bɛɹlən wɪð səm tə spɛɹ. wi kən liv əɾ ɛni taɪm. aɪ sədʒɛs naʊ."

"The horses are ready," the Warder said, "and we have enough provisions to reach Baerlon with some to spare. We can leave at any time. I suggest now."

"nɑt wɪθaʊt mi." ɛɡwin slɪpt ɪndə ðə steɪbəl, ə ʃɔl-ɹæp bʌndəl ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz. ɹænd nɪɹli fɛl oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn fit.

"Not without me." Egwene slipped into the stable, a shawl-wrapped bundle in her arms. Rand nearly fell over his own feet.

lænz sɔɹd hæd kʌm hæf aʊɾ ʌv ɪts ʃiθ; wən i sɔ hu ɪt wɑz i ʃʌv ðə bleɪd bæk, hɪz aɪz sʌɾənli flæt. pɛɹɪn ən mæt bɪɡæn bæbəlɪŋ tə kənvɪns mɔɪɹeɪn ðeɪ hæd nɑt toʊld ɛɡwin əbaʊt livɪŋ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛm; ʃi sɪmpli lʊkt əɾ ɛɡwin, tæpɪŋ əɹ lɪps θɔtfəli wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ.

Lan's sword had come half out of its sheath; when he saw who it was he shoved the blade back, his eyes suddenly flat. Perrin and Mat began babbling to convince Moiraine they had not told Egwene about leaving. The Aes Sedai ignored them; she simply looked at Egwene, tapping her lips thoughtfully with one finger.

ðə hʊɾ ʌv ɛɡwinz dɑɹk bɹaʊn kloʊk wɑz pʊld ʌp, bʌt nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə haɪd ðə dɪfaɪənt weɪ ʃi feɪs mɔɪɹeɪn. "aɪ hæv ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ nid hɪɹ. ɪnkluɾɪŋ fud. ən əl nɑt bi lɛf bɪhaɪnd. əl pɹɑbli nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ ənʌðɝ tʃæns tə si ðə wɝld aʊtsaɪd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

The hood of Egwene's dark brown cloak was pulled up, but not enough to hide the defiant way she faced Moiraine. "I have everything I need here. Including food. And I will not be left behind. I'll probably never get another chance to see the world outside the Two Rivers."

"ðɪs ɪzən ə pɪknɪk tʃɹɪp ɪndə ðə wɔɾɝwʊd, ɛɡwin," mæt ɡɹaʊld. hi stɛp bæk wən ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm fɹəm ʌndɝ loʊɝd bɹaʊz.

"This isn't a picnic trip into the Waterwood, Egwene," Mat growled. He stepped back when she looked at him from under lowered brows.

"θæŋk ju, mæt. aɪ wʊdn əv noʊn. dʒju θɪŋk jə θɹi ɑɹ ði oʊnli wʌnz u wɑnə si wʌts aʊtsaɪd? aɪv dʒɹimd əbaʊɾ ɪɾ əz lɔŋ əz jə hæv, ən aɪ doʊn ɪntɛn tə mɪs ðɪs tʃæns."

"Thank you, Mat. I wouldn't have known. Do you think you three are the only ones who want to see what's outside? I've dreamed about it as long as you have, and I don't intend to miss this chance."

"haʊ dɪd jə faɪn aʊt wi wɝ livɪŋ?" ɹænd dɪmændəd. "ɛniweɪ, jə kænt ɡoʊ wɪð ʌs. wi ɑɹən livɪŋ fəɹ ðə fʌn ʌv ɪt. ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ æftɝ ʌs." ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə tɑlɝən lʊk, ən i flʌʃt ən stɪfən ɪndɪɡnənli.

"How did you find out we were leaving?" Rand demanded. "Anyway, you can't go with us. We aren't leaving for the fun of it. The Trollocs are after us." She gave him a tolerant look, and he flushed and stiffened indignantly.

"fɝst," ʃi toʊld ɪm peɪʃənli, "aɪ sɔ mæt kɹipɪŋ əbaʊt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ hɑɹd nɑt tə bi noʊɾəst. ðən aɪ sɔ pɛɹɪn ətɛmptɪŋ tə haɪd ðəɾ əbsɝd ɡɹeɪɾ æks ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk. aɪ nu læn hæd bɑɾ ə hɔɹs, ən ɪt sʌɾənli əkɝd tə mi tə wʌndɝ waɪ hi niɾəd ənʌðɝ. ən ɪf i kəd baɪ wʌn, hi kəd baɪ ʌðɝz. pʊɾɪŋ ðət wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn snikɪŋ əbaʊt laɪk bʊl kævz pɹitɛndɪŋ tə bi fɑksəz . . . wɛl, aɪ kəd si oʊnli wʌn ænsɝ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf aɪm sɝpɹaɪzd əɹ nɑt tə faɪn jə hɪɹ, ɹænd, æftɝ ɔl jəɹ tɔk əbaʊt deɪdʒɹimz. wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn ɪnvɑlvd, aɪ səpoʊz aɪ ʃʊɾə noʊn jə wəd bi ɪn ɪt, tu."

"First," she told him patiently, "I saw Mat creeping about, trying hard not to be noticed. Then I saw Perrin attempting to hide that absurd great axe under his cloak. I knew Lan had bought a horse, and it suddenly occurred to me to wonder why he needed another. And if he could buy one, he could buy others. Putting that with Mat and Perrin sneaking about like bull calves pretending to be foxes . . . well, I could see only one answer. I don't know if I'm surprised or not to find you here, Rand, after all your talk about daydreams. With Mat and Perrin involved, I suppose I should have known you would be in it, too."

"aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ, ɛɡwin," ɹænd sɛd. "ɔl ʌv əs du, əɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks wɪl kʌm bæk."

"I have to go, Egwene," Rand said. "All of us do, or the Trollocs will come back."

"ðə tʃɹɑləks!" ɛɡwin læft ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "ɹænd, ɪf juv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə si səm ə ðə wɝld, wɛl ən ɡʊd, bʌt pliz spɛɹ mi ɛni ʌv jəɹ nɑnsɛnsɪkəl teɪlz."

"The Trollocs!" Egwene laughed incredulously. "Rand, if you've decided to see some of the world, well and good, but please spare me any of your nonsensical tales."

"ɪts tʃɹu," pɛɹɪn sɛɾ əz mæt bɪɡæn, "ðə tʃɹɑləks - "

"It's true," Perrin said as Mat began, "The Trollocs - "

"ɪnʌf," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kwaɪətli, bʌɾ ɪt kʌt ðɛɹ tɔk əz ʃɑɹpli əz ə naɪf. "dɪɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls noʊɾəs ɔl ə ðɪs?" hɝ vɔɪs wɑz sɑft, bʌɾ ɛɡwin swɑloʊɾ ən dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ.

"Enough," Moiraine said quietly, but it cut their talk as sharply as a knife. "Did anyone else notice all of this?" Her voice was soft, but Egwene swallowed and drew herself up before answering.

"æftɝ læs naɪt, ɔl ðeɪ kən θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪz ɹibɪldɪŋ, ðəɾ ən wʌt tə də ɪf ɪt hæpənz əɡɛn. ðeɪ kʊdn si ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ənlɛs ɪt wɑz pʊʃt ʌndɝ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz. ən aɪ toʊl noʊ wʌn wʌɾ aɪ səspɛktəd. noʊ wʌn."

"After last night, all they can think about is rebuilding, that and what to do if it happens again. They couldn't see anything else unless it was pushed under their noses. And I told no one what I suspected. No one."

"vɛɹi wɛl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt. "ju meɪ kʌm wɪð ʌs."

"Very well," Moiraine said after a moment. "You may come with us."

ə stɑɹɾəld ɪkspɹɛʃən dɑɹɾɪd əkɹɔs lænz feɪs. ɪt wɑz ɡɔn ɪn ən ɪnstənt, livɪŋ ɪm aʊtwɝdli kɑm, bʌt fjʊɹiəs wɝdz ɪɹʌptəd fɹəm hɪm. "noʊ, mɔɪɹeɪn!"

A startled expression darted across Lan's face. It was gone in an instant, leaving him outwardly calm, but furious words erupted from him. "No, Moiraine!"

"ɪɾ ɪz pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn, naʊ, læn."

"It is part of the Pattern, now, Lan."

"ɪɾ ɪz ɹɪdɪkjələs!" hi ɹitɔɹɾɪd. "ðɛɹz noʊ ɹizən fəɹ əɹ tə kʌm əlɔŋ, ən ɛvɹi ɹizən fəɹ əɹ nɑt tə."

"It is ridiculous!" he retorted. "There's no reason for her to come along, and every reason for her not to."

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə ɹizən fəɹ ɪt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kɑmli. "ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn, læn." ðə wɔɹɾɝz stoʊni feɪs ʃoʊd nʌθɪŋ, bʌɾ i nɑɾəd sloʊli.

"There is a reason for it," Moiraine said calmly. "A part of the Pattern, Lan." The Warder's stony face showed nothing, but he nodded slowly.

"bʌt, ɛɡwin," ɹænd sɛd, "ðə tʃɹɑləks wɪl bi tʃeɪsɪŋ ʌs. wi woʊn bi seɪf əntɪl wi ɡɛt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"But, Egwene," Rand said, "the Trollocs will be chasing us. We won't be safe until we get to Tar Valon."

"doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə fɹaɪɾən mi ɔf," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ æm ɡoʊɪŋ."

"Don't try to frighten me off," she said. "I am going."

ɹænd nu ðət toʊn ə vɔɪs. hi hæd nɑt hɝɾ ɪt sɪns ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd ðət klaɪmɪŋ ðə tɔlɪs tʃɹiz wɑz fəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən, bʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪt wɛl. "ɪf jə θɪŋk biɪŋ tʃeɪs baɪ tʃɹɑləks wɪl bi fʌn," hi bɪɡæn, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn ɪntɝʌptɪd.

Rand knew that tone of voice. He had not heard it since she decided that climbing the tallest trees was for children, but he remembered it well. "If you think being chased by Trollocs will be fun," he began, but Moiraine interrupted.

"wi hæv noʊ taɪm fəɹ ðɪs. wi mʌs bi əz fɑɹ əweɪ əz pɑsəbəl baɪ deɪbɹeɪk. ɪf ʃiz lɛf bɪhaɪnd, ɹænd, ʃi kəd ɹaʊs ðə vɪlədʒ bɪfɔɹ wɪv ɡɔn ə maɪl, ən ðət wəd ʃʊɹli wɔɹn ðə mɹdʒɹɑl."

"We have no time for this. We must be as far away as possible by daybreak. If she is left behind, Rand, she could rouse the village before we have gone a mile, and that would surely warn the Myrddraal."

"aɪ wəd nɑt də ðæt," ɛɡwin pɹətɛstəd.

"I would not do that," Egwene protested.

"ʃi kən ɹaɪd ðə ɡlimənz hɔɹs," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd. "aɪl liv ɪm ɪnʌf tə baɪ ənʌðɝ."

"She can ride the gleeman's horse," the Warder said. "I'll leave him enough to buy another."

"ðæt wɪl nɑt bi pɑsəbəl," keɪm tɑm mɛɹɪlɪnz ɹɛzənən vɔɪs fɹəm ðə heɪlɔft. lænz sɔɹd lɛft ɪts ʃiθ ðɪs taɪm, ən i dɪd nɑt pʊɾ ɪt bæk əz i stɛɹɾ ʌp ət ðə ɡlimən.

"That will not be possible," came Thom Merrilin's resonant voice from the hayloft. Lan's sword left its sheath this time, and he did not put it back as he stared up at the gleeman.

tɑm tɔs daʊn ə blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl, ðən slʌŋ ɪz keɪs fluɾ ən hɑɹp əkɹɔs ɪz bæk ən ʃoʊldɝd bʌlʒɪŋ sæɾəlbæɡz. "ðɪs vɪlədʒ əz noʊ jus fəɹ mi, naʊ, waɪl ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, aɪ hæv nɛvɝ pɝfɔɹmd ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. ən ðoʊ aɪ juʒəwəli dʒɝni əloʊn, æftɝ læs naɪɾ aɪ hæv noʊ əbdʒɛkʃənz əɾ ɔl tə tʃɹævlɪŋ ɪn kʌmpəni."

Thom tossed down a blanketroll, then slung his cased flute and harp across his back and shouldered bulging saddlebags. "This village has no use for me, now, while on the other hand, I have never performed in Tar Valon. And though I usually journey alone, after last night I have no objections at all to traveling in company."

ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡeɪv pɛɹɪn ə hɑɹd lʊk, ən pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli. "aɪ dɪdn θɪŋk ə lʊkɪŋ ɪn ðə lɔft," hi mʌɾɝd.

The Warder gave Perrin a hard look, and Perrin shifted uncomfortably. "I didn't think of looking in the loft," he muttered.

əz ðə lɔŋ-lɪmd ɡlimən skɹæmbəl daʊn ðə læɾɝ fɹəm ðə lɔft, læn spoʊk, stɪfli fɔɹməl. "ɪz ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn, tu, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ?"

As the long-limbed gleeman scrambled down the ladder from the loft, Lan spoke, stiffly formal. "Is this part of the Pattern, too, Moiraine Sedai?"

"ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn, maɪ oʊl fɹɛnd," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd sɔfli. "wi kænɑt pɪk ən tʃuz. bʌt wi ʃæl si."

"Everything is a part of the Pattern, my old friend," Moiraine replied softly. "We cannot pick and choose. But we shall see."

tɑm pʊɾ ɪz fiɾ ɑn ðə steɪbəl flɔɹ ən tɝn fɹəm ðə læɾɝ, bɹʌʃɪŋ stʃɹɔ fɹəm ɪz pætʃ-kʌvɝd kloʊk. "ɪn fækt," hi sɛɾ ɪn mɔɹ nɔɹməl toʊnz, "ju maɪt seɪ ðəɾ aɪ ɪnsɪst ɑn tʃɹævlɪŋ ɪn kʌmpəni. aɪ hæv ɡɪvən mɛni aʊɝz oʊvɝ mɛni mʌɡz ʌv eɪl tə θɪŋkɪŋ ə haʊ aɪ maɪɾ ɛn maɪ deɪz. eɪ tʃɹɑlɑks kʊkpɑt wɑz nɑt wʌn ə ðə θɔts." hi lʊkt əskæns ət ðə wɔɹɾɝz sɔɹd. "ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ ðæt. aɪm nɑɾ ə tʃiz fəɹ slaɪsɪŋ."

Thom put his feet on the stable floor and turned from the ladder, brushing straw from his patch-covered cloak. "In fact," he said in more normal tones, "you might say that I insist on traveling in company. I have given many hours over many mugs of ale to thinking of how I might end my days. A Trolloc's cookpot was not one of the thoughts." He looked askance at the Warder's sword. "There's no need for that. I am not a cheese for slicing."

"mæstɝ mɛɹɪlɪn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "wi mʌst ɡoʊ kwɪkli, ən ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli ɪn ɡɹeɪt deɪnʒɝ. ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ stɪl aʊt ðɛɹ, ən wi ɡoʊ baɪ naɪt. ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ðət jə wɑnə tʃɹævəl wɪð ʌs?"

"Master Merrilin," Moiraine said, "we must go quickly, and almost certainly in great danger. The Trollocs are still out there, and we go by night. Are you sure that you want to travel with us?"

tɑm aɪd ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm wɪð ə kwɪtsɪkəl smaɪl. "ɪf ɪts nɑt tu deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ ðə ɡɝl, ɪt kæn bi tu deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ mi. bɪsaɪdz, wʌt ɡlimən wəd nɑt feɪs ə lɪɾəl deɪnʒɝ tə pɝfɔɹm ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn?"

Thom eyed the lot of them with a quizzical smile. "If it is not too dangerous for the girl, it can't be too dangerous for me. Besides, what gleeman would not face a little danger to perform in Tar Valon?"

mɔɪɹeɪn nɑɾəd, ən læn skæbɑɹɾɪd ɪz sɔɹd. ɹænd sʌɾənli wʌndɝd wʌt wʊɾə hæpən ɪf tɑm hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪz maɪnd, əɹ ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn hæd nɑt nɑɾəd. ðə ɡlimən bɪɡæn sæɾəlɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs əz ɪf sɪməlɝ θɔts hæd nɛvɝ kɹɔst ɪz maɪnd, bʌt ɹænd noʊɾəst ðəɾ i aɪd lænz sɔɹd mɔɹ ðən wʌns.

Moiraine nodded, and Lan scabbarded his sword. Rand suddenly wondered what would have happened if Thom had changed his mind, or if Moiraine had not nodded. The gleeman began saddling his horse as if similar thoughts had never crossed his mind, but Rand noticed that he eyed Lan's sword more than once.

"naʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "wʌt hɔɹs fəɹ ɛɡwin?"

"Now," Moiraine said. "What horse for Egwene?"

"ðə pɛdlɝz hɔɹsəz ɑɹ əz bæɾ əz ðə dɝənz," ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɹɪplaɪd saʊɝli. "stʃɹɔŋ, bʌt sloʊ plɑɾɝz."

"The peddler's horses are as bad as the Dhurrans," the Warder replied sourly. "Strong, but slow plodders."

"bɛlə," ɹænd sɛd, ɡɛɾɪŋ ə lʊk fɹəm læn ðət meɪɾ ɪm wɪʃ i hæd kɛp saɪlənt. bʌɾ i nu hi kəd nɑt dɪsweɪɾ ɛɡwin; ði oʊnli θɪŋ lɛft wɑz tə hɛlp. "bɛlə meɪ nɑt bi əz fæst əz ði ʌðɝz, bʌt ʃiz stʃɹɔŋ. aɪ ɹaɪɾ əɹ səmtaɪmz. ʃi kən kip ʌp."

"Bela," Rand said, getting a look from Lan that made him wish he had kept silent. But he knew he could not dissuade Egwene; the only thing left was to help. "Bela may not be as fast as the others, but she's strong. I ride her sometimes. She can keep up."

læn lʊkt ɪndə bɛləz stɔl, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. "ʃi maɪt bi ə lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ ðən ði ʌðɝz," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "aɪ doʊn səpoʊz ðəɹ ɪz ɛni ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs."

Lan looked into Bela's stall, muttering under his breath. "She might be a little better than the others," he said finally. "I don't suppose there is any other choice."

"ðɛn ʃɪl əv tə du," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɹænd, faɪn ə sæɾəl fəɹ bɛlə. kwɪkli, naʊ! wɪv tɑɹid tu lɔŋ ɔlɹɛɾi."

"Then she will have to do," Moiraine said. "Rand, find a saddle for Bela. Quickly, now! We have tarried too long already."

ɹænd hɝidli tʃoʊz ə sæɾəl ən blæŋkəɾ ɪn ðə tæk ɹum, ðən fɛtʃt bɛlə fɹəm əɹ stɔl. ðə mɛɹ lʊk bæk əɾ ɪm ɪn slipi sɝpɹaɪz wən i pʊt ðə sæɾəl ɑn əɹ bæk. wən i ɹoʊd hɝ, ɪt wɑz bæɹbækt; ʃi wɑz nɑt juz tə ə sæɾəl. hi meɪd suðɪŋ nɔɪzɪz waɪl i taɪɾənd ðə ɡɝθ stʃɹæp, ən ʃi æksɛptɪd ði ɑɾəti wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə ʃeɪk ə hɝ meɪn.

Rand hurriedly chose a saddle and blanket in the tack room, then fetched Bela from her stall. The mare looked back at him in sleepy surprise when he put the saddle on her back. When he rode her, it was barebacked; she was not used to a saddle. He made soothing noises while he tightened the girth strap, and she accepted the oddity with no more than a shake of her mane.

teɪkɪŋ ɛɡwinz bʌndəl fɹəm hɝ, hi taɪɾ ɪɾ ɑn bɪhaɪn ðə sæɾəl waɪl ʃi maʊntəɾ ən ədʒʌstəɾ əɹ skɝts. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt dɪvaɪɾəd fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ əstʃɹaɪd, soʊ hɝ wʊl stɑkɪŋz wɝ bɛɹd tə ðə ni. ʃi wɔɹ ðə seɪm sɑf lɛðɝ ʃuz əz ɔl ði ʌðɝ vɪlədʒ ɡɝlz. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ əɾ ɔl suɾəd fəɹ dʒɝniɪŋ tə wɑtʃ hɪl, mʌtʃ lɛs tɑɹ vəlɑn.

Taking Egwene's bundle from her, he tied it on behind the saddle while she mounted and adjusted her skirts. They were not divided for riding astride, so her wool stockings were bared to the knee. She wore the same soft leather shoes as all the other village girls. They were not at all suited for journeying to Watch Hill, much less Tar Valon.

"aɪ stɪl θɪŋk jə ʃʊdn kʌm," hi sɛd. "aɪ wɑzn meɪkɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp əbaʊt ðə tʃɹɑləks. bʌɾ aɪ pɹɑməs əl teɪk kɛɹ ə ju."

"I still think you shouldn't come," he said. "I wasn't making it up about the Trollocs. But I promise I will take care of you."

"pɝhæps əl teɪk kɛɹ ə ju," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd laɪtli. əɾ ɪz ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd lʊk ʃi smaɪld ən bɛn daʊn tə smuð ɪz hɛɹ. "aɪ noʊ jəl lʊk æftɝ mi, ɹænd. wɪl lʊk æftɝ itʃ ʌðɝ. bʌt naʊ jə hæd bɛɾɝ lʊk æftɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ ɑn jəɹ hɔɹs."

"Perhaps I'll take care of you," she replied lightly. At his exasperated look she smiled and bent down to smooth his hair. "I know you'll look after me, Rand. We will look after each other. But now you had better look after getting on your horse."

ɔl ə ði ʌðɝz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi maʊntəɾ ən weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɪm, hi ɹilaɪzd. ði oʊnli hɔɹs lɛft ɹaɪɾɝləs wɑz klaʊd, ə tɔl ɡɹeɪ wɪð ə blæk meɪn ən teɪl ðət bɪlɔŋ tə dʒɑn θeɪn, əɹ hæd. hi skɹæmbəld ɪndə ðə sæɾəl, ðoʊ nɑt wɪθaʊt dɪfəkəlti əz ðə ɡɹeɪ tɔst ɪz hɛɾ ən pɹænst saɪdweɪz əz ɹænd pʊɾ ɪz fʊɾ ɪn ðə stɝəp, ən ɪz skæbɝd kɑɾ ɪn ɪz lɛɡz. ɪt wɑz nɑt tʃæns ðəɾ ɪz fɹɛnz hæd nɑt tʃoʊzən klaʊd. mæstɝ θeɪn ɔfən ɹeɪs ðə spɪɹəɾəd ɡɹeɪ əɡɛns mɝtʃəns' hɔɹsəz, ən ɹænd hæd nɛvɝ noʊn ɪm tə luz, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ noʊn klaʊd tə ɡɪv ɛniwʌn ən izi ɹaɪd, iðɝ. læn mʌst əv ɡɪvən ə hjudʒ pɹaɪs tə meɪk ðə mɪlɝ sɛl. əz i sɛɾəld ɪn ðə sæɾəl klaʊdz dænsɪŋ ɪnkɹist, əz ɪf ðə ɡɹeɪ wɝ iɡɝ tə ɹʌn. ɹænd ɡɹɪp ðə ɹeɪnz fɝmli ən tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk ðəɾ i wəɾ əv noʊ tʃɹʌbəl. pɝhæps ɪf i kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf, hi kəd kənvɪns ðə hɔɹs, tu.

All of the others were already mounted and waiting for him, he realized. The only horse left riderless was Cloud, a tall gray with a black mane and tail that belonged to Jon Thane, or had. He scrambled into the saddle, though not without difficulty as the gray tossed his head and pranced sideways as Rand put his foot in the stirrup, and his scabbard caught in his legs. It was not chance that his friends had not chosen Cloud. Master Thane often raced the spirited gray against merchants' horses, and Rand had never known him to lose, but he had never known Cloud to give anyone an easy ride, either. Lan must have given a huge price to make the miller sell. As he settled in the saddle Cloud's dancing increased, as if the gray were eager to run. Rand gripped the reins firmly and tried to think that he would have no trouble. Perhaps if he convinced himself, he could convince the horse, too.

ən aʊl huɾɪd ɪn ðə naɪɾ aʊtsaɪd, ən ðə vɪlədʒ pipəl dʒʌmp bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. ðeɪ læf nɝvəsli ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ʃeɪməfeɪs lʊks.

An owl hooted in the night outside, and the village people jumped before they realized what it was. They laughed nervously and exchanged shamefaced looks.

"nɛks θɪŋ, fil maɪs wɪl tʃeɪs əs ʌp ə tʃɹi," ɛɡwin sɛd wɪð ən ənstɛɾi tʃʌkəl.

"Next thing, field mice will chase us up a tree," Egwene said with an unsteady chuckle.

læn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "bɛɾɝ ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn wʊlvz."

Lan shook his head. "Better if it had been wolves."

"wʊlvz!" pɛɹɪn ɪkskleɪmd, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ feɪvɝɾ ɪm wɪð ə flæt stɛɹ.

"Wolves!" Perrin exclaimed, and the Warder favored him with a flat stare.

"wʊlvz doʊn laɪk tʃɹɑləks, blæksmɪθ, ən tʃɹɑləks doʊn laɪk wʊlvz, əɹ dɑɡz, iðɝ. ɪf aɪ hɝd wʊlvz aɪ wəd bi ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɝ noʊ tʃɹɑləks weɪɾɪŋ aʊt ðəɹ fəɹ ʌs." hi muvd ɪndə ðə munlɪt naɪt, wɔkɪŋ ɪz tɔl blæk sloʊli.

"Wolves don't like Trollocs, blacksmith, and Trollocs don't like wolves, or dogs, either. If I heard wolves I would be sure there were no Trollocs waiting out there for us." He moved into the moonlit night, walking his tall black slowly.

mɔɪɹeɪn ɹoʊɾ æftɝ ɪm wɪθaʊɾ ə moʊməns hɛzəteɪʃən, ən ɛɡwin kɛp hɑɹd tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪz saɪd. ɹænd ən ðə ɡlimən bɹɔɾ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ, fɑloʊɪŋ mæt ən pɛɹɪn.

Moiraine rode after him without a moment's hesitation, and Egwene kept hard to the Aes Sedai's side. Rand and the gleeman brought up the rear, following Mat and Perrin.

ðə bæk ə ði ɪn wɑz dɑɹk ən saɪlənt, ən dæpəl mun ʃædoʊz fɪl ðə steɪbliɑɹd. ðə sɑf θʌdz ə ðə hʊvz feɪɾəd kwɪkli, swɑloʊd baɪ ðə naɪt. ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs ðə wɔɹɾɝz kloʊk meɪɾ ɪm ə ʃædoʊ, tu. oʊnli ðə nid tə lɛɾ ɪm lɛd ðə weɪ kɛp ði ʌðɝz fɹəm klʌstɝɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm. ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə vɪlədʒ wɪθaʊt biɪŋ sin wɑz gɑnə bi noʊ izi tæsk, ɹænd dɪsaɪɾɪd əz i nɪɹd ðə ɡeɪt. ət list, wɪθaʊt biɪŋ sin baɪ vɪlɪdʒɝz. mɛni wɪndoʊz ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ ɪmɪɾəd peɪl jɛloʊ laɪt, ən ɔlðoʊ ðoʊz ɡloʊz sim vɛɹi smɔl ɪn ðə naɪt naʊ, ʃeɪps muv fɹikwənli wɪðɪn ðɛm, ðə ʃeɪps ə vɪlɪdʒɝz wɑtʃɪŋ tə si wʌt ðɪs naɪt bɹɔt. noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə bi kɑt baɪ sɝpɹaɪz əɡɛn.

The back of the inn was dark and silent, and dappled moon shadows filled the stableyard. The soft thuds of the hooves faded quickly, swallowed by the night. In the darkness the Warder's cloak made him a shadow, too. Only the need to let him lead the way kept the others from clustering around him. Getting out of the village without being seen was going to be no easy task, Rand decided as he neared the gate. At least, without being seen by villagers. Many windows in the village emitted pale yellow light, and although those glows seemed very small in the night now, shapes moved frequently within them, the shapes of villagers watching to see what this night brought. No one wanted to be caught by surprise again.

ɪn ðə dip ʃædoʊz bɪsaɪd ði ɪn, dʒʌst ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə livɪŋ ðə steɪbliɑɹd, læn əbɹʌpli hɔltəd, moʊʃənɪŋ ʃɑɹpli fəɹ saɪləns.

In the deep shadows beside the inn, just on the point of leaving the stableyard, Lan abruptly halted, motioning sharply for silence.

buts ɹæɾəld ɑn ðə wæɡən bɹɪdʒ, ən hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ɑn ðə bɹɪdʒ munlaɪt ɡlɪntɪɾ ɔf mɛɾəl. ðə buts klæɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə bɹɪdʒ, ɡɹeɪɾɪd ɑn ɡɹævəl, ən əpɹoʊtʃt ði ɪn. noʊ saʊn əɾ ɔl keɪm fɹəm ðoʊz ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ. ɹænd səspɛktəɾ ɪz fɹɛnz, ət list, wɝ tu fɹaɪɾənd tə meɪk ə nɔɪz. laɪk hɪm.

Boots rattled on the Wagon Bridge, and here and there on the bridge moonlight glinted off metal. The boots clattered across the bridge, grated on gravel, and approached the inn. No sound at all came from those in the shadow. Rand suspected his friends, at least, were too frightened to make a noise. Like him.

ðə fʊtstɛps hɔltəd bɪfɔɹ ði ɪn ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪnəs dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə dɪm laɪt fɹəm ðə kɑmən-ɹum wɪndoʊz. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əntɪl dʒɑn θeɪn stɛp fɔɹwɝd, ə spɪɹ pɹɑpt ɑn ɪz staʊt ʃoʊldɝ, ən oʊl dʒɝkɪn soʊn ɔl oʊvɝ wɪð stil dɪsks stʃɹeɪnɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst, ðət ɹænd sɔ ðɛm fəɹ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ. ə dʌzən mɛn fɹəm ðə vɪlədʒ ən ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ fɑɹmz, səm ɪn hɛlməts əɹ pisəz ʌv ɑɹmɝ ðət hæd leɪn dʌst-kʌvɝɾ ɪn æɾɪks fəɹ dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz, ɔl wɪð ə spɪɹ əɹ ə wʊdeɪks əɹ ə ɹʌsti bɪl.

The footsteps halted before the inn in the grayness just beyond the dim light from the common-room windows. It was not until Jon Thane stepped forward, a spear propped on his stout shoulder, an old jerkin sewn all over with steel disks straining across his chest, that Rand saw them for what they were. A dozen men from the village and the surrounding farms, some in helmets or pieces of armor that had lain dust-covered in attics for generations, all with a spear or a woodaxe or a rusty bill.

ðə mɪlɝ pɪɹɾ ɪndə ə kɑmən-ɹum wɪndoʊ, ðən tɝnd wɪð ə kɝt, "ɪt lʊks ɹaɪt hɪɹ." ði ʌðɝz fɔɹmd ɪn tu ɹæɡəd ɹæŋks bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən ðə pətʃɹoʊl mɑɹtʃt ɪndə ðə naɪɾ əz ɪf stɛpɪŋ tə θɹi dɪfɹən dʒɹʌmz.

The miller peered into a common-room window, then turned with a curt, "It looks right here." The others formed in two ragged ranks behind him, and the patrol marched into the night as if stepping to three different drums.

"tu dɑvɑl tʃɹɑləks wəɾ əv əm ɔl fəɹ bɹɛkfəst," læn mʌɾɝd wən ðə saʊn ə ðɛɹ buts hæd feɪɾəd, "bʌt ðeɪv aɪz ən ɪɹz." hi tɝn ɪz stæljən bæk. "kʌm."

"Two Dha'vol Trollocs would have them all for breakfast," Lan muttered when the sound of their boots had faded, "but they have eyes and ears." He turned his stallion back. "Come."

sloʊli, kwaɪətli, ðə wɔɹɾɝ tʊk əm bæk əkɹɔs ðə steɪbliɑɹd, daʊn ðə bæŋk θɹu ðə wɪloʊz ən ɪndə ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ wɔɾɝ. soʊ kloʊs tə ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪtsɛlf ðə koʊld, swɪft wɔɾɝ, ɡlimɪŋ əz ɪt swɝld ɝaʊn ðə hɔɹsəz' lɛɡz, wɑz dip ɪnʌf tə læp əɡɛns ðə soʊlz ə ðə ɹaɪɾɝz' buts.

Slowly, quietly, the Warder took them back across the stableyard, down the bank through the willows and into the Winespring Water. So close to the Winespring itself the cold, swift water, gleaming as it swirled around the horses' legs, was deep enough to lap against the soles of the riders' boots.

klaɪmɪŋ aʊɾ ɑn ðə fɑɹ bæŋk, ðə laɪn ə hɔɹsəz waʊn ɪts weɪ ʌndɝ ðə wɔɹɾɝz dɛf dɝɛkʃən, kipɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɛni ʌv ðə vɪlədʒ haʊsəz. fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm læn stɑpt, saɪnɪŋ əm ɔl tə bi kwaɪət, ðoʊ noʊ wʌn ɛls hɝɾ əɹ sɔ ɛniθɪŋ. itʃ taɪm i dɪd, haʊɛvɝ, ənʌðɝ pətʃɹoʊl ə vɪlɪdʒɝz ən fɑɹmɝz sun pæst. sloʊli ðeɪ muv təwɔɹd ðə nɔɹθ ɛdʒ ə ðə vɪlədʒ.

Climbing out on the far bank, the line of horses wound its way under the Warder's deft direction, keeping away from any of the village houses. From time to time Lan stopped, signing them all to be quiet, though no one else heard or saw anything. Each time he did, however, another patrol of villagers and farmers soon passed. Slowly they moved toward the north edge of the village.

ɹænd pɪɹɾ ət ðə haɪ-pik haʊsəz ɪn ðə dɑɹk, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪmpɹɛs əm ɑn ɪz mɛmɹi. ə faɪn ædvɛntʃɝɝ aɪ æm, hi θɔt. hi wɑz nɑɾ ivən aʊɾ ə ðə vɪlədʒ jɛt, ən ɔlɹɛɾi hi wɑz hoʊmsɪk. bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt stɑp lʊkɪŋ.

Rand peered at the high-peaked houses in the dark, trying to impress them on his memory. A fine adventurer I am, he thought. He was not even out of the village yet, and already he was homesick. But he did not stop looking.

ðeɪ pæs bɪɑn ðə læs fɑɹmhaʊsəz ɑn ði aʊtskɝts ə ðə vɪlədʒ ən ɪndə ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd, pɛɹəlɛlɪŋ ðə nɔɹθ ɹoʊd ðət lɛd tə tɛɹən fɛɹi. ɹænd θɔt ðət ʃʊɹli noʊ naɪt skaɪ ɛlswɛɹ kəd bi əz bjuɾəfəl əz ðə tu ɹɪvɝz skaɪ. ðə klɪɹ blæk sim tə ɹitʃ tə fɝɛvɝ, ən mɪɹiəd stɑɹz ɡlim laɪk pɔɪns ə laɪt skæɾɝd θɹu kɹɪstəl. ðə mun, oʊnli ə θɪn slaɪs lɛs ðən fʊl, əpɪɹɾ ɔlmoʊs kloʊs ɪnʌf tə tʌtʃ, ɪf i stʃɹɛtʃt, ænd. . . .

They passed beyond the last farmhouses on the outskirts of the village and into the countryside, paralleling the North Road that led to Taren Ferry. Rand thought that surely no night sky elsewhere could be as beautiful as the Two Rivers sky. The clear black seemed to reach to forever, and myriad stars gleamed like points of light scattered through crystal. The moon, only a thin slice less than full, appeared almost close enough to touch, if he stretched, and. . . .

ə blæk ʃeɪp flu sloʊli əkɹɔs ðə sɪlvɝi bɔl ə ðə mun. ɹændz ɪnvɑləntɛɹi dʒɝk ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz hɔltəd ðə ɡɹeɪ. ə bæt, hi θɔt wikli, bʌɾ i nu ɪt wɑz nɑt. bæts wɝ ə kɑmən saɪɾ ʌv ən ivnɪŋ, dɑɹɾɪŋ æftɝ flaɪz ən baɪtmz ɪn ðə twaɪlaɪt. ðə wɪŋz ðət kæɹid ðɪs kɹitʃɝ maɪɾ əv ðə seɪm ʃeɪp, bʌt ðeɪ muvd wɪð ðə sloʊ, paʊɝfəl swip ʌv ə bɝɾ ə pɹeɪ. ən ɪt wɑz hʌntɪŋ. ðə weɪ ɪt kæs bæk ən fɔɹθ ɪn lɔŋ ɑɹks lɛf noʊ daʊɾ ə ðæt. wɝst ʌv ɔl wɑz ðə saɪz. fəɹ ə bæt tə sim soʊ lɑɹdʒ əɡɛns ðə mun ɪt wʊɾə hæd tə bi ɔlmoʊst wɪðɪn ɑɹmz ɹitʃ. hi tʃɹaɪd tə dʒʌdʒ ɪn ɪz maɪn haʊ fɑɹ əweɪ ɪt mʌs bi, ən haʊ bɪɡ. ðə bɑɾi ʌv ɪt hæd tə bi əz lɑɹdʒ əz ə mæn, ən ðə wɪŋz. . . . ɪt kɹɔs ðə feɪs ə ðə mun əɡɛn, wilɪŋ sʌɾənli daʊnwɝd tə bi ɪnɡʌlf baɪ ðə naɪt.

A black shape flew slowly across the silvery ball of the moon. Rand's involuntary jerk on the reins halted the gray. A bat, he thought weakly, but he knew it was not. Bats were a common sight of an evening, darting after flies and bitemes in the twilight. The wings that carried this creature might have the same shape, but they moved with the slow, powerful sweep of a bird of prey. And it was hunting. The way it cast back and forth in long arcs left no doubt of that. Worst of all was the size. For a bat to seem so large against the moon it would have had to be almost within arm's reach. He tried to judge in his mind how far away it must be, and how big. The body of it had to be as large as a man, and the wings. . . . It crossed the face of the moon again, wheeling suddenly downward to be engulfed by the night.

hi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðət læn hæd ɹɪɾən bæk tə hɪm əntɪl ðə wɔɹɾɝ kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹm. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə sɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ ən stɛɹɪŋ æt, bɔɪ? wɪv tə kip muvɪŋ." ði ʌðɝz weɪɾəd bɪhaɪn læn.

He did not realize that Lan had ridden back to him until the Warder caught his arm. "What are you sitting here and staring at, boy? We have to keep moving." The others waited behind Lan.

hæf ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə bi toʊld i wɑz lɛɾɪŋ fɪɹ ə ðə tʃɹɑləks oʊvɝkʌm ɪz sɛns, ɹænd toʊld wʌɾ i hæd sin. hi hoʊp ðət læn wəd dɪsmɪs ɪɾ əz ə bæt, əɹ ə tʃɹɪk ə hɪz aɪz.

Half expecting to be told he was letting fear of the Trollocs overcome his sense, Rand told what he had seen. He hoped that Lan would dismiss it as a bat, or a trick of his eyes.

læn ɡɹaʊld ə wɝd, saʊndɪŋ əz ɪf ɪt lɛft ə bæd teɪst ɪn ɪz maʊθ. "dʒɹæɡkɝ." ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝ tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk stɛɹɾ ət ðə skaɪ nɝvəsli ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz, bʌt ðə ɡlimən ɡɹoʊn sɔfli.

Lan growled a word, sounding as if it left a bad taste in his mouth. "Draghkar." Egwene and the other Two Rivers folk stared at the sky nervously in all directions, but the gleeman groaned softly.

"jɛs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz tu mʌtʃ tə hoʊp ʌðɝwaɪz. ən ɪf ðə mɹdʒɹɑl əz ə dʒɹæɡkɝ əɾ ɪz kəmænd, ðən hɪl sun noʊ wɛɹ wi ɑɹ, ɪf i dʌz nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. wi mʌs muv mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən wi kən kɹɔs-kʌntʃɹi. wi meɪ stɪl ɹitʃ tɛɹən fɛɹi əhɛɾ ə ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, ən i ən ɪz tʃɹɑləks wɪl nɑt kɹɔs əz izəli əz wi."

"Yes," Moiraine said. "It is too much to hope otherwise. And if the Myrddraal has a Draghkar at his command, then he will soon know where we are, if he does not already. We must move more quickly than we can cross-country. We may still reach Taren Ferry ahead of the Myrddraal, and he and his Trollocs will not cross as easily as we."

"eɪ dʒɹæɡkɝ?" ɛɡwin sɛd. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?"

"A Draghkar?" Egwene said. "What is it?"

ɪt wɑz tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn u ænsɝɾ əɹ hɔɹsli. "ɪn ðə wɔɹ ðəɾ ɛndəd ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, wɝs ðən tʃɹɑləks ən hæfmən wɝ kɹieɪɾəd."

It was Thom Merrilin who answered her hoarsely. "In the war that ended the Age of Legends, worse than Trollocs and Halfmen were created."

mɔɪɹeɪnz hɛd dʒɝk təwɔɹɾ ɪm əz i spoʊk. nɑɾ ivən ðə dɑɹk kəd haɪd ðə ʃɑɹpnəs ə hɝ lʊk.

Moiraine's head jerked toward him as he spoke. Not even the dark could hide the sharpness of her look.

bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn kəɾ æsk ðə ɡlimən fəɹ mɔɹ, læn bɪɡæn ɡɪvɪŋ dɝɛkʃənz. "wi teɪk tə ðə nɔɹθ ɹoʊd, naʊ. fəɹ jəɹ laɪvz, fɑloʊ maɪ lɛd, kip ʌp ən kip təɡɛðɝ."

Before anyone could ask the gleeman for more, Lan began giving directions. "We take to the North Road, now. For your lives, follow my lead, keep up and keep together."

hi wild ɪz hɔɹs əbaʊt, ən ði ʌðɝz ɡæləpt wɝdləsli æftɝ hɪm.

He wheeled his horse about, and the others galloped wordlessly after him.


tʃæptɝ ɪlɛvən


CHAPTER 11

ðə ɹoʊd tə tɛɹən fɛɹi


The Road to Taren Ferry

ɑn ðə hɑɹd-pæk dɝɾ ə ðə nɔɹθ ɹoʊd ðə hɔɹsəz stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt, meɪnz ən teɪlz stʃɹimɪŋ bæk ɪn ðə munlaɪɾ əz ðeɪ ɹeɪs nɔɹθwɝd, hʊvz paʊndɪŋ ə stɛɾi ɹɪðəm. læn lɛd ðə weɪ, blæk hɔɹs ən ʃædoʊ-klæd ɹaɪɾɝ ɔl bʌɾ ɪnvɪzəbəl ɪn ðə koʊl naɪt. mɔɪɹeɪnz waɪt mɛɹ, mætʃɪŋ ðə stæljən stʃɹaɪd fəɹ stʃɹaɪd, wɑz ə peɪl dɑɹt spiɾɪŋ θɹu ðə dɑɹk. ðə ɹɛs fɑloʊɾ ɪn ə taɪt laɪn, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɔl taɪd tə ə ɹoʊp wɪð wʌn ɛn ɪn ðə wɔɹɾɝz hænz.

On the hard-packed dirt of the North Road the horses stretched out, manes and tails streaming back in the moonlight as they raced northward, hooves pounding a steady rhythm. Lan led the way, black horse and shadow-clad rider all but invisible in the cold night. Moiraine's white mare, matching the stallion stride for stride, was a pale dart speeding through the dark. The rest followed in a tight line, as if they were all tied to a rope with one end in the Warder's hands.

ɹænd ɡæləp læst ɪn laɪn, wɪð tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn dʒʌst əhɛɾ ən ði ʌðɝz lɛs dɪstɪŋk bɪɑnd. ðə ɡlimən nɛvɝ tɝn ɪz hɛd, ɹɪzɝvɪŋ ɪz aɪz fəɹ wɛɹ ðeɪ ɹæn, nɑt wʌt ðeɪ ɹæn fɹʌm. ɪf tʃɹɑləks əpɪɹd bɪhaɪnd, əɹ ðə feɪɾ ɑn ɪts saɪlən hɔɹs, əɹ ðət flaɪɪŋ kɹitʃɝ, ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ, ɪt wəd bi ʌp tə ɹænd tə saʊn ən əlɑɹm.

Rand galloped last in line, with Thom Merrilin just ahead and the others less distinct beyond. The gleeman never turned his head, reserving his eyes for where they ran, not what they ran from. If Trollocs appeared behind, or the Fade on its silent horse, or that flying creature, the Draghkar, it would be up to Rand to sound an alarm.

ɛvɹi fju mɪnəts i kɹeɪn ɪz nɛk tə pɪɹ bɪhaɪnd waɪl i klʌŋ tə klaʊdz meɪn ən ɹeɪnz. ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ. . . . wɝs ðən tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz, tɑm hæd sɛd. bʌt ðə skaɪ wɑz ɛmpti, ən oʊnli dɑɹknəs ən ʃædoʊz mɛɾ ɪz aɪz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ʃædoʊz ðət kəd haɪɾ ən ɑɹmi.

Every few minutes he craned his neck to peer behind while he clung to Cloud's mane and reins. The Draghkar. . . . Worse than Trollocs and Fades, Thom had said. But the sky was empty, and only darkness and shadows met his eyes on the ground. Shadows that could hide an army.

naʊ ðət ðə ɡɹeɪ hæd bɪn lɛt lus tə ɹʌn, ði ænəməl spɛd θɹu ðə naɪt laɪk ə ɡoʊst, izəli kipɪŋ peɪs wɪð lænz stæljən. ən klaʊd wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ fæstɝ. hi wɑntəd tə kætʃ ðə blæk, stʃɹeɪn tə kætʃ ðə blæk. ɹænd hæd tə kip ə fɝm hæn ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz tə hoʊld ɪm bæk. klaʊd lʌnʒd əɡɛnst ɪz ɹɪstʃɹeɪn əz ɪf ðə ɡɹeɪ θɔt ðɪs wɝ ə ɹeɪs, faɪɾɪŋ ɪm fəɹ mæstɝi wɪð ɛvɹi stʃɹaɪd. ɹænd klʌŋ tə sæɾəl ən ɹeɪnz wɪð ɛvɹi mʌsəl tɔt. fɝvənli hi hoʊpt ɪz maʊn dɪd nɑt dɪtɛk haʊ ənizi hi wɑz. ɪf klaʊd dɪd, hi wəd luz ðə wʌn ɹil ɛdʒ i hɛld, haʊɛvɝ pɹɪkɛɹiəsli.

Now that the gray had been let loose to run, the animal sped through the night like a ghost, easily keeping pace with Lan's stallion. And Cloud wanted to go faster. He wanted to catch the black, strained to catch the black. Rand had to keep a firm hand on the reins to hold him back. Cloud lunged against his restraint as if the gray thought this were a race, fighting him for mastery with every stride. Rand clung to saddle and reins with every muscle taut. Fervently he hoped his mount did not detect how uneasy he was. If Cloud did, he would lose the one real edge he held, however precariously.

laɪɪŋ loʊ ɑn klaʊdz nɛk, ɹænd kɛpt ə wɝiɾ aɪ ɑn bɛlə ən ɑn əɹ ɹaɪɾɝ. wən i hæd sɛd ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ kəd steɪ wɪð ði ʌðɝz, hi hæd nɑt mɛn ɑn ðə ɹʌn. ʃi kɛpt ʌp naʊ oʊnli baɪ ɹʌnɪŋ əz i hæd nɑt θɔt ʃi kʊd. læn hæd nɑt wɑntəɾ ɛɡwin ɪn ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ. wəɾ i sloʊ fəɹ əɹ ɪf bɛlə bɪɡæn tə flæɡ? əɹ wəɾ i tʃɹaɪ tə liv əɹ bɪhaɪnd? ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ θɔt ɹænd ən ɪz fɹɛnz wɝ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪn səm weɪ, bʌt fəɹ ɔl ə mɔɪɹeɪnz tɔk ə ðə pæɾɝn, hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ ɪnkluɾəd ɛɡwin ɪn ðəɾ ɪmpɔɹɾəns.

Lying low on Cloud's neck, Rand kept a worried eye on Bela and on her rider. When he had said the shaggy mare could stay with the others, he had not meant on the run. She kept up now only by running as he had not thought she could. Lan had not wanted Egwene in their number. Would he slow for her if Bela began to flag? Or would he try to leave her behind? The Aes Sedai and the Warder thought Rand and his friends were important in some way, but for all of Moiraine's talk of the Pattern, he did not think they included Egwene in that importance.

ɪf bɛlə fɛl bæk, hi wəd fɔl bæk, tu, wʌtɛvɝ mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn hæd tə seɪ əbaʊɾ ɪt. bæk wɛɹ ðə feɪɾ ən ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ. bæk wɛɹ ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ wɑz. wɪð ɔl ɪz hɑɹɾ ən dɛspɝeɪʃən i saɪlənli ʃaʊɾəd ət bɛlə tə ɹʌn laɪk ðə wɪnd, saɪlənli tʃɹaɪd tə wɪl stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪndə hɝ. ɹʌn! hɪz skɪn pɹɪkəld, ən ɪz boʊnz fɛlt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ fɹizɪŋ, ɹɛɾi tə splɪɾ oʊpən. ðə laɪt hɛlp hɝ, ɹʌn! ən bɛlə ɹæn.

If Bela fell back, he would fall back, too, whatever Moiraine and Lan had to say about it. Back where the Fade and the Trollocs were. Back where the Draghkar was. With all his heart and desperation he silently shouted at Bela to run like the wind, silently tried to will strength into her. Run! His skin prickled, and his bones felt as if they were freezing, ready to split open. The Light help her, run! And Bela ran.

ɑn ən ɑn ðeɪ spɛd, nɔɹθwɝɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt, taɪm feɪɾɪŋ ɪndə ən ɪndɪstɪŋk blɝ. naʊ ən əɡɛn ðə laɪts ə fɑɹmhaʊsəz flæʃt ɪndə saɪt, ðən dɪsəpɪɹɾ əz kwɪkli əz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. dɑɡz' ʃɑɹp tʃælənʒɪz feɪɾəd swɪfli bɪhaɪnd, əɹ kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli əz ðə dɑɡz dɪsaɪɾɪd ðeɪ hæd bɪn tʃeɪst əweɪ. ðeɪ ɹeɪs θɹu dɑɹknəs ɹɪlivd oʊnli baɪ wɔɾɝi peɪl munlaɪt, ə dɑɹknəs wɛɹ tʃɹiz əlɔŋ ðə ɹoʊd lumd ʌp wɪθaʊt wɔɹnɪŋ, ðən wɝ ɡɔn. fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, mɝk sɝaʊndəd ðɛm, ən oʊnli ə sɑlətɛɹi naɪt-bɝdz kɹaɪ, loʊnli ən mɔɹnfəl, dɪstɝb ðə stɛɾi paʊndɪŋ ə hʊvz.

On and on they sped, northward into the night, time fading into an indistinct blur. Now and again the lights of farmhouses flashed into sight, then disappeared as quickly as imagination. Dogs' sharp challenges faded swiftly behind, or cut off abruptly as the dogs decided they had been chased away. They raced through darkness relieved only by watery pale moonlight, a darkness where trees along the road loomed up without warning, then were gone. For the rest, murk surrounded them, and only a solitary night-bird's cry, lonely and mournful, disturbed the steady pounding of hooves.

əbɹʌpli læn sloʊd, ðən bɹɔt ðə faɪl ə hɔɹsəz tə ə stɑp. ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ lɔŋ ðeɪ hæd bɪn muvɪŋ, bʌɾ ə sɑft eɪk fɪld ɪz lɛɡz fɹəm ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə sæɾəl. əhɛɾ ə ðɛm ɪn ðə naɪt, laɪts spɑɹkəld, əz ɪf ə tɔl swɔɹm ə faɪɝəfliz hɛld wʌn pleɪs əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz.

Abruptly Lan slowed, then brought the file of horses to a stop. Rand was not sure how long they had been moving, but a soft ache filled his legs from gripping the saddle. Ahead of them in the night, lights sparkled, as if a tall swarm of fireflies held one place among the trees.

ɹænd fɹaʊn ət ðə laɪts ɪn pʌzəlmənt, ðən sʌɾənli ɡæspt wɪð sɝpɹaɪz. ðə faɪɝəfliz wɝ wɪndoʊz, ðə wɪndoʊz ə haʊsəz kʌvɝɪŋ ðə saɪdz ən tɑp ʌv ə hɪl. ɪt wɑz wɑtʃ hɪl. hi kəd hɑɹdli bɪliv ðeɪ hæd kʌm soʊ fɑɹ. ðeɪ hæd pɹɑbli meɪd ðə dʒɝni əz fæst əz ɪt hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn tʃɹævəld. fɑloʊɪŋ lænz ɪɡzæmpəl, ɹænd ən tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn dɪsmaʊntɪd. klaʊd stʊd hɛd daʊn, saɪdz hivɪŋ. læðɝ, ɔlmoʊst ɪndɪstɪŋɡwɪʃəbəl fɹəm ðə hɔɹsəz smoʊki saɪdz, flɛk ðə ɡɹeɪz nɛk ən ʃoʊldɝz. ɹænd θɔt ðət klaʊd wəd nɑt bi kæɹiɪŋ ɛniwʌn fɝðɝ ðət naɪt.

Rand frowned at the lights in puzzlement, then suddenly gasped with surprise. The fireflies were windows, the windows of houses covering the sides and top of a hill. It was Watch Hill. He could hardly believe they had come so far. They had probably made the journey as fast as it had ever been traveled. Following Lan's example, Rand and Thom Merrilin dismounted. Cloud stood head down, sides heaving. Lather, almost indistinguishable from the horse's smoky sides, flecked the gray's neck and shoulders. Rand thought that Cloud would not be carrying anyone further that night.

"mʌtʃ əz aɪ wəd laɪk tə pʊɾ ɔl ðiz vɪlədʒəz bɪhaɪn mi," tɑm ənaʊnst, "ə fju aʊɝz ɹɛst wəd nɑt ɡoʊ əmɪs ɹaɪt naʊ. ʃʊɹli wɪv ɪnʌf ʌv ə lɛd tə əlaʊ ðæt?"

"Much as I would like to put all these villages behind me," Thom announced, "a few hours rest would not go amiss right now. Surely we have enough of a lead to allow that?"

ɹænd stʃɹɛtʃt, nʌklɪŋ ðə smɔl ə hɪz bæk. "ɪf wɝ stɑpɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə naɪɾ ɪn wɑtʃ hɪl, wi meɪ əz wɛl ɡoʊ ɑn ʌp."

Rand stretched, knuckling the small of his back. "If we're stopping the rest of the night in Watch Hill, we may as well go on up."

ə veɪɡɹənt ɡʌst ʌv wɪn bɹɔɾ ə fɹæɡmən ə sɔŋ fɹəm ðə vɪlədʒ, ən smɛlz ə kʊkɪŋ ðət meɪɾ ɪz maʊθ wɔɾɝ. ðeɪ wɝ stɪl sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ ɪn wɑtʃ hɪl. ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ tʃɹɑləks tə dɪstɝb ðɛɹ bɛl taɪn. hi lʊk fəɹ ɛɡwin. ʃi wɑz linɪŋ əɡɛns bɛlə, slʌmpt wɪð wɪɹinəs. ði ʌðɝz wɝ klaɪmɪŋ daʊn əz wɛl, wɪð mɛni ə saɪ ən mʌtʃ stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ʌv eɪkɪŋ mʌsəlz. oʊnli ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃoʊd noʊ vɪzəbəl saɪn ə fətiɡ.

A vagrant gust of wind brought a fragment of song from the village, and smells of cooking that made his mouth water. They were still celebrating in Watch Hill. There had been no Trollocs to disturb their Bel Tine. He looked for Egwene. She was leaning against Bela, slumped with weariness. The others were climbing down as well, with many a sigh and much stretching of aching muscles. Only the Warder and the Aes Sedai showed no visible sign of fatigue.

"aɪ kəd də wɪð səm sɪŋɪŋ," mæt pʊɾ ɪn taɪɹədli. "æn meɪbi ə hɑt mʌɾən paɪ ət ðə waɪt bɔɹ." pɔzɪŋ, hi æɾəd, "aɪv nɛvɝ bɪn fɝðɝ ðən wɑtʃ hɪl. ðə waɪt bɔɹz nɑt nɪɹli əz ɡʊɾ əz ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn."

"I could do with some singing," Mat put in tiredly. "And maybe a hot mutton pie at the White Boar." Pausing, he added, "I've never been further than Watch Hill. The White Boar's not nearly as good as the Winespring Inn."

"ðə waɪt bɔɹ ɪzən soʊ bæd," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ə mʌɾən paɪ fəɹ mi, tu. ən lɑts ə hɑt ti tə teɪk ðə tʃɪl ɔf maɪ boʊnz."

"The White Boar isn't so bad," Perrin said. "A mutton pie for me, too. And lots of hot tea to take the chill off my bones."

"wi kænɑt stɑp əntɪl wəɹ əkɹɔs ðə tɛɹən," læn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "nɑt fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ə fju mɪnəts."

"We cannot stop until we are across the Taren," Lan said sharply. "Not for more than a few minutes."

"bʌt ðə hɔɹsəz," ɹænd pɹətɛstəd. "wil ɹʌn əm tə dɛθ ɪf wi tʃɹaɪ tə ɡoʊ ɛni fɝðɝ tənaɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, ʃʊɹli jə - "

"But the horses," Rand protested. "We'll run them to death if we try to go any further tonight. Moiraine Sedai, surely you - "

hi hæd veɪɡli noʊɾəst əɹ muvɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə hɔɹsəz, bʌɾ i hæd nɑt peɪɾ ɛni ɹil ətɛnʃən tə wʌt ʃi dɪd. naʊ ʃi bɹʌʃt pæst ɪm tə leɪ hɝ hænz ɑn klaʊdz nɛk. ɹænd fɛl saɪlənt. sʌɾənli ðə hɔɹs tɔst ɪz hɛd wɪð ə sɑft wɪkɝ, nɪɹli pʊlɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz fɹəm ɹændz hænz. ðə ɡɹeɪ dænst ə stɛp saɪdweɪz, əz ɹɛstɪv əz ɪf i hæd spɛn ə wik ɪn ə steɪbəl. wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd mɔɪɹeɪn wɛn tə bɛlə.

He had vaguely noticed her moving among the horses, but he had not paid any real attention to what she did. Now she brushed past him to lay her hands on Cloud's neck. Rand fell silent. Suddenly the horse tossed his head with a soft whicker, nearly pulling the reins from Rand's hands. The gray danced a step sideways, as restive as if he had spent a week in a stable. Without a word Moiraine went to Bela.

"aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ʃi kəd də ðæt," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli tə læn, hɪz tʃiks hɑt.

"I did not know she could do that," Rand said softly to Lan, his cheeks hot.

"ju, ʌv ɔl pipəl, ʃʊɾə səspɛktəɾ ɪt," ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɹɪplaɪd. "ju wɑtʃt əɹ wɪð jəɹ fɑðɝ. ʃɪl wɑʃ ɔl ðə fətiɡ əweɪ. fɝs fɹəm ðə hɔɹsəz, ðən fɹəm ðə ɹɛst ə ju."

"You, of all people, should have suspected it," the Warder replied. "You watched her with your father. She will wash all the fatigue away. First from the horses, then from the rest of you."

"ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs. nɑt ju?"

"The rest of us. Not you?"

"nɑt mi, ʃifɝɾɝ. aɪ doʊnt niɾ ɪt, nɑt jɛt. ən nɑt hɝ. wʌt ʃi kən də fəɹ ʌðɝz, ʃi kænɑt də fəɹ hɝsɛlf. oʊnli wʌn ʌv əs wɪl ɹaɪd taɪɝd. jə hæd bɛɾɝ hoʊp ʃi dʌz nɑt ɡɹoʊ tu taɪɝd bɪfɔɹ wi ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"Not me, sheepherder. I don't need it, not yet. And not her. What she can do for others, she cannot do for herself. Only one of us will ride tired. You had better hope she does not grow too tired before we reach Tar Valon."

"tu taɪɝd fəɹ wʌt?" ɹænd æsk ðə wɔɹɾɝ.

"Too tired for what?" Rand asked the Warder.

"ju wɝ ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt jəɹ bɛlə, ɹænd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi stʊd baɪ ðə mɛɹ. "ʃi hæz ə ɡʊd hɑɹt, ən əz mʌtʃ stʌbɝnnəs əz ðə ɹɛst ə jə tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk. stʃɹeɪnʒ əz ɪt simz, ʃi meɪ bi ðə list wɪɹi ʌv ɔl."

"You were right about your Bela, Rand," Moiraine said from where she stood by the mare. "She has a good heart, and as much stubbornness as the rest of you Two Rivers folk. Strange as it seems, she may be the least weary of all."

ə skɹim ɹɪp ðə dɑɹknəs, ə saʊn laɪk ə mæn daɪɪŋ ʌndɝ ʃɑɹp naɪvz, ən wɪŋz swup loʊ əbʌv ðə pɑɹɾi. ðə naɪt dipən ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ðət swɛpt oʊvɝ ðɛm. wɪð pænɪkt kɹaɪz ðə hɔɹsəz ɹɪɹd waɪldli.

A scream ripped the darkness, a sound like a man dying under sharp knives, and wings swooped low above the party. The night deepened in the shadow that swept over them. With panicked cries the horses reared wildly.

ðə wɪn ə ðə dʒɹæɡkɝz wɪŋz biɾ ət ɹænd wɪð ə fil laɪk ðə tʌtʃ ə slaɪm, laɪk tʃɪɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə dæŋk dɪmnəs ʌv ə naɪtmɛɹ. hi hæd noʊ taɪm ivən tə fil ðə fɪɹ ʌv ɪt, fəɹ klaʊɾ ɪksploʊɾəd ɪndə ði ɛɹ wɪð ə skɹim ə hɪz oʊn, twɪstɪŋ dɛspɝətli əz ɪf ətɛmptɪŋ tə ʃeɪk ɔf səm klɪŋɪŋ θɪŋ. ɹænd, hæŋɪŋ ɑntu ðə ɹeɪnz, wɑz dʒɝkt ɔf ɪz fiɾ ən dʒɹæɡd əkɹɔs ðə ɡɹaʊnd, klaʊd skɹimɪŋ əz ðoʊ ðə bɪɡ ɡɹeɪ fɛlt wʊlvz tɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪz hɑks.

The wind of the Draghkar's wings beat at Rand with a feel like the touch of slime, like chittering in the dank dimness of a nightmare. He had no time even to feel the fear of it, for Cloud exploded into the air with a scream of his own, twisting desperately as if attempting to shake off some clinging thing. Rand, hanging onto the reins, was jerked off his feet and dragged across the ground, Cloud screaming as though the big gray felt wolves tearing at his hocks.

sʌmhaʊ hi meɪnteɪn ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz; juzɪŋ ði ʌðɝ hæn əz mʌtʃ əz ɪz lɛɡz i skɹæmbəld ɑntu hɪz fit, teɪkɪŋ lipɪŋ, stæɡɝɪŋ stɛps tə kip fɹəm biɪŋ pʊl daʊn əɡɛn. hɪz bɹɛθ keɪm ɪn ɹæɡəd pæns ə dɛspɝeɪʃən. hi kəd nɑt lɛt klaʊd ɡɛɾ əweɪ. hi θɹu aʊɾ ə fɹæntɪk hænd, bɛɹli kætʃɪŋ ðə bɹaɪɾəl. klaʊd ɹɪɹd, lɪftɪŋ ɪm ɪndə ði ɛɹ; ɹænd klʌŋ hɛlpləsli, hoʊpɪŋ əɡɛns hoʊp ðət ðə hɔɹs wəd kwaɪəɾən.

Somehow he maintained his grip on the reins; using the other hand as much as his legs he scrambled onto his feet, taking leaping, staggering steps to keep from being pulled down again. His breath came in ragged pants of desperation. He could not let Cloud get away. He threw out a frantic hand, barely catching the bridle. Cloud reared, lifting him into the air; Rand clung helplessly, hoping against hope that the horse would quieten.

ðə ʃɑk ə lændɪŋ dʒɑɹd ɹænd tə hɪz tiθ, bʌt sʌɾənli ðə ɡɹeɪ wɑz stɪl, nɑstʃɹəlz flɛɹɪŋ ən aɪz ɹoʊlɪŋ, stɪf-lɛɡəɾ ən tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. ɹænd wɑz tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ əz wɛl, ən ɔl bʌt hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə bɹaɪɾəl. ðət dʒoʊl mʌst əv ʃeɪkən ðə ful ænəməl, tu, hi θɔt. hi tʊk θɹi əɹ fɔɹ dip, ʃeɪki bɹɛθs. oʊnli ðən kəɾ i lʊk ɝaʊn ən si wʌt hæd hæpən tə ði ʌðɝz.

The shock of landing jarred Rand to his teeth, but suddenly the gray was still, nostrils flaring and eyes rolling, stiff-legged and trembling. Rand was trembling as well, and all but hanging from the bridle. That jolt must have shaken the fool animal, too, he thought. He took three or four deep, shaky breaths. Only then could he look around and see what had happened to the others.

keɪɑs ɹeɪn əmʌŋ ðə pɑɹɾi. ðeɪ klʌtʃt ɹeɪnz əɡɛns dʒɝkɪŋ hɛdz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ wɪð lɪɾəl səksɛs tə kɑm ðə ɹɪɹɪŋ hɔɹsəz ðət dʒɹæɡd əm əbaʊɾ ɪn ə mɪlɪŋ mæs. oʊnli tu simɪŋli hæd noʊ tʃɹʌbəl əɾ ɔl wɪð ðɛɹ maʊns. mɔɪɹeɪn sæt stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl, ðə waɪt mɛɹ stɛpɪŋ dɛləkətli əweɪ fɹəm ðə kənfjuʒən əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi hæd hæpənd. ɑn fʊt, læn skæn ðə skaɪ, sɔɹɾ ɪn wʌn hæn ən ɹeɪnz ɪn ði ʌðɝ; ðə slik blæk stæljən stʊd kwaɪətli bɪsaɪd hɪm.

Chaos reigned among the party. They clutched reins against jerking heads, trying with little success to calm the rearing horses that dragged them about in a milling mass. Only two seemingly had no trouble at all with their mounts. Moiraine sat straight in her saddle, the white mare stepping delicately away from the confusion as if nothing at all out of the ordinary had happened. On foot, Lan scanned the sky, sword in one hand and reins in the other; the sleek black stallion stood quietly beside him.

saʊnz ə mɛɹɪmækɪŋ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ keɪm fɹəm wɑtʃ hɪl. ðoʊz ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ mʌst əv hɝd ðə kɹaɪ, tu. ɹænd nu ðeɪ wəd lɪsən əwaɪl, ən pɝhæps wɑtʃ fəɹ wʌt hæd kɑzd ɪt, ðən ɹɪtɝn tə ðɛɹ dʒɑləɾi. ðeɪ wəd sun fɝɡɛt ði ɪnsəɾənt, ɪts mɛmɹi səbmɝdʒ baɪ sɔŋ ən fuɾ ən dæns ən fʌn. pɝhæps wən ðeɪ hɝd ðə nuz ʌv wʌt hæd hæpən ɪn ɛmənz fil səm wəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ən wʌndɝ. ə fɪɾəl bɪɡæn tə pleɪ, ən æftɝ ə moʊmən ə flut dʒɔɪn ɪn. ðə vɪlədʒ wɑz ɹɪzumɪŋ ɪts sɛləbɹeɪʃən.

Sounds of merrymaking no longer came from Watch Hill. Those in the village must have heard the cry, too. Rand knew they would listen awhile, and perhaps watch for what had caused it, then return to their jollity. They would soon forget the incident, its memory submerged by song and food and dance and fun. Perhaps when they heard the news of what had happened in Emond's Field some would remember, and wonder. A fiddle began to play, and after a moment a flute joined in. The village was resuming its celebration.

"maʊnt!" læn kəmændəd kɝtli. ʃiðɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd, hi lɛpt ɑntu ðə stæljən. "ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ wəd nɑɾ əv ʃoʊɾ ɪtsɛlf ənlɛs ɪt hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɹipɔɹɾəd əɹ wɛɹəbaʊts tə ðə mɹdʒɹɑl." ənʌðɝ stʃɹaɪɾənt ʃɹik dʒɹɪftəd daʊn fɹəm fɑɹ əbʌv, feɪntɝ bʌt noʊ lɛs hɑɹʃ. ðə mjuzɪk fɹəm wɑtʃ hɪl saɪlənst ɹæədli wʌns mɔɹ. "ɪt tʃɹæks əs naʊ, mɑɹkɪŋ əs fəɹ ðə hæfmən. hi woʊn bi fɑɹ."

"Mount!" Lan commanded curtly. Sheathing his sword, he leaped onto the stallion. "The Draghkar would not have showed itself unless it had already reported our whereabouts to the Myrddraal." Another strident shriek drifted down from far above, fainter but no less harsh. The music from Watch Hill silenced raggedly once more. "It tracks us now, marking us for the Halfman. He won't be far."

ðə hɔɹsəz, fɹɛʃ naʊ əz wɛl əz fɪɹ-stʃɹʌk, pɹænst ən bækt əweɪ fɹəm ðoʊz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə maʊnt. ə kɝsɪŋ tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn wɑz ðə fɝst ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl, bʌt ði ʌðɝz wɝ ʌp sun æftɝ. ɔl bʌt wʌn.

The horses, fresh now as well as fear-struck, pranced and backed away from those trying to mount. A cursing Thom Merrilin was the first into his saddle, but the others were up soon after. All but one.

"hɝi, ɹænd!" ɛɡwin ʃaʊɾəd. ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ ɡeɪv ʃɹɪl vɔɪs wʌns mɔɹ, ən bɛlə ɹæn ə fju stɛps bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd ɹeɪn ðə mɛɹ ɪn. "hɝi!"

"Hurry, Rand!" Egwene shouted. The Draghkar gave shrill voice once more, and Bela ran a few steps before she could rein the mare in. "Hurry!"

wɪð ə stɑɹt ɹænd ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə maʊn klaʊɾ i hæd bɪn stændɪŋ ðəɹ stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə skaɪ ɪn ə veɪn ətɛmp tə loʊkeɪt ðə sɔɹs ə ðoʊz vaɪl ʃɹiks. mɔɹ, ɔl ʌnəwɛɹ, hi hæd dʒɹɔn tæmz sɔɹɾ əz ɪf tə faɪt ðə flaɪɪŋ θɪŋ.

With a start Rand realized that instead of trying to mount Cloud he had been standing there staring at the sky in a vain attempt to locate the source of those vile shrieks. More, all unaware, he had drawn Tam's sword as if to fight the flying thing.

hɪz feɪs ɹɛɾənd, meɪkɪŋ ɪm ɡlæd fəɹ ðə naɪt tə haɪd hɪm. ɔkwɝdli, wɪð wʌn hæn ɑkjəpaɪd baɪ ðə ɹeɪnz, hi ɹeɪ-ʃiðd ðə bleɪd, ɡlænsɪŋ heɪstəli ət ði ʌðɝz. mɔɪɹeɪn, læn, ən ɛɡwin ɔl wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ haʊ mʌtʃ ðeɪ kəd si ɪn ðə munlaɪt. ðə ɹɛst sim tu əbzɔɹbd wɪð kipɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl tə peɪ hɪm ɛni maɪnd. hi pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə pɑməl ən ɹitʃt ðə sæɾəl ɪn wʌn lip, əz ɪf i hæd bɪn duɪŋ ðə laɪk ɔl ɪz laɪf. ɪf ɛni ʌv ɪz fɹɛnz hæd noʊɾəst ðə sɔɹd, hi wəd ʃʊɹli hɪɹ əbaʊɾ ɪt leɪɾɝ. ðəɹ wəd bi taɪm ɪnʌf tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪt ðɛn.

His face reddened, making him glad for the night to hide him. Awkwardly, with one hand occupied by the reins, he re-sheathed the blade, glancing hastily at the others. Moiraine, Lan, and Egwene all were looking at him, though he could not be sure how much they could see in the moonlight. The rest seemed too absorbed with keeping their horses under control to pay him any mind. He put a hand on the pommel and reached the saddle in one leap, as if he had been doing the like all his life. If any of his friends had noticed the sword, he would surely hear about it later. There would be time enough to worry about it then.

əz sun əz i wɑz ɪn ðə sæɾəl ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɔf əɾ ə ɡæləp əɡɛn, ʌp ðə ɹoʊɾ ən baɪ ðə doʊm-laɪk hɪl. dɑɡz bɑɹkt ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ; ðɛɹ pæsədʒ wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli ənnoʊɾɪst. əɹ meɪbi ðə dɑɡz smɛl tʃɹɑləks, ɹænd θɔt. ðə bɑɹkɪŋ ən ðə vɪlədʒ laɪts əlaɪk vænɪʃt kwɪkli bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

As soon as he was in the saddle they were all off at a gallop again, up the road and by the dome-like hill. Dogs barked in the village; their passage was not entirely unnoticed. Or maybe the dogs smelled Trollocs, Rand thought. The barking and the village lights alike vanished quickly behind them.

ðeɪ ɡæləpt ɪn ə nɑt, hɔɹsəz ɔl bʌt dʒɑsəlɪŋ təɡɛðɝ əz ðeɪ ɹæn. læn ɔɹɾɝd əm tə spɹɛɾ aʊɾ əɡɛn, bʌt noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə bi ivən ə lɪɾəl əloʊn ɪn ðə naɪt. ə skɹim keɪm fɹəm haɪ oʊvɝhɛd. ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡeɪv ʌp ən lɛɾ əm ɹʌn klʌstɝd.

They galloped in a knot, horses all but jostling together as they ran. Lan ordered them to spread out again, but no one wanted to be even a little alone in the night. A scream came from high overhead. The Warder gave up and let them run clustered.

ɹænd wɑz kloʊs bɪhaɪn mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn, ðə ɡɹeɪ stʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn ən ɛfɝt tə fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf bɪtwin ðə wɔɹɾɝz blæk ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪz tʃɹɪm mɛɹ. ɛɡwin ən ðə ɡlimən ɹeɪst ɑn iðɝ flæŋk ə hɪm, waɪl ɹændz fɹɛnz kɹaʊɾəd ɪn bɪhaɪnd. klaʊd, spɝd baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡkɝz kɹaɪz, ɹæn bɪɑn ɛniθɪŋ ɹænd kəd də tə sloʊ hɪm ivən hæɾ i wɪʃt tə, jɛt ðə ɡɹeɪ kəd nɑt ɡeɪn soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə stɛp ɑn ði ʌðɝ tu hɔɹsəz.

Rand was close behind Moiraine and Lan, the gray straining in an effort to force himself between the Warder's black and the Aes Sedai's trim mare. Egwene and the gleeman raced on either flank of him, while Rand's friends crowded in behind. Cloud, spurred by the Draghkar's cries, ran beyond anything Rand could do to slow him even had he wished to, yet the gray could not gain so much as a step on the other two horses.

ðə dʒɹæɡkɝz ʃɹik tʃælənʒd ðə naɪt.

The Draghkar's shriek challenged the night.

staʊt bɛlə ɹæn wɪð nɛk aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt ən teɪl ən meɪn stʃɹimɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪn ə hɝ ɹʌnɪŋ, mætʃɪŋ ðə lɑɹdʒɝ hɔɹsəz' ɛvɹi stʃɹaɪd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ mʌst əv dʌn sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən sɪmpli ɹɪɾɪŋ əɹ ə fətiɡ.

Stout Bela ran with neck outstretched and tail and mane streaming in the wind of her running, matching the larger horses' every stride. The Aes Sedai must have done something more than simply ridding her of fatigue.

ɛɡwinz feɪs ɪn ðə munlaɪt wɑz smaɪlɪŋ ɪn ɪksaɪɾəd dɪlaɪt. hɝ bɹeɪd stʃɹim bɪhaɪn laɪk ðə hɔɹsəz' meɪnz, ən ðə ɡlim ɪn əɹ aɪz wɑz nɑɾ ɔl fɹəm ðə mun, ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ. hɪz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, əntɪl ə swɑloʊd baɪtim sɛɾ ɪm ɔf ɪndə ə fɪɾ ə kɑfɪŋ.

Egwene's face in the moonlight was smiling in excited delight. Her braid streamed behind like the horses' manes, and the gleam in her eyes was not all from the moon, Rand was sure. His mouth dropped open in surprise, until a swallowed biteme set him off into a fit of coughing.

læn mʌst əv æskt ə kwɛstʃən, fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn sʌɾənli ʃaʊɾəd oʊvɝ ðə wɪn ən ðə paʊndɪŋ ə hʊvz. "aɪ kænɑt! moʊst ɪspɛʃli nɑt fɹəm ðə bæk ʌv ə ɡæləpɪŋ hɔɹs. ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑɾ izəli kɪld, ivən wən ðeɪ kən bi sin. wi mʌst ɹʌn, ən hoʊp."

Lan must have asked a question, for Moiraine suddenly shouted over the wind and the pounding of hooves. "I cannot! Most especially not from the back of a galloping horse. They are not easily killed, even when they can be seen. We must run, and hope."

ðeɪ ɡæləp θɹu ə tæɾɝ ə fɑɡ, θɪn ən noʊ haɪɝ ðən ðə hɔɹsəz' niz. klaʊd spɛd θɹu ɪɾ ɪn tu stʃɹaɪdz, ən ɹænd blɪŋkt, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf i hæɾ ɪmædʒən ɪt. ʃʊɹli ðə naɪt wɑz tu koʊl fəɹ fɑɡ. ənʌðɝ pætʃ ə ɹæɡəd ɡɹeɪ wɪsk baɪ ðɛm tə wʌn saɪd, lɑɹdʒɝ ðən ðə fɝst. ɪt hæd bɪn ɡɹoʊɪŋ, əz ɪf ðə mɪst uz fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd. əbʌv ðɛm, ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ skɹimd ɪn ɹeɪdʒ. fɑɡ ɛnvɛləp ðə ɹaɪɾɝz fəɹ ə bɹif moʊmən ən wɑz ɡɔn, keɪm əɡɛn ən vænɪʃt bɪhaɪnd. ði aɪsi mɪs lɛft ə tʃɪl dæmpnəs ɑn ɹændz feɪs ən hænz. ðən ə wɔl ə peɪl ɡɹeɪ lum bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, ən ðeɪ wɝ sʌɾənli ɪnʃɹaʊɾəd. ðə θɪknəs ʌv ɪt mʌfəl ðə saʊn ə ðɛɹ hʊvz tə dʌlnəs, ən ðə kɹaɪz fɹəm oʊvɝhɛd sim tə kʌm θɹu ə wɔl. ɹænd kəɾ oʊnli dʒʌs meɪk aʊt ðə ʃeɪps ʌv ɛɡwin ən tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm.

They galloped through a tatter of fog, thin and no higher than the horses' knees. Cloud sped through it in two strides, and Rand blinked, wondering if he had imagined it. Surely the night was too cold for fog. Another patch of ragged gray whisked by them to one side, larger than the first. It had been growing, as if the mist oozed from the ground. Above them, the Draghkar screamed in rage. Fog enveloped the riders for a brief moment and was gone, came again and vanished behind. The icy mist left a chill dampness on Rand's face and hands. Then a wall of pale gray loomed before them, and they were suddenly enshrouded. The thickness of it muffled the sound of their hooves to dullness, and the cries from overhead seemed to come through a wall. Rand could only just make out the shapes of Egwene and Thom Merrilin on either side of him.

læn dɪd nɑt sloʊ ðɛɹ peɪs. "ðɛɹ ɪz stɪl oʊnli wʌn pleɪs wi kən bi ɡoʊɪŋ," hi kɔld, hɪz vɔɪs saʊndɪŋ hɑloʊ ən dɝɛkʃənləs.

Lan did not slow their pace. "There is still only one place we can be going," he called, his voice sounding hollow and directionless.

"mɹdʒɹɑl ɑɹ slaɪ," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ wɪl juz ɪts oʊn slaɪnəs əɡɛnst ɪt." ðeɪ ɡæləpt ɑn saɪlənli.

"Myrddraal are sly," Moiraine replied. "I will use its own slyness against it." They galloped on silently.

sleɪɾi mɪst əbskjʊɹd boʊθ skaɪ ən ɡɹaʊnd, soʊ ðət ðə ɹaɪɾɝz, ðɛmsɛlvz tɝn tə ʃædoʊ, əpɪɹd tə floʊt θɹu naɪt klaʊdz. ivən ðə lɛɡz ə ðɛɹ oʊn hɔɹsəz sim tə hæv vænɪʃt.

Slaty mist obscured both sky and ground, so that the riders, themselves turned to shadow, appeared to float through night clouds. Even the legs of their own horses seemed to have vanished.

ɹænd ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, ʃɹɪŋkɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ði aɪsi fɑɡ. noʊɪŋ ðət mɔɪɹeɪn kəd də θɪŋz, ivən siɪŋ əɹ də ðɛm, wɑz wʌn θɪŋ; hævɪŋ ðoʊz θɪŋz liv ɪz skɪn dæmp wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls əɡɛn. hi ɹilaɪzd i wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ, tu, ən kɔl hɪmsɛlf naɪn kaɪnz ʌv ɪɾiət. hi kəd nɑt ɹaɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə tɛɹən fɛɹi wɪθaʊt bɹiðɪŋ. ʃi hæd juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɑn tæm, ən i simd ɔl ɹaɪt. stɪl, hi hæd tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf lɛt ðət bɹɛθ ɡoʊ ən ɪnheɪl. ði ɛɹ wɑz hɛvi, bʌɾ ɪf koʊldɝ ɪt wɑz ʌðɝwaɪz noʊ dɪfɹən ðən ðəɾ ɑn ɛni ʌðɝ fɑɡi naɪt. hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf ðæt, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i bɪlivd ɪt.

Rand shifted in his saddle, shrinking away from the icy fog. Knowing that Moiraine could do things, even seeing her do them, was one thing; having those things leave his skin damp was something else again. He realized he was holding his breath, too, and called himself nine kinds of idiot. He could not ride all the way to Taren Ferry without breathing. She had used the One Power on Tam, and he seemed all right. Still, he had to make himself let that breath go and inhale. The air was heavy, but if colder it was otherwise no different than that on any other foggy night. He told himself that, but he was not sure he believed it.

læn ɛnkɝɪdʒd əm tə kip kloʊs, naʊ, tə steɪ wɛɹ itʃ kəd si ði aʊtlaɪnz ʌv ʌðɝz ɪn ðət dæmp, fɹɔsti ɡɹeɪnəs. jɛt ðə wɔɹɾɝ stɪl dɪd nɑt slækən ɪz stæljənz dɛd ɹʌn. saɪd baɪ saɪd, læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn lɛd ðə weɪ θɹu ðə fɑɡ əz ɪf ðeɪ kəd si klɪɹli wʌt leɪ əhɛd. ðə ɹɛs kəɾ oʊnli tʃɹʌst ən fɑloʊ. ən hoʊp.

Lan encouraged them to keep close, now, to stay where each could see the outlines of others in that damp, frosty grayness. Yet the Warder still did not slacken his stallion's dead run. Side by side, Lan and Moiraine led the way through the fog as if they could see clearly what lay ahead. The rest could only trust and follow. And hope.

ðə ʃɹɪl kɹaɪz ðət hæd haʊndɪɾ əm feɪɾəd əz ðeɪ ɡæləpt, ən ðən wɝ ɡɔn, bʌt ðət ɡeɪv smɔl kʌmfɝt. fɔɹəst ən fɑɹmhaʊsəz, mun ən ɹoʊd wɝ ʃɹaʊɾɪd ən hɪɾən. dɑɡz stɪl bɑɹkt, hɑloʊ ən dɪstən ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ heɪz, wən ðeɪ pæs fɑɹmz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ʌðɝ saʊn seɪv ðə dʌl dʒɹʌmɪŋ ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz' hʊvz. nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðət fitʃɝləs æʃən fɑɡ tʃeɪnʒd. nʌθɪŋ ɡeɪv ɛni hɪn ə ðə pæsədʒ ə taɪm ɪksɛp ðə ɡɹoʊɪŋ eɪk ɪn θaɪ ən bæk.

The shrill cries that had hounded them faded as they galloped, and then were gone, but that gave small comfort. Forest and farmhouses, moon and road were shrouded and hidden. Dogs still barked, hollow and distant in the gray haze, when they passed farms, but there was no other sound save the dull drumming of their horses' hooves. Nothing in that featureless ashen fog changed. Nothing gave any hint of the passage of time except the growing ache in thigh and back.

ɪt hæd tə hæv bɪn aʊɝz, ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ. hɪz hænz hæd klʌtʃt ɪz ɹeɪnz əntɪl i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i kəd ɹilis ðɛm, ən i wʌndɝɾ ɪf i wəɾ ɛvɝ wɔk pɹɑpɝli əɡɛn. hi ɡlæns bæk oʊnli wʌns. ʃædoʊz ɪn ðə fɑɡ ɹeɪs bɪhaɪn hɪm, bʌɾ i kəd nɑɾ ivən bi sɝɾən ə ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ. əɹ ivən ðət ðeɪ ɹɪli wɝ ɪz fɹɛnz. ðə tʃɪl ən dæmp soʊk θɹu hɪz kloʊk ən koʊɾ ən ʃɝt, soʊkt ɪndə hɪz boʊnz, soʊ ɪt simd. oʊnli ðə ɹʌʃ ʌv ɛɹ pæst ɪz feɪs ən ðə ɡæðɝ ən stʃɹɛtʃ ə ðə hɔɹs bɪniθ ɪm toʊld ɪm i wɑz muvɪŋ əɾ ɔl. ɪt mʌst əv bɪn aʊɝz.

It had to have been hours, Rand was sure. His hands had clutched his reins until he was not sure he could release them, and he wondered if he would ever walk properly again. He glanced back only once. Shadows in the fog raced behind him, but he could not even be certain of their number. Or even that they really were his friends. The chill and damp soaked through his cloak and coat and shirt, soaked into his bones, so it seemed. Only the rush of air past his face and the gather and stretch of the horse beneath him told him he was moving at all. It must have been hours.

"sloʊ," læn kɔl sʌɾənli. "dʒɹɔ ɹeɪn."

"Slow," Lan called suddenly. "Draw rein."

ɹænd wɑz soʊ stɑɹɾəld ðət klaʊd fɔɹs bɪtwin. læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn, fɔɹdʒɪŋ əhɛd fəɹ hæf ə dʌzən stʃɹaɪdz bɪfɔɹ i kəd pʊl ðə bɪɡ ɡɹeɪ tə ə hɔlt ən stɛɹ.

Rand was so startled that Cloud forced between. Lan and Moiraine, forging ahead for half a dozen strides before he could pull the big gray to a halt and stare.

haʊsəz lumd ɪn ðə fɑɡ ɑn ɔl saɪdz, haʊsəz stʃɹeɪnʒli tɔl tə ɹændz aɪ. hi hæd nɛvɝ sin ðɪs pleɪs bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ i hæɾ ɔfən hɝd dɪskɹɪpʃənz. ðət tælnəs keɪm fɹəm haɪ ɹɛdstoʊn faʊndeɪʃənz, nɛsəsɛɹi wən ðə spɹɪŋ mɛlt ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪs meɪd ðə tɛɹən oʊvɝfloʊ ɪts bæŋks. ðeɪ hæd ɹitʃt tɛɹən fɛɹi.

Houses loomed in the fog on all sides, houses strangely tall to Rand's eye. He had never seen this place before, but he had often heard descriptions. That tallness came from high redstone foundations, necessary when the spring melt in the Mountains of Mist made the Taren overflow its banks. They had reached Taren Ferry.

læn tʃɹɑɾəd ðə blæk wɔɹhɔɹs pæs hɪm. "doʊn bi soʊ iɡɝ, ʃifɝɾɝ."

Lan trotted the black warhorse past him. "Don't be so eager, sheepherder."

dəskɑmfəɾəd, ɹænd fɛl ɪndə pleɪs wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspleɪnɪŋ əz ðə pɑɹɾi muv dipɝ ɪndə ðə vɪlədʒ. hɪz feɪs wɑz hɑt, ən fəɹ ðə moʊmən ðə fɑɡ wɑz wɛlkəm.

Discomfited, Rand fell into place without explaining as the party moved deeper into the village. His face was hot, and for the moment the fog was welcome.

ə loʊn dɔɡ, ənsin ɪn ðə koʊl mɪst, bɑɹkt əɾ əm fjʊɹiəsli, ðən ɹæn əweɪ. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə laɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ə wɪndoʊ əz səm ɝli-ɹaɪzɝ stɝd. ʌðɝ ðən ðə dɔɡ, noʊ saʊn seɪv ðə mjuɾɪd klɑps ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz' hʊvz dɪstɝb ðə læst aʊɝ ə ðə naɪt.

A lone dog, unseen in the cold mist, barked at them furiously, then ran away. Here and there a light appeared in a window as some early-riser stirred. Other than the dog, no sound save the muted clops of their horses' hooves disturbed the last hour of the night.

ɹænd hæd mɛt fju pipəl fɹəm tɛɹən fɛɹi. hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹikɔl wʌt lɪɾəl i nu əbaʊt ðɛm. ðeɪ sɛldəm vɛntʃɝd daʊn ɪndə wʌt ðeɪ kɔld "ðə loʊɝ vɪlədʒəz," wɪð ðɛɹ noʊzɪz ʌp əz ɪf ðeɪ smɛl sʌmθɪŋ bæd. ðə fju hi hæd mɛt bɔɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ neɪmz, laɪk hɪltɑp ən stoʊnboʊt. wʌn ən ɔl, tɛɹən fɛɹi foʊk hæɾ ə ɹɛpjəteɪʃən fəɹ slaɪnəs ən tʃɹɪkɝi. ɪf jə ʃʊk hænz wɪð ə tɛɹən fɛɹi mæn, pipəl sɛd, jə kaʊntəd jəɹ fɪŋɡɝz æftɝwɝdz.

Rand had met few people from Taren Ferry. He tried to recall what little he knew about them. They seldom ventured down into what they called "the lower villages," with their noses up as if they smelled something bad. The few he had met bore strange names, like Hilltop and Stoneboat. One and all, Taren Ferry folk had a reputation for slyness and trickery. If you shook hands with a Taren Ferry man, people said, you counted your fingers afterwards.

læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn stɑp bɪfɔɹ ə tɔl, dɑɹk haʊs ðət lʊkt ɪɡzækli laɪk ɛni ʌðɝ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ. fɑɡ swɝld ɝaʊn ðə wɔɹɾɝ laɪk smoʊk əz i lɛp fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl ən maʊntəd ðə stɛɹz ðət ɹoʊz tə ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ, əz haɪ əbʌv ðə stʃɹiɾ əz ðɛɹ hɛdz. ət ðə tɑp ə ðə stɛɹz læn hæmɝd wɪð ɪz fɪst ɑn ðə dɔɹ.

Lan and Moiraine stopped before a tall, dark house that looked exactly like any other in the village. Fog swirled around the Warder like smoke as he leaped from his saddle and mounted the stairs that rose to the front door, as high above the street as their heads. At the top of the stairs Lan hammered with his fist on the door.

"aɪ θɔɾ i wɑntəd kwaɪət," mæt mʌɾɝd.

"I thought he wanted quiet," Mat muttered.

lænz paʊndɪŋ wɛn ɑn. ə laɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə wɪndoʊ ʌv ðə nɛks haʊs, ən sʌmwʌn ʃaʊɾəd æŋɡɹəli, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ kɛpt ɑn wɪð ɪz dʒɹʌmɪŋ.

Lan's pounding went on. A light appeared in the window of the next house, and someone shouted angrily, but the Warder kept on with his drumming.

əbɹʌpli ðə dɔɹ wɑz flʌŋ bæk baɪ ə mæn ɪn ə naɪtʃɝt ðət flæpt əbaʊɾ ɪz bɛɹ æŋkəlz. ən ɔɪl læmp ɪn wʌn hæn ɪlumən ə nɛɹoʊ feɪs wɪð pɔɪntəd fitʃɝz. hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ æŋɡɹəli, ðən lɛɾ ɪt steɪ oʊpən əz ɪz hɛd swɪvəl tə teɪk ɪn ðə fɑɡ, aɪz bʌlʒɪŋ. "wʌts ðɪs?" hi sɛd. "wʌts ðɪs?" tʃɪl ɡɹeɪ tɛnʒɹəlz kɝld ɪndə ðə dɔɹweɪ, ən i hɝidli stɛp bæk əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm.

Abruptly the door was flung back by a man in a nightshirt that flapped about his bare ankles. An oil lamp in one hand illumined a narrow face with pointed features. He opened his mouth angrily, then let it stay open as his head swiveled to take in the fog, eyes bulging. "What's this?" he said. "What's this?" Chill gray tendrils curled into the doorway, and he hurriedly stepped back away from them.

"mæstɝ haɪtaʊɝ," læn sɛd. "dʒʌs ðə mæn aɪ nid. wi wɑnə kɹɔs oʊvɝ ɑn jəɹ fɛɹi."

"Master Hightower," Lan said. "Just the man I need. We want to cross over on your ferry."

"hi nɛvɝ ivən sɔ ə haɪ taʊɝ," mæt snɪkɝd. ɹænd meɪd ʃʌʃɪŋ moʊʃənz əɾ ɪz fɹɛnd. ðə ʃɑɹp-feɪs fɛloʊ ɹeɪzd ɪz læmp haɪɝ ən pɪɹd daʊn əɾ əm səspɪʃəsli.

"He never even saw a high tower," Mat snickered. Rand made shushing motions at his friend. The sharp-faced fellow raised his lamp higher and peered down at them suspiciously.

æftɝ ə mɪnət mæstɝ haɪtaʊɝ sɛd kɹɑsli, "ðə fɛɹi ɡoʊz oʊvɝ ɪn deɪlaɪt. nɑɾ ɪn ðə naɪt. nɑɾ ɛvɝ. ən nɑɾ ɪn ðɪs fɑɡ, niðɝ. kʌm bæk wən ðə sʌnz ʌp ən ðə fɑɡz ɡɔn."

After a minute Master Hightower said crossly, "The ferry goes over in daylight. Not in the night. Not ever. And not in this fog, neither. Come back when the sun's up and the fog's gone."

hi stɑɹɾəd tə tɝn əweɪ, bʌt læn kɑɾ ɪz ɹɪst. ðə fɛɹimən oʊpən ɪz maʊθ æŋɡɹəli. ɡoʊld ɡlɪntɪɾ ɪn ðə læmplaɪɾ əz ðə wɔɹɾɝ kaʊntəɾ aʊt kɔɪnz wʌn baɪ wʌn ɪndə ði ʌðɝz pɑm. haɪtaʊɝ lɪkt ɪz lɪps əz ðə kɔɪnz klɪŋkt, ən baɪ ɪntʃəz ɪz hɛd muv kloʊsɝ tə hɪz hænd, əz ɪf i kəd nɑt bɪliv wʌɾ i wɑz siɪŋ.

He started to turn away, but Lan caught his wrist. The ferryman opened his mouth angrily. Gold glinted in the lamplight as the Warder counted out coins one by one into the other's palm. Hightower licked his lips as the coins clinked, and by inches his head moved closer to his hand, as if he could not believe what he was seeing.

"æn əz mʌtʃ əɡɛn," læn sɛd, "wɛn wəɹ seɪfli ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. bʌt wi liv naʊ."

"And as much again," Lan said, "when we are safely on the other side. But we leave now."

"naʊ?" tʃuɪŋ ɪz loʊɝ lɪp, ðə fɛɹəɾi mæn ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fiɾ ən pɪɹɾ aʊɾ ət ðə mɪst-leɪɾən naɪt, ðən nɑɾəd əbɹʌpli. "naʊ ɪɾ ɪz. wɛl, lɛt lus maɪ ɹɪst. aɪ hæv tə ɹaʊs maɪ hɔlɝz. jə doʊn θɪŋk aɪ pʊl ðə fɛɹi əkɹɔs maɪsɛlf, də ju?"

"Now?" Chewing his lower lip, the ferrety man shifted his feet and peered out at the mist-laden night, then nodded abruptly. "Now it is. Well, let loose my wrist. I have to rouse my haulers. You don't think I pull the ferry across myself, do you?"

"aɪ wɪl weɪɾ ət ðə fɛɹi," læn sɛd flætli. "fɔɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl." hi ɹilist ɪz hoʊld ɑn ðə fɛɹimən.

"I will wait at the ferry," Lan said flatly. "For a little while." He released his hold on the ferryman.

mæstɝ haɪtaʊɝ dʒɝk ðə hændfʊl ə kɔɪnz tə hɪz tʃɛst ænd, nɑɾɪŋ əɡɹimənt, heɪstəli ʃʌv ðə dɔɹ kloʊzd wɪð ɪz hɪp.

Master Hightower jerked the handful of coins to his chest and, nodding agreement, hastily shoved the door closed with his hip.


tʃæptɝ twɛlv


CHAPTER 12

əkɹɔs ðə tɛɹən


Across the Taren

læn keɪm daʊn ðə stɛɹz, tɛlɪŋ ðə kʌmpəni tə dɪsmaʊn ən lɛd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz æftɝ ɪm θɹu ðə fɑɡ. əɡɛn ðeɪ hæd tə tʃɹʌs ðət ðə wɔɹɾɝ nu wɛɹ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ. ðə fɑɡ swɝld ɝaʊn ɹændz niz, haɪɾɪŋ ɪz fit, əbskjʊɹɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə jɑɹɾ əweɪ. ðə fɑɡ wɑz nɑɾ əz hɛvi əz ɪt hæd bɪn aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊn, bʌɾ i kəd bɛɹli meɪk aʊɾ ɪz kəmpænjənz.

Lan came down the stairs, telling the company to dismount and lead their horses after him through the fog. Again they had to trust that the Warder knew where he was going. The fog swirled around Rand's knees, hiding his feet, obscuring everything more than a yard away. The fog was not as heavy as it had been outside the town, but he could barely make out his companions.

stɪl noʊ hjumən stɝɾ ɪn ðə naɪɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðɛm. ə fju mɔɹ wɪndoʊz ðən bɪfɔɹ ʃoʊɾ ə laɪt, bʌt ðə θɪk mɪs tɝn moʊst ə ðɛm tə dɪm pætʃəz, ən əz ɔfən əz nɑt ðət heɪzi ɡloʊ, hæŋɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ, wɑz ɔl ðət wɑz vɪzəbəl. ʌðɝ haʊsəz, ɹɪvilɪŋ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ, sim tə floʊɾ ɑn ə si ʌv klaʊɾ əɹ tə θɹʌst əbɹʌpli aʊɾ ə ðə mɪst waɪl ðɛɹ neɪbɝz ɹɪmeɪn hɪɾən, soʊ ðət ðeɪ cʊɾə stʊɾ əloʊn fəɹ maɪlz ɝaʊnd.

Still no human stirred in the night except for them. A few more windows than before showed a light, but the thick mist turned most of them to dim patches, and as often as not that hazy glow, hanging in the gray, was all that was visible. Other houses, revealing a little more, seemed to float on a sea of cloud or to thrust abruptly out of the mist while their neighbors remained hidden, so that they could have stood alone for miles around.

ɹænd muv stɪfli fɹəm ði eɪk ə ðə lɔŋ ɹaɪd, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛni weɪ hi kəd wɔk ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. nɑt ðət wɔkɪŋ wɑz mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən ɹaɪɾɪŋ ət ðət moʊmənt, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ivən soʊ hɪz fit wɝ ɔlmoʊs ði oʊnli pɑɹɾ ə hɪm ðət wɑz nɑt sɔɹ. ət list i wɑz juz tə wɔkɪŋ.

Rand moved stiffly from the ache of the long ride, wondering if there was any way he could walk the rest of the way to Tar Valon. Not that walking was much better than riding at that moment, of course, but even so his feet were almost the only part of him that was not sore. At least he was used to walking.

oʊnli wʌns dɪɾ ɛniwʌn spik laʊdli ɪnʌf fəɹ ɹænd tə hɪɹ klɪɹli. "ju mʌs hændəl ɪt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ ɪn ænsɝ tə sʌmθɪŋ ənhɝd fɹəm læn. "hi wɪl ɹɪmɛmbɝ tu mʌtʃ əz ɪɾ ɪz, ən noʊ hɛlp fəɹ ɪt. ɪf aɪ stæn aʊɾ ɪn ɪz θɔts."

Only once did anyone speak loudly enough for Rand to hear clearly. "You must handle it," Moiraine said in answer to something unheard from Lan. "He will remember too much as it is, and no help for it. If I stand out in his thoughts."

ɹænd ɡɹʌmpəli ʃɪftəɾ ɪz naʊ-sɑɾən kloʊk ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, kipɪŋ kloʊs wɪð ði ʌðɝz. mæt ən pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌmbəl tə ðɛmsɛlvz, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ bɹɛθs, wɪð bɪɾən-ɔf ɛkskləmeɪʃənz wɛnɛvɝ wʌn stʌbd ə toʊ ɑn sʌmθɪŋ ənsin. tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn ɡɹʌmbəld, tu, wɝdz laɪk "hɑt mil" ən "faɪɝ" ən "mʌld waɪn" ɹitʃɪŋ ɹænd, bʌt niðɝ ðə wɔɹɾɝ nɔɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tʊk noʊɾəs. ɛɡwin mɑɹtʃt əlɔŋ wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd, hɝ bæk stʃɹeɪɾ ən əɹ hɛd haɪ. ɪt wɑz ə sʌmwʌt peɪnfəli hɛzɪɾənt mɑɹtʃ, tə bi ʃʊɹ, fəɹ ʃi wɑz əz ənjuz tə ɹaɪɾɪŋ əz ðə ɹɛst.

Rand grumpily shifted his now-sodden cloak on his shoulders, keeping close with the others. Mat and Perrin grumbled to themselves, muttering under their breaths, with bitten-off exclamations whenever one stubbed a toe on something unseen. Thom Merrilin grumbled, too, words like "hot meal" and "fire" and "mulled wine" reaching Rand, but neither the Warder nor the Aes Sedai took notice. Egwene marched along without a word, her back straight and her head high. It was a somewhat painfully hesitant march, to be sure, for she was as unused to riding as the rest.

ʃi wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ əɹ ædvɛntʃɝ, hi θɔt ɡlʌmli, ən əz lɔŋ əz ɪt læstəɾ i daʊɾɪd ɪf ʃi wəd noʊɾəs lɪɾəl θɪŋz laɪk fɑɡ əɹ dæmp əɹ koʊld. ðəɹ mʌs bi ə dɪfɝəns ɪn wʌt jə sɔ, ɪt sim tə hɪm, dɪpɛndɪŋ ɑn wɛðɝ jə sɔɾ ædvɛntʃɝ əɹ hæɾ ɪt fɔɹst ɑn ju. ðə stɔɹiz kəd noʊ daʊt meɪk ɡæləpɪŋ θɹu ə koʊl fɑɡ, wɪð ə dʒɹæɡkɝ ən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wʌɾ ɛls tʃeɪsɪŋ ju, saʊn θɹɪlɪŋ. ɛɡwin maɪt bi filɪŋ ə θɹɪl; hi oʊnli fɛl koʊld ən dæmp ən ɡlæd tə hæv ə vɪlədʒ ɝaʊn ɪm əɡɛn, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz tɛɹən fɛɹi.

She was getting her adventure, he thought glumly, and as long as it lasted he doubted if she would notice little things like fog or damp or cold. There must be a difference in what you saw, it seemed to him, depending on whether you sought adventure or had it forced on you. The stories could no doubt make galloping through a cold fog, with a Draghkar and the Light alone knew what else chasing you, sound thrilling. Egwene might be feeling a thrill; he only felt cold and damp and glad to have a village around him again, even if it was Taren Ferry.

əbɹʌpli hi wɔkt ɪndə sʌmθɪŋ lɑɹdʒ ən wɔɹm ɪn ðə mɝk: lænz stæljən. ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən mɔɪɹeɪn hæd stɑpt, ən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə pɑɹɾi dɪd ðə seɪm, pæɾɪŋ ðɛɹ maʊns əz mʌtʃ tə kʌmfɝt ðɛmsɛlvz əz ði ænəməlz. ðə fɑɡ wɑz ə lɪɾəl θɪnɝ hɪɹ, ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə si wʌn ənʌðɝ mɔɹ klɪɹli ðən ðeɪ hæɾ ɪn ə lɔŋ waɪl, bʌt nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk aʊt mʌtʃ mɔɹ. ðɛɹ fit wɝ stɪl hɪɾən baɪ loʊ bɪloʊz laɪk ɡɹeɪ flʌdwɔɾɝ. ðə haʊsəz sim tə hæv ɔl bɪn swɑloʊd.

Abruptly he walked into something large and warm in the murk: Lan's stallion. The Warder and Moiraine had stopped, and the rest of the party did the same, patting their mounts as much to comfort themselves as the animals. The fog was a little thinner here, enough for them to see one another more clearly than they had in a long while, but not enough to make out much more. Their feet were still hidden by low billows like gray floodwater. The houses seemed to have all been swallowed.

kɔʃəsli ɹænd lɛd klaʊd fɔɹwɝɾ ə lɪɾəl weɪ ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə hɪɹ ɪz buts skɹeɪp ɑn wʊɾən plæŋks. ðə fɛɹi lændɪŋ. hi bækt ʌp kɛɹfəli, meɪkɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪ bæk əz wɛl. hi hæd hɝd wʌt ðə tɛɹən fɛɹi lændɪŋ wɑz laɪk - ə bɹɪdʒ ðət lɛd noʊwɛɹ ɪksɛp tə ðə fɛɹiboʊt. ðə tɛɹən wɑz səpoʊz tə bi waɪɾ ən dip, wɪð tʃɹɛtʃɝəs kɝəns ðət kəd pʊl ʌndɝ ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst swɪmɝ. mʌtʃ waɪɾɝ ðən ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ wɔɾɝ, hi səpoʊzd. wɪð ðə fɑɡ æɾəd ɪn. ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlif wən i fɛl dɝɾ ʌndɝ ɪz fiɾ əɡɛn.

Cautiously Rand led Cloud forward a little way and was surprised to hear his boots scrape on wooden planks. The ferry landing. He backed up carefully, making the gray back as well. He had heard what the Taren Ferry landing was like - a bridge that led nowhere except to the ferryboat. The Taren was supposed to be wide and deep, with treacherous currents that could pull under the strongest swimmer. Much wider than the Winespring Water, he supposed. With the fog added in. It was a relief when he felt dirt under his feet again.

ə fɪɹs "st!" fɹəm læn, əz ʃɑɹp əz ðə fɑɡ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ dʒɛstʃɝɾ əɾ əm əz i dæʃt tə pɛɹɪnz saɪɾ ən θɹu bæk ðə stɑki juθs kloʊk, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪɾ æks. oʊbiɾiəntli, ɪf stɪl nɑɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ, ɹænd tɔst ɪz oʊn kloʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ tə ʃoʊ hɪz sɔɹd. əz læn muv swɪfli bæk tə hɪz hɔɹs, bɑbɪŋ laɪts əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə mɪst, ən mʌfəl fʊtstɛps əpɹoʊtʃt.

A fierce "Hsst!" from Lan, as sharp as the fog. The Warder gestured at them as he dashed to Perrin's side and threw back the stocky youth's cloak, exposing the great axe. Obediently, if still not understanding, Rand tossed his own cloak over his shoulder to show his sword. As Lan moved swiftly back to his horse, bobbing lights appeared in the mist, and muffled footsteps approached.

sɪks stɑləd-feɪs mɛn ɪn ɹʌf kloʊðz fɑloʊd mæstɝ haɪtaʊɝ. ðə tɔɹtʃɪz ðeɪ kæɹid bɝn əweɪ ə pætʃ ə fɑɡ ɝaʊn ðɛm. wən ðeɪ stɑpt, ɔl ə ðə pɑɹɾi fɹəm ɛmənz fil kəd bi pleɪnli sin, ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə ɡɹeɪ wɔl ðət sim θɪkɝ fəɹ ðə tɔɹtʃlaɪt ɹəflɛktəd fɹəm ɪt. ðə fɛɹimən ɪɡzæmən ðɛm, hɪz nɛɹoʊ hɛd tɪltəd, noʊz twɪtʃɪŋ laɪk ə wizəl snɪfɪŋ ðə bɹiz fəɹ ə tʃɹæp.

Six stolid-faced men in rough clothes followed Master Hightower. The torches they carried burned away a patch of fog around them. When they stopped, all of the party from Emond's Field could be plainly seen, the lot of them surrounded by a gray wall that seemed thicker for the torchlight reflected from it. The ferryman examined them, his narrow head tilted, nose twitching like a weasel sniffing the breeze for a trap.

læn lin əɡɛnst ɪz sæɾəl wɪð əpɛɹən kæʒəɑlnəs, bʌt wʌn hæn ɹɛstəɾ ɑstənteɪʃəsli ɑn ðə lɔŋ hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd. ðəɹ wɑz ən ɛɹ əbaʊɾ ɪm ʌv ə mɛɾəl spɹɪŋ, kəmpɹɛst, weɪɾɪŋ.

Lan leaned against his saddle with apparent casualness, but one hand rested ostentatiously on the long hilt of his sword. There was an air about him of a metal spring, compressed, waiting.

ɹænd hɝidli kɑpid ðə wɔɹɾɝz poʊz - ət list ɪnsəfɑɹ əz pʊɾɪŋ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i kəɾ ətʃiv ðət dɛdli-simɪŋ slaʊtʃ. ðeɪd pɹɑbli læf ɪf aɪ tʃɹaɪd.

Rand hurriedly copied the Warder's pose - at least insofar as putting his hand on his sword. He did not think he could achieve that deadly-seeming slouch. They'd probably laugh if I tried.

pɛɹɪn izd ɪz æks ɪn ɪts lɛðɝ lup ən plæntəɾ ɪz fit dɪlɪbɝətli. mæt pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɪz kwɪvɝ, ðoʊ ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌt kəndɪʃən ɪz bɑstʃɹɪŋ wɑz ɪn æftɝ biɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn ɔl ðɪs dæmp. tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn stɛp fɔɹwɝd ɡɹænli ən hɛld ʌp wʌn ɛmpti hænd, tɝnɪŋ ɪt sloʊli. sʌɾənli hi dʒɛstʃɝd wɪð ə flɝɪʃ, ən ə dæɡɝ twɝl bɪtwin ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. ðə hɪl slæpt ɪndə hɪz pɑm, ænd, əbɹʌpli nɑnʃəlɑnt, hi bɪɡæn tʃɹɪmɪŋ ɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz.

Perrin eased his axe in its leather loop and planted his feet deliberately. Mat put a hand to his quiver, though Rand was not sure what condition his bowstring was in after being out in all this damp. Thom Merrilin stepped forward grandly and held up one empty hand, turning it slowly. Suddenly he gestured with a flourish, and a dagger twirled between his fingers. The hilt slapped into his palm, and, abruptly nonchalant, he began trimming his fingernails.

ə loʊ, dɪlaɪɾəd læf floʊɾəd fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn. ɛɡwin klæpt əz ɪf wɑtʃɪŋ ə pɝfɔɹməns ət fɛstəvəl, ðən stɑpt ən lʊkt əbæʃt, ðoʊ hɝ maʊθ twɪtʃt wɪð ə smaɪl dʒʌs ðə seɪm.

A low, delighted laugh floated from Moiraine. Egwene clapped as if watching a performance at Festival, then stopped and looked abashed, though her mouth twitched with a smile just the same.

haɪtaʊɝ sim fɑɹ fɹəm əmjuzd. hi stɛɹɾ ət tɑm, ðən klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt laʊdli. "ðɛɹ wɑz mɛnʃən meɪɾ ə mɔɹ ɡoʊl fəɹ ðə kɹɔsɪŋ." hi lʊkt ɝaʊn əɾ əm əɡɛn, ə sʌlən, slaɪ lʊk. "wʌt jə ɡeɪv mi bɪfɔɹ ɪz ɪn ə seɪf pleɪs naʊ, hɪɹ? ɪts nʌn ʌv ɪt wɛɹ jə kən ɡɛɾ əɾ ɪt."

Hightower seemed far from amused. He stared at Thom, then cleared his throat loudly. "There was mention made of more gold for the crossing." He looked around at them again, a sullen, sly look. "What you gave me before is in a safe place now, hear? It's none of it where you can get at it."

"ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɡoʊld," læn toʊl hɪm, "ɡoʊz ɪndə jəɹ hænd wən wəɹ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd." ðə lɛðɝ pɝs hæŋɪŋ əɾ ɪz weɪs klɪŋkt əz i ɡeɪv ɪɾ ə lɪɾəl ʃeɪk.

"The rest of the gold," Lan told him, "goes into your hand when we are on the other side." The leather purse hanging at his waist clinked as he gave it a little shake.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ðə fɛɹimənz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd, bʌɾ ət læst i nɑɾəd. "lɛts bi əbaʊɾ ɪt, ðɛn," hi mʌɾɝd, ən stɔkt aʊɾ ɑntu ðə lændɪŋ fɑloʊd baɪ hɪz sɪks hɛlpɝz. ðə fɑɡ bɝn əweɪ ɝaʊn əm əz ðeɪ muvd; ɡɹeɪ tɛnʒɹəlz kloʊzd ɪn bɪhaɪnd, kwɪkli fɪlɪŋ wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn. ɹænd hɝid tə kip ʌp.

For a moment the ferryman's eyes darted, but at last he nodded. "Let's be about it, then," he muttered, and stalked out onto the landing followed by his six helpers. The fog burned away around them as they moved; gray tendrils closed in behind, quickly filling where they had been. Rand hurried to keep up.

ðə fɛɹi ɪtsɛlf wɑz ə wʊɾən bɑɹdʒ wɪð haɪ saɪdz, bɔɹɾəd baɪ ə ɹæmp ðət kəd bi ɹeɪz tə blɑk ɔf ði ɛnd. ɹoʊps əz θɪk əz ə mænz ɹɪst ɹæn əlɔŋ itʃ saɪɾ ʌv ɪt, ɹoʊps fæsən tə mæsɪv poʊsts ət ði ɛn ə ðə lændɪŋ ən dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə naɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðə fɛɹimənz hɛlpɝz stʌk ðɛɹ tɔɹtʃɪz ɪn aɪɝn bɹækəts ɑn ðə fɛɹiz saɪdz, weɪɾəd waɪl ɛvɹiwʌn lɛd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz əbɔɹd, ðən pʊld ʌp ðə ɹæmp. ðə dɛk kɹik bɪniθ hʊvz ən ʃʌflɪŋ fit, ən ðə fɛɹi ʃɪftəd wɪð ðə weɪt.

The ferry itself was a wooden barge with high sides, boarded by a ramp that could be raised to block off the end. Ropes as thick as a man's wrist ran along each side of it, ropes fastened to massive posts at the end of the landing and disappearing into the night over the river. The ferryman's helpers stuck their torches in iron brackets on the ferry's sides, waited while everyone led their horses aboard, then pulled up the ramp. The deck creaked beneath hooves and shuffling feet, and the ferry shifted with the weight.

haɪtaʊɝ mʌɾɝd hæf ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ fəɹ əm tə kip ðə hɔɹsəz stɪl ən steɪ tə ðə sɛntɝ, aʊɾ ə ðə hɔlɝz' weɪ. hi ʃaʊɾəd əɾ ɪz hɛlpɝz, tʃɪviɪŋ əm əz ðeɪ ɹɛɾid ðə fɛɹi tə kɹɔs, bʌt ðə mɛn muvd ət ðə seɪm ɹɪlʌktən spid wʌtɛvɝ i sɛd, ən i wɑz hæfhɑɹɾɪd əbaʊɾ ɪt, ɔfən kʌɾɪŋ ɔf ɪn mɪd-ʃaʊt tə hoʊld ɪz tɔɹtʃ haɪ ən pɪɹ ɪndə ðə fɑɡ. faɪnəli hi stɑpt ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɔltəɡɛðɝ ən wɛn tə ðə baʊ, wɛɹ i stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə mɪs ðət kʌvɝd ðə ɹɪvɝ. hi dɪd nɑt muv əntɪl wʌn ə ðə hɔlɝz tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm; ðən i dʒʌmpt, ɡlɛɹɪŋ.

Hightower muttered half under his breath, growling for them to keep the horses still and stay to the center, out of the haulers' way. He shouted at his helpers, chivvying them as they readied the ferry to cross, but the men moved at the same reluctant speed whatever he said, and he was halfhearted about it, often cutting off in mid-shout to hold his torch high and peer into the fog. Finally he stopped shouting altogether and went to the bow, where he stood staring into the mist that covered the river. He did not move until one of the haulers touched his arm; then he jumped, glaring.

"wʌt? oʊ. ju, ɪz ɪt? ɹɛɾi? əbaʊt taɪm. wɛl, mæn, wʌɾ ɑɹ jə weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ?" hi weɪvd ɪz ɑɹmz, hidləs ə ðə tɔɹtʃ ən ðə weɪ ðə hɔɹsəz wɪkɝɾ ən tʃɹaɪd tə muv bæk. "kæst ɔf! ɡɪv weɪ! muv!" ðə mæn slaʊtʃt ɔf tə kəmplaɪ, ən haɪtaʊɝ pɪɹd wʌns mɔɹ ɪndə ðə fɑɡ əhɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz fɹi hæn ənizəli ɑn ɪz koʊt fɹʌnt.

"What? Oh. You, is it? Ready? About time. Well, man, what are you waiting for?" He waved his arms, heedless of the torch and the way the horses whickered and tried to move back. "Cast off! Give way! Move!" The man slouched off to comply, and Hightower peered once more into the fog ahead, rubbing his free hand uneasily on his coat front.

ðə fɛɹi lɝtʃt əz ɪts muɹɪŋz wɝ lust ən ðə stʃɹɔŋ kɝən kɑɾ ɪt, ðən lɝtʃt əɡɛn əz ðə ɡaɪd-ɹoʊps hɛld ɪt. ðə hɔlɝz, θɹi tə ə saɪd, ɡɹæb hoʊld ə ðə ɹoʊps ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə fɛɹi ən ləbɔɹiəsli bɪɡæn wɔkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə bæk, mʌɾɝɪŋ ənizəli əz ðeɪ ɛdʒd aʊɾ ɑntu ðə ɡɹeɪ-kloʊkt ɹɪvɝ.

The ferry lurched as its moorings were loosed and the strong current caught it, then lurched again as the guide-ropes held it. The haulers, three to a side, grabbed hold of the ropes at the front of the ferry and laboriously began walking toward the back, muttering uneasily as they edged out onto the gray-cloaked river.

ðə lændɪŋ dɪsəpɪɹɾ əz mɪst sɝaʊndəd ðɛm, tɛnjəwəs stʃɹimɝz dʒɹɪftɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə fɛɹi bɪtwin ðə flɪkɝɪŋ tɔɹtʃɪz. ðə bɑɹdʒ ɹɑk sloʊli ɪn ðə kɝənt. nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛp ðə stɛɾi tʃɹɛɾ ə ðə hɔlɝz, fɔɹwɝd tə teɪk hoʊld ə ðə ɹoʊps ən bæk daʊn əɡɛn pʊlɪŋ, ɡeɪv ə hɪn ʌv ɛni ʌðɝ muvmənt. noʊ wʌn spoʊk. ðə vɪlɪdʒɝz kɛpt əz kloʊs tə ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə fɛɹi əz ðeɪ kʊd. ðeɪ hæd hɝd ðə tɛɹən wɑz fɑɹ waɪɾɝ ðən ðə stʃɹimz ðeɪ wɝ juz tə; ðə fɑɡ meɪɾ ɪɾ ɪnfənətli væstɝ ɪn ðɛɹ maɪnz.

The landing disappeared as mist surrounded them, tenuous streamers drifting across the ferry between the flickering torches. The barge rocked slowly in the current. Nothing except the steady tread of the haulers, forward to take hold of the ropes and back down again pulling, gave a hint of any other movement. No one spoke. The villagers kept as close to the center of the ferry as they could. They had heard the Taren was far wider than the streams they were used to; the fog made it infinitely vaster in their minds.

æftɝ ə taɪm ɹænd muv kloʊsɝ tə læn. ɹɪvɝz ə mæn kəd nɑt weɪɾ əɹ swɪm əɹ ivən si əkɹɔs wɝ nɝvəs-meɪkɪŋ tə sʌmwʌn u hæd nɛvɝ sin ɛniθɪŋ bɹɔɾɝ əɹ dipɝ ðən ə wɔɾɝwʊd pɑnd. "wʊd ðeɪ ɹɪli hæv tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɑb ʌs?" hi æskt kwaɪətli. "hi æktəd mɔɹ əz ɪf i wɝ əfɹeɪd wi wəd ɹɑb hɪm."

After a time Rand moved closer to Lan. Rivers a man could not wade or swim or even see across were nervous-making to someone who had never seen anything broader or deeper than a Waterwood pond. "Would they really have tried to rob us?" he asked quietly. "He acted more as if he were afraid we would rob him."

ðə wɔɹɾɝ aɪd ðə fɛɹimən ən ɪz hɛlpɝz - nʌn əpɪɹd tə bi lɪsnɪŋ - bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ dʒʌst əz sɔfli. "wɪð ðə fɑɡ tə haɪɾ əm wɛl, wən wʌt ðeɪ də ɪz hɪɾən, mɛn səmtaɪmz dil wɪð stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɪn weɪz ðeɪ wʊdn ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ aɪz tə si. ən ðə kwɪkɪs tə hɑɹm ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ɑɹ ðə sunəs tə θɪŋk ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ wɪl hɑɹm ðɛm. ðɪs fɛloʊ aɪ bɪliv i maɪt sɛl ɪz mʌðɝ tə tʃɹɑləks fəɹ stu miɾ ɪf ðə pɹaɪs wɑz ɹaɪt. ɪm ə lɪɾəl sɝpɹaɪz jə æsk. aɪ hɝd ðə weɪ pipəl ɪn ɛmənz fil spik ə ðoʊz fɹəm tɛɹən fɛɹi."

The Warder eyed the ferryman and his helpers - none appeared to be listening - before answering just as softly. "With the fog to hide them well, when what they do is hidden, men sometimes deal with strangers in ways they wouldn't if there were other eyes to see. And the quickest to harm a stranger are the soonest to think a stranger will harm them. This fellow I believe he might sell his mother to Trollocs for stew meat if the price was right. I'm a little surprised you ask. I heard the way people in Emond's Field speak of those from Taren Ferry."

"jɛs, bʌt. wɛl, ɛvɹiwʌn sɛz ðeɪ. bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ θɔt ðeɪ wəɾ æktʃəli ." ɹænd dɪsaɪɾɪd i hæd bɛɾɝ stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ ðəɾ i nu ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl ʌv wʌt pipəl wɝ laɪk bɪɑn ɪz oʊn vɪlədʒ. "hi maɪt tɛl ðə feɪd wi kɹɔst ɑn ðə fɛɹi," hi sɛɾ ət læst. "meɪbi hɪl bɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks oʊvɝ æftɝ ʌs."

"Yes, but. Well, everyone says they. But I never thought they would actually." Rand decided he had better stop thinking that he knew anything at all of what people were like beyond his own village. "He might tell the Fade we crossed on the ferry," he said at last. "Maybe he'll bring the Trollocs over after us."

læn tʃʌkəl dʒɹaɪli. "ɹɑbɪŋ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ɪz wʌn θɪŋ, dilɪŋ wɪð ə hæfmən sʌmθɪŋ ɛls əɡɛn. kən jə ɹɪli si hɪm fɛɹiɪŋ tʃɹɑləks oʊvɝ, ɪspɛʃli ɪn ðɪs fɑɡ, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mʌtʃ ɡoʊld wɑz ɔfɝd? əɹ ivən tɔkɪŋ tə ə mɹdʒɹɑl, ɪf i hæɾ ɛni tʃɔɪs? dʒʌs ðə θɔɾ ʌv ɪt wəd kip ɪm ɹʌnɪŋ fəɹ ə mʌnθ. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wɪv tə wɝi vɛɹi mʌtʃ əbaʊt dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn tɛɹən fɛɹi. nɑt hɪɹ. wəɹ seɪf fəɹ ə taɪm, ət list. fɹəm ðɪs lɑt, ɛniweɪ. wɑtʃ jɝsɛlf."

Lan chuckled dryly. "Robbing a stranger is one thing, dealing with a Halfman something else again. Can you really see him ferrying Trollocs over, especially in this fog, no matter how much gold was offered? Or even talking to a Myrddraal, if he had any choice? Just the thought of it would keep him running for a month. I don't think we have to worry very much about Darkfriends in Taren Ferry. Not here. We are safe for a time, at least. From this lot, anyway. Watch yourself."

haɪtaʊɝ hæd tɝn fɹəm piɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə fɑɡ əhɛd. pɔɪntəd feɪs pʊʃt fɔɹwɝɾ ən tɔɹtʃ hɛl haɪ, hi stɛɹɾ ət læn ən ɹænd əz ɪf siɪŋ əm klɪɹli fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. dɛk-plæŋks kɹikt ʌndɝ ðə hɔlɝz' fiɾ ən ði əkeɪʒənəl stæmp ʌv ə huf. əbɹʌpli ðə fɛɹimən twɪtʃt əz i ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛm. wɪð ə lip i spʌn bæk tə lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ðə fɑɹ bæŋk, əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz i sɔɾ ɪn ðə fɑɡ.

Hightower had turned from peering into the fog ahead. Pointed face pushed forward and torch held high, he stared at Lan and Rand as if seeing them clearly for the first time. Deck-planks creaked under the haulers' feet and the occasional stamp of a hoof. Abruptly the ferryman twitched as he realized they were watching him watching them. With a leap he spun back to looking for the far bank, or whatever it was he sought in the fog.

"seɪ noʊ mɔɹ," læn sɛd, soʊ sɔfli ɹænd ɔlmoʊs kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. "ðiz ɑɹ bæd deɪz tə spik ə tʃɹɑləks, əɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, əɹ ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz, wɪð stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪɹz tə hɪɹ. sətʃ tɔk kən bɹɪŋ wɝs ðən ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ skɹɔld ɑn jəɹ dɔɹ."

"Say no more," Lan said, so softly Rand almost could not understand. "These are bad days to speak of Trollocs, or Darkfriends, or the Father of Lies, with strange ears to hear. Such talk can bring worse than the Dragon's Fang scrawled on your door."

ɹænd fɛl noʊ dɪzaɪɝ tə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð ɪz kwɛstʃənz. ɡlum sɛɾəld ɑn ɪm ivən mɔɹ ðən ɪt hæd bɪfɔɹ. dɑɹkfɹɛnz! əz ɪf feɪdz ən tʃɹɑləks ən dʒɹæɡkɝ wɝ nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə wɝi əbaʊt. ət lis jə kəd tɛl ə tʃɹɑlɑk ət saɪt.

Rand felt no desire to go on with his questions. Gloom settled on him even more than it had before. Darkfriends! As if Fades and Trollocs and Draghkar were not enough to worry about. At least you could tell a Trolloc at sight.

əbɹʌpli paɪlɪŋz lumd ʃæɾoʊi ɪn ðə mɪs bɪfɔɹ ðɛm. ðə fɛɹi θʌddɪɾ əɡɛns ðə fɑɹ bæŋk, ən ðən ðə hɔlɝz wɝ hɝiɪŋ tə læʃ ðə kɹæft fæst ən lɛt daʊn ðə ɹæmp ət ðəɾ ɛnd wɪð ə θʌmp, waɪl mæt ən pɛɹɪn ənaʊns laʊdli ðət ðə tɛɹən wɑz nɑt hæf əz waɪɾ əz ðeɪ hæd hɝd. læn lɛɾ ɪz stæljən daʊn ðə ɹæmp, fɑloʊd baɪ mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði ʌðɝz. əz ɹænd, ðə læst, tʊk klaʊd daʊn bɪhaɪn bɛlə, mæstɝ haɪtaʊɝ kɔld aʊɾ æŋɡɹəli.

Abruptly pilings loomed shadowy in the mist before them. The ferry thudded against the far bank, and then the haulers were hurrying to lash the craft fast and let down the ramp at that end with a thump, while Mat and Perrin announced loudly that the Taren was not half as wide as they had heard. Lan led his stallion down the ramp, followed by Moiraine and the others. As Rand, the last, took Cloud down behind Bela, Master Hightower called out angrily.

"hɪɹ, naʊ! hɪɹ! wɛɹz maɪ ɡoʊld?"

"Here, now! Here! Where's my gold?"

"ɪt ʃæl bi peɪd." mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs keɪm fɹəm sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə mɪst. ɹændz buts klʌmp fɹəm ðə ɹæmp tə ə wʊɾən lændɪŋ. "æn ə sɪlvɝ mɑɹk fəɹ itʃ ə jəɹ mɛn," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ æɾəd, "fɔɹ ðə kwɪk kɹɔsɪŋ."

"It shall be paid." Moiraine's voice came from somewhere in the mist. Rand's boots clumped from the ramp to a wooden landing. "And a silver mark for each of your men," the Aes Sedai added, "for the quick crossing."

ðə fɛɹimən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, feɪs pʊʃt fɔɹwɝɾ əz ɪf i smɛl deɪnʒɝ, bʌɾ ət ðə mɛnʃən ə sɪlvɝ ðə hɔlɝz ɹaʊz ðɛmsɛlvz. səm pɔz tə siz ə tɔɹtʃ, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl θʌmp daʊn ðə ɹæmp bɪfɔɹ haɪtaʊɝ kəɾ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ. wɪð ə sʌlən ɡɹɪmɑs, ðə fɛɹimən fɑloʊɾ ɪz kɹu.

The ferryman hesitated, face pushed forward as if he smelled danger, but at the mention of silver the haulers roused themselves. Some paused to seize a torch, but they all thumped down the ramp before Hightower could open his mouth. With a sullen grimace, the ferryman followed his crew.

klaʊdz hʊvz klʌmp hɑloʊli ɪn ðə fɑɡ əz ɹænd meɪɾ ɪz weɪ kɛɹfəli əlɔŋ ðə lændɪŋ. ðə ɡɹeɪ mɪst wɑz əz θɪk hɪɹ əz oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪvɝ. ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə lændɪŋ, ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz hændɪŋ aʊt kɔɪnz, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə tɔɹtʃɪz ə haɪtaʊɝ ən ɪz fɛloʊz. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɪksɛp mɔɪɹeɪn weɪɾəd dʒʌs bɪɑn ɪn ən æŋkʃəs klʌstɝ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stʊd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðoʊ wʌt ʃi kəd si wɑz bɪɑn ɹænd. wɪð ə ʃɪvɝ i hɪtʃt ʌp ɪz kloʊk, sɑɾən əz ɪt wɑz. hi wɑz ɹɪli aʊɾ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, naʊ, ən ɪt simd mʌtʃ fɑɹðɝ əweɪ ðən ðə wɪdθ ʌv ə ɹɪvɝ.

Cloud's hooves clumped hollowly in the fog as Rand made his way carefully along the landing. The gray mist was as thick here as over the river. At the foot of the landing, the Warder was handing out coins, surrounded by the torches of Hightower and his fellows. Everyone else except Moiraine waited just beyond in an anxious cluster. The Aes Sedai stood looking at the river, though what she could see was beyond Rand. With a shiver he hitched up his cloak, sodden as it was. He was really out of the Two Rivers, now, and it seemed much farther away than the width of a river.

"ðɛɹ," læn sɛd, hændɪŋ ə læs kɔɪn tə haɪtaʊɝ. "æz əɡɹid." hi dɪd nɑt pʊɾ ʌp ɪz pɝs, ən ðə fɛɹəɾi-feɪst mæn aɪɾ ɪt ɡɹiɾəli.

"There," Lan said, handing a last coin to Hightower. "As agreed." He did not put up his purse, and the ferrety-faced man eyed it greedily.

wɪð ə laʊd kɹik, ðə lændɪŋ ʃɪvɝd. haɪtaʊɝ dʒɝkt əpɹaɪt, hɛd swɪvəlɪŋ bæk təwɔɹd ðə mɪst-kloʊk fɛɹi. ðə tɔɹtʃɪz ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɑn bɔɹd wɝ ə pɛɹ ə dɪm, fʌzi pɔɪns ə laɪt. ðə lændɪŋ ɡɹoʊnd, ən wɪð ə θʌndɝəs kɹæk ə snæpɪŋ wʊd, ðə twɪn ɡloʊz lɝtʃt, ðən bɪɡæn tə ɹivɑlv. ɛɡwin kɹaɪɾ aʊt wɝdləsli, ən tɑm kɝst.

With a loud creak, the landing shivered. Hightower jerked upright, head swiveling back toward the mist-cloaked ferry. The torches remaining on board were a pair of dim, fuzzy points of light. The landing groaned, and with a thunderous crack of snapping wood, the twin glows lurched, then began to revolve. Egwene cried out wordlessly, and Thom cursed.

"ɪts lus!" haɪtaʊɝ skɹimd. ɡɹæbɪŋ ɪz hɔlɝz, hi pʊʃt əm təwɔɹd ði ɛn ə ðə lændɪŋ. "ðə fɛɹiz lus, jə fulz! ɡɛɾ ɪt! ɡɛɾ ɪt!"

"It's loose!" Hightower screamed. Grabbing his haulers, he pushed them toward the end of the landing. "The ferry's loose, you fools! Get it! Get it!"

ðə hɔlɝz stʌmbəld ə fju stɛps ʌndɝ haɪtaʊɝz ʃʌvz, ðən stɑpt. ðə feɪn laɪts ɑn ðə fɛɹi spʌn fæstɝ, ðən fæstɝ stɪl. ðə fɑɡ əbʌv əm swɝld, sʌkt ɪndə ə spaɪɹəl. ðə lændɪŋ tʃɹɛmbəld. ðə kɹækɪŋ ən splɪntɝɪŋ ʌv wʊd fɪl ði ɛɹ əz ðə fɛɹi bɪɡæn bɹeɪkɪŋ əpɑɹt.

The haulers stumbled a few steps under Hightower's shoves, then stopped. The faint lights on the ferry spun faster, then faster still. The fog above them swirled, sucked into a spiral. The landing trembled. The cracking and splintering of wood filled the air as the ferry began breaking apart.

"wɝl pul," wʌn ə ðə hɔlɝz sɛd, hɪz vɔɪs fɪld wɪð ɑ.

"Whirl pool," one of the haulers said, his voice filled with awe.

"noʊ wɝl pulz ɑn ðə tɛɹən." haɪtaʊɝ saʊndəɾ ɛmpti. "nɛvɝ bɪn ə wɝl pul."

"No whirl pools on the Taren." Hightower sounded empty. "Never been a whirl pool."

"æn ənfɔɹtʃənəɾ əkɝəns." mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs wɑz hɑloʊ ɪn ðə fɑɡ ðət meɪɾ əɹ ə ʃædoʊ əz ʃi tɝn fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ.

"An unfortunate occurrence." Moiraine's voice was hollow in the fog that made her a shadow as she turned from the river.

"ənfɔɹtʃənət," læn əɡɹiɾ ɪn ə flæt toʊn. "ɪt simz jəl bi kæɹiɪŋ noʊ wʌn ɛls əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ fəɹ ə taɪm. ən ɪl θɪŋ ðət jə lɔs jəɹ kɹæft ɪn əɹ sɝvəs." hi dɛlvd əɡɛn ɪndə hɪz pɝs, ɹɛɾi ɪn ɪz hænd. "ðɪs ʃəd ɹipeɪ ju."

"Unfortunate," Lan agreed in a flat tone. "It seems you'll be carrying no one else across the river for a time. An ill thing that you lost your craft in our service." He delved again into his purse, ready in his hand. "This should repay you."

fəɹ ə moʊmən haɪtaʊɝ stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɡoʊld, ɡlɪntɪŋ ɪn lænz hæn ɪn ðə tɔɹtʃlaɪt, ðən ɪz ʃoʊldɝz hʌntʃt ən ɪz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd tə ði ʌðɝz i hæd kæɹiɾ əkɹɔs. meɪɾ ɪndɪstɪŋk baɪ ðə fɑɡ, ði ɛmənz fildɝz stʊd saɪlənli. wɪð ə fɹaɪɾənd, ɪnɑɹtɪkjələt kɹaɪ, ðə fɛɹimən snætʃt ðə kɔɪnz fɹəm læn, wɝld, ən ɹæn ɪndə ðə mɪst. hɪz hɔlɝz wɝ oʊnli hæf ə stɛp bɪhaɪn hɪm, ðɛɹ tɔɹtʃɪz kwɪkli swɑloʊɾ əz ðeɪ vænɪʃt ʌpɹɪvɝ.

For a moment Hightower stared at the gold, glinting in Lan's hand in the torchlight, then his shoulders hunched and his eyes darted to the others he had carried across. Made indistinct by the fog, the Emond's Fielders stood silently. With a frightened, inarticulate cry, the ferryman snatched the coins from Lan, whirled, and ran into the mist. His haulers were only half a step behind him, their torches quickly swallowed as they vanished upriver.

"ðɛɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ fɝðɝ tə hoʊld əs hɪɹ," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛɾ əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi hæd hæpənd. liɾɪŋ əɹ waɪt mɛɹ, ʃi stɑɹɾəd əweɪ fɹəm ðə lændɪŋ, ʌp ðə bæŋk.

"There is nothing further to hold us here," the Aes Sedai said as if nothing out of the ordinary had happened. Leading her white mare, she started away from the landing, up the bank.

ɹænd stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə hɪɾən ɹɪvɝ. ɪt cʊɾə bɪn hæpənstæns. noʊ wɝl pulz, hi sɛd, bʌɾ ɪt. əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪzd ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls hæd ɡɔn. hɝidli hi skɹæmbəld ʌp ðə dʒɛnli sloʊpɪŋ bæŋk.

Rand stood staring at the hidden river. It could have been happenstance. No whirl pools, he said, but it. Abruptly he realized everyone else had gone. Hurriedly he scrambled up the gently sloping bank.

ɪn ðə speɪs ə θɹi peɪsɪz ðə hɛvi mɪs feɪɾəd əweɪ tə nʌθɪŋ. hi stɑp dɛɾ ən stɛɹd bæk. əlɔŋ ə laɪn ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ðə ʃɔɹ θɪk ɡɹeɪ hʌŋ ɑn wʌn saɪd, ɑn ði ʌðɝ ʃoʊn ə klɪɹ naɪt skaɪ, stɪl dɑɹk ðoʊ ðə ʃɑɹpnəs ə ðə mun hɪntəɾ ət dɔn nɑt fɑɹ ɔf.

In the space of three paces the heavy mist faded away to nothing. He stopped dead and stared back. Along a line running down the shore thick gray hung on one side, on the other shone a clear night sky, still dark though the sharpness of the moon hinted at dawn not far off.

ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stʊd kənfɝɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns bɪɑn ðə bɔɹɾɝ ə ðə fɑɡ. ði ʌðɝz hʌɾəld ə lɪɾəl əpɑɹt; ivən ɪn ðə munlɪt dɑɹknəs ðɛɹ nɝvəsnəs wɑz pælpəbəl. ɔl aɪz wɝ ɑn læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ɔl bʌɾ ɛɡwin wɝ linɪŋ bæk əz ɪf tɔɹn bɪtwin luzɪŋ ðə pɛɹ ən ɡɛɾɪŋ tu kloʊs. ɹænd tʃɹɑɾəd ðə læs fju spænz tə ɛɡwinz saɪd, liɾɪŋ klaʊd, ən ʃi ɡɹɪn ət hɪm. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə ʃaɪn ɪn əɹ aɪz wɑz ɔl fɹəm munlaɪt.

The Warder and the Aes Sedai stood conferring beside their horses a short distance beyond the border of the fog. The others huddled a little apart; even in the moonlit darkness their nervousness was palpable. All eyes were on Lan and Moiraine, and all but Egwene were leaning back as if torn between losing the pair and getting too close. Rand trotted the last few spans to Egwene's side, leading Cloud, and she grinned at him. He did not think the shine in her eyes was all from moonlight.

"ɪt fɑloʊz ðə ɹɪvɝ əz ɪf dʒɹɔn wɪð ə pɛn," mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz seɪɪŋ ɪn sæɾəsfaɪd toʊnz. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ nɑt tɛn wɪmən ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn u kəd də ðəɾ əneɪɾɪd. nɑt tə mɛnʃən fɹəm ðə bæk ʌv ə ɡæləpɪŋ hɔɹs."

"It follows the river as if drawn with a pen," Moiraine was saying in satisfied tones. "There are not ten women in Tar Valon who could do that unaided. Not to mention from the back of a galloping horse."

"aɪ doʊn min tə kəmpleɪn, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ," tɑm sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɑdli dɪfəɾənt fəɹ hɪm, "bʌt wəɾ ɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn bɛɾɝ tə kʌvɝ əs ə lɪɾəl fɝðɝ? seɪ tə bɛɹlən? ɪf ðət dʒɹæɡkɝ lʊks ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, wɪl luz ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɪv ɡeɪnd."

"I don't mean to complain, Moiraine Sedai," Thom said, sounding oddly diffident for him, "but would it not have been better to cover us a little further? Say to Baerlon? If that Draghkar looks on this side of the river, we'll lose everything we have gained."

"dʒɹæɡkɝ ɑɹ nɑt vɛɹi smɑɹt, mæstɝ mɛɹɪlɪn," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "fɪɹsəm ən dɛdli deɪnʒɝəs, ən wɪð ʃɑɹp aɪz, bʌt lɪɾəl ɪntɛlədʒəns. ɪɾəl tɛl ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ðət ðɪs saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪz klɪɹ, bʌt ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪtsɛlf ɪz kloʊk fəɹ maɪlz ɪn boʊθ dɝɛkʃənz. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɪl noʊ ði ɛkstʃɹə ɛfɝt ðət kɑs mi. hɪl əv tə kənsɪɾɝ ðət wi meɪ bi ɪskeɪpɪŋ daʊn ðə ɹɪvɝ, ən ðət wɪl sloʊ hɪm. hɪl əv tə dɪvaɪɾ ɪz ɛfɝts. ðə fɑɡ ʃəd hoʊld lɔŋ ɪnʌf ðət hɪl nɛvɝ bi ʃʊɹ ðət wi dɪd nɑt tʃɹævəl ət lis pɑɹtweɪ baɪ boʊt. aɪ cʊɾə ɪkstɛndəd ðə fɑɡ ə lɪɾəl weɪ təwɔɹd bɛɹlən, ɪnstɛd, bʌt ðən ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ kəd sɝtʃ ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪn ə mæɾɝ ʌv aʊɝz, ən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wəd noʊ ɪɡzækli wɛɹ wi wɝ hɛɾəd."

"Draghkar are not very smart, Master Merrilin," the Aes Sedai said dryly. "Fearsome and deadly dangerous, and with sharp eyes, but little intelligence. It will tell the Myrddraal that this side of the river is clear, but the river itself is cloaked for miles in both directions. The Myrddraal will know the extra effort that cost me. He will have to consider that we may be escaping down the river, and that will slow him. He will have to divide his efforts. The fog should hold long enough that he will never be sure that we did not travel at least partway by boat. I could have extended the fog a little way toward Baerlon, instead, but then the Draghkar could search the river in a matter of hours, and the Myrddraal would know exactly where we were headed."

tɑm meɪɾ ə pʌfɪŋ saʊn ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ əpɑlədʒaɪz, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ hoʊp aɪ dɪd nɑɾ əfɛnd."

Thom made a puffing sound and shook his head. "I apologize, Aes Sedai. I hope I did not offend."

"ɑ, mwɑ ɑ, ɛɛs sədaɪ." mæt stɑp tə swɑloʊ ɑɾəbli. "ðə fɛɹi ɑ dɪd jə aɪ min aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd waɪ." hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf wikli, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə saɪləns soʊ dip ðət ðə laʊɾəst saʊn ɹænd hɝd wɑz ɪz oʊn bɹiðɪŋ.

"Ah, Moi ah, Aes Sedai." Mat stopped to swallow audibly. "The ferry ah did you I mean I don't understand why." He trailed off weakly, and there was a silence so deep that the loudest sound Rand heard was his own breathing.

faɪnəli mɔɪɹeɪn spoʊk, ən əɹ vɔɪs fɪl ði ɛmpti saɪləns wɪð ʃɑɹpnəs. "ju ɔl wɑn ɛkspləneɪʃənz, bʌɾ ɪf aɪ ɪkspleɪn maɪ ɛvɹi ækʃən tə ju, aɪ wəɾ əv noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls." ɪn ðə munlaɪt, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sim tɔlɝ, sʌmhaʊ, ɔlmoʊs lumɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛm. "noʊ ðɪs. aɪ ɪntɛn tə si jə seɪfli ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðəɾ ɪz ðə wʌn θɪŋ jə nid tə noʊ."

Finally Moiraine spoke, and her voice filled the empty silence with sharpness. "You all want explanations, but if I explained my every action to you, I would have no time for anything else." In the moonlight, the Aes Sedai seemed taller, somehow, almost looming over them. "Know this. I intend to see you safely in Tar Valon. That is the one thing you need to know."

"ɪf wi kip stændɪŋ hɪɹ," læn pʊɾ ɪn, "ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ wɪl nɑt nid tə sɝtʃ ðə ɹɪvɝ. ɪf aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ kɝɛkli." hi lɛɾ ɪz hɔɹs ɑn ʌp ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk.

"If we keep standing here," Lan put in, "the Draghkar will not need to search the river. If I remember correctly." He led his horse on up the riverbank.

əz ɪf ðə wɔɹɾɝz muvmən hæd lusən sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ɪz tʃɛst, ɹænd dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. hi hɝɾ ʌðɝz duɪŋ ðə seɪm, ivən tɑm, ən ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ən oʊl seɪɪŋ. bɛɾɝ tə spɪɾ ɪn ə wʊlfs aɪ ðən tə kɹɔs ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. jɛt ðə tɛnʃən hæd lɛsənd. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz nɑt lumɪŋ oʊvɝ ɛniwʌn; ʃi bɛɹli ɹitʃt ɪz tʃɛst.

As if the Warder's movement had loosened something in his chest, Rand drew a deep breath. He heard others doing the same, even Thom, and remembered an old saying. Better to spit in a wolf's eye than to cross an Aes Sedai. Yet the tension had lessened. Moiraine was not looming over anyone; she barely reached his chest.

"aɪ doʊn səpoʊz wi kəd ɹɛst ə bɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd hoʊpfəli, ɛndɪŋ wɪð ə jɔn. ɛɡwin, slʌmpt əɡɛns bɛlə, saɪd taɪɹədli.

"I don't suppose we could rest a bit," Perrin said hopefully, ending with a yawn. Egwene, slumped against Bela, sighed tiredly.

ɪt wɑz ðə fɝst saʊn ivən əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ə kəmpleɪn ðət ɹænd hæd hɝd fɹəm hɝ. meɪbi naʊ ʃi ɹiəlaɪzɪz ðɪs ɪzən səm ɡɹæn ædvɛntʃɝ æftɝ ɔl. ðən i ɡɪltəli ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðæt, ənlaɪk hɪm, ʃi hæd nɑt slɛp ðə deɪ əweɪ. "wi də nid tə ɹɛst, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ," hi sɛd. "æftɝ ɔl, wɪv ɹɪɾən ɔl naɪt."

It was the first sound even approaching a complaint that Rand had heard from her. Maybe now she realizes this isn't some grand adventure after all. Then he guiltily remembered that, unlike him, she had not slept the day away. "We do need to rest, Moiraine Sedai," he said. "After all, we have ridden all night."

"ðɛn aɪ sədʒɛst wi si wʌt læn əz fəɹ ʌs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "kʌm."

"Then I suggest we see what Lan has for us," Moiraine said. "Come."

ʃi lɛɾ əm ɑn ʌp ðə bæŋk, ɪndə ðə wʊdz bɪɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ. bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz θɪkən ðə ʃædoʊz. ə ɡʊd hʌnʒɹəd spænz fɹəm ðə tɛɹən ðeɪ keɪm tə ə dɑɹk maʊn bɪsaɪɾ ə klɪɹɪŋ. hɪɹ ə lɔŋ-əɡoʊ flʌd hæɾ ʌndɝmaɪn ən tɑpəld ən ɪntaɪɝ stæn ə lɛðɝlifs, wɑʃɪŋ əm təɡɛðɝ ɪndə ə ɡɹeɪt, θɪk tæŋɡəl, ən əpɛɹənli sɑləd mæs ə tʃɹʌŋks ən bɹæntʃəz ən ɹuts. mɔɪɹeɪn stɑpt, ən sʌɾənli ə laɪɾ əpɪɹd loʊ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə hip ə tʃɹiz.

She led them on up the bank, into the woods beyond the river. Bare branches thickened the shadows. A good hundred spans from the Taren they came to a dark mound beside a clearing. Here a long-ago flood had undermined and toppled an entire stand of leatherleafs, washing them together into a great, thick tangle, an apparently solid mass of trunks and branches and roots. Moiraine stopped, and suddenly a light appeared low to the ground, coming from under the heap of trees.

θɹʌstɪŋ ə stʌb ʌv ə tɔɹtʃ əhɛɾ ə hɪm, læn kɹɔld aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə maʊn ən stʃɹeɪɾənd. "noʊ ənwɛlkəm vɪzəɾɝz," hi toʊl mɔɪɹeɪn. "æn ðə wʊɾ aɪ lɛft ɪz stɪl dʒɹaɪ, soʊ aɪ stɑɹɾəd ə smɔl faɪɝ. wɪl ɹɛst wɔɹm."

Thrusting a stub of a torch ahead of him, Lan crawled out from under the mound and straightened. "No unwelcome visitors," he told Moiraine. "And the wood I left is still dry, so I started a small fire. We will rest warm."

"ju ɪkspɛktəɾ əs tə stɑp hɪɹ?" ɛɡwin sɛɾ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz.

"You expected us to stop here?" Egwene said in surprise.

"ɪt simd ə laɪkli pleɪs," læn ɹɪplaɪd. "aɪ laɪk tə bi pɹipɛɹd, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs."

"It seemed a likely place," Lan replied. "I like to be prepared, just in case."

mɔɪɹeɪn tʊk ðə tɔɹtʃ fɹəm hɪm. "wɪl jə si tə ðə hɔɹsəz? wən jə ɑɹ dʌn əl də wʌɾ aɪ kən əbaʊɾ ɛvɹiwʌnz taɪɹədnəs. ɹaɪt naʊ aɪ wɑnə tɔk tə ɛɡwin. ɛɡwin?"

Moiraine took the torch from him. "Will you see to the horses? When you are done I will do what I can about everyone's tiredness. Right now I want to talk to Egwene. Egwene?"

ɹænd wɑtʃt ðə tu wɪmən kɹaʊtʃ daʊn ən dɪsəpɪɹ ʌndɝ ðə ɡɹeɪt paɪl ə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋks. ðəɹ wɑz ə loʊ oʊpənɪŋ, bɛɹli bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə kɹɔl ɪntu. ðə laɪɾ ə ðə tɔɹtʃ vænɪʃt.

Rand watched the two women crouch down and disappear under the great pile of tree trunks. There was a low opening, barely big enough to crawl into. The light of the torch vanished.

læn hæɾ ɪnkluɾəd fidbæɡz ən ə smɔl kwɑntəɾi ʌv oʊts ɪn ðə səplaɪz, bʌɾ i stɑp ði ʌðɝz fɹəm ənsæɾəlɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. ɪnstɛɾ i pɹədus ðə hɑbəlz i hæɾ ɔlsoʊ pækt. "ðeɪ wəd ɹɛst iziɝ wɪθaʊt ðə sæɾəlz, bʌɾ ɪf wi mʌs liv kwɪkli, ðəɹ meɪ bi noʊ taɪm tə ɹipleɪs ðɛm."

Lan had included feedbags and a small quantity of oats in the supplies, but he stopped the others from unsaddling their horses. Instead he produced the hobbles he had also packed. "They would rest easier without the saddles, but if we must leave quickly, there may be no time to replace them."

"ðeɪ doʊn lʊk tə mi laɪk ðeɪ niɾ ɛni ɹɛst," pɛɹɪn sɛɾ əz i ətɛmptəd tə slɪp ə fidbæɡ oʊvɝ ɪz maʊns mʌzəl. ðə hɔɹs tɔst ɪts hɛd bɪfɔɹ əlaʊɪŋ ɪm tə pʊt ðə stʃɹæps ɪn pleɪs. ɹænd wɑz hævɪŋ dɪfəkəltiz wɪð klaʊd, tu, teɪkɪŋ θɹi tʃɹaɪz bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɡɛt ðə kænvəs bæɡ oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹeɪz noʊz.

"They don't look to me like they need any rest," Perrin said as he attempted to slip a feedbag over his mount's muzzle. The horse tossed its head before allowing him to put the straps in place. Rand was having difficulties with Cloud, too, taking three tries before he could get the canvas bag over the gray's nose.

"ðeɪ du," læn toʊl ðɛm. hi stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm hɑbəlɪŋ ɪz stæljən. "oʊ, ðeɪ kən stɪl ɹʌn. ðəl ɹʌn ət ðɛɹ fæstəst, ɪf wi lɛt ðɛm, ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðə sɛkən ðeɪ dʒɹɑp dɛd fɹəm ɪɡzɔstʃən ðeɪ nɛvɝ ivən fɛlt. aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ hæd nɑt hæd tə də wʌt ʃi dɪd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi." hi pæɾəd ðə stæljənz nɛk, ən ðə hɔɹs bɑbd ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf æknɑlɪdʒɪŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝz tʌtʃ. "wi mʌst ɡoʊ sloʊli wɪð əm fəɹ ðə nɛks fju deɪz, əntɪl ðeɪ ɹɪkʌvɝ. mɔɹ sloʊli ðən aɪ wəd laɪk. bʌt wɪð lʌk ɪɾəl bi ɪnʌf."

"They do," Lan told them. He straightened from hobbling his stallion. "Oh, they can still run. They will run at their fastest, if we let them, right up to the second they drop dead from exhaustion they never even felt. I would rather Moiraine Sedai had not had to do what she did, but it was necessary." He patted the stallion's neck, and the horse bobbed his head as if acknowledging the Warder's touch. "We must go slowly with them for the next few days, until they recover. More slowly than I would like. But with luck it will be enough."

"ɪz ðət ?" mæt swɑloʊɾ ɑɾəbli. "ɪz ðət wʌt ʃi mɛnt? əbaʊɾ əɹ taɪɹədnəs?"

"Is that ?" Mat swallowed audibly. "Is that what she meant? About our tiredness?"

ɹænd pæɾəd klaʊdz nɛk ən stɛɹɾ ət nʌθɪŋ. dɪspaɪt wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn fəɹ tæm, hi hæd noʊ dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə juz ðə paʊɝ ɑn hɪm. laɪt, ʃi əz mʌtʃ əz ədmɪɾəd sɪŋkɪŋ ðə fɛɹi.

Rand patted Cloud's neck and stared at nothing. Despite what she had done for Tam, he had no desire for the Aes Sedai to use the Power on him. Light, she as much as admitted sinking the ferry.

"sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ɪt." læn tʃʌkəld ɹaɪli. "bʌt jəl nɑɾ əv tə wɝi əbaʊt ɹʌnɪŋ jɝsɛlf tə dɛθ. nɑɾ ənlɛs θɪŋz ɡɛɾ ə lɑt wɝs ðən ðeɪ ɑɹ. dʒʌs θɪŋk ʌv ɪɾ əz ən ɛkstʃɹə naɪts slip."

"Something like it." Lan chuckled wryly. "But you will not have to worry about running yourself to death. Not unless things get a lot worse than they are. Just think of it as an extra night's sleep."

ðə ʃɹɪl skɹim ə ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ sʌɾənli ɛkoʊd fɹəm əbʌv ðə fɑɡ-kʌvɝd ɹɪvɝ. ivən ðə hɔɹsəz fɹoʊz. əɡɛn ɪt keɪm, kloʊsɝ naʊ, ən əɡɛn, pɪɹsɪŋ ɹændz skʌl laɪk niɾəlz. ðən ðə kɹaɪz wɝ feɪɾɪŋ, əntɪl ðeɪ hæd feɪɾəd əweɪ ɪntaɪɝli.

The shrill scream of the Draghkar suddenly echoed from above the fog-covered river. Even the horses froze. Again it came, closer now, and again, piercing Rand's skull like needles. Then the cries were fading, until they had faded away entirely.

"lʌk," læn bɹiðd. "ɪt sɝtʃɪz ðə ɹɪvɝ fəɹ ʌs." hi ɡeɪv ə kwɪk ʃɹʌɡ ən əbɹʌpli saʊndəd mæɾɝ-ʌv-fækt. "lɛts ɡɛɾ ɪnsaɪd. aɪ kəd də wɪð səm hɑt ti ən sʌmθɪŋ tə fɪl maɪ bɛli."

"Luck," Lan breathed. "It searches the river for us." He gave a quick shrug and abruptly sounded matter-of-fact. "Let's get inside. I could do with some hot tea and something to fill my belly."

ɹænd wɑz ðə fɝs tə kɹɔl ɑn hænz ən niz θɹu ði oʊpənɪŋ ɪn ðə tæŋɡəl ə tʃɹiz ən daʊn ə ʃɔɹt tʌnəl. ət ði ɛn ʌv ɪt, hi stɑpt, stɪl kɹaʊtʃɪŋ. əhɛd wɑz ən ɪɹɛɡjəlɝli ʃeɪp speɪs, ə wʊɾi keɪv izəli lɑɹdʒ ɪnʌf tə hoʊld əm ɔl. ðə ɹuf ə tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋks ən bɹæntʃəz keɪm tu loʊ tə əlaʊ ɛni bʌt ðə wɪmən tə stænd. smoʊk fɹəm ə smɔl faɪɝ ɑn ə bɛɾ ə ɹɪvɝ stoʊnz dʒɹɪftəɾ ʌp ən θɹu; ðə dʒɹæft wɑz ɪnʌf tə kip ðə speɪs fɹi ʌv smoʊk, bʌt ði ɪntɝwivɪŋ wɑz tu θɪk tə lɛɾ aʊɾ ivən ə ɡlɪmɝ ə ðə fleɪmz. mɔɪɹeɪn ən ɛɡwin, ðɛɹ kloʊks θɹoʊn əsaɪd, sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəd, feɪsɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ bɪsaɪd ðə faɪɝ.

Rand was the first to crawl on hands and knees through the opening in the tangle of trees and down a short tunnel. At the end of it, he stopped, still crouching. Ahead was an irregularly shaped space, a woody cave easily large enough to hold them all. The roof of tree trunks and branches came too low to allow any but the women to stand. Smoke from a small fire on a bed of river stones drifted up and through; the draft was enough to keep the space free of smoke, but the interweaving was too thick to let out even a glimmer of the flames. Moiraine and Egwene, their cloaks thrown aside, sat cross-legged, facing one another beside the fire.

"ðə wʌn paʊɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz seɪɪŋ, "kʌmz fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ðə dʒɹaɪvɪŋ fɔɹs ə kɹieɪʃən, ðə fɔɹs ðə kɹieɪɾɝ meɪd tə tɝn ðə wil ə taɪm." ʃi pʊɾ əɹ hænz təɡɛðɝ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ ən pʊʃt əm əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ. "seɪɾɪn, ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ən seɪaɪdɑɹ, ðə fimeɪl hæf, wɝk əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm təɡɛðɝ tə pɹəvaɪd ðət fɔɹs. seɪɾɪn" - ʃi lɪftəd wʌn hænd, ðən lɛɾ ɪt dʒɹɑp - "ɪz faʊl baɪ ðə tʌtʃ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, laɪk wɔɾɝ wɪð ə θɪn slɪk ə ɹænsɪɾ ɔɪl floʊɾɪŋ ɑn tɑp. ðə wɔɾɝ ɪz stɪl pjʊɹ, bʌɾ ɪt kænɑt bi tʌtʃt wɪθaʊt tʌtʃɪŋ ðə faʊlnəs. oʊnli seɪaɪdɑɹ ɪz stɪl seɪf tə bi juzd." ɛɡwinz bæk wɑz tə ɹænd. hi kəd nɑt si hɝ feɪs, bʌt ʃi wɑz linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ iɡɝli.

"The One Power," Moiraine was saying, "comes from the True Source, the driving force of Creation, the force the Creator made to turn the Wheel of Time." She put her hands together in front of her and pushed them against each other. "Saidin, the male half of the True Source, and saidar, the female half, work against each other and at the same time together to provide that force. Saidin" - she lifted one hand, then let it drop - "is fouled by the touch of the Dark One, like water with a thin slick of rancid oil floating on top. The water is still pure, but it cannot be touched without touching the foulness. Only saidar is still safe to be used." Egwene's back was to Rand. He could not see her face, but she was leaning forward eagerly.

mæt poʊkt ɹænd fɹəm bɪhaɪn ən mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ, ən i muvd ɑn ɪndə ðə tʃɹi kævɝn. mɔɪɹeɪn ən ɛɡwin ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪz ɛntʃɹi. ði ʌðɝ mɛn kɹaʊɾəd ɪn bɪhaɪn hɪm, tɔsɪŋ ɔf dæmp kloʊks, sɛɾəlɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝ, ən hoʊldɪŋ hænz aʊt tə ðə wɔɹmθ. læn, ðə læs tə ɛntɝ, pʊld wɔɾɝbæɡz ən lɛðɝ sæks fɹəm ə nʊk ɪn ðə wɔl, tʊk aʊɾ ə kɛɾəl, ən bɪɡæn tə pɹipɛɹ ti. hi peɪd noʊ ətɛnʃən tə wʌt ðə wɪmən wɝ seɪɪŋ, bʌt ɹændz fɹɛnz bɪɡæn tə stɑp toʊstɪŋ ðɛɹ hænz ən stɛɹ oʊpənli. tɑm pɹitɛndəd ðəɾ ɔl ə hɪz ɪntʃɹəst wɑz ɛnɡeɪdʒd ɪn loʊɾɪŋ ɪz θɪkli kɑɹv paɪp, bʌt ðə weɪ hi lin təwɔɹd ðə wɪmən ɡeɪv ɪm əweɪ. mɔɪɹeɪn ən ɛɡwin æktəɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn.

Mat poked Rand from behind and muttered something, and he moved on into the tree cavern. Moiraine and Egwene ignored his entry. The other men crowded in behind him, tossing off damp cloaks, settling around the fire, and holding hands out to the warmth. Lan, the last to enter, pulled waterbags and leather sacks from a nook in the wall, took out a kettle, and began to prepare tea. He paid no attention to what the women were saying, but Rand's friends began to stop toasting their hands and stare openly. Thom pretended that all of his interest was engaged in loading his thickly carved pipe, but the way he leaned toward the women gave him away. Moiraine and Egwene acted as if they were alone.

"noʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ ɪn ænsɝ tə ə kwɛstʃən ɹænd hæd mɪst, "ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs kænɑt bi juzd ʌp, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðə ɹɪvɝ kən bi juzd ʌp baɪ ðə wil ʌv ə mɪl. ðə sɔɹs ɪz ðə ɹɪvɝ; ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə wɔtɝwil."

"No," Moiraine said in answer to a question Rand had missed, "the True Source cannot be used up, any more than the river can be used up by the wheel of a mill. The Source is the river; the Aes Sedai, the waterwheel."

"æn jə ɹɪli θɪŋk aɪ kən lɝn?" ɛɡwin æskt. hɝ feɪs ʃoʊn wɪð iɡɝnəs. ɹænd hæd nɛvɝ sin əɹ lʊk soʊ bjuɾəfəl, əɹ soʊ fɑɹ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. "aɪ kən bɪkʌm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"And you really think I can learn?" Egwene asked. Her face shone with eagerness. Rand had never seen her look so beautiful, or so far away from him. "I can become an Aes Sedai?"

ɹænd dʒʌmpt ʌp, kɹækɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛns ðə loʊ ɹuf ə lɔɡz. tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn ɡɹæbd ɪz ɑɹm, jæŋkɪŋ ɪm bæk daʊn.

Rand jumped up, cracking his head against the low roof of logs. Thom Merrilin grabbed his arm, yanking him back down.

"doʊn bi ə ful," ðə ɡlimən mɝmɝd. hi aɪd ðə wɪmən - niðɝ sim tə hæv noʊɾəst - ən ðə lʊk i ɡeɪv ɹænd wɑz sɪmpəθɛɾɪk. "ɪts bɪɑn jə naʊ, bɔɪ."

"Don't be a fool," the gleeman murmured. He eyed the women - neither seemed to have noticed - and the look he gave Rand was sympathetic. "It's beyond you now, boy."

"tʃaɪld," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd dʒɛnli, "oʊnli ə vɛɹi fju kən lɝn tə tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ən juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ. səm ə ðoʊz kən lɝn tə ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ dɪɡɹi, səm tə ə lɛsɝ. jə ɑɹ wʌn ə ðə bɛɹ hændfʊl fəɹ hum ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə lɝn. ət list, tʌtʃɪŋ ðə sɔɹs wɪl kʌm tə jə wɛðɝ jə wɑn ɪɾ əɹ nɑt. wɪθaʊt ðə titʃɪŋ jə kən ɹəsiv ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ðoʊ, jəl nɛvɝ lɝn tə tʃænəl ɪt fʊli, ən jə meɪ nɑt sɝvaɪv. mɛn u hæv ði əbɪləɾi tə tʌtʃ seɪɾɪn bɔɹn ɪn əm daɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ dʌz nɑt faɪn əm ən dʒɛntəl ðɛm."

"Child," Moiraine said gently, "only a very few can learn to touch the True Source and use the One Power. Some of those can learn to a greater degree, some to a lesser. You are one of the bare handful for whom there is no need to learn. At least, touching the Source will come to you whether you want it or not. Without the teaching you can receive in Tar Valon, though, you will never learn to channel it fully, and you may not survive. Men who have the ability to touch saidin born in them die, of course, if the Red Ajah does not find them and gentle them."

tɑm ɡɹaʊl dip ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt, ən ɹænd ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli. mɛn laɪk ðoʊz ə hum ði ɛɛs sədaɪ spoʊk wɝ ɹɛɹ - hi hæɾ oʊnli hɝɾ ə θɹi ɪn ɪz hoʊl laɪf, ən θæŋk ðə laɪt nɛvɝ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz - bʌt ðə dæmədʒ ðeɪ dɪd bɪfɔɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ faʊn əm wɑz ɔlweɪz bæɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə nuz tə kæɹi, laɪk ðə nuz ʌv wɔɹz, əɹ ɝθkweɪks ðət dɪstʃɹɔɪd sɪɾiz. hi hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪli ʌndɝstʊd wʌt ði ədʒəz dɪd. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə stɔɹiz ðeɪ wɝ səsaɪəɾiz əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ðət sim tə plɑɾ ən skwɑbəl əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, bʌt ðə stɔɹiz wɝ klɪɹ ɑn wʌn pɔɪnt. ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ hɛld ɪts pɹaɪm duɾi tə bi ðə pɹivɛnʃən ʌv ənʌðɝ bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən ðeɪ dɪɾ ɪt baɪ hʌntɪŋ daʊn ɛvɹi mæn u ivən dʒɹimd ʌv wildɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. mæt ən pɛɹɪn lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ sʌɾənli wɪʃt ðeɪ wɝ bæk hoʊm ɪn ðɛɹ bɛdz.

Thom growled deep in his throat, and Rand shifted uncomfortably. Men like those of whom the Aes Sedai spoke were rare - he had only heard of three in his whole life, and thank the Light never in the Two Rivers - but the damage they did before the Aes Sedai found them was always bad enough for the news to carry, like the news of wars, or earthquakes that destroyed cities. He had never really understood what the Ajahs did. According to the stories they were societies among the Aes Sedai that seemed to plot and squabble among themselves more than anything else, but the stories were clear on one point. The Red Ajah held its prime duty to be the prevention of another Breaking of the World, and they did it by hunting down every man who even dreamed of wielding the One Power. Mat and Perrin looked as if they suddenly wished they were back home in their beds.

"... bʌt səm ə ðə wɪmən daɪ, tu. ɪts hɑɹd tə lɝn wɪθaʊɾ ə ɡaɪd. ðə wɪmən wi də nɑt faɪnd, ðoʊz u laɪv, ɔfən bɪkʌm wɛl, ɪn ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɝl ðeɪ maɪt bɪkʌm wɪsdəmz ə ðɛɹ vɪlədʒəz." ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɔz θɔtfəli. "ði oʊl blʌɾ ɪz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ɛmənz fild, ən ði oʊl blʌd sɪŋz. aɪ nu jə fəɹ wʌt jə wɝ ðə moʊmən aɪ sɔ ju. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ kən stæn ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ə wʊmən u kən tʃænəl, əɹ u ɪz kloʊs tə hɝ tʃeɪnʒ, ən nɑt fil ɪt." ʃi ɹʌmɪɡd ɪn ðə paʊtʃ əɾ əɹ bɛlt ən pɹədus ðə smɔl blu dʒɛm ɑn ə ɡoʊl tʃeɪn ðət ʃi hæɾ ɝliɝ wɔɹn ɪn əɹ hɛɹ. "ju ɑɹ vɛɹi kloʊz tə jəɹ tʃeɪnʒ, jəɹ fɝs tʌtʃɪŋ. ɪɾəl bi bɛɾɝ ɪf aɪ ɡaɪd jə θɹu ɪt. ðət weɪ jəl əvɔɪd ði ənplɛzən ɪfɛks ðət kʌm tə ðoʊz u mʌs faɪn ðɛɹ oʊn weɪ."

"... but some of the women die, too. It is hard to learn without a guide. The women we do not find, those who live, often become well, in this part of the world they might become Wisdoms of their villages." The Aes Sedai paused thoughtfully. "The old blood is strong in Emond's Field, and the old blood sings. I knew you for what you were the moment I saw you. No Aes Sedai can stand in the presence of a woman who can channel, or who is close to her change, and not feel it." She rummaged in the pouch at her belt and produced the small blue gem on a gold chain that she had earlier worn in her hair. "You are very close to your change, your first touching. It will be better if I guide you through it. That way you will avoid the unpleasant effects that come to those who must find their own way."

ɛɡwinz aɪz waɪɾənd əz ʃi lʊkt ət ðə stoʊn, ən ʃi wɛɾ əɹ lɪps ɹɪpiɾɪdli. "ɪz dʌz ðəɾ əv ðə paʊɝ?"

Egwene's eyes widened as she looked at the stone, and she wet her lips repeatedly. "Is does that have the Power?"

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt," mɔɪɹeɪn snæpt. "θɪŋz də nɑɾ əv ðə paʊɝ, tʃaɪld. ivən ən æŋɡɹil ɪz oʊnli ə tul. ðɪs ɪz dʒʌst ə pɹɪɾi blu stoʊn. bʌɾ ɪt kən ɡɪv ɔf laɪt. hɪɹ."

"Of course not," Moiraine snapped. "Things do not have the Power, child. Even an angreal is only a tool. This is just a pretty blue stone. But it can give off light. Here."

ɛɡwinz hænz tʃɹɛmbəld əz mɔɪɹeɪn leɪd ðə stoʊn ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝtɪps. ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə pʊl bæk, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛl boʊθ əɹ hænz ɪn wʌn ə hɝz ən dʒɛnli tʌtʃt ði ʌðɝ tə ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɛɡwinz hɛd.

Egwene's hands trembled as Moiraine laid the stone on her fingertips. She started to pull back, but the Aes Sedai held both her hands in one of hers and gently touched the other to the side of Egwene's head.

"lʊk ət ðə stoʊn," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd sɔfli. "ɪɾ ɪz bɛɾɝ ðɪs weɪ ðən fʌmbəlɪŋ əloʊn. klɪɹ jəɹ maɪn ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌt ðə stoʊn. klɪɹ jəɹ maɪnd, ən lɛt jɝsɛlf dʒɹɪft. ðəɹ ɪz oʊnli ðə stoʊn ən ɛmptinəs. əl bɪɡɪn ɪt. dʒɹɪft, ən lemi ɡaɪd ju. noʊ θɔts. dʒɹɪft."

"Look at the stone," the Aes Sedai said softly. "It is better this way than fumbling alone. Clear your mind of everything but the stone. Clear your mind, and let yourself drift. There is only the stone and emptiness. I will begin it. Drift, and let me guide you. No thoughts. Drift."

ɹændz fɪŋɡɝz dʌɡ ɪndə hɪz niz; hɪz dʒɔz klɛntʃt əntɪl ðeɪ hɝt. ʃiz tə feɪl. ʃiz tə.

Rand's fingers dug into his knees; his jaws clenched until they hurt. She has to fail. She has to.

laɪt blumd ɪn ðə stoʊn, dʒʌst wʌn flæʃ ə blu ən ðən ɡɔn, noʊ bɹaɪɾɝ ðən ə faɪɝflaɪ, bʌɾ i flɪntʃt əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn blaɪndɪŋ. ɛɡwin ən mɔɪɹeɪn stɛɹɾ ɪndə ðə stoʊn, feɪsəz ɛmpti. ənʌðɝ flæʃ keɪm, ən ənʌðɝ, əntɪl ði æʒɝ laɪt pʌls laɪk ðə biɾɪŋ ʌv ə hɑɹt. ɪts ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, hi θɔt dɛspɝətli. mɔɪɹeɪnz duɪŋ ɪt. nɑɾ ɛɡwin.

Light bloomed in the stone, just one flash of blue and then gone, no brighter than a firefly, but he flinched as if it had been blinding. Egwene and Moiraine stared into the stone, faces empty. Another flash came, and another, until the azure light pulsed like the beating of a heart. It's the Aes Sedai, he thought desperately. Moiraine's doing it. Not Egwene.

wʌn læst, fibəl flɪkɝ, ən ðə stoʊn wɑz mɪɹli ə bɔbəl əɡɛn. ɹænd hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ.

One last, feeble flicker, and the stone was merely a bauble again. Rand held his breath.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɛɡwin kəntɪnjud tə stɛɹ ət ðə smɔl stoʊn, ðən ʃi lʊkt ʌp ət mɔɪɹeɪn. "aɪ aɪ θɔɾ aɪ fɛl sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt. pɝhæps jəɹ mɪsteɪkən əbaʊt mi. aɪm sɑɹi aɪ weɪstəd jəɹ taɪm."

For a moment Egwene continued to stare at the small stone, then she looked up at Moiraine. "I I thought I felt something, but. Perhaps you're mistaken about me. I am sorry I wasted your time."

"aɪ hæv weɪstəd nʌθɪŋ, tʃaɪld." ə smɔl smaɪl ə sæɾəsfækʃən flɪɾɪd əkɹɔs mɔɪɹeɪnz lɪps. "ðæt læs laɪt wɑz jʊɹz əloʊn."

"I have wasted nothing, child." A small smile of satisfaction flitted across Moiraine's lips. "That last light was yours alone."

"ɪt wɑz?" ɛɡwin ɪkskleɪmd, ðən slɪɾ ɪmiɾiətli bæk ɪndə ɡlʌmnəs. "bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɹli ðəɹ əɾ ɔl."

"It was?" Egwene exclaimed, then slid immediately back into glumness. "But it was barely there at all."

"naʊ jə ɑɹ bɪheɪvɪŋ laɪk ə fulɪʃ vɪlədʒ ɡɝl. moʊst u kʌm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn mʌst stʌɾi fəɹ mɛni mʌnθs bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kən də wʌt jə dʒʌs dɪd. jə meɪ ɡoʊ fɑɹ. pɝhæps ivən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, wʌn deɪ, ɪf jə stʌɾi hɑɹɾ ən wɝk hɑɹd."

"Now you are behaving like a foolish village girl. Most who come to Tar Valon must study for many months before they can do what you just did. You may go far. Perhaps even the Amyrlin Seat, one day, if you study hard and work hard."

"ju min?" wɪð ə kɹaɪ ʌv dɪlaɪɾ ɛɡwin θɹu hɝ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "oʊ, θæŋk ju. ɹænd, dɪd jə hɪɹ? aɪm gɑnə bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ!"

"You mean?" With a cry of delight Egwene threw her arms around the Aes Sedai. "Oh, thank you. Rand, did you hear? I'm going to be an Aes Sedai!"


tʃæptɝ θɝtin


CHAPTER 13

tʃɔɪsəz


Choices

bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɛn tə slip mɔɪɹeɪn nɛl baɪ itʃ ɪn tɝn ən leɪɾ əɹ hænz ɑn ðɛɹ hɛdz. læn ɡɹʌmbəl ðəɾ i hæd noʊ niɾ ən ʃi ʃəd nɑt weɪst əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp hɝ. ɛɡwin wɑz iɡɝ fəɹ ði ɪkspɪɹiəns, mæt ən pɛɹɪn klɪɹli fɹaɪɾənd ʌv ɪt, ən fɹaɪɾənd tə seɪ noʊ. tɑm dʒɝkt əweɪ fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪz hænz, bʌt ʃi sizd ɪz ɡɹeɪ hɛd wɪð ə lʊk ðəɾ əlaʊd noʊ nɑnsɛns. ðə ɡlimən skaʊl θɹu ði ɪntaɪɝ θɪŋ. ʃi smaɪl mɑkəŋli wʌns ʃi tʊk əɹ hænz əweɪ. hɪz fɹaʊn dipənd, bʌɾ i dɪd lʊk ɹifɹɛʃt. ðeɪ ɔl dɪd.

Before they went to sleep Moiraine knelt by each in turn and laid her hands on their heads. Lan grumbled that he had no need and she should not waste her strength, but he did not try to stop her. Egwene was eager for the experience, Mat and Perrin clearly frightened of it, and frightened to say no. Thom jerked away from the Aes Sedai's hands, but she seized his gray head with a look that allowed no nonsense. The gleeman scowled through the entire thing. She smiled mockingly once she took her hands away. His frown deepened, but he did look refreshed. They all did.

ɹænd hæd dʒɹɔn bæk ɪndə ə nɪtʃ ɪn ði ənivən wɔl wɛɹ i hoʊpt i wəd bi oʊvɝlʊkt. hɪz aɪz wɑntəd tə slaɪd kloʊzd wʌns i lin bæk əɡɛns ðə tɪmbɝ dʒʌmbəl, bʌɾ i fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə wɑtʃ. hi pʊʃt ə fɪst əɡɛnst ɪz maʊθ tə staɪfəl ə jɔn. ə lɪɾəl slip, ən aʊɝ əɹ tu, ən i wəd bi dʒʌs faɪn. mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt fɝɡɛt hɪm, ðoʊ.

Rand had drawn back into a niche in the uneven wall where he hoped he would be overlooked. His eyes wanted to slide closed once he leaned back against the timber jumble, but he forced himself to watch. He pushed a fist against his mouth to stifle a yawn. A little sleep, an hour or two, and he would be just fine. Moiraine did not forget him, though.

hi flɪntʃt ət ðə kulnəs ə hɝ fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ɪz feɪs, ən sɛd, "aɪ doʊnt - " hɪz aɪz waɪɾənd ɪn wʌndɝ. taɪɹədnəs dʒɹeɪn aʊɾ ə hɪm laɪk wɔɾɝ ɹʌnɪŋ daʊnhɪl; eɪks ən sɔɹnəs ɛb tə dɪm mɛmɹiz ən vænɪʃt. hi stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ wɪð ɪz maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən. ʃi oʊnli smaɪld ən wɪθdʒɹu hɝ hænz.

He flinched at the coolness of her fingers on his face, and said, "I don't - " His eyes widened in wonder. Tiredness drained out of him like water running downhill; aches and soreness ebbed to dim memories and vanished. He stared at her with his mouth hanging open. She only smiled and withdrew her hands.

"ɪɾ ɪz dʌn," ʃi sɛd, ən əz ʃi stʊd wɪð ə wɪɹi saɪ hi wɑz ɹimaɪndəd ðət ʃi kəd nɑt də ðə seɪm fəɹ hɝsɛlf. ɪndid, ʃi oʊnli dʒɹæŋk ə lɪɾəl ti, ɹəfjuzɪŋ ðə bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz læn tʃɹaɪd tə pɹɛs ɑn hɝ, bɪfɔɹ kɝlɪŋ ʌp bɪsaɪd ðə faɪɝ. ʃi sim tə fɔl əslip ði ɪnstənt ʃi ɹæpt əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn hɝ.

"It is done," she said, and as she stood with a weary sigh he was reminded that she could not do the same for herself. Indeed, she only drank a little tea, refusing the bread and cheese Lan tried to press on her, before curling up beside the fire. She seemed to fall asleep the instant she wrapped her cloak around her.

ði ʌðɝz, ɔl seɪv læn, wɝ dʒɹɑpɪŋ əslip wɛɹɛvɝ ðeɪ kəd faɪn ə speɪs tə stʃɹɛtʃ aʊt, bʌt ɹænd kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən waɪ. hi fɛlt əz ɪf i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi hæɾ ə fʊl naɪɾ ɪn ə ɡʊd bɛd. noʊ sunɝ dɪɾ i lin bæk əɡɛns ðə lɔɡ wɔl, ðoʊ, ðən slip ɹoʊld ɪm ʌndɝ. wən læn poʊkt ɪm əweɪk ən aʊɝ leɪɾɝ i fɛlt əz ðoʊ hi hæd hæd θɹi deɪz ɹɛst.

The others, all save Lan, were dropping asleep wherever they could find a space to stretch out, but Rand could not imagine why. He felt as if he had already had a full night in a good bed. No sooner did he lean back against the log wall, though, than sleep rolled him under. When Lan poked him awake an hour later he felt as though he had had three days rest.

ðə wɔɹɾɝ əweɪkən əm ɔl, ɪksɛp mɔɪɹeɪn, ən i stɝnli hʌʃt ɛni saʊn ðət maɪt dɪstɝb hɝ. ivən soʊ, hi əlaʊɾ əm oʊnli ə ʃɔɹt steɪ ɪn ðə snʌɡ keɪv ə tʃɹiz. bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn wɑz twaɪs ɪts oʊn haɪɾ əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən, ɔl tʃɹeɪsəz ðəɾ ɛniwʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ stɑp ðəɹ hæd bɪn klɪɹɾ əweɪ ən ðeɪ wɝ ɔl maʊntəɾ ən muvɪŋ nɔɹθ təwɔɹd bɛɹlən, ɹaɪɾɪŋ sloʊli tə kənsɝv ðə hɔɹsəz. ði ɛɛs sədaɪz aɪz wɝ ʃæɾoʊd, bʌt ʃi sæɾ əɹ sæɾəl əpɹaɪɾ ən stɛɾi.

The Warder awakened them all, except Moiraine, and he sternly hushed any sound that might disturb her. Even so, he allowed them only a short stay in the snug cave of trees. Before the sun was twice its own height above the horizon, all traces that anyone had ever stopped there had been cleared away and they were all mounted and moving north toward Baerlon, riding slowly to conserve the horses. The Aes Sedai's eyes were shadowed, but she sat her saddle upright and steady.

fɑɡ stɪl hʌŋ θɪk oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪvɝ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ə ɡɹeɪ wɔl ɹɪzɪstɪŋ ði ɛfɝts ə ðə fibəl sʌn tə bɝn ɪɾ əweɪ ən haɪɾɪŋ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz fɹəm vju. ɹænd wɑtʃt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əz i ɹoʊd, hoʊpɪŋ fəɹ wʌn læst ɡlɪmps, ivən ə tɛɹən fɛɹi, əntɪl ðə fɑɡbæŋk wɑz lɔs tə saɪt.

Fog still hung thick over the river behind them, a gray wall resisting the efforts of the feeble sun to burn it away and hiding the Two Rivers from view. Rand watched over his shoulder as he rode, hoping for one last glimpse, even of Taren Ferry, until the fogbank was lost to sight.

"aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ aɪɾ ɛvɝ bi ðɪs fɑɹ fɹəm hoʊm," hi sɛd wən ðə tʃɹiz ət læs hɪd boʊθ ðə fɑɡ ən ðə ɹɪvɝ. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ wən wɑtʃ hɪl simd ə lɔŋ weɪ?" tu deɪz əɡoʊ, ðət wɑz. ɪt simz laɪk fɝɛvɝ.

"I never thought I'd ever be this far from home," he said when the trees at last hid both the fog and the river. "Remember when Watch Hill seemed a long way?" Two days ago, that was. It seems like forever.

"ɪn ə mʌnθ əɹ tu, wɪl bi bæk," pɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɪn ə stʃɹeɪn vɔɪs. "θɪŋk wʌt wɪl əv tə tɛl."

"In a month or two, we'll be back," Perrin said in a strained voice. "Think what we'll have to tell."

"ivən tʃɹɑləks kæn tʃeɪs əs fɝɛvɝ," mæt sɛd. "bɝn mi, ðeɪ kænt." hi stʃɹeɪɾənd ɝaʊnd wɪð ə hɛvi saɪ, slʌmpɪŋ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl əz ɪf i dɪd nɑt bɪliv ə wɝd ðət hæd bɪn sɛd.

"Even Trollocs can't chase us forever," Mat said. "Burn me, they can't." He straightened around with a heavy sigh, slumping in his saddle as if he did not believe a word that had been said.

"mɛn!" ɛɡwin snɔɹɾɪd. "ju ɡɛt ði ædvɛntʃɝ jəɹ ɔlweɪz pɹeɪɾɪŋ əbaʊt, ən ɔlɹɛɾi jəɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt hoʊm." ʃi hɛld əɹ hɛd haɪ, jɛt ɹænd noʊɾəst ə tʃɹɛmɝ tə hɝ vɔɪs, naʊ ðət nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ wɑz tə bi sin ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz.

"Men!" Egwene snorted. "You get the adventure you're always prating about, and already you're talking about home." She held her head high, yet Rand noticed a tremor to her voice, now that nothing more was to be seen of the Two Rivers.

niðɝ mɔɪɹeɪn nɔɹ læn meɪɾ ɛni ətɛmp tə ɹiəʃʊɹ ðɛm, nɑɾ ə wɝd tə seɪ ðəɾ ə kɔɹs ðeɪ wəd kʌm bæk. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ɑn wʌt ðət maɪt min. ivən ɹɛstəd, hi wɑz fʊl ɪnʌf ə daʊts wɪθaʊt sɝtʃɪŋ aʊt mɔɹ. hʌntʃɪŋ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl i bɪɡæn ə weɪkɪŋ dʒɹim ə tɛndɪŋ ðə ʃip əlɔŋsaɪd tæm ɪn ə pæstʃɝ wɪð dip, lʌʃ ɡɹæs ən lɑɹks sɪŋɪŋ ʌv ə spɹɪŋ mɔɹnɪŋ. ən ə tʃɹɪp ɪndə ɛmənz fild, ən bɛl taɪn ðə weɪ ɪt hæd bɪn, dænsɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹin wɪð nɛvɝ ə kɛɹ bɪɑnd wɛðɝ i maɪt stʌmbəl ɪn ðə stɛps. hi mænədʒ tə luz hɪmsɛlf ɪn ɪt fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm.

Neither Moiraine nor Lan made any attempt to reassure them, not a word to say that of course they would come back. He tried not to think on what that might mean. Even rested, he was full enough of doubts without searching out more. Hunching in his saddle he began a waking dream of tending the sheep alongside Tam in a pasture with deep, lush grass and larks singing of a spring morning. And a trip into Emond's Field, and Bel Tine the way it had been, dancing on the Green with never a care beyond whether he might stumble in the steps. He managed to lose himself in it for a long time.

ðə dʒɝni tə bɛɹlən tʊk ɔlmoʊst ə wik. læn mʌɾɝd əbaʊt ðə læɡɹdnəs ə ðɛɹ tʃɹævəl, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz i hu sɛt ðə peɪs ən fɔɹs ðə ɹɛs tə kip ɪt. wɪð hɪmsɛlf ən ɪz stæljən, mændɑɹb - hi sɛɾ ɪt mɛnt "bleɪd" ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ - hi wɑz nɑt soʊ spɛɹɪŋ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ kʌvɝd twaɪs əz mʌtʃ ɡɹaʊn əz ðeɪ dɪd, ɡæləpɪŋ əhɛd, hɪz kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk swɝlɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd, tə skaʊt wʌt leɪ bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, əɹ dʒɹɑpɪŋ bɪhaɪn tə ɪɡzæmɪn ðɛɹ bæktʃɹeɪl. ɛni ʌðɝz u tʃɹaɪd tə muv ət mɔɹ ðən ə wɔk, ðoʊ, ɡɑt kʌɾɪŋ wɝdz ɑn teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ ə ðɛɹ ænəməlz, baɪɾɪŋ wɝdz ɑn haʊ wɛl ðeɪ wəd də əfʊɾ ɪf ðə tʃɹɑləks dɪɾ əpɪɹ. nɑɾ ivən mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz pɹuf əɡɛnst ɪz tʌŋ ɪf ʃi lɛt ðə waɪt mɛɹ pɪk ʌp əɹ stɛp. ɑldib, ðə mɛɹ wɑz kɔld; ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "wɛstwɪnd," ðə wɪn ðət bɹɔt ðə spɹɪŋ ɹeɪnz.

The journey to Baerlon took almost a week. Lan muttered about the laggardness of their travel, but it was he who set the pace and forced the rest to keep it. With himself and his stallion, Mandarb - he said it meant "Blade" in the Old Tongue - he was not so sparing. The Warder covered twice as much ground as they did, galloping ahead, his color-shifting cloak swirling in the wind, to scout what lay before them, or dropping behind to examine their backtrail. Any others who tried to move at more than a walk, though, got cutting words on taking care of their animals, biting words on how well they would do afoot if the Trollocs did appear. Not even Moiraine was proof against his tongue if she let the white mare pick up her step. Aldieb, the mare was called; in the Old Tongue, "Westwind," the wind that brought the spring rains.

ðə wɔɹɾɝz skaʊɾɪŋ nɛvɝ tɝn ʌp ɛni saɪn ə pɝsut, əɹ æmbʊʃ. hi spoʊk oʊnli tə mɔɪɹeɪn ʌv wʌɾ i sɔ, ən ðət kwaɪətli, soʊ ɪt kəd nɑt bi oʊvɝhɝd, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪnfɔɹm ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm ʌv wʌt ʃi θɔt ðeɪ niɾəd tə noʊ. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ɹænd lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əz mʌtʃ əz i dɪɾ əhɛd. hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn. pɛɹɪn fɪŋɡɝɾ ɪz æks ɔfən, ən mæt ɹoʊd wɪð ən æɹoʊ nɑk tə hɪz baʊ, ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. bʌt ðə læn bɪhaɪn ɹɪmeɪn ɛmpti ʌv tʃɹɑləks əɹ fɪɡjɝz ɪn blæk kloʊks, ðə skaɪ ɹɪmeɪn ɛmpti ʌv dʒɹæɡkɝ. sloʊli, ɹænd bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk pɝhæps ðeɪ ɹɪli hæɾ ɪskeɪpt.

The Warder's scouting never turned up any sign of pursuit, or ambush. He spoke only to Moiraine of what he saw, and that quietly, so it could not be overheard, and the Aes Sedai informed the rest of them of what she thought they needed to know. In the beginning, Rand looked over his shoulder as much as he did ahead. He was not the only one. Perrin fingered his axe often, and Mat rode with an arrow nocked to his bow, in the beginning. But the land behind remained empty of Trollocs or figures in black cloaks, the sky remained empty of Draghkar. Slowly, Rand began to think perhaps they really had escaped.

noʊ vɛɹi ɡɹeɪt kʌvɝ wɑz tə bi hæd, ivən ɪn ðə θɪkəs pɑɹts ə ðə wʊdz. wɪntɝ klʌŋ əz hɑɹd nɔɹθ ə ðə tɛɹən əz ɪt dɪɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. stænz ə paɪn əɹ fɝ əɹ lɛðɝlif, ən hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ə fju spɪswʊdz əɹ lɔɹəlz, dɑɾəd ə fɔɹəst ʌv ʌðɝwaɪz bɛɹ, ɡɹeɪ bɹæntʃəz. nɑɾ ivən ði ɛldɝz ʃoʊɾ ə lif. oʊnli skæɾɝd ɡɹin spɹɪɡz ə nu ɡɹoʊθ stʊɾ aʊɾ əɡɛns bɹaʊn mɛdoʊz biɾən flæt baɪ ðə wɪntɝz snoʊz. hɪɹ, tu, mʌtʃ ʌv wʌd ɡɹoʊ wɑz stɪŋɪŋ nɛɾəlz ən kɔɹs θɪsəl ən stɪŋkwid. ɑn ðə bɛɹ dɝɾ ə ðə fɔɹəs flɔɹ səm ə ðə læst snoʊ stɪl hʌŋ ɑn, ɪn ʃeɪɾi pætʃəz ən ɪn dʒɹɪfs bɪniθ ðə loʊ bɹæntʃəz ʌv ɛvɝɡɹinz. ɛvɹiwʌn kɛp ðɛɹ kloʊks dʒɹɔn wɛl əbaʊt ðɛm, fəɹ ðə θɪn sʌnlaɪt hæd noʊ wɔɹmθ tə ɪɾ ən ðə naɪt koʊl pɪɹs dip. noʊ mɔɹ bɝdz flu hɪɹ ðən ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, nɑɾ ivən ɹeɪvənz.

No very great cover was to be had, even in the thickest parts of the woods. Winter clung as hard north of the Taren as it did in the Two Rivers. Stands of pine or fir or leatherleaf, and here and there a few spicewoods or laurels, dotted a forest of otherwise bare, gray branches. Not even the elders showed a leaf. Only scattered green sprigs of new growth stood out against brown meadows beaten flat by the winter's snows. Here, too, much of what did grow was stinging nettles and coarse thistle and stinkweed. On the bare dirt of the forest floor some of the last snow still hung on, in shady patches and in drifts beneath the low branches of evergreens. Everyone kept their cloaks drawn well about them, for the thin sunlight had no warmth to it and the night cold pierced deep. No more birds flew here than in the Two Rivers, not even ravens.

ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ lizɝli əbaʊt ðə sloʊnəs ə ðɛɹ muvmənt. ðə nɔɹθ ɹoʊd - ɹænd kəntɪnjud tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt ðət weɪ, ðoʊ hi səspɛktəɾ ɪt maɪɾ əv ə dɪfɹənt neɪm hɪɹ, nɔɹθ ə ðə tɛɹən - stɪl ɹæn ɔlmoʊs du nɔɹθ, bʌɾ ət lænz ɪnsɪstəns ðɛɹ pæθ sneɪk ðɪs weɪ ən ðət θɹu ðə fɔɹəst əz ɔfən əz ɪt ɹæn əlɔŋ ðə hɑɹd-pæk dɝt ɹoʊd. ə vɪlədʒ, əɹ ə fɑɹm, əɹ ɛni saɪn ə mɛn əɹ sɪvəlɪzeɪʃən sɛn əm sɝkəlɪŋ fəɹ maɪlz tə əvɔɪɾ ɪt, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɝ fju ɪnʌf ʌv ɛni ʌv ðoʊz. ðə hoʊl fɝs deɪ ɹænd sɔ noʊ ɛvəɾəns əsaɪd fɹəm ðə ɹoʊd ðət mɛn hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ɪn ðət wʊdz. ɪt keɪm tə hɪm ðəɾ ivən wən i hæd ɡɔn tə ðə fʊɾ ə ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst i maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn əz fɑɹ fɹəm ə hjumən hæbəteɪʃən əz i wɑz ðət deɪ.

There was nothing leisurely about the slowness of their movement. The North Road - Rand continued to think of it that way, though he suspected it might have a different name here, north of the Taren - still ran almost due north, but at Lan's insistence their path snaked this way and that through the forest as often as it ran along the hard-packed dirt road. A village, or a farm, or any sign of men or civilization sent them circling for miles to avoid it, though there were few enough of any of those. The whole first day Rand saw no evidence aside from the road that men had ever been in that woods. It came to him that even when he had gone to the foot of the Mountains of Mist he might not have been as far from a human habitation as he was that day.

ðə fɝs fɑɹm i sɔ - ə lɑɹdʒ fɹeɪm haʊs ən tɔl bɑɹn wɪð haɪ-pikt, θætʃt ɹufs, ə kɝl ə smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ə stoʊn tʃɪmni - wɑz ə ʃɑk.

The first farm he saw - a large frame house and tall barn with high-peaked, thatched roofs, a curl of smoke rising from a stone chimney - was a shock.

"ɪts noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm bæk hoʊm," pɛɹɪn sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðə dɪstən bɪldɪŋz, bɛɹli vɪzəbəl θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. pipəl muvd ɝaʊn ðə fɑɹmjɑɹd, əz jɛɾ ʌnəwɛɹ ə ðə tʃɹævəlɝz.

"It's no different from back home," Perrin said, frowning at the distant buildings, barely visible through the trees. People moved around the farmyard, as yet unaware of the travelers.

"ʌv kɔɹs ɪɾ ɪz," mæt sɛd. "wɝ dʒʌs nɑt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si."

"Of course it is," Mat said. "We're just not close enough to see."

"aɪ tɛl ju, ɪts noʊ dɪfɹənt," pɛɹɪn ɪnsɪstəd.

"I tell you, it's no different," Perrin insisted.

"ɪt mʌs bi. wɝ nɔɹθ ə ðə tɛɹən, æftɝ ɔl."

"It must be. We're north of the Taren, after all."

"kwaɪət, jə tu," læn ɡɹaʊld. "wi doʊnt wɑnə bi sin, ɹɪmɛmbɝ? ðɪs weɪ." hi tɝnd wɛst, tə sɝkəl ðə fɑɹm θɹu ðə tʃɹiz.

"Quiet, you two," Lan growled. "We don't want to be seen, remember? This way." He turned west, to circle the farm through the trees.

lʊkɪŋ bæk, ɹænd θɔt pɛɹɪn wɑz ɹaɪt. ðə fɑɹm lʊk mʌtʃ ðə seɪm əz ɛni ɝaʊn ɛmənz fild. ðəɹ wɑz ə smɔl bɔɪ toʊɾɪŋ wɔɾɝ fɹəm ðə wɛl, ən oʊldɝ bɔɪz tɛndɪŋ ʃip bɪhaɪn ə ɹeɪl fɛns. ɪɾ ivən hæɾ ə kjʊɹɪŋ ʃɛd, fəɹ təbæk. bʌt mæt wɑz ɹaɪt, tu. wɝ nɔɹθ ə ðə tɛɹən. ɪt mʌs bi dɪfɹənt.

Looking back, Rand thought Perrin was right. The farm looked much the same as any around Emond's Field. There was a small boy toting water from the well, and older boys tending sheep behind a rail fence. It even had a curing shed, for tabac. But Mat was right, too. We're north of the Taren. It must be different.

ɔlweɪz ðeɪ hɔltəd waɪl laɪt stɪl klʌŋ tə ðə skaɪ, tə tʃuz ə spɑt sləp fəɹ dʒɹeɪnədʒ ən ʃɛltɝd fɹəm ðə wɪn ðət sɛldəm daɪd kəmplitli, oʊnli tʃeɪnʒd dɝɛkʃən. ðɛɹ faɪɝ wɑz ɔlweɪz smɔl ən hɪɾən fɹəm oʊnli ə fju jɑɹdz ɔf, ən wʌns ti wɑz bɹud, ðə fleɪmz wɝ daʊst ən ðə koʊlz bɛɹid.

Always they halted while light still clung to the sky, to choose a spot sloped for drainage and sheltered from the wind that seldom died completely, only changed direction. Their fire was always small and hidden from only a few yards off, and once tea was brewed, the flames were doused and the coals buried.

ət ðɛɹ fɝst stɑp, bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn sæŋk, læn bɪɡæn titʃɪŋ ðə bɔɪz wʌt tə də wɪð ðə wɛpənz ðeɪ kæɹid. hi stɑɹɾəd wɪð ðə baʊ. æftɝ wɑtʃɪŋ mæt pʊt θɹi æɹoʊz ɪndə ə nɑt ðə saɪz ʌv ə mænz hɛd, ɑn ðə fɪʃɝd tʃɹʌŋk ʌv ə dɛd lɛðɝlif, əɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz, hi toʊl ði ʌðɝz tə teɪk ðɛɹ tɝnz. pɛɹɪn duplɪkeɪɾɪd mæts fit, ən ɹænd, sʌmənɪŋ ðə fleɪm ən ðə vɔɪd, ði ɛmpti kɑm ðət lɛt ðə baʊ bɪkʌm ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm, əɹ ɪm ʌv ɪt, klʌstɝɾ ɪz θɹi wɛɹ ðə pɔɪns ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃt wʌn ənʌðɝ. mæt ɡeɪv ɪm ə kənɡɹætʃələtɔɹi klæp ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ.

At their first stop, before the sun sank, Lan began teaching the boys what to do with the weapons they carried. He started with the bow. After watching Mat put three arrows into a knot the size of a man's head, on the fissured trunk of a dead leatherleaf, at a hundred paces, he told the others to take their turns. Perrin duplicated Mat's feat, and Rand, summoning the flame and the void, the empty calm that let the bow become a part of him, or him of it, clustered his three where the points almost touched one another. Mat gave him a congratulatory clap on the shoulder.

"naʊ ɪf jə ɔl hæd baʊz," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd dʒɹaɪli wən ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd ɡɹɪnɪŋ, "æn ɪf ðə tʃɹɑləks əɡɹid nɑt tə kʌm soʊ kloʊs jə kʊdn juz ðɛm. . . ." ðə ɡɹɪnz feɪɾəd əbɹʌpli. "lɛt mi si wʌɾ aɪ kən titʃ jə ɪn keɪs ðeɪ də kʌm ðət kloʊs."

"Now if you all had bows," the Warder said dryly when they started grinning, "and if the Trollocs agreed not to come so close you couldn't use them. . . ." The grins faded abruptly. "Let me see what I can teach you in case they do come that close."

hi ʃoʊd pɛɹɪn ə bɪɾ ə haʊ tə juz ðət ɡɹeɪt-bleɪɾɪd æks; ɹeɪzɪŋ ən æks tə sʌmwʌn, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ, ðət hæɾ ə wɛpən wɑz nɑɾ əɾ ɔl laɪk tʃɑpɪŋ wʊɾ əɹ fleɪlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪn pɹitɛnd. sɛɾɪŋ ðə bɪɡ əpɹɛntəs blæksmɪθ tə ə sɪɹiz ʌv ɛksɝsaɪzəz, blɑk, pɛɹi, ən stʃɹaɪk, hi dɪd ðə seɪm fəɹ ɹænd ən ɪz sɔɹd. nɑt ðə waɪld lipɪŋ əbaʊɾ ən slæʃɪŋ ðət ɹænd hæɾ ɪn maɪnd wɛnɛvɝ i θɔɾ əbaʊt juzɪŋ ɪt, bʌt smuð moʊʃənz, wʌn floʊɪŋ ɪndə ənʌðɝ, ɔlmoʊst ə dæns.

He showed Perrin a bit of how to use that great-bladed axe; raising an axe to someone, or something, that had a weapon was not at all like chopping wood or flailing around in pretend. Setting the big apprentice blacksmith to a series of exercises, block, parry, and strike, he did the same for Rand and his sword. Not the wild leaping about and slashing that Rand had in mind whenever he thought about using it, but smooth motions, one flowing into another, almost a dance.

"muvɪŋ ðə bleɪɾ ɪz nɑɾ ɪnʌf," læn sɛd, "ðoʊ səm θɪŋk ɪɾ ɪz. ðə maɪn ɪz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, moʊst ʌv ɪt. blæŋk jəɹ maɪnd, ʃifɝɾɝ. ɛmpti ɪɾ ə heɪɾ əɹ fɪɹ, ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ. bɝn əm əweɪ. jə ʌðɝz lɪsən tə ðɪs, tu. jə kən juz ɪt wɪð ði æks əɹ ðə baʊ, wɪð ə spɪɹ, əɹ ə kɔɹɾɝstæf, əɹ ivən jəɹ bɛɹ hænz."

"Moving the blade is not enough," Lan said, "though some think it is. The mind is part of it, most of it. Blank your mind, sheepherder. Empty it of hate or fear, of everything. Burn them away. You others listen to this, too. You can use it with the axe or the bow, with a spear, or a quarterstaff, or even your bare hands."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "ðə fleɪm ən ðə vɔɪd," hi sɛd wʌndɝɪŋli. "ðæts wʌt jə min, ɪzən ɪt? maɪ fɑðɝ tɔt mi əbaʊt ðæt."

Rand stared at him. "The flame and the void," he said wonderingly. "That's what you mean, isn't it? My father taught me about that."

ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡeɪv ɪm ən ənɹiɾəbəl lʊk ɪn ɹɪtɝn. "hoʊl ðə sɔɹɾ əz aɪ ʃoʊd ju, ʃifɝɾɝ. aɪ kænɑt meɪk ə mʌd-fʊɾɪd vɪlɪdʒɝ ɪndə ə bleɪdmæstɝ ɪn ən aʊɝ, bʌt pɝhæps aɪ kən kip jə fɹəm slaɪsɪŋ ɔf jəɹ oʊn fʊt."

The Warder gave him an unreadable look in return. "Hold the sword as I showed you, sheepherder. I cannot make a mud-footed villager into a blademaster in an hour, but perhaps I can keep you from slicing off your own foot."

ɹænd saɪɾ ən hɛl ðə sɔɹɾ əpɹaɪt bɪfɔɹ ɪm ɪn boʊθ hænz. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑtʃt wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən, bʌt ðə nɛkst ivnɪŋ ʃi toʊld læn tə kəntɪnju ðə lɛsənz.

Rand sighed and held the sword upright before him in both hands. Moiraine watched without expression, but the next evening she told Lan to continue the lessons.

ðə mil əɾ ivnɪŋ wɑz ɔlweɪz ðə seɪm əz ət mɪddeɪ ən bɹɛkfəst, flætbɹɛɾ ən tʃiz ən dʒɹaɪd mit, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ivnɪŋz ðeɪ hæd hɑt ti tə wɑʃ ɪt daʊn ɪnstɛɾ ʌv wɔɾɝ. tɑm ɛntɝteɪn ðɛm, ivnɪŋz. læn wəd nɑt lɛt ðə ɡlimən pleɪ hɑɹp əɹ flut - noʊ nid tə ɹaʊs ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd, ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd - bʌt tɑm dʒʌɡəld ən toʊl stɔɹiz. "mɑɹə ən ðə θɹi fulɪʃ kɪŋz," əɹ wʌn ə ðə hʌnʒɹədz əbaʊɾ ænlə ðə waɪz kaʊnsəlɝ, əɹ sʌmθɪŋ fɪld wɪð ɡlɔɹi ən ædvɛntʃɝ, laɪk ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz wɪð ə hæpi ɛndɪŋ ən ə dʒɔɪəs hoʊmkʌmɪŋ.

The meal at evening was always the same as at midday and breakfast, flatbread and cheese and dried meat, except that evenings they had hot tea to wash it down instead of water. Thom entertained them, evenings. Lan would not let the gleeman play harp or flute - no need to rouse the countryside, the Warder said - but Thom juggled and told stories. "Mara and the Three Foolish Kings," or one of the hundreds about Anla the Wise Counselor, or something filled with glory and adventure, like The Great Hunt of the Horn, but always with a happy ending and a joyous homecoming.

jɛɾ ɪf ðə lænd wɑz pisfəl ɝaʊn ðɛm, ɪf noʊ tʃɹɑləks əpɪɹɾ əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz, noʊ dʒɹæɡkɝ əmʌŋ ðə klaʊdz, ɪt sim tə ɹænd ðət ðeɪ mænədʒ tə ɹeɪz ðɛɹ tɛnʃən ðɛmsɛlvz, wɛnɛvɝ ɪt wɑz ɪn deɪnʒɝ ə vænɪʃɪŋ.

Yet if the land was peaceful around them, if no Trollocs appeared among the trees, no Draghkar among the clouds, it seemed to Rand that they managed to raise their tension themselves, whenever it was in danger of vanishing.

ðəɹ wɑz ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ðəɾ ɛɡwin əwoʊk ən bɪɡæn ənbɹeɪɾɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ. ɹænd wɑtʃt əɹ fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ əz i meɪɾ ʌp ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl. ɛvɹi naɪt wən ðə faɪɝ wɑz daʊst, ɛvɹiwʌn tʊk tə ðɛɹ blæŋkəts ɪksɛp fəɹ ɛɡwin ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə tu wɪmən ɔlweɪz wɛn əsaɪd fɹəm ði ʌðɝz ən tɔk fəɹ ən aʊɝ əɹ tu, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ wən ði ʌðɝz wɝ əslip. ɛɡwin koʊmd əɹ hɛɹ aʊt - wʌn hʌnʒɹəd stʃɹoʊks; hi kaʊntəd - waɪl i wɑz sæɾəlɪŋ klaʊd, taɪɪŋ ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən blæŋkət bɪhaɪn ðə sæɾəl. ðən ʃi tʌk ðə koʊm əweɪ, swɛpt əɹ lus hɛɹ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ən pʊld ʌp ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk.

There was the morning that Egwene awoke and began unbraiding her hair. Rand watched her from the corner of his eye as he made up his blanketroll. Every night when the fire was doused, everyone took to their blankets except for Egwene and the Aes Sedai. The two women always went aside from the others and talked for an hour or two, returning when the others were asleep. Egwene combed her hair out - one hundred strokes; he counted - while he was saddling Cloud, tying his saddlebags and blanket behind the saddle. Then she tucked the comb away, swept her loose hair over her shoulder, and pulled up the hood of her cloak.

stɑɹɾəld, hi æskt, "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ?" ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk wɪθaʊɾ ænsɝɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm i hæd spoʊkən tə hɝ ɪn tu deɪz, hi ɹilaɪzd, sɪns ðə naɪɾ ɪn ðə lɔɡ ʃɛltɝ ɑn ðə bæŋk ə ðə tɛɹən, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt lɛt ðət stɑp hɪm. "ɔl jəɹ laɪf juv weɪɾəd tə wɛɹ jəɹ hɛɹ ɪn ə bɹeɪd, ən naʊ jəɹ ɡɪvɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp? waɪ? kəz ʃi dʌzn bɹeɪd hɝz?"

Startled, he asked, "What are you doing?" She gave him a sidelong look without answering. It was the first time he had spoken to her in two days, he realized, since the night in the log shelter on the bank of the Taren, but he did not let that stop him. "All your life you've waited to wear your hair in a braid, and now you're giving it up? Why? Because she doesn't braid hers?"

"ɛɛs sədaɪ doʊn bɹeɪd ðɛɹ hɛɹ," ʃi sɛd sɪmpli. "æt list, nɑɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ wɑn tə."

"Aes Sedai don't braid their hair," she said simply. "At least, not unless they want to."

"ju ɑɹən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. jəɹ ɛɡwin ælvɪɹ fɹəm ɛmənz fild, ən ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl wəɾ əv ə fɪɾ ɪf ðeɪ kəd si jə naʊ."

"You aren't an Aes Sedai. You're Egwene al'Vere from Emond's Field, and the Women's Circle would have a fit if they could see you now."

"wɪmənz sɝkəl bɪznəs ɪz nʌn ə jʊɹz, ɹænd ælθɹ. ən əl bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. dʒʌst əz sun əz aɪ ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"Women's Circle business is none of yours, Rand al'Thor. And I will be an Aes Sedai. Just as soon as I reach Tar Valon."

hi snɔɹɾɪd. "æz sun əz jə ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn. waɪ? laɪt, tɛl mi ðæt. jəɹ noʊ dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

He snorted. "As soon as you reach Tar Valon. Why? Light, tell me that. You're no Darkfriend."

"du jə θɪŋk mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd? də ju?" ʃi skwɛɹɾ ɝaʊn tə feɪs ɪm wɪð əɹ fɪsts klɛntʃt, ən i ɔlmoʊs θɔt ʃi wɑz gɑnə hɪt hɪm. "æftɝ ʃi seɪv ðə vɪlədʒ? æftɝ ʃi seɪv jəɹ fɑðɝ?"

"Do you think Moiraine Sedai is a Darkfriend? Do you?" She squared around to face him with her fists clenched, and he almost thought she was going to hit him. "After she saved the village? After she saved your father?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt ʃi ɪz, bʌt wʌtɛvɝ ʃi ɪz, ɪt dʌzn seɪ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm. ðə stɔɹiz - "

"I don't know what she is, but whatever she is, it doesn't say anything about the rest of them. The stories - "

"ɡɹoʊ ʌp, ɹænd! fɝɡɛt ðə stɔɹiz ən juz jəɹ aɪz."

"Grow up, Rand! Forget the stories and use your eyes."

"maɪ aɪz sɔ hɝ sɪŋk ðə fɛɹi! dɪnaɪ ðæt! wʌns jə ɡɛɾ ən aɪdiə ɪn jəɹ hɛd, jə woʊn bʌdʒ ivən ɪf sʌmbɑɾi pɔɪns aʊt jəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stæn ɑn wɔɾɝ. ɪf jə wɝn sətʃ ə laɪt-blaɪndɪd ful, jud si - !"

"My eyes saw her sink the ferry! Deny that! Once you get an idea in your head, you won't budge even if somebody points out you're trying to stand on water. If you weren't such a Light-blinded fool, you'd see - !"

"ful, æm aɪ? lemi tɛl jə ə θɪŋ əɹ tu, ɹænd ælθɹ! jə ɑɹ ðə mjuliəst, moʊst wʊl-hɛɾəd - !"

"Fool, am I? Let me tell you a thing or two, Rand al'Thor! You are the muliest, most wool-headed - !"

"ju tu tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə weɪk ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪnsaɪd tɛn maɪlz?" ðə wɔɹɾɝ æskt.

"You two trying to wake everybody inside ten miles?" the Warder asked.

stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɪð ɪz maʊθ oʊpən, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ə wɝɾ ɪn ɛdʒwaɪz, ɹænd sʌɾənli ɹilaɪzd i hæd bɪn ʃaʊɾɪŋ. ðeɪ boʊθ hæd.

Standing there with his mouth open, trying to get a word in edgewise, Rand suddenly realized he had been shouting. They both had.

ɛɡwinz feɪs wɛn skɑɹlət tə hɝ aɪbɹaʊz, ən ʃi spʌn əweɪ wɪð ə mʌɾɝd, "mɛn!" ðət simd əz mʌtʃ fəɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝ əz fəɹ hɪm.

Egwene's face went scarlet to her eyebrows, and she spun away with a muttered, "Men!" that seemed as much for the Warder as for him.

wɛɹəli, ɹænd lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə kæmp. ɛvɹibɑɾi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, nɑt dʒʌs ðə wɔɹɾɝ. mæt ən pɛɹɪn, wɪð ðɛɹ feɪsəz waɪt. tɑm, tɛnst əz ɪf ɹɛɾi tə ɹʌn əɹ faɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn. ði ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs wɑz ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz sim tə bɔɹ ɪndə hɪz hɛd. dɛspɝətli, hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹikɔl ɪɡzækli wʌɾ i hæd sɛd, əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

Warily, Rand looked around the camp. Everybody was looking at him, not just the Warder. Mat and Perrin, with their faces white. Thom, tensed as if ready to run or fight. Moiraine. The Aes Sedai's face was expressionless, but her eyes seemed to bore into his head. Desperately, he tried to recall exactly what he had said, about Aes Sedai and Darkfriends.

"ɪɾ ɪz taɪm tə bi ɡoʊɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. ʃi tɝn tə ɑldib, ən ɹænd ʃɪvɝɾ əz ɪf i hæd bɪn lɛɾ aʊɾ ʌv ə tʃɹæp. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf i hæd bɪn.

"It is time to be going," Moiraine said. She turned to Aldieb, and Rand shivered as if he had been let out of a trap. He wondered if he had been.

tu naɪts leɪɾɝ, wɪð ðə faɪɝ bɝnɪŋ loʊ, mæt lɪk ðə læs kɹʌmz ə tʃiz fɹəm ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ən sɛd, "ju noʊ, aɪ θɪŋk wiv lɔst əm fəɹ ɡʊd." læn wɑz ɔf ɪn ðə naɪt, teɪkɪŋ ə læs lʊk ɝaʊnd. mɔɪɹeɪn ən ɛɡwin hæd ɡɔn əsaɪd fəɹ wʌn ə ðɛɹ kɑnvɝseɪʃənz. tɑm wɑz hæf doʊzɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz paɪp, ən ðə jʌŋ mɛn hæd ðə faɪɝ tə ðɛmsɛlvz.

Two nights later, with the fire burning low, Mat licked the last crumbs of cheese from his fingers and said, "You know, I think we've lost them for good." Lan was off in the night, taking a last look around. Moiraine and Egwene had gone aside for one of their conversations. Thom was half dozing over his pipe, and the young men had the fire to themselves.

pɛɹɪn, aɪdli poʊkɪŋ ði ɛmbɝz wɪð ə stɪk, ænsɝd. "ɪf wiv lɔs ðɛm, waɪ dʌz læn kip skaʊɾɪŋ?" nɪɹli əslip, ɹænd ɹoʊld oʊvɝ, hɪz bæk tə ðə faɪɝ.

Perrin, idly poking the embers with a stick, answered. "If we've lost them, why does Lan keep scouting?" Nearly asleep, Rand rolled over, his back to the fire.

"wi lɔst əm bæk ət tɛɹən fɛɹi." mæt leɪ bæk wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝz leɪs bɪhaɪn ɪz hɛd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə mun-fɪl skaɪ. "ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ivən ɹɪli æftɝ ʌs."

"We lost them back at Taren Ferry." Mat lay back with his fingers laced behind his head, staring at the moon-filled sky. "If they were even really after us."

"ju θɪŋk ðət dʒɹæɡkɝ wɑz tʃeɪsɪŋ əs kəz ɪt laɪkt ʌs?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"You think that Draghkar was chasing us because it liked us?" Perrin asked.

"aɪ seɪ, stɑp wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks ən sʌtʃ," mæt wɛn ɑn əz ɪf pɛɹɪn hæd nɑt spoʊkən, "æn stɑɹt θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt siɪŋ ðə wɝld. wɝ aʊt wɛɹ ðə stɔɹiz kʌm fɹʌm. wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ə ɹil sɪɾi ɪz laɪk?"

"I say, stop worrying about Trollocs and such," Mat went on as if Perrin had not spoken, "and start thinking about seeing the world. We're out where the stories come from. What do you think a real city is like?"

"wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə bɛɹlən," ɹænd sɛd slipəli, bʌt mæt snɔɹɾɪd.

"We're going to Baerlon," Rand said sleepily, but Mat snorted.

"bɛɹlənz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, bʌɾ aɪv sin ðəɾ oʊl mæp mæstɝ ælvɪɹ hæz. ɪf wi tɝn saʊθ wʌns wi ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn, ðə ɹoʊd lidz ɔl ðə weɪ tə ɪljən, ən bɪɑnd."

"Baerlon's all very well, but I've seen that old map Master al'Vere has. If we turn south once we reach Caemlyn, the road leads all the way to Illian, and beyond."

"wʌts soʊ spɛʃəl əbaʊɾ ɪljən?" pɛɹɪn sɛd, jɔnɪŋ.

"What's so special about Illian?" Perrin said, yawning.

"fɔɹ wʌn θɪŋ," mæt ɹɪplaɪd, "ɪljən ɪzən fʊl ʌv ɛɛs saʊθist - "

"For one thing," Mat replied, "Illian isn't full of Aes Se - "

ə saɪləns fɛl, ən ɹænd wɑz sʌɾənli waɪɾ əweɪk. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd kʌm bæk ɝli. ɛɡwin wɑz wɪð hɝ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, stændɪŋ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə faɪɹlaɪt, hu hɛl ðɛɹ ətɛnʃən. mæt leɪ ðəɹ ɑn ɪz bæk, hɪz maʊθ stɪl oʊpən, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɝ. mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz kɑt ðə laɪt laɪk dɑɹk, pɑlɪʃt stoʊnz. əbɹʌpli ɹænd wʌndɝd haʊ lɔŋ ʃi hæd bɪn stændɪŋ ðɛɹ.

A silence fell, and Rand was suddenly wide awake. Moiraine had come back early. Egwene was with her, but it was the Aes Sedai, standing at the edge of the firelight, who held their attention. Mat lay there on his back, his mouth still open, staring at her. Moiraine's eyes caught the light like dark, polished stones. Abruptly Rand wondered how long she had been standing there.

"ðə lædz wɝ dʒʌst - " tɑm bɪɡæn, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn spoʊk ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə tɑp ə hɪm.

"The lads were just - " Thom began, but Moiraine spoke right over the top of him.

"ə fju deɪz ɹɛspɪt, ən jə ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə ɡɪv ʌp." hɝ kɑm, lɛvəl vɔɪs kəntʃɹæstəd ʃɑɹpli wɪð əɹ aɪz. "ə deɪ əɹ tu ʌv kwaɪət, ən ɔlɹɛɾi juv fɝɡɑɾən wɪntɝnaɪt."

"A few days respite, and you are ready to give up." Her calm, level voice contrasted sharply with her eyes. "A day or two of quiet, and already you have forgotten Winternight."

"wi hævən fɝɡɑɾən," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ɪts dʒʌst - " stɪl nɑt ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃɹiɾəd ɪm əz ʃi hæd ðə ɡlimən.

"We haven't forgotten," Perrin said. "It's just - " Still not raising her voice, the Aes Sedai treated him as she had the gleeman.

"ɪz ðət ðə weɪ jə ɔl fil? jə ɑɹ ɔl iɡɝ tə ɹʌn ɔf tə ɪljən ən fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks, ən hæfmən, ən dʒɹæɡkɝ?" ʃi ɹæn əɹ aɪz oʊvɝ əm - ðət stoʊni ɡlɪn pleɪɪŋ əɡɛns ði ɛvɹideɪ toʊn ə vɔɪs meɪd ɹænd ənizi - bʌt ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ wʌn ə tʃæns tə spik. "ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz æftɝ jə θɹi, wʌn əɹ ɔl, ən ɪf aɪ lɛt jə ɡoʊ ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf wɛɹɛvɝ jə wɑnə ɡoʊ, hɪl teɪk ju. wʌtɛvɝ ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑns, aɪ əpoʊz, soʊ hɪɹ ðɪs ən noʊ ɪt tʃɹu. bɪfɔɹ aɪ lɛt ðə dɑɹk wʌn əv ju, əl dɪstʃɹɔɪ jə maɪsɛlf."

"Is that the way you all feel? You are all eager to run off to Illian and forget about Trollocs, and Halfmen, and Draghkar?" She ran her eyes over them - that stony glint playing against the everyday tone of voice made Rand uneasy - but she gave no one a chance to speak. "The Dark One is after you three, one or all, and if I let you go running off wherever you want to go, he will take you. Whatever the Dark One wants, I oppose, so hear this and know it true. Before I let the Dark One have you, I will destroy you myself."

ɪt wɑz əɹ vɔɪs, soʊ mæɾɝ-ʌv-fækt, ðət kənvɪnst ɹænd. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd də ɪɡzækli wʌt ʃi sɛd, ɪf ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz nɛsəsɛɹi. hi hæɾ ə hɑɹd taɪm slipɪŋ ðət naɪt, ən i wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn. ivən ðə ɡlimən dɪd nɑt bɪɡɪn snɔɹɪŋ tɪl lɔŋ æftɝ ðə læs koʊlz daɪd. fəɹ wʌns, mɔɪɹeɪn ɔfɝd noʊ hɛlp.

It was her voice, so matter-of-fact, that convinced Rand. The Aes Sedai would do exactly what she said, if she thought it was necessary. He had a hard time sleeping that night, and he was not the only one. Even the gleeman did not begin snoring till long after the last coals died. For once, Moiraine offered no help.

ðoʊz naɪtli tɔks bɪtwin ɛɡwin ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ə sɔɹ pɔɪn fəɹ ɹænd. wɛnɛvɝ ðeɪ dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs, əsaɪd fɹəm ðə ɹɛs fəɹ pɹaɪvəsi, hi wʌndɝd wʌt ðeɪ wɝ seɪɪŋ, wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ. wʌt wɑz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ duɪŋ tə ɛɡwin?

Those nightly talks between Egwene and the Aes Sedai were a sore point for Rand. Whenever they disappeared into the darkness, aside from the rest for privacy, he wondered what they were saying, what they were doing. What was the Aes Sedai doing to Egwene?

wʌn naɪt, hi weɪɾəd əntɪl ði ʌðɝ mɛn hæɾ ɔl sɛɾəld daʊn, tɑm snɔɹɪŋ laɪk ə sɔ kʌɾɪŋ ən oʊk nɑt. ðən i slɪpt əweɪ, klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz blæŋkəɾ ɝaʊn hɪm. juzɪŋ ɛvɹi bɪɾ ə skɪl i hæd ɡeɪn stɔkɪŋ ɹæbəts, hi muvd wɪð ðə mun ʃædoʊz əntɪl i wɑz kɹaʊtʃt ət ðə beɪs ʌv ə tɔl lɛðɝlif tʃɹi, θɪk wɪð tʌf, bɹɔd livz, kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ mɔɪɹeɪn ən ɛɡwin, wɛɹ ðeɪ sæɾ ɑn ə fɔlən lɔɡ wɪð ə smɔl læntɝn fəɹ laɪt.

One night, he waited until the other men had all settled down, Thom snoring like a saw cutting an oak knot. Then he slipped away, clutching his blanket around him. Using every bit of skill he had gained stalking rabbits, he moved with the moon shadows until he was crouched at the base of a tall leatherleaf tree, thick with tough, broad leaves, close enough to hear Moiraine and Egwene, where they sat on a fallen log with a small lantern for light.

"æsk," mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz seɪɪŋ, "æn ɪf aɪ kən tɛl jə naʊ, aɪ wɪl. ʌndɝstænd, ðəɹ ɪz mʌtʃ fəɹ wɪtʃ jə ɑɹ nɑt jɛt ɹɛɾi, θɪŋz jə kænɑt lɝn əntɪl juv lɝn ʌðɝ θɪŋz wɪtʃ ɹikwaɪɝ stɪl ʌðɝz tə bi lɝn bɪfɔɹ ðɛm. bʌɾ æsk wʌt jə wɪl."

"Ask," Moiraine was saying, "and if I can tell you now, I will. Understand, there is much for which you are not yet ready, things you cannot learn until you have learned other things which require still others to be learned before them. But ask what you will."

"ðə faɪv paʊɝz," ɛɡwin sɛd sloʊli. "ɝθ, wɪnd, faɪɝ, wɔɾɝ, ən spɪɹət. ɪt dʌzn sim fɛɹ ðət mɛn ʃʊɾə bɪn stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɪn wildɪŋ ɝθ ən faɪɝ. waɪ ʃəd ðeɪv hæd ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəs paʊɝz?"

"The Five Powers," Egwene said slowly. "Earth, Wind, Fire, Water, and Spirit. It doesn't seem fair that men should have been strongest in wielding Earth and Fire. Why should they have had the strongest Powers?"

mɔɪɹeɪn læft. "ɪz ðət wʌt jə θɪŋk, tʃaɪld? ɪz ðəɹ ə ɹɑk soʊ hɑɹd ðət wɪn ən wɔɾɝ kænɑt wɛɹ ɪɾ əweɪ, ə faɪɝ soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðət wɔɾɝ kænɑt kwɛntʃ ɪɾ əɹ wɪn snʌf ɪɾ aʊt?"

Moiraine laughed. "Is that what you think, child? Is there a rock so hard that wind and water cannot wear it away, a fire so strong that water cannot quench it or wind snuff it out?"

ɛɡwin wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə taɪm, dɪɡɪŋ əɹ toʊ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəs flɔɹ. "ðeɪ . . . ðeɪ wɝ ðə wʌnz u . . . hu tʃɹaɪd tə fɹi ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ðə fɔɹseɪkən, wɝn ðeɪ? ðə meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən pɪkt ʌp spid. "ðə wɪmən wɝ nɑt pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. ɪt wɑz ðə mɛn u wɛn mæɾ ən bɹoʊk ðə wɝld."

Egwene was silent for a time, digging her toe into the forest floor. "They . . . they were the ones who . . . who tried to free the Dark One and the Forsaken, weren't they? The male Aes Sedai?" She took a deep breath and picked up speed. "The women were not part of it. It was the men who went mad and broke the world."

"ju ɑɹ əfɹeɪd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "ɪf jə hæd ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ɛmənz fild, jə wʊɾə bɪkʌm wɪzdəm, ɪn taɪm. ðət wɑz nɪneɪivz plæn, wɑz ɪt nɑt? ɔɹ, jə wʊɾə sæɾ ɪn ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl ən mænədʒ ði əfɛɹz ʌv ɛmənz fild waɪl ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl θɔɾ ɪt wɑz duɪŋ soʊ. bʌt jə dɪd ði ənθɪŋkəbəl. jə lɛft ɛmənz fild, lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, sikɪŋ ædvɛntʃɝ. jə wɑntəd tə də ɪt, ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm jə ɑɹ əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪt. ən jə ɑɹ stʌbɝnli ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə lɛt jəɹ fɪɹ bɛs ju. jə wəd nɑɾ əv æsk mi haʊ ə wʊmən bɪkʌmz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌðɝwaɪz. jə wəd nɑɾ əv θɹoʊn kʌstəm ən kənvɛnʃən oʊvɝ ðə fɛns, ʌðɝwaɪz."

"You are afraid," Moiraine said grimly. "If you had remained in Emond's Field, you would have become Wisdom, in time. That was Nynaeve's plan, was it not? Or, you would have sat in the Women's Circle and managed the affairs of Emond's Field while the Village Council thought it was doing so. But you did the unthinkable. You left Emond's Field, left the Two Rivers, seeking adventure. You wanted to do it, and at the same time you are afraid of it. And you are stubbornly refusing to let your fear best you. You would not have asked me how a woman becomes an Aes Sedai, otherwise. You would not have thrown custom and convention over the fence, otherwise."

"noʊ," ɛɡwin pɹətɛstəd. "aɪm nɑɾ əfɹeɪd. aɪ də wɑnə bɪkʌm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"No," Egwene protested. "I'm not afraid. I do want to become an Aes Sedai."

"bɛɾɝ fəɹ jə ɪf jə wɝ əfɹeɪd, bʌɾ aɪ hoʊp jə hoʊl tə ðət kənvɪkʃən. fju wɪmən ðiz deɪz əv ði əbɪləɾi tə bɪkʌm ɪnɪʃiəts, mʌtʃ lɛs əv ðə wɪʃ tə." mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn mjuzɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. "ʃʊɹli nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ tu ɪn wʌn vɪlədʒ. ði oʊl blʌɾ ɪz ɪndid stɪl stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"Better for you if you were afraid, but I hope you hold to that conviction. Few women these days have the ability to become initiates, much less have the wish to." Moiraine's voice sounded as if she had begun musing to herself. "Surely never before two in one village. The old blood is indeed still strong in the Two Rivers."

ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz, ɹænd ʃɪftəd. ə twɪɡ snæpt ʌndɝ ɪz fʊt. hi fɹoʊz ɪnstənli, swɛɾɪŋ ən hoʊldɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ, bʌt niðɝ ə ðə wɪmən lʊkt ɝaʊnd.

In the shadows, Rand shifted. A twig snapped under his foot. He froze instantly, sweating and holding his breath, but neither of the women looked around.

"tu?" ɛɡwin ɪkskleɪmd. "hu ɛls? ɪz ɪt kɛɹi? kɛɹi θeɪn? lɑɹə aɪɛlən?"

"Two?" Egwene exclaimed. "Who else? Is it Kari? Kari Thane? Lara Ayellan?"

mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd klɪk ə hɝ tʌŋ, ðən sɛd stɝnli, "ju mʌs fɝɡɛɾ aɪ sɛd ðæt. hɝ ɹoʊd laɪz ənʌðɝ weɪ, aɪ fɪɹ. kənsɝn jɝsɛlf wɪð jəɹ oʊn sɝkəmstænsəz. ɪts nɑɾ ən izi ɹoʊd juv tʃoʊzən."

Moiraine gave an exasperated click of her tongue, then said sternly, "You must forget I said that. Her road lies another way, I fear. Concern yourself with your own circumstances. It is not an easy road you have chosen."

"aɪ wɪl nɑt tɝn bæk," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"I will not turn back," Egwene said.

"bi ðəɾ əz ɪt meɪ. bʌt jə stɪl wɑn ɹiəʃʊɹəns, ən aɪ kænɑt ɡɪv ɪt tə ju, nɑɾ ɪn ðə weɪ jə wɑnt."

"Be that as it may. But you still want reassurance, and I cannot give it to you, not in the way you want."

"aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd."

"I don't understand."

"ju wɑnə noʊ ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ ɡʊɾ ən pjʊɹ, ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ðoʊz wɪkəd mɛn ə ðə lɛdʒənz u kɑz ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, nɑt ðə wɪmən. wɛl, ɪt wɑz ðə mɛn, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ noʊ mɔɹ wɪkəd ðən ɛni mɛn. ðeɪ wɝ ɪnseɪn, nɑɾ ivəl. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ jəl faɪn ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn ɑɹ hjumən, noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ wɪmən ɪksɛp fəɹ ði əbɪləɾi ðət sɛts əs əpɑɹt. ðeɪ ɑɹ bɹeɪv ən kaʊɝdli, stʃɹɔŋ ən wik, kaɪn ən kɹuəl, wɔɹm-hɑɹɾəd ən koʊld. bɪkʌmɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪl nɑt tʃeɪnʒ jə fɹəm wʌt jə ɑɹ."

"You want to know that Aes Sedai are good and pure, that it was those wicked men of the legends who caused the Breaking of the World, not the women. Well, it was the men, but they were no more wicked than any men. They were insane, not evil. The Aes Sedai you will find in Tar Valon are human, no different from any other women except for the ability that sets us apart. They are brave and cowardly, strong and weak, kind and cruel, warm-hearted and cold. Becoming an Aes Sedai will not change you from what you are."

ɛɡwin dʒɹu ə hɛvi bɹɛθ. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ə ðæt, ðəɾ aɪd bi tʃeɪnʒd baɪ ðə paʊɝ. ðəɾ ən ðə tʃɹɑləks. ən ðə feɪd. ænd. . . . mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, ɪn ðə neɪm ə ðə laɪt, waɪ dɪd ðə tʃɹɑləks kʌm tə ɛmənz fild?"

Egwene drew a heavy breath. "I suppose I was afraid of that, that I'd be changed by the Power. That and the Trollocs. And the Fade. And. . . . Moiraine Sedai, in the name of the Light, why did the Trollocs come to Emond's Field?"

ði ɛɛs sədaɪz hɛd swʌŋ, ən ʃi lʊk stʃɹeɪɾ ət ɹændz haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs. hɪz bɹɛθ sizd ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt; hɝ aɪz wɝ əz hɑɹɾ əz wən ʃi hæd θɹɛɾənd ðɛm, ən i hæd ðə filɪŋ ðeɪ kəd pɛnətʃɹeɪt ðə lɛðɝlifs θɪk bɹæntʃəz. laɪt, wʌt wɪl ʃi də ɪf ʃi faɪnz mi lɪsnɪŋ?

The Aes Sedai's head swung, and she looked straight at Rand's hiding place. His breath seized in his throat; her eyes were as hard as when she had threatened them, and he had the feeling they could penetrate the leatherleaf's thick branches. Light, what will she do if she finds me listening?

hi tʃɹaɪd tə mɛl bæk ɪndə ðə dipɝ ʃædoʊz. wɪð ɪz aɪz ɑn ðə wɪmən, ə ɹut snæɡd ɪz fʊt, ən i bɛɹli kɑt hɪmsɛlf fɹəm tʌmbəlɪŋ ɪndə dɛd bɹʌʃ ðət wʊɾə pɔɪntəɾ ɪm aʊt wɪð ə kɹækəl ə snæpɪŋ bɹæntʃəz laɪk faɪɹwɝks. pæntɪŋ, hi skɹæmbəld əweɪ ɑn ɔl fɔɹz, kipɪŋ saɪlən əz mʌtʃ baɪ lʌk əz baɪ ɛniθɪŋ i dɪd. hɪz hɑɹt paʊndɪd soʊ hɑɹɾ i θɔt ðət maɪt ɡɪv ɪm əweɪ ɪtsɛlf. ful! ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ ɑn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ!

He tried to melt back into the deeper shadows. With his eyes on the women, a root snagged his foot, and he barely caught himself from tumbling into dead brush that would have pointed him out with a crackle of snapping branches like fireworks. Panting, he scrambled away on all fours, keeping silent as much by luck as by anything he did. His heart pounded so hard he thought that might give him away itself. Fool! Eavesdropping on an Aes Sedai!

bæk wɛɹ ði ʌðɝz wɝ slipɪŋ, hi mænədʒ tə slɪp ɪn əmʌŋ əm saɪlənli. læn muvd əz i dʒɹɑp tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ən dʒɝkt ɪz blæŋkəɾ ʌp, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛɾəld bæk wɪð ə saɪ. hi hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ɹoʊlɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪn ɪz slip. ɹænd lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ, saɪlən bɹɛθ.

Back where the others were sleeping, he managed to slip in among them silently. Lan moved as he dropped to the ground and jerked his blanket up, but the Warder settled back with a sigh. He had only been rolling over in his sleep. Rand let out a long, silent breath.

ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ mɔɪɹeɪn əpɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə naɪt, stɑpɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi kəd stʌɾi ðə slʌmbɝɪŋ ʃeɪps. munlaɪt meɪɾ ə nɪmbəs ɝaʊn hɝ. ɹænd kloʊzd ɪz aɪz ən bɹiðd ivənli, ɔl ðə waɪl lɪsnɪŋ hɑɹd fəɹ fʊtstɛps kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ. nʌn dɪd. wən i oʊpən ɪz aɪz əɡɛn, ʃi wɑz ɡɔn.

A moment later Moiraine appeared out of the night, stopping where she could study the slumbering shapes. Moonlight made a nimbus around her. Rand closed his eyes and breathed evenly, all the while listening hard for footsteps coming closer. None did. When he opened his eyes again, she was gone.

wən faɪnəli slip keɪm, ɪt wɑz fɪtfəl ən fɪld wɪð swɛɾi dʒɹimz wɛɹ ɔl ðə mɛn ɪn ɛmənz fil kleɪm tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn ən ɔl ðə wɪmən hæd blu stoʊnz ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ laɪk ðə wʌn mɔɪɹeɪn wɔɹ. hi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə oʊvɝhɪɹ mɔɪɹeɪn ən ɛɡwin əɡɛn.

When finally sleep came, it was fitful and filled with sweaty dreams where all the men in Emond's Field claimed to be the Dragon Reborn and all the women had blue stones in their hair like the one Moiraine wore. He did not try to overhear Moiraine and Egwene again.

ɑn ɪndə ðə sɪksθ deɪ ðə sloʊ dʒɝni stʃɹɛtʃt. ðə wɔɹmθləs sʌn slɪd sloʊli təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹitɑps, waɪl ə hændfʊl ə θɪn klaʊdz dʒɹɪftəd haɪ tə ðə nɔɹθ. ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd haɪɝ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən ɹænd pʊld ɪz kloʊk bæk ʌp ɑntu hɪz ʃoʊldɝz, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðeɪ wəɾ ɛvɝ ɡɛt tə bɛɹlən. ðə dɪstəns ðeɪ hæd tʃɹævəl fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ ɔlɹɛɾi wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf tə teɪk ɪm fɹəm tɛɹən fɛɹi tə ðə waɪt ɹɪvɝ, bʌt læn ɔlweɪz sɛɾ ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə ʃɔɹt dʒɝni wɛnɛvɝ i wɑz æskt, hɑɹdli wɝθ kɔlɪŋ ə dʒɝni əɾ ɔl. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm fil lɔst.

On into the sixth day the slow journey stretched. The warmthless sun slid slowly toward the treetops, while a handful of thin clouds drifted high to the north. The wind gusted higher for a moment, and Rand pulled his cloak back up onto his shoulders, muttering to himself. He wondered if they would ever get to Baerlon. The distance they had traveled from the river already was more than enough to take him from Taren Ferry to the White River, but Lan always said it was just a short journey whenever he was asked, hardly worth calling a journey at all. It made him feel lost.

læn əpɪɹɾ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm ɪn ðə wʊdz, ɹɪtɝnɪŋ fɹəm wʌn ə hɪz fɔɹeɪz. hi ɹeɪn ɪn ən ɹoʊd bɪsaɪd mɔɪɹeɪn, hɪz hɛd bɛn kloʊs tə hɝz.

Lan appeared ahead of them in the woods, returning from one of his forays. He reined in and rode beside Moiraine, his head bent close to hers.

ɹænd ɡɹɪməst, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑɾ æsk ɛni kwɛstʃənz. læn sɪmpli ɹəfjuz tə æknɑlɪdʒ ɔl sətʃ kwɛstʃənz eɪmd ət hɪm.

Rand grimaced, but he did not ask any questions. Lan simply refused to acknowledge all such questions aimed at him.

oʊnli ɛɡwin, əmʌŋ ði ʌðɝz, ivən əpɪɹd tə noʊɾəs lænz ɹɪtɝn, soʊ juz tə ðɪs ɝeɪnʒmənt hæd ðeɪ bɪkʌm, ən ʃi kɛp bæk, tu. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ maɪɾ əv bɪɡʌn æktɪŋ əz ɪf ɛɡwin wɝ ɪn tʃɑɹdʒ ə ði ɛmənz fildɝz, bʌt ðət ɡeɪv əɹ noʊ seɪ wən ðə wɔɹɾɝ meɪɾ ɪz ɹɪpɔɹts. pɛɹɪn wɑz kæɹiɪŋ mæts baʊ, ɹæpt ɪn ðə θɔtfəl saɪləns ðət sim tə teɪk əm ɔl mɔɹ ən mɔɹ əz ðeɪ ɡɑt fɝðɝ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ðə hɔɹsəz' sloʊ wɔk əlaʊd mæt tə pɹæktəs dʒʌɡəlɪŋ θɹi smɔl stoʊnz ʌndɝ tɑm mɛɹɪlɪnz wɑtʃfəl aɪ. ðə ɡlimən hæd ɡɪvən lɛsənz itʃ naɪt, tu, əz wɛl əz læn.

Only Egwene, among the others, even appeared to notice Lan's return, so used to this arrangement had they become, and she kept back, too. The Aes Sedai might have begun acting as if Egwene were in charge of the Emond's Fielders, but that gave her no say when the Warder made his reports. Perrin was carrying Mat's bow, wrapped in the thoughtful silence that seemed to take them all more and more as they got further from the Two Rivers. The horses' slow walk allowed Mat to practice juggling three small stones under Thom Merrilin's watchful eye. The gleeman had given lessons each night, too, as well as Lan.

læn fɪnɪʃt wʌtɛvɝ i hæd bɪn tɛlɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ʃi twɪstəɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə lʊk bæk ət ði ʌðɝz. ɹænd tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə stɪfən wən əɹ aɪz muvd əkɹɔs hɪm. dɪd ðeɪ lɪŋɡɝ ɑn ɪm ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɑn ɛniwʌn ɛls? hi hæd ðə kwizi filɪŋ ðət ʃi nu hu hæd bɪn lɪsnɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs ðət naɪt.

Lan finished whatever he had been telling Moiraine, and she twisted in her saddle to look back at the others. Rand tried not to stiffen when her eyes moved across him. Did they linger on him a moment longer than on anyone else? He had the queasy feeling that she knew who had been listening in the darkness that night.

"heɪ, ɹænd," mæt kɔld, "aɪ kən dʒʌɡəl fɔɹ!" ɹænd weɪvd ɪn ɹɪplaɪ wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊnd. "aɪ toʊl jə aɪd ɡɛt tə fɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ju. aɪ - lʊk!"

"Hey, Rand," Mat called, "I can juggle four!" Rand waved in reply without looking around. "I told you I'd get to four before you. I - Look!"

ðeɪ hæd tɑpt ə loʊ hɪl, ən bɪloʊ ðɛm, ə skæn maɪl əweɪ θɹu ðə stɑɹk tʃɹiz ən ðə stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ʃædoʊz ʌv ivnɪŋ, leɪ bɛɹlən. ɹænd ɡæspt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə smaɪl ən ɡeɪp ət ðə seɪm taɪm.

They had topped a low hill, and below them, a scant mile away through the stark trees and the stretching shadows of evening, lay Baerlon. Rand gasped, trying to smile and gape at the same time.

ə lɔɡ wɔl, nɪɹli twɛnti fit tɔl, sɝaʊndəd ðə taʊn, wɪð wʊɾən wɑtʃtaʊɝz skæɾɝd əlɔŋ ɪts lɛŋθ. wɪðɪn, ɹuftɑps ə sleɪɾ ən taɪl ɡlɪntɪd wɪð ðə sɪŋkɪŋ sʌn, ən fɛðɝz ə smoʊk dʒɹɪftəɾ ʌpwɝd fɹəm tʃɪmniz. hʌnʒɹədz ə tʃɪmniz. ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə θætʃt ɹuf tə bi sin. ə bɹɔd ɹoʊd ɹæn is fɹəm ðə taʊn, ən ənʌðɝ wɛst, itʃ wɪð ət list ə dʌzən wæɡənz ən twaɪs əz mɛni ɑks-kɑɹts tʃɹʌdʒɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə pælɪsɑd. fɑɹmz leɪ skæɾɝd əbaʊt ðə taʊn, θɪkəs tə ðə nɔɹθ waɪl oʊnli ə fju bɹoʊk ðə fɔɹəs tə ðə saʊθ, bʌt ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl nɑɾ əv ɪɡzɪstəd soʊ fɑɹ əz ɹænd wɑz kənsɝnd. ɪts bɪɡɝ ðən ɛmənz fild ən wɑtʃ hɪl ən dɛvən ɹaɪɾ ɔl pʊt təɡɛðɝ! ən meɪbi tɛɹən fɛɹi, tu.

A log wall, nearly twenty feet tall, surrounded the town, with wooden watchtowers scattered along its length. Within, rooftops of slate and tile glinted with the sinking sun, and feathers of smoke drifted upward from chimneys. Hundreds of chimneys. There was not a thatched roof to be seen. A broad road ran east from the town, and another west, each with at least a dozen wagons and twice as many ox-carts trudging toward the palisade. Farms lay scattered about the town, thickest to the north while only a few broke the forest to the south, but they might as well not have existed so far as Rand was concerned. It's bigger than Emond's Field and Watch Hill and Deven Ride all put together! And maybe Taren Ferry, too.

"soʊ ðæts ə sɪɾi," mæt bɹiðd, linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ əkɹɔs ɪz hɔɹsəz nɛk tə stɛɹ.

"So that's a city," Mat breathed, leaning forward across his horse's neck to stare.

pɛɹɪn kəɾ oʊnli ʃeɪk ɪz hɛd. "haʊ kən soʊ mɛni pipəl lɪv ɪn wʌn pleɪs?"

Perrin could only shake his head. "How can so many people live in one place?"

ɛɡwin sɪmpli stɛɹd.

Egwene simply stared.

tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn ɡlænst ət mæt, ðən ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz ən blu aʊɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz. "sɪɾi!" hi snɔɹɾɪd.

Thom Merrilin glanced at Mat, then rolled his eyes and blew out his mustaches. "City!" he snorted.

"æn ju, ɹænd?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ə jəɹ fɝst saɪɾ ə bɛɹlən?"

"And you, Rand?" Moiraine said. "What do you think of your first sight of Baerlon?"

"aɪ θɪŋk ɪts ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm hoʊm," hi sɛd sloʊli, bɹɪŋɪŋ ə ʃɑɹp læf fɹəm mæt.

"I think it's a long way from home," he said slowly, bringing a sharp laugh from Mat.

"ju hæv fɝðɝ tə ɡoʊ jɛt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "mʌtʃ fɝðɝ. bʌt ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs, ɪksɛp tə ɹʌn ən haɪɾ ən ɹʌn əɡɛn fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ laɪvz. ən ʃɔɹt laɪvz ðeɪ wəd bi. jə mʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt, wən ðə dʒɝni bɪkʌmz hɑɹd. juv noʊ tʃɔɪs."

"You have further to go yet," Moiraine said. "Much further. But there is no other choice, except to run and hide and run again for the rest of your lives. And short lives they would be. You must remember that, when the journey becomes hard. You have no choice."

ɹænd ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn. baɪ ðɛɹ feɪsəz, ðeɪ wɝ θɪŋkɪŋ ðə seɪm θɪŋ i wɑz. haʊ kəd ʃi tɔk əz ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɛni tʃɔɪs æftɝ wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd? ði ɛɛs sədaɪz meɪɾ əɹ tʃɔɪsəz.

Rand exchanged glances with Mat and Perrin. By their faces, they were thinking the same thing he was. How could she talk as if they had any choice after what she had said? The Aes Sedai's made our choices.

mɔɪɹeɪn wɛn ɑn əz ɪf ðɛɹ θɔts wɝ nɑt pleɪn. "ðə deɪnʒɝ bɪɡɪnz əɡɛn hɪɹ. wɑtʃ wʌt jə seɪ wɪðɪn ðoʊz wɔlz. əbʌv ɔl, də nɑt mɛnʃən tʃɹɑləks, əɹ hæfmən, əɹ ɛni sʌtʃ. jə mʌs nɑɾ ivən θɪŋk ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. səm ɪn bɛɹlən əv ivən lɛs lʌv fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ðən də ðə pipəl ʌv ɛmənz fild, ən ðəɹ meɪ ivən bi dɑɹkfɹɛnz." ɛɡwin ɡæspt, ən pɛɹɪn mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. mæts feɪs peɪld, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn wɛn ɑn kɑmli. "wi mʌst ətʃɹækt əz lɪɾəl ətɛnʃən əz pɑsəbəl." læn wɑz ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ə ʃɪftɪŋ ɡɹeɪz ən ɡɹinz fəɹ wʌn ə dɑɹk bɹaʊn, mɔɹ ɔɹɾənɛɹi, ðoʊ ʌv faɪn kʌɾ ən wiv. hɪz kʌlɝ-tʃeɪnʒɪŋ kloʊk meɪɾ ə lɑɹdʒ bʌlʒ ɪn wʌn ə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz. "wi də nɑt ɡoʊ baɪ əɹ oʊn neɪmz hɪɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn kəntɪnjud. "hɪɹ aɪm noʊn əz æliz, ən læn ɪz ænʒɹə. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. ɡʊd. lɛɾ əs bi wɪðɪn ðə wɔlz bɪfɔɹ naɪt kætʃəz ʌs. ðə ɡeɪts ə bɛɹlən ɑɹ kloʊz fɹəm sʌndaʊn tə sʌnɹaɪz."

Moiraine went on as if their thoughts were not plain. "The danger begins again here. Watch what you say within those walls. Above all, do not mention Trollocs, or Halfmen, or any such. You must not even think of the Dark One. Some in Baerlon have even less love for Aes Sedai than do the people of Emond's Field, and there may even be Darkfriends." Egwene gasped, and Perrin muttered under his breath. Mat's face paled, but Moiraine went on calmly. "We must attract as little attention as possible." Lan was exchanging his cloak of shifting grays and greens for one of dark brown, more ordinary, though of fine cut and weave. His color-changing cloak made a large bulge in one of his saddlebags. "We do not go by our own names here," Moiraine continued. "Here I am known as Alys, and Lan is Andra. Remember that. Good. Let us be within the walls before night catches us. The gates of Baerlon are closed from sundown to sunrise."

læn lɛd ðə weɪ daʊn ðə hɪl ən θɹu ðə wʊdz təwɔɹd ðə lɔɡ wɔl. ðə ɹoʊd pæs hæf ə dʌzən fɑɹmz - nʌn leɪ kloʊs, ən nʌn ə ðə pipəl fɪnɪʃɪŋ ðɛɹ tʃɔɹz sim tə noʊɾəs ðə tʃɹævəlɝz - ɛndɪŋ ət hɛvi wʊɾən ɡeɪts baʊnd wɪð waɪd stʃɹæps ə blæk aɪɝn. ðeɪ wɝ kloʊz taɪt, ivən ɪf ðə sʌn wɑz nɑt daʊn jɛt.

Lan led the way down the hill and through the woods toward the log wall. The road passed half a dozen farms - none lay close, and none of the people finishing their chores seemed to notice the travelers - ending at heavy wooden gates bound with wide straps of black iron. They were closed tight, even if the sun was not down yet.

læn ɹoʊd kloʊs tə ðə wɔl ən ɡeɪv ə tʌɡ tə ə fɹeɪd ɹoʊp hæŋɪŋ daʊn bɪsaɪd ðə ɡeɪts. ə bɛl klæŋd ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl. əbɹʌpli ə waɪzən feɪs ʌndɝ ə bæɾɝd klɔθ kæp pɪɹd daʊn səspɪʃəsli fɹəm ətɑp ðə wɔl, ɡlɛɹɪŋ bɪtwin ðə kʌt-ɔf ɛnz ə tu ʌv ðə lɔɡz, ə ɡʊd θɹi spænz oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɛdz.

Lan rode close to the wall and gave a tug to a frayed rope hanging down beside the gates. A bell clanged on the other side of the wall. Abruptly a wizened face under a battered cloth cap peered down suspiciously from atop the wall, glaring between the cut-off ends of two of the logs, a good three spans over their heads.

"wʌts ɔl ðɪs, ɛ? ɪts tu leɪɾ ɪn ðə deɪ tə bi oʊpənɪŋ ðɪs ɡeɪt. tu leɪt, aɪ seɪ. ɡoʊ ɝaʊn tə ðə waɪtbɹɪdʒ ɡeɪɾ ɪf jə wɑnə - " mɔɪɹeɪnz mɛɹ muvd aʊt tə wɛɹ ðə mæn ətɑp ðə wɔl hæɾ ə klɪɹ vju ʌv hɝ. sʌɾənli hɪz ɹɪŋkəlz dipən ɪn ə ɡæp-tuθ smaɪl, ən i sim tə kwɪvɝ bɪtwin spikɪŋ ən duɪŋ ɪz duɾi. "aɪ dɪdnt noʊ ɪt wɑz ju, mɪstʃɹəs. weɪt. əl bi ɹaɪt daʊn. dʒʌst weɪt. aɪm kʌmɪŋ. aɪm kʌmɪŋ."

"What's all this, eh? It's too late in the day to be opening this gate. Too late, I say. Go around to the Whitebridge Gate if you want to - " Moiraine's mare moved out to where the man atop the wall had a clear view of her. Suddenly his wrinkles deepened in a gap-toothed smile, and he seemed to quiver between speaking and doing his duty. "I didn't know it was you, mistress. Wait. I'll be right down. Just wait. I'm coming. I'm coming."

ðə hɛd dɪpt aʊɾ ə saɪt, bʌt ɹænd kəd stɪl hɪɹ mʌfəld ʃaʊts fəɹ əm tə steɪ wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ, ðəɾ i wɑz kʌmɪŋ. wɪð ɡɹeɪt kɹiks ə dɪsjus, ðə ɹaɪt-hænd ɡeɪt sloʊli swʌŋ aʊtwɝd. ɪt stɑpt wən oʊpən dʒʌst waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ wʌn hɔɹs tə pæs θɹu əɾ ə taɪm, ən ðə ɡeɪtkipɝ poʊkt ɪz hɛɾ ɪndə ðə ɡæp, flæʃt ɪz hæf-tuθləs smaɪl əɾ əm əɡɛn ən dɑɹɾɪd bæk aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. mɔɪɹeɪn fɑloʊd læn θɹu, wɪð ɛɡwin ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɝ.

The head dipped out of sight, but Rand could still hear muffled shouts for them to stay where they were, that he was coming. With great creaks of disuse, the right-hand gate slowly swung outward. It stopped when open just wide enough for one horse to pass through at a time, and the gatekeeper poked his head into the gap, flashed his half-toothless smile at them again and darted back out of the way. Moiraine followed Lan through, with Egwene right behind her.

ɹænd tʃɹɑɾəd klaʊɾ æftɝ bɛlə ən faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə nɛɹoʊ stʃɹit fɹʌntɪd baɪ haɪ wʊɾən fɛnsəz ən wɛɹhaʊzɪz, tɔl ən wɪndoʊləs, bɹɔd dɔɹz kloʊzd ʌp taɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn fʊt, spikɪŋ tə ðə ɹɪŋkəl-feɪst ɡeɪtkipɝ, soʊ ɹænd dɪsmaʊntɪd, tu.

Rand trotted Cloud after Bela and found himself in a narrow street fronted by high wooden fences and warehouses, tall and windowless, broad doors closed up tight. Moiraine and Lan were already on foot, speaking to the wrinkle-faced gatekeeper, so Rand dismounted, too.

ðə lɪɾəl mæn, ɪn ə mʌtʃ-mɛndɪd kloʊk ən koʊt, hɛld ɪz klɔθ kæp kɹʌmpəld ɪn wʌn hæn ən dʌkt ɪz hɛd wɛnɛvɝ i spoʊk. hi pɪɹɾ ət ðoʊz dɪsmaʊntɪŋ bɪhaɪn læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "daʊnkaʊntʃɹi foʊk." hi ɡɹɪnd. "waɪ, mɪstʃɹəs æliz, jə teɪkən ʌp kəlɛktɪŋ daʊnkaʊntʃɹi foʊk wɪð heɪ ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ?" hɪz lʊk tʊk ɪn tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn, ðɛn. "ju eɪn ə ʃipfɑɹmɝ. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ lɛɾɪŋ jə ɡoʊ θɹu səm deɪz bæk, aɪ du. dɪdn laɪk jəɹ tʃɹɪks daʊnkaʊntʃɹi, ɛ, ɡlimən?"

The little man, in a much-mended cloak and coat, held his cloth cap crumpled in one hand and ducked his head whenever he spoke. He peered at those dismounting behind Lan and Moiraine, and shook his head. "Downcountry folk." He grinned. "Why, Mistress Alys, you taken up collecting downcountry folk with hay in their hair?" His look took in Thom Merrilin, then. "You ain't a sheepfarmer. I remember letting you go through some days back, I do. Didn't like your tricks downcountry, eh, gleeman?"

"aɪ hoʊp jə ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə fɝɡɛt lɛɾɪŋ əs θɹu, mæstɝ eɪvɪn," læn sɛd, pɹɛsɪŋ ə kɔɪn ɪndə ðə mænz fɹi hænd. "æn lɛɾɪŋ əs bæk ɪn, tu."

"I hope you remembered to forget letting us through, Master Avin," Lan said, pressing a coin into the man's free hand. "And letting us back in, too."

"noʊ nid fəɹ ðæt, mæstɝ ænʒɹə. noʊ nid fəɹ ðæt. jə ɡɪmi plɛnti wən jə wɛn aʊt. plɛnti." dʒʌs ðə seɪm, eɪvɪn meɪd ðə kɔɪn dɪsəpɪɹ əz dɛfli əz ɪf i wɝ ə ɡlimən, tu. "aɪ eɪn toʊl noʊbɑdi, ən aɪ woʊnt, niðɝ. ɪspɛʃli nɑɾ əm waɪtkloʊks," hi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ə skaʊl. hi pɝst ʌp ɪz lɪps tə spɪt, ðən ɡlænst ət mɔɪɹeɪn ən swɑloʊd, ɪnstɛd.

"No need for that, Master Andra. No need for that. You give me plenty when you went out. Plenty." Just the same, Avin made the coin disappear as deftly as if he were a gleeman, too. "I ain't told nobody, and I won't, neither. Especially not them Whitecloaks," he finished with a scowl. He pursed up his lips to spit, then glanced at Moiraine and swallowed, instead.

ɹænd blɪŋkt, bʌt kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt. ði ʌðɝz dɪd, tu, ðoʊ ɪɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ən ɛfɝt fəɹ mæt. tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, ɹænd θɔt wʌndɝɪŋli. stɔɹiz toʊld əbaʊt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən baɪ pɛdlɝz ən mɝtʃəns ən mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz vɛɹid fɹəm ædmɝeɪʃən tə heɪtʃɹəd, bʌɾ ɔl əɡɹid ðə tʃɪlʒɹən heɪɾəd ɛɛs sədaɪ əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ dɪd dɑɹkfɹɛnz. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðɪs wɑz mɔɹ tʃɹʌbəl ɔlɹɛɾi.

Rand blinked, but kept his mouth shut. The others did, too, though it appeared to be an effort for Mat. Children of the Light, Rand thought wonderingly. Stories told about the Children by peddlers and merchants and merchants' guards varied from admiration to hatred, but all agreed the Children hated Aes Sedai as much as they did Darkfriends. He wondered if this was more trouble already.

"ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɑɹ ɪn bɛɹlən?" læn dɪmændəd.

"The Children are in Baerlon?" Lan demanded.

"ðeɪ ʃʊɹli ɑɹ." ðə ɡeɪtkipɝ bɑbd ɪz hɛd. "keɪm ðə seɪm deɪ jə lɛft, əz aɪ ɹikɔl. eɪnt noʊbɑdi hɪɹ laɪks əm əɾ ɔl. moʊs doʊn lɛɾ ɑn, ʌv kɔɹs."

"They surely are." The gatekeeper bobbed his head. "Came the same day you left, as I recall. Ain't nobody here likes them at all. Most don't let on, of course."

"hæv ðeɪ sɛd waɪ ðeɪ ɑɹ hɪɹ?" mɔɪɹeɪn æskt ɪntɛnli.

"Have they said why they are here?" Moiraine asked intently.

"waɪ ðəɹ hɪɹ, mɪstʃɹəs?" eɪvɪn wɑz soʊ əstɑnɪʃt i fɝɡɑt tə dʌk ɪz hɛd. "ʌv kɔɹs, ðeɪ sɛd waɪ - oʊ, aɪ fɝɡɑt. jə bɪn daʊnkaʊntʃɹi. laɪkli jə eɪn hɝd nʌθɪŋ bʌt ʃip bliɾɪŋ. ðeɪ seɪ ðəɹ hɪɹ kəz ʌv wʌts ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn daʊn ɪn ɡildən. ðə dʒɹæɡən, jə noʊ - wɛl, hɪm əz kɔlz hɪmsɛlf dʒɹæɡən. ðeɪ seɪ ðə fɛloʊz stɝɪŋ ʌp ivəl - wɪtʃ aɪ ɪkspɛk hiz - ən ðəɹ hɪɹ tə stæmp ɪɾ aʊt, oʊnli hiz daʊn ðəɹ ɪn ɡildən, nɑt hɪɹ. dʒʌst ən ɪkskjus tə mɛɾəl ɪn ʌðɝ pipəlz bɪznəs, ɪz wʌɾ aɪ fɪɡjɝ. ðɛɹz ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ ɑn səm pipəlz dɔɹz." ðɪs taɪm i dɪd spɪt.

"Why they're here, mistress?" Avin was so astonished he forgot to duck his head. "Of course, they said why - Oh, I forgot. You been downcountry. Likely you ain't heard nothing but sheep bleating. They say they're here because of what's going on down in Ghealdan. The Dragon, you know - well, him as calls himself Dragon. They say the fellow's stirring up evil - which I expect he is - and they're here to stamp it out, only he's down there in Ghealdan, not here. Just an excuse to meddle in other people's business, is what I figure. There's already been the Dragon's Fang on some people's doors." This time he did spit.

"hæv ðeɪ kɑz mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl, ðɛn?" læn sɛd, ən eɪvɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd vɪɡɝəsli.

"Have they caused much trouble, then?" Lan said, and Avin shook his head vigorously.

"nɑt ðət ðeɪ doʊnt wɑn tə, aɪ ɪkspɛkt, oʊnli ðə ɡʌvɝnɝ doʊn tʃɹʌst əm noʊ mɔɹ ðən aɪ du. hi woʊn lɛt bʌt meɪbi tɛn əɹ soʊ ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz ət wʌn taɪm, ən eɪn ðeɪ mæɾ əbaʊt ðæt. ðə ɹɛst əv ə kæmp ə lɪɾəl weɪz nɔɹθ, aɪ hɪɹ. bɛt ðeɪ ɡɑt ðə fɑɹmɝz lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ðə wʌnz ðət də kʌm ɪn, ðeɪ dʒʌst stɔk ɝaʊn ɪn ðoʊz waɪt kloʊks, lʊkɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ noʊzɪz əɾ ɑnəs foʊk. wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt, ðeɪ seɪ, ən ɪts ən ɔɹɾɝ. nɪɹ kʌm tə bloʊz mɔɹ ðən wʌns wɪð ðə wæɡənɪɹz ən maɪnɝz ən smɛltɝz ən ɔl, ən ivən ðə wɑtʃ, bʌt ðə ɡʌvɝnɝ wɑns ɪɾ ɔl pisfəl, ən ðæts haʊ ɪts bɪn soʊ fɑɹ. ɪf ðəɹ hʌntɪŋ ivəl, aɪ seɪ waɪ ɑɹən ðeɪ ʌp ɪn sɑldɑiə? ðɛɹz səm kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl ʌp ðɛɹ, aɪ hɪɹ. əɹ daʊn ɪn ɡildən? ðɛɹz bɪn ə bɪɡ bæɾəl daʊn ðɛɹ, ðeɪ seɪ. ɹil bɪɡ."

"Not that they don't want to, I expect, only the Governor don't trust them no more than I do. He won't let but maybe ten or so inside the walls at one time, and ain't they mad about that. The rest have a camp a little ways north, I hear. Bet they got the farmers looking over their shoulders. The ones that do come in, they just stalk around in those white cloaks, looking down their noses at honest folk. Walk in the Light, they say, and it's an order. Near come to blows more than once with the wagoneers and miners and smelters and all, and even the Watch, but the Governor wants it all peaceful, and that's how it's been so far. If they're hunting evil, I say why aren't they up in Saldaea? There's some kind of trouble up there, I hear. Or down in Ghealdan? There's been a big battle down there, they say. Real big."

mɔɪɹeɪn dʒɹu ə sɑf bɹɛθ. "aɪ hæd hɝd ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɡildən."

Moiraine drew a soft breath. "I had heard that Aes Sedai were going to Ghealdan."

"jɛs, ðeɪ dɪd, mɪstʃɹəs." eɪvɪnz hɛd stɑɹɾəd bɑbɪŋ əɡɛn. "ðeɪ wɛn tə ɡildən, ɔl ɹaɪt, ən ðæts wʌt stɑɹɾəd ðɪs bæɾəl, əɹ soʊ aɪ hɪɹ. ðeɪ seɪ səm ə ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ dɛd. meɪbi ɔl ə ðɛm. aɪ noʊ səm foʊks doʊn hoʊld wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ aɪ seɪ, hu ɛls ɪz gɑnə stɑp ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən? ɛ? ən ðoʊz dæm fulz u θɪŋk ðeɪ kən bi mɛn ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ səm sʌtʃ. wʌɾ əbaʊt ðɛm? kɔɹs, səm seɪ - nɑt ðə waɪtkloʊks, maɪnd, ən nɑt mi, bʌt səm foʊks - ðət meɪbi ðɪs fɛloʊ ɹɪli ɪz ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn. hi kən də θɪŋz, aɪ hɪɹ. juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðɛɹz θaʊzənz fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm."

"Yes, they did, mistress." Avin's head started bobbing again. "They went to Ghealdan, all right, and that's what started this battle, or so I hear. They say some of those Aes Sedai are dead. Maybe all of them. I know some folks don't hold with Aes Sedai, but I say, who else is going to stop a false Dragon? Eh? And those damned fools who think they can be men Aes Sedai or some such. What about them? Course, some say - not the Whitecloaks, mind, and not me, but some folks - that maybe this fellow really is the Dragon Reborn. He can do things, I hear. Use the One Power. There's thousands following him."

"doʊn bi ə ful," læn snæpt, ən eɪvɪnz feɪs foʊldəɾ ɪndə ə hɝt lʊk.

"Don't be a fool," Lan snapped, and Avin's face folded into a hurt look.

"aɪm oʊnli seɪɪŋ wʌɾ aɪ hɝd, eɪn aɪ? dʒʌst wʌɾ aɪ hɝd, mæstɝ ænʒɹə. ðeɪ seɪ, səm du, ðət hiz muvɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmi ist ən saʊθ, təwɔɹd tɛɹ." hɪz vɔɪs bɪkeɪm hɛvi wɪð minɪŋ. "ðeɪ seɪ hiz neɪmd əm ðə pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən."

"I'm only saying what I heard, ain't I? Just what I heard, Master Andra. They say, some do, that he's moving his army east and south, toward Tear." His voice became heavy with meaning. "They say he's named them the People of the Dragon."

"neɪmz min lɪɾəl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kɑmli. ɪf ɛniθɪŋ ʃi hæd hɝd dɪstɝb hɝ, ʃi ɡeɪv noʊ aʊtwɝd saɪn ʌv ɪt naʊ. "ju kəd kɔl jəɹ mjul pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən, ɪf jə wɑntəd."

"Names mean little," Moiraine said calmly. If anything she had heard disturbed her, she gave no outward sign of it now. "You could call your mule People of the Dragon, if you wanted."

"nɑt laɪkli, mɪstʃɹəs." eɪvɪn tʃʌkəld. "nɑt wɪð ðə waɪtkloʊks ɝaʊnd, fəɹ ʃʊɹ. aɪ doʊn ɪkspɛkt ɛnibəɾi ɛls wəd lʊk kaɪnli ɑn ə neɪm laɪk ðæt, niðɝ. aɪ si wʌt jə min, bʌt . . . oʊ, noʊ, mɪstʃɹəs. nɑt maɪ mjul."

"Not likely, mistress." Avin chuckled. "Not with the Whitecloaks around, for sure. I don't expect anybody else would look kindly on a name like that, neither. I see what you mean, but . . . oh, no, mistress. Not my mule."

"noʊ daʊɾ ə waɪz dɪsɪʒən," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "naʊ wi mʌs bi ɔf."

"No doubt a wise decision," Moiraine said. "Now we must be off."

"æn doʊn jə wɝi, mɪstʃɹəs," eɪvɪn sɛd, wɪð ə dip bɑb ə hɪz hɛd, "aɪ eɪn sin noʊbɑdi." hi dɑɹɾɪd tə ðə ɡeɪɾ ən bɪɡæn tʌɡɪŋ ɪt kloʊzd wɪð kwɪk dʒɝks. "eɪn sin noʊbɑdi, ən eɪn sin nʌθɪŋ." ðə ɡeɪt θʌddɪd ʃʌt, ən i pʊl daʊn ðə lɑkɪŋ bɑɹ wɪð ə ɹoʊp. "ɪn fækt, mɪstʃɹəs, ðɪs ɡeɪɾ eɪn bɪn oʊpən ɪn deɪz."

"And don't you worry, mistress," Avin said, with a deep bob of his head, "I ain't seen nobody." He darted to the gate and began tugging it closed with quick jerks. "Ain't seen nobody, and ain't seen nothing." The gate thudded shut, and he pulled down the locking bar with a rope. "In fact, mistress, this gate ain't been open in days."

"ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ju, eɪvɪn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd.

"The Light illumine you, Avin," Moiraine said.

ʃi lɛɾ əm əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɡeɪt, ðɛn. ɹænd lʊk bæk, wʌns, ən eɪvɪn wɑz stɪl stændɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɡeɪt. hi sim tə bi pɑlɪʃɪŋ ə kɔɪn wɪð ən ɛdʒ ə hɪz kloʊk ən tʃʌklɪŋ.

She led them away from the gate, then. Rand looked back, once, and Avin was still standing in front of the gate. He seemed to be polishing a coin with an edge of his cloak and chuckling.

ðə weɪ lɛd θɹu dɝt stʃɹits bɛɹli ðə wɪdθ ə tu wæɡənz, ɛmpti ʌv pipəl, ɔl laɪnd wɪð wɛɹhaʊzɪz ən əkeɪʒənəl haɪ, wʊɾən fɛnsəz. ɹænd wɔkt ə taɪm bɪsaɪd ðə ɡlimən. "tɑm, wʌt wɑz ɔl ðəɾ əbaʊt tiɹ, ən ðə pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən? tiɹ ɪz ə sɪɾi ɔl ðə weɪ daʊn ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, ɪzən ɪt?"

The way led through dirt streets barely the width of two wagons, empty of people, all lined with warehouses and occasional high, wooden fences. Rand walked a time beside the gleeman. "Thom, what was all that about Tear, and the People of the Dragon? Tear is a city all the way down on the Sea of Storms, isn't it?"

"ðə kæɹæəθən saɪkəl," tɑm sɛd kɝtli.

"The Karaethon Cycle," Thom said curtly.

ɹænd blɪŋkt. ðə pɹɑfəsiz ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. "noʊbɑdi tɛlz ðə . . . ðoʊz stɔɹiz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. nɑɾ ɪn ɛmənz fild, ɛniweɪ. ðə wɪzdəm wəd skɪn əm əlaɪv, ɪf ðeɪ dɪd."

Rand blinked. The Prophecies of the Dragon. "Nobody tells the . . . those stories in the Two Rivers. Not in Emond's Field, anyway. The Wisdom would skin them alive, if they did."

"aɪ səpoʊz ʃi wʊd, ət ðæt," tɑm sɛd dʒɹaɪli. hi ɡlænst ət mɔɪɹeɪn ʌp əhɛd wɪð læn, sɔ ʃi kəd nɑɾ oʊvɝhɪɹ, ən wɛn ɑn. "tiɹ ɪz ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst pɔɹɾ ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, ən ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ ɪz ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ðət ɡɑɹdz ɪt. ðə stoʊn ɪz sɛd tə bi ðə fɝs fɔɹtʃɹəs bɪlt æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən ɪn ɔl ðɪs taɪm ɪts nɛvɝ fɔlən, ðoʊ mɔɹ ðən wʌn ɑɹmi hæz tʃɹaɪd. wʌn ə ðə pɹɑfəsiz sɛz ðət ðə stoʊn ə tiɹ wɪl nɛvɝ fɔl əntɪl ðə pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən kʌm tə ðə stoʊn. ənʌðɝ sɛz ðə stoʊn wɪl nɛvɝ fɔl tɪl ðə sɔɹd ðət kænɑt bi tʌtʃt ɪz wildɪd baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡənz hænd." tɑm ɡɹɪməst. "ðə fɔl ə ðə stoʊn wɪl bi wʌn ə ðə meɪdʒɝ pɹufs ðət ðə dʒɹæɡən əz bɪn ɹibɔɹn. meɪ ðə stoʊn stæn tɪl aɪm dʌst."

"I suppose she would, at that," Thom said dryly. He glanced at Moiraine up ahead with Lan, saw she could not overhear, and went on. "Tear is the greatest port on the Sea of Storms, and the Stone of Tear is the fortress that guards it. The Stone is said to be the first fortress built after the Breaking of the World, and in all this time it has never fallen, though more than one army has tried. One of the Prophecies says that the Stone of Tear will never fall until the People of the Dragon come to the Stone. Another says the Stone will never fall till the Sword That Cannot Be Touched is wielded by the Dragon's hand." Thom grimaced. "The fall of the Stone will be one of the major proofs that the Dragon has been reborn. May the Stone stand till I am dust."

"ðə sɔɹd ðət kænɑt bi tʌtʃt?"

"The sword that cannot be touched?"

"ðæts wʌɾ ɪt sɛz. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ ɪts ə sɔɹd. wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz, ɪt laɪz ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə stoʊn, ðə sɛntʃɹəl sɪɾədɛl ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs. nʌn bʌt ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ə tiɹ kən ɛntɝ ðɛɹ, ən ðeɪ nɛvɝ spik ʌv wʌt laɪz ɪnsaɪd. sɝɾənli nɑt tə ɡlimən, ɛniweɪ."

"That's what it says. I don't know whether it is a sword. Whatever it is, it lies in the Heart of the Stone, the central citadel of the fortress. None but the High Lords of Tear can enter there, and they never speak of what lies inside. Certainly not to gleemen, anyway."

ɹænd fɹaʊnd. "ðə stoʊn kænɑt fɔl əntɪl ðə dʒɹæɡən wilz ðə sɔɹd, bʌt haʊ kən hi, ənlɛs ðə stoʊn əz ɔlɹɛɾi fɔlən? ɪz ðə dʒɹæɡən səpoʊz tə bi ə haɪ lɔɹɾ ə tiɹ?"

Rand frowned. "The Stone cannot fall until the Dragon wields the sword, but how can he, unless the Stone has already fallen? Is the Dragon supposed to be a High Lord of Tear?"

"nɑt mʌtʃ tʃæns ə ðæt," ðə ɡlimən sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "tɛɹ heɪts ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə paʊɝ ivən mɔɹ ðən æmədɔɹ, ən æmədɔɹ ɪz ðə stʃɹɔŋhoʊld ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt."

"Not much chance of that," the gleeman said dryly. "Tear hates anything to do with the Power even more than Amador, and Amador is the stronghold of the Children of the Light."

"ðɛn haʊ kən ðə pɹɑfəsi bi fʊlfɪld?" ɹænd æskt. "aɪd laɪk ɪt wɛl ɪnʌf ɪf ðə dʒɹæɡən wɑz nɛvɝ ɹibɔɹn, bʌɾ ə pɹɑfəsi ðət kænɑt bi fʊlfɪl dʌzn meɪk mʌtʃ sɛns. ɪt saʊnz laɪk ə stɔɹi mɛn tə meɪk pipəl θɪŋk ðə dʒɹæɡən nɛvɝ wɪl bi ɹibɔɹn. ɪz ðəɾ ɪt?"

"Then how can the Prophecy be fulfilled?" Rand asked. "I'd like it well enough if the Dragon was never reborn, but a prophecy that cannot be fulfilled doesn't make much sense. It sounds like a story meant to make people think the Dragon never will be reborn. Is that it?"

"ju æsk ən ɑfəl lɑɾ ə kwɛstʃənz, bɔɪ," tɑm sɛd. "ə pɹɑfəsi ðət wɑz izəli fʊlfɪld wəd nɑt bi wɝθ mʌtʃ, naʊ wəɾ ɪt?" sʌɾənli hɪz vɔɪs bɹaɪɾənd. "wɛl, wɝ hɪɹ. wɛɹɛvɝ hɪɹ ɪz."

"You ask an awful lot of questions, boy," Thom said. "A prophecy that was easily fulfilled would not be worth much, now would it?" Suddenly his voice brightened. "Well, we're here. Wherever here is."

læn hæd stɑp baɪ ə sɛkʃən ə hɛd-haɪ wʊɾən fɛns ðət lʊk noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ ðeɪ hæd pæst. hi wɑz wɝkɪŋ ðə bleɪɾ ə hɪz dæɡɝ bɪtwin tu ʌv ðə bɔɹdz. əbɹʌpli hi ɡeɪv ə ɡɹʌn ə sæɾəsfækʃən, pʊld, ən ə lɛŋθ ə ðə fɛns swʌŋ aʊt laɪk ə ɡeɪt. ɪn fækt ɪt wɑz ə ɡeɪt, ɹænd sɔ, ðoʊ wʌn mɛn tə bi oʊpən oʊnli fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ðə mɛɾəl lætʃ ðət læn hæd lɪftəd wɪð ɪz dæɡɝ ʃoʊd ðæt.

Lan had stopped by a section of head-high wooden fence that looked no different from any other they had passed. He was working the blade of his dagger between two of the boards. Abruptly he gave a grunt of satisfaction, pulled, and a length of the fence swung out like a gate. In fact it was a gate, Rand saw, though one meant to be opened only from the other side. The metal latch that Lan had lifted with his dagger showed that.

mɔɪɹeɪn wɛn θɹu ɪmiɾiətli, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɑldib bɪhaɪn hɝ. læn moʊʃən ði ʌðɝz tə fɑloʊ, ən bɹɔɾ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ, kloʊzɪŋ ðə ɡeɪt bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Moiraine went through immediately, drawing Aldieb behind her. Lan motioned the others to follow, and brought up the rear, closing the gate behind him.

ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə fɛns ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ ʌv ən ɪn. ə laʊd bʌsəl ən klæɾɝ keɪm fɹəm ðə bɪldɪŋz kɪtʃən, bʌt wʌt stʃɹʌk ɪm wɑz ɪts saɪz: ɪt kʌvɝd mɔɹ ðən twaɪs əz mʌtʃ ɡɹaʊn əz ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn, ən wɑz fɔɹ stɔɹiz haɪ bɪsaɪdz. wɛl oʊvɝ hæf ðə wɪndoʊz wɝ əɡloʊ ɪn ðə dipənɪŋ twaɪlaɪt. hi wʌndɝɾ ət ðɪs sɪɾi, ðət kəɾ əv soʊ mɛni stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɪn ɪt.

On the other side of the fence Rand found himself in the stableyard of an inn. A loud bustle and clatter came from the building's kitchen, but what struck him was its size: it covered more than twice as much ground as the Winespring Inn, and was four stories high besides. Well over half the windows were aglow in the deepening twilight. He wondered at this city, that could have so many strangers in it.

noʊ sunɝ hæd ðeɪ kʌm wɛl ɪndə ðə steɪbliɑɹd ðən θɹi mɛn ɪn dɝɾi kænvəs eɪpɹənz əpɪɹɾ ət ðə hjudʒ steɪbəlz bɹɔd, ɑɹtʃt dɔɹz. wʌn, ə wɪɹi fɛloʊ ən ði oʊnli wʌn wɪθaʊɾ ə mənʊɹ fɔɹk ɪn ɪz hænz, keɪm fɔɹwɝd weɪvɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz.

No sooner had they come well into the stableyard than three men in dirty canvas aprons appeared at the huge stable's broad, arched doors. One, a wiry fellow and the only one without a manure fork in his hands, came forward waving his arms.

"hɪɹ! hɪɹ! jə kæn kʌm ɪn ðət weɪ! jəl əv tə ɡoʊ ɹaʊn ðə fɹʌnt!"

"Here! Here! You can't come in that way! You'll have to go round the front!"

lænz hænd wɛn tə hɪz pɝs əɡɛn, bʌɾ ivən əz ɪt dɪɾ ənʌðɝ mæn, əz bɪɡ ɝaʊn əz mæstɝ ælvɪɹ, keɪm hɝiɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɪn. pʌfs ə hɛɹ stʌk aʊɾ əbʌv ɪz ɪɹz, ən ɪz spɑɹklɪŋ waɪɾ eɪpɹən wɑz əz ɡʊɾ əz ə saɪn pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ ɪm ði ɪnkipɝ.

Lan's hand went to his purse again, but even as it did another man, as big around as Master al'Vere, came hurrying out of the inn. Puffs of hair stuck out above his ears, and his sparkling white apron was as good as a sign proclaiming him the innkeeper.

"ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt, mʌtʃ," ðə nukʌmɝ sɛd. "ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt. ðiz foʊk ɑɹ ɪkspɛktəd ɡɛsts. teɪk kɛɹ ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, naʊ. ɡʊd kɛɹ."

"It's all right, Mutch," the newcomer said. "It's all right. These folk are expected guests. Take care of their horses, now. Good care."

mʌtʃ sʌlənli nʌkəld ɪz fɔɹhɛd, ðən moʊʃən ɪz tu kəmpænjənz tə kʌm hɛlp. ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz hɝidli ɡɑt ðɛɹ sæɾəlbæɡz ən blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊlz daʊn waɪl ði ɪnkipɝ tɝn tə mɔɪɹeɪn. hi ɡeɪv əɹ ə dip baʊ, ən spoʊk wɪð ə dʒɛnjəwən smaɪl.

Mutch sullenly knuckled his forehead, then motioned his two companions to come help. Rand and the others hurriedly got their saddlebags and blanketrolls down while the innkeeper turned to Moiraine. He gave her a deep bow, and spoke with a genuine smile.

"wɛlkəm, mɪstʃɹəs æliz. wɛlkəm. ɪts ɡʊd tə bi siɪŋ ju, jə ən mæstɝ ænʒɹə, boʊθ. vɛɹi ɡʊd. jəɹ faɪn kɑnvɝseɪʃən əz bɪn mɪst. jɛs, ɪt hæz. aɪ mʌst seɪ aɪ wɝid, jə ɡoʊɪŋ daʊnkaʊntʃɹi ən ɔl. wɛl, aɪ min, əɾ ə taɪm laɪk ðɪs, wɪð ðə wɛðɝ ɔl kɹeɪzi ən wʊlvz haʊlɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðə wɔlz ɪn ðə naɪt." əbɹʌpli hi slæp boʊθ hænz əɡɛnst ɪz ɹaʊn bɛli ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "hɪɹ aɪ ɡoʊ ɑn laɪk ðɪs, tʃæɾɝɪŋ əweɪ, ɪnstɛɾ ə teɪkɪŋ jə ɪnsaɪd. kʌm. kʌm. hɑt milz ən wɔɹm bɛdz, ðæts wʌt jəl bi wɑntɪŋ. ən ðə bɛst ɪn bɛɹlən ɑɹ ɹaɪt hɪɹ. ðə vɛɹi bɛst."

"Welcome, Mistress Alys. Welcome. It's good to be seeing you, you and Master Andra, both. Very good. Your fine conversation has been missed. Yes, it has. I must say I worried, you going downcountry and all. Well, I mean, at a time like this, with the weather all crazy and wolves howling right up to the walls in the night." Abruptly he slapped both hands against his round belly and shook his head. "Here I go on like this, chattering away, instead of taking you inside. Come. Come. Hot meals and warm beds, that's what you'll be wanting. And the best in Baerlon are right here. The very best."

"æn hɑt bæθs, tu, aɪ tʃɹʌst, mæstɝ fɪtʃ?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, ən ɛɡwin ɛkoʊɾ əɹ fɝvənli. "oʊ, jɛs."

"And hot baths, too, I trust, Master Fitch?" Moiraine said, and Egwene echoed her fervently. "Oh, yes."

"bæθz?" ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd. "waɪ, dʒʌs ðə bɛst ən ðə hɑɾəst ɪn bɛɹlən. kʌm. wɛlkəm tə ðə stæɡ ən laɪən. wɛlkəm tə bɛɹlən."

"Baths?" the innkeeper said. "Why, just the best and the hottest in Baerlon. Come. Welcome to the Stag and Lion. Welcome to Baerlon."


tʃæptɝ fɔɹtin


CHAPTER 14

ðə stæɡ ən laɪən


The Stag and Lion

ɪnsaɪd, ði ɪn wɑz ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz bɪzi əz ðə saʊnz kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ɪt hæɾ ɪndəkeɪɾəd ən mɔɹ. ðə pɑɹɾi fɹəm ɛmənz fil fɑloʊd mæstɝ fɪtʃ θɹu ðə bæk dɔɹ, sun wivɪŋ ɝaʊn ən bɪtwin ə kɑnstən stʃɹim ə mɛn ən wɪmən ɪn lɔŋ eɪpɹənz, plæɾɝz ə fuɾ ən tʃɹeɪz ə dʒɹɪŋk hɛl haɪ. ðə bɛɹɝz mɝmɝd kwɪk əpɑlədʒiz wən ðeɪ ɡɑɾ ɪn ɛniwʌnz weɪ, bʌt ðeɪ nɛvɝ sloʊd baɪ ə stɛp. wʌn ə ðə mɛn tʊk hɝiɾ ɔɹɾɝz fɹəm mæstɝ fɪtʃ ən dɪsəpɪɹɾ əɾ ə ɹʌn.

Inside, the inn was every bit as busy as the sounds coming from it had indicated and more. The party from Emond's Field followed Master Fitch through the back door, soon weaving around and between a constant stream of men and women in long aprons, platters of food and trays of drink held high. The bearers murmured quick apologies when they got in anyone's way, but they never slowed by a step. One of the men took hurried orders from Master Fitch and disappeared at a run.

"ði ɪn ɪz nɪɹ fʊl, aɪm əfɹeɪd," ði ɪnkipɝ toʊl mɔɪɹeɪn. "ɔlmoʊs tə ðə ɹæftɝz. ɛvɹi ɪn ɪn ðə taʊn ɪz ðə seɪm. wɪð ðə wɪntɝ wi dʒʌs hæd . . . wɛl, əz sun əz ɪt klɪɹɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə ɡɛt daʊn aʊɾ ə ðə maʊntənz wi wɝ ɪnəndeɪɾɪd - jɛs, ðæts ðə wɝd - ɪnəndeɪɾɪd baɪ mɛn fɹəm ðə maɪnz ən smɛltɝz, ɔl tɛlɪŋ ðə moʊs hɔɹəbəl teɪlz. wʊlvz, ən wɝs. ðə kaɪndə teɪlz mɛn tɛl wən ðeɪv bɪn kupt ʌp ɔl wɪntɝ. aɪ kæn θɪŋk ðɛɹz ɛniwʌn lɛft ʌp ðəɹ əɾ ɔl, wɪv ðət mɛni hɪɹ. bʌt nɛvɝ fɪɹ. θɪŋz meɪ bi ə lɪɾəl kɹaʊɾəd, bʌɾ əl də maɪ bɛs baɪ jə ən mæstɝ ænʒɹə. ən jəɹ fɹɛnz, tu, ʌv kɔɹs." hi ɡlæns kjʊɹiəsli wʌns əɹ twaɪs ət ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz; ɪksɛp fəɹ tɑm ðɛɹ kloʊðz neɪmd əm kʌntʃɹi foʊk, ən tɑmz ɡlimənz kloʊk meɪɾ ɪm ə stʃɹeɪnʒ tʃɹævlɪŋ kəmpænjən əz wɛl fəɹ "mɪstʃɹəs æliz" ən "mæstɝ ænʒɹə." "aɪ wɪl də maɪ bɛst, jə meɪ ɹɛst əʃʊɹd."

"The inn is near full, I'm afraid," the innkeeper told Moiraine. "Almost to the rafters. Every inn in the town is the same. With the winter we just had . . . well, as soon as it cleared enough for them to get down out of the mountains we were inundated - yes, that's the word - inundated by men from the mines and smelters, all telling the most horrible tales. Wolves, and worse. The kind of tales men tell when they've been cooped up all winter. I can't think there's anyone left up there at all, we have that many here. But never fear. Things may be a little crowded, but I'll do my best by you and Master Andra. And your friends, too, of course." He glanced curiously once or twice at Rand and the others; except for Thom their clothes named them country folk, and Thom's gleeman's cloak made him a strange traveling companion as well for "Mistress Alys" and "Master Andra." "I will do my best, you may rest assured."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə bʌsəl ɝaʊn əm ən tʃɹaɪd tə əvɔɪd biɪŋ stɛpt ɑn, ðoʊ nʌn ə ðə hɛlp ɹɪli sim tə bi ɪn ɛni deɪnʒɝ ə ðæt. hi kɛp θɪŋkɪŋ ə haʊ mæstɝ ælvɪɹ ən ɪz waɪf tɛndəd ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn wɪð səmtaɪmz ə lɪɾəl əsɪstəns fɹəm ðɛɹ dɔɾɝz.

Rand stared at the bustle around them and tried to avoid being stepped on, though none of the help really seemed to be in any danger of that. He kept thinking of how Master al'Vere and his wife tended the Winespring Inn with sometimes a little assistance from their daughters.

mæt ən pɛɹɪn kɹeɪn ðɛɹ nɛks ɪn ɪntʃɹəs təwɔɹd ðə kɑmən ɹum, fɹəm wɪtʃ ɹoʊld ə weɪv ə læftɝ ən sɪŋɪŋ ən dʒoʊviəl ʃaʊɾɪŋ wɛnɛvɝ ðə waɪd dɔɹ ət ði ɛn ə ðə hɔl swʌŋ oʊpən. mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt faɪndɪŋ aʊt ðə nuz, ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡɹɪmli dɪsəpɪɹd θɹu ðət swɪŋɪŋ dɔɹ, swɑloʊd baɪ ə weɪv ə mɛɹəmənt.

Mat and Perrin craned their necks in interest toward the common room, from which rolled a wave of laughter and singing and jovial shouting whenever the wide door at the end of the hall swung open. Muttering about finding out the news, the Warder grimly disappeared through that swinging door, swallowed by a wave of merriment.

ɹænd wɑntəd tə fɑloʊ hɪm, bʌɾ i wɑntəɾ ə bæθ ivən mɔɹ. hi cʊɾə dʌn wɪð pipəl ən læfɪŋ ɹaɪt ðɛn, bʌt ðə kɑmən ɹum wəɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾ ɪz pɹɛzəns mɔɹ wən i wɑz klin. mæt ən pɛɹɪn əpɛɹənli fɛl ðə seɪm; mæt wɑz skɹætʃɪŋ sɝəptɪʃəsli.

Rand wanted to follow him, but he wanted a bath even more. He could have done with people and laughing right then, but the common room would appreciate his presence more when he was clean. Mat and Perrin apparently felt the same; Mat was scratching surreptitiously.

"mæstɝ fɪtʃ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "aɪ ʌndɝstæn ðəɹ ɑɹ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ ɪn bɛɹlən. ɪz ðəɹ laɪkli tə bi tʃɹʌbəl?"

"Master Fitch," Moiraine said, "I understand there are Children of the Light in Baerlon. Is there likely to be trouble?"

"oʊ, nɛvɝ jə wɝi əbaʊt ðɛm, mɪstʃɹəs æliz. ðəɹ ʌp tə ðɛɹ juʒəwəl tʃɹɪks. kleɪm ðɛɹz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə taʊn." mɔɪɹeɪn lɪftəɾ ən aɪbɹaʊ, ən ði ɪnkipɝ spɹɛɾ ɪz plʌmp hænz. "doʊn jə wɝi. ðeɪv tʃɹaɪɾ ɪt bɪfɔɹ. ðɛɹz noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn bɛɹlən, ən ðə ɡʌvɝnɝ noʊz ɪt. ðə waɪtkloʊks θɪŋk ɪf ðeɪ ʃoʊ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, səm wʊmən ðeɪ kleɪm ɪz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, pipəl wɪl lɛɾ ɔl ə ðɛm ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz. wɛl, aɪ səpoʊz səm wʊd. səm wʊd. bʌt moʊs pipəl noʊ wʌt ðə waɪtkloʊks ɑɹ ʌp tə, ən ðeɪ səpɔɹt ðə ɡʌvɝnɝ. noʊ wʌn wɑns tə si səm hɑɹmləs oʊld wʊmən hɝt dʒʌst soʊ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən kən əv ən ɪkskjus fəɹ wɪpɪŋ ʌp ə fɹɛnzi."

"Oh, never you worry about them, Mistress Alys. They're up to their usual tricks. Claim there's an Aes Sedai in the town." Moiraine lifted an eyebrow, and the innkeeper spread his plump hands. "Don't you worry. They've tried it before. There's no Aes Sedai in Baerlon, and the Governor knows it. The Whitecloaks think if they show an Aes Sedai, some woman they claim is an Aes Sedai, people will let all of them inside the walls. Well, I suppose some would. Some would. But most people know what the Whitecloaks are up to, and they support the Governor. No one wants to see some harmless old woman hurt just so the Children can have an excuse for whipping up a frenzy."

"aɪ æm ɡlæd tə hɪɹ ɪt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd dʒɹaɪli. ʃi pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ði ɪnkipɝz ɑɹm. "ɪz mɪn stɪl hɪɹ? aɪ wɪʃ tə tɔk wɪð hɝ, ɪf ʃi ɪz."

"I am glad to hear it," Moiraine said dryly. She put a hand on the innkeeper's arm. "Is Min still here? I wish to talk with her, if she is."

mæstɝ fɪtʃəz ænsɝ wɑz lɔs tə ɹænd ɪn ði ɝaɪvəl ʌv ətɛndəns tə liɾ əm tə ðə bæθs. mɔɪɹeɪn ən ɛɡwin vænɪʃt bɪhaɪn ə plʌmp wʊmən wɪð ə ɹɛɾi smaɪl ən ən ɑɹmloʊɾ ə taʊəlz. ðə ɡlimən ən ɹænd ən ɪz fɹɛnz faʊn ðɛmsɛlvz fɑloʊɪŋ ə slaɪt, dɑɹk-hɛɹd fɛloʊ, æɹə baɪ neɪm.

Master Fitch's answer was lost to Rand in the arrival of attendants to lead them to the baths. Moiraine and Egwene vanished behind a plump woman with a ready smile and an armload of towels. The gleeman and Rand and his friends found themselves following a slight, dark-haired fellow, Ara by name.

ɹænd tʃɹaɪɾ æskɪŋ æɹə əbaʊt bɛɹlən, bʌt ðə mæn bɛɹli sɛd tu wɝdz təɡɛðɝ ɪksɛp tə seɪ ɹænd hæɾ ə fʌni æksɛnt, ən ðən ðə fɝst saɪɾ ə ðə bæθ tʃeɪmbɝ dʒɹoʊv ɔl θɔts ə tɔk ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ɹændz hɛd. ə dʌzən tɔl, kɑpɝ bæθtʌbz sæɾ ɪn ə sɝkəl ɑn ðə taɪl flɔɹ, wɪtʃ sləp daʊn slaɪtli tə ə dʒɹeɪn ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə bɪɡ stoʊn-wɔld ɹum. ə θɪk taʊəl, nitli foʊldəd, ən ə lɑɹdʒ keɪk ə jɛloʊ soʊp sæɾ ɑn ə stul bɪhaɪn itʃ tʌb, ən bɪɡ blæk aɪɝn kɔlʒɹənz ʌv wɔɾɝ stʊd hiɾɪŋ oʊvɝ faɪɝz əlɔŋ wʌn wɔl. ɑn ði ɑpəzət wɔl lɔɡz bleɪzɪŋ ɪn ə dip faɪɝpleɪs æɾəd tə ðə dʒɛnɝəl wɔɹmθ.

Rand tried asking Ara about Baerlon, but the man barely said two words together except to say Rand had a funny accent, and then the first sight of the bath chamber drove all thoughts of talk right out of Rand's head. A dozen tall, copper bathtubs sat in a circle on the tiled floor, which sloped down slightly to a drain in the center of the big stone-walled room. A thick towel, neatly folded, and a large cake of yellow soap sat on a stool behind each tub, and big black iron cauldrons of water stood heating over fires along one wall. On the opposite wall logs blazing in a deep fireplace added to the general warmth.

"ɔlmoʊst əz ɡʊɾ əz ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn bæk hoʊm," pɛɹɪn sɛd lɔɪəli, ɪf nɑɾ ɪɡzækli wɪð ə ɡɹeɪɾ ətɛnʃən tə tʃɹuθ.

"Almost as good as the Winespring Inn back home," Perrin said loyally, if not exactly with a great attention to truth.

tɑm bɑɹkt ə læf, ən mæt snɪɡɝd, "saʊnz laɪk wi bɹɔɾ ə kɑplɪn wɪð əs ən dɪdnt noʊ ɪt."

Thom barked a laugh, and Mat sniggered, "Sounds like we brought a Coplin with us and didn't know it."

ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd aʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk ən stʃɹɪpt ɔf ɪz kloʊðz waɪl æɹə fɪl fɔɹ ə ðə kɑpɝ tʌbz. nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz wɑz fɑɹ bɪhaɪn ɹænd ɪn tʃuzɪŋ ə bæθtəb. wʌns ðɛɹ kloʊðz wɝ ɔl ɪn paɪlz ɑn ðə stulz, æɹə bɹɔɾ əm itʃ ə lɑɹdʒ bʌkəɾ ə hɑt wɔɾɝ ən ə dɪpɝ. ðət dʌn, hi sæɾ ɑn ə stul baɪ ðə dɔɹ, linɪŋ bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz kɹɔst, əpɛɹənli lɔst ɪn ɪz oʊn θɔts.

Rand shrugged out of his cloak and stripped off his clothes while Ara filled four of the copper tubs. None of the others was far behind Rand in choosing a bathtub. Once their clothes were all in piles on the stools, Ara brought them each a large bucket of hot water and a dipper. That done, he sat on a stool by the door, leaning back against the wall with his arms crossed, apparently lost in his own thoughts.

ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv kɑnvɝseɪʃən waɪl ðeɪ læðɝɾ ən sluaɪst əweɪ ə wik ʌv ɡɹaɪm wɪð dɪpɝz ə stimɪŋ wɔɾɝ. ðən ɪt wɑz ɪndə ðə tʌbz fəɹ ə lɔŋ soʊk; æɹə hæd meɪd ðə wɔɾɝ hɑɾ ɪnʌf ðət sɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn wɑz ə sloʊ pɹɑsɛs ə ləɡʒɝiən saɪz. ði ɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹum wɛn fɹəm wɔɹm tə mɪsti ən hɑt. fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saʊn ɪksɛp ði əkeɪʒənəl lɔŋ, ɹɪlæksɪŋ ɛkshəleɪʃən əz taɪt mʌsəlz lusən ən ə tʃɪl ðət ðeɪ hæd kʌm tə θɪŋk pɝmənənt wɑz dʒɹɔn aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ boʊnz.

There was little in the way of conversation while they lathered and sluiced away a week of grime with dippers of steaming water. Then it was into the tubs for a long soak; Ara had made the water hot enough that settling in was a slow process of luxuriant sighs. The air in the room went from warm to misty and hot. For a long time there was no sound except the occasional long, relaxing exhalation as tight muscles loosened and a chill that they had come to think permanent was drawn out of their bones.

"niɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls?" æɹə æsk sʌɾənli. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ ɹum tə tɔk əbaʊt pipəlz æksɛns; hi ən mæstɝ fɪtʃ boʊθ saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ə maʊθ fʊl ə mʌʃ. "mɔɹ taʊəlz? mɔɹ hɑt wɔɾɝ?"

"Need anything else?" Ara asked suddenly. He did not have much room to talk about people's accents; he and Master Fitch both sounded as if they had a mouth full of mush. "More towels? More hot water?"

"nʌθɪŋ," tɑm sɛɾ ɪn ɪz ɹɪvɝbɝən vɔɪs. aɪz kloʊzd, hi ɡeɪv ən ɪndələnt weɪv ə hɪz hænd. "ɡoʊ ən ɛndʒɔɪ ði ivnɪŋ. əɾ ə leɪɾɝ taɪm əl si ðət jə ɹəsiv mɔɹ ðən æɾəkwət ɹɛkəmpɛns fəɹ jəɹ sɝvəsəz." hi sɛɾəld loʊɝ ɪn ðə tʌb, əntɪl ðə wɔɾɝ kʌvɝɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌɾ ɪz aɪz ən noʊz.

"Nothing," Thom said in his reverberant voice. Eyes closed, he gave an indolent wave of his hand. "Go and enjoy the evening. At a later time I will see that you receive more than adequate recompense for your services." He settled lower in the tub, until the water covered everything but his eyes and nose.

æɹəz aɪz wɛn tə ðə stulz bɪhaɪn ðə tʌbz, wɛɹ ðɛɹ kloʊðz ən bɪlɔŋɪŋz wɝ stækt. hi ɡlænst ət ðə baʊ, bʌt lɪŋɡɝd lɔŋɡəst oʊvɝ ɹændz sɔɹɾ ən pɛɹɪnz æks. "ɪz ðəɹ tʃɹʌbəl daʊnkaʊntʃɹi, tu?" hi sɛɾ əbɹʌpli. "ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝz, əɹ wʌtɛvɝ jə kɔl ɪt?"

Ara's eyes went to the stools behind the tubs, where their clothes and belongings were stacked. He glanced at the bow, but lingered longest over Rand's sword and Perrin's axe. "Is there trouble downcountry, too?" he said abruptly. "In the Rivers, or whatever you call it?"

"ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," mæt sɛd, pɹənaʊnsɪŋ itʃ sɛpɹət wɝd dɪstɪŋkli. "ɪts ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. əz fəɹ tʃɹʌbəl, waɪ - "

"The Two Rivers," Mat said, pronouncing each separate word distinctly. "It's the Two Rivers. As for trouble, why - "

"wʌt dʒju min, tu?" ɹænd æskt. "ɪz ðəɹ səm kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl hɪɹ?"

"What do you mean, too?" Rand asked. "Is there some kind of trouble here?"

pɛɹɪn, ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ɪz soʊk, mɝmɝd, "ɡʊd! ɡʊd!" tɑm ɹeɪz hɪmsɛlf bæk ʌp ə lɪɾəl, ən oʊpən ɪz aɪz.

Perrin, enjoying his soak, murmured, "Good! Good!" Thom raised himself back up a little, and opened his eyes.

"hɪɹ?" æɹə snɔɹɾɪd. "tʃɹʌbəl? maɪnɝz hævɪŋ fɪstfaɪts ɪn ðə stʃɹits ɪn ðə dɑɹk ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ɑɹən tʃɹʌbəl. ɔɹ. . . ." hi stɑpt ən aɪɾ əm ə moʊmənt. "aɪ mɛn ðə ɡildən kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "noʊ, aɪ səpoʊz nɑt. nʌθɪŋ bʌt ʃip daʊnkaʊntʃɹi, ɪz ðɛɹ? noʊ əfɛns. aɪ dʒʌs mɛn ɪts kwaɪət daʊn ðɛɹ. stɪl, ɪts bɪn ə stʃɹeɪnʒ wɪntɝ. stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz ɪn ðə maʊntənz. aɪ hɝd ði ʌðɝ deɪ ðəɹ wɝ tʃɹɑləks ʌp ɪn sɑldɑiə. bʌt ðæts ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz ðɛn, ɪzən ɪt?" hi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ɪz maʊθ stɪl oʊpən, ðən snæpt ɪt ʃʌt, əpɪɹɪŋ sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ i hæd sɛd soʊ mʌtʃ.

"Here?" Ara snorted. "Trouble? Miners having fistfights in the streets in the dark of the morning aren't trouble. Or. . . ." He stopped and eyed them a moment. "I meant the Ghealdan kind of trouble," he said finally. "No, I suppose not. Nothing but sheep downcountry, is there? No offense. I just meant it's quiet down there. Still, it's been a strange winter. Strange things in the mountains. I heard the other day there were Trollocs up in Saldaea. But that's the Borderlands then, isn't it?" He finished with his mouth still open, then snapped it shut, appearing surprised that he had said so much.

ɹænd hæd tɛnst ət ðə wɝd tʃɹɑləks, ən tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ ɪt baɪ ɹɪŋɪŋ ɪz wɑʃklɔθ aʊɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. əz ðə fɛloʊ wɛn ɑn i ɹɪlækst, bʌt nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt.

Rand had tensed at the word Trollocs, and tried to hide it by wringing his washcloth out over his head. As the fellow went on he relaxed, but not everyone kept his mouth shut.

"tʃɹɑləks?" mæt tʃɔɹɾəld. ɹænd splæʃt wɔɾɝ ət hɪm, bʌt mæt dʒʌst waɪpt ɪɾ ɔf ə hɪz feɪs wɪð ə ɡɹɪn. "ju dʒʌs lemi tɛl jə əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks."

"Trollocs?" Mat chortled. Rand splashed water at him, but Mat just wiped it off of his face with a grin. "You just let me tell you about Trollocs."

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm sɪns klaɪmɪŋ ɪndə hɪz tʌb, tɑm spoʊk. "waɪ doʊn jə nɑt? aɪm ə lɪɾəl taɪɝɾ ə hɪɹɪŋ maɪ oʊn stɔɹiz bæk fɹəm ju."

For the first time since climbing into his tub, Thom spoke. "Why don't you not? I am a little tired of hearing my own stories back from you."

"hiz ə ɡlimən," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən æɹə ɡeɪv ɪm ə skɔɹnfəl lʊk.

"He's a gleeman," Perrin said, and Ara gave him a scornful look.

"aɪ sɔ ðə kloʊk. jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə pɝfɔɹm?"

"I saw the cloak. You going to perform?"

"dʒʌst ə mɪnət," mæt pɹətɛstəd. "wʌts ðɪs əbaʊt mi tɛlɪŋ tɑmz stɔɹiz? ɑɹ jə ɔl - ?"

"Just a minute," Mat protested. "What's this about me telling Thom's stories? Are you all - ?"

"ju dʒʌs doʊn tɛl əm əz wɛl əz tɑm," ɹænd kʌɾ ɪm ɔf heɪstəli, ən pɛɹɪn hɑpt ɪn. "ju kip æɾɪŋ ɪn θɪŋz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ɪt bɛɾɝ, ən ðeɪ nɛvɝ du."

"You just don't tell them as well as Thom," Rand cut him off hastily, and Perrin hopped in. "You keep adding in things, trying to make it better, and they never do."

"æn jə ɡɛɾ ɪɾ ɔl mɪkst ʌp, tu," ɹænd æɾəd. "bɛs liv ɪt tə tɑm."

"And you get it all mixed up, too," Rand added. "Best leave it to Thom."

ðeɪ wɝ ɔl tɔkɪŋ soʊ fæs ðəɾ æɹə stɛɹɾ əɾ əm wɪð ɪz maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən. mæt stɛɹd, tu, əz ɪf ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls hæd sʌɾənli ɡɔn kɹeɪzi. ɹænd wʌndɝd haʊ tə ʃʌɾ ɪm ʌp ʃɔɹɾ ə dʒʌmpɪŋ ɑn hɪm.

They were all talking so fast that Ara stared at them with his mouth hanging open. Mat stared, too, as if everyone else had suddenly gone crazy. Rand wondered how to shut him up short of jumping on him.

ðə dɔɹ bæŋd oʊpən tə ədmɪt læn, bɹaʊn kloʊk slʌŋ oʊvɝ wʌn ʃoʊldɝ, əlɔŋ wɪð ə ɡʌst ə kulɝ ɛɹ ðət moʊməntɛɹəli θɪn ðə mɪst.

The door banged open to admit Lan, brown cloak slung over one shoulder, along with a gust of cooler air that momentarily thinned the mist.

"wɛl," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz, "ðɪs ɪz wʌɾ aɪ hæv bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ." æɹə pɪkt ʌp ə bʌkət, bʌt læn weɪvd ɪɾ əweɪ. "noʊ, əl si tə maɪsɛlf." dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪz kloʊk ɑn wʌn ə ðə stulz, hi bʌndəl ðə bæθ ətɛndən aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, dɪspaɪt ðə fɛloʊz pɹoʊɾɛsts, ən ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ fɝmli æftɝ hɪm. hi weɪɾəd ðəɹ ə moʊmənt, hɪz hɛd kɑk tə lɪsən, ən wən i tɝn bæk tə ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm ɪz vɔɪs wɑz stoʊni ən ɪz aɪz stæbd ət mæt. "ɪts ə ɡʊd θɪŋ aɪ ɡɑt bæk wən aɪ dɪd, fɑɹmbɔɪ. doʊn jə lɪsən tə wʌt jə ɑɹ toʊld?"

"Well," the Warder said, rubbing his hands, "this is what I have been waiting for." Ara picked up a bucket, but Lan waved it away. "No, I will see to myself." Dropping his cloak on one of the stools, he bundled the bath attendant out of the room, despite the fellow's protests, and shut the door firmly after him. He waited there a moment, his head cocked to listen, and when he turned back to the rest of them his voice was stony and his eyes stabbed at Mat. "It's a good thing I got back when I did, farmboy. Don't you listen to what you are told?"

"aɪ dɪdn də ɛniθɪŋ," mæt pɹətɛstəd. "aɪ wɑz dʒʌs gɑnə tɛl ɪm əbaʊt ðə tʃɹɑləks, nɑɾ əbaʊt. . . ." hi stɑpt, ən lin bæk fɹəm ðə wɔɹɾɝz aɪz, flæɾ əɡɛns ðə bæk ə ðə tʌb.

"I didn't do anything," Mat protested. "I was just going to tell him about the Trollocs, not about. . . ." He stopped, and leaned back from the Warder's eyes, flat against the back of the tub.

"doʊn tɔk əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks," læn sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "doʊn ivən θɪŋk əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks." wɪð ən æŋɡɹi snɔɹɾ i bɪɡæn fɪlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ə bæθtəb. "blʌɾ ən æʃəz, jə hæd bɛɾɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ðə dɑɹk wʌn əz aɪz ən ɪɹz wɛɹ jə list ɪkspɛkt. ən ɪf ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt hɝd tʃɹɑləks wɝ æftɝ ju, ðeɪd bi bɝnɪŋ tə ɡɛt ðɛɹ hænz ɑn ju. tə ðɛm, ɪt wəd bi əz mʌtʃ əz neɪmɪŋ jə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. ɪt meɪ nɑt bi wʌt jə ɑɹ juz tə, bʌɾ əntɪl wi ɡɛt wɛɹ wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ, kip jəɹ tʃɹʌst smɔl ənlɛs mɪstʃɹəs æliz əɹ aɪ tɛl jə dɪfɹənli." əɾ ɪz ɛmfəsəs ɑn ðə neɪm mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz juzɪŋ, mæt flɪntʃt.

"Don't talk about Trollocs," Lan said grimly. "Don't even think about Trollocs." With an angry snort he began filling himself a bathtub. "Blood and ashes, you had better remember, the Dark One has eyes and ears where you least expect. And if the Children of the Light heard Trollocs were after you, they'd be burning to get their hands on you. To them, it would be as much as naming you Darkfriend. It may not be what you are used to, but until we get where we are going, keep your trust small unless Mistress Alys or I tell you differently." At his emphasis on the name Moiraine was using, Mat flinched.

"ðɛɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ðət fɛloʊ wʊdn tɛl ʌs," ɹænd sɛd. "sʌmθɪŋ i θɔt wɑz tʃɹʌbəl, bʌɾ i wʊdn seɪ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz."

"There was something that fellow wouldn't tell us," Rand said. "Something he thought was trouble, but he wouldn't say what it was."

"pɹɑbli ðə tʃɪlʒɹən," læn sɛd, pɔɹɪŋ mɔɹ hɑt wɔɾɝ ɪndə hɪz tʌb. "moʊs pipəl kənsɪɾɝ əm tʃɹʌbəl. səm doʊnt, ðoʊ, ən i dɪd nɑt noʊ jə wɛl ɪnʌf tə ɹɪsk ɪt. jə maɪɾ əv ɡɔn ɹʌnɪŋ tə ðə waɪtkloʊks, fəɹ ɔl i nu."

"Probably the Children," Lan said, pouring more hot water into his tub. "Most people consider them trouble. Some don't, though, and he did not know you well enough to risk it. You might have gone running to the Whitecloaks, for all he knew."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd; ðɪs pleɪs ɔlɹɛɾi saʊndəd wɝs ðən tɛɹən fɛɹi kəd pɑsəbli bi.

Rand shook his head; this place already sounded worse than Taren Ferry could possibly be.

"hi sɛd ðəɹ wɝ tʃɹɑləks ɪn . . . ɪn sɑldɑiə, wɑzn ɪt?" pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"He said there were Trollocs in . . . in Saldaea, wasn't it?" Perrin said.

læn hɝld ɪz ɛmpti bʌkət tə ðə flɔɹ wɪð ə kɹæʃ. "ju wɪl tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt, woʊn ju? ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, blæksmɪθ. dʒʌs jə pʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə fɹʌn ə jəɹ maɪn ðət wi wɑnt noʊ mɔɹ ətɛnʃən ðən maɪs ɪn ə fild. kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ðæt. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑns tə ɡɛt jə ɔl tə tɑɹ vəlɑn əlaɪv, ən əl də ɪɾ ɪf ɪt kən bi dʌn, bʌɾ ɪf jə bɹɪŋ ɛni hɑɹm tə hɝ. . . ."

Lan hurled his empty bucket to the floor with a crash. "You will talk about it, won't you? There are always Trollocs in the Borderlands, blacksmith. Just you put it in the front of your mind that we want no more attention than mice in a field. Concentrate on that. Moiraine wants to get you all to Tar Valon alive, and I will do it if it can be done, but if you bring any harm to her. . . ."

ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛɹ beɪðɪŋ wɑz dʌn ɪn saɪləns, ən dʒɹɛsɪŋ æftɝwɝdz, tu.

The rest of their bathing was done in silence, and dressing afterwards, too.

wən ðeɪ lɛf ðə bæθ tʃeɪmbɝ, mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz stændɪŋ ət ði ɛn ə ðə hɔl wɪð ə slɛndɝ ɡɝl nɑt mʌtʃ tɔlɝ ðən hɝsɛlf. ət list, ɹænd θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ə ɡɝl, ðoʊ hɝ dɑɹk hɛɹ wɑz kʌt ʃɔɹɾ ən ʃi wɔɹ ə mænz ʃɝɾ ən tʃɹaʊzɝz. mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sʌmθɪŋ, ən ðə ɡɝl lʊkt ət ðə mɛn ʃɑɹpli, ðən nɑɾəd tə mɔɪɹeɪn ən hɝiɾ əweɪ.

When they left the bath chamber, Moiraine was standing at the end of the hall with a slender girl not much taller than herself. At least, Rand thought it was a girl, though her dark hair was cut short and she wore a man's shirt and trousers. Moiraine said something, and the girl looked at the men sharply, then nodded to Moiraine and hurried away.

"wɛl, naʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ əz ðeɪ dʒɹu kloʊsɝ, "aɪ æm ʃʊɹ ə bæθ əz ɡɪvən jə ɔl ən æpətaɪt. mæstɝ fɪtʃ əz ɡɪvən əs ə pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ ɹum." ʃi tɔkt ɑn ɪnkɑnsəkwɛntʃəli əz ʃi tɝn tə lid ðə weɪ, əbaʊt ðɛɹ ɹumz ən ðə kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɪn ðə taʊn, ən haʊ ði ɪnkipɝ hoʊp tɑm wəd feɪvɝ ðə kɑmən ɹum wɪð səm mjuzɪk ən ə stɔɹi əɹ tu. ʃi nɛvɝ mɛnʃən ðə ɡɝl, ɪf ɡɝl ɪt hæd bɪn.

"Well, now," Moiraine said as they drew closer, "I am sure a bath has given you all an appetite. Master Fitch has given us a private dining room." She talked on inconsequentially as she turned to lead the way, about their rooms and the crowding in the town, and how the innkeeper hoped Thom would favor the common room with some music and a story or two. She never mentioned the girl, if girl it had been.

ðə pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ ɹum hæɾ ə pɑlɪʃt oʊk teɪbəl wɪð ə dʌzən tʃɛɹz ɝaʊn ɪt, ən ə θɪk ɹʌɡ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. əz ðeɪ ɛntɝd, ɛɡwin, fɹɛʃli ɡlimɪŋ hɛɹ koʊmd aʊɾ ɝaʊn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, tɝn fɹəm wɔɹmɪŋ əɹ hænz ət ðə faɪɝ kɹæklɪŋ ɑn ðə hɑɹθ. ɹænd hæd hæd plɛnti ʌv taɪm fəɹ θɔt dʊɹɪŋ ðə lɔŋ saɪləns ɪn ðə bæθ tʃeɪmbɝ. lænz kɑnstən ædmənɪʃənz nɑt tə tʃɹʌst ɛniwʌn, ən ɪspɛʃli æɹə biɪŋ əfɹeɪd tə tʃɹʌs ðɛm, hæd meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə dʒʌs haʊ əloʊn ðeɪ ɹɪli wɝ. ɪt sim ðeɪ kəd nɑt tʃɹʌst ɛniwʌn bʌt ðɛmsɛlvz, ən i wɑz stɪl nɑt tu ʃʊɹ haʊ fɑɹ ðeɪ kəd tʃɹʌs mɔɪɹeɪn, əɹ læn. dʒʌs ðɛmsɛlvz. ən ɛɡwin wɑz stɪl ɛɡwin. mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ ɪt wʊɾə hæpən tə hɝ ɛniweɪ, ðɪs tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. ʃi hæd noʊ kəntʃɹoʊl oʊvɝ ɪt, ən ðət mɛn ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əɹ fɔlt. ən ʃi wɑz stɪl ɛɡwin.

The private dining room had a polished oak table with a dozen chairs around it, and a thick rug on the floor. As they entered, Egwene, freshly gleaming hair combed out around her shoulders, turned from warming her hands at the fire crackling on the hearth. Rand had had plenty of time for thought during the long silence in the bath chamber. Lan's constant admonitions not to trust anyone, and especially Ara being afraid to trust them, had made him think of just how alone they really were. It seemed they could not trust anyone but themselves, and he was still not too sure how far they could trust Moiraine, or Lan. Just themselves. And Egwene was still Egwene. Moiraine said it would have happened to her anyway, this touching the True Source. She had no control over it, and that meant it was not her fault. And she was still Egwene.

hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə əpɑlədʒaɪz, bʌɾ ɛɡwin stɪfən ən tɝn əɹ bæk bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɡɛɾ ə wɝɾ aʊt. stɛɹɪŋ sʌlənli əɾ əɹ bæk, hi swɑloʊd wʌɾ i hæd bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ. ɔl ɹaɪt, ðɛn. ɪf ʃi wɑns tə bi laɪk ðæt, ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ aɪ kən du.

He opened his mouth to apologize, but Egwene stiffened and turned her back before he could get a word out. Staring sullenly at her back, he swallowed what he had been going to say. All right, then. If she wants to be like that, there's nothing I can do.

mæstɝ fɪtʃ bʌsəld ɪn ðɛn, fɑloʊd baɪ fɔɹ wɪmən ɪn waɪɾ eɪpɹənz əz lɔŋ əz hɪz, wɪð ə plæɾɝ hoʊldɪŋ θɹi ɹoʊs tʃɪkənz ən ʌðɝz bɛɹɪŋ sɪlvɝ, ən pɑɾɝi dɪʃəz, ən kʌvɝd boʊlz. ðə wɪmən bɪɡæn sɛɾɪŋ ðə teɪbəl ɪmiɾiətli, waɪl ði ɪnkipɝ baʊd tə mɔɪɹeɪn.

Master Fitch bustled in then, followed by four women in white aprons as long as his, with a platter holding three roast chickens and others bearing silver, and pottery dishes, and covered bowls. The women began setting the table immediately, while the innkeeper bowed to Moiraine.

"maɪ əpɑlədʒiz, mɪstʃɹəs æliz, fəɹ meɪkɪŋ jə weɪt laɪk ðɪs, bʌt wɪð soʊ mɛni pipəl ɪn ði ɪn, ɪts ə wʌndɝ ɛnibəɾi ɡɛts sɝvd əɾ ɔl. aɪm əfɹeɪd ðə fuɾ ɪzənt wʌɾ ɪt ʃəd bi, iðɝ. dʒʌs ðə tʃɪkənz, ən səm tɝnəps ən hɛnpiz, wɪð ə lɪɾəl tʃiz fəɹ æftɝ. noʊ, ɪt dʒʌst ɪzənt wʌɾ ɪt ʃəd bi. aɪ tʃɹuli də əpɑlədʒaɪz."

"My apologies, Mistress Alys, for making you wait like this, but with so many people in the inn, it's a wonder anybody gets served at all. I am afraid the food isn't what it should be, either. Just the chickens, and some turnips and henpeas, with a little cheese for after. No, it just isn't what it should be. I truly do apologize."

"ə fist." mɔɪɹeɪn smaɪld. "fɔɹ ðiz tʃɹʌbəl taɪmz, ə fist ɪndid, mæstɝ fɪtʃ."

"A feast." Moiraine smiled. "For these troubled times, a feast indeed, Master Fitch."

ði ɪnkipɝ baʊɾ əɡɛn. hɪz wɪspi hɛɹ, stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz əz ɪf i kɑnstənli ɹæn ɪz hænz θɹu ɪt, meɪd ðə baʊ kɑmɪkəl, bʌɾ ɪz ɡɹɪn wɑz soʊ plɛzən ðəɾ ɛniwʌn u læft wəd bi læfɪŋ wɪð hɪm, nɑɾ ət hɪm. "maɪ θæŋks, mɪstʃɹəs æliz. maɪ θæŋks." əz i stʃɹeɪɾənd i fɹaʊn ən waɪpt ən ɪmædʒən bɪɾ ə dʌs fɹəm ðə teɪbəl wɪð ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz eɪpɹən. "ɪɾ ɪzənt wʌɾ aɪ wʊɾə leɪd bɪfɔɹ jə ə jɪɹ əɡoʊ, ʌv kɔɹs. nɑt nɪɹli. ðə wɪntɝ. jɛs. ðə wɪntɝ. maɪ sɛlɝz ɑɹ ɛmptiɪŋ aʊt, ən ðə mɑɹkəɾ ɪz ɔl bʌt bɛɹ. ən u kən bleɪm ðə fɑɹm foʊk? hu? ðɛɹz sɝɾənli noʊ tɛlɪŋ wən ðəl hɑɹvəst ənʌðɝ kɹɑp. noʊ tɛlɪŋ əɾ ɔl. ɪts ðə wʊlvz ɡɛt ðə mʌɾən ən bif ðət ʃəd ɡoʊ ɑn pipəlz teɪbəlz, ænd. . . ."

The innkeeper bowed again. His wispy hair, sticking out in all directions as if he constantly ran his hands through it, made the bow comical, but his grin was so pleasant that anyone who laughed would be laughing with him, not at him. "My thanks, Mistress Alys. My thanks." As he straightened he frowned and wiped an imagined bit of dust from the table with a corner of his apron. "It isn't what I would have laid before you a year ago, of course. Not nearly. The winter. Yes. The winter. My cellars are emptying out, and the market is all but bare. And who can blame the farm folk? Who? There's certainly no telling when they'll harvest another crop. No telling at all. It's the wolves get the mutton and beef that should go on people's tables, and. . . ."

əbɹʌpli hi sim tə ɹilaɪz ðət ðɪs wɑz hɑɹdli ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən tə sɛɾəl ɪz ɡɛsts tə ə kʌmftəɹbəl mil. "haʊ aɪ də ɹʌn ɑn. fʊl ʌv oʊld wɪnd, ðæts mi. oʊld wɪnd. mɑɹi, sɪndə, lɛt ðiz ɡʊd pipəl iɾ ɪn pis." hi meɪd ʃuɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝz ət ðə wɪmən ænd, əz ðeɪ skɝid fɹəm ðə ɹum, swʌŋ bæk tə baʊ tə mɔɪɹeɪn jɛɾ əɡɛn. "aɪ hoʊp jə ɛndʒɔɪ jəɹ mil, mɪstʃɹəs æliz. ɪf ðɛɹz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls jə nid, dʒʌst spik ɪt, ən əl fɛtʃ ɪt. dʒʌs jə spik ɪt. ɪts ə plɛʒɝ sɝvɪŋ jə ən mæstɝ ænʒɹə. ə plɛʒɝ." hi ɡeɪv wʌn mɔɹ dip baʊ ən wɑz ɡɔn, kloʊzɪŋ ðə dɔɹ sɔfli bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Abruptly he seemed to realize that this was hardly the conversation to settle his guests to a comfortable meal. "How I do run on. Full of old wind, that's me. Old wind. Mari, Cinda, let these good people eat in peace." He made shooing gestures at the women and, as they scurried from the room, swung back to bow to Moiraine yet again. "I hope you enjoy your meal, Mistress Alys. If there's anything else you need, just speak it, and I will fetch it. Just you speak it. It is a pleasure serving you and Master Andra. A pleasure." He gave one more deep bow and was gone, closing the door softly behind him.

læn hæd slaʊtʃt əɡɛns ðə wɔl θɹu ɔl ə ðɪs əz ɪf hæf əslip. naʊ hi lɛpt ʌp ən wɑz ət ðə dɔɹ ɪn tu lɔŋ stʃɹaɪdz. pɹɛsɪŋ ən ɪɹ tə ə dɔɹ pænəl, hi lɪsən ɪntɛnli fəɹ ə sloʊ kaʊn ə θɝɾi, ðən snætʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ən stʌk ɪz hɛɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl. "ðeɪɹ ɡɔn," hi sɛɾ ət læst, kloʊzɪŋ ðə dɔɹ. "wi kən tɔk seɪfli."

Lan had slouched against the wall through all of this as if half asleep. Now he leaped up and was at the door in two long strides. Pressing an ear to a door panel, he listened intently for a slow count of thirty, then snatched open the door and stuck his head into the hall. "They're gone," he said at last, closing the door. "We can talk safely."

"aɪ noʊ jə seɪ nɑt tə tʃɹʌst ɛniwʌn," ɛɡwin sɛd, "bʌɾ ɪf jə səspɛk ði ɪnkipɝ, waɪ steɪ hɪɹ?"

"I know you say not to trust anyone," Egwene said, "but if you suspect the innkeeper, why stay here?"

"aɪ səspɛkt ɪm noʊ mɔɹ ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls," læn ɹɪplaɪd. "bʌt ðɛn, əntɪl wi ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn, aɪ səspɛkt ɛvɹiwʌn. ðɛɹ, əl səspɛkt oʊnli hæf."

"I suspect him no more than anyone else," Lan replied. "But then, until we reach Tar Valon, I suspect everyone. There, I'll suspect only half."

ɹænd stɑɹɾəd tə smaɪl, θɪŋkɪŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz meɪkɪŋ ə dʒoʊk. ðən i ɹilaɪz ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ə tʃɹeɪs ə hjumɝ ɑn lænz feɪs. hi ɹɪli wəd səspɛk pipəl ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. wɑz ɛniwɛɹ seɪf?

Rand started to smile, thinking the Warder was making a joke. Then he realized there was not a trace of humor on Lan's face. He really would suspect people in Tar Valon. Was anywhere safe?

"hi ɪɡzædʒɝeɪts," mɔɪɹeɪn toʊld əm suðɪŋli. "mæstɝ fɪtʃ ɪz ə ɡʊd mæn, ɑnəst ən tʃɹʌstwɝði. bʌɾ i dʌz laɪk tə tɔk, ən wɪð ðə bɛst wɪl ɪn ðə wɝld i maɪt lɛt sʌmθɪŋ slɪp tə ðə ɹɔŋ ɪɹ. ən aɪ hæv nɛvɝ jɛt stɑpt əɾ ən ɪn wɛɹ hæf ðə meɪdz dɪd nɑt lɪsən ət dɔɹz ən spɛn mɔɹ taɪm ɡɑsəpɪŋ ðən meɪkɪŋ bɛdz. kʌm, lɛɾ əs bi siɾəd bɪfɔɹ əɹ mil ɡɛts koʊld."

"He exaggerates," Moiraine told them soothingly. "Master Fitch is a good man, honest and trustworthy. But he does like to talk, and with the best will in the world he might let something slip to the wrong ear. And I have never yet stopped at an inn where half the maids did not listen at doors and spend more time gossiping than making beds. Come, let us be seated before our meal gets cold."

ðeɪ tʊk pleɪsəz ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl, wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn ət ðə hɛɾ ən læn ət ðə fʊt, ən fəɹ ə waɪl ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz tu bɪzi fɪlɪŋ ðɛɹ pleɪts fəɹ tɔk. ɪt maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪn ə fist, bʌɾ æftɝ kloʊs tə ə wik ə flætbɹɛɾ ən dʒɹaɪd mit, ɪt teɪstəd laɪk wʌn.

They took places around the table, with Moiraine at the head and Lan at the foot, and for a while everyone was too busy filling their plates for talk. It might not have been a feast, but after close to a week of flatbread and dried meat, it tasted like one.

æftɝ ə taɪm, mɔɪɹeɪn æskt, "wʌt dɪd jə lɝn ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum?" naɪvz ən fɔɹks stɪld, səspɛndəɾ ɪn mɪdɛɹ, ən ɔl aɪz tɝn tə ðə wɔɹɾɝ.

After a time, Moiraine asked, "What did you learn in the common room?" Knives and forks stilled, suspended in midair, and all eyes turned to the Warder.

"lɪɾəl ðæts ɡʊd," læn ɹɪplaɪd. "eɪvɪn wɑz ɹaɪt, ət list əz fɑɹ əz tɔk əz ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz ə bæɾəl ɪn ɡildən, ən lɑɡən wɑz ðə vɪktɝ. ə dʌzən dɪfɹən stɔɹiz ɑɹ floʊɾɪŋ əbaʊt, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl əɡɹi ɑn ðæt."

"Little that's good," Lan replied. "Avin was right, at least as far as talk has it. There was a battle in Ghealdan, and Logain was the victor. A dozen different stories are floating about, but they all agree on that."

lɑɡən? ðət mʌs bi ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. ɪt wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm ɹænd hæd hɝɾ ə neɪm pʊt tə ðə mæn. læn saʊndəɾ ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf i nu hɪm.

Logain? That must be the false Dragon. It was the first time Rand had heard a name put to the man. Lan sounded almost as if he knew him.

"ði ɛɛs sədaɪ?" mɔɪɹeɪn æskt kwaɪətli, ən læn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"The Aes Sedai?" Moiraine asked quietly, and Lan shook his head.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ. səm seɪ ðeɪ wɝ ɔl kɪld, səm seɪ nʌn." hi snɔɹɾɪd. "sʌm ivən seɪ ðeɪ wɛn oʊvɝ tə lɑɡən. ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ ɹɪlaɪəbəl, ən aɪ dɪd nɑt kɛɹ tə ʃoʊ tu mʌtʃ ɪntʃɹəst."

"I don't know. Some say they were all killed, some say none." He snorted. "Some even say they went over to Logain. There's nothing reliable, and I did not care to show too much interest."

"jɛs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "lɪɾəl ðəɾ ɪz ɡʊd." wɪð ə dip bɹɛθ ʃi bɹɔɾ əɹ ətɛnʃən bæk tə ðə teɪbəl. "ænd wʌɾ ʌv əɹ oʊn sɝkəmstænsəz?"

"Yes," Moiraine said. "Little that is good." With a deep breath she brought her attention back to the table. "And what of our own circumstances?"

"ðɛɹ, ðə nuz ɪz bɛɾɝ. noʊ ɑd hæpənɪŋz, noʊ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɝaʊn u maɪt bi mɹdʒɹɑl, sɝɾənli noʊ tʃɹɑləks. ən ðə waɪtkloʊks ɑɹ bɪzi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ ɡʌvɝnɝ eɪɾən kəz i woʊn koʊɑpɝeɪt wɪð ðɛm. ðəl nɑɾ ivən noʊɾəs əs ənlɛs wi ædvɝtaɪz aʊɝsɛlvz."

"There, the news is better. No odd happenings, no strangers around who might be Myrddraal, certainly no Trollocs. And the Whitecloaks are busy trying to make trouble for Governor Adan because he won't cooperate with them. They will not even notice us unless we advertise ourselves."

"ɡʊd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ðæɾ əɡɹiz wɪð wʌt ðə bæθ meɪd sɛd. ɡɑsəp dʌz əv ɪts pɔɪns. naʊ," ʃi ədʒɹɛs ði ɪntaɪɝ kʌmpəni, "wi hæv ə lɔŋ dʒɝni stɪl əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs, bʌt ðə læst wik əz nɑt bɪn izi, iðɝ, soʊ aɪ pɹəpoʊz tə ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ tənaɪɾ ən təmɑɹoʊ naɪt, ən liv ɝli ðə fɑloʊɪŋ mɔɹnɪŋ." ɔl ðə jʌŋɡɝ foʊk ɡɹɪnd; ə sɪɾi fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. mɔɪɹeɪn smaɪld, bʌt ʃi stɪl sɛd, "wʌt dʌz mæstɝ ænʒɹə seɪ tə ðæt?"

"Good," Moiraine said. "That agrees with what the bath maid said. Gossip does have its points. Now," she addressed the entire company, "we have a long journey still ahead of us, but the last week has not been easy, either, so I propose to remain here tonight and tomorrow night, and leave early the following morning." All the younger folk grinned; a city for the first time. Moiraine smiled, but she still said, "What does Master Andra say to that?"

læn aɪd ðə ɡɹɪnɪŋ feɪsəz flætli. "wɛl ɪnʌf, ɪf ðeɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ aɪv toʊld əm fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ."

Lan eyed the grinning faces flatly. "Well enough, if they remember what I've told them for a change."

tɑm snɔɹɾɪd θɹu hɪz mʌstæʃɪz. "ðiz kʌntʃɹi foʊk lus ɪn ə . . . ə sɪɾi." hi snɔɹɾɪd əɡɛn ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

Thom snorted through his mustaches. "These country folk loose in a . . . a city." He snorted again and shook his head.

wɪð ðə kɹaʊɾɪŋ ət ði ɪn ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli θɹi ɹumz tə bi hæd, wʌn fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn ən ɛɡwin, ən tu tə teɪk ðə mɛn. ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf ʃɛɹɪŋ wɪð læn ən tɑm, ɑn ðə fɔɹθ flɔɹ ət ðə bæk, kloʊs ʌp ʌndɝ ði oʊvɝhæŋɪŋ ivz, wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl smɔl wɪndoʊ ðəɾ oʊvɝlʊk ðə steɪbliɑɹd. fʊl naɪt hæd fɔlən, ən laɪt fɹəm ði ɪn meɪɾ ə pul aʊtsaɪd. ɪt wɑz ə smɔl ɹum tə bɪɡɪn, ən ən ɛkstʃɹə bɛd sɛɾ ʌp fəɹ tɑm meɪɾ ɪt smɔlɝ, ðoʊ ɔl θɹi wɝ nɛɹoʊ. ən hɑɹd, ɹænd faʊnd wən i θɹu hɪmsɛlf daʊn ɑn hɪz. dɛfənətli nɑt ðə bɛst ɹum.

With the crowding at the inn there were only three rooms to be had, one for Moiraine and Egwene, and two to take the men. Rand found himself sharing with Lan and Thom, on the fourth floor at the back, close up under the overhanging eaves, with a single small window that overlooked the stableyard. Full night had fallen, and light from the inn made a pool outside. It was a small room to begin, and an extra bed set up for Thom made it smaller, though all three were narrow. And hard, Rand found when he threw himself down on his. Definitely not the best room.

tɑm steɪɾ oʊnli lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ənkeɪs ɪz fluɾ ən hɑɹp, ðən lɛft ɔlɹɛɾi pɹæktəsɪŋ ɡɹæn poʊzəz. læn wɛnt wɪð hɪm.

Thom stayed only long enough to uncase his flute and harp, then left already practicing grand poses. Lan went with him.

ɪt wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ, ɹænd θɔɾ əz i ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli ɑn ðə bɛd. ə wik əɡoʊ hi wʊɾə bɪn daʊnstɛɹz laɪk ə fɔlɪŋ ɹɑk fəɹ dʒʌs ðə tʃæns i maɪt si ə ɡlimən pɝfɔɹm, fəɹ dʒʌs ðə ɹumɝ ʌv ɪt. bʌɾ i hæd hɝd tɑm tɛl ɪz stɔɹiz ɛvɹi naɪt fəɹ ə wik, ən tɑm wəd bi ðəɹ təmɑɹoʊ naɪt, ən ðə nɛkst, ən ðə hɑt bæθ hæd lusən kɪŋks ɪn mʌsəlz ðəɾ i hæd θɔt wəd bi ðəɹ fɝɛvɝ, ən ɪz fɝs hɑt mil ɪn ə wik uz lɛθɝdʒi ɪndə hɪm. slipəli hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf læn ɹɪli dɪd noʊ ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, lɑɡən. ə mʌfəld ʃaʊt keɪm fɹəm bɛləstɛɹz, ðə kɑmən ɹum ɡɹiɾɪŋ tɑmz ɝaɪvəl, bʌt ɹænd wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi əslip.

It was strange, Rand thought as he shifted uncomfortably on the bed. A week ago he would have been downstairs like a falling rock for just the chance he might see a gleeman perform, for just the rumor of it. But he had heard Thom tell his stories every night for a week, and Thom would be there tomorrow night, and the next, and the hot bath had loosened kinks in muscles that he had thought would be there forever, and his first hot meal in a week oozed lethargy into him. Sleepily he wondered if Lan really did know the false Dragon, Logain. A muffled shout came from belowstairs, the common room greeting Thom's arrival, but Rand was already asleep.

ðə stoʊn hɔlweɪ wɑz dɪm ən ʃæɾoʊi, ən ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ɹænd. hi kəd nɑt tɛl wɛɹ ðə laɪt keɪm fɹʌm, wʌt lɪɾəl ðəɹ wɑz ʌv ɪt; ðə ɡɹeɪ wɔlz wɝ bɛɹ ə kændəlz əɹ læmps, nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl tə əkaʊn fəɹ ðə feɪnt ɡloʊ ðət sim tə dʒʌs bi ðɛɹ. ði ɛɹ wɑz stɪl ən dæŋk, ən sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə dɪstəns wɔɾɝ dʒɹɪpt wɪð ə stɛɾi, hɑloʊ plɑŋk. wɛɹɛvɝ ðɪs wɑz, ɪt wɑz nɑt ði ɪn. fɹaʊnɪŋ, hi ɹʌbd əɾ ɪz fɔɹhɛd. ɪn? hɪz hɛd hɝt, ən θɔts wɝ hɑɹd tə hoʊld ɑn tə. ðəɹ hæd bɪn sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt . . . ən ɪn? ɪt wɑz ɡɔn, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz.

The stone hallway was dim and shadowy, and empty except for Rand. He could not tell where the light came from, what little there was of it; the gray walls were bare of candles or lamps, nothing at all to account for the faint glow that seemed to just be there. The air was still and dank, and somewhere in the distance water dripped with a steady, hollow plonk. Wherever this was, it was not the inn. Frowning, he rubbed at his forehead. Inn? His head hurt, and thoughts were hard to hold on to. There had been something about . . . an inn? It was gone, whatever it was.

hi lɪkt ɪz lɪps ən wɪʃt i hæd sʌmθɪŋ tə dʒɹɪŋk. hi wɑz ɑfli θɝsti, dʒɹaɪ-æz-dʌs θɝsti. ɪt wɑz ðə dʒɹɪpɪŋ saʊn ðət dɪsaɪɾɪd hɪm. wɪð nʌθɪŋ tə tʃuz baɪ ɪksɛpt ɪz θɝst, hi stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðət stɛɾi plɑŋk - plɑŋk - plɑŋk.

He licked his lips and wished he had something to drink. He was awfully thirsty, dry-as-dust thirsty. It was the dripping sound that decided him. With nothing to choose by except his thirst, he started toward that steady plonk - plonk - plonk.

ðə hɔlweɪ stʃɹɛtʃt ɑn, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni kɹɔsɪŋ kɔɹəɾɝ ən wɪθaʊt ðə slaɪɾəst tʃeɪnʒ ɪn əpɪɹəns. ði oʊnli fitʃɝz əɾ ɔl wɝ ðə ɹʌf dɔɹz sɛɾ ət ɹɛɡjəlɝ ɪntɝvəlz ɪn pɛɹz, wʌn ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə hɔl, ðə wʊd splɪntɝɾ ən dʒɹaɪ dɪspaɪt ðə dæmp ɪn ði ɛɹ. ðə ʃædoʊz ɹəsiɾəd əhɛɾ ə hɪm, steɪɪŋ ðə seɪm, ən ðə dʒɹɪpɪŋ nɛvɝ keɪm ɛni kloʊsɝ. æftɝ ə lɔŋ taɪm i dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tʃɹaɪ wʌn ə ðoʊz dɔɹz. ɪɾ oʊpən izəli, ən i stɛp θɹu ɪndə ə ɡɹɪm, stoʊn-wɔl tʃeɪmbɝ.

The hallway stretched on, without any crossing corridor and without the slightest change in appearance. The only features at all were the rough doors set at regular intervals in pairs, one on either side of the hall, the wood splintered and dry despite the damp in the air. The shadows receded ahead of him, staying the same, and the dripping never came any closer. After a long time he decided to try one of those doors. It opened easily, and he stepped through into a grim, stone-walled chamber.

wʌn wɔl oʊpən ɪn ə sɪɹiz ʌv ɑɹtʃəz ɑntu ə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn bælkəni, ən bɪɑn ðət wɑz ə skaɪ sətʃ əz i hæd nɛvɝ sin. stʃɹieɪɾɪd klaʊdz ɪn blæks ən ɡɹeɪz, ɹɛdz ən ɔɹənʒəz, stʃɹim baɪ əz ɪf stɔɹm wɪnz dʒɹoʊv ðɛm, wivɪŋ ən ɪntɝwivɪŋ ɛnləsli. noʊ wʌn kəɾ ɛvɝ əv sin ə skaɪ laɪk ðæt; ɪt kəd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst.

One wall opened in a series of arches onto a gray stone balcony, and beyond that was a sky such as he had never seen. Striated clouds in blacks and grays, reds and oranges, streamed by as if storm winds drove them, weaving and interweaving endlessly. No one could ever have seen a sky like that; it could not exist.

hi pʊld ɪz aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ðə bælkəni, bʌt ðə ɹɛst ə ðə ɹum wɑz noʊ bɛɾɝ. ɑd kɝvz ən pəkjuljɝ æŋɡəlz, əz ɪf ðə tʃeɪmbɝ hæd bɪn mɛltəɾ ɔlmoʊs hæfəzɝdli aʊɾ ə ðə stoʊn, ən kɑləmz ðət sim tə ɡɹoʊ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪ flɔɹ. fleɪmz ɹɔɹɾ ɑn ðə hɑɹθ laɪk ə fɔɹdʒ-faɪɝ wɪð ðə bɛloʊz pʌmpɪŋ, bʌt ɡeɪv noʊ hit. stʃɹeɪnʒ oʊvəl stoʊnz meɪd ðə faɪɝpleɪs; ðeɪ dʒʌs lʊk laɪk stoʊnz, wɛt-slɪk dɪspaɪt ðə faɪɝ, wən i lʊk stʃɹeɪɾ ət ðɛm, bʌt wən i ɡlɪmpst əm fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ ðeɪ sim tə bi feɪsəz ɪnstɛd, ðə feɪsəz ə mɛn ən wɪmən ɹaɪðɪŋ ɪn æŋɡwɪʃ, skɹimɪŋ saɪlənli. ðə haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹz ən ðə pɑlɪʃt teɪbəl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum wɝ pɝfəkli ɔɹɾənɛɹi, bʌt ðəɾ ɪn ɪtsɛlf ɛmfəsaɪz ðə ɹɛst. ə sɪŋɡəl mɪɹɝ hʌŋ ɑn ðə wɔl, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɔɹɾənɛɹi əɾ ɔl. wən i lʊkt əɾ ɪɾ i sɔ oʊnli ə blɝ wɛɹ ɪz ɹəflɛkʃən ʃəɾ əv bɪn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ðə ɹum wɑz ʃoʊn tʃɹu, bʌt nɑt hɪm.

He pulled his eyes away from the balcony, but the rest of the room was no better. Odd curves and peculiar angles, as if the chamber had been melted almost haphazardly out of the stone, and columns that seemed to grow out of the gray floor. Flames roared on the hearth like a forge-fire with the bellows pumping, but gave no heat. Strange oval stones made the fireplace; they just looked like stones, wet-slick despite the fire, when he looked straight at them, but when he glimpsed them from the corner of his eye they seemed to be faces instead, the faces of men and women writhing in anguish, screaming silently. The high-backed chairs and the polished table in the middle of the room were perfectly ordinary, but that in itself emphasized the rest. A single mirror hung on the wall, but that was not ordinary at all. When he looked at it he saw only a blur where his reflection should have been. Everything else in the room was shown true, but not him.

ə mæn stʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. hi hæd nɑt noʊɾəst ðə mæn wən i fɝs keɪm ɪn. ɪf i hæd nɑt noʊn ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl, hi wʊɾə sɛd noʊ wʌn hæd bɪn ðəɹ əntɪl i æktʃəli  lʊkt ət ðə mæn. dʒɹɛst ɪn dɑɹk kloʊðz ʌv ə faɪn kʌt, hi simd ɪn ðə pɹaɪm ə hɪz mətʃʊɹəɾi, ən ɹænd səpoʊzd wʊɾə əv faʊn ɪm ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ.

A man stood in front of the fireplace. He had not noticed the man when he first came in. If he had not known it was impossible, he would have said no one had been there until he actually looked at the man. Dressed in dark clothes of a fine cut, he seemed in the prime of his maturity, and Rand supposed women would have found him good-looking.

"wʌns mɔɹ wi mit feɪs-tə-feɪs," ðə mæn sɛɾ ænd, dʒʌs fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, hɪz maʊθ ən aɪz bɪkeɪm oʊpənɪŋz ɪndə ɛnləs kævɝnz ə fleɪm.

"Once more we meet face-to-face," the man said and, just for an instant, his mouth and eyes became openings into endless caverns of flame.

wɪð ə jɛl ɹænd hɝl hɪmsɛlf bækwɝdz aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ i stʌmbəld əkɹɔs ðə hɔl ən bæŋd ɪndə ðə dɔɹ ðɛɹ, nɑkɪŋ ɪɾ oʊpən. hi twɪstəɾ ən ɡɹæbd ət ðə dɔɹhændəl tə kip fɹəm fɔlɪŋ tə ðə flɔɹ - ən faʊn hɪmsɛlf stɛɹɪŋ waɪd-aɪɾ ɪndə ə stoʊn ɹum wɪð ən ɪmpɑsəbəl skaɪ θɹu ði ɑɹtʃəz liɾɪŋ tə ə bælkəni, ən ə faɪɝpleɪs. . . .

With a yell Rand hurled himself backwards out of the room, so hard that he stumbled across the hall and banged into the door there, knocking it open. He twisted and grabbed at the doorhandle to keep from falling to the floor - and found himself staring wide-eyed into a stone room with an impossible sky through the arches leading to a balcony, and a fireplace. . . .

"ju kænɑt ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm mi ðəɾ izəli," ðə mæn sɛd.

"You cannot get away from me that easily," the man said.

ɹænd twɪstəd, skɹæmbəlɪŋ bæk aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪɡeɪn ɪz fit wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ daʊn. ðɪs taɪm ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kɔɹəɾɝ. hi fɹoʊz hæf kɹaʊtʃt nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə pɑlɪʃt teɪbəl, ən lʊkt ət ðə mæn baɪ ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən lʊkɪŋ ət ðə faɪɝpleɪs stoʊnz, əɹ ət ðə skaɪ.

Rand twisted, scrambling back out of the room, trying to regain his feet without slowing down. This time there was no corridor. He froze half crouched not far from the polished table, and looked at the man by the fireplace. It was better than looking at the fireplace stones, or at the sky.

"ðɪs ɪz ə dʒɹim," hi sɛɾ əz i stʃɹeɪɾənd. bɪhaɪn ɪm i hɝd ðə klɪk ə ðə dɔɹ kloʊzɪŋ. "ɪts səm kaɪndə naɪtmɛɹ." hi ʃʌɾ ɪz aɪz, θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt weɪkɪŋ ʌp. wən i wɑz ə tʃaɪl ðə wɪzdəm hæd sɛɾ ɪf jə kəd də ðəɾ ɪn ə naɪtmɛɹ, ɪt wəd ɡoʊ əweɪ. ðə . . . wɪzdəm? wʌt? ɪf oʊnli hɪz θɔts wəd stɑp slaɪɾɪŋ əweɪ. ɪf oʊnli hɪz hɛd wəd stɑp hɝɾɪŋ, ðən i kəd θɪŋk stʃɹeɪt.

"This is a dream," he said as he straightened. Behind him he heard the click of the door closing. "It's some kind of nightmare." He shut his eyes, thinking about waking up. When he was a child the Wisdom had said if you could do that in a nightmare, it would go away. The . . . Wisdom? What? If only his thoughts would stop sliding away. If only his head would stop hurting, then he could think straight.

hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz əɡɛn. ðə ɹum wɑz stɪl əz ɪt hæd bɪn, ðə bælkəni, ðə skaɪ. ðə mæn baɪ ðə faɪɝpleɪs.

He opened his eyes again. The room was still as it had been, the balcony, the sky. The man by the fireplace.

"ɪz ɪɾ ə dʒɹim?" ðə mæn sɛd. "dʌz ɪt mæɾɝ?" wʌns əɡɛn, fəɹ ə moʊmənt, hɪz maʊθ ən aɪz bɪkeɪm piifoʊlz ɪndə ə fɝnəs ðət sim tə stʃɹɛtʃ fɝɛvɝ. hɪz vɔɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ; hi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs ɪt hæpənɪŋ əɾ ɔl.

"Is it a dream?" the man said. "Does it matter?" Once again, for a moment, his mouth and eyes became peepholes into a furnace that seemed to stretch forever. His voice did not change; he did not seem to notice it happening at all.

ɹænd dʒʌmpt ə lɪɾəl ðɪs taɪm, bʌɾ i mænədʒ tə kip fɹəm jɛlɪŋ. ðɪs ɪz ə dʒɹim. ɪts tə bi. ɔl ðə seɪm, hi stɛp bækwɝdz ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə dɔɹ, nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz ɔf ðə fɛloʊ baɪ ðə faɪɝ, ən tʃɹaɪd ðə hændəl. ɪt dɪd nɑt muv; ðə dɔɹ wɑz lɑkt.

Rand jumped a little this time, but he managed to keep from yelling. This is a dream. It has to be. All the same, he stepped backwards all the way to the door, never taking his eyes off the fellow by the fire, and tried the handle. It did not move; the door was locked.

"ju sim θɝsti," ðə mæn baɪ ðə faɪɝ sɛd. "dʒɹɪŋk."

"You seem thirsty," the man by the fire said. "Drink."

ɑn ðə teɪbəl wɑz ə ɡɑblət, ʃaɪnɪŋ ɡoʊld ən ɔɹnəmɛntɪd wɪð ɹubiz ən æmɛθɪsts. ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ. hi wɪʃt i kəd stɑp dʒʌmpɪŋ. ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə dʒɹim. hɪz maʊθ fɛlt laɪk dʌst.

On the table was a goblet, shining gold and ornamented with rubies and amethysts. It had not been there before. He wished he could stop jumping. It was only a dream. His mouth felt like dust.

"aɪ æm, ə lɪɾəl," hi sɛd, pɪkɪŋ ʌp ðə ɡɑblət. ðə mæn lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntɛnli, wʌn hæn ɑn ðə bæk ʌv ə tʃɛɹ, wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. ðə smɛl ə spaɪst waɪn dʒɹoʊv hoʊm tə ɹænd dʒʌs haʊ θɝsti hi wɑz, əz ɪf i hæd hæd nʌθɪŋ tə dʒɹɪŋk ɪn deɪz. hæv aɪ?

"I am, a little," he said, picking up the goblet. The man leaned forward intently, one hand on the back of a chair, watching him. The smell of spiced wine drove home to Rand just how thirsty he was, as if he had had nothing to drink in days. Have I?

wɪð ðə waɪn hæfweɪ tə hɪz maʊθ, hi stɑpt. wɪspɝz ə smoʊk wɝ ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə tʃɛɹbæk bɪtwin ðə mænz fɪŋɡɝz. ən ðoʊz aɪz wɑtʃt ɪm soʊ ʃɑɹpli, flɪkɝɪŋ ɹæpədli ɪn ən aʊɾ ə fleɪmz.

With the wine halfway to his mouth, he stopped. Whispers of smoke were rising from the chairback between the man's fingers. And those eyes watched him so sharply, flickering rapidly in and out of flames.

ɹænd lɪkt ɪz lɪps ən pʊt ðə waɪn bæk ɑn ðə teɪbəl, ənteɪstəd. "aɪm nɑɾ əz θɝsti əz aɪ θɔt." ðə mæn stʃɹeɪɾənd əbɹʌpli, hɪz feɪs wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən. hɪz dɪsəpɔɪnmənt kəd nɑɾ əv bɪn mɔɹ pleɪn ɪf i hæd kɝst. ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌt wɑz ɪn ðə waɪn. bʌt ðət wɑz ə stupəd kwɛstʃən, ʌv kɔɹs. ðɪs wɑz ɔl ə dʒɹim. ðən waɪ woʊn ɪt stɑp? "wʌt dʒju wɑnt?" hi dɪmændəd. "hu ɑɹ ju?"

Rand licked his lips and put the wine back on the table, untasted. "I'm not as thirsty as I thought." The man straightened abruptly, his face without expression. His disappointment could not have been more plain if he had cursed. Rand wondered what was in the wine. But that was a stupid question, of course. This was all a dream. Then why won't it stop? "What do you want?" he demanded. "Who are you?"

fleɪmz ɹoʊz ɪn ðə mænz aɪz ən maʊθ; ɹænd θɔɾ i kəd hɪɹ əm ɹɔɹ. "sʌm kɔl mi bælzəmən."

Flames rose in the man's eyes and mouth; Rand thought he could hear them roar. "Some call me Ba'alzamon."

ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf feɪsɪŋ ðə dɔɹ, dʒɝkɪŋ fɹæntəkəli ət ðə hændəl. ɔl θɔɾ ə dʒɹimz hæd vænɪʃt. ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðə dɔɹhændəl wəd nɑt bʌdʒ, bʌɾ i kɛp twɪstɪŋ.

Rand found himself facing the door, jerking frantically at the handle. All thought of dreams had vanished. The Dark One. The doorhandle would not budge, but he kept twisting.

"ɑɹ jə ðə wʌn?" bælzəmən sɛd sʌɾənli. "ju kænɑt haɪɾ ɪt fɹəm mi fɝɛvɝ. jə kænɑɾ ivən haɪd jɝsɛlf fɹəm mi, nɑɾ ɑn ðə haɪəs maʊntən əɹ ɪn ðə dipəs keɪv. aɪ noʊ jə daʊn tə ðə smɔləs hɛɹ."

"Are you the one?" Ba'alzamon said suddenly. "You cannot hide it from me forever. You cannot even hide yourself from me, not on the highest mountain or in the deepest cave. I know you down to the smallest hair."

ɹænd tɝn tə feɪs ðə mæn - tə feɪs bælzəmən. hi swɑloʊd hɑɹd. ə naɪtmɛɹ. hi ɹitʃt bæk tə ɡɪv ðə dɔɹ-hændəl wʌn læs pʊl, ðən stʊɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪɾɝ.

Rand turned to face the man - to face Ba'alzamon. He swallowed hard. A nightmare. He reached back to give the door-handle one last pull, then stood up straighter.

"ɑɹ jə ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɡlɔɹi?" bælzəmən sɛd. "paʊɝ? dɪd ðeɪ tɛl jə ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld wəd sɝv ju? wʌt ɡlɔɹi əɹ paʊɝ ɪz ðəɹ fəɹ ə pʌpət? ðə stʃɹɪŋz ðət muv juv bɪn sɛntʃɝiz wivɪŋ. jəɹ fɑðɝ wɑz tʃoʊzən baɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ, laɪk ə stæljən ɹoʊpt ən lɛd tə hɪz bɪznəs. jəɹ mʌðɝ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə bɹud mɛɹ tə ðɛɹ plænz. ən ðoʊz plænz lɛd tə jəɹ dɛθ."

"Are you expecting glory?" Ba'alzamon said. "Power? Did they tell you the Eye of the World would serve you? What glory or power is there for a puppet? The strings that move you have been centuries weaving. Your father was chosen by the White Tower, like a stallion roped and led to his business. Your mother was no more than a brood mare to their plans. And those plans lead to your death."

ɹændz hænz nɑɾɪd ɪn fɪsts. "maɪ fɑðɝ ɪz ə ɡʊd mæn, ən maɪ mʌðɝ wɑz ə ɡʊd wʊmən. doʊn jə tɔk əbaʊt ðɛm!"

Rand's hands knotted in fists. "My father is a good man, and my mother was a good woman. Don't you talk about them!"

ðə fleɪmz læft. "soʊ ðəɹ ɪz səm spɪɹəɾ ɪn jə æftɝ ɔl. pɝhæps jə ɑɹ ðə wʌn. lɪɾəl ɡʊɾ ɪɾəl də ju. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wɪl juz jə əntɪl jə ɑɹ kənsumd, dʒʌst əz dɑviən wɑz juzd, ən jʊɹiən stoʊnboʊ, ən ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsən, ən ɹɑoʊlɪn dɑɹksbeɪn. dʒʌst əz lɑɡən ɪz biɪŋ juzd. juzd əntɪl ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ lɛft ə ju."

The flames laughed. "So there is some spirit in you after all. Perhaps you are the one. Little good it will do you. The Amyrlin Seat will use you until you are consumed, just as Davian was used, and Yurian Stonebow, and Guaire Amalasan, and Raolin Darksbane. Just as Logain is being used. Used until there is nothing left of you."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ. . . ." ɹænd swʌŋ ɪz hɛd fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd. ðət wʌn moʊmən ə klɪɹ θɪŋkɪŋ, bɔɹn ɪn æŋɡɝ, wɑz ɡɔn. ivən əz i ɡɹoʊp fəɹ ɪɾ əɡɛn i kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ hi hæd ɹitʃt ɪt ðə fɝs taɪm. hɪz θɔts spʌn ɝaʊn ən ɝaʊnd. hi sizd wʌn laɪk ə ɹæft ɪn ðə wɝlpul. hi fɔɹs ðə wɝdz aʊt, hɪz vɔɪs stʃɹɛŋθənɪŋ ðə fɝðɝ i wɛnt. "ju . . . ɑɹ baʊnd . . . ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. jə ən ɔl ðə fɔɹseɪkən . . . baʊn baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ əntɪl ði ɛn ə taɪm."

"I don't know. . . ." Rand swung his head from side to side. That one moment of clear thinking, born in anger, was gone. Even as he groped for it again he could not remember how he had reached it the first time. His thoughts spun around and around. He seized one like a raft in the whirlpool. He forced the words out, his voice strengthening the further he went. "You . . . are bound . . . in Shayol Ghul. You and all the Forsaken . . . bound by the Creator until the end of time."

"ði ɛn ə taɪm?" bælzəmən mɑkt. "ju lɪv laɪk ə biɾəl ʌndɝ ə ɹɑk, ən jə θɪŋk jəɹ slaɪm ɪz ðə junəvɝs. ðə dɛθ ə taɪm wɪl bɹɪŋ mi paʊɝ sətʃ əz jə kəd nɑt dʒɹim ʌv, wɝm."

"The end of time?" Ba'alzamon mocked. "You live like a beetle under a rock, and you think your slime is the universe. The death of time will bring me power such as you could not dream of, worm."

"ju ɑɹ baʊnd - "

"You are bound - "

"ful, aɪ hæv nɛvɝ bɪn baʊnd!" ðə faɪɝz ə hɪz feɪs ɹɔɹd soʊ hɑt ðət ɹænd stɛp bæk, ʃɛltɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz hænz. ðə swɛɾ ɑn ɪz pɑmz dʒɹaɪd fɹəm ðə hit. "aɪ stʊɾ ət luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝz ʃoʊldɝ wən i dɪd ðə did ðət neɪm hɪm. ɪt wɑz aɪ hu toʊld ɪm tə kɪl ɪz waɪf, ən ɪz tʃɪlʒɹən, ən ɔl ɪz blʌd, ən ɛvɹi lɪvɪŋ pɝsən u lʌvd ɪm əɹ hum i lʌvd. ɪt wɑz aɪ hu ɡeɪv ɪm ðə moʊmən ə sænəɾi tə noʊ wʌɾ i hæd dʌn. hæv jə ɛvɝ hɝɾ ə mæn skɹim ɪz soʊl əweɪ, wɝm? hi cʊɾə stʃɹʌk ət mi, ðɛn. hi kəd nɑɾ əv wʌn, bʌɾ i kəɾ əv tʃɹaɪd. ɪnstɛɾ i kɔl daʊn ɪz pɹɛʃəs wʌn paʊɝ əpɑn hɪmsɛlf, soʊ mʌtʃ ðət ði ɝθ splɪɾ oʊpən ən ɹɪɹɾ ʌp dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊn tə mɑɹk ɪz tum.

"Fool, I have never been bound!" The fires of his face roared so hot that Rand stepped back, sheltering behind his hands. The sweat on his palms dried from the heat. "I stood at Lews Therin Kinslayer's shoulder when he did the deed that named him. It was I who told him to kill his wife, and his children, and all his blood, and every living person who loved him or whom he loved. It was I who gave him the moment of sanity to know what he had done. Have you ever heard a man scream his soul away, worm? He could have struck at me, then. He could not have won, but he could have tried. Instead he called down his precious One Power upon himself, so much that the earth split open and reared up Dragonmount to mark his tomb.

"ə θaʊzən jɪɹz leɪɾɝ aɪ sɛn ðə tʃɹɑləks ɹeɪvinɪŋ saʊθ, ən fəɹ θɹi sɛntʃɝiz ðeɪ sævɪdʒ ðə wɝld. ðoʊz blaɪn fulz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn sɛɾ aɪ wɑz biɾən ɪn ði ɛnd, bʌt ðə sɛkən kʌvənənt, ðə kʌvənən ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz, wɑz ʃæɾɝd bɪɑn ɹimeɪkɪŋ, ən u wɑz lɛf tə əpoʊz mi ðɛn? aɪ wɪspɝɾ ɪn ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz ɪɹ, ən ðə lɛŋθ ən bɹɛdθ ə ðə læn ɛɛs sədaɪ daɪd. aɪ wɪspɝɾ əɡɛn, ən ðə haɪ kɪŋ sɛn ɪz ɑɹmiz əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, əkɹɔs ðə wɝl si, ən sil tu dumz. ðə dum ə hɪz dʒɹim ʌv wʌn læn ən wʌn pipəl, ən ə dum jɛt tə kʌm. əɾ ɪz dɛθbɛɾ aɪ wɑz ðəɹ wən ɪz kaʊnsəlɝz toʊld ɪm oʊnli ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd seɪv ɪz laɪf. aɪ spoʊk, ən i ɔɹɾɝd ɪz kaʊnsəlɝz tə ðə steɪk. aɪ spoʊk, ən ðə haɪ kɪŋz læst wɝdz wɝ tə kɹaɪ ðət tɑɹ vəlɑn mʌs bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd.

"A thousand years later I sent the Trollocs ravening south, and for three centuries they savaged the world. Those blind fools in Tar Valon said I was beaten in the end, but the Second Covenant, the Covenant of the Ten Nations, was shattered beyond remaking, and who was left to oppose me then? I whispered in Artur Hawkwing's ear, and the length and breadth of the land Aes Sedai died. I whispered again, and the High King sent his armies across the Aryth Ocean, across the World Sea, and sealed two dooms. The doom of his dream of one land and one people, and a doom yet to come. At his deathbed I was there when his councilors told him only Aes Sedai could save his life. I spoke, and he ordered his councilors to the stake. I spoke, and the High King's last words were to cry that Tar Valon must be destroyed.

"wɛn mɛn sətʃ əz ðiz kəd nɑt stæn əɡɛns mi, wʌt tʃæns dʒju hæv, ə toʊd kɹaʊtʃɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ə fɔɹəs pʌɾəl. jəl sɝv mi, əɹ jəl dæns ɑn ɛɛs sədaɪ stʃɹɪŋz əntɪl jə daɪ. ən ðən jəl bi maɪn. ðə dɛd bɪlɔŋ tə mi!"

"When men such as these could not stand against me, what chance do you have, a toad crouching beside a forest puddle. You will serve me, or you will dance on Aes Sedai strings until you die. And then you will be mine. The dead belong to me!"

"noʊ," ɹænd mʌɾɝd, "ðɪs ɪz ə dʒɹim. ɪts ə dʒɹim!"

"No," Rand muttered, "this is a dream. It is a dream!"

"du jə θɪŋk jə ɑɹ seɪf fɹəm mi ɪn jəɹ dʒɹimz? lʊk!" bælzəmən pɔɪntəd kəmændɪŋli, ən ɹændz hɛd tɝn tə fɑloʊ, ɔlðoʊ hi dɪd nɑt tɝn ɪt; hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə tɝn.

"Do you think you are safe from me in your dreams? Look!" Ba'alzamon pointed commandingly, and Rand's head turned to follow, although he did not turn it; he did not want to turn.

ðə ɡɑblət wɑz ɡɔn fɹəm ðə teɪbəl. wɛɹ ɪt hæd bɪn, kɹaʊtʃt ə lɑɹdʒ ɹæt, blɪŋkɪŋ ət ðə laɪt, snɪfɪŋ ði ɛɹ wɛɹəli. bælzəmən kɹʊkəɾ ɪz fɪŋɡɝ, ən wɪð ə skwik ðə ɹæɾ ɑɹtʃt ɪts bæk, fɹpɔz lɪftɪŋ ɪndə ði ɛɹ waɪl ɪt bælənst ɔkwɝdli ɑn ɪts haɪn fit. ðə fɪŋɡɝ kɝv mɔɹ, ən ðə ɹæt tɑpəld oʊvɝ, skɹæbəlɪŋ fɹæntəkəli, pɔɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ, skwilɪŋ ʃɹɪli, ɪts bæk bɛndɪŋ, bɛndɪŋ, bɛndɪŋ. wɪð ə ʃɑɹp snæp laɪk ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ʌv ə twɪɡ, ðə ɹæt tʃɹɛmbəl vaɪələnli ən wɑz stɪl, laɪɪŋ bɛn ɔlmoʊs dʌbəl.

The goblet was gone from the table. Where it had been, crouched a large rat, blinking at the light, sniffing the air warily. Ba'alzamon crooked his finger, and with a squeak the rat arched its back, forepaws lifting into the air while it balanced awkwardly on its hind feet. The finger curved more, and the rat toppled over, scrabbling frantically, pawing at nothing, squealing shrilly, its back bending, bending, bending. With a sharp snap like the breaking of a twig, the rat trembled violently and was still, lying bent almost double.

ɹænd swɑloʊd. "ɛniθɪŋ kən hæpən ɪn ə dʒɹim," hi mʌmbəld. wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ i swʌŋ ɪz fɪs bæk əɡɛns ðə dɔɹ əɡɛn. hɪz hæn hɝt, bʌɾ i stɪl dɪd nɑt weɪk ʌp.

Rand swallowed. "Anything can happen in a dream," he mumbled. Without looking he swung his fist back against the door again. His hand hurt, but he still did not wake up.

"ðɛn ɡoʊ tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɡoʊ tə ðə waɪt taʊɝ ən tɛl ðɛm. tɛl ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ə ðɪs . . . dʒɹim." ðə mæn læft; ɹænd fɛl ðə hiɾ ə ðə fleɪmz ɑn ɪz feɪs. "ðæɾ ɪz wʌn weɪ tə ɪskeɪp ðɛm. ðəl nɑt juz ju, ðɛn. noʊ, nɑt wən ðeɪ noʊ ðəɾ aɪ noʊ. bʌt wɪl ðeɪ lɛt jə lɪv, tə spɹɛd ðə teɪl ʌv wʌt ðeɪ du? ɑɹ jə ə bɪɡ ɪnʌf ful tə bɪliv ðeɪ wɪl? ði æʃəz ə mɛni laɪk jə ɑɹ skæɾɝd ɑn ðə sloʊps ə dʒɹæɡoʊnmaʊnt."

"Then go to the Aes Sedai. Go to the White Tower and tell them. Tell the Amyrlin Seat of this . . . dream." The man laughed; Rand felt the heat of the flames on his face. "That is one way to escape them. They will not use you, then. No, not when they know that I know. But will they let you live, to spread the tale of what they do? Are you a big enough fool to believe they will? The ashes of many like you are scattered on the slopes of Dragonmount."

"ðɪs ɪz ə dʒɹim," ɹænd sɛd, pæntɪŋ. "ɪts ə dʒɹim, ən aɪm gɑnə weɪk ʌp."

"This is a dream," Rand said, panting. "It's a dream, and I am going to wake up."

"wɪl ju?" aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ hi sɔ ðə mænz fɪŋɡɝ muv tə pɔɪn ət hɪm. "wɪl ju, ɪndid?" ðə fɪŋɡɝ kɹʊkəd, ən ɹænd skɹimd əz i ɑɹtʃt bækwɝdz, ɛvɹi mʌsəl ɪn ɪz bɑɾi fɔɹsɪŋ ɪm fɝðɝ. "wɪl jə ɛvɝ weɪk əɡɛn?"

"Will you?" Out of the corner of his eye he saw the man's finger move to point at him. "Will you, indeed?" The finger crooked, and Rand screamed as he arched backwards, every muscle in his body forcing him further. "Will you ever wake again?"

kənvʌlsɪvli ɹænd dʒɝkt ʌp ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, hɪz hænz taɪɾənɪŋ ɑn klɔθ. ə blæŋkət. peɪl munlaɪt ʃoʊn θɹu ðə sɪŋɡəl wɪndoʊ. ðə ʃæɾoʊd ʃeɪps ə ði ʌðɝ tu bɛdz. ə snɔɹ fɹəm wʌn ə ðɛm, laɪk kænvəs ɹɪpɪŋ: tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn. ə fju koʊlz ɡlimd əmʌŋ ði æʃəz ɑn ðə hɑɹθ.

Convulsively Rand jerked up in the darkness, his hands tightening on cloth. A blanket. Pale moonlight shone through the single window. The shadowed shapes of the other two beds. A snore from one of them, like canvas ripping: Thom Merrilin. A few coals gleamed among the ashes on the hearth.

ɪt hæd bɪn ə dʒɹim, ðɛn, laɪk ðət naɪtmɛɹ ɪn ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn ðə deɪ ʌv bɛl taɪn, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðəɾ i hæd hɝɾ ən dʌn ɔl dʒʌmbəld ɪn təɡɛðɝ wɪð oʊl teɪlz ən nɑnsɛns fɹəm noʊwɛɹ. hi pʊl ðə blæŋkəɾ ʌp ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt koʊl ðət meɪɾ ɪm ʃeɪk. hɪz hɛd hɝt, tu. pɝhæps mɔɪɹeɪn kəd də sʌmθɪŋ tə stɑp ðiz dʒɹimz. ʃi sɛd ʃi kəd hɛlp wɪð naɪtmɛɹz.

It had been a dream, then, like that nightmare in the Winespring Inn the day of Bel Tine, everything that he had heard and done all jumbled in together with old tales and nonsense from nowhere. He pulled the blanket up around his shoulders, but it was not cold that made him shake. His head hurt, too. Perhaps Moiraine could do something to stop these dreams. She said she could help with nightmares.

wɪð ə snɔɹɾ i leɪ bæk. wɝ ðə dʒɹimz ɹɪli bæɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə æsk ðə hɛlp ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, kəɾ ɛniθɪŋ i dɪd naʊ ɡɛɾ ɪm ɪn ɛni dipɝ? hi hæd lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, kʌm əweɪ wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt ðəɹ hæd nɑt bɪn ɛni tʃɔɪs, ʌv kɔɹs. soʊ dɪɾ i hæv ɛni tʃɔɪs bʌt tə tʃɹʌs hɝ? ən ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɪt wɑz əz bæɾ əz ðə dʒɹimz, θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt. hi hʌɾəld ʌndɝ ɪz blæŋkət, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ðə kɑmnəs ə ðə vɔɪd ðə weɪ tæm hæd tɔt hɪm, bʌt slip wɑz ə lɔŋ taɪm ɹɪtɝnɪŋ.

With a snort he lay back. Were the dreams really bad enough for him to ask the help of an Aes Sedai? On the other hand, could anything he did now get him in any deeper? He had left the Two Rivers, come away with an Aes Sedai. But there had not been any choice, of course. So did he have any choice but to trust her? An Aes Sedai? It was as bad as the dreams, thinking about it. He huddled under his blanket, trying to find the calmness of the void the way Tam had taught him, but sleep was a long time returning.


tʃæptɝ fɪftin


CHAPTER 15

stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ən fɹɛnz


Strangers and Friends

sʌnlaɪt stʃɹimɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪz nɛɹoʊ bɛd faɪnəli woʊk ɹænd aʊɾ ʌv ə dip bʌt ɹɛsləs slip. hi pʊld ə pɪloʊ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt ɹɪli ʃʌɾ aʊt ðə laɪt, ən i dɪd nɑt ɹɪli wɑnə ɡoʊ bæk tə slip. ðəɹ hæd bɪn mɔɹ dʒɹimz æftɝ ðə fɝst. hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛni bʌt ðə fɝst, bʌɾ i nu hi wɑntəd noʊ mɔɹ.

Sunlight streaming across his narrow bed finally woke Rand out of a deep but restless sleep. He pulled a pillow over his head, but it did not really shut out the light, and he did not really want to go back to sleep. There had been more dreams after the first. He could not remember any but the first, but he knew he wanted no more.

wɪð ə saɪ hi tɔs ðə pɪloʊ əsaɪɾ ən sæɾ ʌp, wɪnsɪŋ əz i stʃɹɛtʃt. ɔl ði eɪks i θɔt hæd soʊkt aʊɾ ɪn ðə bæθ wɝ bæk. ən ɪz hɛd stɪl hɝt, tu. ɪt dɪd nɑt sɝpɹaɪz hɪm. ə dʒɹim laɪk ðət wɑz ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ɛnibəɾi ə hɛdeɪk. ði ʌðɝz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi feɪɾəd, bʌt nɑt ðət wʌn.

With a sigh he tossed the pillow aside and sat up, wincing as he stretched. All the aches he thought had soaked out in the bath were back. And his head still hurt, too. It did not surprise him. A dream like that was enough to give anybody a headache. The others had already faded, but not that one.

ði ʌðɝ bɛdz wɝ ɛmpti. laɪt pɔɹɾ ɪn θɹu ðə wɪndoʊ əɾ ə stip æŋɡəl; ðə sʌn stʊd wɛl əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən. baɪ ðɪs aʊɝ bæk ɑn ðə fɑɹm i wəɾ əv ɔlɹɛɾi fɪkst sʌmθɪŋ tə iɾ ən bɪn wɛl ɪndə hɪz tʃɔɹz. hi skɹæmbəld aʊɾ ə bɛd, mʌɾɝɪŋ æŋɡɹəli tə hɪmsɛlf. ə sɪɾi tə si, ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ivən weɪk hɪm. ət list sʌmwʌn hæd sin ðət ðəɹ wɑz wɔɾɝ ɪn ðə pɪtʃɝ, ən stɪl wɔɹm, tu.

The other beds were empty. Light poured in through the window at a steep angle; the sun stood well above the horizon. By this hour back on the farm he would have already fixed something to eat and been well into his chores. He scrambled out of bed, muttering angrily to himself. A city to see, and they did not even wake him. At least someone had seen that there was water in the pitcher, and still warm, too.

hi wɑʃt ən dʒɹɛs kwɪkli, hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ ə moʊmən oʊvɝ tæmz sɔɹd. læn ən tɑm hæd lɛf ðɛɹ sæɾəlbæɡz ən blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊlz bɪhaɪn ɪn ðə ɹum, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝz sɔɹd wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə bi sin. læn hæd wɔɹn ɪz sɔɹɾ ɪn ɛmənz fild ivən bɪfɔɹ ðəɹ wɑz ɛni hɪn ə tʃɹʌbəl. hi θɔɾ i wəd teɪk ði oʊldɝ mænz lɛd. tɛlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪt wɑz nɑt kəz i hæɾ ɔfən deɪdʒɹimd əbaʊt wɔkɪŋ ðə stʃɹits ʌv ə ɹil sɪɾi wɛɹɪŋ ə sɔɹd, hi bɛltəɾ ɪɾ ɑn ən tɔst ɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ laɪk ə sæk.

He washed and dressed quickly, hesitating a moment over Tam's sword. Lan and Thom had left their saddlebags and blanketrolls behind in the room, of course, but the Warder's sword was nowhere to be seen. Lan had worn his sword in Emond's Field even before there was any hint of trouble. He thought he would take the older man's lead. Telling himself it was not because he had often daydreamed about walking the streets of a real city wearing a sword, he belted it on and tossed his cloak over his shoulder like a sack.

teɪkɪŋ ðə stɛɹz tu əɾ ə taɪm, hi hɝid daʊn tə ðə kɪtʃən. ðət wɑz ʃʊɹli ðə kwɪkɪs pleɪs tə ɡɛɾ ə baɪt, ən ɑn ɪz oʊnli deɪ ɪn bɛɹlən i dɪd nɑt wɑnə weɪst ɛni mɔɹ taɪm ðən i ɔlɹɛɾi hæd. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, bʌt ðeɪ cʊɾə weɪk mi.

Taking the stairs two at a time, he hurried down to the kitchen. That was surely the quickest place to get a bite, and on his only day in Baerlon he did not want to waste any more time than he already had. Blood and ashes, but they could have waked me.

mæstɝ fɪtʃ wɑz ɪn ðə kɪtʃən, kənfɹʌntɪŋ ə plʌmp wʊmən huz ɑɹmz wɝ kʌvɝɾ ɪn flaʊɝ tə hɝ ɛlboʊz, ɑbviəsli ðə kʊk. ɹæðɝ, ʃi wɑz kənfɹʌntɪŋ hɪm, ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ fɪŋɡɝ ʌndɝ ɪz noʊz. sɝvɪŋ meɪdz ən skʌljənz, pɑtbɔɪz ən spɪtbɔɪz, hɝiɾ əbaʊt ðɛɹ tæsks, ɪlæbɹətli ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm.

Master Fitch was in the kitchen, confronting a plump woman whose arms were covered in flour to her elbows, obviously the cook. Rather, she was confronting him, shaking her finger under his nose. Serving maids and scullions, potboys and spitboys, hurried about their tasks, elaborately ignoring what was going on in front of them.

". . . maɪ sɹi ɪz ə ɡʊd kæt," ðə kʊk wɑz seɪɪŋ ʃɑɹpli, "æn aɪ woʊn hɪɹ ə wɝɾ ʌðɝwaɪz, dʒju hɪɹ? kəmpleɪnɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm duɪŋ ɪz dʒɑb tu wɛl, ðæts wʌt jəɹ duɪŋ, ɪf jə æsk mi."

". . . my Cirri is a good cat," the cook was saying sharply, "and I won't hear a word otherwise, do you hear? Complaining about him doing his job too well, that's what you're doing, if you ask me."

"aɪ hæv hæd kəmpleɪns," mæstɝ fɪtʃ mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ɪn. "kəmpleɪns, mɪstʃɹəs. hæf ðə ɡɛsts - "

"I have had complaints," Master Fitch managed to get in. "Complaints, mistress. Half the guests - "

"aɪ woʊn hɪɹ ʌv ɪt. aɪ dʒʌst woʊn hɪɹ ʌv ɪt. ɪf ðeɪ wɑnə kəmpleɪn əbaʊt maɪ kæt, lɛɾ əm də ðə kʊkɪŋ. maɪ pʊɹ oʊl kæt, huz dʒʌs duɪŋ ɪz dʒɑb, ən mi, wɪl ɡoʊ sʌmwɛɹ wɛɹ wɝ əpɹiʃieɪɾɪd, si ɪf wi doʊnt." ʃi əntaɪɾ əɹ eɪpɹən ən stɑɹɾəd tə lɪft ɪɾ oʊvɝ əɹ hɛd.

"I won't hear of it. I just won't hear of it. If they want to complain about my cat, let them do the cooking. My poor old cat, who's just doing his job, and me, we'll go somewhere where we're appreciated, see if we don't." She untied her apron and started to lift it over her head.

"noʊ!" mæstɝ fɪtʃ jɛlpt, ən lɛp tə stɑp hɝ. ðeɪ dænst ɪn ə sɝkəl wɪð ðə kʊk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk əɹ eɪpɹən ɔf ən ði ɪnkipɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊɾ ɪt bæk ɑn hɝ. "noʊ, sɛɹə," hi pæntɪd. "ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ ðɪs. noʊ nid, aɪ seɪ! wʌt wəɾ aɪ də wɪθaʊt ju? sɹiz ə faɪn kæt. ən ɛksələn kæt. hiz ðə bɛs kæɾ ɪn bɛɹlən. ɪf ɛniwʌn ɛls kəmpleɪnz, əl tɛl əm tə bi θæŋkfəl ðə kæɾ ɪz duɪŋ ɪz dʒɑb. jɛs, θæŋkfəl. jə mʌsnt ɡoʊ. sɛɹə? sɛɹə!"

"No!" Master Fitch yelped, and leaped to stop her. They danced in a circle with the cook trying to take her apron off and the innkeeper trying to put it back on her. "No, Sara," he panted. "There's no need for this. No need, I say! What would I do without you? Cirri's a fine cat. An excellent cat. He's the best cat in Baerlon. If anyone else complains, I'll tell them to be thankful the cat is doing his job. Yes, thankful. You mustn't go. Sara? Sara!"

ðə kʊk stɑp ðɛɹ sɝkəlɪŋ ən mænədʒ tə snætʃ əɹ eɪpɹən fɹi ʌv hɪm. "ɔl ɹaɪt, ðɛn. ɔl ɹaɪt." klʌtʃɪŋ ði eɪpɹən ɪn boʊθ hænz, ʃi stɪl dɪd nɑt ɹɛɾi ɪt. "bʌɾ ɪf jə ɪkspɛk mi tə hæv ɛniθɪŋ ɹɛɾi fəɹ mɪddeɪ, jud bɛst ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ ən lemi ɡɛt tə ɪt. ðɪs meɪ bi jəɹ ɪn, bʌɾ ɪts maɪ kɪtʃən. ənlɛs jə wɑnə də ðə kʊkɪŋ?" ʃi meɪɾ əz ɪf tə hæn ði eɪpɹən tə hɪm.

The cook stopped their circling and managed to snatch her apron free of him. "All right, then. All right." Clutching the apron in both hands, she still did not retie it. "But if you expect me to have anything ready for midday, you'd best get out of here and let me get to it. This may be your inn, but it's my kitchen. Unless you want to do the cooking?" She made as if to hand the apron to him.

mæstɝ fɪtʃ stɛp bæk wɪð ɪz hænz spɹɛd waɪd. hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ðən stɑpt, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. ðə kɪtʃən hɛlp stɪl stuɾiəsli ɪɡnɔɹd ðə kʊk ən ði ɪnkipɝ, ən ɹænd bɪɡæn ən ɪntɛnsɪv sɝtʃ ə hɪz koʊt pɑkəts, ðoʊ ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə kɔɪn mɔɪɹeɪn hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɪn əm bʌɾ ə fju kɑpɝz ən ə hændfʊl ʌv ɑdz ən ɛnz. hɪz pɑkət naɪf ən ʃɑɹpənɪŋ stoʊn. tu spɛɹ bɑstʃɹɪŋz ən ə pis ə stʃɹɪŋ i hæd θɔt maɪt bi jusfəl.

Master Fitch stepped back with his hands spread wide. He opened his mouth, then stopped, looking around for the first time. The kitchen help still studiously ignored the cook and the innkeeper, and Rand began an intensive search of his coat pockets, though except for the coin Moiraine had given him there was nothing in them but a few coppers and a handful of odds and ends. His pocket knife and sharpening stone. Two spare bowstrings and a piece of string he had thought might be useful.

"aɪ æm ʃʊɹ, sɛɹə," mæstɝ fɪtʃ sɛd kɛɹfəli, "ðæɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɪl bi ʌp tə jəɹ juʒəwəl ɛksələns." wɪð ðəɾ i tʊk wʌn læst səspɪʃəs lʊk ət ðə kɪtʃən hɛlp, ðən lɛft wɪð əz mʌtʃ dɪɡnəɾi əz i kəd mænədʒ.

"I am sure, Sara," Master Fitch said carefully, "that everything will be up to your usual excellence." With that he took one last suspicious look at the kitchen help, then left with as much dignity as he could manage.

sɛɹə weɪɾəd əntɪl i wɑz ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ bɹɪskli taɪɪŋ əɹ eɪpɹən stʃɹɪŋz əɡɛn, ðən fæsən əɹ aɪ ɑn ɹænd. "aɪ səpoʊz jə wɑn sʌmθɪŋ tə it, ɛ? wɛl, kʌm ɑn ɪn." ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə kwɪk ɡɹɪn. "aɪ doʊn baɪt, aɪ doʊnt, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt jə meɪ hæv sin əz jə ʃʊdnt. sil, ɡɛt ðə læd səm bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz ən mɪlk. ðæts ɔl ðəɹ ɪz ɹaɪt naʊ. sɪt jɝsɛlf, læd. jəɹ fɹɛnz əv ɔl ɡɔn aʊt, ɪksɛpt wʌn læɾ aɪ ʌndɝstænd wɑzn filɪŋ wɛl, ən aɪ ɪkspɛk jəl bi wɑntɪŋ tə də ðə seɪm."

Sara waited until he was gone before briskly tying her apron strings again, then fastened her eye on Rand. "I suppose you want something to eat, eh? Well, come on in." She gave him a quick grin. "I don't bite, I don't, no matter what you may have seen as you shouldn't. Ciel, get the lad some bread and cheese and milk. That's all there is right now. Sit yourself, lad. Your friends have all gone out, except one lad I understand wasn't feeling well, and I expect you'll be wanting to do the same."

wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz bɹɔɾ ə tʃɹeɪ waɪl ɹænd tʊk ə stul ət ðə teɪbəl. hi bɪɡæn iɾɪŋ əz ðə kʊk wɛn bæk tə niɾɪŋ əɹ bɹɛd doʊ, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt fɪnɪʃt tɔkɪŋ.

One of the serving maids brought a tray while Rand took a stool at the table. He began eating as the cook went back to kneading her bread dough, but she was not finished talking.

"ju mʌsnt teɪk ɛni maɪn ʌv wʌt jə sɔ, naʊ. mæstɝ fɪtʃ ɪz ə ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf mæn, ðoʊ ðə bɛst ə jə ɑɹən ɛni bɑɹɡənz. ɪts ðə foʊk kəmpleɪnɪŋ əz əz ɪm ɑn ɛdʒ, ən wʌt də ðeɪv tə kəmpleɪn əbaʊt? wəd ðeɪ ɹæðɝ faɪn laɪv ɹæts ðən dɛd wʌnz? ðoʊ ɪɾ ɪzən laɪk sɹi tə liv ɪz hændiwɝk bɪhaɪnd. ən oʊvɝ ə dʌzən? sɹi wʊdn lɛt soʊ mɛni ɡɛɾ ɪndə ði ɪn, hi wʊdnt. ɪts ə klin pleɪs, tu, ən nɑt wʌn tə bi soʊ tʃɹʌbəld. ən ɔl wɪð bæks bɹoʊkən." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ət ðə stʃɹeɪnʒnəs ʌv ɪɾ ɔl.

"You mustn't take any mind of what you saw, now. Master Fitch is a good enough man, though the best of you aren't any bargains. It's the folk complaining as has him on edge, and what do they have to complain about? Would they rather find live rats than dead ones? Though it isn't like Cirri to leave his handiwork behind. And over a dozen? Cirri wouldn't let so many get into the inn, he wouldn't. It's a clean place, too, and not one to be so troubled. And all with backs broken." She shook her head at the strangeness of it all.

ðə bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz tɝn tə æʃəz ɪn ɹændz maʊð. "ðɛɹ bæks wɝ bɹoʊkən?"

The bread and cheese turned to ashes in Rand's mouth. "Their backs were broken?"

ðə kʊk weɪvd ə flaʊɝi hænd. "θɪŋk ɑn hæpiɝ θɪŋz, ðæts maɪ weɪ ʌv lʊkɪŋ. ðɛɹz ə ɡlimən, jə noʊ. ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum ɹaɪt ðɪs mɪnət. bʌt ðɛn, jə keɪm wɪð hɪm, dɪdn ju? jə ɑɹ wʌn ə ðoʊz əz keɪm wɪð mɪstʃɹəs æliz læst ivnɪŋ, ɑɹən ju? aɪ θɔt jə wɝ. aɪ woʊnt ɡɛt mʌtʃ tʃæns tə si ðɪs ɡlimən maɪsɛlf, aɪm θɪŋkɪŋ, nɑt wɪð ði ɪn əz fʊl əz ɪɾ ɪz, ən moʊst ə ðɛm ɹɪfɹæf daʊn fɹəm ðə maɪnz." ʃi ɡeɪv ðə doʊ ən ɪspɛʃli hɛvi θʌmp. "nɑt ðə sɔɹt wid lɛɾ ɪn moʊs taɪmz, oʊnli ðə hoʊl taʊn ɪz fɪld ʌp wɪð ðɛm. bɛɾɝ ðən səm ðeɪ kəd bi, ðoʊ, aɪ səpoʊz. waɪ, aɪ hævən sin ə ɡlimən sɪns bɪfɔɹ ðə wɪntɝ, ænd. . . ."

The cook waved a floury hand. "Think on happier things, that's my way of looking. There's a gleeman, you know. In the common room right this minute. But then, you came with him, didn't you? You are one of those as came with Mistress Alys last evening, aren't you? I thought you were. I won't get much chance to see this gleeman myself, I'm thinking, not with the inn as full as it is, and most of them riffraff down from the mines." She gave the dough an especially heavy thump. "Not the sort we'd let in most times, only the whole town is filled up with them. Better than some they could be, though, I suppose. Why, I haven't seen a gleeman since before the winter, and. . . ."

ɹænd eɪt məkænɪkli, nɑt teɪstɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ, nɑt lɪsnɪŋ tə wʌt ðə kʊk sɛd. dɛd ɹæts, wɪð ðɛɹ bæks bɹoʊkən. hi fɪnɪʃt ɪz bɹɛkfəs heɪstəli, stæmɝɾ ɪz θæŋks, ən hɝiɾ aʊt. hi hæd tə tɔk tə sʌmwʌn.

Rand ate mechanically, not tasting anything, not listening to what the cook said. Dead rats, with their backs broken. He finished his breakfast hastily, stammered his thanks, and hurried out. He had to talk to someone.

ðə kɑmən ɹum ə ðə stæɡ ən laɪən ʃɛɹd lɪɾəl ɪksɛpt ɪts pɝpəs wɪð ðə seɪm ɹum ət ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn. ɪt wɑz twaɪs əz waɪɾ ən θɹi taɪmz əz lɔŋ, ən kʌlɝfəl pɪktʃɝz ʌv ɔɹneɪt bɪldɪŋz wɪð ɡɑɹɾənz ə tɔl tʃɹiz ən bɹaɪt flaʊɝz wɝ peɪntəd haɪ ɑn ðə wɔlz. ɪnstɛɾ ʌv wʌn hjudʒ faɪɝpleɪs, ə hɑɹθ bleɪzd ɑn itʃ wɔl, ən skɔɹz ə teɪbəlz fɪl ðə flɔɹ, wɪð ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi tʃɛɹ, bɛntʃ, əɹ stul teɪkən.

The common room of the Stag and Lion shared little except its purpose with the same room at the Winespring Inn. It was twice as wide and three times as long, and colorful pictures of ornate buildings with gardens of tall trees and bright flowers were painted high on the walls. Instead of one huge fireplace, a hearth blazed on each wall, and scores of tables filled the floor, with almost every chair, bench, or stool taken.

ɛvɹi mæn əmʌŋ ðə kɹaʊɾ ə peɪtʃɹənz wɪð paɪps ɪn ðɛɹ tiθ ən mʌɡz ɪn ðɛɹ fɪsts lin fɔɹwɝd wɪð ɪz ətɛnʃən ɑn wʌn θɪŋ: tɑm, stændɪŋ ətɑp ə teɪbəl ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum, hɪz mɛni-kʌlɝd kloʊk tɔst oʊvɝ ə nɪɹbaɪ tʃɛɹ. ivən mæstɝ fɪtʃ hɛld ə sɪlvɝ tæŋkɝɾ ən ə pɑlɪʃɪŋ klɔθ ɪn moʊʃənləs hænz.

Every man among the crowd of patrons with pipes in their teeth and mugs in their fists leaned forward with his attention on one thing: Thom, standing atop a table in the middle of the room, his many-colored cloak tossed over a nearby chair. Even Master Fitch held a silver tankard and a polishing cloth in motionless hands.

". . . pɹænsɪŋ, sɪlvɝ hʊvz ən pɹaʊd, ɑɹtʃt nɛks," tɑm pɹoʊkleɪmd, waɪl sʌmhaʊ simɪŋ nɑɾ oʊnli tə bi ɹaɪɾɪŋ ə hɔɹs, bʌt tə bi wʌn ʌv ə lɔŋ pɹəsɛʃən ə ɹaɪɾɝz. "sɪlkən meɪnz flʌɾɝ wɪð tɔs hɛdz. ə θaʊzən stʃɹimɪŋ bænɝz wɪp ɹeɪnboʊz əɡɛnst ən ɛnləs skaɪ. ə hʌnʒɹəd bɹeɪzən-θɹoʊɾɪd tʃɹʌmpəts ʃɪvɝ ði ɛɹ, ən dʒɹʌmz ɹæɾəl laɪk θʌndɝ. weɪv ɑn weɪv, tʃɪɹz ɹoʊl fɹəm wɑtʃɝz ɪn ðɛɹ θaʊzənz, ɹoʊl əkɹɔs ðə ɹuftɑps ən taʊɝz ʌv ɪljən, kɹæʃ ən bɹeɪk ənhɝɾ ɝaʊn ðə θaʊzən ɪɹz ə ɹaɪɾɝz huz aɪz ən hɑɹts ʃaɪn wɪð ðɛɹ seɪkɹəd kwɛst. ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn ɹaɪdz fɔɹθ, ɹaɪdz tə sik ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ ðət wɪl sʌmən ðə hɪɹoʊz ə ði eɪdʒəz bæk fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv tə bæɾəl fəɹ ðə laɪt. . . ."

". . . prancing, silver hooves and proud, arched necks," Thom proclaimed, while somehow seeming not only to be riding a horse, but to be one of a long procession of riders. "Silken manes flutter with tossed heads. A thousand streaming banners whip rainbows against an endless sky. A hundred brazen-throated trumpets shiver the air, and drums rattle like thunder. Wave on wave, cheers roll from watchers in their thousands, roll across the rooftops and towers of Illian, crash and break unheard around the thousand ears of riders whose eyes and hearts shine with their sacred quest. The Great Hunt of the Horn rides forth, rides to seek the Horn of Valere that will summon the heroes of the Ages back from the grave to battle for the Light. . . ."

ɪt wɑz wʌt ðə ɡlimən hæd kɔl pleɪn tʃænt, ðoʊz naɪts bɪsaɪd ðə faɪɝ ɑn ðə ɹaɪd nɔɹθ. stɔɹiz, hi sɛd, wɝ toʊld ɪn θɹi vɔɪsəz, haɪ tʃænt, pleɪn tʃænt, ən kɑmən, wɪtʃ mɛn sɪmpli tɛlɪŋ ɪt ðə weɪ jə maɪt tɛl jəɹ neɪbɝ əbaʊt jəɹ kɹɑp. tɑm toʊl stɔɹiz ɪn kɑmən, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə haɪɾ ɪz kəntɛmp fəɹ ðə vɔɪs.

It was what the gleeman had called Plain Chant, those nights beside the fire on the ride north. Stories, he said, were told in three voices, High Chant, Plain Chant, and Common, which meant simply telling it the way you might tell your neighbor about your crop. Thom told stories in Common, but he did not bother to hide his contempt for the voice.

ɹænd kloʊz ðə dɔɹ wɪθaʊt ɡoʊɪŋ ɪn ən slʌmpt əɡɛns ðə wɔl. hi wəd ɡɛt noʊ ædvaɪs fɹəm tɑm. mɔɪɹeɪn - wʌt wəd ʃi də ɪf ʃi nu?

Rand closed the door without going in and slumped against the wall. He would get no advice from Thom. Moiraine - what would she do if she knew?

hi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə pipəl stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm əz ðeɪ pæst, ən ɹilaɪzd i wɑz mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. smuðɪŋ ɪz koʊt, hi stʃɹeɪɾənd. hi hæd tə tɔk tə sʌmbɑɾi. ðə kʊk hæd sɛd wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz hæd nɑt ɡɔn aʊt. ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə ɹʌn.

He became aware of people staring at him as they passed, and realized he was muttering under his breath. Smoothing his coat, he straightened. He had to talk to somebody. The cook had said one of the others had not gone out. It was an effort not to run.

wən i ɹæpt ɑn ðə dɔɹ ə ðə ɹum wɛɹ ði ʌðɝ bɔɪz hæd slɛpt ən poʊkt ɪz hɛɾ ɪn, oʊnli pɛɹɪn wɑz ðɛɹ, laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪz bɛɾ ən stɪl nɑt dʒɹɛst. hi twɪstəɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ðə pɪloʊ tə lʊk ət ɹænd, ðən kloʊzd ɪz aɪz əɡɛn. mæts baʊ ən kwɪvɝ wɝ pɹɑpt ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ.

When he rapped on the door of the room where the other boys had slept and poked his head in, only Perrin was there, lying on his bed and still not dressed. He twisted his head on the pillow to look at Rand, then closed his eyes again. Mat's bow and quiver were propped in the corner.

"aɪ hɝd jə wɝn filɪŋ wɛl," ɹænd sɛd. hi keɪm ɪn ən sæɾ ɑn ðə nɛks bɛd. "aɪ dʒʌst wɑntəd tə tɔk. aɪ. . . ." hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ tə bɹɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp, hi ɹilaɪzd. "ɪf jəɹ sɪk," hi sɛd, hæf stændɪŋ, "meɪbi jə ɔt tə slip. aɪ kən ɡoʊ."

"I heard you weren't feeling well," Rand said. He came in and sat on the next bed. "I just wanted to talk. I. . . ." He did not know how to bring it up, he realized. "If you're sick," he said, half standing, "maybe you ought to sleep. I can go."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf əl ɛvɝ slip əɡɛn." pɛɹɪn saɪd. "aɪ hæɾ ə bæd dʒɹim, ɪf jə mʌs noʊ, ən kʊdnt ɡɛt bæk tə slip. mæt wɪl bi kwɪk ɪnʌf tə tɛl ju. hi læf ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, wən aɪ toʊld əm waɪ aɪ wɑz tu taɪɝd tə ɡoʊ aʊt wɪð hɪm, bʌɾ i dʒɹimd, tu. aɪ lɪsən tə hɪm fəɹ moʊst ə ðə naɪt, tɔsɪŋ ən mʌɾɝɪŋ, ən jə kæn tɛl mi hi ɡɑɾ ə ɡʊd naɪts slip." hi θɹu ə θɪk ɑɹm əkɹɔs ɪz aɪz. "laɪt, bʌɾ aɪm taɪɝd. meɪbi ɪf aɪ dʒʌst steɪ hɪɹ fəɹ ən aʊɝ əɹ tu, əl fil laɪk ɡɛɾɪŋ ʌp. mæt wɪl nɛvɝ lemi hɪɹ ði ɛn ʌv ɪɾ ɪf aɪ mɪs siɪŋ bɛɹlən kəz ʌv ə dʒɹim."

"I don't know if I'll ever sleep again." Perrin sighed. "I had a bad dream, if you must know, and couldn't get back to sleep. Mat will be quick enough to tell you. He laughed this morning, when I told them why I was too tired to go out with him, but he dreamed, too. I listened to him for most of the night, tossing and muttering, and you can't tell me he got a good night's sleep." He threw a thick arm across his eyes. "Light, but I'm tired. Maybe if I just stay here for an hour or two, I'll feel like getting up. Mat will never let me hear the end of it if I miss seeing Baerlon because of a dream."

ɹænd sloʊli loʊɝd hɪmsɛlf tə ðə bɛɾ əɡɛn. hi lɪkt ɪz lɪps, ðən sɛd kwɪkli, "dɪɾ i kɪl ə ɹæt?"

Rand slowly lowered himself to the bed again. He licked his lips, then said quickly, "Did he kill a rat?"

pɛɹɪn loʊɝɾ ɪz ɑɹm ən stɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "ju, tu?" hi sɛd faɪnəli. wən ɹænd nɑɾəd, hi sɛd, "aɪ wɪʃ aɪ wɑz bæk hoʊm. hi toʊl mi . . . hi sɛd. . . . wʌɾ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ tə du? hæv jə toʊl mɔɪɹeɪn?"

Perrin lowered his arm and stared at him. "You, too?" he said finally. When Rand nodded, he said, "I wish I was back home. He told me . . . he said. . . . What are we going to do? Have you told Moiraine?"

"noʊ. nɑt jɛt. meɪbi aɪ woʊnt. aɪ doʊnt noʊ. wʌɾ əbaʊt ju?"

"No. Not yet. Maybe I won't. I don't know. What about you?"

"hi sɛd. . . . blʌɾ ən æʃəz, ɹænd, aɪ doʊnt noʊ." pɛɹɪn ɹeɪzd ʌp ɑn ɪz ɛlboʊ əbɹʌpli. "du jə θɪŋk mæt hæd ðə seɪm dʒɹim? hi læft, bʌɾ ɪt saʊndəd fɔɹst, ən i lʊk fʌni wən aɪ sɛɾ aɪ kʊdn slip kəz ʌv ə dʒɹim."

"He said. . . . Blood and ashes, Rand, I don't know." Perrin raised up on his elbow abruptly. "Do you think Mat had the same dream? He laughed, but it sounded forced, and he looked funny when I said I couldn't sleep because of a dream."

"meɪbi hi dɪd," ɹænd sɛd. ɡɪltəli, hi fɛlt ɹɪlivd i wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn. "aɪ wɑz gɑnə æsk tɑm fəɹ ædvaɪs. hiz sin ə lɑɾ ə ðə wɝld. jə . . . jə doʊn θɪŋk wi ʃəd tɛl mɔɪɹeɪn, də ju?"

"Maybe he did," Rand said. Guiltily, he felt relieved he was not the only one. "I was going to ask Thom for advice. He's seen a lot of the world. You . . . you don't think we should tell Moiraine, do you?"

pɛɹɪn fɛl bæk ɑn ɪz pɪloʊ. "juv hɝd ðə stɔɹiz əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. dʒju θɪŋk wi kən tʃɹʌs tɑm? ɪf wi kən tʃɹʌst ɛnibəɾi. ɹænd, ɪf wi ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðɪs əlaɪv, ɪf wi ɛvɝ ɡɛt bæk hoʊm, ən jə hɪɹ mi seɪ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt livɪŋ ɛmənz fild, ivən tə ɡoʊ əz fɑɹ əz wɑtʃ hɪl, jə kɪk mi. ɔl ɹaɪt?"

Perrin fell back on his pillow. "You've heard the stories about Aes Sedai. Do you think we can trust Thom? If we can trust anybody. Rand, if we get out of this alive, if we ever get back home, and you hear me say anything about leaving Emond's Field, even to go as far as Watch Hill, you kick me. All right?"

"ðæts noʊ weɪ tə tɔk," ɹænd sɛd. hi pʊɾ ɑn ə smaɪl, əz tʃɪɹfəl əz i kəd meɪk ɪt. "ʌv kɔɹs wɪl ɡɛt hoʊm. kʌm ɑn, ɡɛɾ ʌp. wɝ ɪn ə sɪɾi, ən wɪv ə hoʊl deɪ tə si ɪt. wɛɹ ɑɹ jəɹ kloʊðz?"

"That's no way to talk," Rand said. He put on a smile, as cheerful as he could make it. "Of course we'll get home. Come on, get up. We're in a city, and we have a whole day to see it. Where are your clothes?"

"ju ɡoʊ. aɪ dʒʌst wɑnə laɪ hɪɹ əwaɪl." pɛɹɪn pʊɾ ɪz ɑɹm bæk əkɹɔs ɪz aɪz. "ju ɡoʊ əhɛd. əl kætʃ jə ʌp ɪn ən aʊɝ əɹ tu."

"You go. I just want to lie here awhile." Perrin put his arm back across his eyes. "You go ahead. I'll catch you up in an hour or two."

"ɪts jəɹ lɔs," ɹænd sɛɾ əz i ɡɑɾ ʌp. "θɪŋk ʌv wʌt jə maɪt mɪs." hi stɑpt ət ðə dɔɹ. "bɛɹlən. haʊ mɛni taɪmz əv wi tɔkt əbaʊt siɪŋ bɛɹlən wʌn deɪ?" pɛɹɪn leɪ ðəɹ wɪð ɪz aɪz kʌvɝɾ ən dɪd nɑt seɪ ə wɝd. æftɝ ə mɪnət ɹænd stɛpt aʊɾ ən kloʊz ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

"It's your loss," Rand said as he got up. "Think of what you might miss." He stopped at the door. "Baerlon. How many times have we talked about seeing Baerlon one day?" Perrin lay there with his eyes covered and did not say a word. After a minute Rand stepped out and closed the door behind him.

ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ hi lin əɡɛns ðə wɔl, hɪz smaɪl feɪɾɪŋ. hɪz hɛd stɪl hɝt; ɪt wɑz wɝs, nɑt bɛɾɝ. hi kəd nɑt wɝk ʌp mʌtʃ ɪnθuziæzəm fəɹ bɛɹlən, iðɝ, nɑt naʊ. hi kəd nɑt sʌmən ɪnθuziæzəm əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ.

In the hallway he leaned against the wall, his smile fading. His head still hurt; it was worse, not better. He could not work up much enthusiasm for Baerlon, either, not now. He could not summon enthusiasm about anything.

ə tʃeɪmbɝmeɪd keɪm baɪ, hɝ ɑɹmz fʊl ə ʃits, ən ɡeɪv ɪm ə kənsɝn lʊk. bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd spik i muvd ɔf daʊn ðə hɔl, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ ɪndə hɪz kloʊk. tɑm wəd nɑt bi fɪnɪʃt ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum fəɹ aʊɝz jɛt. hi maɪɾ əz wɛl si wʌɾ i kʊd. pɝhæps i kəd faɪn mæt, ən si ɪf bælzəmən hæd bɪn ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz, tu. hi wɛn daʊnstɛɹz mɔɹ sloʊli ðɪs taɪm, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tɛmpəl.

A chambermaid came by, her arms full of sheets, and gave him a concerned look. Before she could speak he moved off down the hall, shrugging into his cloak. Thom would not be finished in the common room for hours yet. He might as well see what he could. Perhaps he could find Mat, and see if Ba'alzamon had been in his dreams, too. He went downstairs more slowly this time, rubbing his temple.

ðə stɛɹz ɛndəd nɪɹ ðə kɪtʃən, soʊ hi tʊk ðət weɪ aʊt, nɑɾɪŋ tə sɛɹə bʌt hɝiɪŋ ɑn wən ʃi simd əbaʊt tə teɪk ʌp wɛɹ ʃi hæd lɛft ɔf. ðə steɪbliɑɹd wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ mʌtʃ, stændɪŋ ɪn ðə steɪbəl dɔɹ, ən wʌn ə ði ʌðɝ ɑslɝz kæɹiɪŋ ə sæk ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ɪndə ðə steɪbəl. ɹænd nɑɾəd tə mʌtʃ, tu, bʌt ðə steɪbəlmən ɡeɪv ɪm ə tʃɹʌkjələn lʊk ən wɛn ɪnsaɪd. hi hoʊp ðə ɹɛst ə ðə sɪɾi wɑz mɔɹ laɪk sɛɹə ən lɛs laɪk mʌtʃ. ɹɛɾi tə si wʌɾ ə sɪɾi wɑz laɪk, hi pɪkt ʌp ɪz stɛp.

The stairs ended near the kitchen, so he took that way out, nodding to Sara but hurrying on when she seemed about to take up where she had left off. The stableyard was empty except for Mutch, standing in the stable door, and one of the other ostlers carrying a sack on his shoulder into the stable. Rand nodded to Mutch, too, but the stableman gave him a truculent look and went inside. He hoped the rest of the city was more like Sara and less like Mutch. Ready to see what a city was like, he picked up his step.

ət ði oʊpən steɪbliɑɹd ɡeɪts, hi stɑpt ən stɛɹd. pipəl pæk ðə stʃɹit laɪk ʃip ɪn ə pɛn, pipəl swɑð tə ði aɪz ɪn kloʊks ən koʊts, hæts pʊl daʊn əɡɛns ðə koʊld, wivɪŋ ɪn ən aʊɾ əɾ ə kwɪk stɛp əz ðoʊ ðə wɪnd wɪslɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə ɹuftɑps blu ðɛm əlɔŋ, ɛlboʊɪŋ pæst wʌn ənʌðɝ wɪð bɛɹli ə wɝɾ əɹ ə ɡlæns. ɔl stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, hi θɔt. nʌn ə ðɛm noʊ itʃ ʌðɝ.

At the open stableyard gates, he stopped and stared. People packed the street like sheep in a pen, people swathed to the eyes in cloaks and coats, hats pulled down against the cold, weaving in and out at a quick step as though the wind whistling over the rooftops blew them along, elbowing past one another with barely a word or a glance. All strangers, he thought. None of them know each other.

ðə smɛlz wɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ, tu, ʃɑɹp ən saʊɝ ən swiɾ ɔl mɪkst ɪn ə hɑdʒpɑdʒ ðət hæɾ ɪm ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz noʊz. ivən ət ðə haɪɾ ə fɛstəvəl i hæd nɛvɝ sin soʊ mɛni pipəl soʊ dʒæm təɡɛðɝ. nɑɾ ivən hæf soʊ mɛni. ən ðɪs wɑz oʊnli wʌn stʃɹit. mæstɝ fɪtʃ ən ðə kʊk sɛd ðə hoʊl sɪɾi wɑz fʊl. ðə hoʊl sɪɾi . . . laɪk ðɪs?

The smells were strange, too, sharp and sour and sweet all mixed in a hodgepodge that had him rubbing his nose. Even at the height of Festival he had never seen so many people so jammed together. Not even half so many. And this was only one street. Master Fitch and the cook said the whole city was full. The whole city . . . like this?

hi bæk sloʊli əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɡeɪt, əweɪ fɹəm ðə stʃɹit fʊl ə pipəl. ɪt ɹɪli wɑz nɑt ɹaɪt tə ɡoʊ ɔf ən liv pɛɹɪn sɪk ɪn bɛd. ən wʌɾ ɪf tɑm fɪnɪʃt ɪz stɔɹitɛlɪŋ waɪl ɹænd wɑz ɔf ɪn ðə sɪɾi? ðə ɡlimən maɪt ɡoʊ aʊt hɪmsɛlf, ən ɹænd niɾəd tə tɔk tə sʌmwʌn. mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ tə weɪɾ ə bɪt. hi bɹiðd ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif əz i tɝn ɪz bæk ɑn ðə swɔɹmɪŋ stʃɹit.

He backed slowly away from the gate, away from the street full of people. It really was not right to go off and leave Perrin sick in bed. And what if Thom finished his storytelling while Rand was off in the city? The gleeman might go out himself, and Rand needed to talk to someone. Much better to wait a bit. He breathed a sigh of relief as he turned his back on the swarming street.

ɡoʊɪŋ bæk ɪnsaɪd ði ɪn dɪd nɑɾ əpil tə hɪm, ðoʊ, nɑt wɪð ɪz hɛdeɪk. hi sæɾ ɑn ən ʌpɛndəd bæɹəl əɡɛns ðə bæk ə ði ɪn ən hoʊp ðə koʊld ɛɹ maɪt hɛlp ɪz hɛd.

Going back inside the inn did not appeal to him, though, not with his headache. He sat on an upended barrel against the back of the inn and hoped the cold air might help his head.

mʌtʃ keɪm tə ðə steɪbəl dɔɹ fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm tə stɛɹ ət hɪm, ən ivən əkɹɔs ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ i kəd meɪk aʊt ðə fɛloʊz dɪsəpɹuvɪŋ skaʊl. wɑz ɪt kʌntʃɹi pipəl ðə mæn dɪd nɑt laɪk? əɹ hæɾ i bɪn ɪmbɛɹəs baɪ mæstɝ fɪtʃ ɡɹiɾɪŋ əm æftɝ i hæd tʃɹaɪd tə tʃeɪs əm ɔf fəɹ kʌmɪŋ ɪn ðə bæk weɪ? meɪbi hiz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, hi θɔt, ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə tʃʌkəl ət ði aɪdiə, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə fʌni θɔt. hi ɹʌbd ɪz hæn əlɔŋ ðə hɪlt ə tæmz sɔɹd. ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ lɛf ðət wɑz fʌni əɾ ɔl.

Mutch came to the stable door from time to time to stare at him, and even across the stableyard he could make out the fellow's disapproving scowl. Was it country people the man did not like? Or had he been embarrassed by Master Fitch greeting them after he had tried to chase them off for coming in the back way? Maybe he's a Darkfriend, he thought, expecting to chuckle at the idea, but it was not a funny thought. He rubbed his hand along the hilt of Tam's sword. There was not much left that was funny at all.

"ə ʃɛpɝd wɪð ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd," sɛɾ ə loʊ, wʊmənz vɔɪs. "ðæts ɔlmoʊst ɪnʌf tə meɪk mi bɪliv ɛniθɪŋ. wʌt tʃɹʌbəl ɑɹ jə ɪn, daʊnkaʊntʃɹi bɔɪ?"

"A shepherd with a heron-mark sword," said a low, woman's voice. "That's almost enough to make me believe anything. What trouble are you in, downcountry boy?"

stɑɹɾəld, ɹænd dʒʌmp tə hɪz fit. ɪt wɑz ðə kɹɑp-hɛɹd jʌŋ wʊmən u hæd bɪn wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn wən i keɪm aʊɾ ə ðə bæθ tʃeɪmbɝ, stɪl dʒɹɛst ɪn ə bɔɪz koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz. ʃi wɑz ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ ðən i wɑz, hi θɔt, wɪð dɑɹk aɪz ivən bɪɡɝ ðən ɛɡwinz, ən ɑdli ɪntɛnt.

Startled, Rand jumped to his feet. It was the crop-haired young woman who had been with Moiraine when he came out of the bath chamber, still dressed in a boy's coat and breeches. She was a little older than he was, he thought, with dark eyes even bigger than Egwene's, and oddly intent.

"ju ɑɹ ɹænd, ɑɹən ju?" ʃi wɛn ɑn. "maɪ neɪm ɪz mɪn."

"You are Rand, aren't you?" she went on. "My name is Min."

"aɪm nɑɾ ɪn tʃɹʌbəl," hi sɛd. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn hæd toʊl hɝ, bʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd lænz ædmənɪʃən nɑt tə ətʃɹækt ɛni noʊɾəs. "wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk aɪm ɪn tʃɹʌbəl? ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz ə kwaɪət pleɪs, ən wɝ ɔl kwaɪət pipəl. noʊ pleɪs fəɹ tʃɹʌbəl, ənlɛs ɪts tə də wɪð kɹɑps, əɹ ʃip."

"I'm not in trouble," he said. He did not know what Moiraine had told her, but he remembered Lan's admonition not to attract any notice. "What makes you think I'm in trouble? The Two Rivers is a quiet place, and we're all quiet people. No place for trouble, unless it has to do with crops, or sheep."

"kwaɪət?" mɪn sɛd wɪð ə feɪn smaɪl. "aɪv hɝd mɛn tɔk əbaʊt jə tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk. aɪv hɝd ðə dʒoʊks əbaʊt wʊɾən-hɛdəd ʃifɝɾɝz, ən ðən ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛn u hæv æktʃəli  bɪn daʊnkaʊntʃɹi."

"Quiet?" Min said with a faint smile. "I've heard men talk about you Two Rivers folk. I've heard the jokes about wooden-headed sheepherders, and then there are men who have actually been downcountry."

"wʊɾən-hɛdəd?" ɹænd sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "wʌt dʒoʊks?"

"Wooden-headed?" Rand said, frowning. "What jokes?"

"ðə wʌnz u noʊ," ʃi wɛn ɑn əz ɪf i hæd nɑt spoʊkən, "seɪ jə wɔk ɝaʊn ɔl smaɪlz ən pəlaɪtnəs, dʒʌst əz mik ən sɑft əz bʌɾɝ. ɑn ðə sɝfəs, ɛniweɪ. ʌndɝniθ, ðeɪ seɪ, jəɹ ɔl əz tʌf əz oʊld oʊk ɹuts. pɹɑd tu hɑɹd, ðeɪ seɪ, ən jə dɪɡ ʌp stoʊn. bʌt ðə stoʊn ɪzən bɛɹid vɛɹi dip ɪn ju, əɹ ɪn jəɹ fɹɛnz. ɪts əz ɪf ə stɔɹm əz skaʊɝɾ əweɪ ɔlmoʊst ɔl ðə kʌvɝɪŋ. mɔɪɹeɪn dɪdn tɛl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ, bʌɾ aɪ si wʌɾ aɪ si."

"The ones who know," she went on as if he had not spoken, "say you walk around all smiles and politeness, just as meek and soft as butter. On the surface, anyway. Underneath, they say, you're all as tough as old oak roots. Prod too hard, they say, and you dig up stone. But the stone isn't buried very deep in you, or in your friends. It's as if a storm has scoured away almost all the covering. Moiraine didn't tell me everything, but I see what I see."

oʊld oʊk ɹuts? stoʊn? ɪt hɑɹdli saʊndəd laɪk ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ðə mɝtʃəns əɹ ðɛɹ pipəl wəd seɪ. ðət læs meɪɾ ɪm dʒʌmp, ðoʊ.

Old oak roots? Stone? It hardly sounded like the sort of thing the merchants or their people would say. That last made him jump, though.

hi lʊkt ɝaʊn kwɪkli; ðə steɪbliɑɹd wɑz ɛmpti, ən ðə nɪɹəst wɪndoʊz wɝ kloʊzd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɛnibəɾi neɪmd - wʌt wɑz ɪɾ əɡɛn?"

He looked around quickly; the stableyard was empty, and the nearest windows were closed. "I don't know anybody named - what was it again?"

"mɪstʃɹəs æliz, ðɛn, ɪf jə pɹəfɝ," mɪn sɛd wɪð ən əmjuz lʊk ðət meɪɾ ɪz tʃiks kʌlɝ. "ðɛɹz noʊ wʌn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ."

"Mistress Alys, then, if you prefer," Min said with an amused look that made his cheeks color. "There's no one close enough to hear."

"wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk mɪstʃɹəs æliz əz ənʌðɝ neɪm?"

"What makes you think Mistress Alys has another name?"

"bɪkɔz ʃi toʊl mi," mɪn sɛd, soʊ peɪʃənli ðəɾ i blʌʃt əɡɛn. "nɑt ðət ʃi hæɾ ə tʃɔɪs, aɪ səpoʊz. aɪ sɔ ʃi wɑz . . . dɪfɹənt . . . ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. wən ʃi stɑp hɪɹ bɪfɔɹ, ɑn əɹ weɪ daʊnkaʊntʃɹi. ʃi nu əbaʊt mi. aɪv tɔk tə . . . ʌðɝz laɪk əɹ bɪfɔɹ."

"Because she told me," Min said, so patiently that he blushed again. "Not that she had a choice, I suppose. I saw she was . . . different . . . right away. When she stopped here before, on her way downcountry. She knew about me. I've talked to . . . others like her before."

" 'sɔ'?" ɹænd sɛd.

" 'Saw'?" Rand said.

"wɛl, aɪ doʊn səpoʊz jəl ɡoʊ ɹʌnɪŋ tə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. nɑt kənsɪɾɝɪŋ u jəɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ kəmpænjənz ɑɹ. ðə waɪtkloʊks wʊdn laɪk wʌɾ aɪ də ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ laɪk wʌt ʃi dʌz."

"Well, I don't suppose you'll go running to the Children. Not considering who your traveling companions are. The Whitecloaks wouldn't like what I do any more than they like what she does."

"aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd."

"I don't understand."

"ʃi sɛz aɪ si pisəz ə ðə pæɾɝn." mɪn ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl læf ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "saʊnz tu ɡɹænd, tə mi. aɪ dʒʌst si θɪŋz wən aɪ lʊk ət pipəl, ən səmtaɪmz aɪ noʊ wʌt ðeɪ min. aɪ lʊk əɾ ə mæn ən ə wʊmən huv nɛvɝ ivən tɔk tə wʌn ənʌðɝ, ən aɪ noʊ ðəl mɛɹi. ən ðeɪ du. ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ. ʃi wɑntəd mi tə lʊk ət ju. ɔl ə jə təɡɛðɝ."

"She says I see pieces of the Pattern." Min gave a little laugh and shook her head. "Sounds too grand, to me. I just see things when I look at people, and sometimes I know what they mean. I look at a man and a woman who've never even talked to one another, and I know they'll marry. And they do. That sort of thing. She wanted me to look at you. All of you together."

ɹænd ʃɪvɝd. "ænd wʌd jə si?"

Rand shivered. "And what did you see?"

"wɛn jəɹ ɔl ɪn ə ɡɹup? spɑɹks swɝlɪŋ ɝaʊn ju, θaʊzənz ə ðɛm, ən ə bɪɡ ʃædoʊ, dɑɹkɝ ðən mɪdnaɪt. ɪts soʊ stʃɹɔŋ, aɪ ɔlmoʊst wʌndɝ waɪ ɛvɹibɑɾi kæn si ɪt. ðə spɑɹks ɑɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɪl ðə ʃædoʊ, ən ðə ʃædoʊ ɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə swɑloʊ ðə spɑɹks." ʃi ʃɹʌɡd. "ju ɑɹ ɔl taɪd təɡɛðɝ ɪn sʌmθɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs, bʌɾ aɪ kæn meɪk ɛni mɔɹ ʌv ɪt."

"When you're all in a group? Sparks swirling around you, thousands of them, and a big shadow, darker than midnight. It's so strong, I almost wonder why everybody can't see it. The sparks are trying to fill the shadow, and the shadow is trying to swallow the sparks." She shrugged. "You are all tied together in something dangerous, but I can't make any more of it."

"ɔl ʌv ʌs?" ɹænd mʌɾɝd. "ɛɡwin, tu? bʌt ðeɪ wɝn æftɝ - aɪ min - "

"All of us?" Rand muttered. "Egwene, too? But they weren't after - I mean - "

mɪn dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs ɪz slɪp. "ðə ɡɝl? ʃiz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. ən ðə ɡlimən. ɔl ə ju. jəɹ ɪn lʌv wɪð hɝ." hi stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. "aɪ kən tɛl ðəɾ ivən wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ɛni ɪmədʒəz. ʃi lʌvz ju, tu, bʌt ʃiz nɑt fəɹ ju, əɹ jə fəɹ hɝ. nɑt ðə weɪ jə boʊθ wɑnt."

Min did not seem to notice his slip. "The girl? She's part of it. And the gleeman. All of you. You're in love with her." He stared at her. "I can tell that even without seeing any images. She loves you, too, but she's not for you, or you for her. Not the way you both want."

"wʌts ðət səpoʊz tə min?"

"What's that supposed to mean?"

"wɛn aɪ lʊk ət hɝ, aɪ si ðə seɪm əz wən aɪ lʊk ət . . . mɪstʃɹəs æliz. ʌðɝ θɪŋz, θɪŋz aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd, tu, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ wʌt ðət minz. ʃi woʊn ɹəfjuz ɪt."

"When I look at her, I see the same as when I look at . . . Mistress Alys. Other things, things I don't understand, too, but I know what that means. She won't refuse it."

"ðɪs ɪz ɔl fulɪʃnəs," ɹænd sɛɾ ənkʌmftəbli. hɪz hɛdeɪk wɑz feɪɾɪŋ tə nʌmnəs; hɪz hɛd fɛl pækt wɪð wʊl. hi wɑntəd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðɪs ɡɝl ən ðə θɪŋz ʃi sɔ. ən jɛt. . . . "wʌt dʒju si wən jə lʊk ət . . . ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs?"

"This is all foolishness," Rand said uncomfortably. His headache was fading to numbness; his head felt packed with wool. He wanted to get away from this girl and the things she saw. And yet. . . . "What do you see when you look at . . . the rest of us?"

"ɔl sɔɹts ə θɪŋz," mɪn sɛd, wɪð ə ɡɹɪn əz ɪf ʃi nu wʌɾ i ɹɪli wɑntəd tə æsk. "ðə wɔɹ . . . ɑ . . . mæstɝ ænʒɹə hæz sɛvən ɹuən taʊɝz ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd, ən ə beɪb ɪn ə kɹeɪɾəl hoʊldɪŋ ə sɔɹd, ænd. . . ." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "mɛn laɪk ɪm - jə ʌndɝstænd? - ɔlweɪz əv soʊ mɛni ɪmədʒəz ðeɪ kɹaʊd wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɪmədʒəz ɝaʊn ðə ɡlimən ɑɹ ə mæn - nɑɾ ɪm - dʒʌɡəlɪŋ faɪɝ, ən ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ən ðət dʌzn meɪk ɛni sɛns əɾ ɔl fəɹ ə mæn. ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəs θɪŋz aɪ si əbaʊt ðə bɪɡ, kɝli-hɛɹd fɛloʊ ɑɹ ə wʊlf, ən ə bɹoʊkən kɹaʊn, ən tʃɹiz flaʊɝɪŋ ɔl ɝaʊn hɪm. ən ði ʌðɝ wʌn - ə ɹɛɾ iɡəl, ən aɪ ɑn ə bæləns skeɪl, ə dæɡɝ wɪð ə ɹubi, ə hɔɹn, ən ə læfɪŋ feɪs. ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ θɪŋz, bʌt jə si wʌɾ aɪ min. ðɪs taɪm aɪ kæn meɪk ʌp əɹ daʊn aʊɾ ʌv ɛni ʌv ɪt." ʃi weɪɾəd ðɛn, stɪl ɡɹɪnɪŋ, əntɪl i faɪnəli klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən æskt.

"All sorts of things," Min said, with a grin as if she knew what he really wanted to ask. "The War . . . ah . . . Master Andra has seven ruined towers around his head, and a babe in a cradle holding a sword, and. . . ." She shook her head. "Men like him - you understand? - always have so many images they crowd one another. The strongest images around the gleeman are a man - not him - juggling fire, and the White Tower, and that doesn't make any sense at all for a man. The strongest things I see about the big, curly-haired fellow are a wolf, and a broken crown, and trees flowering all around him. And the other one - a red eagle, an eye on a balance scale, a dagger with a ruby, a horn, and a laughing face. There are other things, but you see what I mean. This time I can't make up or down out of any of it." She waited then, still grinning, until he finally cleared his throat and asked.

"wʌɾ əbaʊt mi?"

"What about me?"

hɝ ɡɹɪn stɑp dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ʌv aʊtʃɹaɪt læftɝ. "ðə seɪm kaɪndə θɪŋz əz ðə ɹɛst. ə sɔɹd ðəɾ ɪzən ə sɔɹd, ə ɡoʊldən kɹaʊn ə lɔɹəl livz, ə bɛɡɝz stæf, jə pɔɹɪŋ wɔɾɝ ɑn sænd, ə blʌɾi hæn ən ə waɪt-hɑɾ aɪɝn, θɹi wɪmən stændɪŋ oʊvɝ ə fjunɝəl biɹ wɪð jə ɑn ɪt, blæk ɹɑk wɛt wɪð blʌd - "

Her grin stopped just short of outright laughter. "The same kind of things as the rest. A sword that isn't a sword, a golden crown of laurel leaves, a beggar's staff, you pouring water on sand, a bloody hand and a white-hot iron, three women standing over a funeral bier with you on it, black rock wet with blood - "

"ɔl ɹaɪt," hi bɹoʊk ɪn ənizəli. "ju doʊn əv tə lɪst ɪɾ ɔl."

"All right," he broke in uneasily. "You don't have to list it all."

"moʊst ʌv ɔl, aɪ si laɪtnɪŋ ɝaʊn ju, səm stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ət ju, səm kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ju. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɛni ʌv ɪt minz, ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ. jə ən əl miɾ əɡɛn." ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə kwɪtsɪkəl lʊk, əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðəɾ iðɝ.

"Most of all, I see lightning around you, some striking at you, some coming out of you. I don't know what any of it means, except for one thing. You and I will meet again." She gave him a quizzical look, as if she did not understand that either.

"waɪ ʃʊdnt wi?" hi sɛd. "aɪl bi kʌmɪŋ bæk ðɪs weɪ ɑn maɪ weɪ hoʊm."

"Why shouldn't we?" he said. "I'll be coming back this way on my way home."

"aɪ səpoʊz jə wɪl, ət ðæt." sʌɾənli hɝ ɡɹɪn wɑz bæk, ɹaɪ ən mɪstɪɹiəs, ən ʃi pæɾəd ɪz tʃik. "bʌɾ ɪf aɪ toʊl jə ɛvɹiθɪŋ aɪ sɔ, jud bi əz kɝli-hɛɹɾ əz jəɹ fɹɛnd wɪð ðə ʃoʊldɝz."

"I suppose you will, at that." Suddenly her grin was back, wry and mysterious, and she patted his cheek. "But if I told you everything I saw, you'd be as curly-haired as your friend with the shoulders."

hi dʒɝk bæk fɹəm əɹ hæn əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɹɛd-hɑt. "wʌt dʒju min? dʒju si ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ɹæts? əɹ dʒɹimz?"

He jerked back from her hand as if it were red-hot. "What do you mean? Do you see anything about rats? Or dreams?"

"ɹæts! noʊ, noʊ ɹæts. əz fəɹ dʒɹimz, meɪbi ɪts jəɹ aɪdiə ʌv ə dʒɹim, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz maɪn."

"Rats! No, no rats. As for dreams, maybe it's your idea of a dream, but I never thought it was mine."

hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ʃi wɑz kɹeɪzi, ɡɹɪnɪŋ laɪk ðæt. "aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ," hi sɛd, ɛdʒɪŋ ɝaʊn hɝ. "aɪ . . . aɪ hæv tə mit maɪ fɹɛnz."

He wondered if she was crazy, grinning like that. "I have to go," he said, edging around her. "I . . . I have to meet my friends."

"ɡoʊ, ðɛn. bʌt jə woʊn ɪskeɪp."

"Go, then. But you won't escape."

hi dɪdn ɪɡzækli bɹeɪk ɪndə ə ɹʌn, bʌɾ ɛvɹi stɛp i tʊk wɑz kwɪkɝ ðən ðə stɛp bɪfɔɹ.

He didn't exactly break into a run, but every step he took was quicker than the step before.

"ɹʌn, ɪf jə wɑnt," ʃi kɔld æftɝ hɪm. "ju kæn ɪskeɪp fɹəm mi." hɝ læftɝ spɛɾ ɪm əkɹɔs ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ ən aʊɾ ɪndə ðə stʃɹit, ɪndə ðə hʌbəb ə pipəl. hɝ læst wɝdz wɝ tu kloʊz tə wʌt bælzəmən hæd sɛd. hi blʌndɝɾ ɪndə pipəl əz i hɝid θɹu ðə kɹaʊd, ɝnɪŋ hɑɹd lʊks ən hɑɹd wɝdz, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt sloʊ daʊn əntɪl i wɑz sɛvɹəl stʃɹits əweɪ fɹəm ði ɪn.

"Run, if you want," she called after him. "You can't escape from me." Her laughter sped him across the stableyard and out into the street, into the hubbub of people. Her last words were too close to what Ba'alzamon had said. He blundered into people as he hurried through the crowd, earning hard looks and hard words, but he did not slow down until he was several streets away from the inn.

æftɝ ə taɪm i bɪɡæn tə peɪ ətɛnʃən əɡɛn tə wɛɹ i wɑz. hɪz hɛd fɛlt laɪk ə bəlun, bʌɾ i stɛɹɾ ən ɛndʒɔɪɾ ɛniweɪ. hi θɔt bɛɹlən wɑz ə ɡɹæn sɪɾi, ɪf nɑɾ ɪɡzækli ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ əz sɪɾiz ɪn tɑmz stɔɹiz. hi wɑndɝɾ ʌp bɹɔd stʃɹits, moʊs peɪvd wɪð flæɡstoʊn, ən daʊn nɛɹoʊ, twɪstɪŋ leɪnz, wɛɹɛvɝ tʃæns ən ðə ʃɪftɪŋ ə ðə kɹaʊd tʊk hɪm. ɪt hæd ɹeɪn dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt, ən ðə stʃɹits ðət wɝ ənpeɪv hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn tʃɝn tə mʌd baɪ ðə kɹaʊdz, bʌt mʌɾi stʃɹits wɝ nʌθɪŋ nu tə hɪm. nʌn ə ðə stʃɹits ɪn ɛmənz fild wɑz peɪvd.

After a time he began to pay attention again to where he was. His head felt like a balloon, but he stared and enjoyed anyway. He thought Baerlon was a grand city, if not exactly in the same way as cities in Thom's stories. He wandered up broad streets, most paved with flagstone, and down narrow, twisting lanes, wherever chance and the shifting of the crowd took him. It had rained during the night, and the streets that were unpaved had already been churned to mud by the crowds, but muddy streets were nothing new to him. None of the streets in Emond's Field was paved.

ðəɹ sɝɾənli wɝ noʊ pæləsəz, ən oʊnli ə fju haʊsəz wɝ vɛɹi mʌtʃ bɪɡɝ ðən ðoʊz bæk hoʊm, bʌɾ ɛvɹi haʊs hæɾ ə ɹuf ə sleɪɾ əɹ taɪl əz faɪn əz ðə ɹuf ə ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn. hi səpoʊz ðəɹ wəd bi ə pæləs əɹ tu ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. əz fəɹ ɪnz, hi kaʊntəd naɪn, nɑt wʌn smɔlɝ ðən ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ən moʊst əz lɑɹdʒ əz ðə stæɡ ən laɪən, ən ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv stʃɹits i hæd nɑt sin jɛt.

There certainly were no palaces, and only a few houses were very much bigger than those back home, but every house had a roof of slate or tile as fine as the roof of the Winespring Inn. He supposed there would be a palace or two in Caemlyn. As for inns, he counted nine, not one smaller than the Winespring and most as large as the Stag and Lion, and there were plenty of streets he had not seen yet.

ʃɑps dɑɾəd ɛvɹi stʃɹit, wɪð ɔnɪŋz aʊt fɹʌnt ʃɛltɝɪŋ teɪbəlz kʌvɝd wɪð ɡʊdz, ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɹəm klɔθ tə bʊks tə pɑts tə buts. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ə hʌnʒɹəd pɛdlɝz' wæɡənz hæd spɪld aʊt ðɛɹ kɑntɛns. hi stɛɹd soʊ mʌtʃ ðət mɔɹ ðən wʌns i hæd tə hɝi ɑn ət ðə səspɪʃəs lʊk ʌv ə ʃɑpkipɝ. hi hæd nɑɾ ʌndɝstʊd ðə fɝst ʃɑpkipɝz stɛɹ. wən i dɪɾ ʌndɝstænd, hi stɑɹɾəd tə ɡɛɾ æŋɡɹi əntɪl i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət hɪɹ i wɑz ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ. hi kəd nɑɾ əv bɑt mʌtʃ, ɛniweɪ. hi ɡæspt wən i sɔ haʊ mɛni kɑpɝz wɝ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd fəɹ ə dʌzən dɪskʌlɝɾ æpəlz əɹ ə hændfʊl ə ʃɹɪvəl tɝnəps, ðə sɔɹt ðət wəd bi fɛd tə ðə hɔɹsəz ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, bʌt pipəl simd iɡɝ tə peɪ.

Shops dotted every street, with awnings out front sheltering tables covered with goods, everything from cloth to books to pots to boots. It was as if a hundred peddlers' wagons had spilled out their contents. He stared so much that more than once he had to hurry on at the suspicious look of a shopkeeper. He had not understood the first shopkeeper's stare. When he did understand, he started to get angry until he remembered that here he was the stranger. He could not have bought much, anyway. He gasped when he saw how many coppers were exchanged for a dozen discolored apples or a handful of shriveled turnips, the sort that would be fed to the horses in the Two Rivers, but people seemed eager to pay.

ðəɹ wɝ sɝɾənli mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf pipəl, tə hɪz ɛstəmeɪʃən. fəɹ ə waɪl ðə ʃɪɹ nʌmbɝ ə ðɛm ɔlmoʊst oʊvɝwɛlm hɪm. səm wɔɹ kloʊðz ə faɪnɝ kʌt ðən ɛniwʌn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz - ɔlmoʊst əz faɪn əz mɔɪɹeɪnz - ən kwaɪɾ ə fju hæd lɔŋ, fɝ-laɪn koʊts ðət flæpt ɝaʊn ðɛɹ æŋkəlz. ðə maɪnɝz ɛvɹibɑɾi ət ði ɪn kɛp tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, ðeɪ hæd ðə hʌntʃt lʊk ə mɛn u ɡɹʌbd ʌndɝɡɹaʊnd. bʌt moʊst ə ðə pipəl dɪd nɑt lʊk ɛni dɪfɹən fɹəm ðoʊz i hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp wɪð, nɑɾ ɪn dʒɹɛs əɹ ɪn feɪs. hi hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd ðeɪ wʊd, sʌmhaʊ. ɪndid, səm ə ðɛm hæd soʊ mʌtʃ ðə lʊk ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪn ðɛɹ feɪsəz ðəɾ i kəɾ ɪmædʒən ðeɪ bɪlɔŋ tə wʌn fæmli əɹ ənʌðɝ ðəɾ i nu ɝaʊn ɛmənz fild. ə tuθləs, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd fɛloʊ wɪð ɪɹz laɪk dʒʌɡ hændəlz, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə bɛntʃ aʊtsaɪd wʌn ə ði ɪnz ən piɹɪŋ mɔɹnfəli ɪndə ən ɛmpti tæŋkɝd, kəɾ izəli hæv bɪn bili kɔŋɡɝz kloʊs kʌzən. ðə læntɝn-dʒɔd teɪlɝ soʊɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz ʃɑp maɪɾ əv bɪn dʒɑn θeɪnz bɹʌðɝ, ivən tə ðə seɪm bɔl spɑɾ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd. ə nɪɹ mɪɹɝ ɪmədʒ ə səmɛl kɹeɪ pʊʃt pæst ɹænd əz i tɝn ə kɔɹnɝ, ænd. . . .

There were certainly more than enough people, to his estimation. For a while the sheer number of them almost overwhelmed him. Some wore clothes of finer cut than anyone in the Two Rivers - almost as fine as Moiraine's - and quite a few had long, fur-lined coats that flapped around their ankles. The miners everybody at the inn kept talking about, they had the hunched look of men who grubbed underground. But most of the people did not look any different from those he had grown up with, not in dress or in face. He had expected they would, somehow. Indeed, some of them had so much the look of the Two Rivers in their faces that he could imagine they belonged to one family or another that he knew around Emond's Field. A toothless, gray-haired fellow with ears like jug handles, sitting on a bench outside one of the inns and peering mournfully into an empty tankard, could easily have been Bili Congar's close cousin. The lantern-jawed tailor sewing in front of his shop might have been Jon Thane's brother, even to the same bald spot on the back of his head. A near mirror image of Samel Crawe pushed past Rand as he turned a corner, and. . . .

ɪn dɪsbɪlif i stɛɹɾ əɾ ə boʊni lɪɾəl mæn wɪð lɔŋ ɑɹmz ən ə bɪɡ noʊz, ʃʌvɪŋ hɝidli θɹu ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn kloʊðz ðət lʊk laɪk ə bʌndəl ə ɹæɡz. ðə mænz aɪz wɝ sʌŋkən ən ɪz dɝɾi feɪs ɡɔnt, əz ɪf i hæd nɑɾ iɾən əɹ slɛpt ɪn deɪz, bʌt ɹænd kəd swɛɹ. . . . ðə ɹæɡəd mæn sɔ hɪm ðɛn, ən fɹoʊz ɪn mɪd-stɛp, hidləs ə pipəl u ɔl bʌt stʌmbəld oʊvɝ hɪm. ðə læs daʊɾ ɪn ɹændz maɪn vænɪʃt.

In disbelief he stared at a bony little man with long arms and a big nose, shoving hurriedly through the crowd in clothes that looked like a bundle of rags. The man's eyes were sunken and his dirty face gaunt, as if he had not eaten or slept in days, but Rand could swear. . . . The ragged man saw him then, and froze in mid-step, heedless of people who all but stumbled over him. The last doubt in Rand's mind vanished.

"mæstɝ feɪn!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "wi ɔl θɔt jə wɝ - "

"Master Fain!" he shouted. "We all thought you were - "

əz kwɪk əz ə blɪŋk ðə pɛdlɝ dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ, bʌt ɹænd dɑdʒd æftɝ hɪm, kɔlɪŋ əpɑlədʒiz oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ tə ðə pipəl i bʌmpt. θɹu ðə kɹaʊɾ i dʒʌs kɑt saɪɾ ə feɪn dæʃɪŋ ɪndə ən æliweɪ, ən i tɝn æftɝ.

As quick as a blink the peddler darted away, but Rand dodged after him, calling apologies over his shoulder to the people he bumped. Through the crowd he just caught sight of Fain dashing into an alleyway, and he turned after.

ə fju stɛps ɪndə ði æliweɪ ðə pɛdlɝ hæd stɑpt ɪn ɪz tʃɹæks. ə tɔl fɛns meɪɾ ɪɾ ɪndə ə dɛɾ ɛnd. əz ɹænd skɪɾəd tə ə hɔlt, feɪn ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn hɪm, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ wɛɹəli ən bækɪŋ əweɪ. hi flæpt ɡɹaɪmi hænz ət ɹænd tə steɪ bæk. mɔɹ ðən wʌn ɹɪp ʃoʊɾ ɪn ɪz koʊt, ən ɪz kloʊk wɑz wɔɹn ən tæɾɝd əz ɪf ɪt hæd sin mʌtʃ hɑɹɾɝ juz ðən ɪt wɑz mɛn fɔɹ.

A few steps into the alleyway the peddler had stopped in his tracks. A tall fence made it into a dead end. As Rand skidded to a halt, Fain rounded on him, crouching warily and backing away. He flapped grimy hands at Rand to stay back. More than one rip showed in his coat, and his cloak was worn and tattered as if it had seen much harder use than it was meant for.

"mæstɝ feɪn?" ɹænd sɛd hɛzɪɾəntli. "wʌɾ ɪz ðə mæɾɝ? ɪts mi, ɹænd ælθɹ, fɹəm ɛmənz fild. wi ɔl θɔt ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd teɪkən ju."

"Master Fain?" Rand said hesitantly. "What is the matter? It's me, Rand al'Thor, from Emond's Field. We all thought the Trollocs had taken you."

feɪn dʒɛstʃɝd ʃɑɹpli ænd, stɪl ɪn ə kɹaʊtʃ, ɹæn ə fju kɹæb stɛps təwɔɹd ði oʊpən ɛn ə ði æli. hi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə pæs ɹænd, əɹ ivən kʌm kloʊs tə hɪm. "doʊnt!" hi ɹæspt. hɪz hɛd ʃɪftəd kɑnstənli əz i tʃɹaɪd tə si ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹit bɪɑn ɹænd. "doʊn mɛnʃən" - hɪz vɔɪs dʒɹɑp tə ə hɔɹs wɪspɝ, ən i tɝn ɪz hɛɾ əweɪ, wɑtʃɪŋ ɹænd wɪð kwɪk, saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlænsɪz - "ðɛm. ðəɹ bi waɪtkloʊks ɪn ðə taʊn."

Fain gestured sharply and, still in a crouch, ran a few crabbed steps toward the open end of the alley. He did not try to pass Rand, or even come close to him. "Don't!" he rasped. His head shifted constantly as he tried to see everything in the street beyond Rand. "Don't mention" - his voice dropped to a hoarse whisper, and he turned his head away, watching Rand with quick, sidelong glances - "them. There be Whitecloaks in the town."

"ðeɪ hæv noʊ ɹizən tə bɑðɝ ʌs," ɹænd sɛd. "kʌm bæk tə ðə stæɡ ən laɪən wɪð mi. aɪm steɪɪŋ ðəɹ wɪð fɹɛnz. jə noʊ moʊst ə ðɛm. ðəl bi ɡlæd tə si ju. wi ɔl θɔt jə wɝ dɛd."

"They have no reason to bother us," Rand said. "Come back to the Stag and Lion with me. I'm staying there with friends. You know most of them. They'll be glad to see you. We all thought you were dead."

"dɛd?" ðə pɛdlɝ snæpt ɪndɪɡnənli. "nɑt pdən feɪn. pdən feɪn noʊz wɪtʃ weɪ tə dʒʌmp ən wɛɹ tə lænd." hi stʃɹeɪɾənd ɪz ɹæɡz əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ fistdeɪ kloʊðz. "ɔlweɪz hæv, ən ɔlweɪz wɪl. əl lɪv ə lɔŋ taɪm. lɔŋɡɝ ðən - " əbɹʌpli hɪz feɪs taɪɾənd ən ɪz hænz klʌtʃt hoʊld ə hɪz koʊt fɹʌnt. "ðeɪ bɝn maɪ wæɡən, ən ɔl maɪ ɡʊdz. hæd noʊ kɑz tə bi duɪŋ ðæt, dɪd ðeɪ? aɪ kʊdnt ɡɛt tə maɪ hɔɹsəz. maɪ hɔɹsəz, bʌt ðət fæɾ oʊld ɪnkipɝ hæɾ əm lɑkt ʌp ɪn ɪz steɪbəl. aɪ hæd tə stɛp kwɪk nɑt tə ɡɛt maɪ θɹoʊt slɪt, ən wʌɾ ɪt ɡɛt mi? ɔl ðəɾ aɪv ɡɑt lɛft ɪz wʌɾ aɪ stæn ʌp ɪn. naʊ, ɪz ðət fɛɹ? ɪz ɪt, naʊ?"

"Dead?" the peddler snapped indignantly. "Not Padan Fain. Padan Fain knows which way to jump and where to land." He straightened his rags as if they were feastday clothes. "Always have, and always will. I'll live a long time. Longer than - " Abruptly his face tightened and his hands clutched hold of his coat front. "They burned my wagon, and all my goods. Had no cause to be doing that, did they? I couldn't get to my horses. My horses, but that fat old innkeeper had them locked up in his stable. I had to step quick not to get my throat slit, and what did it get me? All that I've got left is what I stand up in. Now, is that fair? Is it, now?"

"jɔɹ hɔɹsəz ɑɹ seɪf ɪn mæstɝ ælvɪɹz steɪbəl. jə kən ɡɛɾ əm ɛnitaɪm. ɪf jə kʌm tə ði ɪn wɪð mi, aɪm ʃʊɹ mɔɪɹeɪn wɪl hɛlp jə ɡɛt bæk tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"Your horses are safe in Master al'Vere's stable. You can get them anytime. If you come to the inn with me, I'm sure Moiraine will help you get back to the Two Rivers."

"ɑə! ʃiz . . . ʃiz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɪz ʃi?" ə ɡɑɹɾəd lʊk keɪm oʊvɝ feɪnz feɪs. "meɪbi, ðoʊ. . . ." hi pɔzd, lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps nɝvəsli. "haʊ lɔŋ wɪl jə bi ət ðɪs - wʌt wɑz ɪt? wʌd jə kɔl ɪt? - ðə stæɡ ən laɪən?"

"Aaaaah! She's . . . she's the Aes Sedai, is she?" A guarded look came over Fain's face. "Maybe, though. . . ." He paused, licking his lips nervously. "How long will you be at this - What was it? What did you call it? - the Stag and Lion?"

"wi liv təmɑɹoʊ," ɹænd sɛd. "bʌt wʌt dʌz ðəɾ əv tə də wɪð - ?"

"We leave tomorrow," Rand said. "But what does that have to do with - ?"

"ju dʒʌs doʊnt noʊ," feɪn waɪnd, "stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɪð ə fʊl bɛli ən ə ɡʊd naɪts slip ɪn ə sɑf bɛd. aɪv hɑɹdli slɛpt ə wɪŋk sɪns ðət naɪt. maɪ buts ɑɹ ɔl wɔɹn aʊt wɪð ɹʌnɪŋ, ən əz fəɹ wʌɾ aɪv hæd tə it. . . ." hɪz feɪs twɪstəd. "aɪ doʊnt wɑnə bi wɪðɪn maɪlz ʌv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi spæt ðə læst wɝdz, "nɑt maɪlz ən maɪlz, bʌɾ aɪ meɪ hæv tə. aɪv noʊ tʃɔɪs, hæv aɪ? ðə θɔɾ ə hɝ aɪz ɑn mi, ʌv əɹ ivən noʊɪŋ wɛɹ aɪ æm. . . ." hi ɹitʃt təwɔɹd ɹænd əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə ɡɹæb ɪz koʊt, bʌɾ ɪz hænz stɑpt ʃɔɹt, flʌɾɝɪŋ, ən i æktʃəli  tʊk ə stɛp bæk. "pɹɑməs mi jə woʊn tɛl hɝ. ʃi fɹaɪɾənz mi. ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə bi tɛlɪŋ hɝ, noʊ ɹizən fəɹ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ivən bi noʊɪŋ ɪm juv hæv tə juv hæv tə!"

"You just don't know," Fain whined, "standing there with a full belly and a good night's sleep in a soft bed. I've hardly slept a wink since that night. My boots are all worn out with running, and as for what I've had to eat. . . ." His face twisted. "I don't want to be within miles of an Aes Sedai," he spat the last words, "not miles and miles, but I may have to. I've no choice, have I? The thought of her eyes on me, of her even knowing where I am. . . ." He reached toward Rand as if he wanted to grab his coat, but his hands stopped short, fluttering, and he actually took a step back. "Promise me you won't tell her. She frightens me. There's no need to be telling her, no reason for an Aes Sedai to even be knowing I'm alive. You have to promise. You have to!"

"aɪ pɹɑməs," ɹænd sɛd suðɪŋli. "bʌt ðɛɹz noʊ ɹizən fəɹ jə tə bi əfɹeɪɾ ə hɝ. kʌm wɪð mi. ðə lis jəl ɡɛɾ ɪz ə hɑt mil."

"I promise," Rand said soothingly. "But there's no reason for you to be afraid of her. Come with me. The least you'll get is a hot meal."

"meɪbi. meɪbi." feɪn ɹʌbd ɪz tʃɪn pɛnsɪvli. "təmɑɹoʊ, jə seɪ? ɪn ðət taɪm. . . . jə woʊn fɝɡɛt jəɹ pɹɑməs? jə woʊn bi lɛɾɪŋ əɹ . . . ?"

"Maybe. Maybe." Fain rubbed his chin pensively. "Tomorrow, you say? In that time. . . . You won't forget your promise? You won't be letting her . . . ?"

"aɪ woʊn lɛɾ əɹ hɝt ju," ɹænd sɛd, wʌndɝɪŋ haʊ hi kəd stɑp ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, wʌtɛvɝ ʃi wɑntəd tə du.

"I won't let her hurt you," Rand said, wondering how he could stop an Aes Sedai, whatever she wanted to do.

"ʃi woʊn hɝt mi," feɪn sɛd. "noʊ, ʃi woʊnt. aɪ woʊn bi lɛɾɪŋ hɝ." laɪk ə flæʃ i hɛɹd pæst ɹænd ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd.

"She won't hurt me," Fain said. "No, she won't. I won't be letting her." Like a flash he hared past Rand into the crowd.

"mæstɝ feɪn!" ɹænd kɔld. "weɪt!"

"Master Fain!" Rand called. "Wait!"

hi dæʃt aʊɾ ə ði æli dʒʌst ɪn taɪm tə kætʃ saɪɾ ʌv ə ɹæɡəd koʊt dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə nɛks kɔɹnɝ. stɪl kɔlɪŋ, hi ɹæn æftɝ ɪt, dɑɹɾɪd ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹnɝ. hi oʊnli hæd taɪm tə si ə mænz bæk bɪfɔɹ i kɹæʃt ɪndə ɪɾ ən ðeɪ boʊθ wɛn daʊn ɪn ə hip ɪn ðə mʌd.

He dashed out of the alley just in time to catch sight of a ragged coat disappearing around the next corner. Still calling, he ran after it, darted around the corner. He only had time to see a man's back before he crashed into it and they both went down in a heap in the mud.

"kæn jə wɑtʃ wɛɹ jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ?" keɪm ə mʌɾɝ fɹəm ʌndɝ hɪm, ən ɹænd skɹæmbəld ʌp ɪn sɝpɹaɪz.

"Can't you watch where you're going?" came a mutter from under him, and Rand scrambled up in surprise.

"mæt?"

"Mat?"

mæt sæɾ ʌp wɪð ə beɪlfəl ɡlɛɹ ən bɪɡæn skɹeɪpɪŋ mʌɾ ɔf ɪz kloʊk wɪð ɪz hænz. "ju mʌst ɹɪli bi tɝnɪŋ ɪndə ə sɪɾi mæn. slip ɔl mɔɹnɪŋ ən ɹʌn ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ pipəl." klaɪmɪŋ tə hɪz fit, hi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz mʌɾi hænz, ðən mʌɾɝd ən waɪpt əm ɔf ɑn ɪz kloʊk. "lɪsən, jəl nɛvɝ ɡɛs u aɪ θɔɾ aɪ dʒʌst sɔ."

Mat sat up with a baleful glare and began scraping mud off his cloak with his hands. "You must really be turning into a city man. Sleep all morning and run right over people." Climbing to his feet, he stared at his muddy hands, then muttered and wiped them off on his cloak. "Listen, you'll never guess who I thought I just saw."

"pdən feɪn," ɹænd sɛd.

"Padan Fain," Rand said.

"pdən fɑ - haʊ dɪd jə noʊ?"

"Padan Fa - How did you know?"

"aɪ wɑz tɔkɪŋ tə hɪm, bʌɾ i ɹæn ɔf."

"I was talking to him, but he ran off."

"soʊ ðə tʃɹoʊ - " mæt stɑp tə lʊk ɝaʊnd wɛɹəli, bʌt ðə kɹaʊd wɑz pæsɪŋ əm baɪ wɪð nɛvɝ ə ɡlæns. ɹænd wɑz ɡlæɾ i hæd lɝn ə lɪɾəl kɑʃən. "soʊ ðeɪ dɪdnt ɡɛt hɪm. aɪ wʌndɝ waɪ hi lɛft ɛmənz fild, wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd laɪk ðæt? pɹɑbli stɑɹɾəd ɹʌnɪŋ ðɛn, tu, ən dɪdn stɑp əntɪl i ɡɑt hɪɹ. bʌt waɪ wɑz i ɹʌnɪŋ dʒʌs naʊ?"

"So the Tro - " Mat stopped to look around warily, but the crowd was passing them by with never a glance. Rand was glad he had learned a little caution. "So they didn't get him. I wonder why he left Emond's Field, without a word like that? Probably started running then, too, and didn't stop until he got here. But why was he running just now?"

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ən wɪʃt i hæd nɑt. ɪt fɛlt əz ðoʊ ɪt maɪt fɔl ɔf. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ, ɪksɛp ðət hiz əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɛm . . . mɪstʃɹəs æliz." ɔl ðɪs wɑtʃɪŋ wʌt jə sɛd wɑz nɑɾ izi. "hi dʌznt wɑn əɹ tə noʊ hiz hɪɹ. hi meɪd mi pɹɑməs aɪ wʊdn tɛl hɝ."

Rand shook his head and wished he had not. It felt as though it might fall off. "I don't know, except that he's afraid of M . . . Mistress Alys." All this watching what you said was not easy. "He doesn't want her to know he's here. He made me promise I wouldn't tell her."

"wɛl, hɪz sikɹəɾ ɪz seɪf wɪð mi," mæt sɛd. "aɪ wɪʃ ʃi dɪdnt noʊ wɛɹ aɪ wɑz, iðɝ."

"Well, his secret is safe with me," Mat said. "I wish she didn't know where I was, either."

"mæt?" pipəl stɪl stʃɹim baɪ wɪθaʊt peɪɪŋ əm ɛni hid, bʌt ɹænd loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs ɛniweɪ, ən lin kloʊsɝ. "mæt, dɪd juv ə naɪtmɛɹ læs naɪt? əbaʊɾ ə mæn u kɪld ə ɹæt?"

"Mat?" People still streamed by without paying them any heed, but Rand lowered his voice anyway, and leaned closer. "Mat, did you have a nightmare last night? About a man who killed a rat?"

mæt stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ. "ju, tu?" hi sɛd faɪnəli. "æn pɛɹɪn, aɪ səpoʊz. aɪ ɔlmoʊst æskt ɪm ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ, bʌt. . . . hi mʌs hæv. blʌɾ ən æʃəz! naʊ sʌmbɑɾiz meɪkɪŋ əs dʒɹim θɪŋz. ɹænd, aɪwɪʃ noʊbɑdi nu wɛɹ aɪ wɑz."

Mat stared at him without blinking. "You, too?" he said finally. "And Perrin, I suppose. I almost asked him this morning, but. . . . He must have. Blood and ashes! Now somebody's making us dream things. Rand, Iwish nobody knew where I was."

"ðɛɹ wɝ dɛd ɹæts ɔl oʊvɝ ði ɪn ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ." hi dɪd nɑt fil əz əfɹeɪɾ ət seɪɪŋ ɪɾ əz i wəɾ əv ɝliɝ. hi dɪd nɑt fil mʌtʃ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ. "ðɛɹ bæks wɝ bɹoʊkən." hɪz vɔɪs ɹæŋ ɪn ɪz oʊn ɪɹz. ɪf i wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ sɪk, hi maɪɾ əv tə ɡoʊ tə mɔɪɹeɪn. hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ ivən ðə θɔɾ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ biɪŋ juzd ɑn ɪm dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ hɪm.

"There were dead rats all over the inn this morning." He did not feel as afraid at saying it as he would have earlier. He did not feel much of anything. "Their backs were broken." His voice rang in his own ears. If he was getting sick, he might have to go to Moiraine. He was surprised that even the thought of the One Power being used on him did not bother him.

mæt tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, hɪtʃɪŋ ɪz kloʊk, ən lʊkt ɝaʊn əz ɪf sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwɛɹ tə ɡoʊ. "wʌts hæpənɪŋ tə ʌs, ɹænd? wʌt?"

Mat took a deep breath, hitching his cloak, and looked around as if searching for somewhere to go. "What's happening to us, Rand? What?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ. aɪm gɑnə æsk tɑm fəɹ ædvaɪs. əbaʊt wɛðɝ tə tɛl . . . ɛniwʌn ɛls."

"I don't know. I'm going to ask Thom for advice. About whether to tell . . . anyone else."

"noʊ! nɑt hɝ. meɪbi hɪm, bʌt nɑt hɝ."

"No! Not her. Maybe him, but not her."

ðə ʃɑɹpnəs ʌv ɪt tʊk ɹænd baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. "ðɛn jə bɪliv hɪm?" hi dɪd nɑt nid tə seɪ wɪtʃ "hɪm" hi mɛnt; ðə ɡɹɪmɑs ɑn mæts feɪs sɛɾ i ʌndɝstʊd.

The sharpness of it took Rand by surprise. "Then you believed him?" He did not need to say which "him" he meant; the grimace on Mat's face said he understood.

"noʊ," mæt sɛd sloʊli. "ɪts ðə tʃænsəz, ðæts ɔl. ɪf wi tɛl hɝ, ən i wɑz laɪɪŋ, ðən meɪbi nʌθɪŋ hæpənz. meɪbi. bʌt meɪbi dʒʌst ɪm biɪŋ ɪn əɹ dʒɹimz ɪz ɪnʌf fɔɹ. . . . aɪ doʊnt noʊ." hi stɑp tə swɑloʊ. "ɪf wi doʊn tɛl hɝ, meɪbi wɪl əv səm mɔɹ dʒɹimz. ɹæts əɹ noʊ ɹæts, dʒɹimz ɑɹ bɛɾɝ ðæn. . . . ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə fɛɹi? aɪ seɪ wi kip kwaɪət."

"No," Mat said slowly. "It's the chances, that's all. If we tell her, and he was lying, then maybe nothing happens. Maybe. But maybe just him being in our dreams is enough for. . . . I don't know." He stopped to swallow. "If we don't tell her, maybe we'll have some more dreams. Rats or no rats, dreams are better than. . . . Remember the ferry? I say we keep quiet."

"ɔl ɹaɪt." ɹænd ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə fɛɹi - ən mɔɪɹeɪnz θɹɛt, tu - bʌt sʌmhaʊ ɪt simd ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ. "ɔl ɹaɪt."

"All right." Rand remembered the ferry - and Moiraine's threat, too - but somehow it seemed a long time ago. "All right."

"pɛɹɪn woʊn seɪ ɛniθɪŋ, wɪl hi?" mæt wɛn ɑn, baʊnsɪŋ ɑn ɪz toʊz. "wi hæv tə ɡɛt bæk tə hɪm. ɪf i tɛlz hɝ, ʃɪl fɪɡjɝ ɪɾ aʊɾ əbaʊɾ ɔl ʌv ʌs. jə kən bɛɾ ɑn ɪt. kʌm ɑn." hi stɑɹɾəd ɔf bɹɪskli θɹu ðə kɹaʊd.

"Perrin won't say anything, will he?" Mat went on, bouncing on his toes. "We have to get back to him. If he tells her, she'll figure it out about all of us. You can bet on it. Come on." He started off briskly through the crowd.

ɹænd stʊd ðəɹ lʊkɪŋ æftɝ ɪm əntɪl mæt keɪm bæk ən ɡɹæb hɪm. ət ðə tʌtʃ ɑn ɪz ɑɹm i blɪŋkt, ðən fɑloʊɾ ɪz fɹɛnd.

Rand stood there looking after him until Mat came back and grabbed him. At the touch on his arm he blinked, then followed his friend.

"wʌts ðə mæɾɝ wɪð ju?" mæt æskt. "ju gɑnə slip əɡɛn?"

"What's the matter with you?" Mat asked. "You going to sleep again?"

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪ hæv ə koʊld," ɹænd sɛd. hɪz hɛd wɑz əz taɪɾ əz ə dʒɹʌm, ən ɔlmoʊst əz ɛmpti.

"I think I have a cold," Rand said. His head was as tight as a drum, and almost as empty.

"ju kən ɡɛt səm tʃɪkən sup wən wi ɡɛt bæk tə ði ɪn," mæt sɛd. hi kɛpt ʌp ə kɑnstən tʃæɾɝ əz ðeɪ hʌntəd θɹu ðə pæk stʃɹits. ɹænd meɪɾ ən ɛfɝt tə lɪsən, ən ivən tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ naʊ ən ðɛn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt. hi wɑz nɑt taɪɝd; hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə slip. hi dʒʌs fɛlt əz ɪf i wɝ dʒɹɪftɪŋ. æftɝ ə waɪl i faʊn hɪmsɛlf tɛlɪŋ mæt əbaʊt mɪn.

"You can get some chicken soup when we get back to the inn," Mat said. He kept up a constant chatter as they hunted through the packed streets. Rand made an effort to listen, and even to say something now and then, but it was an effort. He was not tired; he did not want to sleep. He just felt as if he were drifting. After a while he found himself telling Mat about Min.

"ə dæɡɝ wɪð ə ɹubi, ɛ?" mæt sɛd. "aɪ laɪk ðæt. aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt ði aɪ, ðoʊ. ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑzn meɪkɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp? ɪt simz tə mi ʃi wəd noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɔl minz ɪf ʃi ɹɪli ɪz ə suθseɪɝ."

"A dagger with a ruby, eh?" Mat said. "I like that. I don't know about the eye, though. Are you sure she wasn't making it up? It seems to me she would know what it all means if she really is a soothsayer."

"ʃi dɪdn seɪ ʃiz ə suθseɪɝ," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ bɪliv ʃi dʌz si θɪŋz. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz tɔkɪŋ tə hɝ wən wi fɪnɪʃt əɹ bæθs. ən ʃi noʊz u mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz."

"She didn't say she's a soothsayer," Rand said. "I believe she does see things. Remember, Moiraine was talking to her when we finished our baths. And she knows who Moiraine is."

mæt fɹaʊn ət hɪm. "aɪ θɔt wi wɝn səpoʊz tə juz ðət neɪm."

Mat frowned at him. "I thought we weren't supposed to use that name."

"noʊ," ɹænd mʌɾɝd. hi ɹʌbd ɪz hɛd wɪð boʊθ hænz. ɪt wɑz soʊ hɑɹd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ɛniθɪŋ.

"No," Rand muttered. He rubbed his head with both hands. It was so hard to concentrate on anything.

"aɪ θɪŋk meɪbi jə ɹɪli ɑɹ sɪk," mæt sɛd, stɪl fɹaʊnɪŋ. sʌɾənli hi pʊld ɹænd tə ə stɑp baɪ hɪz koʊt sliv. "lʊk ət ðɛm."

"I think maybe you really are sick," Mat said, still frowning. Suddenly he pulled Rand to a stop by his coat sleeve. "Look at them."

θɹi mɛn ɪn bɹɛstpleɪts ən kɑnɪkəl stil kæps, bɝnɪʃt tɪl ðeɪ ʃoʊn laɪk sɪlvɝ, wɝ meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ daʊn ðə stʃɹit təwɔɹd ɹænd ən mæt. ivən ðə meɪl ɑn ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ɡlimd. ðɛɹ lɔŋ kloʊks, pɹɪstin waɪɾ ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɑn ðə lɛf bɹɛst wɪð ə ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst, dʒʌs klɪɹd ðə mʌɾ ən pʌɾəlz ə ðə stʃɹit. ðɛɹ hænz ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ðɛɹ sɔɹd hɪls, ən ðeɪ lʊkt ɝaʊn əm əz ɪf lʊkɪŋ ət θɪŋz ðət hæd ɹɪəld aʊt fɹəm ʌndɝ ə ɹɑɾɪŋ lɔɡ. noʊbɑdi lʊk bæk, ðoʊ. noʊbɑdi ivən sim tə noʊɾəs ðɛm. dʒʌs ðə seɪm, ðə θɹi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə pʊʃ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd; ðə bʌsəl pɑɹɾəd tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə waɪt-kloʊk mɛn əz ɪf baɪ hæpənstæns, livɪŋ əm tə wɔk ɪn ə klɪɹ speɪs ðət muvd wɪð ðɛm.

Three men in breastplates and conical steel caps, burnished till they shone like silver, were making their way down the street toward Rand and Mat. Even the mail on their arms gleamed. Their long cloaks, pristine white and embroidered on the left breast with a golden sunburst, just cleared the mud and puddles of the street. Their hands rested on their sword hilts, and they looked around them as if looking at things that had wriggled out from under a rotting log. Nobody looked back, though. Nobody even seemed to notice them. Just the same, the three did not have to push through the crowd; the bustle parted to either side of the white-cloaked men as if by happenstance, leaving them to walk in a clear space that moved with them.

"du jə səpoʊz ðəɹ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt?" mæt æskt ɪn ə laʊd vɔɪs. ə pæsɝbaɪ lʊk hɑɹɾ ət mæt, ðən kwɪkən ɪz peɪs.

"Do you suppose they're Children of the Light?" Mat asked in a loud voice. A passerby looked hard at Mat, then quickened his pace.

ɹænd nɑɾəd. tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. waɪtkloʊks. mɛn u heɪɾəd ɛɛs sədaɪ. mɛn u toʊl pipəl haʊ tə lɪv, kɑzɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ ðoʊz u ɹəfjuz tə oʊbeɪ. ɪf bɝn fɑɹmz ən wɝs kəd bi kɔld əz maɪld əz tʃɹʌbəl. aɪ ʃəd bi əfɹeɪd, hi θɔt. əɹ kjʊɹiəs. sʌmθɪŋ, əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt. ɪnstɛɾ i stɛɹɾ əɾ əm pæsɪvli.

Rand nodded. Children of the Light. Whitecloaks. Men who hated Aes Sedai. Men who told people how to live, causing trouble for those who refused to obey. If burned farms and worse could be called as mild as trouble. I should be afraid, he thought. Or curious. Something, at any rate. Instead he stared at them passively.

"ðeɪ doʊn lʊk laɪk soʊ mʌtʃ tə mi," mæt sɛd. "fʊl ə ðɛmsɛlvz, ðoʊ, ɑɹən ðeɪ?"

"They don't look like so much to me," Mat said. "Full of themselves, though, aren't they?"

"ðeɪ doʊn mæɾɝ," ɹænd sɛd. "ði ɪn. wɪv tə tɔk tə pɛɹɪn."

"They don't matter," Rand said. "The inn. We have to talk to Perrin."

"laɪk juwɔɝd kɔŋɡɝ. hi ɔlweɪz əz ɪz noʊz ɪn ði ɛɹ, tu." sʌɾənli mæt ɡɹɪnd, ə twɪŋkəl ɪn ɪz aɪ. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ wən i fɛl ɔf ðə wæɡən bɹɪdʒ ən hæd tə tʃɹæmp hoʊm dʒɹɪpɪŋ wɛt? ðət tʊk ɪm daʊn ə pɛɡ fəɹ ə mʌnθ."

"Like Eward Congar. He always has his nose in the air, too." Suddenly Mat grinned, a twinkle in his eye. "Remember when he fell off the Wagon Bridge and had to tramp home dripping wet? That took him down a peg for a month."

"wʌt dʌz ðəɾ əv tə də wɪð pɛɹɪn?"

"What does that have to do with Perrin?"

"si ðæt?" mæt pɔɪntəd tə ə kɑɹt ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ɪts ʃæfs ɪn ən æliweɪ dʒʌst əhɛɾ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ə sɪŋɡəl steɪk hɛld ə dʌzən stæk bæɹəlz ɪn pleɪs ɑn ðə flæt bɛd. "wɑtʃ." læfɪŋ, hi dɑɹɾɪd ɪndə ə kʌtlɝz ʃɑp tə ðɛɹ lɛft.

"See that?" Mat pointed to a cart resting on its shafts in an alleyway just ahead of the Children. A single stake held a dozen stacked barrels in place on the flat bed. "Watch." Laughing, he darted into a cutler's shop to their left.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ æftɝ hɪm, noʊɪŋ i ʃəd də sʌmθɪŋ. ðət lʊk ɪn mæts aɪz ɔlweɪz mɛnt wʌn ə hɪz tʃɹɪks. bʌɾ ɑdli, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə wʌtɛvɝ mæt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə du. sʌmθɪŋ toʊld ɪm ðət filɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ, ðəɾ ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs, bʌɾ i smaɪld ɪn æntɪsəpeɪʃən ɛniweɪ.

Rand stared after him, knowing he should do something. That look in Mat's eyes always meant one of his tricks. But oddly, he found himself looking forward to whatever Mat was going to do. Something told him that feeling was wrong, that it was dangerous, but he smiled in anticipation anyway.

ɪn ə mɪnət mæt əpɪɹɾ əbʌv hɪm, klaɪmɪŋ hæf aʊɾ ʌv ən æɾɪk wɪndoʊ ɑntu ðə taɪl ɹuf ə ðə ʃɑp. hɪz slɪŋ wɑz ɪn ɪz hænz, ɔlɹɛɾi bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə wɝl. ɹændz aɪz wɛn bæk tə ðə kɑɹt. ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃɑɹp kɹæk, ən ðə steɪk hoʊldɪŋ ðə bæɹəlz bɹoʊk dʒʌst əz ðə waɪtkloʊks keɪm əbɹɛst ə ði æli. pipəl dʒʌmpt aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ əz ðə bæɹəlz ɹoʊl daʊn ðə kɑɹt ʃæfs wɪð ən ɛmpti ɹʌmbəl ən dʒaʊnst ɪndə ðə stʃɹit, splæʃɪŋ mʌɾ ən mʌɾi wɔɾɝ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. ðə θɹi tʃɪlʒɹən dʒʌmp noʊ lɛs kwɪkli ðən ɛniwʌn ɛls, ðɛɹ supɪɹiɝ lʊks ɹipleɪs baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. səm pæsɝzbi fɛl daʊn, meɪkɪŋ mɔɹ splæʃəz, bʌt ðə θɹi muvd ədʒɪlli, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə bæɹəlz wɪð iz. ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əvɔɪd ðə flaɪɪŋ mʌd ðət splæɾɝd ðɛɹ waɪt kloʊks, ðoʊ.

In a minute Mat appeared above him, climbing half out of an attic window onto the tile roof of the shop. His sling was in his hands, already beginning to whirl. Rand's eyes went back to the cart. Almost immediately there was a sharp crack, and the stake holding the barrels broke just as the Whitecloaks came abreast of the alley. People jumped out of the way as the barrels rolled down the cart shafts with an empty rumble and jounced into the street, splashing mud and muddy water in every direction. The three Children jumped no less quickly than anyone else, their superior looks replaced by surprise. Some passersby fell down, making more splashes, but the three moved agilely, avoiding the barrels with ease. They could not avoid the flying mud that splattered their white cloaks, though.

ə bɪɹɾəd mæn ɪn ə lɔŋ eɪpɹən hɝiɾ aʊɾ ə ði æli, weɪvɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ æŋɡɹəli, bʌt wʌn lʊk ət ðə θɹi tʃɹaɪɪŋ veɪnli tə ʃeɪk ðə mʌd fɹəm ðɛɹ kloʊks ən i vænɪʃt bæk ɪndə ði æli ivən fæstɝ ðən i hæd kʌm aʊt. ɹænd ɡlænst ʌp ət ðə ʃɑp ɹuf; mæt wɑz ɡɔn. ɪt hæd bɪn ən izi ʃɑt fəɹ ɛni tu ɹɪvɝz læd, bʌt ði ɪfɛkt wɑz sɝɾənli ɔl ðət kəd bi hoʊp fɔɹ. hi kəd nɑt hɛlp læfɪŋ; ðə hjumɝ sim tə bi ɹæpt ɪn wʊl, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl fʌni. wən i tɝn bæk tə ðə stʃɹit, ðə θɹi waɪtkloʊks wɝ stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət hɪm.

A bearded man in a long apron hurried out of the alley, waving his arms and shouting angrily, but one look at the three trying vainly to shake the mud from their cloaks and he vanished back into the alley even faster than he had come out. Rand glanced up at the shop roof; Mat was gone. It had been an easy shot for any Two Rivers lad, but the effect was certainly all that could be hoped for. He could not help laughing; the humor seemed to be wrapped in wool, but it was still funny. When he turned back to the street, the three Whitecloaks were staring straight at him.

"ju faɪn sʌmθɪŋ fʌni, jɛs?" ðə wʌn u spoʊk stʊɾ ə lɪɾəl ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ʌðɝz. hi wɔɹ ən ɛɹəɡənt, ənblɪŋkɪŋ lʊk, wɪð ə laɪɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz əz ɪf i nu sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, sʌmθɪŋ noʊ wʌn ɛls nu.

"You find something funny, yes?" The one who spoke stood a little in front of the others. He wore an arrogant, unblinking look, with a light in his eyes as if he knew something important, something no one else knew.

ɹændz læftɝ kʌɾ ɔf ʃɔɹt. hi ən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən wɝ əloʊn wɪð ðə mʌɾ ən ðə bæɹəlz. ðə kɹaʊd ðət hæd bɪn ɔl ɝaʊn əm hæd faʊn ɝdʒən bɪznəs ʌp əɹ daʊn ðə stʃɹit.

Rand's laughter cut off short. He and the Children were alone with the mud and the barrels. The crowd that had been all around them had found urgent business up or down the street.

"dʌz fɪɹ ə ðə laɪt hoʊl jəɹ tʌŋ?" æŋɡɝ meɪd ðə waɪtkloʊks nɛɹoʊ feɪs sim ivən mɔɹ pɪntʃt. hi ɡlæns dɪsmɪsɪvli ət ðə sɔɹd hɪl stɪkɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ɹændz kloʊk. "pɝhæps jə ɑɹ ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ ðɪs, jɛs?" ənlaɪk ði ʌðɝz i hæɾ ə ɡoʊldən nɑt bɪniθ ðə sʌnbɝst ɑn ɪz kloʊk.

"Does fear of the Light hold your tongue?" Anger made the Whitecloak's narrow face seem even more pinched. He glanced dismissively at the sword hilt sticking out from Rand's cloak. "Perhaps you are responsible for this, yes?" Unlike the others he had a golden knot beneath the sunburst on his cloak.

ɹænd muv tə kʌvɝ ðə sɔɹd, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd swɛpt ɪz kloʊk bæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd wɑz ə fɹæntɪk wʌndɝ ət wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə dɪstən θɔt. "æksəɾənts hæpən," hi sɛd. "ivən tə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt."

Rand moved to cover the sword, but instead swept his cloak back over his shoulder. In the back of his head was a frantic wonder at what he was doing, but it was a distant thought. "Accidents happen," he said. "Even to the Children of the Light."

ðə nɛɹoʊ-feɪs mæn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. "ju ɑɹ ðət deɪnʒɝəs, jʌŋɡəlɪŋ?" hi wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ðən ɹænd.

The narrow-faced man raised an eyebrow. "You are that dangerous, youngling?" He was not much older than Rand.

"hɛɹən-mɑɹk, lɔɹd bɔɹnhəld," wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz sɛd wɔɹnɪŋli.

"Heron-mark, Lord Bornhald," one of the others said warningly.

ðə nɛɹoʊ-feɪs mæn ɡlænst ət ɹændz sɔɹd hɪlt əɡɛn - ðə bɹɑnz hɛɹən wɑz pleɪn - ən ɪz aɪz waɪɾənd moʊməntɛɹəli. ðən ɪz ɡeɪz ɹoʊz tə ɹændz feɪs, ən i snɪf dɪsmɪsɪvli. "hi ɪz tu jʌŋ. jə ɑɹ nɑt fɹəm ðɪs pleɪs, jɛs?" hi sɛd koʊldli tə ɹænd. "ju kʌm fɹəm wɛɹ?"

The narrow-faced man glanced at Rand's sword hilt again - the bronze heron was plain - and his eyes widened momentarily. Then his gaze rose to Rand's face, and he sniffed dismissively. "He is too young. You are not from this place, yes?" he said coldly to Rand. "You come from where?"

"aɪ dʒʌst ɝaɪvd ɪn bɛɹlən." ə tɪŋɡəlɪŋ θɹɪl ɹæn əlɔŋ ɹændz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz. hi fɛl flʌʃt, ɔlmoʊst wɔɹm. "ju wʊdnt noʊ ʌv ə ɡʊɾ ɪn, wəd ju?"

"I just arrived in Baerlon." A tingling thrill ran along Rand's arms and legs. He felt flushed, almost warm. "You wouldn't know of a good inn, would you?"

"ju əvɔɪd maɪ kwɛstʃənz," bɔɹnhəl snæpt. "wʌɾ ivəl ɪz ɪn jə ðət jə də nɑɾ ænsɝ mi?" hɪz kəmpænjənz muvd ʌp tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm, feɪsəz hɑɹɾ ən ɪkspɹɛʃənləs. dɪspaɪt ðə mʌdsteɪnz ɑn ðɛɹ kloʊks, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fʌni əbaʊɾ əm naʊ.

"You avoid my questions," Bornhald snapped. "What evil is in you that you do not answer me?" His companions moved up to either side of him, faces hard and expressionless. Despite the mudstains on their cloaks, there was nothing funny about them now.

ðə tɪŋɡəlɪŋ fɪld ɹænd; ðə hit hæd ɡɹoʊn tə ə fivɝ. hi wɑntəd tə læf, ɪt fɛl soʊ ɡʊd. ə smɔl vɔɪs ɪn ɪz hɛd ʃaʊɾəd ðət sʌmθɪŋ wɑz ɹɔŋ, bʌɾ ɔl i kəd θɪŋk ʌv wɑz haʊ fʊl ʌv ɛnɝdʒi hi fɛlt, nɪɹli bɝstɪŋ wɪð ɪt. smaɪlɪŋ, hi ɹɑkt ɑn ɪz hilz ən weɪɾəd fəɹ wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən. veɪɡli, dɪstənli, hi wʌndɝd wʌɾ ɪt wəd bi.

The tingling filled Rand; the heat had grown to a fever. He wanted to laugh, it felt so good. A small voice in his head shouted that something was wrong, but all he could think of was how full of energy he felt, nearly bursting with it. Smiling, he rocked on his heels and waited for what was going to happen. Vaguely, distantly, he wondered what it would be.

ðə liɾɝz feɪs dɑɹkənd. wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz dʒɹu hɪz sɔɹɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ən ɪntʃ ə stil tə ʃoʊ ən spoʊk ɪn ə vɔɪs kwɪvɝɪŋ wɪð æŋɡɝ. "wɛn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ æsk kwɛstʃənz, jə ɡɹeɪ-aɪd bʌmpkɪn, wi ɪkspɛkt ænsɝz, əɹ - " hi kʌɾ ɔf əz ðə nɛɹoʊ-feɪs mæn θɹu ən ɑɹm əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst. bɔɹnhəl dʒɝkt ɪz hɛɾ ʌp ðə stʃɹit.

The leader's face darkened. One of the others drew his sword enough for an inch of steel to show and spoke in a voice quivering with anger. "When the Children of the Light ask questions, you gray-eyed bumpkin, we expect answers, or - " He cut off as the narrow-faced man threw an arm across his chest. Bornhald jerked his head up the street.

ðə taʊn wɑtʃ hæɾ ɝaɪvd, ə dʌzən mɛn ɪn ɹaʊn stil kæps ən stʌɾɪd lɛðɝ dʒɝkɪnz, kæɹiɪŋ kɔɹɾɝstɑfs əz ɪf ðeɪ nu haʊ tə juz ðɛm. ðeɪ stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ, saɪlənli, fɹəm tɛn peɪsɪz ɔf.

The Town Watch had arrived, a dozen men in round steel caps and studded leather jerkins, carrying quarterstaffs as if they knew how to use them. They stood watching, silently, from ten paces off.

"ðɪs taʊn əz lɔs ðə laɪt," ɡɹaʊl ðə mæn u hæd hæf dʒɹɔn ɪz sɔɹd. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs tə ʃaʊɾ ət ðə wɑtʃ. "bɛɹlən stænz ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ðə dɑɹk wʌn!" əɾ ə dʒɛstʃɝ fɹəm bɔɹnhəld i slæmd ɪz bleɪd bæk ɪndə ɪts skæbɝd.

"This town has lost the Light," growled the man who had half drawn his sword. He raised his voice to shout at the Watch. "Baerlon stands in the Shadow of the Dark One!" At a gesture from Bornhald he slammed his blade back into its scabbard.

bɔɹnhəl tɝn ɪz ətɛnʃən bæk tə ɹænd. ðə laɪɾ ə noʊɪŋ bɝn ɪn ɪz aɪz. "dɑɹkfɹɛnz də nɑɾ ɪskeɪp ʌs, jʌŋɡəlɪŋ, ivən ɪn ə taʊn ðət stænz ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ. wɪl miɾ əɡɛn. jə meɪ bi ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt!"

Bornhald turned his attention back to Rand. The light of knowing burned in his eyes. "Darkfriends do not escape us, youngling, even in a town that stands in the Shadow. We will meet again. You may be sure of it!"

hi spʌn ɑn ɪz hil ən stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ, hɪz tu kəmpænjənz kloʊs bɪhaɪnd, əz ɪf ɹænd hæd sis tə ɪɡzɪst. fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, ət list. wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə kɹaʊɾəd pɑɹɾ ə ðə stʃɹit, ðə seɪm simɪŋli æksədɛntəl pɑkəɾ əz bɪfɔɹ oʊpən ɝaʊn ðɛm. ðə wɑtʃmən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, aɪɪŋ ɹænd, ðən ʃoʊldɝd ðɛɹ kɔɹɾɝstɑfs ən fɑloʊd ðə waɪt-kloʊk θɹi. ðeɪ hæd tə pʊʃ ðɛɹ weɪ ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd, ʃaʊɾɪŋ, "meɪk weɪ fəɹ ðə wɑtʃ!" fju dɪd meɪk weɪ, ɪksɛpt ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli.

He spun on his heel and strode away, his two companions close behind, as if Rand had ceased to exist. For the moment, at least. When they reached the crowded part of the street, the same seemingly accidental pocket as before opened around them. The Watchmen hesitated, eyeing Rand, then shouldered their quarterstaffs and followed the white-cloaked three. They had to push their way into the crowd, shouting, "Make way for the Watch!" Few did make way, except grudgingly.

ɹænd stɪl ɹɑkt ɑn ɪz hilz, weɪɾɪŋ. ðə tɪŋɡəl wɑz soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðəɾ i ɔlmoʊs kwɪvɝd; hi fɛlt əz ɪf i wɝ bɝnɪŋ ʌp.

Rand still rocked on his heels, waiting. The tingle was so strong that he almost quivered; he felt as if he were burning up.

mæt keɪm aʊɾ ə ðə ʃɑp, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm. "ju ɑɹən sɪk," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "ju ɑɹ kɹeɪzi!"

Mat came out of the shop, staring at him. "You aren't sick," he said finally. "You are crazy!"

ɹænd dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, ən əbɹʌpli ɪt wɑz ɔl ɡɔn laɪk ə pɹɪk bʌbəl. hi stæɡɝɾ əz ɪt vænɪʃt, ðə ɹiləzeɪʃən ʌv wʌɾ i hæd dʒʌs dʌn flʌɾɪŋ ɪn ɑn hɪm. lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps, hi mɛt mæts stɛɹ. "aɪ θɪŋk wi hæd bɛɾɝ ɡoʊ bæk tə ði ɪn, naʊ," hi sɛɾ ənstɛɾəli.

Rand drew a deep breath, and abruptly it was all gone like a pricked bubble. He staggered as it vanished, the realization of what he had just done flooding in on him. Licking his lips, he met Mat's stare. "I think we had better go back to the inn, now," he said unsteadily.

"jɛs," mæt sɛd. "jɛs. aɪ θɪŋk wi bɛɾɝ hæd."

"Yes," Mat said. "Yes. I think we better had."

ðə stʃɹit hæd bɪɡʌn tə fɪl ʌp əɡɛn, ən mɔɹ ðən wʌn pæsɝbaɪ stɛɹɾ ət ðə tu bɔɪz ən mɝmɝd sʌmθɪŋ tə ə kəmpænjən. ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə stɔɹi wəd spɹɛd. ə kɹeɪzi mæn hæd tʃɹaɪd tə stɑɹɾ ə faɪt wɪð θɹi tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tə tɔk əbaʊt. meɪbi ðə dʒɹimz ɑɹ dʒɹaɪvɪŋ mi kɹeɪzi.

The street had begun to fill up again, and more than one passerby stared at the two boys and murmured something to a companion. Rand was sure the story would spread. A crazy man had tried to start a fight with three Children of the Light. That was something to talk about. Maybe the dreams are driving me crazy.

ðə tu lɔs ðɛɹ weɪ sɛvɹəl taɪmz ɪn ðə hæphæzɝd stʃɹits, bʌɾ æftɝ ə waɪl ðeɪ fɛl ɪn wɪð tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn, meɪkɪŋ ə ɡɹæn pɹəsɛʃən ɔl baɪ hɪmsɛlf θɹu ðə θɹɔŋ. ðə ɡlimən sɛɾ i wɑz aʊt tə stʃɹɛtʃ ɪz lɛɡz ən fəɹ ə bɪɾ ə fɹɛʃ ɛɹ, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ ɛniwʌn lʊk twaɪs əɾ ɪz kʌlɝfəl kloʊk i wəɾ ənaʊns ɪn ə ɹisaʊndɪŋ vɔɪs, "aɪ æm ət ðə stæɡ ən laɪən, tənaɪɾ oʊnli."

The two lost their way several times in the haphazard streets, but after a while they fell in with Thom Merrilin, making a grand procession all by himself through the throng. The gleeman said he was out to stretch his legs and for a bit of fresh air, but whenever anyone looked twice at his colorful cloak he would announce in a resounding voice, "I am at the Stag and Lion, tonight only."

ɪt wɑz mæt u bɪɡæn dɪsdʒɔɪntɪdli tɛlɪŋ tɑm əbaʊt ðə dʒɹim ən ðɛɹ wɝi oʊvɝ wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt tə tɛl mɔɪɹeɪn, bʌt ɹænd dʒɔɪn ɪn, fəɹ ðəɹ wɝ dɪfɝənsɪz ɪn ɪɡzækli haʊ ðeɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪt. əɹ meɪbi itʃ dʒɹim wɑz ə lɪɾəl dɪfɹənt, hi θɔt. ðə meɪdʒɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðə dʒɹimz wɑz ðə seɪm, ðoʊ.

It was Mat who began disjointedly telling Thom about the dream and their worry over whether or not to tell Moiraine, but Rand joined in, for there were differences in exactly how they remembered it. Or maybe each dream was a little different, he thought. The major part of the dreams was the same, though.

ðeɪ hæd nɑt ɡɔn fɑɹ ɪn ðə tɛlɪŋ bɪfɔɹ tɑm stɑɹɾəd peɪɪŋ fʊl ətɛnʃən. wən ɹænd mɛnʃən bælzəmən, ðə ɡlimən ɡɹæbd əm itʃ baɪ ə ʃoʊldɝ wɪð ə kəmæn tə hoʊl ðɛɹ tʌŋz, ɹeɪzd ɑn tɪptoʊ tə lʊk oʊvɝ ðə hɛdz ə ðə kɹaʊd, ðən hʌsəld əm aʊɾ ə ðə pɹɛs tə ə dɛd-ɛn æli ðət wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju kɹeɪts ən ə slæt-ɹɪbd, jɛloʊ dɔɡ hʌɾəld aʊɾ ə ðə koʊld.

They had not gone far in the telling before Thom started paying full attention. When Rand mentioned Ba'alzamon, the gleeman grabbed them each by a shoulder with a command to hold their tongues, raised on tiptoe to look over the heads of the crowd, then hustled them out of the press to a dead-end alley that was empty except for a few crates and a slat-ribbed, yellow dog huddled out of the cold.

tɑm stɛɹɾ aʊɾ ət ðə kɹaʊd, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ɛniwʌn stɑpɪŋ tə lɪsən, bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ ɪz ətɛnʃən tə ɹænd ən mæt. hɪz blu aɪz bɔɹɾ ɪndə ðɛɹz, bɪtwin flɪkɝɪŋ əweɪ tə wɑtʃ ðə maʊθ ə ði æli. "doʊn ɛvɝ seɪ ðət neɪm wɛɹ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz kən hɪɹ." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz loʊ, bʌɾ ɝdʒənt. "nɑɾ ivən wɛɹ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ maɪt hɪɹ. ɪts ə vɛɹi deɪnʒɝəs neɪm, ivən wɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ ɑɹ nɑt wɑndɝɪŋ ðə stʃɹits."

Thom stared out at the crowd, looking for anyone stopping to listen, before turning his attention to Rand and Mat. His blue eyes bored into theirs, between flickering away to watch the mouth of the alley. "Don't ever say that name where strangers can hear." His voice was low, but urgent. "Not even where a stranger might hear. It is a very dangerous name, even where Children of the Light are not wandering the streets."

mæt snɔɹɾɪd. "aɪ kəd tɛl jə əbaʊt tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt," hi sɛd wɪð ə ɹaɪ lʊk ət ɹænd.

Mat snorted. "I could tell you about Children of the Light," he said with a wry look at Rand.

tɑm ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm. "ɪf oʊnli wʌn ə jə hæd hæd ðɪs dʒɹim. . . ." hi tʌɡd əɾ ɪz mʌstæʃ fjʊɹiəsli. "tɛl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ jə kən ɹɪmɛmbɝ əbaʊɾ ɪt. ɛvɹi dɪteɪl." hi kɛpt ʌp ɪz wɛɹi wɑtʃ waɪl i lɪsənd.

Thom ignored him. "If only one of you had had this dream. . . ." He tugged at his mustache furiously. "Tell me everything you can remember about it. Every detail." He kept up his wary watch while he listened.

". . . hi neɪm ðə mɛn i sɛd hæd bɪn juzd," ɹænd sɛd faɪnəli. hi θɔɾ i hæd toʊld ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls. "ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsən. ɹɑoʊlɪn dɑɹksbeɪn."

". . . he named the men he said had been used," Rand said finally. He thought he had told everything else. "Guaire Amalasan. Raolin Darksbane."

"dɑviən," mæt æɾəd bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɡoʊ ɑn. "æn jʊɹiən stoʊnboʊ."

"Davian," Mat added before he could go on. "And Yurian Stonebow."

"æn lɑɡən," ɹænd fɪnɪʃt.

"And Logain," Rand finished.

"deɪnʒɝəs neɪmz," tɑm mʌɾɝd. hɪz aɪz sim tə dʒɹɪl əɾ əm ivən mɔɹ ɪntɛnli ðən bɪfɔɹ. "nɪɹli əz deɪnʒɝəs əz ðəɾ ʌðɝ, wʌn weɪ ən ənʌðɝ. ɔl dɛd, naʊ, ɪksɛp fəɹ lɑɡən. səm lɔŋ dɛd. ɹɑoʊlɪn dɑɹksbeɪn nɪɹli tu θaʊzən jɪɹz. bʌt deɪnʒɝəs dʒʌs ðə seɪm. bɛs jə doʊn seɪ ðɛm əlaʊɾ ivən wən jəɹ əloʊn. moʊs pipəl wʊdn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ə wʌn ə ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪf ðə ɹɔŋ pɝsən oʊvɝhɹz. . . ."

"Dangerous names," Thom muttered. His eyes seemed to drill at them even more intently than before. "Nearly as dangerous as that other, one way and another. All dead, now, except for Logain. Some long dead. Raolin Darksbane nearly two thousand years. But dangerous just the same. Best you don't say them aloud even when you're alone. Most people wouldn't recognize a one of them, but if the wrong person overhears. . . ."

"bʌɾ u wɝ ðeɪ?" ɹænd sɛd.

"But who were they?" Rand said.

"mɛn," tɑm mɝmɝd. "mɛn u ʃʊk ðə pɪlɝz ə hɛvən ən ɹɑk ðə wɝld ɑn ɪts faʊndeɪʃənz." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ. fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt ðɛm. ðeɪ ɑɹ dʌs naʊ."

"Men," Thom murmured. "Men who shook the pillars of heaven and rocked the world on its foundations." He shook his head. "It doesn't matter. Forget about them. They are dust now."

"dɪd ðə . . . wɝ ðeɪ juzd, laɪk i sɛd?" mæt æskt. "æn kɪld?" "ju maɪt seɪ ðə waɪt taʊɝ kɪl ðɛm. jə maɪt seɪ ðæt." tɑmz maʊθ taɪɾənd moʊməntɛɹəli, ðən i ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn. "bʌt juzd . . . ? noʊ, aɪ kænɑt si ðæt. ðə laɪt noʊz ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ əz ɪnʌf plɑts ɡoʊɪŋ, bʌɾ aɪ kæn si ðæt."

"Did the . . . were they used, like he said?" Mat asked. "And killed?" "You might say the White Tower killed them. You might say that." Thom's mouth tightened momentarily, then he shook his head again. "But used . . . ? No, I cannot see that. The Light knows the Amyrlin Seat has enough plots going, but I can't see that."

mæt ʃɪvɝd. "hi sɛd soʊ mɛni θɪŋz. kɹeɪzi θɪŋz. ɔl ðəɾ əbaʊt luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ, ən ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. ən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld. wʌɾ ɪn ðə laɪɾ ɪz ðət səpoʊz tə bi?"

Mat shivered. "He said so many things. Crazy things. All that about Lews Therin Kinslayer, and Artur Hawkwing. And the Eye of the World. What in the Light is that supposed to be?"

"ə lɛdʒənd," ðə ɡlimən sɛd sloʊli. "meɪbi. əz bɪɡ ə lɛdʒən əz ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ət list ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ʌp ðɛɹ, jʌŋ mɛn ɡoʊ hʌntɪŋ ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl ðə weɪ jʌŋ mɛn fɹəm ɪljən hʌn ðə hɔɹn. meɪbi ə lɛdʒənd."

"A legend," the gleeman said slowly. "Maybe. As big a legend as the Horn of Valere, at least in the Borderlands. Up there, young men go hunting the Eye of the World the way young men from Illian hunt the Horn. Maybe a legend."

"wʌt də wi du, tɑm?" ɹænd sɛd. "du wi tɛl hɝ? aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛni mɔɹ dʒɹimz laɪk ðæt. meɪbi ʃi kəd də sʌmθɪŋ."

"What do we do, Thom?" Rand said. "Do we tell her? I don't want any more dreams like that. Maybe she could do something."

"meɪbi wi wʊdn laɪk wʌt ʃi dɪd," mæt ɡɹaʊld.

"Maybe we wouldn't like what she did," Mat growled.

tɑm stʌɾid ðɛm, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ən stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ɪz mʌstæʃ wɪð ə nʌkəl. "aɪ seɪ hoʊl jəɹ pis," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "doʊn tɛl ɛniwʌn, fəɹ ðə taɪm, ət list. jə kən ɔlweɪz tʃeɪnʒ jəɹ maɪnd, ɪf juv tə, bʌt wʌns jə tɛl, ɪts dʌn, ən jəɹ taɪɾ ʌp wɝs ðən ɛvɝ wɪð . . . wɪð hɝ." sʌɾənli hi stʃɹeɪɾənd, hɪz stup ɔlmoʊs dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ. "ði ʌðɝ læd! jə seɪ hi hæd ðə seɪm dʒɹim? dʌz i hæv sɛns ɪnʌf tə kip ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt?"

Thom studied them, considering and stroking his mustache with a knuckle. "I say hold your peace," he said finally. "Don't tell anyone, for the time, at least. You can always change your mind, if you have to, but once you tell, it's done, and you're tied up worse than ever with . . . with her." Suddenly he straightened, his stoop almost disappearing. "The other lad! You say he had the same dream? Does he have sense enough to keep his mouth shut?"

"aɪ θɪŋk soʊ," ɹænd sɛɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət mæt sɛd, "wi wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə ði ɪn tə wɔɹn hɪm."

"I think so," Rand said at the same time that Mat said, "We were going back to the inn to warn him."

"ðə laɪt sɛnd wɝ nɑt tu leɪt!" kloʊk flæpɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz æŋkəlz, pætʃəz flʌɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd, tɑm stʃɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə ði æli, lʊkɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ wɪθaʊt stɑpɪŋ. "wɛl? ɑɹ jəɹ fit pɛɡd tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd?"

"The Light send we're not too late!" Cloak flapping around his ankles, patches fluttering in the wind, Thom strode out of the alley, looking back over his shoulder without stopping. "Well? Are your feet pegged to the ground?"

ɹænd ən mæt hɝiɾ æftɝ hɪm, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt weɪt fəɹ əm tə kætʃ ʌp. ðɪs taɪm i dɪd nɑt pɔz fəɹ pipəl u lʊkt əɾ ɪz kloʊk, əɹ ðoʊz u heɪld ɪm əz ə ɡlimən, iðɝ. hi kloʊv θɹu ðə kɹaʊɾəd stʃɹits əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɛmpti, ɹænd ən mæt hæf ɹʌnɪŋ tə fɑloʊ ɪn ɪz weɪk. ɪn mʌtʃ lɛs taɪm ðən ɹænd ɪkspɛktəd ðeɪ wɝ hɝiɪŋ ʌp tə ðə stæɡ ən laɪən.

Rand and Mat hurried after him, but he did not wait for them to catch up. This time he did not pause for people who looked at his cloak, or those who hailed him as a gleeman, either. He clove through the crowded streets as if they were empty, Rand and Mat half running to follow in his wake. In much less time than Rand expected they were hurrying up to the Stag and Lion.

əz ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd ɪn, pɛɹɪn keɪm spiɾɪŋ aʊt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɹoʊ hɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz əz i ɹæn. hi nɪɹli fɛl ɪn ɪz ɛfɝt nɑt tə kɹəm ɪndə ðɛm. "aɪ wɑz kʌmɪŋ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ jə tu," hi pæntɪd wən i hæd kɑɾ ɪz bæləns.

As they started in, Perrin came speeding out, trying to throw his cloak around his shoulders as he ran. He nearly fell in his effort not to carom into them. "I was coming looking for you two," he panted when he had caught his balance.

ɹænd ɡɹæbd ɪm baɪ ði ɑɹm. "dɪd jə tɛl ɛniwʌn əbaʊt ðə dʒɹim?"

Rand grabbed him by the arm. "Did you tell anyone about the dream?"

"seɪ ðət jə dɪdnt," mæt dɪmændəd.

"Say that you didn't," Mat demanded.

"ɪts vɛɹi ɪmpɔɹɾənt," tɑm sɛd.

"It's very important," Thom said.

pɛɹɪn lʊkt əɾ əm ɪn kənfjuʒən. "noʊ, aɪ hævənt. aɪ dɪdn ivən ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə bɛɾ əntɪl lɛs ðən ən aʊɝ əɡoʊ." hɪz ʃoʊldɝz slʌmpt. "aɪv ɡɪvən maɪsɛlf ə hɛdeɪk tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt, mʌtʃ lɛs tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt. waɪ dɪd jə tɛl hɪm?" hi nɑɾəd ət ðə ɡlimən.

Perrin looked at them in confusion. "No, I haven't. I didn't even get out of bed until less than an hour ago." His shoulders slumped. "I've given myself a headache trying not to think about it, much less talk about it. Why did you tell him?" He nodded at the gleeman.

"wi hæd tə tɔk tə sʌmbɑɾi əɹ ɡoʊ kɹeɪzi," ɹænd sɛd.

"We had to talk to somebody or go crazy," Rand said.

"aɪ wɪl ɪkspleɪn leɪɾɝ," tɑm æɾəd wɪð ə səɡnɪfɪkən lʊk ət ðə pipəl pæsɪŋ ɪn ən aʊɾ ə ðə stæɡ ən laɪən.

"I will explain later," Thom added with a significant look at the people passing in and out of the Stag and Lion.

"ɔl ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd sloʊli, stɪl lʊkɪŋ kənfjuzd. sʌɾənli hi slæpt ɪz hɛd. "ju ɔlmoʊs meɪd mi fɝɡɛt waɪ aɪ wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ju, nɑt ðəɾ aɪ doʊnt wɪʃ aɪ kʊd. nɪneɪiv ɪz ɪnsaɪd."

"All right," Perrin replied slowly, still looking confused. Suddenly he slapped his head. "You almost made me forget why I was looking for you, not that I don't wish I could. Nynaeve is inside."

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz!" mæt jɛlpt. "haʊ dɪd ʃi ɡɛt hɪɹ? mɔɪɹeɪn. . . . ðə fɛɹi. . . ."

"Blood and ashes!" Mat yelped. "How did she get here? Moiraine. . . . The ferry. . . ."

pɛɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd. "ju θɪŋk ə lɪɾəl θɪŋ laɪk ə sʌŋkən fɛɹi kəd stɑp hɝ? ʃi ɹuɾəd haɪtaʊɝ aʊt - aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ hi ɡɑt bæk oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪvɝ, bʌt ʃi sɛɾ i wɑz haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɪz bɛdʒɹum ən dɪdnt wɑnə ɡoʊ nɪɹ ðə ɹɪvɝ - ɛniweɪ, ʃi bʊliɾ ɪm ɪndə faɪndɪŋ ə boʊt bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ əɹ ən əɹ hɔɹs ən ɹoʊɪŋ əɹ əkɹɔs. hɪmsɛlf. ʃi oʊnli ɡeɪv ɪm taɪm tə faɪnd wʌn ə hɪz hɔlɝz tə wɝk ənʌðɝ sɛɾ ʌv ɔɹz."

Perrin snorted. "You think a little thing like a sunken ferry could stop her? She rooted Hightower out - I don't know how he got back over the river, but she said he was hiding in his bedroom and didn't want to go near the river - anyway, she bullied him into finding a boat big enough for her and her horse and rowing her across. Himself. She only gave him time to find one of his haulers to work another set of oars."

"laɪt!" mæt bɹiðd.

"Light!" Mat breathed.

"wʌɾ ɪz ʃi duɪŋ hɪɹ?" ɹænd wɑntəd tə noʊ. mæt ən pɛɹɪn boʊθ ɡeɪv ɪm ə skɔɹnfəl lʊk.

"What is she doing here?" Rand wanted to know. Mat and Perrin both gave him a scornful look.

"ʃi keɪm æftɝ ʌs," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ʃiz wɪð . . . wɪð mɪstʃɹəs æliz ɹaɪt naʊ, ən ɪts koʊld ɪnʌf ɪn ðəɹ tə snoʊ."

"She came after us," Perrin said. "She's with . . . with Mistress Alys right now, and it's cold enough in there to snow."

"kʊdnt wi dʒʌst ɡoʊ sʌmwɛɹ ɛls fəɹ ə waɪl?" mæt æskt. "maɪ dɑ sɛz, oʊnli ə ful pʊts ɪz hæn ɪn ə hɔɹnɪt nɛst əntɪl i æbsəlutli hæz tə."

"Couldn't we just go somewhere else for a while?" Mat asked. "My da says, only a fool puts his hand in a hornet nest until he absolutely has to."

ɹænd kʌɾ ɪn. "ʃi kæn meɪk əs ɡoʊ bæk. wɪntɝnaɪt ʃʊɾə bɪn ɪnʌf tə meɪk əɹ si ðæt. ɪf ʃi dʌznt, wɪl əv tə meɪk hɝ."

Rand cut in. "She can't make us go back. Winternight should have been enough to make her see that. If she doesn't, we will have to make her."

mæts aɪbɹaʊz lɪftəd haɪɝ wɪð ɛvɹi wɝd, ən wən ɹænd fɪnɪʃt i lɛɾ aʊɾ ə loʊ wɪsəl. "ju ɛvɝ tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk nɪneɪiv si sʌmθɪŋ ʃi dʌznt wɑnə si? aɪ hæv. aɪ seɪ wi steɪ əweɪ tɪl naɪt, ən snik ɪn ðɛn."

Mat's eyebrows lifted higher with every word, and when Rand finished he let out a low whistle. "You ever try to make Nynaeve see something she doesn't want to see? I have. I say we stay away till night, and sneak in then."

"fɹʌm maɪ ɑbzɝveɪʃən ə ðə jʌŋ wʊmən," tɑm sɛd, "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ʃɪl stɑp əntɪl ʃiz hæɾ əɹ seɪ. ɪf ʃiz nɑɾ əlaʊd tə hæv ɪt sun, ʃi maɪt kip ɑn əntɪl ʃi ətʃɹæks ətɛnʃən nʌn ʌv əs wɑns."

"From my observation of the young woman," Thom said, "I don't think she will stop until she has had her say. If she is not allowed to have it soon, she might keep on until she attracts attention none of us wants."

ðət bɹɔɾ əm ɔl ʌp ʃɔɹt. ðeɪ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz, dʒɹu dip bɹɛθs, ən mɑɹtʃt ɪnsaɪɾ əz ɪf tə feɪs tʃɹɑləks.

That brought them all up short. They exchanged glances, drew deep breaths, and marched inside as if to face Trollocs.


tʃæptɝ sɪkstin


CHAPTER 16

ðə wɪzdəm


The Wisdom

pɛɹɪn lɛd ðə weɪ ɪndə ðə dɛpθs ə ði ɪn. ɹænd wɑz soʊ ɪntɛn ɑn wʌɾ i ɪntɛndəd tə seɪ tə nɪneɪiv ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt si mɪn əntɪl ʃi sizd ɪz ɑɹm ən pʊld ɪm tə wʌn saɪd. ði ʌðɝz kɛpt ɑn ə fju stɛps daʊn ðə hɔl bɪfɔɹ ɹilaɪzɪŋ i hæd stɑpt, ðən ðeɪ hɔltəd, tu, hæf ɪmpeɪʃən tə ɡoʊ ɑn, hæf ɹɪlʌktən tə də soʊ.

Perrin led the way into the depths of the inn. Rand was so intent on what he intended to say to Nynaeve that he did not see Min until she seized his arm and pulled him to one side. The others kept on a few steps down the hall before realizing he had stopped, then they halted, too, half impatient to go on, half reluctant to do so.

"wi doʊn əv taɪm fəɹ ðæt, bɔɪ," tɑm sɛd ɡɹʌflaɪ.

"We don't have time for that, boy," Thom said gruffly.

mɪn ɡeɪv ðə waɪt-hɛɹd ɡlimən ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. "ɡoʊ dʒʌɡəl sʌmθɪŋ," ʃi snæpt, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɹænd fɝðɝ əweɪ fɹəm ði ʌðɝz.

Min gave the white-haired gleeman a sharp look. "Go juggle something," she snapped, drawing Rand further away from the others.

"aɪ ɹɪli doʊn əv taɪm," ɹænd toʊl hɝ. "sɝɾənli nɑt fəɹ ɛni mɔɹ ful tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪskeɪpɪŋ ən ðə laɪk." hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛɾ ɪz ɑɹm lus, bʌɾ ɛvɹi taɪm i pʊl fɹi, ʃi ɡɹæbd ɪɾ əɡɛn.

"I really don't have time," Rand told her. "Certainly not for any more fool talk about escaping and the like." He tried to get his arm loose, but every time he pulled free, she grabbed it again.

"æn aɪ doʊn əv taɪm fəɹ jəɹ fulɪʃnəs, iðɝ. wɪl jə bi stɪl!" ʃi ɡeɪv ði ʌðɝz ə kwɪk lʊk, ðən muv kloʊsɝ, loʊɝɪŋ əɹ vɔɪs. "ə wʊmən ɝaɪvd ə lɪɾəl waɪl əɡoʊ - ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən aɪ, jʌŋ, wɪð dɑɹk aɪz ən dɑɹk hɛɹ ɪn ə bɹeɪd daʊn tə hɝ weɪst. ʃiz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, ɹaɪɾ əlɔŋ wɪð ðə ɹɛst ə ju."

"And I don't have time for your foolishness, either. Will you be still!" She gave the others a quick look, then moved closer, lowering her voice. "A woman arrived a little while ago - shorter than I, young, with dark eyes and dark hair in a braid down to her waist. She's part of it, right along with the rest of you."

fəɹ ə mɪnət ɹænd dʒʌst stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. nɪneɪiv? haʊ kən ʃi bi ɪnvɑlvd? laɪt, haʊ kən aɪ bi ɪnvɑlvd? "ðæts . . . ɪmpɑsəbəl."

For a minute Rand just stared at her. Nynaeve? How can she be involved? Light, how can I be involved? "That's . . . impossible."

"ju noʊ hɝ?" mɪn wɪspɝd.

"You know her?" Min whispered.

"jɛs, ən ʃi kæn bi mɪkst ɪn . . . ɪn wʌtɛvɝ ɪts ju. . . ."

"Yes, and she can't be mixed in . . . in whatever it is you. . . ."

"ðə spɑɹks, ɹænd. ʃi mɛt mɪstʃɹəs æliz kʌmɪŋ ɪn, ən ðəɹ wɝ spɑɹks, wɪð dʒʌs ðə tu ʌv ðɛm. jɛstɝdeɪ aɪ kʊdn si spɑɹks wɪθaʊɾ ət lis θɹi əɹ fɔɹ ə jə təɡɛðɝ, bʌt tədeɪ ɪts ɔl ʃɑɹpɝ, ən mɔɹ fjʊɹiəs." ʃi lʊkt ət ɹændz fɹɛnz, weɪɾɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənli, ən ʃɪvɝd bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ bæk tə hɪm. "ɪts ɔlmoʊst ə wʌndɝ ði ɪn dʌzn kætʃ faɪɝ. jəɹ ɔl ɪn mɔɹ deɪnʒɝ tədeɪ ðən jɛstɝdeɪ. sɪns ʃi keɪm."

"The sparks, Rand. She met Mistress Alys coming in, and there were sparks, with just the two of them. Yesterday I couldn't see sparks without at least three or four of you together, but today it's all sharper, and more furious." She looked at Rand's friends, waiting impatiently, and shivered before turning back to him. "It's almost a wonder the inn doesn't catch fire. You're all in more danger today than yesterday. Since she came."

ɹænd ɡlænst əɾ ɪz fɹɛnz. tɑm, hɪz bɹaʊz dʒɹɔn daʊn ɪn ə bʊʃi vi, wɑz linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə teɪkɪŋ səm ækʃən tə hɝi hɪm əlɔŋ. "ʃi woʊn də ɛniθɪŋ tə hɝɾ ʌs," hi toʊl mɪn. "aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ, naʊ." hi səksiɾəd ɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪz ɑɹm bæk, ðɪs taɪm.

Rand glanced at his friends. Thom, his brows drawn down in a bushy V, was leaning forward on the point of taking some action to hurry him along. "She won't do anything to hurt us," he told Min. "I have to go, now." He succeeded in getting his arm back, this time.

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ əɹ skwɔk, hi dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝz, ən ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd ɔf əɡɛn daʊn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ. ɹænd lʊk bæk wʌns. mɪn ʃʊk əɹ fɪst əɾ ɪm ən stæmpt əɹ fʊt.

Ignoring her squawk, he joined the others, and they started off again down the corridor. Rand looked back once. Min shook her fist at him and stamped her foot.

"wʌt dɪd ʃi hæv tə seɪ?" mæt æskt.

"What did she have to say?" Mat asked.

"nɪneɪiv ɪz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt," ɹænd sɛd wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ, ðən ʃɑt mæt ə hɑɹd lʊk ðət kɑɾ ɪm wɪð ɪz maʊθ oʊpən. ðən ʌndɝstændɪŋ sloʊli spɹɛɾ əkɹɔs mæts feɪs.

"Nynaeve is part of it," Rand said without thinking, then shot Mat a hard look that caught him with his mouth open. Then understanding slowly spread across Mat's face.

"pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt?" tɑm sɛd sɔfli. "dʌz ðət ɡɝl noʊ sʌmθɪŋ?"

"Part of what?" Thom said softly. "Does that girl know something?"

waɪl ɹænd wɑz stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡæðɝ ɪn ɪz hɛd wʌt tə seɪ, mæt spoʊk ʌp. "ʌv kɔɹs ʃiz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt," hi sɛd ɡɹʌmpəli. "pɑɹɾ ə ðə seɪm bæd lʌk wiv bɪn hævɪŋ sɪns wɪntɝnaɪt. meɪbi hævɪŋ ðə wɪzdəm ʃoʊ ʌp ɪz noʊ ɡɹeɪɾ əfɛɹ tə ju, bʌɾ aɪɾ əz sun əv ðə waɪtkloʊks hɪɹ, maɪsɛlf."

While Rand was still trying to gather in his head what to say, Mat spoke up. "Of course she's part of it," he said grumpily. "Part of the same bad luck we've been having since Winternight. Maybe having the Wisdom show up is no great affair to you, but I'd as soon have the Whitecloaks here, myself."

"ʃi sɔ nɪneɪiv ɝaɪv," ɹænd sɛd. "sɔ hɝ tɔkɪŋ tə mɪstʃɹəs æliz, ən θɔt ʃi maɪɾ əv sʌmθɪŋ tə də wɪð ʌs." tɑm ɡeɪv ɪm ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk ən ɹʌfəld ɪz mʌstæʃɪz wɪð ə snɔɹt, bʌt ði ʌðɝz sim tə æksɛpt ɹændz ɛkspləneɪʃən. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk kipɪŋ sikɹəts fɹəm ɪz fɹɛnz, bʌt mɪnz sikɹət kəd bi əz deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ əɹ əz ɛni ʌv ðɛɹz wɑz fəɹ ðɛm.

"She saw Nynaeve arrive," Rand said. "Saw her talking to Mistress Alys, and thought she might have something to do with us." Thom gave him a sidelong look and ruffled his mustaches with a snort, but the others seemed to accept Rand's explanation. He did not like keeping secrets from his friends, but Min's secret could be as dangerous for her as any of theirs was for them.

pɛɹɪn stɑp sʌɾənli ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə dɔɹ, ən dɪspaɪɾ ɪz saɪz i simd ɑdli hɛzɪɾənt. hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, lʊkt əɾ ɪz kəmpænjənz, tʊk ənʌðɝ bɹɛθ, ðən sloʊli oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ən wɛn ɪn. wʌn baɪ wʌn ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm fɑloʊd. ɹænd wɑz ðə læst, ən i kloʊz ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ɪm wɪð ði ʌtmoʊst ɹɪlʌktəns.

Perrin stopped suddenly in front of a door, and despite his size he seemed oddly hesitant. He drew a deep breath, looked at his companions, took another breath, then slowly opened the door and went in. One by one the rest of them followed. Rand was the last, and he closed the door behind him with the utmost reluctance.

ɪt wɑz ðə ɹum wɛɹ ðeɪ hæɾ iɾən ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ. ə bleɪz kɹækəld ɑn ðə hɑɹθ, ən ə pɑlɪʃt sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ sæɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə teɪbəl hoʊldɪŋ ə ɡlimɪŋ sɪlvɝ pɪtʃɝ ən kʌps. mɔɪɹeɪn ən nɪneɪiv sæɾ əɾ ɑpəzəɾ ɛnz ə ðə teɪbəl, niðɝ teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz fɹəm ði ʌðɝ. ɔl ði ʌðɝ tʃɛɹz wɝ ɛmpti. mɔɪɹeɪnz hænz ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, əz stɪl əz əɹ feɪs. nɪneɪivz bɹeɪd wɑz θɹoʊn oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ, ði ɛnd ɡɹɪpt ɪn wʌn fɪst; ʃi kɛpt ɡɪvɪŋ ɪt lɪɾəl tʌɡz ðə weɪ ʃi dɪd wən ʃi wɑz biɪŋ ivən mɔɹ stʌbɝn ðən juʒəwəl wɪð ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl. pɛɹɪn wɑz ɹaɪt. dɪspaɪt ðə faɪɝ ɪt sim fɹizɪŋ koʊld, ən ɔl kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə tu wɪmən ət ðə teɪbəl.

It was the room where they had eaten the night before. A blaze crackled on the hearth, and a polished silver tray sat in the middle of the table holding a gleaming silver pitcher and cups. Moiraine and Nynaeve sat at opposite ends of the table, neither taking her eyes from the other. All the other chairs were empty. Moiraine's hands rested on the table, as still as her face. Nynaeve's braid was thrown over her shoulder, the end gripped in one fist; she kept giving it little tugs the way she did when she was being even more stubborn than usual with the Village Council. Perrin was right. Despite the fire it seemed freezing cold, and all coming from the two women at the table.

læn wɑz linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə mæntəl, stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə fleɪmz ən ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz fəɹ wɔɹmθ. ɛɡwin, hɝ bæk flæɾ əɡɛns ðə wɔl, hæɾ əɹ kloʊk ɑn wɪð ðə hʊd pʊld ʌp. tɑm, mæt, ən pɛɹɪn stɑpt ənsɝteɪnli ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə dɔɹ.

Lan was leaning against the mantel, staring into the flames and rubbing his hands for warmth. Egwene, her back flat against the wall, had her cloak on with the hood pulled up. Thom, Mat, and Perrin stopped uncertainly in front of the door.

ʃɹʌɡɪŋ ənkʌmftəbli, ɹænd wɔk tə ðə teɪbəl. səmtaɪmz juv tə ɡɹæb ðə wʊlf baɪ ði ɪɹz, hi ɹimaɪndəd hɪmsɛlf. bʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ənʌðɝ oʊl seɪɪŋ, tu. wən juv ə wʊlf baɪ ði ɪɹz, ɪts əz hɑɹd tə lɛt ɡoʊ əz tə hoʊld ɑn. hi fɛl mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz ɑn hɪm, ən nɪneɪivz, ən ɪz feɪs bɪkeɪm hɑt, bʌɾ i sæt daʊn ɛniweɪ, hæfweɪ bɪtwin ðə tu.

Shrugging uncomfortably, Rand walked to the table. Sometimes you have to grab the wolf by the ears, he reminded himself. But he remembered another old saying, too. When you have a wolf by the ears, it's as hard to let go as to hold on. He felt Moiraine's eyes on him, and Nynaeve's, and his face became hot, but he sat down anyway, halfway between the two.

fəɹ ə mɪnət ðə ɹum wɑz əz stɪl əz ə kɑɹvɪŋ, ðən ɛɡwin ən pɛɹɪn, ən faɪnəli mæt, meɪd ðɛɹ ɹɪlʌktənt weɪ tə ðə teɪbəl ən tʊk sits - təwɔɹd ðə mɪɾəl, wɪð ɹænd. ɛɡwin tʌɡd əɹ hʊd fɝðɝ fɔɹwɝd, ɪnʌf tə hæf haɪɾ əɹ feɪs, ən ðeɪ ɔl əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛniwʌn.

For a minute the room was as still as a carving, then Egwene and Perrin, and finally Mat, made their reluctant way to the table and took seats - toward the middle, with Rand. Egwene tugged her hood further forward, enough to half hide her face, and they all avoided looking at anyone.

"wɛl," tɑm snɔɹɾɪd, fɹəm ɪz pleɪs bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ. "æt lis ðət mʌtʃ ɪz dʌn."

"Well," Thom snorted, from his place beside the door. "At least that much is done."

"sɪns ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz hɪɹ," læn sɛd, livɪŋ ðə faɪɝpleɪs ən fɪlɪŋ wʌn ə ðə sɪlvɝ kʌps wɪð waɪn, "pɝhæps jəl faɪnəli teɪk ðɪs." hi pɹɑfɝd ðə kʌp tə nɪneɪiv; ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪt səspɪʃəsli. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə bi əfɹeɪd," hi sɛd peɪʃənli. "ju sɔ ði ɪnkipɝ bɹɪŋ ðə waɪn, ən niðɝ ʌv əs əz hæɾ ə tʃæns tə pʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ɪt. ɪts kwaɪt seɪf."

"Since everyone is here," Lan said, leaving the fireplace and filling one of the silver cups with wine, "perhaps you will finally take this." He proffered the cup to Nynaeve; she looked at it suspiciously. "There is no need to be afraid," he said patiently. "You saw the innkeeper bring the wine, and neither of us has had a chance to put anything in it. It is quite safe."

ðə wɪzdəmz maʊθ taɪɾənd æŋɡɹəli ət ðə wɝɾ əfɹeɪd, bʌt ʃi tʊk ðə kʌp wɪð ə mɝmɝd, "θæŋk ju."

The Wisdom's mouth tightened angrily at the word afraid, but she took the cup with a murmured, "Thank you."

"aɪ æm ɪntʃɹəstəd," hi sɛd, "ɪn haʊ jə faʊn ʌs."

"I am interested," he said, "in how you found us."

"soʊ æm aɪ." mɔɪɹeɪn lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntɛnli. "pɝhæps jə ɑɹ wɪlɪŋ tə spik naʊ ðəɾ ɛɡwin ən ðə bɔɪz əv bɪn bɹɔt tə ju?"

"So am I." Moiraine leaned forward intently. "Perhaps you are willing to speak now that Egwene and the boys have been brought to you?"

nɪneɪiv sɪp ðə waɪn bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "ðɛɹ wɑz noʊwɛɹ fəɹ jə tə ɡoʊ ɪksɛp bɛɹlən. tə bi seɪf, ðoʊ, aɪ fɑloʊd jəɹ tʃɹeɪl. jə sɝɾənli kʌt bæk ən fɔɹθ ɪnʌf. bʌt ðɛn, aɪ səpoʊz jə wəd nɑt kɛɹ tə ɹɪsk miɾɪŋ disən pipəl."

Nynaeve sipped the wine before answering the Aes Sedai. "There was nowhere for you to go except Baerlon. To be safe, though, I followed your trail. You certainly cut back and forth enough. But then, I suppose you would not care to risk meeting decent people."

"ju . . . fɑloʊɾ əɹ tʃɹeɪl?" læn sɛd, tʃɹuli sɝpɹaɪz fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ðət ɹænd kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ. "aɪ mʌs bi ɡɛɾɪŋ kɛɹləs."

"You . . . followed our trail?" Lan said, truly surprised for the first time that Rand could remember. "I must be getting careless."

"ju lɛf vɛɹi lɪɾəl tʃɹeɪs, bʌɾ aɪ kən tʃɹæk əz wɛl əz ɛni mæn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɪksɛpt pɝhæps tæm ælθɹ." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən æɾəd, "əntɪl maɪ fɑðɝ daɪd, hi tʊk mi hʌntɪŋ wɪð hɪm, ən tɔt mi wʌɾ i wʊɾə tɔt ðə sʌnz i nɛvɝ hæd." ʃi lʊkt ət læn tʃælənʒɪŋli, bʌɾ i oʊnli nɑɾəd wɪð əpɹuvəl.

"You left very little trace, but I can track as well as any man in the Two Rivers, except perhaps Tam al'Thor." She hesitated, then added, "Until my father died, he took me hunting with him, and taught me what he would have taught the sons he never had." She looked at Lan challengingly, but he only nodded with approval.

"ɪf jə kən fɑloʊ ə tʃɹeɪl aɪ hæv tʃɹaɪd tə haɪd, hi tɔt jə wɛl. fju kən də ðæt, ivən ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz."

"If you can follow a trail I have tried to hide, he taught you well. Few can do that, even in the Borderlands."

əbɹʌpli nɪneɪiv bɛɹiɾ əɹ feɪs ɪn əɹ kʌp. ɹændz aɪz waɪɾənd. ʃi wɑz blʌʃɪŋ. nɪneɪiv nɛvɝ ʃoʊd hɝsɛlf ivən ðə lis bɪt dɪskənsɝɾɪd. æŋɡɹi, jɛs; aʊtʃɹeɪdʒd, ɔfən; bʌt nɛvɝ aʊɾ ə kaʊntənəns. bʌt ʃi wɑz sɝɾənli ɹɛd-tʃik naʊ, ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪɾ ɪn ðə waɪn.

Abruptly Nynaeve buried her face in her cup. Rand's eyes widened. She was blushing. Nynaeve never showed herself even the least bit disconcerted. Angry, yes; outraged, often; but never out of countenance. But she was certainly red-cheeked now, and trying to hide in the wine.

"pɝhæps naʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kwaɪətli, "ju wɪl ænsɝ ə fju ʌv maɪ kwɛstʃənz. aɪ hæv ænsɝd jʊɹz fɹili ɪnʌf."

"Perhaps now," Moiraine said quietly, "you will answer a few of my questions. I have answered yours freely enough."

"wɪð ə ɡɹeɪt sækfəl ʌv ɡlimənz teɪlz," nɪneɪiv ɹitɔɹɾɪd. "ði oʊnli fæks aɪ kən si ɑɹ ðət fɔɹ jʌŋ pipəl əv bɪn kæɹiɾ ɔf, fəɹ ðə laɪɾ əloʊn noʊz wʌt ɹizən, baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"With a great sackful of gleeman's tales," Nynaeve retorted. "The only facts I can see are that four young people have been carried off, for the Light alone knows what reason, by an Aes Sedai."

"ju hæv bɪn toʊl ðəɾ ɪzənt noʊn hɪɹ," læn sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "ju mʌs lɝn tə ɡɑɹd jəɹ tʌŋ."

"You have been told that isn't known here," Lan said sharply. "You must learn to guard your tongue."

"waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. "waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ hɛlp haɪd ju, əɹ wʌt jə ɑɹ? aɪv kʌm tə teɪk ɛɡwin ən ðə bɔɪz bæk tə ɛmənz fild, nɑt hɛlp jə spɪɹəɾ əm əweɪ."

"Why should I?" Nynaeve demanded. "Why should I help hide you, or what you are? I've come to take Egwene and the boys back to Emond's Field, not help you spirit them away."

tɑm bɹoʊk ɪn, ɪn ə skɔɹnfəl vɔɪs. "ɪf jə wɑn əm tə si ðɛɹ vɪlədʒ əɡɛn - əɹ ju, iðɝ - jə hæd bɛɾɝ bi mɔɹ kɛɹfəl. ðəɹ ɑɹ ðoʊz ɪn bɛɹlən u wəd kɪl hɝ" - hi dʒɝkt ɪz hɛd təwɔɹd mɔɪɹeɪn -  "fɔɹ wʌt ʃi ɪz. hɪm, tu." hi ɪndəkeɪɾəd læn, ðən əbɹʌpli muv fɔɹwɝd tə pʊɾ ɪz fɪsts ɑn ðə teɪbəl. hi lumd oʊvɝ nɪneɪiv, ən ɪz lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz ən θɪk aɪbɹaʊz sʌɾənli sim θɹɛɾənɪŋ.

Thom broke in, in a scornful voice. "If you want them to see their village again - or you, either - you had better be more careful. There are those in Baerlon who would kill her" - he jerked his head toward Moiraine -  "for what she is. Him, too." He indicated Lan, then abruptly moved forward to put his fists on the table. He loomed over Nynaeve, and his long mustaches and thick eyebrows suddenly seemed threatening.

hɝ aɪz waɪɾənd, ən ʃi stɑɹɾəd tə lin bæk, əweɪ fɹəm hɪm; ðən əɹ bæk stɪfən dɪfaɪənli. tɑm dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə noʊɾəs; hi wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn ɪn ən ɑmənəsli sɑf vɔɪs. "ðeɪd swɔɹm oʊvɝ ðɪs ɪn laɪk mɝɾɝəs æns ɑn ə ɹumɝ, ə wɪspɝ. ðɛɹ heɪɾ ɪz ðət stʃɹɔŋ, ðɛɹ dɪzaɪɝ tə kɪl əɹ teɪk ɛni laɪk ðiz tu. ən ðə ɡɝl? ðə bɔɪz? ju? jə ɑɹ ɔl əsoʊsieɪɾəd wɪð ðɛm, ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə waɪtkloʊks, ɛniweɪ. jə wʊdn laɪk ðə weɪ ðeɪ æsk kwɛstʃənz, ɪspɛʃli wən ðə waɪt taʊɝ ɪz ɪnvɑlvd. waɪtkloʊk kwɛstʃənɝz əsum jəɹ ɡɪlti bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ stɑɹt, ən ðeɪv oʊnli wʌn sɛntəns fəɹ ðət kaɪndə ɡɪlt. ðeɪ doʊn kɛɹ əbaʊt faɪndɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ; ðeɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ noʊ ðəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ɔl ðeɪ ɡoʊ æftɝ wɪð ðɛɹ hɑɾ aɪɝnz ən pɪnsɝz ɪz ə kənfɛʃən. bɛs jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ səm sikɹəts ɑɹ tu deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ seɪɪŋ əlaʊd, ivən wən jə θɪŋk jə noʊ hu hɪɹz." hi stʃɹeɪɾənd wɪð ə mʌɾɝd, "aɪ sim tə tɛl ðət tə pipəl ɔfən ə leɪt."

Her eyes widened, and she started to lean back, away from him; then her back stiffened defiantly. Thom did not appear to notice; he went right on in an ominously soft voice. "They'd swarm over this inn like murderous ants on a rumor, a whisper. Their hate is that strong, their desire to kill or take any like these two. And the girl? The boys? You? You are all associated with them, enough for the Whitecloaks, anyway. You wouldn't like the way they ask questions, especially when the White Tower is involved. Whitecloak Questioners assume you're guilty before they start, and they have only one sentence for that kind of guilt. They don't care about finding the truth; they think they know that already. All they go after with their hot irons and pincers is a confession. Best you remember some secrets are too dangerous for saying aloud, even when you think you know who hears." He straightened with a muttered, "I seem to tell that to people often of late."

"wɛl pʊt, ɡlimən," læn sɛd. ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd ðət weɪɪŋ lʊk ɪn ɪz aɪz əɡɛn. "aɪm sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn jə soʊ kənsɝnd."

"Well put, gleeman," Lan said. The Warder had that weighing look in his eyes again. "I'm surprised to find you so concerned."

tɑm ʃɹʌɡd. "ɪts noʊn aɪ ɝaɪvd wɪð ju, tu. aɪ doʊn kɛɹ fəɹ ðə θɔɾ ʌv ə kwɛstʃənɝ wɪð ə hɑɾ aɪɝn tɛlɪŋ mi tə ɹɪpɛn maɪ sɪnz ən wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt."

Thom shrugged. "It's known I arrived with you, too. I don't care for the thought of a Questioner with a hot iron telling me to repent my sins and walk in the Light."

"ðæt," nɪneɪiv pʊɾ ɪn ʃɑɹpli, "ɪz dʒʌst wʌn mɔɹ ɹizən fəɹ əm tə kʌm hoʊm wɪð mi ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. əɹ ðɪs æftɝnun, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ðə sunɝ wɝ əweɪ fɹəm jə ən ɑn əɹ weɪ bæk tə ɛmənz fild, ðə bɛɾɝ."

"That," Nynaeve put in sharply, "is just one more reason for them to come home with me in the morning. Or this afternoon, for that matter. The sooner we're away from you and on our way back to Emond's Field, the better."

"wi kænt," ɹænd sɛd, ən wɑz ɡlæd ðəɾ ɪz fɹɛnz ɔl spoʊk ʌp ət ðə seɪm taɪm. ðət weɪ nɪneɪivz ɡlɛɹ hæd tə bi spɹɛɾ ɝaʊnd; ʃi spɛɹd noʊ wʌn əz ɪt wɑz. bʌɾ i hæd spoʊkən fɝst, ən ðeɪ ɔl fɛl saɪlənt, lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. ivən mɔɪɹeɪn sæt bæk ɪn əɹ tʃɛɹ, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm oʊvɝ stipəl fɪŋɡɝz. ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt fəɹ ɪm tə mit ðə wɪzdəmz aɪz. "ɪf wi ɡoʊ bæk tə ɛmənz fild, ðə tʃɹɑləks wɪl kʌm bæk, tu. ðəɹ . . . hʌntɪŋ ʌs. aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ. meɪbi wi kən faɪn aʊt waɪ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. meɪbi wi kən faɪn aʊt haʊ tə stɑp ɪt. ɪts ði oʊnli weɪ."

"We can't," Rand said, and was glad that his friends all spoke up at the same time. That way Nynaeve's glare had to be spread around; she spared no one as it was. But he had spoken first, and they all fell silent, looking at him. Even Moiraine sat back in her chair, watching him over steepled fingers. It was an effort for him to meet the Wisdom's eyes. "If we go back to Emond's Field, the Trollocs will come back, too. They're . . . hunting us. I don't know why, but they are. Maybe we can find out why in Tar Valon. Maybe we can find out how to stop it. It's the only way."

nɪneɪiv θɹu ʌp əɹ hænz. "ju saʊn dʒʌs laɪk tæm. hi hæd hɪmsɛlf kæɹid tə ðə vɪlədʒ miɾɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪd tə kənvɪns ɛvɹibɑɾi. hiɾ ɔlɹɛɾi tʃɹaɪd wɪð ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl. ðə laɪt noʊz haʊ jəɹ . . . mɪstʃɹəs æliz" - ʃi ɪnvɛstəd ðə neɪm wɪð ə wæɡoʊnloʊɾ ə skɔɹn -  "mænədʒ tə meɪk ɪm bɪliv; hiz ə maɪɾ ə sɛns, juʒəwəli, mɔɹ ðən moʊs mɛn. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðə kaʊnsəl ɪz ə pæk ə fulz moʊst ə ðə taɪm, bʌt nɑt fulɪʃ ɪnʌf fəɹ ðæt, ən niðɝ wɑz ɛniwʌn ɛls. ðeɪ əɡɹid jə hæd tə bi faʊnd. ðən tæm wɑntəd tə bi ðə wʌn tə kʌm æftɝ ju, ən ɪm nɑɾ eɪbəl tə stæn baɪ hɪmsɛlf. fulɪʃnəs mʌst ɹʌn ɪn jəɹ fæmli."

Nynaeve threw up her hands. "You sound just like Tam. He had himself carried to the village meeting and tried to convince everybody. He'd already tried with the Village Council. The Light knows how your . . . Mistress Alys" - she invested the name with a wagonload of scorn -  "managed to make him believe; he has a mite of sense, usually, more than most men. In any case, the Council is a pack of fools most of the time, but not foolish enough for that, and neither was anyone else. They agreed you had to be found. Then Tam wanted to be the one to come after you, and him not able to stand by himself. Foolishness must run in your family."

mæt klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt, ðən mʌmbəld, "wʌɾ əbaʊt maɪ dɑ? wʌɾ i seɪ?"

Mat cleared his throat, then mumbled, "What about my da? What did he say?"

"hiz əfɹeɪd jəl tʃɹaɪ jəɹ tʃɹɪks wɪð aʊtləndɝz ən ɡɛt jəɹ hɛd θʌmpt. hi simd mɔɹ əfɹeɪɾ ə ðət ðən ʌv . . . mɪstʃɹəs æliz, hɪɹ. bʌt ðɛn, hi wɑz nɛvɝ mʌtʃ bɹaɪɾɝ ðən ju."

"He's afraid you'll try your tricks with outlanders and get your head thumped. He seemed more afraid of that than of . . . Mistress Alys, here. But then, he was never much brighter than you."

mæt simd ənʃʊɹ haʊ tə teɪk wʌt ʃi hæd sɛd, əɹ haʊ tə ɹɪplaɪ, əɹ ivən wɛðɝ tə ɹɪplaɪ.

Mat seemed unsure how to take what she had said, or how to reply, or even whether to reply.

"aɪ ɪkspɛkt," pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn hɛzɪɾəntli. "aɪ min, aɪ səpoʊz mæstɝ luhən wɑz nɑt tu plizd əbaʊt maɪ livɪŋ, iðɝ."

"I expect," Perrin began hesitantly. "I mean, I suppose Master Luhhan was not too pleased about my leaving, either."

"dɪd jə ɪkspɛkt ɪm tə bi?" nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd dɪsɡʌstɪdli ən lʊkt əɾ ɛɡwin. "meɪbi aɪ ʃəd nɑt bi sɝpɹaɪzd ət ðɪs hɛɹbɹeɪn ɪɾiəsi fɹəm jə θɹi, bʌɾ aɪ θɔɾ ʌðɝz hæd mɔɹ dʒʌdʒmənt."

"Did you expect him to be?" Nynaeve shook her head disgustedly and looked at Egwene. "Maybe I should not be surprised at this harebrained idiocy from you three, but I thought others had more judgment."

ɛɡwin sæt bæk soʊ ʃi wɑz ʃildɪd baɪ pɛɹɪn. "aɪ lɛft ə noʊt," ʃi sɛd feɪnli. ʃi tʌɡd ət ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk əz ɪf ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪɾ əɹ ənbaʊn hɛɹ ʃoʊd. "aɪ ɪkspleɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ." nɪneɪivz feɪs dɑɹkənd.

Egwene sat back so she was shielded by Perrin. "I left a note," she said faintly. She tugged at the hood of her cloak as if she was afraid her unbound hair showed. "I explained everything." Nynaeve's face darkened.

ɹænd saɪd. ðə wɪzdəm wɑz ɑn ðə pɔɪn ʌv wʌn ə hɝ tʌŋ-læʃɪŋz, ən ɪt lʊkt əz ɪf ɪt maɪt bi ə fɝst-ɹeɪt wʌn. ɪf ʃi tʊk ə pəzɪʃən ɪn ðə hiɾ ʌv æŋɡɝ - ɪf ʃi sɛd ʃi ɪntɛndəd tə si ðɛm bæk ɪn ɛmənz fil noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɛnibəɾi sɛd, fəɹ ɪnstəns - ʃi wəd bi nɪɹli ɪmpɑsəbəl tə bʌdʒ. hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ.

Rand sighed. The Wisdom was on the point of one of her tongue-lashings, and it looked as if it might be a first-rate one. If she took a position in the heat of anger - if she said she intended to see them back in Emond's Field no matter what anybody said, for instance - she would be nearly impossible to budge. He opened his mouth.

"ə noʊt!" nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn, dʒʌst əz mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "ju ən aɪ mʌst stɪl tɔk, wɪzdəm."

"A note!" Nynaeve began, just as Moiraine said, "You and I must still talk, Wisdom."

ɪf ɹænd cʊɾə stɑp hɪmsɛlf, hi wəd hæv, bʌt ðə wɝdz pɔɹɾ aʊɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə flʌdɡeɪɾ i hæɾ oʊpən ɪnstɛɾ ə hɪz maʊð. "ɔl ðɪs ɪz vɛɹi wɛl, bʌɾ ɪt dʌzn tʃeɪnʒ ɛniθɪŋ. wi kænt ɡoʊ bæk. wɪv tə ɡoʊ ɑn." hi spoʊk mɔɹ sloʊli təwɔɹd ði ɛnd, ən ɪz vɔɪs sæŋk, soʊ hi fɪnɪʃt ɪn ə wɪspɝ, wɪð ðə wɪzdəm ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ boʊθ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. ɪt wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə lʊk i ɹəsivd ɪf i keɪm ɑn wɪmən tɔkɪŋ wɪmənz sɝkəl bɪznəs, ðə sɔɹt ðət sɛɾ i hæd stɛpt ɪn wɛɹ i dɪd nɑt bɪlɔŋ. hi sæt bæk, wɪʃɪŋ i wɑz sʌmwɛɹ ɛls.

If Rand could have stopped himself, he would have, but the words poured out as if it were a floodgate he had opened instead of his mouth. "All this is very well, but it doesn't change anything. We can't go back. We have to go on." He spoke more slowly toward the end, and his voice sank, so he finished in a whisper, with the Wisdom and the Aes Sedai both looking at him. It was the sort of look he received if he came on women talking Women's Circle business, the sort that said he had stepped in where he did not belong. He sat back, wishing he was somewhere else.

"wɪzdəm," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "ju mʌs bɪliv ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ seɪfɝ wɪð mi ðən ðeɪ wəd bi bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"Wisdom," Moiraine said, "you must believe that they are safer with me than they would be back in the Two Rivers."

"seɪfɝ!" nɪneɪiv tɔst əɹ hɛd dɪsmɪsɪvli. "ju ɑɹ ðə wʌn u bɹɔɾ əm hɪɹ, wɛɹ ðə waɪtkloʊks ɑɹ. ðə seɪm waɪtkloʊks hu, ɪf ðə ɡlimən tɛlz ðə tʃɹuθ, meɪ hɑɹm əm kəz ə ju. tɛl mi haʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ seɪfɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Safer!" Nynaeve tossed her head dismissively. "You are the one who brought them here, where the Whitecloaks are. The same Whitecloaks who, if the gleeman tells the truth, may harm them because of you. Tell me how they are safer, Aes Sedai."

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ mɛni deɪnʒɝz fɹəm wɪtʃ aɪ kænɑt pɹətɛk ðɛm," mɔɪɹeɪn əɡɹid, "ɛni mɔɹ ðən jə kən pɹətɛkt əm fɹəm biɪŋ stʃɹʌk baɪ laɪtnɪŋ ɪf ðeɪ ɡoʊ hoʊm. bʌɾ ɪts nɑt laɪtnɪŋ ʌv wɪtʃ ðeɪ mʌs bi əfɹeɪd, nɔɹ ivən waɪtkloʊks. ɪts ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən mɪnjənz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. fɹəm ðoʊz θɪŋz aɪ kən pɹətɛkt. tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, tʌtʃɪŋ seɪaɪdɑɹ, ɡɪvz mi ðət pɹətɛkʃən, əz ɪt dʌz tə ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ." nɪneɪivz maʊθ taɪɾənd skɛptɪkəli. mɔɪɹeɪnz ɡɹu taɪɾɝ, tu, wɪð æŋɡɝ, bʌt ʃi wɛn ɑn, hɝ vɔɪs hɑɹɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə peɪʃəns. "ivən ðoʊz pʊɹ mɛn u faɪn ðɛmsɛlvz wildɪŋ ðə paʊɝ fəɹ ə ʃɔɹt taɪm ɡeɪn ðət mʌtʃ, ðoʊ səmtaɪmz tʌtʃɪŋ seɪɾɪn pɹətɛks, ən səmtaɪmz ðə teɪn meɪks əm mɔɹ vʌlnɝəbəl. bʌɾ aɪ, əɹ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ, kən ɪkstɛn maɪ pɹətɛkʃən tə ðoʊz kloʊs baɪ mi. noʊ feɪd kən hɑɹm əm əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ɑɹ əz kloʊz tə mi əz ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹaɪt naʊ. noʊ tʃɹɑlɑk kən kʌm wɪðɪn ə kɔɹɾɝ ʌv ə maɪl wɪθaʊt læn noʊɪŋ ɪt, filɪŋ ði ivəl ʌv ɪt. kən jə ɔfɝ əm hæf əz mʌtʃ ɪf ðeɪ ɹɪtɝn tə ɛmənz fild wɪð ju?"

"There are many dangers from which I cannot protect them," Moiraine agreed, "any more than you can protect them from being struck by lightning if they go home. But it is not lightning of which they must be afraid, nor even Whitecloaks. It is the Dark One, and minions of the Dark One. From those things I can protect. Touching the True Source, touching saidar, gives me that protection, as it does to every Aes Sedai." Nynaeve's mouth tightened skeptically. Moiraine's grew tighter, too, with anger, but she went on, her voice hard on the edge of patience. "Even those poor men who find themselves wielding the Power for a short time gain that much, though sometimes touching saidin protects, and sometimes the taint makes them more vulnerable. But I, or any Aes Sedai, can extend my protection to those close by me. No Fade can harm them as long as they are as close to me as they are right now. No Trolloc can come within a quarter of a mile without Lan knowing it, feeling the evil of it. Can you offer them half as much if they return to Emond's Field with you?"

"ju stæn ʌp stʃɹɔ mɛn," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "wi hæv ə seɪɪŋ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. 'wɛðɝ ðə bɛɹ bits ðə wʊlf əɹ ðə wʊlf bits ðə bɛɹ, ðə ɹæbəɾ ɔlweɪz luzəz.' teɪk jəɹ kɑntɛst sʌmwɛɹ ɛls ən liv ɛmənz fil foʊk aʊɾ ʌv ɪt."

"You stand up straw men," Nynaeve said. "We have a saying in the Two Rivers. 'Whether the bear beats the wolf or the wolf beats the bear, the rabbit always loses.' Take your contest somewhere else and leave Emond's Field folk out of it."

"ɛɡwin," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt, "teɪk ði ʌðɝz ən liv ðə wɪzdəm əloʊn wɪð mi fəɹ ə waɪl." hɝ feɪs wɑz ɪmpæsɪv; nɪneɪiv skwɛɹd hɝsɛlf ət ðə teɪbəl əz ɪf ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɛɾi fəɹ ən ɔl-ɪn ɹɛslɪŋ mætʃ.

"Egwene," Moiraine said after a moment, "take the others and leave the Wisdom alone with me for a while." Her face was impassive; Nynaeve squared herself at the table as if getting ready for an all-in wrestling match.

ɛɡwin baʊns tə hɝ fit, hɝ dɪzaɪɝ tə bi dɪɡnəfaɪɾ ɑbviəsli wɔɹɪŋ wɪð əɹ dɪzaɪɝ tə əvɔɪɾ ə kɑnfɹənteɪʃən wɪð ðə wɪzdəm oʊvɝ əɹ ənbɹeɪɾɪd hɛɹ. ʃi hæd noʊ dɪfəkəlti ɡæðɝɪŋ ʌp ɛvɹiwʌn baɪ aɪ, ðoʊ. mæt ən pɛɹɪn skɹeɪp bæk ðɛɹ tʃɛɹz hɝidli, meɪkɪŋ pəlaɪt mɝmɝz waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə æktʃəli  ɹʌn ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ aʊt. ivən læn stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ əɾ ə sɪɡnəl fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn, dʒɹɔɪŋ tɑm wɪð hɪm.

Egwene bounced to her feet, her desire to be dignified obviously warring with her desire to avoid a confrontation with the Wisdom over her unbraided hair. She had no difficulty gathering up everyone by eye, though. Mat and Perrin scraped back their chairs hurriedly, making polite murmurs while trying not to actually run on their way out. Even Lan started for the door at a signal from Moiraine, drawing Thom with him.

ɹænd fɑloʊd, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ ʃʌt ðə dɔɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ðən tʊk ʌp ɡɑɹɾ əkɹɔs ðə hɔlweɪ. ʌndɝ lænz aɪz ði ʌðɝz muvd ɑn daʊn ðə hɔl ə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns; ðeɪ wɝ nɑt tə bi əlaʊɾ ivən ðə slaɪɾəst tʃæns ʌv ivzdʒɹɑpɪŋ. wən ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn fɑɹ ɪnʌf tə sut hɪm, læn lin bæk əɡɛns ðə wɔl. ivən wɪθaʊɾ ɪz kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk, hi wɑz soʊ stɪl ðəɾ ɪt wəd bi izi nɑt tə noʊɾəs ɪm əntɪl jə wɝ ɹaɪɾ ɑn hɪm.

Rand followed, and the Warder shut the door behind them, then took up guard across the hallway. Under Lan's eyes the others moved on down the hall a short distance; they were not to be allowed even the slightest chance of eavesdropping. When they had gone far enough to suit him, Lan leaned back against the wall. Even without his color-shifting cloak, he was so still that it would be easy not to notice him until you were right on him.

ðə ɡlimən mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt bɛɾɝ θɪŋz tə də wɪð ɪz taɪm ən lɛft wɪð ə stɝn, "ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ aɪ sɛd," oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ tə ðə bɔɪz. noʊ wʌn ɛls simd ɪnklaɪn tə liv.

The gleeman muttered something about better things to do with his time and left with a stern, "Remember what I said," over his shoulder to the boys. No one else seemed inclined to leave.

"wʌt dɪɾ i min?" ɛɡwin æskt æbsənli, hɝ aɪz ɑn ðə dɔɹ ðət hɪd mɔɪɹeɪn ən nɪneɪiv. ʃi kɛp fɪdlɪŋ wɪð əɹ hɛɹ əz ɪf tɔɹn bɪtwin kəntɪnjuɪŋ tə haɪd ðə fæk ðəɾ ɪt wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ bɹeɪɾɪd ən pʊʃɪŋ bæk ðə hʊɾ ə hɝ kloʊk.

"What did he mean?" Egwene asked absently, her eyes on the door that hid Moiraine and Nynaeve. She kept fiddling with her hair as if torn between continuing to hide the fact that it was no longer braided and pushing back the hood of her cloak.

"hi ɡeɪv əs səm ædvaɪs," mæt sɛd.

"He gave us some advice," Mat said.

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. "hi sɛd nɑt tə oʊpən əɹ maʊðz əntɪl wi wɝ ʃʊɹ wʌt wi wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ."

Perrin gave him a sharp look. "He said not to open our mouths until we were sure what we were going to say."

"ðæt saʊnz laɪk ɡʊɾ ædvaɪs," ɛɡwin sɛd, bʌt klɪɹli ʃi wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ɪntʃɹəstəd.

"That sounds like good advice," Egwene said, but clearly she was not really interested.

ɹænd wɑz ɪnɡɹoʊst ɪn ɪz oʊn θɔts. haʊ kəd nɪneɪiv pɑsəbli bi pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt? haʊ kəɾ ɛni ʌv əm bi ɪnvɑlvd wɪð tʃɹɑləks, ən feɪdz, ən bælzəmən əpɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ dʒɹimz? ɪt wɑz kɹeɪzi. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf mɪn hæd toʊl mɔɪɹeɪn əbaʊt nɪneɪiv. wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ seɪɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ??

Rand was engrossed in his own thoughts. How could Nynaeve possibly be part of it? How could any of them be involved with Trollocs, and Fades, and Ba'alzamon appearing in their dreams? It was crazy. He wondered if Min had told Moiraine about Nynaeve. What are they saying in there??

hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə haʊ lɔŋ i hæd bɪn stændɪŋ ðəɹ wən ðə dɔɹ faɪnəli oʊpənd. nɪneɪiv stɛpt aʊt, ən ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt wən ʃi sɔ læn. ðə wɔɹɾɝ mɝmɝd sʌmθɪŋ ðət meɪɾ əɹ tɔs əɹ hɛɾ æŋɡɹəli, ðən i slɪpt pæst əɹ θɹu ðə dɔɹ.

He had no idea how long he had been standing there when the door finally opened. Nynaeve stepped out, and gave a start when she saw Lan. The Warder murmured something that made her toss her head angrily, then he slipped past her through the door.

ʃi tɝn təwɔɹd ɹænd, ən fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm i ɹilaɪz ði ʌðɝz hæɾ ɔl kwaɪətli dɪsəpɪɹd. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə feɪs ðə wɪzdəm əloʊn, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ əweɪ naʊ ðəɾ i hæd mɛt nɪneɪivz aɪ. ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli sɝtʃɪŋ aɪ, hi θɔt, pʌzəld. wʌd ðeɪ seɪ? hi dʒɹu hɪmsɛlf ʌp əz ʃi keɪm kloʊsɝ.

She turned toward Rand, and for the first time he realized the others had all quietly disappeared. He did not want to face the Wisdom alone, but he could not get away now that he had met Nynaeve's eye. A particularly searching eye, he thought, puzzled. What did they say? He drew himself up as she came closer.

ʃi ɪndəkeɪɾəd tæmz sɔɹd. "ðæt simz tə fɪt ju, naʊ, ðoʊ aɪ wəd laɪk ɪt bɛɾɝ ɪf ɪt dɪd nɑt. juv ɡɹoʊn, ɹænd."

She indicated Tam's sword. "That seems to fit you, now, though I would like it better if it did not. You've grown, Rand."

"ɪn ə wik?" hi læft, bʌɾ ɪt saʊndəd fɔɹst, ən ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ əz ɪf i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. "dɪd ʃi kənvɪns ju?" hi æskt. "ɪt ɹɪli ɪz ði oʊnli weɪ." hi pɔzd, θɪŋkɪŋ ə mɪnz spɑɹks. "ɑɹ jə kʌmɪŋ wɪð ʌs?"

"In a week?" He laughed, but it sounded forced, and she shook her head as if he did not understand. "Did she convince you?" he asked. "It really is the only way." He paused, thinking of Min's sparks. "Are you coming with us?"

nɪneɪivz aɪz oʊpənd waɪd. "kʌmɪŋ wɪð ju! waɪ wəɾ aɪ də ðæt? mævɹə mɔlən keɪm ʌp fɹəm dɛvən ɹaɪd tə si tə θɪŋz tɪl aɪ ɹɪtɝn, bʌt ʃɪl bi wɑntɪŋ tə ɡɛt bæk əz sun əz ʃi kæn. aɪ stɪl hoʊp tə meɪk jə si sɛns ən kʌm hoʊm wɪð mi."

Nynaeve's eyes opened wide. "Coming with you! Why would I do that? Mavra Mallen came up from Deven Ride to see to things till I return, but she'll be wanting to get back as soon as she can. I still hope to make you see sense and come home with me."

"wi kænt." hi θɔɾ i sɔ sʌmθɪŋ muv ət ðə stɪl-oʊpən dɔɹ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ.

"We can't." He thought he saw something move at the still-open door, but they were alone in the hallway.

"ju toʊl mi ðæt, ən ʃi dɪd, tu." nɪneɪiv fɹaʊnd. "ɪf ʃi wɑzn mɪkst ʌp ɪn ɪt. . . . ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ nɑt tə bi tʃɹʌstɪd, ɹænd."

"You told me that, and she did, too." Nynaeve frowned. "If she wasn't mixed up in it. . . . Aes Sedai are not to be trusted, Rand."

"ju saʊn əz ɪf jə ɹɪli də bɪliv ʌs," hi sɛd sloʊli. "wʌt hæpən ət ðə vɪlədʒ miɾɪŋ?"

"You sound as if you really do believe us," he said slowly. "What happened at the village meeting?"

nɪneɪiv lʊk bæk ət ðə dɔɹweɪ bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ muvmən ðəɹ naʊ. "ɪt wɑz ə ʃæmbəlz, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ əɹ tə noʊ wi kæn hændəl əɹ əfɛɹz ɛni bɛɾɝ ðən ðæt. ən aɪ bɪliv oʊnli wʌn θɪŋ: jə ɑɹ ɔl ɪn deɪnʒɝ əz lɔŋ əz jə ɑɹ wɪð hɝ."

Nynaeve looked back at the doorway before answering; there was no movement there now. "It was a shambles, but there is no need for her to know we can't handle our affairs any better than that. And I believe only one thing: you are all in danger as long as you are with her."

"sʌmθɪŋ hæpənd," hi ɪnsɪstəd. "waɪ dʒju wɑn əs tə ɡoʊ bæk ɪf jə θɪŋk ðɛɹz ivən ə tʃæns wəɹ ɹaɪt? ən waɪ ju, əɾ ɔl? əz sun sɛn ðə meɪɝ hɪmsɛlf əz ðə wɪzdəm."

"Something happened," he insisted. "Why do you want us to go back if you think there's even a chance we are right? And why you, at all? As soon send the Mayor himself as the Wisdom."

"ju hæv ɡɹoʊn." ʃi smaɪld, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən əɹ əmjuzmən hæɾ ɪm ʃɪftɪŋ ɪz fit. "aɪ kən θɪŋk ʌv ə taɪm wən jə wəd nɑɾ əv kwɛstʃənd wɛɹ aɪ tʃoʊz tə ɡoʊ əɹ wʌɾ aɪ tʃoʊz tə du, wɛɹɛvɝ əɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz. ə taɪm dʒʌst ə wik əɡoʊ."

"You have grown." She smiled, and for a moment her amusement had him shifting his feet. "I can think of a time when you would not have questioned where I chose to go or what I chose to do, wherever or whatever it was. A time just a week ago."

hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən pɹɛst ɑn stʌbɝnli. "ɪt dʌzn meɪk sɛns. waɪ ɑɹ jə ɹɪli hɪɹ?"

He cleared his throat and pressed on stubbornly. "It doesn't make sense. Why are you really here?"

ʃi hæf ɡlænst ət ðə stɪl-ɛmpti dɔɹweɪ, ðən tʊk ɪz ɑɹm. "lɛts wɔk waɪl wi tɔk." hi lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi lɛɾ əweɪ, ən wən ðeɪ wɝ fɑɹ ɪnʌf fɹəm ðə dɔɹ nɑt tə bi oʊvɝhɝd, ʃi bɪɡæn əɡɛn. "æz aɪ sɛd, ðə miɾɪŋ wɑz ə ʃæmbəlz. ɛvɹibɑɾi əɡɹid sʌmwʌn hæd tə bi sɛn æftɝ ju, bʌt ðə vɪlədʒ splɪɾ ɪndə tu ɡɹups. wʌn wɑntəd jə ɹɛskjud, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbəl ɑɹɡjəmən oʊvɝ haʊ ðət wɑz tə bi dʌn kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðət jə wɝ wɪð ə . . . ðə laɪks ə hɝ."

She half glanced at the still-empty doorway, then took his arm. "Let's walk while we talk." He let himself be led away, and when they were far enough from the door not to be overheard, she began again. "As I said, the meeting was a shambles. Everybody agreed someone had to be sent after you, but the village split into two groups. One wanted you rescued, though there was considerable argument over how that was to be done considering that you were with a . . . the likes of her."

hi wɑz ɡlæd ʃi wɑz ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ tə wɑtʃ wʌt ʃi sɛd. "ði ʌðɝz bɪliv tæm?" hi sɛd.

He was glad she was remembering to watch what she said. "The others believed Tam?" he said.

"nɑɾ ɪɡzækli, bʌt ðeɪ θɔt jə ʃʊdn bi əmʌŋ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, iðɝ, ɪspɛʃli nɑt wɪð sʌmwʌn laɪk hɝ. iðɝ weɪ, ðoʊ, ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi mæn wɑntəd tə bi wʌn ə ðə pɑɹɾi. tæm, ən bɹæn ælvɪɹ, wɪð ðə skeɪlz ʌv ɔfəs ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, ən hɹəl luhən, tɪl ælsbɛt meɪɾ ɪm sɪt daʊn. ivən sɛn bui. ðə laɪt seɪv mi fɹəm mɛn u θɪŋk wɪð ðə hɛɹ ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɛsts. ðoʊ aɪ doʊnt noʊ əz ðəɹ ɑɹ ɛni ʌðɝ kaɪnd." ʃi ɡeɪv ə hɑɹɾi snɪf, ən lʊkt ʌp ət hɪm, ən əkjuzɪŋ ɡlæns. "æɾ ɛni ɹeɪt, aɪ kəd si ɪt wəd bi ənʌðɝ deɪ, pɝhæps mɔɹ, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ keɪm tə ɛni dɪsɪʒən, ən sʌmhaʊ . . . sʌmhaʊ aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ wi dɪd nɑt dɛɹ weɪt ðət lɔŋ. soʊ aɪ kɔl ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl təɡɛðɝ ən toʊld əm wʌt hæd tə bi dʌn. aɪ kænɑt seɪ ðeɪ laɪkt ɪt, bʌt ðeɪ sɔ ðə ɹaɪɾ ʌv ɪt. ən ðəɾ ɪz waɪ aɪm hɪɹ; kəz ðə mɛn ɝaʊn ɛmənz fild ɑɹ stʌbɝn wʊl-hɛdz. ðəɹ pɹɑbli stɪl ɑɹɡjuɪŋ əbaʊɾ u tə sɛnd, ðoʊ aɪ lɛft wɝɾ aɪ wəd teɪk kɛɹ ʌv ɪt."

"Not exactly, but they thought you shouldn't be among strangers, either, especially not with someone like her. Either way, though, almost every man wanted to be one of the party. Tam, and Bran al'Vere, with the scales of office around his neck, and Haral Luhhan, till Alsbet made him sit down. Even Cenn Buie. The Light save me from men who think with the hair on their chests. Though I don't know as there are any other kind." She gave a hearty sniff, and looked up at him, an accusing glance. "At any rate, I could see it would be another day, perhaps more, before they came to any decision, and somehow . . . somehow I was sure we did not dare wait that long. So I called the Women's Circle together and told them what had to be done. I cannot say they liked it, but they saw the right of it. And that is why I am here; because the men around Emond's Field are stubborn wool-heads. They're probably still arguing about who to send, though I left word I would take care of it."

nɪneɪivz stɔɹi ɪkspleɪn əɹ pɹɛzəns, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nʌθɪŋ tə ɹiəʃʊɹ hɪm. ʃi wɑz stɪl dɪtɝmən tə bɹɪŋ əm bæk wɪð hɝ.

Nynaeve's story explained her presence, but it did nothing to reassure him. She was still determined to bring them back with her.

"wʌt dɪd ʃi seɪ tə jə ɪn ðɛɹ?" hi æskt. mɔɪɹeɪn wəd ʃʊɹli hæv kʌvɝɾ ɛvɹi ɑɹɡjəmənt, bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz wʌn ʃi hæd mɪst, hi wəd meɪk ɪt.

"What did she say to you in there?" he asked. Moiraine would surely have covered every argument, but if there was one she had missed, he would make it.

"mɔɹ ə ðə seɪm," nɪneɪiv ɹɪplaɪd. "ænd ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ əbaʊt jə bɔɪz. tə si ɪf ʃi kəd ɹizən aʊt waɪ jə . . . hæv ətʃɹæktəd ðə kaɪndə ətɛnʃən juv . . . ʃi sɛd." ʃi pɔzd, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. "ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə dɪsɡaɪz ɪt, bʌt moʊst ʌv ɔl ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ ɪf ɛni ʌv jə wɑz bɔɹn aʊtsaɪd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"More of the same," Nynaeve replied. "And she wanted to know about you boys. To see if she could reason out why you . . . have attracted the kind of attention you have . . . she said." She paused, watching him out of the corner of her eye. "She tried to disguise it, but most of all she wanted to know if any of you was born outside the Two Rivers."

hɪz feɪs wɑz sʌɾənli əz tɔɾ əz ə dʒɹʌmhɛd. hi mænədʒd ə hɔɹs tʃʌkəl. "ʃi dʌz θɪŋk ə səm ɑd θɪŋz. aɪ hoʊp jə əʃʊɹɾ əɹ wɝ ɔl ɛmənz fil bɔɹn."

His face was suddenly as taut as a drumhead. He managed a hoarse chuckle. "She does think of some odd things. I hope you assured her we're all Emond's Field born."

"ʌv kɔɹs," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd. ðəɹ hæɾ oʊnli bɪn ə hɑɹtbits pɔz bɪfɔɹ ʃi spoʊk, soʊ bɹif i wʊɾə mɪst ɪɾ ɪf i hæd nɑt bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ ɪt.

"Of course," she replied. There had only been a heartbeat's pause before she spoke, so brief he would have missed it if he had not been watching for it.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk ə sʌmθɪŋ tə seɪ, bʌɾ ɪz tʌŋ fɛlt laɪk ə pis ə lɛðɝ. ʃi noʊz. ʃi wɑz ðə wɪzdəm, æftɝ ɔl, ən ðə wɪzdəm wɑz səpoʊz tə noʊ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛvɹiwʌn. ɪf ʃi noʊz, ɪt wɑz noʊ fivɝ-dʒɹim. oʊ, laɪt hɛlp mi, fɑðɝ!

He tried to think of something to say, but his tongue felt like a piece of leather. She knows. She was the Wisdom, after all, and the Wisdom was supposed to know everything about everyone. If she knows, it was no fever-dream. Oh, Light help me, father!

"ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?" nɪneɪiv æskt.

"Are you all right?" Nynaeve asked.

"hi sɛd . . . sɛɾ aɪ . . . wɑzn ɪz sʌn. wən i wɑz dɪlɪɹiəs . . . wɪð ðə fivɝ. hi sɛɾ i faʊn mi. aɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz dʒʌst. . . ." hɪz θɹoʊt bɪɡæn tə bɝn, ən i hæd tə stɑp.

"He said . . . said I . . . wasn't his son. When he was delirious . . . with the fever. He said he found me. I thought it was just. . . ." His throat began to burn, and he had to stop.

"oʊ, ɹænd." ʃi stɑpt ən tʊk ɪz feɪs ɪn boʊθ hænz. ʃi hæd tə ɹitʃ ʌp tə də ɪt. "pipəl seɪ stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz ɪn ə fivɝ. twɪstəd θɪŋz. θɪŋz ðəɾ ɑɹ nɑt tʃɹu, əɹ ɹil. lɪsən tə mi. tæm ælθɹ ɹæn əweɪ sikɪŋ ædvɛntʃɝ wən i wɑz ə bɔɪ noʊ oʊldɝ ðən ju. aɪ kən dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ wən i keɪm bæk tə ɛmənz fild, ə ɡɹoʊn mæn wɪð ə ɹɛd-hɛɹd, aʊtləndɝ waɪf ən ə beɪb ɪn swɑɾəlɪŋ kloʊðz. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ kɛɹi ælθɹ kɹeɪɾəlɪŋ ðət tʃaɪld ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz wɪð əz mʌtʃ lʌv ɡɪvən ən dɪlaɪt teɪkən əz aɪ hæv ɛvɝ sin fɹəm ɛni wʊmən wɪð ə beɪb. hɝ tʃaɪld, ɹænd. ju. naʊ jə stʃɹeɪɾən ʌp ən stɑp ðɪs fulɪʃnəs."

"Oh, Rand." She stopped and took his face in both hands. She had to reach up to do it. "People say strange things in a fever. Twisted things. Things that are not true, or real. Listen to me. Tam al'Thor ran away seeking adventure when he was a boy no older than you. I can just remember when he came back to Emond's Field, a grown man with a red-haired, outlander wife and a babe in swaddling clothes. I remember Kari al'Thor cradling that child in her arms with as much love given and delight taken as I have ever seen from any woman with a babe. Her child, Rand. You. Now you straighten up and stop this foolishness."

"ʌv kɔɹs," hi sɛd. aɪ wɑz bɔɹn aʊtsaɪd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. "ʌv kɔɹs." meɪbi tæm hæd bɪn hævɪŋ ə fivɝ-dʒɹim, ən meɪbi hi hæd faʊn ə beɪbi æftɝ ə bæɾəl. "waɪ dɪdn jə tɛl hɝ?"

"Of course," he said. I was born outside the Two Rivers. "Of course." Maybe Tam had been having a fever-dream, and maybe he had found a baby after a battle. "Why didn't you tell her?"

"ɪɾ ɪz nʌn ʌv ɛni aʊtləndɝz bɪznəs."

"It is none of any outlander's business."

"wɝ ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz bɔɹn aʊtsaɪd?" əz sun əz ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz aʊt, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "noʊ, doʊn ænsɝ. ɪts nʌn ə maɪ bɪznəs, iðɝ." bʌɾ ɪt wəd bi naɪs tə noʊ ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn hæd səm spɛʃəl ɪntʃɹəst ɪn hɪm, oʊvɝ ən əbʌv wʌt ʃi hæɾ ɪn ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm. wəɾ ɪt?

"Were any of the others born outside?" As soon as the question was out, he shook his head. "No, don't answer. It's none of my business, either." But it would be nice to know if Moiraine had some special interest in him, over and above what she had in the whole lot of them. Would it?

"noʊ, ɪɾ ɪzən jəɹ bɪznəs," nɪneɪiv əɡɹid. "ɪt maɪt nɑt min ɛniθɪŋ. ʃi kəd dʒʌs bi sɝtʃɪŋ blaɪnli fəɹ ə ɹizən, ɛni ɹizən, waɪ ðoʊz θɪŋz ɑɹ æftɝ ju. æftɝ ɔl ə ju."

"No, it isn't your business," Nynaeve agreed. "It might not mean anything. She could just be searching blindly for a reason, any reason, why those things are after you. After all of you."

ɹænd mænədʒd ə ɡɹɪn. "ðɛn jə də bɪliv ðəɹ tʃeɪsɪŋ ʌs."

Rand managed a grin. "Then you do believe they're chasing us."

nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd ɹaɪli. "juv sɝɾənli lɝn haʊ tə twɪst wɝdz sɪns jə mɛt hɝ."

Nynaeve shook her head wryly. "You've certainly learned how to twist words since you met her."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?" hi æskt.

"What are you going to do?" he asked.

ʃi stʌɾid hɪm; hi mɛɾ əɹ aɪz stɛɾəli. "tədeɪ, aɪm gɑnə hæv ə bæθ. fəɹ ðə ɹɛst, wɪl əv tə si, woʊnt wi?"

She studied him; he met her eyes steadily. "Today, I am going to have a bath. For the rest, we will have to see, won't we?"


tʃæptɝ sɛvəntin


CHAPTER 17

wɑtʃɝz ən hʌntɝz


Watchers and Hunters

æftɝ ðə wɪzdəm lɛf hɪm, ɹænd meɪɾ ɪz weɪ tə ðə kɑmən ɹum. hi niɾəd tə hɪɹ pipəl læfɪŋ, tə fɝɡɛt wʌt nɪneɪiv hæd sɛɾ ən ðə tʃɹʌbəl ʃi maɪt kɑz əlaɪk.

After the Wisdom left him, Rand made his way to the common room. He needed to hear people laughing, to forget what Nynaeve had said and the trouble she might cause alike.

ðə ɹum wɑz kɹaʊɾəd ɪndid, bʌt noʊ wʌn wɑz læfɪŋ, ðoʊ ɛvɹi tʃɛɹ ən bɛntʃ wɑz fɪld ən pipəl laɪn ðə wɔlz. tɑm wɑz pɝfɔɹmɪŋ əɡɛn, stændɪŋ ɑn ə teɪbəl əɡɛns ðə fɑɹ wɔl, hɪz dʒɛstʃɝz ɡɹæn ɪnʌf tə fɪl ðə bɪɡ ɹum. ɪt wɑz ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn əɡɛn, bʌt noʊ wʌn kəmpleɪnd, ʌv kɔɹs. ðəɹ wɝ soʊ mɛni teɪlz tə bi toʊld əbaʊɾ itʃ ə ðə hʌntɝz, ən soʊ mɛni hʌntɝz tə tɛl ʌv, ðət noʊ tu tɛlɪŋz wɝ ɛvɝ ðə seɪm. ðə hoʊl ʌv ɪɾ ɪn wʌn tɛlɪŋ wʊɾə teɪkən ə wik əɹ mɔɹ. ði oʊnli saʊn kəmpiɾɪŋ wɪð ðə ɡlimənz vɔɪs ən hɑɹp wɑz ðə kɹæklɪŋ ə ðə faɪɝz ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪsəz.

The room was crowded indeed, but no one was laughing, though every chair and bench was filled and people lined the walls. Thom was performing again, standing on a table against the far wall, his gestures grand enough to fill the big room. It was The Great Hunt of the Horn again, but no one complained, of course. There were so many tales to be told about each of the Hunters, and so many Hunters to tell of, that no two tellings were ever the same. The whole of it in one telling would have taken a week or more. The only sound competing with the gleeman's voice and harp was the crackling of the fires in the fireplaces.

". . . tə ði eɪt kɔɹnɝz ə ðə wɝld, ðə hʌntɝz ɹaɪd, tə ði eɪt pɪlɝz ə hɛvən, wɛɹ ðə wɪnz ə taɪm bloʊ ən feɪt sizɪz ðə maɪɾi ən ðə smɔl əlaɪk baɪ ðə fɔɹlɑk. naʊ, ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ə ðə hʌntɝz ɪz ɹəɡoʊʃ ə tælmɔɹ, ɹəɡoʊʃ iɡəl-aɪ, feɪmd ət ðə kɔɹɾ ə ðə haɪ kɪŋ, fɪɹɾ ɑn ðə sloʊps ə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. . . ." ðə hʌntɝz wɝ ɔlweɪz maɪɾi hɪɹoʊz, ɔl ə ðɛm.

". . . To the eight corners of the world, the Hunters ride, to the eight pillars of heaven, where the winds of time blow and fate seizes the mighty and the small alike by the forelock. Now, the greatest of the Hunters is Rogosh of Talmour, Rogosh Eagle-eye, famed at the court of the High King, feared on the slopes of Shayol Ghul. . . ." The Hunters were always mighty heroes, all of them.

ɹænd spɑɾəd ɪz tu fɹɛnz ən skwizd ɑntu ə pleɪs pɛɹɪn meɪd fəɹ ɪm ɑn ði ɛn ə ðɛɹ bɛntʃ. kɪtʃən smɛlz dʒɹɪftɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɹum ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ðəɾ i wɑz hʌŋɡɹi, bʌɾ ivən ðə pipəl u hæd fuɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm ɡeɪv ɪt lɪɾəl ətɛnʃən. ðə meɪdz u ʃʊɾə bɪn sɝvɪŋ stʊɾ ɪntʃɹænst, klʌtʃɪŋ ðɛɹ eɪpɹənz ən lʊkɪŋ ət ðə ɡlimən, ən noʊbɑdi sim tə maɪn əɾ ɔl. lɪsnɪŋ wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən iɾɪŋ, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ɡʊd ðə fud.

Rand spotted his two friends and squeezed onto a place Perrin made for him on the end of their bench. Kitchen smells drifting into the room reminded him that he was hungry, but even the people who had food in front of them gave it little attention. The maids who should have been serving stood entranced, clutching their aprons and looking at the gleeman, and nobody seemed to mind at all. Listening was better than eating, no matter how good the food.

". . . sɪns ðə deɪ ʌv əɹ bɝθ əz ðə dɑɹk wʌn mɑɹk blz əz ɪz oʊn, bʌt nɑɾ ə ðɪs maɪn ɪz ʃi - noʊ dɑɹkfɹɛnd, blz ə mətukɪn! stʃɹɔŋ əz ði æʃ ʃi stænz, laɪð əz ðə wɪloʊ bɹæntʃ, bjuɾəfəl əz ðə ɹoʊz. ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd blz. ɹɛɾi tə daɪ bɪfɔɹ ʃi jilz. bʌt hɑɹk! ɛkoʊɪŋ fɹəm ðə taʊɝz ə ðə sɪɾi, tʃɹʌmpəts blɛɹ, bɹeɪzən ən boʊld. hɝ hɛɹəlz pɹoʊkleɪm ði ɝaɪvəl ʌv ə hɪɹoʊ əɾ əɹ kɔɹt. dʒɹʌmz θʌndɝ ən sɪmbəlz sɪŋ! ɹəɡoʊʃ iɡəl-aɪ kʌmz tə də ɑmədʒ . . ."

". . . since the day of her birth has the Dark One marked Blaes as his own, but not of this mind is she - no Darkfriend, Blaes of Matuchin! Strong as the ash she stands, lithe as the willow branch, beautiful as the rose. Golden-haired Blaes. Ready to die before she yields. But hark! Echoing from the towers of the city, trumpets blare, brazen and bold. Her heralds proclaim the arrival of a hero at her court. Drums thunder and cymbals sing! Rogosh Eagle-eye comes to do homage . . ."

"ðə bɑɹɡən ə ɹəɡoʊʃ iɡəl-aɪ" waʊn ɪts weɪ tə ən ɛnd, bʌt tɑm pɔzd oʊnli tə wɛɾ ɪz θɹoʊt fɹəm ə mʌɡ ʌv eɪl bɪfɔɹ lɔntʃɪŋ ɪndə "ljɑnz stænd." ɪn tɝn ðət wɑz fɑloʊd baɪ "ðə fɔl ʌv ɑlɛθ-lɔɹil," ən "ɡeɪɾəl keɪnz sɔɹd," ən "ðə læst ɹaɪɾ ə buəɾ ʌv ælbhən." ðə pɔzəz ɡɹu lɔŋɡɝ əz ði ivnɪŋ wɔɹ ɑn, ən wən tɑm ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ðə hɑɹp fəɹ ɪz flut, ɛvɹiwʌn nu ɪt wɑz ði ɛn ə stɔɹitɛlɪŋ fəɹ ðə naɪt. tu mɛn dʒɔɪn tɑm, wɪð ə dʒɹʌm ən ə hæmɝd dʌlsɪmɝ, bʌt sɪɾɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə teɪbəl waɪl i ɹɪmeɪn ətɑp ɪt.

"The Bargain of Rogosh Eagle-eye" wound its way to an end, but Thom paused only to wet his throat from a mug of ale before launching into "Lian's Stand." In turn that was followed by "The Fall of Aleth-Loriel," and "Gaidal Cain's Sword," and "The Last Ride of Buad of Albhain." The pauses grew longer as the evening wore on, and when Thom exchanged the harp for his flute, everyone knew it was the end of storytelling for the night. Two men joined Thom, with a drum and a hammered dulcimer, but sitting beside the table while he remained atop it.

ðə θɹi jʌŋ mɛn fɹəm ɛmənz fil bɪɡæn klæpɪŋ ðɛɹ hænz wɪð ðə fɝs noʊɾ ʌv "ðə wɪn ðət ʃeɪks ðə wɪloʊ," ən ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ði oʊnli wʌnz. ɪt wɑz ə feɪvɹɪɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən ɪn bɛɹlən, tu, ɪt simd. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ vɔɪsəz ivən tʊk ʌp ðə wɝdz, nɑt soʊ ɔf-ki əz fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə hʌʃ ðɛm.

The three young men from Emond's Field began clapping their hands with the first note of "The Wind That Shakes the Willow," and they were not the only ones. It was a favorite in the Two Rivers, and in Baerlon, too, it seemed. Here and there voices even took up the words, not so off-key as for anyone to hush them.

"maɪ lʌv ɪz ɡɔn, kæɹiɾ əweɪbi ðə wɪn ðət ʃeɪks ðə wɪloʊæn ɔl ðə læn ɪz biɾən hɑɹdbi ðə wɪn ðət ʃeɪks ðə wɪloʊbʌɾ əl hoʊld əɹ kloʊs tə min hɑɹɾ ən dɪɹəs mɛmɹiænd wɪð əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ tə stil maɪ soʊlhɝ lʌv tə wɔɹm maɪ hɑɹt-stʃɹɪŋzaɪ wɪl stænd wɛɹ wi wʌns sæŋðoʊ koʊld wɪnd ʃeɪks ðə wɪloʊ."

"My love is gone, carried awayby the wind that shakes the willow,and all the land is beaten hardby the wind that shakes the willow.But I will hold her close to mein heart and dearest memory,and with her strength to steel my soul,her love to warm my heart-strings,I will stand where we once sang,though cold wind shakes the willow."

ðə sɛkən sɔŋ wɑz nɑt soʊ sæd. ɪn fækt, "oʊnli wʌn bʌkəɾ ʌv wɔɾɝ" simd ivən mɔɹ mɛɹi ðən juʒəwəl baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən, wɪtʃ maɪɾ əv bɪn ðə ɡlimənz ɪntɛnt. pipəl ɹʌʃt tə klɪɹ teɪbəlz fɹəm ðə flɔɹ tə meɪk ɹum fəɹ dænsɪŋ, ən bɪɡæn kɪkɪŋ ʌp ðɛɹ hilz əntɪl ðə wɔlz ʃʊk fɹəm ðə stɑmpɪŋ ən wɝlɪŋ. ðə fɝs dæns ɛndəd wɪð læfɪŋ dænsɝz livɪŋ ðə flɔɹ hoʊldɪŋ ðɛɹ saɪdz, ən nu pipəl teɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ pleɪsəz.

The second song was not so sad. In fact, "Only One Bucket of Water" seemed even more merry than usual by comparison, which might have been the gleeman's intent. People rushed to clear tables from the floor to make room for dancing, and began kicking up their heels until the walls shook from the stomping and whirling. The first dance ended with laughing dancers leaving the floor holding their sides, and new people taking their places.

tɑm pleɪd ði oʊpənɪŋ noʊts ʌv "waɪld ɡis ɑn ðə wɪŋ," ðən pɔz fəɹ pipəl tə teɪk ðɛɹ pleɪsəz fəɹ ðə ɹil.

Thom played the opening notes of "Wild Geese on the Wing," then paused for people to take their places for the reel.

"aɪ θɪŋk əl tʃɹaɪ ə fju stɛps," ɹænd sɛd, ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɪz fit. pɛɹɪn pɑpt ʌp ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɪm. mæt wɑz ðə læs tə muv, ən soʊ faʊn hɪmsɛlf steɪɪŋ bɪhaɪn tə ɡɑɹd ðə kloʊks, əlɔŋ wɪð ɹændz sɔɹɾ ən pɛɹɪnz æks.

"I think I'll try a few steps," Rand said, getting to his feet. Perrin popped up right behind him. Mat was the last to move, and so found himself staying behind to guard the cloaks, along with Rand's sword and Perrin's axe.

"ɹɪmɛmbɝ aɪ wɑn ə tɝn, tu," mæt kɔld æftɝ ðɛm.

"Remember I want a turn, too," Mat called after them.

ðə dænsɝz fɔɹm tu lɔŋ laɪnz feɪsɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ, mɛn ɪn wʌn, wɪmən ɪn ði ʌðɝ. fɝs ðə dʒɹʌm ən ðən ðə dʌlsɪmɝ tʊk ʌp ðə bit, ən ɔl ðə dænsɝz bɪɡæn bɛndɪŋ ðɛɹ niz ɪn taɪm. ðə ɡɝl əkɹɔs fɹəm ɹænd, hɝ dɑɹk hɛɹ ɪn bɹeɪdz ðət meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə hoʊm, ɡeɪv ɪm ə ʃaɪ smaɪl, ən ðən ə wɪŋk ðət wɑz nɑt ʃaɪ əɾ ɔl. tɑmz flut lɛpt ɪndə ðə tun, ən ɹænd muv fɔɹwɝd tə mit ðə dɑɹk-hɛɹd ɡɝl; ʃi θɹu bæk əɹ hɛɾ ən læft əz i spʌn əɹ ɝaʊn ən pæst əɹ ɑn tə ðə nɛks mæn ɪn laɪn.

The dancers formed two long lines facing each other, men in one, women in the other. First the drum and then the dulcimer took up the beat, and all the dancers began bending their knees in time. The girl across from Rand, her dark hair in braids that made him think of home, gave him a shy smile, and then a wink that was not shy at all. Thom's flute leaped into the tune, and Rand moved forward to meet the dark-haired girl; she threw back her head and laughed as he spun her around and passed her on to the next man in line.

ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə ɹum wɑz læfɪŋ, hi θɔɾ əz i dænst ɝaʊn ɪz nɛks pɑɹtnɝ, wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz wɪð əɹ eɪpɹən flæpɪŋ waɪldli. ði oʊnli ənsmaɪlɪŋ feɪs i sɔ wɑz ɑn ə mæn hʌɾəld baɪ wʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪsəz, ən ðət fɛloʊ hæɾ ə skɑɹ ðət kɹɔst ɪz hoʊl feɪs fɹəm wʌn tɛmpəl tə ði ɑpəzət dʒɔ, ɡɪvɪŋ ɪz noʊz ə slæn ən dʒɹɔɪŋ ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz maʊθ daʊn. ðə mæn mɛɾ ɪz ɡeɪz ən ɡɹɪməst, ən ɹænd lʊkt əweɪ ɪn ɪmbɛɹəsmənt. meɪbi wɪð ðət skɑɹ ðə fɛloʊ kəd nɑt smaɪl.

Everyone in the room was laughing, he thought as he danced around his next partner, one of the serving maids with her apron flapping wildly. The only unsmiling face he saw was on a man huddled by one of the fireplaces, and that fellow had a scar that crossed his whole face from one temple to the opposite jaw, giving his nose a slant and drawing the corner of his mouth down. The man met his gaze and grimaced, and Rand looked away in embarrassment. Maybe with that scar the fellow could not smile.

hi kɑɾ ɪz nɛks pɑɹtnɝ əz ʃi spʌn, ən wɝld əɹ ɪn ə sɝkəl bɪfɔɹ pæsɪŋ əɹ ɑn. θɹi mɔɹ wɪmən dænst wɪð ɪm əz ðə mjuzɪk ɡeɪn spid, ðən i wɑz bæk wɪð ðə fɝs dɑɹk-hɛɹd ɡɝl fəɹ ə fæs pɹɑməneɪd ðət tʃeɪnʒd ðə laɪnz əbaʊt kəmplitli. ʃi wɑz stɪl læfɪŋ, ən ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ənʌðɝ wɪŋk.

He caught his next partner as she spun, and whirled her in a circle before passing her on. Three more women danced with him as the music gained speed, then he was back with the first dark-haired girl for a fast promenade that changed the lines about completely. She was still laughing, and she gave him another wink.

ðə skɑɹ-feɪs mæn wɑz skaʊlɪŋ ət hɪm. hɪz stɛp fɔltɝɾ ən ɪz tʃiks ɡɹu hɑt. hi hæd nɑt mɛn tə ɪmbɛɹəs ðə fɛloʊ; hi ɹɪli dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i hæd stɛɹd. hi tɝn tə miɾ ɪz nɛks pɑɹtnɝ ən fɝɡɑɾ ɔl əbaʊt ðə mæn. ðə nɛkst wʊmən tə dæns ɪndə hɪz ɑɹmz wɑz nɪneɪiv.

The scar-faced man was scowling at him. His step faltered and his cheeks grew hot. He had not meant to embarrass the fellow; he really did not think he had stared. He turned to meet his next partner and forgot all about the man. The next woman to dance into his arms was Nynaeve.

hi stʌmbəl θɹu ðə stɛps, ɔlmoʊs tʃɹɪpɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz oʊn fit, nɪɹli stɛpɪŋ ɑn hɝz. ʃi dænst ɡɹeɪsfəli ɪnʌf tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ ɪz klʌmzinəs, smaɪlɪŋ ðə waɪl.

He stumbled through the steps, almost tripping over his own feet, nearly stepping on hers. She danced gracefully enough to make up for his clumsiness, smiling the while.

"aɪ θɔt jə wɝ ə bɛɾɝ dænsɝ," ʃi læft əz ðeɪ tʃeɪnʒd pɑɹtnɝz.

"I thought you were a better dancer," she laughed as they changed partners.

hi hæɾ oʊnli ə moʊmən tə ɡæðɝ hɪmsɛlf bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ tʃeɪnʒd əɡɛn, ən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf dænsɪŋ wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn. ɪf i hæd θɔɾ i wɑz stʌmbəl-fʊɾɪd wɪð ðə wɪzdəm, ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə haʊ hi fɛlt wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi ɡlaɪɾɪd əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ smuðli, hɝ ɡaʊn swɝlɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ; hi ɔlmoʊs fɛl twaɪs. ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə sɪmpəθɛɾɪk smaɪl, wɪtʃ meɪɾ ɪt wɝs ɹæðɝ ðən hɛlpɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlif tə ɡoʊ tə hɪz nɛks pɑɹtnɝ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz ɛɡwin.

He had only a moment to gather himself before they changed again, and he found himself dancing with Moiraine. If he had thought he was stumble-footed with the Wisdom, it was nothing to how he felt with the Aes Sedai. She glided across the floor smoothly, her gown swirling about her; he almost fell twice. She gave him a sympathetic smile, which made it worse rather than helping. It was a relief to go to his next partner in the pattern, even if it was Egwene.

hi ɹiɡeɪn səm ə hɪz pɔɪz. æftɝ ɔl, hi hæd dænst wɪð əɹ fəɹ jɪɹz. hɝ hɛɹ stɪl hʌŋ ənbɹeɪɾɪd, bʌt ʃi hæd ɡæðɝɾ ɪt bæk wɪð ə ɹɛd ɹɪbən. pɹɑbli kʊdn dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ tə pliz mɔɪɹeɪn əɹ nɪneɪiv, hi θɔt saʊɝli. hɝ lɪps wɝ pɑɹɾəd, ən ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ spoʊk, ən i wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə spik fɝst. nɑɾ æftɝ ðə weɪ ʃi hæd kʌɾ ɔf ɪz ɝliɝ ətɛmpt ɪn ðə pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ ɹum. ðeɪ stɛɹɾ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ soʊbɝli ən dænst əpɑɹt wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd.

He regained some of his poise. After all, he had danced with her for years. Her hair still hung unbraided, but she had gathered it back with a red ribbon. Probably couldn't decide whether to please Moiraine or Nynaeve, he thought sourly. Her lips were parted, and she looked as if she wanted to say something, but she never spoke, and he was not about to speak first. Not after the way she had cut off his earlier attempt in the private dining room. They stared at one another soberly and danced apart without a word.

hi wɑz ɡlæɾ ɪnʌf tə ɹɪtɝn tə ðə bɛntʃ wən ðə ɹil wɑz dʌn. ðə mjuzɪk fəɹ ənʌðɝ dæns, ə dʒɪɡ, bɪɡæn waɪl i wɑz sɪɾɪŋ daʊn. mæt hɝid tə dʒɔɪn ɪn, ən pɛɹɪn slɪɾ ɑntu ðə bɛntʃ əz i wɑz livɪŋ.

He was glad enough to return to the bench when the reel was done. The music for another dance, a jig, began while he was sitting down. Mat hurried to join in, and Perrin slid onto the bench as he was leaving.

"dɪd jə si hɝ?" pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn bɪfɔɹ i wɑz ivən siɾəd. "dɪd ju?" "wɪtʃ wʌn?" ɹænd æskt. "ðə wɪzdəm, əɹ mɪstʃɹəs æliz? aɪ dænst wɪð boʊθ ə ðɛm."

"Did you see her?" Perrin began before he was even seated. "Did you?" "Which one?" Rand asked. "The Wisdom, or Mistress Alys? I danced with both of them."

"ði eɪ . . . mɪstʃɹəs æliz, tu?" pɛɹɪn ɪkskleɪmd. "aɪ dænst wɪð nɪneɪiv. aɪ dɪdn ivən noʊ ʃi dænst. ʃi nɛvɝ dʌz əɾ ɛni ʌv ðə dænsəz bæk hoʊm."

"The Ae . . . Mistress Alys, too?" Perrin exclaimed. "I danced with Nynaeve. I didn't even know she danced. She never does at any of the dances back home."

"aɪ wʌndɝ," ɹænd sɛd θɔtfəli, "wʌt ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl wəd seɪ əbaʊt ðə wɪzdəm dænsɪŋ? meɪbi ðæts waɪ."

"I wonder," Rand said thoughtfully, "what the Women's Circle would say about the Wisdom dancing? Maybe that's why."

ðən ðə mjuzɪk ən ðə klæpɪŋ ən ðə sɪŋɪŋ wɝ tu laʊd fəɹ ɛni fɝðɝ tɔk. ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn dʒɔɪn ɪn ðə klæpɪŋ əz ðə dænsɝz sɝkəl ðə flɔɹ. sɛvɹəl taɪmz i bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ðə skɑɹ-feɪs mæn stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm. ðə mæn hæɾ ə ɹaɪt tə bi tʌtʃi, wɪð ðət skɑɹ, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ i kəd də naʊ ðət wəd nɑt meɪk mæɾɝz wɝs. hi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ðə mjuzɪk ən əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə fɛloʊ.

Then the music and the clapping and the singing were too loud for any further talk. Rand and Perrin joined in the clapping as the dancers circled the floor. Several times he became aware of the scar-faced man staring at him. The man had a right to be touchy, with that scar, but Rand did not see anything he could do now that would not make matters worse. He concentrated on the music and avoided looking at the fellow.

ðə dænsɪŋ ən sɪŋɪŋ wɛn ɑn ɪndə ðə naɪt. ðə meɪdz faɪnəli dɪd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɛɹ duɾiz; ɹænd wɑz ɡlæd tə wʊlf daʊn səm hɑt stu ən bɹɛd. ɛvɹiwʌn eɪt wɛɹ ðeɪ sæɾ əɹ stʊd. ɹænd dʒɔɪn ɪn θɹi mɔɹ dænsəz, ən i mænədʒd ɪz stɛps bɛɾɝ wən i faʊn hɪmsɛlf dænsɪŋ wɪð nɪneɪiv əɡɛn, ən wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn, əz wɛl. ðɪs taɪm ðeɪ boʊθ kəmpləmɛntɪɾ ɪm ɑn ɪz dænsɪŋ, wɪtʃ meɪɾ ɪm stæmɝ. hi dænst wɪð ɛɡwin əɡɛn, tu; ʃi stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, dɑɹk-aɪɾ ən ɔlweɪz simɪŋ ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə spikɪŋ, bʌt nɛvɝ seɪɪŋ ə wɝd. hi wɑz dʒʌst əz saɪlən əz ʃi, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ i dɪd nɑt skaʊl ət hɝ, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt mæt sɛd wən i ɹɪtɝn tə ðə bɛntʃ.

The dancing and singing went on into the night. The maids finally did remember their duties; Rand was glad to wolf down some hot stew and bread. Everyone ate where they sat or stood. Rand joined in three more dances, and he managed his steps better when he found himself dancing with Nynaeve again, and with Moiraine, as well. This time they both complimented him on his dancing, which made him stammer. He danced with Egwene again, too; she stared at him, dark-eyed and always seeming on the point of speaking, but never saying a word. He was just as silent as she, but he was sure he did not scowl at her, no matter what Mat said when he returned to the bench.

təwɔɹd mɪdnaɪt mɔɪɹeɪn lɛft. ɛɡwin, æftɝ wʌn hɛɹid lʊk fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə nɪneɪiv, hɝiɾ æftɝ hɝ. ðə wɪzdəm wɑtʃt əm wɪð ən ənɹiɾəbəl ɪkspɹɛʃən, ðən dɪlɪbɝətli dʒɔɪn ɪn ənʌðɝ dæns bɪfɔɹ ʃi lɛft, tu, wɪð ə lʊk əz ɪf ʃi hæd ɡeɪn ə pɔɪn ɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Toward midnight Moiraine left. Egwene, after one harried look from the Aes Sedai to Nynaeve, hurried after her. The Wisdom watched them with an unreadable expression, then deliberately joined in another dance before she left, too, with a look as if she had gained a point on the Aes Sedai.

sun tɑm wɑz pʊɾɪŋ ɪz fluɾ ɪndə ɪts keɪs ən ɑɹɡjuɪŋ ɡʊd-neɪtʃɝdli wɪð ðoʊz u wɑntəɾ ɪm tə steɪ lɔŋɡɝ. læn keɪm baɪ tə ɡæðɝ ʌp ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz.

Soon Thom was putting his flute into its case and arguing good-naturedly with those who wanted him to stay longer. Lan came by to gather up Rand and the others.

"wi hæv tə meɪk ən ɝli stɑɹt," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd, linɪŋ kloʊs tə bi hɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə nɔɪz, "ænd wɪl niɾ ɔl ðə ɹɛst wi kən ɡɛt."

"We have to make an early start," the Warder said, leaning close to be heard over the noise, "and we will need all the rest we can get."

"ðɛɹz ə fɛloʊ bɪn stɛɹɪŋ ət mi," mæt sɛd. "ə mæn wɪð ə skɑɹ əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs. jə doʊn θɪŋk i kəd bi ə . . . wʌn ə ðə fɹɛnz jə wɔɹn əs əbaʊt?"

"There's a fellow been staring at me," Mat said. "A man with a scar across his face. You don't think he could be a . . . one of the friends you warned us about?"

"laɪk ðɪs?" ɹænd sɛd, dʒɹɔɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝ əkɹɔs ɪz noʊz tə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz maʊθ. "hi stɛɹɾ ət mi, tu." hi lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə ɹum. pipəl wɝ dʒɹɪftɪŋ əweɪ, ən moʊst ə ðoʊz stɪl lɛf klʌstɝɾ ɝaʊn tɑm. "hiz nɑt hɪɹ, naʊ."

"Like this?" Rand said, drawing a finger across his nose to the corner of his mouth. "He stared at me, too." He looked around the room. People were drifting away, and most of those still left clustered around Thom. "He's not here, now."

"aɪ sɔ ðə mæn," læn sɛd. "əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə mæstɝ fɪtʃ, hiz ə spaɪ fəɹ ðə waɪtkloʊks. hiz noʊ wɝi tə ʌs." meɪbi hi wɑz nɑt, bʌt ɹænd kəd si sʌmθɪŋ wɑz bɑðɝɪŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝ.

"I saw the man," Lan said. "According to Master Fitch, he's a spy for the Whitecloaks. He's no worry to us." Maybe he was not, but Rand could see something was bothering the Warder.

ɹænd ɡlænst ət mæt, hu hæd ðə stɪf ɪkspɹɛʃən ɑn ɪz feɪs ðəɾ ɔlweɪz mɛn i wɑz haɪɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. eɪ waɪtkloʊk spaɪ. kəd bɔɹnhəld wɑnə ɡɛt bæk əɾ əs ðət mʌtʃ? "wɝ livɪŋ ɝli?" hi sɛd. "ɹɪli ɝli?" meɪbi ðeɪ kəd bi ɡɔn bɪfɔɹ ɛniθɪŋ keɪm ʌv ɪt.

Rand glanced at Mat, who had the stiff expression on his face that always meant he was hiding something. A Whitecloak spy. Could Bornhald want to get back at us that much? "We're leaving early?" he said. "Really early?" Maybe they could be gone before anything came of it.

"æt fɝs laɪt," ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɹɪplaɪd.

"At first light," the Warder replied.

əz ðeɪ lɛf ðə kɑmən ɹum, mæt sɪŋɪŋ snætʃɪz ə sɔŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, ən pɛɹɪn stɑpɪŋ naʊ ən əɡɛn tə tʃɹaɪ aʊɾ ə nu stɛp i hæd lɝnd, tɑm dʒɔɪn əm ɪn haɪ spɪɹəts. lænz feɪs wɑz ɪkspɹɛʃənləs əz ðeɪ hɛɾəd fəɹ ðə stɛɹz.

As they left the common room, Mat singing snatches of song under his breath, and Perrin stopping now and again to try out a new step he had learned, Thom joined them in high spirits. Lan's face was expressionless as they headed for the stairs.

"wɛɹ ɪz nɪneɪiv slipɪŋ?" mæt æskt. "mæstɝ fɪtʃ sɛd wi ɡɑt ðə læst ɹumz."

"Where is Nynaeve sleeping?" Mat asked. "Master Fitch said we got the last rooms."

"ʃi hæz ə bɛd," tɑm sɛd dʒɹaɪli, "ɪn wɪð mɪstʃɹəs æliz ən ðə ɡɝl." pɛɹɪn wɪsəl bɪtwin ɪz tiθ, ən mæt mʌɾɝd, "blʌɾ ən æʃəz! aɪ wʊdn bi ɪn ɛɡwinz ʃuz fəɹ ɔl ðə ɡoʊld ɪn keɪɛmlɪn!"

"She has a bed," Thom said dryly, "in with Mistress Alys and the girl." Perrin whistled between his teeth, and Mat muttered, "Blood and ashes! I wouldn't be in Egwene's shoes for all the gold in Caemlyn!"

nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, ɹænd wɪʃt mæt kəd θɪŋk sɪɹiəsli əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ mɔɹ ðən tu mɪnəts. ðɛɹ oʊn ʃuz wɝ nɑt vɛɹi kʌmftəɹbəl ɹaɪt ðɛn. "aɪm gɑnə ɡɛt səm mɪlk," hi sɛd. meɪbi ɪt wəd hɛlp ɪm slip. meɪbi aɪ woʊn dʒɹim tənaɪt.

Not for the first time, Rand wished Mat could think seriously about something for more than two minutes. Their own shoes were not very comfortable right then. "I'm going to get some milk," he said. Maybe it would help him sleep. Maybe I won't dream tonight.

læn lʊkt əɾ ɪm ʃɑɹpli. "ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ tənaɪt. doʊnt wɑndɝ fɑɹ. ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ, wi liv wɛðɝ jə ɑɹ əweɪk ɪnʌf tə sɪt jəɹ sæɾəl əɹ əv tə bi taɪɾ ɑn."

Lan looked at him sharply. "There's something wrong tonight. Don't wander far. And remember, we leave whether you are awake enough to sit your saddle or have to be tied on."

ðə wɔɹɾɝ stɑɹɾəd ʌp ðə stɛɹz; ði ʌðɝz fɑloʊd hɪm, ðɛɹ dʒɑləɾi səbdud. ɹænd stʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔl əloʊn. æftɝ hævɪŋ soʊ mɛni pipəl ɝaʊnd, ɪt wɑz loʊnli ɪndid.

The Warder started up the stairs; the others followed him, their jollity subdued. Rand stood in the hall alone. After having so many people around, it was lonely indeed.

hi hɝid tə ðə kɪtʃən, wɛɹ ə skʌlɝi meɪd wɑz stɪl ɑn duɾi. ʃi pɔɹɾ ə mʌɡ ʌv mɪlk fɹəm ə bɪɡ stoʊn kɹɑk fəɹ hɪm.

He hurried to the kitchen, where a scullery maid was still on duty. She poured a mug of milk from a big stone crock for him.

əz i keɪm aʊɾ ə ðə kɪtʃən, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ, ə ʃeɪp ɪn dʌl blæk stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹɾ ɪm daʊn ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə hɔl, ɹeɪzɪŋ peɪl hænz tə tɔs bæk ðə dɑɹk kaʊl ðət hæd hɪɾən ðə feɪs bɪniθ. ðə kloʊk hʌŋ moʊʃənləs əz ðə fɪɡjɝ muvd, ən ðə feɪs. . . . ə mænz feɪs, bʌt peɪsti waɪt, laɪk ə slʌɡ ʌndɝ ə ɹɑk, ən aɪləs. fɹəm ɔɪli blæk hɛɹ tə pʌfi tʃiks wɑz əz smuð əz ən ɛɡʃɛl. ɹænd tʃoʊkt, spɹeɪɪŋ mɪlk.

As he came out of the kitchen, drinking, a shape in dull black started toward him down the length of the hall, raising pale hands to toss back the dark cowl that had hidden the face beneath. The cloak hung motionless as the figure moved, and the face. . . . A man's face, but pasty white, like a slug under a rock, and eyeless. From oily black hair to puffy cheeks was as smooth as an eggshell. Rand choked, spraying milk.

"ju ɑɹ wʌn ə ðɛm, bɔɪ," ðə feɪd sɛd, ə hɔɹs wɪspɝ laɪk ə faɪl sɔfli dʒɹɔn əkɹɔs boʊn.

"You are one of them, boy," the Fade said, a hoarse whisper like a file softly drawn across bone.

dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðə mʌɡ, ɹænd bækt əweɪ. hi wɑntəd tə ɹʌn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl i kəd də tə meɪk ɪz fit teɪk wʌn hɔltɪŋ stɛp əɾ ə taɪm. hi kəd nɑt bɹeɪk fɹi ʌv ðəɾ aɪləs feɪs; hɪz ɡeɪz wɑz hɛld, ən ɪz stʌmək kɝɾəld. hi tʃɹaɪd tə ʃaʊt fəɹ hɛlp, tə skɹim; hɪz θɹoʊt wɑz laɪk stoʊn. ɛvɹi ɹæɡəd bɹɛθ hɝt.

Dropping the mug, Rand backed away. He wanted to run, but it was all he could do to make his feet take one halting step at a time. He could not break free of that eyeless face; his gaze was held, and his stomach curdled. He tried to shout for help, to scream; his throat was like stone. Every ragged breath hurt.

ðə feɪd ɡlaɪɾɪd kloʊsɝ, ɪn noʊ hɝi. ɪts stʃɹaɪdz hæɾ ə sɪnwəs, dɛdli ɡɹeɪs, laɪk ə vaɪpɝ, ðə ɹɪzɛmbləns ɛmfəsaɪz baɪ ði oʊvɝlæpɪŋ blæk pleɪts ʌv ɑɹmɝ daʊn ɪts tʃɛst. θɪn, blʌdləs lɪps kɝvd ɪn ə kɹuəl smaɪl, meɪd mɔɹ mɑkɪŋ baɪ ðə smuð, peɪl skɪn wɛɹ aɪz ʃəɾ əv bɪn. ðə vɔɪs meɪd bɔɹnhəlz sim wɔɹm ən sɑft. "wɛɹ ɑɹ ði ʌðɝz? aɪ noʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ hɪɹ. spik, bɔɪ, ən əl lɛt jə lɪv."

The Fade glided closer, in no hurry. Its strides had a sinuous, deadly grace, like a viper, the resemblance emphasized by the overlapping black plates of armor down its chest. Thin, bloodless lips curved in a cruel smile, made more mocking by the smooth, pale skin where eyes should have been. The voice made Bornhald's seem warm and soft. "Where are the others? I know they are here. Speak, boy, and I will let you live."

ɹændz bæk stʃɹʌk wʊd, ə wɔl əɹ ə dɔɹ - hi kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf lʊk ɝaʊn tə si wɪtʃ. naʊ ðəɾ ɪz fit hæd stɑpt, hi kəd nɑt meɪk əm stɑɹɾ əɡɛn. hi ʃɪvɝd, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl slaɪðɝ nɪɹɝ. hɪz ʃeɪkɪŋ ɡɹu hɑɹɾɝ wɪð ɛvɹi sloʊ stʃɹaɪd.

Rand's back struck wood, a wall or a door - he could not make himself look around to see which. Now that his feet had stopped, he could not make them start again. He shivered, watching the Myrddraal slither nearer. His shaking grew harder with every slow stride.

"spik, aɪ seɪ, əɹ - "

"Speak, I say, or - "

fɹəm əbʌv keɪm ə kwɪk klæɾɝ ə buts, fɹəm ðə stɛɹz ʌp ðə hɔl, ən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl kʌɾ ɔf, wɝlɪŋ. ðə kloʊk hʌŋ stɪl. fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðə feɪdz hɛd tɪltəd, əz ɪf ðəɾ aɪləs ɡeɪz kəd pɪɹs ðə wʊɾən wɔl. ə sɔɹɾ əpɪɹɾ ɪn ə dɛd-waɪt hænd, bleɪɾ əz blæk əz ðə kloʊk. ðə laɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔl sim tə ɡɹoʊ dɪmɝ ɪn ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðət bleɪd. ðə paʊndɪŋ ə buts ɡɹu laʊɾɝ, ən ðə feɪd spʌn bæk tə ɹænd, ən ɔlmoʊs boʊnləs muvmənt. ðə blæk bleɪd ɹoʊz; nɛɹoʊ lɪps pil bæk ɪn ə ɹɪktəs snɑɹl.

From above came a quick clatter of boots, from the stairs up the hall, and the Myrddraal cut off, whirling. The cloak hung still. For an instant the Fade's head tilted, as if that eyeless gaze could pierce the wooden wall. A sword appeared in a dead-white hand, blade as black as the cloak. The light in the hall seemed to grow dimmer in the presence of that blade. The pounding of boots grew louder, and the Fade spun back to Rand, an almost boneless movement. The black blade rose; narrow lips peeled back in a rictus snarl.

tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, ɹænd nu hi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ. mɪdnaɪt stil flæʃt əɾ ɪz hɛd . . . ən stɑpt.

Trembling, Rand knew he was going to die. Midnight steel flashed at his head . . . and stopped.

"ju bɪlɔŋ tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk." ðə bɹɛθi ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ ə ðət vɔɪs saʊndəd laɪk fɪŋɡɝneɪlz skɹætʃt əkɹɔs ə sleɪt. "ju ɑɹ hɪz."

"You belong to the Great Lord of the Dark." The breathy grating of that voice sounded like fingernails scratched across a slate. "You are his."

spɪnɪŋ ɪn ə blæk blɝ, ðə feɪd dɑɹɾɪd daʊn ðə hɔl əweɪ fɹəm ɹænd. ðə ʃædoʊz ət ði ɛn ə ðə hɔl ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən ɛmbɹeɪst ɪt, ən ɪt wɑz ɡɔn.

Spinning in a black blur, the Fade darted down the hall away from Rand. The shadows at the end of the hall reached out and embraced it, and it was gone.

læn lɛp daʊn ðə læst stɛɹz, lændɪŋ wɪð ə kɹæʃ, sɔɹɾ ɪn hænd.

Lan leaped down the last stairs, landing with a crash, sword in hand.

ɹænd stʃɹʌɡəl tə faɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "feɪd," hi ɡæspt. "ɪt wɑz. . . ."əbɹʌpli hi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪz sɔɹd. wɪð ðə mɹdʒɹɑl feɪsɪŋ ɪm i hæd nɛvɝ θɔɾ ʌv ɪt. hi fʌmbəl ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪɾ aʊt naʊ, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ ɪf ɪt wɑz tu leɪt. "ɪt ɹæn ðət weɪ!"

Rand struggled to find his voice. "Fade," he gasped. "It was. . . ."Abruptly he remembered his sword. With the Myrddraal facing him he had never thought of it. He fumbled the heron-mark blade out now, not caring if it was too late. "It ran that way!"

læn nɑɾəd æbsənli; hi sim tə bi lɪsnɪŋ tə sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. "jɛs. ɪts ɡoʊɪŋ; feɪɾɪŋ. noʊ taɪm tə pɝsu ɪt, naʊ. wɝ livɪŋ, ʃifɝɾɝ."

Lan nodded absently; he seemed to be listening to something else. "Yes. It's going; fading. No time to pursue it, now. We're leaving, sheepherder."

mɔɹ buts stʌmbəl daʊn ðə stɛɹz; mæt ən pɛɹɪn ən tɑm, hʌŋ əbaʊt wɪð blæŋkəts ən sæɾəlbæɡz. mæt wɑz stɪl bʌklɪŋ ɪz bɛdʒɹoʊl, wɪð ɪz baʊ ɑkwɝɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm.

More boots stumbled down the stairs; Mat and Perrin and Thom, hung about with blankets and saddlebags. Mat was still buckling his bedroll, with his bow awkward under his arm.

"livɪŋ?" ɹænd sɛd. ʃiðɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd, hi tʊk ɪz θɪŋz fɹəm tɑm. "naʊ? ɪn ðə naɪt?"

"Leaving?" Rand said. Sheathing his sword, he took his things from Thom. "Now? In the night?"

"ju wɑnə weɪt fəɹ ðə hæfmən tə kʌm bæk, ʃifɝɾɝ?" ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛɾ ɪmpeɪʃənli. "fɔɹ hæf ə dʌzən ə ðɛm? ɪt noʊz wɛɹ wi ɑɹ, naʊ."

"You want to wait for the Halfman to come back, sheepherder?" the Warder said impatiently. "For half a dozen of them? It knows where we are, now."

"aɪ wɪl ɹaɪd wɪð jə əɡɛn," tɑm toʊl ðə wɔɹɾɝ, "ɪf juv noʊ ɡɹeɪɾ əbdʒɛkʃənz. tu mɛni pipəl ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ aɪ ɝaɪvd wɪð ju. aɪ fɪɹ ðət bɪfɔɹ təmɑɹoʊ ðɪs wɪl bi ə bæd pleɪs tə bi noʊn əz jəɹ fɹɛnd."

"I will ride with you again," Thom told the Warder, "if you have no great objections. Too many people remember that I arrived with you. I fear that before tomorrow this will be a bad place to be known as your friend."

"ju kən ɹaɪd wɪð ʌs, əɹ ɹaɪd tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, ɡlimən." lænz skæbɝd ɹæɾəld fɹəm ðə fɔɹs wɪð wɪtʃ i ɹæmd ɪz sɔɹd hoʊm.

"You can ride with us, or ride to Shayol Ghul, gleeman." Lan's scabbard rattled from the force with which he rammed his sword home.

ə steɪbəlmən keɪm dɑɹɾɪŋ pæst əm fɹəm ðə ɹɪɹ dɔɹ, ən ðən mɔɪɹeɪn əpɪɹd wɪð mæstɝ fɪtʃ, ən bɪhaɪn əm ɛɡwin, wɪð əɹ bʌndəld ʃɔl ɪn əɹ ɑɹmz. ən nɪneɪiv. ɛɡwin lʊk fɹaɪɾənd ɔlmoʊs tə tɛɹz, bʌt ðə wɪzdəmz feɪs wɑz ə mæsk ə kul æŋɡɝ.

A stableman came darting past them from the rear door, and then Moiraine appeared with Master Fitch, and behind them Egwene, with her bundled shawl in her arms. And Nynaeve. Egwene looked frightened almost to tears, but the Wisdom's face was a mask of cool anger.

"ju mʌs teɪk ðɪs sɪɹiəsli," mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz tɛlɪŋ ði ɪnkipɝ. "ju wɪl sɝɾənli hæv tʃɹʌbəl hɪɹ baɪ mɔɹnɪŋ. dɑɹkfɹɛnz, pɝhæps; pɝhæps wɝs. wən ɪt kʌmz, kwɪkli meɪk ɪt klɪɹ ðət wəɹ ɡɔn. ɔfɝ noʊ ɹeɪ sɪs tæns. dʒʌs lɛt huɛvɝ ɪts noʊ ðət wi lɛft ɪn ðə naɪt, ən ðeɪ ʃəd bɑðɝ jə noʊ fɝðɝ. ɪts əs ðeɪ ɑɹ æftɝ."

"You must take this seriously," Moiraine was telling the innkeeper. "You will certainly have trouble here by morning. Darkfriends, perhaps; perhaps worse. When it comes, quickly make it clear that we are gone. Offer no re sis tance. Just let whoever it is know that we left in the night, and they should bother you no further. It is us they are after."

"nɛvɝ jə wɝi əbaʊt tʃɹʌbəl," mæstɝ fɪtʃ ɹɪplaɪd dʒoʊviəli. "nɛvɝ ə bɪt. ɪf ɛni kʌm ɝaʊn maɪ ɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ maɪ ɡɛsts . . . wɛl, ðəl ɡɛt ʃɔɹt ʃɹɪft fɹəm ðə lædz ən aɪ. ʃɔɹt ʃɹɪft. ən ðəl hɪɹ nɑɾ ə wɝɾ əbaʊt wɛɹ juv ɡɔn əɹ wɛn, əɹ ivən ɪf jə wɝ ɛvɝ hɪɹ. aɪv noʊ jus fəɹ ðət kaɪnd. nɑɾ ə wɝd wɪl bi spoʊkən əbaʊt jə baɪ ɛni hɪɹ. nɑɾ ə wɝd!"

"Never you worry about trouble," Master Fitch replied jovially. "Never a bit. If any come around my inn trying to make trouble for my guests . . . well, they'll get short shrift from the lads and I. Short shrift. And they'll hear not a word about where you've gone or when, or even if you were ever here. I've no use for that kind. Not a word will be spoken about you by any here. Not a word!"

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"mɪstʃɹəs æliz, aɪ ɹɪli mʌst si tə jəɹ hɔɹsəz ɪf jəɹ gɑnə liv ɪn ɡʊɾ ɔɹɾɝ." hi pʊld lus fɹəm əɹ ɡɹɪp ɑn ɪz sliv ən tʃɹɑɾəd ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə steɪbəlz.

"Mistress Alys, I really must see to your horses if you're going to leave in good order." He pulled loose from her grip on his sleeve and trotted in the direction of the stables.

mɔɪɹeɪn saɪd veɪksədli. "stʌbɝn, stʌbɝn mæn. hɪl nɑt lɪsən."

Moiraine sighed vexedly. "Stubborn, stubborn man. He will not listen."

"ju θɪŋk tʃɹɑləks maɪt kʌm hɪɹ hʌntɪŋ fəɹ ʌs?" mæt æskt.

"You think Trollocs might come here hunting for us?" Mat asked.

"tʃɹɑləks!" mɔɪɹeɪn snæpt. "ʌv kɔɹs nɑt! ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ θɪŋz tə fɪɹ, nɑt ðə list ʌv wɪtʃ ɪz haʊ wi wɝ faʊnd." ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ mæts bɹɪsəl, ʃi wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn. "ðə feɪd kænɑt bɪliv wɪl ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ, naʊ ðət wi noʊ ɪts faʊn ʌs, bʌt mæstɝ fɪtʃ teɪks dɑɹkfɹɛnz tu laɪtli. hi θɪŋks ə ðɛm əz ɹɛtʃəz haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz, bʌt dɑɹkfɹɛnz kən bi faʊn ɪn ðə ʃɑps ən stʃɹits ʌv ɛvɹi sɪɾi, ən ɪn ðə haɪəs kaʊnsəlz, tu. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl meɪ sɛn əm tə si ɪf i kən lɝn ʌv əɹ plænz." ʃi tɝn ɑn əɹ hil ən lɛft, læn kloʊs bɪhaɪn hɝ.

"Trollocs!" Moiraine snapped. "Of course not! There are other things to fear, not the least of which is how we were found." Ignoring Mat's bristle, she went right on. "The Fade cannot believe we will remain here, now that we know it has found us, but Master Fitch takes Darkfriends too lightly. He thinks of them as wretches hiding in the shadows, but Darkfriends can be found in the shops and streets of every city, and in the highest councils, too. The Myrddraal may send them to see if he can learn of our plans." She turned on her heel and left, Lan close behind her.

əz ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə steɪbliɑɹd, ɹænd fɛl ɪn bɪsaɪd nɪneɪiv. ʃi hæɾ əɹ sæɾəlbæɡz ən blæŋkəts, tu. "soʊ jəɹ kʌmɪŋ æftɝ ɔl," hi sɛd. mɪn wɑz ɹaɪt.

As they started for the stableyard, Rand fell in beside Nynaeve. She had her saddlebags and blankets, too. "So you're coming after all," he said. Min was right.

"wɑz ðəɹ sʌmθɪŋ daʊn hɪɹ?" ʃi æskt kwaɪətli. "ʃi sɛɾ ɪt wɑz - " ʃi stɑpt əbɹʌpli ən lʊkt ət hɪm.

"Was there something down here?" she asked quietly. "She said it was - " She stopped abruptly and looked at him.

"eɪ feɪd," hi ænsɝd. hi wɑz əmeɪz ðəɾ i kəd seɪ ɪt soʊ kɑmli. "ɪt wɑz ɪn ðə hɔl wɪð mi, ən ðən læn keɪm."

"A Fade," he answered. He was amazed that he could say it so calmly. "It was in the hall with me, and then Lan came."

nɪneɪiv ʃɹʌɡd əɹ kloʊk əɡɛns ðə wɪn əz ðeɪ lɛf ði ɪn. "pɝhæps ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ æftɝ ju. bʌɾ aɪ keɪm tə si jə seɪfli bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild, ɔl ə ju, ən əl nɑt liv tɪl ðəɾ ɪz dʌn. aɪ woʊn liv jə əloʊn wɪð əɹ sɔɹt." laɪts muvd ɪn ðə steɪbəlz wɛɹ ði ɑslɝz wɝ sæɾəlɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz.

Nynaeve shrugged her cloak against the wind as they left the inn. "Perhaps there is something after you. But I came to see you safely back in Emond's Field, all of you, and I will not leave till that is done. I won't leave you alone with her sort." Lights moved in the stables where the ostlers were saddling the horses.

"mʌtʃ!" ði ɪnkipɝ ʃaʊɾəd fɹəm ðə steɪbəl dɔɹ wɛɹ i stʊd wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn. "stɝ jəɹ boʊnz!" hi tɝn bæk tə hɝ, əpɪɹɪŋ tə ətɛmp tə suð əɹ ɹæðɝ ðən ɹɪli lɪsnɪŋ wən ʃi spoʊk, ðoʊ hi dɪɾ ɪt dɪfɝɛntʃəli, wɪð baʊz ɪntɝspɝst əmʌŋ ði ɔɹɾɝz kɔl tə ðə steɪbəlmən.

"Mutch!" the innkeeper shouted from the stable door where he stood with Moiraine. "Stir your bones!" He turned back to her, appearing to attempt to soothe her rather than really listening when she spoke, though he did it deferentially, with bows interspersed among the orders called to the stablemen.

ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ lɛɾ aʊt, ðə steɪbəlmən ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ sɔfli əbaʊt ðə hɝi ən ðə leɪtnəs. ɹænd hɛld ɛɡwinz bʌndəl, hændɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp tə hɝ wən ʃi wɑz ɑn bɛləz bæk. ʃi lʊk bæk əɾ ɪm wɪð waɪd, fɪɹ-fɪld aɪz. ət list ʃi dʌzn θɪŋk ɪts ən ædvɛntʃɝ ɛnimɔɹ.

The horses were led out, the stablemen grumbling softly about the hurry and the lateness. Rand held Egwene's bundle, handing it up to her when she was on Bela's back. She looked back at him with wide, fear-filled eyes. At least she doesn't think it's an adventure anymore.

hi wɑz əʃeɪmd əz sun əz i θɔɾ ɪt. ʃi wɑz ɪn deɪnʒɝ kəz ə hɪm ən ði ʌðɝz. ivən ɹaɪɾɪŋ bæk tə ɛmənz fild əloʊn wəd bi seɪfɝ ðən ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "ɛɡwin, aɪ. . . ."

He was ashamed as soon as he thought it. She was in danger because of him and the others. Even riding back to Emond's Field alone would be safer than going on. "Egwene, I. . . ."

ðə wɝdz daɪɾ ɪn ɪz maʊθ. ʃi wɑz tu stʌbɝn tə dʒʌs tɝn bæk, nɑɾ æftɝ seɪɪŋ ʃi wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. wʌɾ əbaʊt wʌt mɪn sɔ? ʃiz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. laɪt, pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt?

The words died in his mouth. She was too stubborn to just turn back, not after saying she was going all the way to Tar Valon. What about what Min saw? She's part of it. Light, part of what?

"ɛɡwin," hi sɛd, "aɪm sɑɹi. aɪ kæn sim tə θɪŋk stʃɹeɪɾ ɛnimɔɹ."

"Egwene," he said, "I'm sorry. I can't seem to think straight anymore."

ʃi lin daʊn tə ɡɹɪp ɪz hæn hɑɹd. ɪn ðə laɪt fɹəm ðə steɪbəl i kəd si hɝ feɪs klɪɹli. ʃi dɪd nɑt lʊk əz fɹaɪɾənd əz ʃi hæd.

She leaned down to grip his hand hard. In the light from the stable he could see her face clearly. She did not look as frightened as she had.

wʌns ðeɪ wɝ ɔl maʊntəd, mæstɝ fɪtʃ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn liɾɪŋ əm tə ðə ɡeɪts, ðə steɪbəlmən laɪɾɪŋ ðə weɪ wɪð ðɛɹ læmps. ðə ɹaʊnd-bɛliɾ ɪnkipɝ baʊɾ əm ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ wɪð əʃʊɹənsɪz ðəɾ i wəd kip ðɛɹ sikɹəts, ən ɪnvɪteɪʃənz tə kʌm əɡɛn. mʌtʃ wɑtʃt əm liv əz saʊɝli əz i hæd wɑtʃt əm ɝaɪv.

Once they were all mounted, Master Fitch insisted on leading them to the gates, the stablemen lighting the way with their lamps. The round-bellied innkeeper bowed them on their way with assurances that he would keep their secrets, and invitations to come again. Mutch watched them leave as sourly as he had watched them arrive.

ðəɹ wɑz wʌn, ɹænd θɔt, hu wəd nɑt ɡɪv ʃɔɹt ʃɹɪf tə ɛniwʌn, əɹ ɛni kaɪndə ʃɹɪft. mʌtʃ wəd tɛl ðə fɝs pɝsən u æskt ɪm wən ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls i kəd θɪŋk ə kənsɝnɪŋ ðɛm. ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns daʊn ðə stʃɹit, hi lʊk bæk. wʌn fɪɡjɝ stʊd, læmp ɹeɪz haɪ, piɹɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm. hi dɪd nɑt nid tə si ðə feɪs tə noʊ ɪt wɑz mʌtʃ.

There was one, Rand thought, who would not give short shrift to anyone, or any kind of shrift. Mutch would tell the first person who asked him when they had gone and everything else he could think of concerning them. A little distance down the street, he looked back. One figure stood, lamp raised high, peering after them. He did not need to see the face to know it was Mutch.

ðə stʃɹits ə bɛɹlən wɝ əbændən ət ðəɾ aʊɝ ə ðə naɪt; oʊnli ə fju feɪnt ɡlɪmɝz hɪɹ ən ðəɹ ɪskeɪp taɪtli kloʊzd ʃʌɾɝz, ən ðə laɪɾ ə ðə mun ɪn ɪts læs kɔɹɾɝ wækst ən weɪnd wɪð ðə wɪnd-dʒɹɪvən klaʊdz. naʊ ən əɡɛn ə dɔɡ bɑɹkt əz ðeɪ pæst ən æliweɪ, bʌt noʊ ʌðɝ saʊn dɪstɝb ðə naɪɾ ɪksɛp ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz' hʊvz ən ðə wɪnd wɪslɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹuftɑps. ðə ɹaɪɾɝz hɛld ən ivən dipɝ saɪləns, hʌɾəld ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks ən ðɛɹ oʊn θɔts.

The streets of Baerlon were abandoned at that hour of the night; only a few faint glimmers here and there escaped tightly closed shutters, and the light of the moon in its last quarter waxed and waned with the wind-driven clouds. Now and again a dog barked as they passed an alleyway, but no other sound disturbed the night except their horses' hooves and the wind whistling across the rooftops. The riders held an even deeper silence, huddled in their cloaks and their own thoughts.

ðə wɔɹɾɝ lɛd ðə weɪ, əz juʒəwəl, wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn ən ɛɡwin kloʊs bɪhaɪnd. nɪneɪiv kɛp nɪɹ ðə ɡɝl, ən ði ʌðɝz bɹɔɾ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ ɪn ə taɪt klʌstɝ. læn kɛp ðə hɔɹsəz muvɪŋ əɾ ə bɹɪsk wɔk.

The Warder led the way, as usual, with Moiraine and Egwene close behind. Nynaeve kept near the girl, and the others brought up the rear in a tight cluster. Lan kept the horses moving at a brisk walk.

ɹænd wɑtʃt ðə stʃɹits ɝaʊn əm wɛɹəli, ən i noʊɾəst ɪz fɹɛnz duɪŋ ðə seɪm. ʃɪftɪŋ mun ʃædoʊz ɹɪkɔl ðə ʃædoʊz ət ði ɛn ə ðə hɔl, ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd sim tə ɹitʃ aʊt tə ðə feɪd. ən əkeɪʒənəl nɔɪz ɪn ðə dɪstəns, laɪk ə bæɹəl tɑpəlɪŋ, əɹ ənʌðɝ dɔɡ bɑɹkɪŋ, dʒɝkt ɛvɹi hɛɾ ɝaʊnd. sloʊli, bɪt baɪ bɪɾ əz ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu ðə taʊn, ðeɪ ɔl bʌntʃt ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz kloʊsɝ tə lænz blæk stæljən ən mɔɪɹeɪnz waɪt mɛɹ.

Rand watched the streets around them warily, and he noticed his friends doing the same. Shifting moon shadows recalled the shadows at the end of the hall, the way they had seemed to reach out to the Fade. An occasional noise in the distance, like a barrel toppling, or another dog barking, jerked every head around. Slowly, bit by bit as they made their way through the town, they all bunched their horses closer to Lan's black stallion and Moiraine's white mare.

ət ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɡeɪt læn dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən hæmɝd wɪð ɪz fɪst ɑn ðə dɔɹ ʌv ə smɔl skwɛɹ stoʊn bɪldɪŋ skwɑɾɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl. ə wɪɹi wɑtʃmən əpɪɹd, ɹʌbɪŋ slipəli əɾ ɪz feɪs. əz læn spoʊk, hɪz slipinəs vænɪʃt, ən i stɛɹd pæs ðə wɔɹɾɝ tə ði ʌðɝz.

At the Caemlyn Gate Lan dismounted and hammered with his fist on the door of a small square stone building squatting against the wall. A weary Watchman appeared, rubbing sleepily at his face. As Lan spoke, his sleepiness vanished, and he stared past the Warder to the others.

"ju wɑnə liv?" hi ɪkskleɪmd. "naʊ? ɪn ðə naɪt? jə mʌs bi mæd!"

"You want to leave?" he exclaimed. "Now? In the night? You must be mad!"

"ənlɛs ðəɹ ɪz səm ɔɹɾɝ fɹəm ðə ɡʌvɝnɝ ðət pɹoʊhɪbəts əɹ livɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. ʃi hæd dɪsmaʊntɪɾ əz wɛl, bʌt ʃi steɪd bæk fɹəm ðə dɔɹ, aʊɾ ə ðə laɪt ðət spɪld ɪndə ðə dɑɹk stʃɹit.

"Unless there is some order from the Governor that prohibits our leaving," Moiraine said. She had dismounted as well, but she stayed back from the door, out of the light that spilled into the dark street.

"nɑɾ ɪɡzækli, mɪstʃɹəs." ðə wɑtʃmən pɪɹɾ ət hɝ, fɹaʊnɪŋ əz i tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk aʊɾ əɹ feɪs. "bʌt ðə ɡeɪts steɪ ʃʌt fɹəm sʌndaʊn tə sʌnʌp. noʊ wʌn tə kʌm ɪn ɪksɛpt ɪn deɪlaɪt. ðæts ði ɔɹɾɝ. ɛniweɪ, θɛɹɛɹ wʊlvz aʊt ðɛɹ. kɪld ə dʌzən kaʊz ɪn ðə læst wik. kəd kɪl ə mæn dʒʌst əz izi."

"Not exactly, mistress." The Watchman peered at her, frowning as he tried to make out her face. "But the gates stay shut from sundown to sunup. No one to come in except in daylight. That's the order. Anyway, there're wolves out there. Killed a dozen cows in the last week. Could kill a man just as easy."

"noʊ wʌn tə kʌm ɪn, bʌt nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt livɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ əz ɪf ðət sɛɾəld ðə mæɾɝ. "ju si? wəɹ nɑɾ æskɪŋ jə tə dɪsəbeɪ ðə ɡʌvɝnɝ."

"No one to come in, but nothing about leaving," Moiraine said as if that settled the matter. "You see? We are not asking you to disobey the Governor."

læn pɹɛst sʌmθɪŋ ɪndə ðə wɑtʃmənz hænd. "fɔɹ jəɹ tʃɹʌbəl," hi mɝmɝd.

Lan pressed something into the Watchman's hand. "For your trouble," he murmured.

"aɪ səpoʊz," ðə wɑtʃmən sɛd sloʊli. hi ɡlænst əɾ ɪz hænd; ɡoʊld ɡlɪntɪd bɪfɔɹ i heɪstəli stʌft ɪɾ ɪn ɪz pɑkət. "aɪ səpoʊz livɪŋ wɑzn mɛnʃən ət ðæt. dʒʌst ə mɪnət." hi stʌk ɪz hɛd bæk ɪnsaɪd. "ɑɹɪn! dɑɹ! ɡɛɾ aʊt hɪɹ ən hɛlp mi oʊpən ðə ɡeɪt. ðɛɹz pipəl wɑnə liv. doʊn ɑɹɡju. dʒʌs də ɪt."

"I suppose," the Watchman said slowly. He glanced at his hand; gold glinted before he hastily stuffed it in his pocket. "I suppose leaving wasn't mentioned at that. Just a minute." He stuck his head back inside. "Arin! Dar! Get out here and help me open the gate. There's people want to leave. Don't argue. Just do it."

tu mɔɹ ə ðə wɑtʃ əpɪɹd fɹəm ɪnsaɪd, stɑpɪŋ tə stɛɹ ɪn slipi sɝpɹaɪz ət ðə pɑɹɾi ʌv eɪt weɪɾɪŋ tə liv. ʌndɝ ðə fɝst wɑtʃmənz ɝdʒɪŋz ðeɪ ʃʌfəld oʊvɝ tə hiv ət ðə bɪɡ wil ðət ɹeɪz ðə θɪk bɑɹ əkɹɔs ðə ɡeɪts, ðən tɝn ðɛɹ ɛfɝts tə kɹæŋkɪŋ ðə ɡeɪts oʊpən. ðə kɹæŋk-ænd-ɹætʃət meɪɾ ə ɹæpəd klɪkɪŋ saʊnd, bʌt ðə wɛl-ɔɪld ɡeɪts swʌŋ aʊtwɝd saɪlənli. bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ ivən ə kɔɹɾɝ oʊpən, ðoʊ, ə koʊl vɔɪs spoʊk aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹknəs.

Two more of the Watch appeared from inside, stopping to stare in sleepy surprise at the party of eight waiting to leave. Under the first Watchman's urgings they shuffled over to heave at the big wheel that raised the thick bar across the gates, then turned their efforts to cranking the gates open. The crank-and-ratchet made a rapid clicking sound, but the well-oiled gates swung outward silently. Before they were even a quarter open, though, a cold voice spoke out of the darkness.

faɪv waɪt-kloʊk mɛn wɔkt ɪndə ðə laɪt fɹəm ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs dɔɹ. ðɛɹ kaʊlz wɝ dʒɹɔn ʌp tə haɪd ðɛɹ feɪsəz, bʌɾ itʃ mæn ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd, ən ðə ɡoʊldən sʌnz ɑn ðɛɹ lɛf bɹɛsts wɝ ə pleɪn ənaʊnsmən ə hu ðeɪ wɝ. mæt mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. ðə wɑtʃmən stɑp ðɛɹ kɹæŋkɪŋ ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ənizi lʊks.

Five white-cloaked men walked into the light from the guardhouse door. Their cowls were drawn up to hide their faces, but each man rested his hand on his sword, and the golden suns on their left breasts were a plain announcement of who they were. Mat muttered under his breath. The Watchmen stopped their cranking and exchanged uneasy looks.

"wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs? ɑɹ ðiz ɡeɪts nɑɾ ɔɹɾɝd kloʊzd əntɪl sʌnɹaɪz?"

"What is this? Are these gates not ordered closed until sunrise?"

faɪv waɪt-kloʊk mɛn wɔkt ɪndə ðə laɪt fɹəm ðə ɡɑɹdhaʊs dɔɹ. ðɛɹ kaʊlz wɝ dʒɹɔn ʌp tə haɪd ðɛɹ feɪsəz, bʌɾ itʃ mæn ɹɛstəɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd, ən ðə ɡoʊldən sʌnz ɑn ðɛɹ lɛf bɹɛsts wɝ ə pleɪn ənaʊnsmən ə hu ðeɪ wɝ. mæt mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. ðə wɑtʃmən stɑp ðɛɹ kɹæŋkɪŋ ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ənizi lʊks.

Five white-cloaked men walked into the light from the guardhouse door. Their cowls were drawn up to hide their faces, but each man rested his hand on his hand on his sword, and the golden suns on their left breasts were a plain announcement of who they were. Mat muttered under his breath. The Watchmen stopped their cranking and exchanged uneasy looks.

"ðɪs ɪz nʌn ə jəɹ əfɛɹ," ðə fɝst wɑtʃmən sɛd bɛlɪdʒɝənli. faɪv waɪt hʊdz tɝn tə ɹəɡɑɹd hɪm, ən i fɪnɪʃt ɪn ə wikɝ toʊn. "ðə tʃɪlʒɹən hoʊl noʊ sweɪ hɪɹ. ðə ɡʌvɝnɝ - "

"This is none of your affair," the first Watchman said belligerently. Five white hoods turned to regard him, and he finished in a weaker tone. "The Children hold no sway here. The Governor - "

"ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt," ðə waɪt-kloʊk mæn u hæd fɝst spoʊkən sɛd sɔfli, "hoʊl sweɪ wɛɹɛvɝ mɛn wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt. oʊnli wɛɹ ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɹeɪnz ɑɹ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən dɪnaɪd, jɛs?" hi swʌŋ ɪz hʊd fɹəm ðə wɑtʃmən tə læn, ðən sʌɾənli ɡeɪv ðə wɔɹɾɝ ə sɛkənd, mɔɹ wɛɹi, lʊk.

"The Children of the Light," the white-cloaked man who had first spoken said softly, "hold sway wherever men walk in the Light. Only where the Shadow of the Dark One reigns are the Children denied, yes?" He swung his hood from the Watchman to Lan, then suddenly gave the Warder a second, more wary, look.

ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd nɑt muvd; ɪn fækt, hi sim kəmplitli əɾ iz. bʌt nɑt mɛni pipəl kəd lʊk ət ðə tʃɪlʒɹən soʊ ənkɹɪŋli. lænz stoʊni feɪs kəɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn lʊkɪŋ əɾ ə butblæk. wən ðə waɪtkloʊk spoʊk əɡɛn, hi saʊndəd səspɪʃəs.

The Warder had not moved; in fact, he seemed completely at ease. But not many people could look at the Children so uncaringly. Lan's stony face could as well have been looking at a bootblack. When the Whitecloak spoke again, he sounded suspicious.

"wʌt kaɪndə pipəl wɑnə liv taʊn wɔlz ɪn ðə naɪt dʊɹɪŋ taɪmz laɪk ðiz? wɪð wʊlvz stɔkɪŋ ðə dɑɹknəs, ən ðə dɑɹk wʌnz hændiwɝk sin flaɪɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə taʊn?" hi aɪd ðə bɹeɪɾɪd lɛðɝ bæn ðət kɹɔs lænz fɔɹhɛɾ ən hɛld ɪz lɔŋ hɛɹ bæk. "ə nɔɹðɝnɝ, jɛs?"

"What kind of people want to leave town walls in the night during times like these? With wolves stalking the darkness, and the Dark One's handiwork seen flying over the town?" He eyed the braided leather band that crossed Lan's forehead and held his long hair back. "A northerner, yes?"

ɹænd hʌntʃt loʊɝ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl. eɪ dʒɹæɡkɝ. ɪt hæd tə bi ðæt, ənlɛs ðə mæn dʒʌs neɪmd ɛniθɪŋ i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn əz ðə dɑɹk wʌnz hændiwɝk. wɪð ə feɪɾ ət ðə stæɡ ən laɪən, hi ʃʊɾə ɪkspɛktəɾ ə dʒɹæɡkɝ, bʌɾ ət ðə moʊmən i wɑz hɑɹdli θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt. hi θɔɾ i ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə waɪtkloʊks vɔɪs.

Rand hunched lower in his saddle. A Draghkar. It had to be that, unless the man just named anything he did not understand as the Dark One's handiwork. With a Fade at the Stag and Lion, he should have expected a Draghkar, but at the moment he was hardly thinking about it. He thought he recognized the Whitecloak's voice.

"tʃɹævəlɝz," læn ɹɪplaɪd kɑmli. "ʌv noʊ ɪntʃɹəs tə jə əɹ jʊɹz."

"Travelers," Lan replied calmly. "Of no interest to you or yours."

"ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz ʌv ɪntʃɹəs tə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt."

"Everyone is of interest to the Children of the Light."

læn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd slaɪtli. "ɑɹ jə ɹɪli æftɝ mɔɹ tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ðə ɡʌvɝnɝ? hiz lɪməɾəd jəɹ nʌmbɝz ɪn ðə taʊn, ivən hæd jə fɑloʊd. wʌt wɪl i də wən i dɪskʌvɝz jəɹ hɝæsɪŋ ɑnəst sɪɾəzənz əɾ ɪz ɡeɪts?" hi tɝn tə ðə wɑtʃmən. "waɪ hæv jə stɑpt?" ðeɪ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, pʊt ðɛɹ hænz bæk ɑn ðə kɹæŋk, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd əɡɛn wən ðə waɪtkloʊk spoʊk.

Lan shook his head slightly. "Are you really after more trouble with the Governor? He has limited your numbers in the town, even had you followed. What will he do when he discovers you're harassing honest citizens at his gates?" He turned to the Watchmen. "Why have you stopped?" They hesitated, put their hands back on the crank, then hesitated again when the Whitecloak spoke.

"ðə ɡʌvɝnɝ dʌz nɑt noʊ wʌt hæpənz ʌndɝ ɪz noʊz. ðəɹ ɪz ivəl i dʌz nɑt si, əɹ smɛl. bʌt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt si." ðə wɑtʃmən lʊkt ət wʌn ənʌðɝ; ðɛɹ hænz oʊpən ən kloʊzd əz ɪf ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ ðə spɪɹz lɛft ɪnsaɪd ðə ɡɑɹd haʊs. "ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt smɛl ði ivəl." ðə waɪtkloʊks aɪz tɝn tə ðə pipəl ɑn hɔɹsbæk. "wi smɛl ɪt, ən ɹuɾ ɪɾ aʊt. wɛɹɛvɝ ɪts faʊnd."

"The Governor does not know what happens under his nose. There is evil he does not see, or smell. But the Children of the Light see." The Watchmen looked at one another; their hands opened and closed as if regretting the spears left inside the guard house. "The Children of the Light smell the evil." The Whitecloak's eyes turned to the people on horseback. "We smell it, and root it out. Wherever it is found."

ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk hɪmsɛlf ivən smɔlɝ, bʌt ðə muvmən dʒɹu ðə mænz ətɛnʃən.

Rand tried to make himself even smaller, but the movement drew the man's attention.

"wʌɾ əv wi hɪɹ? sʌmwʌn u dʌz nɑt wɪʃ tə bi sin? wʌt dʒju - ? ɑ!" ðə mæn bɹʌʃt bæk ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz waɪt kloʊk, ən ɹænd wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət ðə feɪs i hæd noʊn wəd bi ðɛɹ. bɔɹnhəl nɑɾəd wɪð ɑbviəs sæɾəsfækʃən. "klɪɹli, wɑtʃmən, aɪ hæv seɪv jə fɹəm ə ɡɹeɪt dɪzæstɝ. ðiz ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz jə wɝ əbaʊt tə hɛlp ɪskeɪp fɹəm ðə laɪt. jə ʃəd bi ɹipɔɹɾəd tə jəɹ ɡʌvɝnɝ fəɹ dɪsəplən, əɹ pɝhæps ɡɪvən tə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz tə dɪskʌvɝ jəɹ tʃɹu ɪntɛn ðɪs naɪt." hi pɔzd, aɪɪŋ ðə wɑtʃmənz fɪɹ; ɪt sim tə hæv noʊ ɪfɛkt ɑn hɪm. "ju wəd nɑt wɪʃ ðæt, noʊ? ɪnstɛd, əl teɪk ðiz ɹʌfaɪənz tə əɹ kæmp, ðət ðeɪ meɪ bi kwɛstʃən ɪn ðə laɪt - ɪnstɛɾ ə ju, jɛs?"

"What have we here? Someone who does not wish to be seen? What do you - ? Ah!" The man brushed back the hood of his white cloak, and Rand was looking at the face he had known would be there. Bornhald nodded with obvious satisfaction. "Clearly, Watchman, I have saved you from a great disaster. These are Darkfriends you were about to help escape from the Light. You should be reported to your Governor for discipline, or perhaps given to the Questioners to discover your true intent this night." He paused, eyeing the Watchman's fear; it seemed to have no effect on him. "You would not wish that, no? Instead, I will take these ruffians to our camp, that they may be questioned in the Light - instead of you, yes?"

"ju wɪl teɪk mi tə jəɹ kæmp, waɪtkloʊk?" mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs keɪm sʌɾənli fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ət wʌns. ʃi hæd muv bæk ɪndə ðə naɪɾ ət ðə tʃɪlʒɹənz əpɹoʊtʃ, ən ʃædoʊz klʌmpt ɝaʊn hɝ. "ju wɪl kwɛstʃən mi?" dɑɹknəs ɹɛðd əɹ əz ʃi tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd; ɪt meɪɾ əɹ sim tɔlɝ. "ju wɪl bɑɹ maɪ weɪ?"

"You will take me to your camp, Whitecloak?" Moiraine's voice came suddenly from every direction at once. She had moved back into the night at the Children's approach, and shadows clumped around her. "You will question me?" Darkness wreathed her as she took a step forward; it made her seem taller. "You will bar my way?"

ənʌðɝ stɛp, ən ɹænd ɡæspt. ʃi wɑz tɔlɝ, hɝ hɛd lɛvəl wɪð ɪz wɛɹ i sæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪz bæk. ʃædoʊz klʌŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ feɪs laɪk θʌndɝklaʊdz.

Another step, and Rand gasped. She was taller, her head level with his where he sat on the gray's back. Shadows clung about her face like thunderclouds.

"ɛɛs sədaɪ!" bɔɹnhəld ʃaʊɾəd, ən faɪv sɔɹdz flæʃt fɹəm ðɛɹ ʃiθs. "daɪ!" ði ʌðɝ fɔɹ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bʌɾ i slæʃt əɾ əɹ ɪn ðə seɪm moʊʃən ðət klɪɹɾ ɪz sɔɹd.

"Aes Sedai!" Bornhald shouted, and five swords flashed from their sheaths. "Die!" The other four hesitated, but he slashed at her in the same motion that cleared his sword.

ɹænd kɹaɪɾ aʊɾ əz mɔɪɹeɪnz stæf ɹoʊz tə ɪntɝsɛp ðə bleɪd. ðət dɛləkətli kɑɹvd wʊd kəd nɑt pɑsəbli stɑp hɑɹd-swʌŋ stil. sɔɹd mɛt stæf, ən spɑɹks spɹeɪɾ ɪn ə faʊntən, ə hɪsɪŋ ɹɔɹ hɝlɪŋ bɔɹnhəl bæk ɪndə hɪz waɪt-kloʊkt kəmpænjənz. ɔl faɪv wɛn daʊn ɪn ə hip. tɛnʒɹəlz ə smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm bɔɹnhəlz sɔɹd, ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪd hɪm, bleɪd bɛn əɾ ə ɹaɪɾ æŋɡəl wɛɹ ɪt hæd bɪn mɛltəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɪn tu.

Rand cried out as Moiraine's staff rose to intercept the blade. That delicately carved wood could not possibly stop hard-swung steel. Sword met staff, and sparks sprayed in a fountain, a hissing roar hurling Bornhald back into his white-cloaked companions. All five went down in a heap. Tendrils of smoke rose from Bornhald's sword, on the ground beside him, blade bent at a right angle where it had been melted almost in two.

"ju dɛɹ ətæk mi!" mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs ɹɔɹd laɪk ə wɝlwɪnd. ʃædoʊ spʌn ɪn ɑn hɝ, dʒɹeɪpt əɹ laɪk ə hʊɾɪd kloʊk; ʃi lumd əz haɪ əz ðə taʊn wɔl. hɝ aɪz ɡlɛɹd daʊn, ə dʒaɪən stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪnsɛks.

"You dare attack me!" Moiraine's voice roared like a whirlwind. Shadow spun in on her, draped her like a hooded cloak; she loomed as high as the town wall. Her eyes glared down, a giant staring at insects.

"ɡoʊ!" læn ʃaʊɾəd. ɪn wʌn laɪtnɪŋ muv i snætʃt ðə ɹeɪnz ə mɔɪɹeɪnz mɛɹ ən lɛpt ɪndə hɪz oʊn sæɾəl. "naʊ!" hi kəmændəd. hɪz ʃoʊldɝz bɹʌʃt iðɝ ɡeɪɾ əz ɪz stæljən tɔɹ θɹu ðə nɛɹoʊ oʊpənɪŋ laɪk ə flʌŋ stoʊn.

"Go!" Lan shouted. In one lightning move he snatched the reins of Moiraine's mare and leaped into his own saddle. "Now!" he commanded. His shoulders brushed either gate as his stallion tore through the narrow opening like a flung stone.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd ɹɪmeɪn fɹoʊzən, stɛɹɪŋ. mɔɪɹeɪnz hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz stʊɾ əbʌv ðə wɔl, naʊ. wɑtʃmən ən tʃɪlʒɹən əlaɪk kaʊɝɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɝ, hʌɾəlɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ bæks əɡɛns ðə fɹʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹd haʊs. ði ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs wɑz lɔst ɪn ðə naɪt, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz, əz bɪɡ əz fʊl munz, ʃoʊn wɪð ɪmpeɪʃəns əz wɛl əz æŋɡɝ wən ðeɪ tʌtʃt hɪm. swɑloʊɪŋ hɑɹd, hi buɾɪd klaʊɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪbz ən ɡæləpt æftɝ ði ʌðɝz.

For a moment Rand remained frozen, staring. Moiraine's head and shoulders stood above the wall, now. Watchmen and Children alike cowered away from her, huddling with their backs against the front of the guard house. The Aes Sedai's face was lost in the night, but her eyes, as big as full moons, shone with impatience as well as anger when they touched him. Swallowing hard, he booted Cloud in the ribs and galloped after the others.

fɪfti peɪsɪz fɹəm ðə wɔl, læn dʒɹu ðɛm ʌp, ən ɹænd lʊk bæk. mɔɪɹeɪnz ʃæɾoʊd ʃeɪp taʊɝd haɪ oʊvɝ ðə lɔɡ pælɪsɑd, hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz ə dipɝ dɑɹknəs əɡɛns ðə naɪt skaɪ, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə sɪlvɝ nɪmbəs fɹəm ðə hɪɾən mun. əz i wɑtʃt, maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛpt oʊvɝ ðə wɔl. ðə ɡeɪts bɪɡæn swɪŋɪŋ ʃʌt fɹæntəkəli. əz sun əz əɹ fit wɝ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn aʊtsaɪd, ʃi wɑz sʌɾənli hɝ nɔɹməl saɪz əɡɛn.

Fifty paces from the wall, Lan drew them up, and Rand looked back. Moiraine's shadowed shape towered high over the log palisade, head and shoulders a deeper darkness against the night sky, surrounded by a silver nimbus from the hidden moon. As he watched, mouth hanging open, the Aes Sedai stepped over the wall. The gates began swinging shut frantically. As soon as her feet were on the ground outside, she was suddenly her normal size again.

"hoʊl ðə ɡeɪts!" ən ənstɛɾi vɔɪs ʃaʊɾəd ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔl. ɹænd θɔɾ ɪt wɑz bɔɹnhəld. "wi mʌs pɝsu ðɛm, ən teɪk ðɛm!" bʌt ðə wɑtʃmən dɪd nɑt sloʊ ðə peɪs ə kloʊzɪŋ. ðə ɡeɪts slæmd ʃʌt, ən moʊməns leɪɾɝ ðə bɑɹ kɹæʃt ɪndə pleɪs, silɪŋ ðɛm. meɪbi səm ə ðoʊz ʌðɝ waɪtkloʊks ɑɹən əz iɡɝ tə kənfɹʌn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əz bɔɹnhəld.

"Hold the gates!" an unsteady voice shouted inside the wall. Rand thought it was Bornhald. "We must pursue them, and take them!" But the Watchmen did not slow the pace of closing. The gates slammed shut, and moments later the bar crashed into place, sealing them. Maybe some of those other Whitecloaks aren't as eager to confront an Aes Sedai as Bornhald.

mɔɪɹeɪn hɝid tə ɑldib, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ðə waɪt mɛɹz noʊz wʌns bɪfɔɹ ʃi tʌkt əɹ stæf ʌndɝ ðə ɡɝθ stʃɹæp. ɹænd dɪd nɑt nid tə lʊk ðɪs taɪm tə noʊ ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ivən ə nɪk ɪn ðə stæf.

Moiraine hurried to Aldieb, stroking the white mare's nose once before she tucked her staff under the girth strap. Rand did not need to look this time to know there was not even a nick in the staff.

"ju wɝ tɔlɝ ðən ə dʒaɪənt," ɛɡwin sɛd bɹɛθləsli, ʃɪftɪŋ ɑn bɛləz bæk. noʊ wʌn ɛls spoʊk, ðoʊ mæt ən pɛɹɪn ɛdʒ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz əweɪ fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

"You were taller than a giant," Egwene said breathlessly, shifting on Bela's back. No one else spoke, though Mat and Perrin edged their horses away from the Aes Sedai.

"wɑz aɪ?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ æbsənli əz ʃi swʌŋ ɪndə hɝ sæɾəl.

"Was I?" Moiraine said absently as she swung into her saddle.

"aɪ sɔ ju," ɛɡwin pɹətɛstəd.

"I saw you," Egwene protested.

"ðə maɪn pleɪz tʃɹɪks ɪn ðə naɪt; ði aɪ siz wʌɾ ɪz nɑt ðɛɹ."

"The mind plays tricks in the night; the eye sees what is not there."

"ðɪs ɪz noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɡeɪmz," nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn æŋɡɹəli, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn kʌɾ əɹ ɔf.

"This is no time for games," Nynaeve began angrily, but Moiraine cut her off.

"noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɡeɪmz ɪndid. wʌt wi ɡeɪn ət ðə stæɡ ən laɪən wi meɪ hæv lɔs hɪɹ." ʃi lʊk bæk ət ðə ɡeɪɾ ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɪf oʊnli aɪ kəd bɪliv ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ wɑz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd." wɪð ə sɛlf-dɪpɹəkeɪtɔɹi snɪf ʃi æɾəd, "ɔɹ ɪf oʊnli ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɝ tʃɹuli blaɪnd. ɪf aɪm wɪʃɪŋ, aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl wɪʃ fəɹ ðə tʃɹuli ɪmpɑsəbəl. noʊ mæɾɝ. ðeɪ noʊ ðə weɪ wi mʌst ɡoʊ, bʌt wɪð lʌk wɪl steɪ ə stɛp əhɛɾ ə ðɛm. læn!"

"No time for games indeed. What we gained at the Stag and Lion we may have lost here." She looked back at the gate and shook her head. "If only I could believe the Draghkar was on the ground." With a self-deprecatory sniff she added, "Or if only the Myrddraal were truly blind. If I am wishing, I might as well wish for the truly impossible. No matter. They know the way we must go, but with luck we will stay a step ahead of them. Lan!"

ðə wɔɹɾɝ muvd ɔf istwɝd daʊn ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd, ən ðə ɹɛs fɑloʊd kloʊs bɪhaɪnd, hʊvz θəɾɪŋ ɹɪðmɪkli ɑn ðə hɑɹd-pækt ɝθ.

The Warder moved off eastward down the Caemlyn Road, and the rest followed close behind, hooves thudding rhythmically on the hard-packed earth.

ðeɪ kɛp tə ən izi peɪs, ə fæst wɔk ðə hɔɹsəz kəd meɪnteɪn fəɹ aʊɝz wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛlp. bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn ivən wʌn aʊɝ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ, ðoʊ, mæt kɹaɪɾ aʊt, pɔɪntɪŋ bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm.

They kept to an easy pace, a fast walk the horses could maintain for hours without any Aes Sedai help. Before they had been even one hour on their way, though, Mat cried out, pointing back the way they had come.

"lʊk ðɛɹ!"

"Look there!"

ðeɪ ɔl dʒɹu ɹeɪn ən stɛɹd.

They all drew rein and stared.

fleɪmz lɪt ðə naɪɾ oʊvɝ bɛɹlən əz ɪf sʌmwʌn hæd bɪlt ə haʊs-saɪz bɑnfaɪɝ, tɪntɪŋ ði ʌndɝsaɪdz ə ðə klaʊd wɪð ɹɛd. spɑɹks wɪpt ɪndə ðə skaɪ ɑn ðə wɪnd.

Flames lit the night over Baerlon as if someone had built a house-size bonfire, tinting the undersides of the cloud with red. Sparks whipped into the sky on the wind.

"aɪ wɔɹn hɪm," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "bʌɾ i wəd nɑt teɪk ɪt sɪɹiəsli." ɑldib dænst saɪdweɪz, ən ɛkoʊ ʌv ði ɛɛs sədaɪz fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. "hi wəd nɑt teɪk ɪt sɪɹiəsli."

"I warned him," Moiraine said, "but he would not take it seriously." Aldieb danced sideways, an echo of the Aes Sedai's frustration. "He would not take it seriously."

"ði ɪn?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðæts ðə stæɡ ən laɪən? haʊ kən jə bi ʃʊɹ?"

"The inn?" Perrin said. "That's the Stag and Lion? How can you be sure?"

"haʊ fɑɹ dʒju wɑnə stʃɹɛtʃ koʊɪnsɪɾəns?" tɑm æskt. "ɪt kəd bi ðə ɡʌvɝnɝz haʊs, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɪzənt. ən ɪɾ ɪzən ə wɛɹhaʊs, əɹ sʌmbɑɾiz kɪtʃən stoʊv, əɹ jəɹ ɡɹændmʌðɝz heɪstæk."

"How far do you want to stretch coincidence?" Thom asked. "It could be the Governor's house, but it isn't. And it isn't a warehouse, or somebody's kitchen stove, or your grandmother's haystack."

"pɝhæps ðə laɪt ʃaɪnz ɑn əs ə lɪɾəl ðɪs naɪt," læn sɛd, ən ɛɡwin ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ɪm æŋɡɹəli.

"Perhaps the Light shines on us a little this night," Lan said, and Egwene rounded on him angrily.

"haʊ kən jə seɪ ðæt? pʊɹ mæstɝ fɪtʃəz ɪn ɪz bɝnɪŋ! pipəl meɪ bi hɝt!"

"How can you say that? Poor Master Fitch's inn is burning! People may be hurt!"

"ɪf ðeɪv ətæk ði ɪn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "pɝhæps əɹ ɛɡzɪt fɹəm ðə taʊn ən maɪ . . . dɪspleɪ wɛn ənnoʊɾɪst."

"If they have attacked the inn," Moiraine said, "perhaps our exit from the town and my . . . display went unnoticed."

"ənlɛs ðæts wʌt ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑns əs tə θɪŋk," læn æɾəd.

"Unless that's what the Myrddraal wants us to think," Lan added.

mɔɪɹeɪn nɑɾəd ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. "pɝhæps. ɪn ɛni keɪs, wi mʌs pɹɛs ɑn. ðəɹ wɪl bi lɪɾəl ɹɛs fəɹ ɛniwʌn tənaɪt."

Moiraine nodded in the darkness. "Perhaps. In any case, we must press on. There will be little rest for anyone tonight."

"ju seɪ ðət soʊ izəli, mɔɪɹeɪn," nɪneɪiv ɪkskleɪmd. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə pipəl ət ði ɪn? pipəl mʌs bi hɝt, ən ði ɪnkipɝ əz lɔst ɪz laɪvlihʊd, kəz ə ju! fəɹ ɔl jəɹ tɔk əbaʊt wɔkɪŋ ɪn ðə laɪt jəɹ ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ ɑn wɪθaʊt spɛɹɪŋ ə θɔt fəɹ hɪm. hɪz tʃɹʌbəl ɪz kəz ə ju!"

"You say that so easily, Moiraine," Nynaeve exclaimed. "What about the people at the inn? People must be hurt, and the innkeeper has lost his livelihood, because of you! For all your talk about walking in the Light you're ready to go on without sparing a thought for him. His trouble is because of you!"

"bɪkɔz ə ðoʊz θɹi," læn sɛɾ æŋɡɹəli. "ðə faɪɝ, ði ɪnʒɝd, ðə ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn - ɔl kəz ə ðoʊz θɹi. ðə fæk ðət ðə pɹaɪs mʌs bi peɪɾ ɪz pɹuf ðəɾ ɪts wɝθ peɪɪŋ. ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑns ðoʊz bɔɪz ə jʊɹz, ən ɛniθɪŋ i wɑns ðɪs bædli, hi mʌs bi kɛp fɹʌm. əɹ wəd jə ɹæðɝ lɛt ðə feɪɾ əv ðɛm?"

"Because of those three," Lan said angrily. "The fire, the injured, the going on - all because of those three. The fact that the price must be paid is proof that it is worth paying. The Dark One wants those boys of yours, and anything he wants this badly, he must be kept from. Or would you rather let the Fade have them?"

"bi əɾ iz, læn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "bi əɾ iz. wɪzdəm, jə θɪŋk aɪ kən hɛlp mæstɝ fɪtʃ ən ðə pipəl ət ði ɪn? wɛl, jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt." nɪneɪiv stɑɹɾəd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn weɪvd ɪɾ əweɪ ən wɛn ɑn. "aɪ kən ɡoʊ bæk baɪ maɪsɛlf ən ɡɪv səm hɛlp. nɑt tu mʌtʃ, ʌv kɔɹs. ðət wəd dʒɹɔ ətɛnʃən tə ðoʊz aɪ hɛlpt, ətɛnʃən ðeɪ wəd nɑt θæŋk mi fɔɹ, ɪspɛʃli wɪð ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ ɪn ðə taʊn. ən ðət wəd liv oʊnli læn tə pɹətɛk ðə ɹɛst ə ju. hiz vɛɹi ɡʊd, bʌɾ ɪɾəl teɪk mɔɹ ðən ɪm ɪf ə mɹdʒɹɑl ən ə fɪst ə tʃɹɑləks faɪn ju. ʌv kɔɹs, wi kəɾ ɔl ɹɪtɝn, ðoʊ aɪ daʊɾ aɪ kən ɡɛɾ ɔl ʌv əs bæk ɪndə bɛɹlən ənnoʊɾɪst. ən ðət wəɾ ɪkspoʊz ɔl ə jə tə humɛvɝ sɛt ðət faɪɝ, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ðə waɪtkloʊks. wɪtʃ ɔltɝnəɾɪv wəd jə tʃuz, wɪzdəm, ɪf jə wɝ aɪ?"

"Be at ease, Lan," Moiraine said. "Be at ease. Wisdom, you think I can help Master Fitch and the people at the inn? Well, you are right." Nynaeve started to say something, but Moiraine waved it away and went on. "I can go back by myself and give some help. Not too much, of course. That would draw attention to those I helped, attention they would not thank me for, especially with the Children of the Light in the town. And that would leave only Lan to protect the rest of you. He is very good, but it will take more than him if a Myrddraal and a fist of Trollocs find you. Of course, we could all return, though I doubt I can get all of us back into Baerlon unnoticed. And that would expose all of you to whomever set that fire, not to mention the Whitecloaks. Which alternative would you choose, Wisdom, if you were I?"

"aɪ wəd də sʌmθɪŋ," nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd ənwɪlɪŋli.

"I would do something," Nynaeve muttered unwillingly.

"æn ɪn ɔl pɹɑbəbɪləɾi hæn ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz vɪktɝi," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt - hu - ɪts ðəɾ i wɑns. wəɹ ɪn ə wɔɹ, əz ʃʊɹli əz ɛniwʌn ɪn ɡildən, ðoʊ θaʊzənz faɪt ðəɹ ən oʊnli eɪɾ ʌv əs hɪɹ. əl əv ɡoʊl sɛn tə mæstɝ fɪtʃ, ɪnʌf tə ɹibɪl ðə stæɡ ən laɪən, ɡoʊl ðət kænɑt bi tʃɹeɪs tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ən hɛlp fəɹ ɛni hu wɝ hɝt, əz wɛl. ɛni mɔɹ ðən ðət wɪl oʊnli ɛndeɪnʒɝ ðɛm. ɪts fɑɹ fɹəm sɪmpəl, jə si. læn." ðə wɔɹɾɝ tɝn ɪz hɔɹs ən tʊk ʌp ðə ɹoʊɾ əɡɛn.

"And in all probability hand the Dark One his victory," Moiraine replied. "Remember what - who - it is that he wants. We are in a war, as surely as anyone in Ghealdan, though thousands fight there and only eight of us here. I will have gold sent to Master Fitch, enough to rebuild the Stag and Lion, gold that cannot be traced to Tar Valon. And help for any who were hurt, as well. Any more than that will only endanger them. It is far from simple, you see. Lan." The Warder turned his horse and took up the road again.

fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm ɹænd lʊk bæk. ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɔl i kəd si wɑz ðə ɡloʊ ɑn ðə klaʊdz, ən ðən ivən ðət wɑz lɔst ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. hi hoʊp mɪn wɑz ɔl ɹaɪt.

From time to time Rand looked back. Eventually all he could see was the glow on the clouds, and then even that was lost in the darkness. He hoped Min was all right.

ɔl wɑz stɪl pɪtʃ-dɑɹk wən ðə wɔɹɾɝ faɪnəli lɛɾ əm ɔf ðə pæk dɝɾ ə ðə ɹoʊɾ ən dɪsmaʊntɪd. ɹænd ɛstəmeɪɾəd ðəɹ wɝ noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə kʌpəl ʌv aʊɝz tɪl dɔn. ðeɪ hɑbəl ðə hɔɹsəz, stɪl sæɾəld, ən meɪɾ ə koʊl kæmp.

All was still pitch-dark when the Warder finally led them off the packed dirt of the road and dismounted. Rand estimated there were no more than a couple of hours till dawn. They hobbled the horses, still saddled, and made a cold camp.

"wʌn aʊɝ," læn wɔɹn əz ɛvɹiwʌn ɪksɛpt ɪm wɑz ɹæpɪŋ ʌp ɪn ðɛɹ blæŋkəts. hi wəd stænd ɡɑɹd waɪl ðeɪ slɛpt. "wʌn aʊɝ, ən wi mʌs bi ɑn əɹ weɪ." saɪləns sɛɾəld oʊvɝ ðɛm.

"One hour," Lan warned as everyone except him was wrapping up in their blankets. He would stand guard while they slept. "One hour, and we must be on our way." Silence settled over them.

æftɝ ə fju mɪnəts mæt spoʊk ɪn ə wɪspɝ ðət bɛɹli ɹitʃt ɹænd. "aɪ wʌndɝ wʌt dæv dɪd wɪð ðət bædʒɝ." ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd saɪlənli, ən mæt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. faɪnəli hi sɛd, "aɪ θɔt wi wɝ seɪf, jə noʊ, ɹænd. nɑɾ ə saɪn ʌv ɛniθɪŋ sɪns wi kɹɔs ðə tɛɹən, ən ðəɹ wi wɝ ɪn ə sɪɾi, wɪð wɔlz ɝaʊn ʌs. aɪ θɔt wi wɝ seɪf. ən ðən ðət dʒɹim. ən ə feɪd. ɑɹ wi ɛvɝ gɑnə bi seɪf əɡɛn?"

After a few minutes Mat spoke in a whisper that barely reached Rand. "I wonder what Dav did with that badger." Rand shook his head silently, and Mat hesitated. Finally he said, "I thought we were safe, you know, Rand. Not a sign of anything since we crossed the Taren, and there we were in a city, with walls around us. I thought we were safe. And then that dream. And a Fade. Are we ever going to be safe again?"

"nɑɾ əntɪl wi ɡɛt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn," ɹænd sɛd. "ðæts wʌt ʃi toʊld ʌs."

"Not until we get to Tar Valon," Rand said. "That's what she told us."

"wɪl wi bi seɪf ðɛn?" pɛɹɪn æsk sɔfli, ən ɔl θɹi ʌv əm lʊk tə ðə ʃæɾoʊi maʊn ðət wɑz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. læn hæd mɛldəɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs; hi cʊɾə bɪn ɛniwɛɹ.

"Will we be safe then?" Perrin asked softly, and all three of them looked to the shadowy mound that was the Aes Sedai. Lan had melded into the darkness; he could have been anywhere.

ɹænd jɔn sʌɾənli. ði ʌðɝz twɪtʃt nɝvəsli ət ðə saʊnd. "aɪ θɪŋk wid bɛɾɝ ɡɛt səm slip," hi sɛd. "steɪɪŋ əweɪk woʊn ænsɝ ɛniθɪŋ."

Rand yawned suddenly. The others twitched nervously at the sound. "I think we'd better get some sleep," he said. "Staying awake won't answer anything."

pɛɹɪn spoʊk kwaɪətli. "ʃi ʃʊɾə dʌn sʌmθɪŋ."

Perrin spoke quietly. "She should have done something."

noʊ wʌn ænsɝd.

No one answered.

ɹænd skwɝmd ɑntu hɪz saɪd tə əvɔɪɾ ə ɹut, tʃɹaɪɾ ɪz bæk, ðən ɹoʊld ɔf ʌv ə stoʊn ɑntu hɪz bɛli ən ənʌðɝ ɹut. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə ɡʊd kæmpsaɪt ðeɪ hæd stɑpt æt, nɑt laɪk ðə spɑts ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd tʃoʊzən ɑn ðə weɪ nɔɹθ fɹəm ðə tɛɹən. hi fɛl əslip wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðə ɹuts dɪɡɪŋ ɪndə hɪz ɹɪbz wəd meɪk ɪm dʒɹim, ən woʊk ət lænz tʌtʃ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ɹɪbz eɪkɪŋ, ən ɡɹeɪtfəl ðəɾ ɪf ɛni dʒɹimz hæd kʌm i dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɛm.

Rand squirmed onto his side to avoid a root, tried his back, then rolled off of a stone onto his belly and another root. It was not a good campsite they had stopped at, not like the spots the Warder had chosen on the way north from the Taren. He fell asleep wondering if the roots digging into his ribs would make him dream, and woke at Lan's touch on his shoulder, ribs aching, and grateful that if any dreams had come he did not remember them.

ɪt wɑz stɪl ðə dɑɹk dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ dɔn, bʌt wʌns ðə blæŋkəts wɝ ɹoʊld ən stʃɹæp bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz læn hæɾ əm ɹaɪɾɪŋ ist əɡɛn. əz ðə sʌn ɹoʊz ðeɪ meɪɾ ə blɪɹi-aɪd bɹɛkfəst ɑn bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz ən wɔɾɝ, iɾɪŋ waɪl ðeɪ ɹoʊd, hʌɾəld ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks əɡɛns ðə wɪnd. ɔl ɪksɛp læn, ðəɾ ɪz. hi eɪt, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt blɪɹi-aɪd, ən i dɪd nɑt hʌɾəl. hi hæd tʃeɪnʒd bæk ɪndə hɪz ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk, ən ɪt wɪpt ɝaʊn hɪm, flʌɾɝɪŋ θɹu ɡɹeɪz ən ɡɹinz, ən ði oʊnli maɪn i peɪɾ ɪt wɑz tə kip ɪt klɪɹ ə hɪz sɔɹd-ɑɹm. hɪz feɪs ɹɪmeɪnd wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz sɝtʃt kɑnstənli, əz ɪf i ɪkspɛktəɾ ən æmbʊʃ ɛni moʊmənt.

It was still the dark just before dawn, but once the blankets were rolled and strapped behind their saddles Lan had them riding east again. As the sun rose they made a bleary-eyed breakfast on bread and cheese and water, eating while they rode, huddled in their cloaks against the wind. All except Lan, that is. He ate, but he was not bleary-eyed, and he did not huddle. He had changed back into his shifting cloak, and it whipped around him, fluttering through grays and greens, and the only mind he paid it was to keep it clear of his sword-arm. His face remained without expression, but his eyes searched constantly, as if he expected an ambush any moment.


tʃæptɝ eɪtin


CHAPTER 18

ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd


The Caemlyn Road

ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd wɑz nɑt vɛɹi dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ ɹoʊd θɹu ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ɪt wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbli waɪɾɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, ən ʃoʊd ðə wɛɹ ə mʌtʃ mɔɹ jus, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl hɑɹd-pæk dɝt, laɪn ɑn iðɝ saɪd baɪ tʃɹiz ðət wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn əɾ ɔl aʊɾ ə pleɪs ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɪspɛʃli sɪns oʊnli ði ɛvɝɡɹinz kæɹiɾ ə lif.

The Caemlyn Road was not very different from the North Road through the Two Rivers. It was considerably wider, of course, and showed the wear of much more use, but it was still hard-packed dirt, lined on either side by trees that would not have been at all out of place in the Two Rivers, especially since only the evergreens carried a leaf.

ðə læn ɪtsɛlf wɑz dɪfɹənt, ðoʊ, fəɹ baɪ mɪddeɪ ðə ɹoʊɾ ɛntɝd loʊ hɪlz. fəɹ tu deɪz ðə ɹoʊd ɹæn θɹu ðə hɪlz - kʌt ɹaɪt θɹu ðɛm, səmtaɪmz, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə hæv meɪd ðə ɹoʊd ɡoʊ mʌtʃ aʊɾ ʌv ɪts weɪ ən nɑt soʊ bɪɡ əz tə hæv meɪd dɪɡɪŋ θɹu tu dɪfəkəlt. əz ði æŋɡəl ə ðə sʌn ʃɪftəɾ itʃ deɪ ɪt bɪkeɪm əpɛɹən ðət ðə ɹoʊd, fəɹ ɔl ɪɾ əpɪɹd stʃɹeɪt tə ði aɪ, kɝv sloʊli saʊθwɝɾ əz ɪt ɹæn ist. ɹænd hæd deɪdʒɹimd oʊvɝ mæstɝ ælvɪɹz oʊl mæp - hæf ðə bɔɪz ɪn ɛmənz fil hæd deɪdʒɹimd oʊvɝ ɪt - ən əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ðə ɹoʊd kɝvd ɝaʊn sʌmθɪŋ kɔl ðə hɪlz ʌv æbʃɝ əntɪl ɪt ɹitʃt waɪtbɹɪdʒ.

The land itself was different, though, for by midday the road entered low hills. For two days the road ran through the hills - cut right through them, sometimes, if they were wide enough to have made the road go much out of its way and not so big as to have made digging through too difficult. As the angle of the sun shifted each day it became apparent that the road, for all it appeared straight to the eye, curved slowly southward as it ran east. Rand had daydreamed over Master al'Vere's old map - half the boys in Emond's Field had daydreamed over it - and as he remembered, the road curved around something called the Hills of Absher until it reached Whitebridge.

fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm læn hæɾ əm dɪsmaʊn ətɑp wʌn ə ðə hɪlz, wɛɹ i kəd ɡɛɾ ə ɡʊd vju ʌv ðə ɹoʊd boʊθ əhɛɾ ən bɪhaɪnd, ən ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ kʌntʃɹisaɪɾ əz wɛl. ðə wɔɹɾɝ wəd stʌɾi ðə vju waɪl ði ʌðɝz stʃɹɛtʃt ðɛɹ lɛɡz əɹ sæɾ ʌndɝ ðə tʃɹiz ən eɪt.

From time to time Lan had them dismount atop one of the hills, where he could get a good view of the road both ahead and behind, and the surrounding countryside as well. The Warder would study the view while the others stretched their legs or sat under the trees and ate.

"aɪ juz tə laɪk tʃiz," ɛɡwin sɛɾ ɑn ðə θɝd deɪ æftɝ livɪŋ bɛɹlən. ʃi sæt wɪð əɹ bæk tə ðə boʊl ʌv ə tʃɹi, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ oʊvɝ ə dɪnɝ ðət wɑz wʌns əɡɛn ðə seɪm əz bɹɛkfəst, əz sʌpɝ wəd bi. "nɑɾ ə tʃæns ə ti. naɪs hɑt ti." ʃi pʊld əɹ kloʊk taɪɾɝ ən ʃɪftəɾ ɝaʊn ðə tʃɹi ɪn ə veɪn ɛfɝt tə əvɔɪd ðə swɝlɪŋ wɪnd.

"I used to like cheese," Egwene said on the third day after leaving Baerlon. She sat with her back to the bole of a tree, grimacing over a dinner that was once again the same as breakfast, as supper would be. "Not a chance of tea. Nice hot tea." She pulled her cloak tighter and shifted around the tree in a vain effort to avoid the swirling wind.

"flætwɝt ti ən ændɪleɪ ɹut," nɪneɪiv wɑz seɪɪŋ tə mɔɪɹeɪn, "ɑɹ bɛs fəɹ fətiɡ. ðeɪ klɪɹ ðə hɛɾ ən dɪm ðə bɝn ɪn taɪɝd mʌsəlz."

"Flatwort tea and andilay root," Nynaeve was saying to Moiraine, "are best for fatigue. They clear the head and dim the burn in tired muscles."

"aɪ æm ʃʊɹ ðeɪ du," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ mɝmɝd, ɡɪvɪŋ nɪneɪiv ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ ɡlæns.

"I am sure they do," the Aes Sedai murmured, giving Nynaeve a sidelong glance.

nɪneɪivz dʒɔ taɪɾənd, bʌt ʃi kəntɪnjuɾ ɪn ðə seɪm toʊn. "naʊ, ɪf jə mʌst ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt slip. . . ."

Nynaeve's jaw tightened, but she continued in the same tone. "Now, if you must go without sleep. . . ."

"noʊ ti!" læn sɛd ʃɑɹpli tə ɛɡwin. "noʊ faɪɝ! wi kæn si ðɛm jɛt, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ bæk ðɛɹ, sʌmwɛɹ, ə feɪɾ əɹ tu ən ðɛɹ tʃɹɑləks, ən ðeɪ noʊ wəɹ teɪkɪŋ ðɪs ɹoʊd. noʊ nid tə tɛl əm ɪɡzækli wɛɹ wi ɑɹ."

"No tea!" Lan said sharply to Egwene. "No fire! We can't see them yet, but they are back there, somewhere, a Fade or two and their Trollocs, and they know we are taking this road. No need to tell them exactly where we are."

"aɪ wɑzn æskɪŋ," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd ɪndə hɝ kloʊk. "dʒʌst ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ."

"I wasn't asking," Egwene muttered into her cloak. "Just regretting."

"ɪf ðeɪ noʊ wɝ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd," pɛɹɪn æskt, "waɪ doʊnt wi ɡoʊ stʃɹeɪɾ əkɹɔs tə waɪtbɹɪdʒ?"

"If they know we're on the road," Perrin asked, "why don't we go straight across to Whitebridge?"

"ivən læn kænɑt tʃɹævəl əz fæs kɹɔs-kʌntʃɹi əz baɪ ɹoʊd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, ɪntɝʌptɪŋ nɪneɪiv, "ɪspɛʃli nɑt θɹu ðə hɪlz ʌv æbʃɝ." ðə wɪzdəm ɡeɪv ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd saɪ. ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌt ʃi wɑz ʌp tə; æftɝ ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kəmplitli fəɹ ðə fɝs deɪ, nɪneɪiv hæd spɛn ðə læs tu tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɔk tə hɝ əbaʊɾ ɝbz. mɔɪɹeɪn muvd əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɪzdəm əz ʃi wɛn ɑn. "waɪ dʒju θɪŋk ðə ɹoʊd kɝvz tə əvɔɪd ðɛm? ən wi wəɾ əv tə kʌm bæk tə ðɪs ɹoʊɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli. wi maɪt faɪn əm əhɛɾ ʌv əs ɪnstɛɾ ə fɑloʊɪŋ."

"Even Lan cannot travel as fast cross-country as by road," Moiraine said, interrupting Nynaeve, "especially not through the Hills of Absher." The Wisdom gave an exasperated sigh. Rand wondered what she was up to; after ignoring the Aes Sedai completely for the first day, Nynaeve had spent the last two trying to talk to her about herbs. Moiraine moved away from the Wisdom as she went on. "Why do you think the road curves to avoid them? And we would have to come back to this road eventually. We might find them ahead of us instead of following."

ɹænd lʊk daʊtfəl, ən mæt mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt "ðə lɔŋ weɪ ɹaʊnd."

Rand looked doubtful, and Mat muttered something about "the long way round."

"hæv jə sin ə fɑɹm ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ?" læn æskt. "ɔɹ ivən ðə smoʊk fɹəm ə tʃɪmni? jə hævənt, kəz ɪts ɔl wɪldɝnəs fɹəm bɛɹlən tə waɪtbɹɪdʒ, ən waɪtbɹɪdʒ ɪz wɛɹ wi mʌs kɹɔs ði ɑɹɪnɛl. ðəɾ ɪz ði oʊnli bɹɪdʒ spænɪŋ ði ɑɹɪnɛl saʊθ ə mɛɹədɑn, ɪn sɑldɑiə."

"Have you seen a farm this morning?" Lan asked. "Or even the smoke from a chimney? You haven't, because it's all wilderness from Baerlon to Whitebridge, and Whitebridge is where we must cross the Arinelle. That is the only bridge spanning the Arinelle south of Maradon, in Saldaea."

tɑm snɔɹɾɪd ən blu aʊɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz. "wʌɾ ɪz tə stɑp əm fɹəm hævɪŋ sʌmwʌn, sʌmθɪŋ, ət waɪtbɹɪdʒ ɔlɹɛɾi?"

Thom snorted and blew out his mustaches. "What is to stop them from having someone, something, at Whitebridge already?"

fɹəm ðə wɛs keɪm ðə kinɪŋ weɪl ʌv ə hɔɹn. lænz hɛd wɪpt ɝaʊn tə stɛɹ bæk daʊn ðə ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ɹænd fɛlt ə tʃɪl. ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm ɹɪmeɪn kɑm ɪnʌf tə θɪŋk, tɛn maɪlz, noʊ mɔɹ.

From the west came the keening wail of a horn. Lan's head whipped around to stare back down the road behind them. Rand felt a chill. A part of him remained calm enough to think, ten miles, no more.

"nʌθɪŋ stɑps ðɛm, ɡlimən," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd. "wi tʃɹʌs tə ðə laɪɾ ən lʌk. bʌt naʊ wi noʊ fəɹ sɝɾən ðəɹ ɑɹ tʃɹɑləks bɪhaɪn ʌs."

"Nothing stops them, gleeman," the Warder said. "We trust to the Light and luck. But now we know for certain there are Trollocs behind us."

mɔɪɹeɪn dʌstɪɾ əɹ hænz. "ɪɾ ɪz taɪm fəɹ əs tə muv ɑn." ði ɛɛs sədaɪ maʊntəɾ əɹ waɪt mɛɹ.

Moiraine dusted her hands. "It is time for us to move on." The Aes Sedai mounted her white mare.

ðət sɛɾ ɔf ə skɹæmbəl fəɹ ðə hɔɹsəz, spiɾɪd baɪ ə sɛkənd waɪndɪŋ ə ðə hɔɹn. ðɪs taɪm ʌðɝz ænsɝd, ðə θɪn saʊnz floʊɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə wɛs laɪk ə dɝdʒ. ɹænd meɪd ɹɛɾi tə pʊt klaʊd tə ə ɡæləp ɹaɪɾ əweɪ, ən ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls sɛɾəld ðɛɹ ɹeɪnz wɪð ðə seɪm ɝdʒənsi. ɛvɹiwʌn ɪksɛp læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn. ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə lɔŋ lʊk.

That set off a scramble for the horses, speeded by a second winding of the horn. This time others answered, the thin sounds floating out of the west like a dirge. Rand made ready to put Cloud to a gallop right away, and everyone else settled their reins with the same urgency. Everyone except Lan and Moiraine. The Warder and the Aes Sedai exchanged a long look.

"kip əm muvɪŋ, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ," læn sɛd faɪnəli. "aɪ wɪl ɹɪtɝn əz sun əz aɪm eɪbəl. jəl noʊ ɪf aɪ feɪl." pʊɾɪŋ ə hæn ɑn mændɑɹbz sæɾəl, hi vɔltəd tə ðə bæk ə ðə blæk stæljən ən ɡæləp daʊn ðə hɪl. hɛɾɪŋ wɛst. ðə hɔɹnz saʊndəɾ əɡɛn.

"Keep them moving, Moiraine Sedai," Lan said finally. "I will return as soon as I am able. You will know if I fail." Putting a hand on Mandarb's saddle, he vaulted to the back of the black stallion and galloped down the hill. Heading west. The horns sounded again.

"ðə laɪt ɡoʊ wɪð ju, læs lɔɹɾ ə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ ɔlmoʊs tu sɔfli fəɹ ɹænd tə hɪɹ. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ʃi tɝn ɑldib tə ði ist. "wi mʌst ɡoʊ ɑn," ʃi sɛd, ən stɑɹɾəd ɔf əɾ ə sloʊ, stɛɾi tʃɹɑt. ði ʌðɝz fɑloʊɾ əɹ ɪn ə taɪt faɪl.

"The Light go with you, last Lord of the Seven Towers," Moiraine said almost too softly for Rand to hear. Drawing a deep breath, she turned Aldieb to the east. "We must go on," she said, and started off at a slow, steady trot. The others followed her in a tight file.

ɹænd twɪstəd wʌns ɪn ɪz sæɾəl tə lʊk fəɹ læn, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi lɔs tə saɪɾ əmʌŋ ðə loʊ hɪlz ən lifləs tʃɹiz. læs lɔɹɾ ə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz, ʃi hæd kɔl hɪm. hi wʌndɝd wʌt ðət mɛnt. hi hæd nɑt θɔɾ ɛniwʌn bɪsaɪdz hɪmsɛlf hæd hɝd, bʌt tɑm wɑz tʃuɪŋ ði ɛnz ə hɪz mʌstæʃɪz, ən i hæɾ ə spɛkjələɾɪv fɹaʊn ɑn ɪz feɪs. ðə ɡlimən sim tə noʊ ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz.

Rand twisted once in his saddle to look for Lan, but the Warder was already lost to sight among the low hills and leafless trees. Last Lord of the Seven Towers, she had called him. He wondered what that meant. He had not thought anyone besides himself had heard, but Thom was chewing the ends of his mustaches, and he had a speculative frown on his face. The gleeman seemed to know a great many things.

ðə hɔɹnz kɔld ən ænsɝd wʌns mɔɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ɹænd ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl. ðeɪ wɝ kloʊsɝ ðɪs taɪm; hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. eɪt maɪlz. meɪbi sɛvən. mæt ən ɛɡwin lʊkt oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ən pɛɹɪn hʌntʃt əz ɪf i ɪkspɛktəd sʌmθɪŋ tə hɪɾ ɪm ɪn ðə bæk. nɪneɪiv ɹoʊɾ ʌp tə spik tə mɔɪɹeɪn.

The horns called and answered once more behind them. Rand shifted in his saddle. They were closer this time; he was sure of it. Eight miles. Maybe seven. Mat and Egwene looked over their shoulders, and Perrin hunched as if he expected something to hit him in the back. Nynaeve rode up to speak to Moiraine.

"kænt wi ɡoʊ ɛni fæstɝ?" ʃi æskt. "ðoʊz hɔɹnz ɑɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ kloʊsɝ."

"Can't we go any faster?" she asked. "Those horns are getting closer."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ænd waɪ də ðeɪ lɛɾ əs noʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ ðɛɹ? pɝhæps soʊ wɪl hɝi ɑn wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv wʌt maɪt bi əhɛd."

The Aes Sedai shook her head. "And why do they let us know they are there? Perhaps so we will hurry on without thinking of what might be ahead."

ðeɪ kɛpt ɑn ət ðə seɪm stɛɾi peɪs. əɾ ɪntɝvəlz ðə hɔɹnz ɡeɪv kɹaɪ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən itʃ taɪm ðə saʊnd wɑz kloʊsɝ. ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ ə haʊ kloʊs, bʌt ðə θɔt keɪm ənbɪddən əɾ ɛvɹi bɹeɪzən weɪl. faɪv maɪlz, hi wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ æŋkʃəsli, wən læn sʌɾənli bɝst ɝaʊn ðə hɪl bɪhaɪn əm əɾ ə ɡæləp.

They kept on at the same steady pace. At intervals the horns gave cry behind them, and each time the sound was closer. Rand tried to stop thinking of how close, but the thought came unbidden at every brazen wail. Five miles, he was thinking anxiously, when Lan suddenly burst around the hill behind them at a gallop.

hi keɪm əbɹɛst ə mɔɪɹeɪn, ɹeɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə stæljən. "æt lis θɹi fɪsts ə tʃɹɑləks, itʃ lɛd baɪ ə hæfmən. meɪbi faɪv."

He came abreast of Moiraine, reining in the stallion. "At least three fists of Trollocs, each led by a Halfman. Maybe five."

"ɪf jə wɝ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si ðɛm," ɛɡwin sɛd wɝidli, "ðeɪ cʊɾə sin ju. ðeɪ kəd bi ɹaɪɾ ɑn jəɹ hilz."

"If you were close enough to see them," Egwene said worriedly, "they could have seen you. They could be right on your heels."

"hi wɑz nɑt sin." nɪneɪiv dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp əz ɛvɹiwʌn lʊkt ət hɝ. "aɪ hæv fɑloʊɾ ɪz tʃɹeɪl, ɹɪmɛmbɝ."

"He was not seen." Nynaeve drew herself up as everyone looked at her. "I have followed his trail, remember."

"hʌʃ," mɔɪɹeɪn kəmændəd. "læn ɪz tɛlɪŋ əs ðəɹ ɑɹ pɝhæps faɪv hʌnʒɹəd tʃɹɑləks bɪhaɪn ʌs." ə stʌn saɪləns fɑloʊd, ðən læn spoʊk əɡɛn.

"Hush," Moiraine commanded. "Lan is telling us there are perhaps five hundred Trollocs behind us." A stunned silence followed, then Lan spoke again.

"æn ðeɪ ɑɹ kloʊzɪŋ ðə ɡæp. ðəl bi ɑn əs ɪn ən aʊɝ əɹ lɛs."

"And they are closing the gap. They will be on us in an hour or less."

hæf tə hɝsɛlf, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd, "ɪf ðeɪ hæd ðət mɛni bɪfɔɹ, waɪ wɝ ðeɪ nɑt juzd əɾ ɛmənz fild? ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt, haʊ dɪd ðeɪ kʌm hɪɹ sɪns?"

Half to herself, the Aes Sedai said, "If they had that many before, why were they not used at Emond's Field? If they did not, how did they come here since?"

"ðeɪ ɑɹ spɹɛɾ aʊt tə dʒɹaɪv əs bɪfɔɹ ðɛm," læn sɛd, "wɪð skaʊts kɔɹɾɝɪŋ əhɛɾ ə ðə meɪn pɑɹɾiz."

"They are spread out to drive us before them," Lan said, "with scouts quartering ahead of the main parties."

"dʒɹaɪvɪŋ əs təwɔɹd wʌt?" mɔɪɹeɪn mjuzd. əz ɪf tə ænsɝ əɹ ə hɔɹn saʊndəɾ ɪn ðə dɪstəns tə ðə wɛst, ə lɔŋ moʊn ðət wɑz ænsɝd ðɪs taɪm baɪ ʌðɝz, ɔl əhɛɾ ə ðɛm. mɔɪɹeɪn stɑpt ɑldib; ði ʌðɝz fɑloʊɾ əɹ lɛd, tɑm ən ði ɛmənz fil foʊk lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn fɪɹfəli. hɔɹnz kɹaɪɾ aʊt bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, ən bɪhaɪnd. ɹænd θɔt ðeɪ hɛld ə noʊɾ ə tʃɹaɪəmf.

"Driving us toward what?" Moiraine mused. As if to answer her a horn sounded in the distance to the west, a long moan that was answered this time by others, all ahead of them. Moiraine stopped Aldieb; the others followed her lead, Thom and the Emond's Field folk looking around fearfully. Horns cried out before them, and behind. Rand thought they held a note of triumph.

"wʌt də wi də naʊ?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəɾ æŋɡɹəli. "wɛɹ də wi ɡoʊ?"

"What do we do now?" Nynaeve demanded angrily. "Where do we go?"

"ɔl ðəɾ ɪz lɛft ɪz nɔɹθ əɹ saʊθ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, mɔɹ θɪŋkɪŋ əlaʊd ðən ænsɝɪŋ ðə wɪzdəm. "tə ðə saʊθ ɑɹ ðə hɪlz ʌv æbʃɝ, bæɹən ən dɛd, ən ðə tɛɹən, wɪð noʊ weɪ tə kɹɔs, ən noʊ tʃɹæfɪk baɪ boʊt. tə ðə nɔɹθ, wi kən ɹitʃ ði ɑɹɪnɛl bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl, ən ðəɹ wɪl bi ə tʃæns ʌv ə tʃɹeɪɾɝz boʊt. ɪf ði aɪs əz bɹoʊkən ət mɛɹədɑn."

"All that is left is north or south," Moiraine said, more thinking aloud than answering the Wisdom. "To the south are the Hills of Absher, barren and dead, and the Taren, with no way to cross, and no traffic by boat. To the north, we can reach the Arinelle before nightfall, and there will be a chance of a trader's boat. If the ice has broken at Maradon."

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə pleɪs ðə tʃɹɑləks wɪl nɑt ɡoʊ," læn sɛd, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪnz hɛd wɪpt ɝaʊnd ʃɑɹpli.

"There is a place the Trollocs will not go," Lan said, but Moiraine's head whipped around sharply.

"noʊ!" ʃi moʊʃən tə ðə wɔɹɾɝ, ən i pʊɾ ɪz hɛd kloʊs tə hɝz soʊ ðɛɹ tɔk kəd nɑt bi oʊvɝhɝd.

"No!" She motioned to the Warder, and he put his head close to hers so their talk could not be overheard.

ðə hɔɹnz wɪndɪd, ən ɹændz hɔɹs dæns nɝvəsli.

The horns winded, and Rand's horse danced nervously.

"ðeɪɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɹaɪɾən ʌs," tɑm ɡɹaʊld, ətɛmptɪŋ tə stɛɾi hɪz maʊnt. hi saʊndəd hæf æŋɡɹi ən hæf əz ɪf ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ səksiɾɪŋ. "ðeɪɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə skɛɹ əs əntɪl wi pænɪk ən ɹʌn. ðəl əv ʌs, ðɛn."

"They're trying to frighten us," Thom growled, attempting to steady his mount. He sounded half angry and half as if the Trollocs were succeeding. "They're trying to scare us until we panic and run. They'll have us, then."

ɛɡwinz hɛd swʌŋ wɪð ɛvɹi blæst ʌv ə hɔɹn, stɛɹɪŋ fɝst əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, ðən bɪhaɪnd, əz ɪf lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ðə fɝs tʃɹɑləks. ɹænd wɑntəd tə də ðə seɪm θɪŋ, bʌɾ i tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ ɪt. hi muv klaʊd kloʊsɝ tə hɝ.

Egwene's head swung with every blast of a horn, staring first ahead of them, then behind, as if looking for the first Trollocs. Rand wanted to do the same thing, but he tried to hide it. He moved Cloud closer to her.

"wi ɡoʊ nɔɹθ," mɔɪɹeɪn ənaʊnst.

"We go north," Moiraine announced.

ðə hɔɹnz kind ʃɹɪli əz ðeɪ lɛf ðə ɹoʊɾ ən tʃɹɑɾəd ɪndə ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ hɪlz.

The horns keened shrilly as they left the road and trotted into the surrounding hills.

ðə hɪlz wɝ loʊ, bʌt ðə weɪ wɑz ɔl ʌp ən daʊn, wɪð nɛvɝ ə flæt stʃɹɛtʃ, bɪniθ bɛɹ-bɹæntʃt tʃɹiz ən θɹu dɛɾ ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ. ðə hɔɹsəz klaɪm ləbɔɹiəsli ʌp wʌn sloʊp oʊnli tə kæntɝ daʊn ði ʌðɝ. læn sɛɾ ə hɑɹd peɪs, fæstɝ ðən ðeɪ hæd juzd ɑn ðə ɹoʊd.

The hills were low, but the way was all up and down, with never a flat stretch, beneath bare-branched trees and through dead undergrowth. The horses climbed laboriously up one slope only to canter down the other. Lan set a hard pace, faster than they had used on the road.

bɹæntʃəz læʃt ɹænd əkɹɔs ðə feɪs ən tʃɛst. oʊl kɹipɝz ən vaɪnz kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹmz, ən səmtaɪmz snæɡd ɪz fʊt ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə stɝəp. ðə kinɪŋ hɔɹnz keɪm ɛvɝ kloʊsɝ, ən ɛvɝ mɔɹ fɹikwənli.

Branches lashed Rand across the face and chest. Old creepers and vines caught his arms, and sometimes snagged his foot right out of the stirrup. The keening horns came ever closer, and ever more frequently.

əz hɑɹɾ əz læn pʊʃt ðɛm, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ɡɛɾɪŋ fɑɹðɝ ɑn vɛɹi kwɪkli. ðeɪ tʃɹævəl tu fiɾ ʌp əɹ daʊn fəɹ ɛvɹi wʌn fɔɹwɝd, ən ɛvɹi fʊt wɑz ə skɹæmbəlɪŋ ɛfɝt. ən ðə hɔɹnz wɝ kʌmɪŋ nɪɹɝ. tu maɪlz, hi θɔt. meɪbi lɛs.

As hard as Lan pushed them, they were not getting farther on very quickly. They traveled two feet up or down for every one forward, and every foot was a scrambling effort. And the horns were coming nearer. Two miles, he thought. Maybe less.

æftɝ ə taɪm læn bɪɡæn piɹɪŋ fɝst wʌn weɪ ðən ənʌðɝ, ðə hɑɹd pleɪnz ə hɪz feɪs əz kloʊs tə wɝi əz ɹænd hæd sin ðɛm. wʌns ðə wɔɹɾɝ stʊɾ ɪn ɪz stɝəps tə stɛɹ bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm. ɔl ɹænd kəd si wɝ tʃɹiz. læn sɛɾəld bæk ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl ən ʌnkɑnʃəsli pʊʃt bæk ɪz kloʊk tə klɪɹ ɪz sɔɹɾ əz i ɹɪzum sɝtʃɪŋ ðə fɔɹəst.

After a time Lan began peering first one way then another, the hard planes of his face as close to worry as Rand had seen them. Once the Warder stood in his stirrups to stare back the way they had come. All Rand could see were trees. Lan settled back into his saddle and unconsciously pushed back his cloak to clear his sword as he resumed searching the forest.

ɹænd mɛt mæts aɪ kwɛstʃənɪŋli, bʌt mæt oʊnli ɡɹɪməst ət ðə wɔɹɾɝz bæk ən ʃɹʌɡd hɛlpləsli.

Rand met Mat's eye questioningly, but Mat only grimaced at the Warder's back and shrugged helplessly.

læn spoʊk, ðɛn, oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ tʃɹɑləks nɪɹbaɪ." ðeɪ tɑpt ə hɪl ən stɑɹɾəd daʊn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. "sʌm ə ðə skaʊts, sɛn əhɛɾ ə ðə ɹɛst. pɹɑbli. ɪf wi kʌm ɑn ðɛm, steɪ wɪð mi əɾ ɔl kɑsts, ən də əz aɪ du. wi mʌs kip ɑn ðə weɪ wəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ."

Lan spoke, then, over his shoulder. "There are Trollocs nearby." They topped a hill and started down the other side. "Some of the scouts, sent ahead of the rest. Probably. If we come on them, stay with me at all costs, and do as I do. We must keep on the way we are going."

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz!" tɑm mʌɾɝd. nɪneɪiv moʊʃən tə ɛɡwin tə kip kloʊs.

"Blood and ashes!" Thom muttered. Nynaeve motioned to Egwene to keep close.

skæɾɝd stænz ʌv ɛvɝɡɹinz pɹəvaɪɾəd ði oʊnli ɹil kʌvɝ, bʌt ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə pɪɹ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ət wʌns, hɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən tɝnɪŋ ɡɹeɪ tʃɹi tʃɹʌŋks kɑɾ aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ ɪndə tʃɹɑləks. ðə hɔɹnz wɝ kloʊsɝ, tu. ən dɝɛkli bɪhaɪn ðɛm. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt. bɪhaɪn ən kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ.

Scattered stands of evergreens provided the only real cover, but Rand tried to peer in every direction at once, his imagination turning gray tree trunks caught out of the corner of his eye into Trollocs. The horns were closer, too. And directly behind them. He was sure of it. Behind and coming closer.

ðeɪ tɑpt ənʌðɝ hɪl.

They topped another hill.

bɪloʊ ðɛm, dʒʌst stɑɹɾɪŋ ʌp ðə sloʊp, mɑɹtʃt tʃɹɑləks kæɹiɪŋ poʊlz tɪpt wɪð ɡɹeɪt lups ə ɹoʊp əɹ lɔŋ hʊks. mɛni tʃɹɑləks. ðə laɪn stʃɹɛtʃt fɑɹ tə iðɝ saɪd, ði ɛnz aʊɾ ə saɪt, bʌɾ əɾ ɪts sɛntɝ, dɝɛkli ɪn fɹʌn ə læn, ə feɪd ɹoʊd.

Below them, just starting up the slope, marched Trollocs carrying poles tipped with great loops of rope or long hooks. Many Trollocs. The line stretched far to either side, the ends out of sight, but at its center, directly in front of Lan, a Fade rode.

ðə mɹdʒɹɑl sim tə hɛzəteɪɾ əz ðə hjumənz əpɪɹɾ ətɑp ðə hɪl, bʌɾ ɪn ðə nɛkst ɪnstən ɪt pɹədust ə sɔɹd wɪð ðə blæk bleɪd ɹænd ɹɪmɛmbɝd soʊ kwizəli, ən weɪvd ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪts hɛd. ðə laɪn ə tʃɹɑləks skɹæmbəl fɔɹwɝd.

The Myrddraal seemed to hesitate as the humans appeared atop the hill, but in the next instant it produced a sword with the black blade Rand remembered so queasily, and waved it over its head. The line of Trollocs scrambled forward.

ivən bɪfɔɹ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl muvd, lænz sɔɹd wɑz ɪn ɪz hænd. "steɪ wɪð mi!" hi kɹaɪd, ən mændɑɹb plʌnʒd daʊn ðə sloʊp təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹɑləks. "fɔɹ ðə sɛvən taʊɝz!" hi ʃaʊɾəd.

Even before the Myrddraal moved, Lan's sword was in his hand. "Stay with me!" he cried, and Mandarb plunged down the slope toward the Trollocs. "For the Seven Towers!" he shouted.

ɹænd ɡʌlpt ən buɾɪd ðə ɡɹeɪ fɔɹwɝd; ðə hoʊl ɡɹup ə ðɛm stʃɹimd æftɝ ðə wɔɹɾɝ. hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə faɪn tæmz sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz fɪst. kɑɾ ʌp baɪ lænz kɹaɪ, hi faʊn ɪz oʊn. "meɪnɛðɝən! meɪnɛðɝən!"

Rand gulped and booted the gray forward; the whole group of them streamed after the Warder. He was surprised to find Tam's sword in his fist. Caught up by Lan's cry, he found his own. "Manetheren! Manetheren!"

pɛɹɪn tʊk ɪɾ ʌp. "meɪnɛðɝən! meɪnɛðɝən!"

Perrin took it up. "Manetheren! Manetheren!"

bʌt mæt ʃaʊɾəd, "kæɹɑi ən kɑldəzɑɹ! kæɹɑi ən ɛlɪsɑnd! æl ɛlɪsɑnd!"

But Mat shouted, "Carai an Caldazar! Carai an Ellisande! Al Ellisande!"

ðə feɪdz hɛd tɝn fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑləks tə ðə ɹaɪɾɝz tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ təwɔɹd hɪm. ðə blæk sɔɹd fɹoʊz oʊvɝ ɪts hɛd, ən ði oʊpənɪŋ ʌv ɪts kaʊl swɪvəld, sɝtʃɪŋ əmʌŋ ði ɔnkʌmɪŋ hɔɹsmən.

The Fade's head turned from the Trollocs to the riders charging toward him. The black sword froze over its head, and the opening of its cowl swiveled, searching among the oncoming horsemen.

ðən læn wɑz ɑn ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, əz ðə hjumən foʊk fɛl ɑn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk laɪn. wɔɹɾɝz bleɪd mɛt blæk stil fɹəm ðə fɔɹdʒɪz ət θɑkændɑɹ wɪð ə klæŋ laɪk ə ɡɹeɪt bɛl, ðə toʊl ɛkoʊɪŋ ɪn ðə hɑloʊ, ə flæʃ ə blu laɪt fɪlɪŋ ði ɛɹ laɪk ʃit laɪtnɪŋ.

Then Lan was on the Myrddraal, as the human folk fell on the Trolloc line. Warder's blade met black steel from the forges at Thakan'dar with a clang like a great bell, the toll echoing in the hollow, a flash of blue light filling the air like sheet lightning.

bist-mʌzəld ɔlmoʊst-mɛn swɔɹmd ɝaʊn itʃ ə ðə hjumənz, kætʃpoʊlz ən hʊks fleɪlɪŋ. oʊnli læn ən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl dɪd ðeɪ əvɔɪd; ðoʊz tu fɔɾ ɪn ə klɪɹ sɝkəl, blæk hɔɹsəz mætʃɪŋ stɛp fəɹ stɛp, sɔɹdz mætʃɪŋ stʃɹoʊk fəɹ stʃɹoʊk. ði ɛɹ flæʃt ən pild.

Beast-muzzled almost-men swarmed around each of the humans, catchpoles and hooks flailing. Only Lan and the Myrddraal did they avoid; those two fought in a clear circle, black horses matching step for step, swords matching stroke for stroke. The air flashed and pealed.

klaʊd ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz ən skɹimd, ɹɪɹɪŋ ən læʃɪŋ aʊt wɪð ɪz hʊvz ət ðə snɑɹlɪŋ, ʃɑɹp-tuθ feɪsəz sɝaʊndɪŋ hɪm. hɛvi bɑɾiz kɹaʊɾəd ʃoʊldɝ-tə-ʃoʊldɝ ɝaʊn hɪm. dɪɡɪŋ ɪz hilz ɪn ɹuθləsli, ɹænd fɔɹs ðə ɡɹeɪ ɑn ɹəɡɑɹdləs, swɪŋɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd wɪð lɪɾəl ə ðə skɪl læn hæd tʃɹaɪd tə ɪmpɑɹt, hækɪŋ əz ɪf hjuɪŋ wʊd. ɛɡwin! dɛspɝətli hi sɝtʃt fəɹ əɹ əz i kɪk ðə ɡɹeɪ ɔnwɝd, slæʃɪŋ ə pæθ θɹu ðə hɛɹi bɑɾiz əz ðoʊ tʃɑpɪŋ ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ.

Cloud rolled his eyes and screamed, rearing and lashing out with his hooves at the snarling, sharp-toothed faces surrounding him. Heavy bodies crowded shoulder-to-shoulder around him. Digging his heels in ruthlessly, Rand forced the gray on regardless, swinging his sword with little of the skill Lan had tried to impart, hacking as if hewing wood. Egwene! Desperately he searched for her as he kicked the gray onward, slashing a path through the hairy bodies as though chopping undergrowth.

mɔɪɹeɪnz waɪt mɛɹ dæʃt ən kʌɾ ət ðə slaɪɾəst tʌtʃ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪz hæn ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz. hɝ feɪs wɑz əz hɑɹɾ əz lænz əz əɹ stæf læʃt aʊt. fleɪm ɛnvɛləp tʃɹɑləks, ðən bɝst wɪð ə ɹɔɹ ðət lɛf mɪsʃeɪpən fɔɹmz ənmoʊvɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin ɹoʊd kloʊs tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð fɹæntɪk ɝdʒənsi, tiθ bɛɹɾ ɔlmoʊst əz fɪɹsli əz ðə tʃɹɑləks', bɛl naɪvz ɪn hænd. ðoʊz ʃɔɹt bleɪdz wəd bi noʊ jus əɾ ɔl ɪf ə tʃɹɑlɑk keɪm kloʊs. ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə tɝn klaʊd təwɔɹd ðɛm, bʌt ðə ɡɹeɪ hæd ðə bɪɾ ɪn ɪz tiθ. skɹimɪŋ ən kɪkɪŋ, klaʊd stʃɹʌɡəl fɔɹwɝd haʊɛvɝ hɑɹd ɹænd tʌɡd ət ðə ɹeɪnz.

Moiraine's white mare dashed and cut at the slightest touch of the Aes Sedai's hand on the reins. Her face was as hard as Lan's as her staff lashed out. Flame enveloped Trollocs, then burst with a roar that left misshapen forms unmoving on the ground. Nynaeve and Egwene rode close to the Aes Sedai with frantic urgency, teeth bared almost as fiercely as the Trollocs', belt knives in hand. Those short blades would be no use at all if a Trolloc came close. Rand tried to turn Cloud toward them, but the gray had the bit in his teeth. Screaming and kicking, Cloud struggled forward however hard Rand tugged at the reins.

ɝaʊn ðə θɹi wɪmən ə speɪs oʊpən əz tʃɹɑləks tʃɹaɪd tə fli fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪnz stæf, bʌɾ əz ðeɪ ətɛmptəd tə əvɔɪd hɝ, ʃi sɔɾ əm aʊt. faɪɝz ɹɔɹd, ən ðə tʃɹɑləks haʊld ɪn ɹeɪdʒ ən fjʊɹi. əbʌv ɹɔɹ ən haʊl kɹæʃt ðə toʊlɪŋ ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz sɔɹɾ əɡɛns ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz; ði ɛɹ flɛɹd blu ɝaʊn ðɛm, flɛɹɾ əɡɛn. əɡɛn.

Around the three women a space opened as Trollocs tried to flee from Moiraine's staff, but as they attempted to avoid her, she sought them out. Fires roared, and the Trollocs howled in rage and fury. Above roar and howl crashed the tolling of the Warder's sword against the Myrddraal's; the air flared blue around them, flared again. Again.

ə nus ɑn ði ɛn ʌv ə poʊl swɛpt ət ɹændz hɛd. wɪð ən ɑkwɝd slæʃ, hi kʌt ðə kætʃpoʊl ɪn tu, ðən hæk ðə ɡoʊt-feɪs tʃɹɑlɑk ðət hɛld ɪt. ə hʊk kɑɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ fɹəm bɪhaɪn ən tæŋɡəld ɪn ɪz kloʊk, dʒɝkɪŋ ɪm bækwɝdz. fɹæntəkəli, ɔlmoʊs luzɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd, hi klʌtʃt ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl tə kip ɪz sit. klaʊd twɪstəd, ʃɹikɪŋ. ɹænd hʌŋ ɑntu sæɾəl ən ɹeɪnz dɛspɝətli; hi kəd fil hɪmsɛlf slɪpɪŋ, ɪntʃ baɪ ɪntʃ, fɔlɪŋ tə ðə hʊk. klaʊd swʌŋ ɝaʊnd; fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɹænd sɔ pɛɹɪn, hæf aʊɾ ə hɪz sæɾəl, stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə ɹɛst ɪz æks əweɪ fɹəm θɹi tʃɹɑləks. ðeɪ hæɾ ɪm baɪ wʌn ɑɹm ən boʊθ lɛɡz. klaʊd plʌnʒd, ən oʊnli tʃɹɑləks fɪld ɹændz aɪz.

A noose on the end of a pole swept at Rand's head. With an awkward slash, he cut the catchpole in two, then hacked the goat-faced Trolloc that held it. A hook caught his shoulder from behind and tangled in his cloak, jerking him backwards. Frantically, almost losing his sword, he clutched the pommel of his saddle to keep his seat. Cloud twisted, shrieking. Rand hung onto saddle and reins desperately; he could feel himself slipping, inch by inch, falling to the hook. Cloud swung around; for an instant Rand saw Perrin, half out of his saddle, struggling to wrest his axe away from three Trollocs. They had him by one arm and both legs. Cloud plunged, and only Trollocs filled Rand's eyes.

eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk dæʃt ɪn ən sizd ɹændz lɛɡ, fɔɹsɪŋ ɪz fʊt fɹi ʌv ðə stɝəp. pæntɪŋ, hi lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv ðə sæɾəl tə stæb ɪt. ɪnstənli ðə hʊk pʊld ɪm aʊɾ ə ðə sæɾəl, tə klaʊdz haɪndkɔɹɾɝz; hɪz dɛθ-ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz wɑz ɔl ðət kɛpt ɪm fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd. klaʊd ɹɪɹɾ ən ʃɹikt. ən ɪn ðət seɪm moʊmən ðə pʊlɪŋ vænɪʃt. ðə tʃɹɑlɑk əɾ ɪz lɛɡ θɹu ʌp ɪts hænz ən skɹimd. ɔl ə ðə tʃɹɑləks skɹimd, ə haʊl laɪk ɔl ðə dɑɡz ɪn ðə wɝld ɡɔn mæd.

A Trolloc dashed in and seized Rand's leg, forcing his foot free of the stirrup. Panting, he let go of the saddle to stab it. Instantly the hook pulled him out of the saddle, to Cloud's hindquarters; his death-grip on the reins was all that kept him from the ground. Cloud reared and shrieked. And in that same moment the pulling vanished. The Trolloc at his leg threw up its hands and screamed. All of the Trollocs screamed, a howl like all the dogs in the world gone mad.

ɝaʊn ðə hjumənz tʃɹɑləks fɛl ɹaɪðɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, tɛɹɪŋ ət ðɛɹ hɛɹ, klɔɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn feɪsəz. ɔl ə ðə tʃɹɑləks. baɪɾɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd, snæpɪŋ ət nʌθɪŋ, haʊlɪŋ, haʊlɪŋ, haʊlɪŋ.

Around the humans Trollocs fell writhing to the ground, tearing at their hair, clawing their own faces. All of the Trollocs. Biting at the ground, snapping at nothing, howling, howling, howling.

ðən ɹænd sɔ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl. stɪl əpɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə sæɾəl ʌv ɪts mædli dænsɪŋ hɔɹs, blæk sɔɹd stɪl fleɪlɪŋ, ɪt hæd noʊ hɛd.

Then Rand saw the Myrddraal. Still upright in the saddle of its madly dancing horse, black sword still flailing, it had no head.

"ɪt woʊn daɪ əntɪl naɪtfɔl," tɑm hæd tə ʃaʊt, bɪtwin hɛvi bɹɛθs, oʊvɝ ði ʌnɹilɛntɪŋ skɹimz. "nɑt kəmplitli. ðəɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪv hɝd, ɛniweɪ."

"It won't die until nightfall," Thom had to shout, between heavy breaths, over the unrelenting screams. "Not completely. That is what I've heard, anyway."

"ɹaɪd!" læn ʃaʊɾəd æŋɡɹəli. ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡæðɝd mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən ən hæɾ əm hæfweɪ ʌp ðə nɛks hɪl. "ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ɔl ə ðɛm!" ɪndid, ðə hɔɹnz dɝdʒd əɡɛn, əbʌv ðə ʃɹiks ə ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, tə ist ən wɛst ən saʊθ.

"Ride!" Lan shouted angrily. The Warder had already gathered Moiraine and the other two women and had them halfway up the next hill. "This is not all of them!" Indeed, the horns dirged again, above the shrieks of the Trollocs on the ground, to east and west and south.

fəɹ ə wʌndɝ, mæt wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn u hæd bɪn ənhɔɹst. ɹænd tʃɹɑɾəd təwɔɹd hɪm, bʌt mæt tɔst ə nus əweɪ fɹəm ɪm wɪð ə ʃʌɾɝ, ɡæðɝɾ ɪz baʊ, ən skɹæmbəld ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl əneɪɾɪd, ðoʊ ɹʌbɪŋ əɾ ɪz θɹoʊt.

For a wonder, Mat was the only one who had been unhorsed. Rand trotted toward him, but Mat tossed a noose away from him with a shudder, gathered his bow, and scrambled into his saddle unaided, though rubbing at his throat.

ðə hɔɹnz beɪd laɪk haʊnz wɪð ðə sɛn ʌv ə dɪɹ. haʊnz kloʊzɪŋ ɪn. ɪf læn hæd sɛɾ ə hɑɹd peɪs bɪfɔɹ, hi dʌbəld ɪt naʊ, tɪl ðə hɔɹsəz skɹæbəld ʌphɪl fæstɝ ðən ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn daʊn bɪfɔɹ, ðən nɪɹli θɹu ðɛmsɛlvz ət ði ʌðɝ saɪd. bʌt stɪl ðə hɔɹnz keɪm ɛvɝ nɪɹɝ, əntɪl ðə ɡʌɾɝəl ʃaʊts ə pɝsut wɝ hɝd wɛnɛvɝ ðə hɔɹnz pɔzd, əntɪl ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðə hjumənz ɹitʃt ə hɪltɑp dʒʌst əz tʃɹɑləks əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə nɛks hɪl bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ðə hɪltɑp blækənd wɪð tʃɹɑləks, snaʊɾəd, dɪstɔɹɾəd feɪsəz haʊlɪŋ, ən θɹi mɹdʒɹɑl oʊvɝɔɾ əm ɔl. oʊnli ə hʌnʒɹəd spænz sɛpɝeɪɾəd ðə tu pɑɹɾiz.

The horns bayed like hounds with the scent of a deer. Hounds closing in. If Lan had set a hard pace before, he doubled it now, till the horses scrabbled uphill faster than they had gone down before, then nearly threw themselves at the other side. But still the horns came ever nearer, until the guttural shouts of pursuit were heard whenever the horns paused, until eventually the humans reached a hilltop just as Trollocs appeared on the next hill behind them. The hilltop blackened with Trollocs, snouted, distorted faces howling, and three Myrddraal overawed them all. Only a hundred spans separated the two parties.

ɹændz hɑɹt ʃɹɪvəld laɪk ən oʊld ɡɹeɪp. θɹi!

Rand's heart shriveled like an old grape. Three!

ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz blæk sɔɹdz ɹoʊz əz wʌn; tʃɹɑləks bɔɪl daʊn ðə sloʊp, θɪk, tʃɹaɪʌmfən kɹaɪz ɹaɪzɪŋ, kætʃpoʊlz bɑbɪŋ əbʌv əz ðeɪ ɹæn.

The Myrddraal's black swords rose as one; Trollocs boiled down the slope, thick, triumphant cries rising, catchpoles bobbing above as they ran.

mɔɪɹeɪn klaɪm daʊn fɹəm ɑldibz bæk. kɑmli ʃi ɹimuv sʌmθɪŋ fɹəm əɹ paʊtʃ, ənɹæpt ɪt. ɹænd ɡlɪmps dɑɹk aɪvɝi. ði æŋɡɹil. wɪð æŋɡɹil ɪn wʌn hæn ən stæf ɪn ði ʌðɝ, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛɾ əɹ fit, feɪsɪŋ ði ɑnɹʌʃɪŋ tʃɹɑləks ən ðə feɪdz' blæk sɔɹdz, ɹeɪzd əɹ stæf haɪ, ən stæbd ɪt daʊn ɪndə ði ɝθ.

Moiraine climbed down from Aldieb's back. Calmly she removed something from her pouch, unwrapped it. Rand glimpsed dark ivory. The angreal. With angreal in one hand and staff in the other, the Aes Sedai set her feet, facing the onrushing Trollocs and the Fades' black swords, raised her staff high, and stabbed it down into the earth.

ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹæŋ laɪk ən aɪɝn kɛɾəl stʃɹʌk baɪ ə mælɪt. ðə hɑloʊ klæŋ dwɪndəld, feɪɾəd əweɪ. fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðɛn, ɪt wɑz saɪlənt. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz saɪlənt. ðə wɪn daɪd. ðə tʃɹɑlɑk kɹaɪz stɪld; ivən ðɛɹ tʃɑɹdʒ fɔɹwɝd sloʊɾ ən stɑpt. fəɹ ə hɑɹtbit, ɛvɹiθɪŋ weɪɾəd. sloʊli ðə dʌl ɹɪŋɪŋ ɹɪtɝnd, tʃeɪnʒɪŋ tə ə loʊ ɹʌmbəl, ɡɹoʊɪŋ əntɪl ði ɝθ moʊnd.

The ground rang like an iron kettle struck by a mallet. The hollow clang dwindled, faded away. For an instant then, it was silent. Everything was silent. The wind died. The Trolloc cries stilled; even their charge forward slowed and stopped. For a heartbeat, everything waited. Slowly the dull ringing returned, changing to a low rumble, growing until the earth moaned.

ðə ɡɹaʊn tʃɹɛmbəl bɪniθ klaʊdz hʊvz. ðɪs wɑz ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk laɪk ðə stɔɹiz toʊld əbaʊt; ɹænd wɪʃt i wɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz əweɪ. ðə tʃɹɛmbəl bɪkeɪm ə ʃeɪkɪŋ ðət sɛt ðə tʃɹiz ɝaʊn əm kwɪvɝɪŋ. ðə ɡɹeɪ stʌmbəld ən nɪɹli fɛl. ivən mændɑɹb ən ɹaɪɾɝləs ɑldib stæɡɝɾ əz ɪf dʒɹʌŋk, ən ðoʊz u ɹoʊd hæd tə klɪŋ tə ɹeɪnz ən meɪnz, tə ɛniθɪŋ, tə kip ðɛɹ sits.

The ground trembled beneath Cloud's hooves. This was Aes Sedai work like the stories told about; Rand wished he were a hundred miles away. The tremble became a shaking that set the trees around them quivering. The gray stumbled and nearly fell. Even Mandarb and riderless Aldieb staggered as if drunk, and those who rode had to cling to reins and manes, to anything, to keep their seats.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stɪl stʊɾ əz ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn, hoʊldɪŋ ði æŋɡɹil ən əɹ əpɹaɪt stæf θɹʌst ɪndə ðə hɪltɑp, ən niðɝ ʃi nɔɹ ðə stæf muvd ən ɪntʃ, fəɹ ɔl ðət ðə ɡɹaʊnd ʃʊk ən ʃɪvɝɾ ɝaʊn hɝ. naʊ ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹɪpəld, spɹɪŋɪŋ aʊt fɹəm ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ stæf, læpɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹɑləks laɪk ɹɪpəlz ɑn ə pɑnd, ɹɪpəlz ðət ɡɹu əz ðeɪ ɹæn, tɑpəlɪŋ oʊl bʊʃəz, flɪŋɪŋ dɛd livz ɪndə ði ɛɹ, ɡɹoʊɪŋ, bɪkʌmɪŋ weɪvz ə ɝθ, ɹoʊlɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹɑləks. tʃɹiz ɪn ðə hɑloʊ læʃt laɪk swɪtʃəz ɪn ðə hænz ə smɔl bɔɪz. ɑn ðə fɑɹ sloʊp tʃɹɑləks fɛl ɪn hips, tʌmbəld oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ baɪ ðə ɹeɪdʒɪŋ ɝθ.

The Aes Sedai still stood as she had begun, holding the angreal and her upright staff thrust into the hilltop, and neither she nor the staff moved an inch, for all that the ground shook and shivered around her. Now the ground rippled, springing out from in front of her staff, lapping toward the Trollocs like ripples on a pond, ripples that grew as they ran, toppling old bushes, flinging dead leaves into the air, growing, becoming waves of earth, rolling toward the Trollocs. Trees in the hollow lashed like switches in the hands of small boys. On the far slope Trollocs fell in heaps, tumbled over and over by the raging earth.

jɛɾ əz ɪf ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɝ nɑt ɹɪɹɪŋ ɔl ɝaʊn ðɛm, ðə mɹdʒɹɑl muv fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ə laɪn, ðɛɹ dɛd-blæk hɔɹsəz nɛvɝ mɪsɪŋ ə stɛp, ɛvɹi huf ɪn junəsən. tʃɹɑləks ɹoʊld ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ɔl əbaʊt ðə blæk stidz, haʊlɪŋ ən ɡɹæbɪŋ ət ðə hɪlsaɪd ðət hivd əm ʌp, bʌt ðə mɹdʒɹɑl keɪm sloʊli ɑn.

Yet as if the ground were not rearing all around them, the Myrddraal moved forward in a line, their dead-black horses never missing a step, every hoof in unison. Trollocs rolled on the ground all about the black steeds, howling and grabbing at the hillside that heaved them up, but the Myrddraal came slowly on.

mɔɪɹeɪn lɪftəɾ əɹ stæf, ən ði ɝθ stɪld, bʌt ʃi wɑz nɑt dʌn. ʃi pɔɪntəd tə ðə hɑloʊ bɪtwin ðə hɪlz, ən fleɪm ɡtəd fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ə faʊntən twɛnti fit haɪ. ʃi flʌŋ əɹ ɑɹmz waɪd, ən ðə faɪɝ ɹeɪs tə lɛft ən ɹaɪɾ əz fɑɹ əz ði aɪ kəd si, spɹɛɾɪŋ ɪndə ə wɔl sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ hjumənz ən tʃɹɑləks. ðə hit meɪd ɹænd pʊɾ ɪz hænz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs, ivən ɑn ðə hɪltɑp. ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz blæk maʊns, wʌtɛvɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ paʊɝz ðeɪ hæd, skɹimd ət ðə faɪɝ, ɹɪɹɾ ən fɔt ðɛɹ ɹaɪɾɝz əz ðə mɹdʒɹɑl biɾ ət ðɛm, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɔɹs əm θɹu ðə fleɪmz.

Moiraine lifted her staff, and the earth stilled, but she was not done. She pointed to the hollow between the hills, and flame gouted from the ground, a fountain twenty feet high. She flung her arms wide, and the fire raced to left and right as far as the eye could see, spreading into a wall separating humans and Trollocs. The heat made Rand put his hands in front of his face, even on the hilltop. The Myrddraal's black mounts, whatever strange powers they had, screamed at the fire, reared and fought their riders as the Myrddraal beat at them, trying to force them through the flames.

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz," mæt sɛd feɪnli. ɹænd nɑɾəd nʌmbli.

"Blood and ashes," Mat said faintly. Rand nodded numbly.

əbɹʌpli mɔɪɹeɪn weɪvɝɾ ən wʊɾə fɔlən hæd læn nɑt lɛp fɹəm ɪz hɔɹs tə kætʃ hɝ. "ɡoʊ ɑn," hi toʊl ði ʌðɝz. ðə hɑɹʃnəs ə hɪz vɔɪs wɑz əɾ ɑdz wɪð ðə dʒɛntəl weɪ hi lɪftəd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hɝ sæɾəl. "ðæt faɪɝ woʊn bɝn fɝɛvɝ. hɝi! ɛvɹi mɪnət kaʊns!"

Abruptly Moiraine wavered and would have fallen had Lan not leaped from his horse to catch her. "Go on," he told the others. The harshness of his voice was at odds with the gentle way he lifted the Aes Sedai to her saddle. "That fire won't burn forever. Hurry! Every minute counts!"

ðə wɔl ə fleɪm ɹɔɹɾ əz ɪf ɪt wəɾ ɪndid bɝn fɝɛvɝ, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑɾ ɑɹɡju. ðeɪ ɡæləp nɔɹθwɝɾ əz fæst əz ðeɪ kəd meɪk ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz ɡoʊ. ðə hɔɹnz ɪn ðə dɪstəns ʃɹɪld aʊt dɪsəpɔɪnmənt, əz ɪf ðeɪ ɔlɹɛɾi nu wʌt hæd hæpənd, ðən fɛl saɪlənt.

The wall of flame roared as if it would indeed burn forever, but Rand did not argue. They galloped northward as fast as they could make their horses go. The horns in the distance shrilled out disappointment, as if they already knew what had happened, then fell silent.

læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn sun kɑɾ ʌp wɪð ði ʌðɝz, ðoʊ læn lɛɾ ɑldib baɪ ðə ɹeɪnz waɪl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sweɪɾ ən hɛl ðə pɑməl ə hɝ sæɾəl wɪð boʊθ hænz. "aɪ wɪl bi ɔl ɹaɪt sun," ʃi sɛd tə ðɛɹ wɝid lʊks. ʃi saʊndəd taɪɝd jɛt kɑnfəɾənt, ən əɹ ɡeɪz wɑz əz kəmpɛlɪŋ əz ɛvɝ. "aɪ æm nɑɾ ət maɪ stʃɹɔŋɡəst wən wɝkɪŋ wɪð ɝθ ən faɪɝ. ə smɔl θɪŋ."

Lan and Moiraine soon caught up with the others, though Lan led Aldieb by the reins while the Aes Sedai swayed and held the pommel of her saddle with both hands. "I will be all right soon," she said to their worried looks. She sounded tired yet confident, and her gaze was as compelling as ever. "I am not at my strongest when working with Earth and Fire. A small thing."

ðə tu ʌv əm muvd ɪndə ðə lɛɾ əɡɛn əɾ ə fæst wɔk. ɹænd dɪd nɑt θɪŋk mɔɪɹeɪn kəd steɪ ɪn ðə sæɾəl əɾ ɛni fæstɝ peɪs. nɪneɪiv ɹoʊd faʊɹd bɪsaɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, stɛɾiɪŋ əɹ wɪð ə hænd. fəɹ ə taɪm əz ðə pɑɹɾi wɛn ɑn əkɹɔs ðə hɪlz ðə tu wɪmən wɪspɝd, ðən ðə wɪzdəm dɛlvd ɪndə hɝ kloʊk ən hændəɾ ə smɔl pækət tə mɔɪɹeɪn. mɔɪɹeɪn ənfoʊldəɾ ɪɾ ən swɑloʊd ðə kɑntɛns. nɪneɪiv sɛd sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ, ðən fɛl bæk wɪð ði ʌðɝz, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðɛɹ kwɛstʃənɪŋ lʊks. dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ sɝkəmstænsəz, ɹænd θɔt ʃi hæɾ ə slaɪt lʊk ə sæɾəsfækʃən.

The two of them moved into the lead again at a fast walk. Rand did not think Moiraine could stay in the saddle at any faster pace. Nynaeve rode foward beside the Aes Sedai, steadying her with a hand. For a time as the party went on across the hills the two women whispered, then the Wisdom delved into her cloak and handed a small packet to Moiraine. Moiraine unfolded it and swallowed the contents. Nynaeve said something more, then fell back with the others, ignoring their questioning looks. Despite their circumstances, Rand thought she had a slight look of satisfaction.

hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli kɛɹ wʌt ðə wɪzdəm wɑz ʌp tə. hi ɹʌb ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd kəntɪnjuəli, ən wɛnɛvɝ i ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, hi stɛɹd daʊn əɾ ɪɾ ɪn wʌndɝ. soʊ ðæts wʌɾ ə bæɾəl ɪz laɪk. hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ mʌtʃ ʌv ɪt, nɑɾ ɛni pɝtɪkjəlɝ pɑɹt. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹæn təɡɛðɝ ɪn ɪz hɛd, ə mɛltəd mæs ə hɛɹi feɪsəz ən fɪɹ. fɪɹ ən hit. ɪt hæd simd əz hɑɾ əz ə mɪdsʌmɝ nun waɪl ɪt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. hi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ðæt. ði aɪsi wɪnd wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɹiz bidz ə pɝspɝeɪʃən ɔl oʊvɝ ɪz feɪs ən bɑɾi.

He did not really care what the Wisdom was up to. He rubbed the hilt of his sword continually, and whenever he realized what he was doing, he stared down at it in wonder. So that's what a battle is like. He could not remember much of it, not any particular part. Everything ran together in his head, a melted mass of hairy faces and fear. Fear and heat. It had seemed as hot as a midsummer noon while it was going on. He could not understand that. The icy wind was trying to freeze beads of perspiration all over his face and body.

hi ɡlænst əɾ ɪz tu fɹɛnz. mæt wɑz skɹʌbɪŋ swɛɾ ɔf ɪz feɪs wɪð ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz kloʊk. pɛɹɪn, stɛɹɪŋ ət sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪstəns ən nɑt laɪkɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz siɪŋ, əpɪɹɾ ʌnəwɛɹ ə ðə bidz ɡlɪsnɪŋ ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛd.

He glanced at his two friends. Mat was scrubbing sweat off his face with the edge of his cloak. Perrin, staring at something in the distance and not liking what he was seeing, appeared unaware of the beads glistening on his forehead.

ðə hɪlz ɡɹu smɔlɝ, ən ðə læn bɪɡæn tə lɛvəl aʊt, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə pɹɛsɪŋ ɑn, læn stɑpt. nɪneɪiv muvd əz ɪf tə ɹidʒɔɪn mɔɪɹeɪn, bʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝz lʊk kɛpt əɹ əweɪ. hi ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹoʊɾ əhɛɾ ən pʊt ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ, ən fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪnz dʒɛstʃɝz ɪt bɪkeɪm əpɛɹən ðeɪ wɝ ɑɹɡjuɪŋ. nɪneɪiv ən tɑm stɛɹɾ ət ðɛm, ðə wɪzdəm fɹaʊnɪŋ wɝidli, ðə ɡlimən mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ ən pɔzɪŋ tə stɛɹ bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ əɾ əm ɔltəɡɛðɝ. hu nu wʌt maɪt kʌm aʊɾ ʌv ən ɑɹɡjəmən bɪtwin ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ə wɔɹɾɝ?

The hills grew smaller, and the land began to level out, but instead of pressing on, Lan stopped. Nynaeve moved as if to rejoin Moiraine, but the Warder's look kept her away. He and the Aes Sedai rode ahead and put their heads together, and from Moiraine's gestures it became apparent they were arguing. Nynaeve and Thom stared at them, the Wisdom frowning worriedly, the gleeman muttering under his breath and pausing to stare back the way they had come, but everyone else avoided looking at them altogether. Who knew what might come out of an argument between an Aes Sedai and a Warder?

æftɝ ə fju mɪnəts ɛɡwin spoʊk tə ɹænd kwaɪətli, kæstɪŋ ən ənizi aɪ ət ðə stɪl-ɑɹɡjuɪŋ pɛɹ. "ðoʊz θɪŋz jə wɝ ʃaʊɾɪŋ ət ðə tʃɹɑləks." ʃi stɑpt əz ɪf ənʃʊɹ haʊ tə pɹəsid.

After a few minutes Egwene spoke to Rand quietly, casting an uneasy eye at the still-arguing pair. "Those things you were shouting at the Trollocs." She stopped as if unsure how to proceed.

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ðɛm?" ɹænd æskt. hi fɛlt ə lɪɾəl ɑkwɝd - wɔɹkɹaɪz wɝ ɔl ɹaɪt fəɹ wɔɹɾɝz; tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk dɪd nɑt də θɪŋz laɪk ðæt, wʌtɛvɝ mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd - bʌɾ ɪf ʃi meɪd fʌn ə hɪm oʊvɝ ɪt. . . . "mæt mʌst əv ɹɪpiɾɪd ðət stɔɹi tɛn taɪmz."

"What about them?" Rand asked. He felt a little awkward - warcries were all right for Warders; Two Rivers folk did not do things like that, whatever Moiraine said - but if she made fun of him over it. . . . "Mat must have repeated that story ten times."

"æn bædli," tɑm pʊɾ ɪn. mæt ɡɹʌntɪɾ ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst.

"And badly," Thom put in. Mat grunted in protest.

"haʊɛvɝ i toʊld ɪt," ɹænd sɛd, "wiv ɔl hɝɾ ɪɾ ɛni nʌmbɝ ə taɪmz. bɪsaɪdz, wi hæd tə ʃaʊt sʌmθɪŋ. aɪ min, ðæts wʌt jə də əɾ ə taɪm laɪk ðæt. jə hɝd læn."

"However he told it," Rand said, "we've all heard it any number of times. Besides, we had to shout something. I mean, that's what you do at a time like that. You heard Lan."

"ænd wɪv ə ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn æɾəd θɔtfəli. "mɔɪɹeɪn sɛz wɝ ɔl dɪsɛndəd fɹəm ðoʊz meɪnɛðɝən pipəl. ðeɪ fɔt ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən wɝ faɪɾɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðət ɡɪvz əs ə ɹaɪt."

"And we have a right," Perrin added thoughtfully. "Moiraine says we're all descended from those Manetheren people. They fought the Dark One, and we're fighting the Dark One. That gives us a right."

ɛɡwin snɪft əz ɪf tə ʃoʊ wʌt ʃi θɔɾ ə ðæt. "aɪ wɑzn tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðæt. wʌt . . . wʌt wɑz ɪt jə wɝ ʃaʊɾɪŋ, mæt?"

Egwene sniffed as if to show what she thought of that. "I wasn't talking about that. What . . . what was it you were shouting, Mat?"

mæt ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. "aɪ doʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝ." hi stɛɹɾ əɾ əm dɪfɛnsɪvli. "wɛl, aɪ doʊnt. ɪts ɔl fɑɡi. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz, əɹ wɛɹ ɪt keɪm fɹʌm, əɹ wʌɾ ɪt minz." hi ɡeɪv ə sɛlf-dɛpɹəkeɪɾɪŋ læf. "aɪ doʊn səpoʊz ɪt minz ɛniθɪŋ."

Mat shrugged uncomfortably. "I don't remember." He stared at them defensively. "Well, I don't. It's all foggy. I don't know what it was, or where it came from, or what it means." He gave a self-deprecating laugh. "I don't suppose it means anything."

"aɪ . . . aɪ θɪŋk ɪt dʌz," ɛɡwin sɛd sloʊli. "wɛn jə ʃaʊɾəd, aɪ θɔt - dʒʌs fəɹ ə mɪnət - aɪ θɔɾ aɪ ʌndɝstʊd ju. bʌɾ ɪts ɔl ɡɔn, naʊ." ʃi saɪɾ ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "pɝhæps jəɹ ɹaɪt. stʃɹeɪnʒ wʌt jə kən ɪmædʒən əɾ ə taɪm laɪk ðæt, ɪzən ɪt?"

"I . . . I think it does," Egwene said slowly. "When you shouted, I thought - just for a minute - I thought I understood you. But it's all gone, now." She sighed and shook her head. "Perhaps you're right. Strange what you can imagine at a time like that, isn't it?"

"kæɹɑi ən kɑldəzɑɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. ðeɪ ɔl twɪstəd tə stɛɹ ət hɝ. "kæɹɑi ən ɛlɪsɑnd. æl ɛlɪsɑnd. fəɹ ði ɑnɝ ə ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl. fəɹ ði ɑnɝ ə ðə ɹoʊz ə ðə sʌn. ðə ɹoʊz ə ðə sʌn. ði eɪntʃənt wɔɹkɹi ʌv meɪnɛðɝən, ən ðə wɔɹkɹi ʌv ɪts læs kɪŋ. ɛldʒɹin wɑz kɔl ðə ɹoʊz ə ðə sʌn." mɔɪɹeɪnz smaɪl tʊk ɪn ɛɡwin ən mæt boʊθ, ðoʊ hɝ ɡeɪz meɪ hæv ɹɛstəɾ ə moʊmən lɔŋɡɝ ɑn ɪm ðən ɑn hɝ. "ðə blʌɾ ʌv æɛmənz laɪn ɪz stɪl stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ði oʊl blʌd stɪl sɪŋz."

"Carai an Caldazar," Moiraine said. They all twisted to stare at her. "Carai an Ellisande. Al Ellisande. For the honor of the Red Eagle. For the honor of the Rose of the Sun. The Rose of the Sun. The ancient warcry of Manetheren, and the warcry of its last king. Eldrene was called the Rose of the Sun." Moiraine's smile took in Egwene and Mat both, though her gaze may have rested a moment longer on him than on her. "The blood of Aemon's line is still strong in the Two Rivers. The old blood still sings."

mæt ən ɛɡwin lʊkt əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ, waɪl ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls lʊkt əɾ əm boʊθ. ɛɡwinz aɪz wɝ waɪd, ən əɹ maʊθ kɛp kwɝkɪŋ ɪndə ə smaɪl ðət ʃi bɪt bæk ɛvɹi taɪm ɪt bɪɡæn, əz ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ dʒʌs haʊ tə teɪk ðɪs tɔk ə ði oʊl blʌd. mæt wɑz ʃʊɹ, fɹəm ðə skaʊlɪŋ fɹaʊn ɑn ɪz feɪs.

Mat and Egwene looked at each other, while everyone else looked at them both. Egwene's eyes were wide, and her mouth kept quirking into a smile that she bit back every time it began, as if she was not sure just how to take this talk of the old blood. Mat was sure, from the scowling frown on his face.

ɹænd θɔɾ i nu wʌt mæt wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ. ðə seɪm θɪŋ i wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ. ɪf mæt wɑz ə dɪsɛndən ə ði eɪntʃən kɪŋz ə meɪnɛðɝən, meɪbi ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ ɹɪli æftɝ ɪm ən nɑɾ ɔl θɹi ʌv ðɛm. ðə θɔt meɪɾ ɪm əʃeɪmd. hɪz tʃiks kʌlɝd, ən wən i kɑɾ ə ɡɪlti ɡɹɪmɑs ɑn pɛɹɪnz feɪs, hi nu pɛɹɪn hæd bɪn hævɪŋ ðə seɪm θɔt.

Rand thought he knew what Mat was thinking. The same thing he was thinking. If Mat was a descendant of the ancient kings of Manetheren, maybe the Trollocs were really after him and not all three of them. The thought made him ashamed. His cheeks colored, and when he caught a guilty grimace on Perrin's face, he knew Perrin had been having the same thought.

"aɪ kæn seɪ ðəɾ aɪ hæv ɛvɝ hɝd ðə laɪk ə ðɪs," tɑm sɛɾ æftɝ ə mɪnət. hi ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf ən bɪkeɪm bɹʌsk. "ənʌðɝ taɪm aɪ maɪɾ ivən meɪk ə stɔɹi aʊɾ ʌv ɪt, bʌt ɹaɪt naʊ. . . . dʒju ɪntɛn tə ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə deɪ, ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"I can't say that I have ever heard the like of this," Thom said after a minute. He shook himself and became brusque. "Another time I might even make a story out of it, but right now. . . . Do you intend to remain here for the rest of the day, Aes Sedai?"

"noʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd, ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz.

"No," Moiraine replied, gathering her reins.

eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹn kin fɹəm ðə saʊθ əz ɪf tə ɛmfəsaɪz əɹ wɝd. mɔɹ hɔɹnz ænsɝd, ist ən wɛst. ðə hɔɹsəz wɪkɝɾ ən saɪɾəld əbaʊt nɝvəsli.

A Trolloc horn keened from the south as if to emphasize her word. More horns answered, east and west. The horses whickered and sidled about nervously.

"ðeɪ hæv pæs ðə faɪɝ," læn sɛd kɑmli. hi tɝn tə mɔɪɹeɪn. "ju ɑɹ nɑt stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ wʌt jə ɪntɛnd, nɑt jɛt, nɑt wɪθaʊt ɹɛst. ən niðɝ mɹdʒɹɑl nɔɹ tʃɹɑlɑk wɪl ɛntɝ ðət pleɪs."

"They have passed the fire," Lan said calmly. He turned to Moiraine. "You are not strong enough for what you intend, not yet, not without rest. And neither Myrddraal nor Trolloc will enter that place."

mɔɪɹeɪn ɹeɪzd ə hæn əz ɪf tə kʌɾ ɪm ɔf, ðən saɪɾ ən lɛɾ ɪt fɔl ɪnstɛd. "vɛɹi wɛl," ʃi sɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli. "ju ɑɹ ɹaɪt, aɪ səpoʊz, bʌɾ aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɛni ʌðɝ tʃɔɪs." ʃi pʊld əɹ stæf fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə ɡɝθ stʃɹæp ə hɝ sæɾəl. "ɡæðɝ ɪn ɝaʊn mi, ɔl ə ju. əz kloʊs əz jə kæn. kloʊsɝ."

Moiraine raised a hand as if to cut him off, then sighed and let it fall instead. "Very well," she said irritably. "You are right, I suppose, but I would rather there was any other choice." She pulled her staff from under the girth strap of her saddle. "Gather in around me, all of you. As close as you can. Closer."

ɹænd ɝdʒ klaʊd nɪɹɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz mɛɹ. ət mɔɪɹeɪnz ɪnsɪstəns ðeɪ kɛpt ɑn kɹaʊɾɪŋ kloʊsɝ ɪn ə sɝkəl ɝaʊn əɹ əntɪl ɛvɹi hɔɹs hæɾ ɪts hɛd stʃɹɛtʃt oʊvɝ ðə kɹup əɹ wɪðɝz ʌv ənʌðɝ. oʊnli ðən wɑz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sæɾəsfaɪd. ðɛn, wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ, ʃi stʊɾ ɪn ðə stɝəps ən swʌŋ əɹ stæf oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɛdz, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ tə meɪk sɝɾən ɪt kʌvɝɾ ɛvɹiwʌn.

Rand urged Cloud nearer the Aes Sedai's mare. At Moiraine's insistence they kept on crowding closer in a circle around her until every horse had its head stretched over the croup or withers of another. Only then was the Aes Sedai satisfied. Then, without speaking, she stood in the stirrups and swung her staff over their heads, stretching to make certain it covered everyone.

ɹænd flɪntʃt itʃ taɪm ðə stæf pæst oʊvɝ hɪm. ə tɪŋɡəl ɹæn θɹu hɪm wɪð ɛvɹi pæs. hi cʊɾə fɑloʊd ðə stæf wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ɪt, dʒʌs baɪ fɑloʊɪŋ ðə ʃɪvɝz əz ɪt muvd oʊvɝ pipəl. ɪt wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz tə hɪm ðət læn wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn nɑɾ əfɛktəd.

Rand flinched each time the staff passed over him. A tingle ran through him with every pass. He could have followed the staff without seeing it, just by following the shivers as it moved over people. It was no surprise to him that Lan was the only one not affected.

əbɹʌpli mɔɪɹeɪn θɹʌs ðə stæf aʊt tə ðə wɛst. dɛd livz wɝld ɪndə ði ɛɹ ən bɹæntʃəz wɪpt əz ɪf ə dʌst-dɛvəl ɹæn əlɔŋ ðə laɪn ʃi pɔɪntəd tə. əz ði ɪnvɪzəbəl wɝlwɪn vænɪʃt fɹəm saɪt ʃi sɛɾəld bæk ɪndə hɝ sæɾəl wɪð ə saɪ.

Abruptly Moiraine thrust the staff out to the west. Dead leaves whirled into the air and branches whipped as if a dust-devil ran along the line she pointed to. As the invisible whirlwind vanished from sight she settled back into her saddle with a sigh.

"tə ðə tʃɹɑləks," ʃi sɛd, "aʊɝ sɛns ən əɹ tʃɹæks wɪl sim tə fɑloʊ ðæt. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɪl si θɹu ɪɾ ɪn taɪm, bʌt baɪ ðɛn. . . ."

"To the Trollocs," she said, "our scents and our tracks will seem to follow that. The Myrddraal will see through it in time, but by then. . . ."

"baɪ ðɛn," læn sɛd, "wi wɪl əv lɔst aʊɝsɛlvz."

"By then," Lan said, "we will have lost ourselves."

"jɔɹ stæf ɪz vɛɹi paʊɝfəl," ɛɡwin sɛd, ɝnɪŋ ə snɪf fɹəm nɪneɪiv.

"Your staff is very powerful," Egwene said, earning a sniff from Nynaeve.

mɔɪɹeɪn meɪɾ ə klɪkɪŋ saʊnd. "aɪ hæv toʊl ju, tʃaɪld, θɪŋz də nɑɾ əv paʊɝ. ðə wʌn paʊɝ kʌmz fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ən oʊnli ə lɪvɪŋ maɪn kən wild ɪt. ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ivən ən æŋɡɹil, mɪɹli ən eɪd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən." wɛɹəli ʃi slɪd ðə stæf bæk ʌndɝ əɹ ɡɝθ stʃɹæp. "læn?"

Moiraine made a clicking sound. "I have told you, child, things do not have power. The One Power comes from the True Source, and only a living mind can wield it. This is not even an angreal, merely an aid to concentration." Wearily she slid the staff back under her girth strap. "Lan?"

"fɑloʊ mi," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd, "æn kip kwaɪət. ɪɾəl ɹuən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪf ðə tʃɹɑləks hɪɹ ʌs."

"Follow me," the Warder said, "and keep quiet. It will ruin everything if the Trollocs hear us."

hi lɛd ðə weɪ nɔɹθ əɡɛn, nɑɾ ət ðə kɹæʃɪŋ peɪs ðeɪ hæd bɪn meɪkɪŋ, bʌt ɹæðɝ ɪn ðə kwɪk wɔk wɪð wɪtʃ ðeɪ hæd tʃɹævəl ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd. ðə læn kəntɪnjud tə flæɾən, ðoʊ ðə fɔɹəst ɹɪmeɪn əz θɪk.

He led the way north again, not at the crashing pace they had been making, but rather in the quick walk with which they had traveled the Caemlyn Road. The land continued to flatten, though the forest remained as thick.

ðɛɹ pæθ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ stʃɹeɪt, əz ɪt hæd bɪn bɪfɔɹ, fəɹ læn tʃoʊz aʊɾ ə ɹut ðət miændɝɾ oʊvɝ hɑɹd ɡɹaʊn ən ɹɑki aʊtkɹɑps, ən i noʊ lɔŋɡɝ lɛɾ əm fɔɹs ðɛɹ weɪ θɹu tæŋɡəlz ə bɹʌʃ, ɪnstɛd teɪkɪŋ ðə taɪm tə meɪk ðɛɹ weɪ ɝaʊnd. naʊ ən əɡɛn i dʒɹɑp tə ðə ɹɪɹ, ɪntɛnli stʌɾiɪŋ ðə tʃɹeɪl ðeɪ meɪd. ɪf ɛniwʌn soʊ mʌtʃ əz kɔft, ɪt dʒɹu ə ʃɑɹp ɡɹʌn fɹəm hɪm.

Their path was no longer straight, as it had been before, for Lan chose out a route that meandered over hard ground and rocky outcrops, and he no longer let them force their way through tangles of brush, instead taking the time to make their way around. Now and again he dropped to the rear, intently studying the trail they made. If anyone so much as coughed, it drew a sharp grunt from him.

nɪneɪiv ɹoʊd bɪsaɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, kənsɝn bæɾəlɪŋ dɪslaɪk ɑn əɹ feɪs. ən ðəɹ wɑz ə hɪn ə sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ, ɹænd θɔt, ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ðə wɪzdəm sɔ səm ɡoʊl ɪn saɪt. mɔɪɹeɪnz ʃoʊldɝz wɝ slʌmpt, ən ʃi hɛld əɹ ɹeɪnz ən ðə sæɾəl wɪð boʊθ hænz, sweɪɪŋ wɪð ɛvɹi stɛp ɑldib tʊk. ɪt wɑz pleɪn ðət leɪɪŋ ðə fɔls tʃɹeɪl, smɔl əz ðət maɪɾ əv sim bɪsaɪd pɹədusɪŋ ən ɝθkweɪk ən ə wɔl ə fleɪm, hæd teɪkən ə ɡɹeɪt dil aʊɾ ə hɝ, stʃɹɛŋkθ ʃi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hæd tə luz.

Nynaeve rode beside the Aes Sedai, concern battling dislike on her face. And there was a hint of something more, Rand thought, almost as if the Wisdom saw some goal in sight. Moiraine's shoulders were slumped, and she held her reins and the saddle with both hands, swaying with every step Aldieb took. It was plain that laying the false trail, small as that might have seemed beside producing an earthquake and a wall of flame, had taken a great deal out of her, strength she no longer had to lose.

ɹænd ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ðə hɔɹnz wəd stɑɹɾ əɡɛn. ət lis ðeɪ wɝ ə weɪ ʌv tɛlɪŋ haʊ fɑɹ bæk ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ. ən ðə feɪdz.

Rand almost wished the horns would start again. At least they were a way of telling how far back the Trollocs were. And the Fades.

hi kɛp lʊkɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən soʊ wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs tə si wʌt leɪ əhɛd. wən i dɪd, hi stɛɹd, pɝplɛkst. ə ɡɹeɪt, ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ mæs stʃɹɛtʃt ɔf tə iðɝ saɪɾ aʊɾ ə saɪt, ɪn moʊs pleɪsəz əz haɪ əz ðə tʃɹiz ðət ɡɹu ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ɪt, wɪð ivən tɔlɝ spaɪɹz hɪɹ ən ðɛɹ. lifləs vaɪnz ən kɹipɝz kʌvɝɾ ɪɾ ɔl ɪn θɪk leɪɝz. ə klɪf? ðə vaɪnz wɪl meɪk klaɪmɪŋ izi, bʌt wɪl nɛvɝ ɡɛt ðə hɔɹsəz ʌp.

He kept looking behind them, and so was not the first to see what lay ahead. When he did, he stared, perplexed. A great, irregular mass stretched off to either side out of sight, in most places as high as the trees that grew right up to it, with even taller spires here and there. Leafless vines and creepers covered it all in thick layers. A cliff? The vines will make climbing easy, but we'll never get the horses up.

sʌɾənli, əz ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ə lɪɾəl kloʊsɝ, hi sɔ ə taʊɝ. ɪt wɑz klɪɹli ə taʊɝ, nɑt səm kaɪndə ɹɑk fɔɹmeɪʃən, wɪð ən ɑd, pɔɪntəd doʊm ɑn ðə tɑp. "ə sɪɾi!" hi sɛd. ən ə sɪɾi wɔl, ən ðə spaɪɹz wɝ ɡɑɹd taʊɝz ɑn ðə wɔl. hɪz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt. ɪt hæd tə bi tɛn taɪmz əz bɪɡ əz bɛɹlən. fɪfti taɪmz əz bɪɡ.

Suddenly, as they rode a little closer, he saw a tower. It was clearly a tower, not some kind of rock formation, with an odd, pointed dome on the top. "A city!" he said. And a city wall, and the spires were guard towers on the wall. His jaw dropped. It had to be ten times as big as Baerlon. Fifty times as big.

mæt nɑɾəd. "ə sɪɾi," hi əɡɹid. "bʌt wʌts ə sɪɾi duɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə fɔɹəs laɪk ðɪs?"

Mat nodded. "A city," he agreed. "But what's a city doing in the middle of a forest like this?"

"ænd wɪθaʊɾ ɛni pipəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. wən ðeɪ lʊkt ət hɪm, hi pɔɪntəd tə ðə wɔl. "wʊd pipəl lɛt vaɪnz ɡɹoʊ oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ laɪk ðæt? jə noʊ haʊ kɹipɝz kən tɛɹ daʊn ə wɔl. lʊk haʊ ɪts fɔlən."

"And without any people," Perrin said. When they looked at him, he pointed to the wall. "Would people let vines grow over everything like that? You know how creepers can tear down a wall. Look how it's fallen."

wʌt ɹænd sɔ ədʒʌstəɾ ɪtsɛlf ɪn ɪz maɪn əɡɛn. ɪt wɑz əz pɛɹɪn sɛd. ʌndɝ ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi loʊ pleɪs ɪn ðə wɔl wɑz ə bɹʌʃ-kʌvɝd hɪl; ɹʌbəl fɹəm ðə kəlæpst wɔl əbʌv. noʊ tu ʌv ðə ɡɑɹd taʊɝz wɝ ðə seɪm haɪt.

What Rand saw adjusted itself in his mind again. It was as Perrin said. Under almost every low place in the wall was a brush-covered hill; rubble from the collapsed wall above. No two of the guard towers were the same height.

"aɪ wʌndɝ wʌt sɪɾi ɪt wɑz," ɛɡwin mjuzd. "aɪ wʌndɝ wʌt hæpən tə ɪt. aɪ doʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniθɪŋ fɹəm pɑpəz mæp."

"I wonder what city it was," Egwene mused. "I wonder what happened to it. I don't remember anything from papa's map."

"ɪt wɑz kɔld ɑɹɪdhɔl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɪn ðə deɪz ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, ɪt wɑz ən ælaɪ ʌv meɪnɛðɝən." stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə mæsɪv wɔlz, ʃi simd ɔlmoʊst ʌnəwɛɹ ə ði ʌðɝz, ivən ə nɪneɪiv, hu səpɔɹɾəd əɹ ɪn ðə sæɾəl wɪð ə hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm. "leɪɾɝ ɑɹɪdhɔl daɪd, ən ðɪs pleɪs wɑz kɔl baɪ ənʌðɝ neɪm."

"It was called Aridhol," Moiraine said. "In the days of the Trolloc Wars, it was an ally of Manetheren." Staring at the massive walls, she seemed almost unaware of the others, even of Nynaeve, who supported her in the saddle with a hand on her arm. "Later Aridhol died, and this place was called by another name."

"wʌt neɪm?" mæt æskt.

"What name?" Mat asked.

"hɪɹ," læn sɛd. hi stɑp mændɑɹb ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wʌt hæd wʌns bɪn ə ɡeɪt waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ fɪfti mɛn tə mɑɹtʃ θɹu əbɹɛst. oʊnli ðə bɹoʊkən, vaɪn-ɛnkɹʌstɪd wɑtʃtaʊɝz ɹɪmeɪnd; ʌv ðə ɡeɪts ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn. "wi ɛntɝ hɪɹ." tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹnz ʃɹikt ɪn ðə dɪstəns. læn pɪɹɾ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðə saʊnd, ðən lʊkt ət ðə sʌn, hæfweɪ daʊn təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹitɑps ɪn ðə wɛst. "ðeɪ hæv dɪskʌvɝɾ ɪts ə fɔls tʃɹeɪl. kʌm, wi mʌs faɪnd ʃɛltɝ bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk."

"Here," Lan said. He stopped Mandarb in front of what had once been a gate wide enough for fifty men to march through abreast. Only the broken, vine-encrusted watchtowers remained; of the gates there was no sign. "We enter here." Trolloc horns shrieked in the distance. Lan peered in the direction of the sound, then looked at the sun, halfway down toward the treetops in the west. "They have discovered it's a false trail. Come, we must find shelter before dark."

"wʌt neɪm?" mæt æskt əɡɛn.

"What name?" Mat asked again.

mɔɪɹeɪn ænsɝɾ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi. "ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ," ʃi sɛd. "ɪɾ ɪz kɔld ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ."

Moiraine answered as they rode into the city. "Shadar Logoth," she said. "It is called Shadar Logoth."


tʃæptɝ naɪntin


CHAPTER 19

ʃædoʊz weɪɾɪŋ


Shadow's Waiting

bɹoʊkən peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz kɹʌntʃt ʌndɝ ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz əz læn lɛd ðə weɪ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi. ði ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi wɑz bɹoʊkən, wʌt ɹænd kəd si ʌv ɪt, ən əz əbændən əz pɛɹɪn hæd sɛd. nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə pɪdʒən muvd, ən widz, meɪnli oʊld ən dɛd, spɹaʊɾəd fɹəm kɹæks ɪn wɔlz əz wɛl əz peɪvmənt. mɔɹ bɪldɪŋz hæd ɹufs fɔlən ɪn ðən hæɾ əm hoʊl. tʌmbəld wɔlz spɪl fænz ə bɹɪk ən stoʊn ɪndə ðə stʃɹits. taʊɝz stɑpt, əbɹʌpt ən dʒæɡd, laɪk bɹoʊkən stɪks. ənivən ɹʌbəl hɪlz wɪð ə fju stʌntɪd tʃɹiz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ sloʊps cʊɾə bɪn ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ə pæləsəz əɹ ʌv ɪntaɪɝ blɑks ə ðə sɪɾi.

Broken paving stones crunched under the horses' hooves as Lan led the way into the city. The entire city was broken, what Rand could see of it, and as abandoned as Perrin had said. Not so much as a pigeon moved, and weeds, mainly old and dead, sprouted from cracks in walls as well as pavement. More buildings had roofs fallen in than had them whole. Tumbled walls spilled fans of brick and stone into the streets. Towers stopped, abrupt and jagged, like broken sticks. Uneven rubble hills with a few stunted trees growing on their slopes could have been the remains of palaces or of entire blocks of the city.

jɛt wʌt wɑz lɛf stændɪŋ wɑz ɪnʌf tə teɪk ɹændz bɹɛθ. ðə lɑɹdʒəs bɪldɪŋ ɪn bɛɹlən wʊɾə vænɪʃt ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz ʌv ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ hɪɹ. peɪl mɑɹbəl pæləsəz tɑpt wɪð hjudʒ doʊmz mɛɾ ɪm wɛɹɛvɝ i lʊkt. ɛvɹi bɪldɪŋ əpɪɹd tə hæv ət list wʌn doʊm; səm hæd fɔɹ əɹ faɪv, ən itʃ wʌn ʃeɪp dɪfɹənli. lɔŋ wɔks laɪn baɪ kɑləmz ɹæn hʌnʒɹədz ə peɪsɪz tə taʊɝz ðət sim tə ɹitʃ ðə skaɪ. əɾ ɛvɹi ɪntɝsɛkʃən stʊɾ ə bɹɑnz faʊntən, əɹ ði æləbæstɝ spaɪɹ ʌv ə mɑnjəmənt, əɹ ə stætʃu ɑn ə pɛɾəstəl. ɪf ðə faʊntənz wɝ dʒɹaɪ, moʊst ə ðə spaɪɹz tɑpəld, ən mɛni ʌv ðə stætʃuz bɹoʊkən, wʌt ɹɪmeɪnd wɑz soʊ ɡɹeɪt ðəɾ i kəɾ oʊnli mɑɹvəl.

Yet what was left standing was enough to take Rand's breath. The largest building in Baerlon would have vanished in the shadows of almost anything here. Pale marble palaces topped with huge domes met him wherever he looked. Every building appeared to have at least one dome; some had four or five, and each one shaped differently. Long walks lined by columns ran hundreds of paces to towers that seemed to reach the sky. At every intersection stood a bronze fountain, or the alabaster spire of a monument, or a statue on a pedestal. If the fountains were dry, most of the spires toppled, and many of the statues broken, what remained was so great that he could only marvel.

ən aɪ θɔt bɛɹlən wɑz ə sɪɾi! bɝn mi, bʌt tɑm mʌst əv bɪn læfɪŋ ʌp ɪz sliv. mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn, tu.

And I thought Baerlon was a city! Burn me, but Thom must have been laughing up his sleeve. Moiraine and Lan, too.

hi wɑz soʊ kɑɾ ʌp ɪn stɛɹɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz teɪkən baɪ sɝpɹaɪz wən læn sʌɾənli stɑpt ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ə waɪt stoʊn bɪldɪŋ ðət hæd wʌns bɪn twaɪs əz bɪɡ əz ðə stæɡ ən laɪən ɪn bɛɹlən. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə seɪ wʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn wən ðə sɪɾi lɪvd ən wɑz ɡɹeɪt, pɝhæps ivən ən ɪn. oʊnli ə hɑloʊ ʃɛl ɹɪmeɪn ə ði ʌpɝ flɔɹz - ði æftɝnun skaɪ wɑz vɪzəbəl θɹu ɛmpti wɪndoʊ fɹeɪmz, ɡlæs ən wʊɾ əlaɪk lɔŋ sɪns ɡɔn - bʌt ðə ɡɹaʊn flɔɹ sim saʊn ɪnʌf.

He was so caught up in staring that he was taken by surprise when Lan suddenly stopped in front of a white stone building that had once been twice as big as the Stag and Lion in Baerlon. There was nothing to say what it had been when the city lived and was great, perhaps even an inn. Only a hollow shell remained of the upper floors - the afternoon sky was visible through empty window frames, glass and wood alike long since gone - but the ground floor seemed sound enough.

mɔɪɹeɪn, hænz stɪl ɑn ðə pɑməl, stʌɾid ðə bɪldɪŋ ɪntɛnli bɪfɔɹ nɑɾɪŋ. "ðɪs wɪl du."

Moiraine, hands still on the pommel, studied the building intently before nodding. "This will do."

læn lɛp fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl ən lɪftəd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ daʊn ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz. "bɹɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz ɪnsaɪd," hi kəmændəd. "faɪn ə ɹum ɪn ðə bæk tə juz fəɹ ə steɪbəl. muv, fɑɹmbɔɪz. ðɪs ɪzən ðə vɪlədʒ ɡɹin." hi vænɪʃt ɪnsaɪd kæɹiɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Lan leaped from his saddle and lifted the Aes Sedai down in his arms. "Bring the horses inside," he commanded. "Find a room in the back to use for a stable. Move, farmboys. This isn't the village green." He vanished inside carrying the Aes Sedai.

nɪneɪiv skɹæmbəl daʊn ən hɝiɾ æftɝ hɪm, klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ bæɡ ʌv ɝbz ən ɔɪnmənts. ɛɡwin wɑz ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn hɝ. ðeɪ lɛf ðɛɹ maʊns stændɪŋ.

Nynaeve scrambled down and hurried after him, clutching her bag of herbs and ointments. Egwene was right behind her. They left their mounts standing.

" 'bɹɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz ɪnsaɪd,' " tɑm mʌɾɝd ɹaɪli, ən pʌft aʊɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz. hi klaɪm daʊn, stɪf ən sloʊ, nʌkəld ɪz bæk, ən ɡeɪv ə lɔŋ saɪ, ðən tʊk ɑldibz ɹeɪnz. "wɛl?" hi sɛd, lɪftɪŋ ən aɪbɹaʊ ət ɹænd ən ɪz fɹɛnz.

" 'Bring the horses inside,' " Thom muttered wryly, and puffed out his mustaches. He climbed down, stiff and slow, knuckled his back, and gave a long sigh, then took Aldieb's reins. "Well?" he said, lifting an eyebrow at Rand and his friends.

ðeɪ hɝid tə dɪsmaʊnt, ən ɡæðɝɾ ʌp ðə ɹɛst ə ðə hɔɹsəz. ðə dɔɹweɪ, wɪθaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə seɪ ðəɹ hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ə dɔɹ ɪn ɪt, wɑz mɔɹ ðən bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə ɡɛt ði ænəməlz θɹu, ivən tu əbɹɛst.

They hurried to dismount, and gathered up the rest of the horses. The doorway, without anything to say there had ever been a door in it, was more than big enough to get the animals through, even two abreast.

ɪnsaɪd wɑz ə hjudʒ ɹum, əz waɪɾ əz ðə bɪldɪŋ, wɪð ə dɝɾi taɪl flɔɹ ən ə fju ɹæɡəd wɔl hæŋʒɪŋz, feɪɾəd tə ə dʌl bɹaʊn, ðət lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ wəd fɔl əpɑɹɾ əɾ ə tʌtʃ. nʌθɪŋ ɛls. læn hæd meɪɾ ə pleɪs ɪn ðə nɪɹəs kɔɹnɝ fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn wɪð ɪz kloʊk ən hɝz. nɪneɪiv, mʌɾɝɪŋ əbaʊt ðə dʌst, nɛl bɪsaɪd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, dɪɡɪŋ ɪn əɹ bæɡ, wɪtʃ ɛɡwin hɛld oʊpən.

Inside was a huge room, as wide as the building, with a dirty tile floor and a few ragged wall hangings, faded to a dull brown, that looked as if they would fall apart at a touch. Nothing else. Lan had made a place in the nearest corner for Moiraine with his cloak and hers. Nynaeve, muttering about the dust, knelt beside the Aes Sedai, digging in her bag, which Egwene held open.

"aɪ meɪ nɑt laɪk hɝ, ɪts tʃɹu," nɪneɪiv wɑz seɪɪŋ tə ðə wɔɹɾɝ əz ɹænd, liɾɪŋ bɛlə ən klaʊd, keɪm ɪn bɪhaɪn tɑm, "bʌɾ aɪ hɛlp ɛniwʌn u nidz maɪ hɛlp, wɛðɝ aɪ laɪk əm əɹ nɑt."

"I may not like her, it is true," Nynaeve was saying to the Warder as Rand, leading Bela and Cloud, came in behind Thom, "but I help anyone who needs my help, whether I like them or not."

"aɪ meɪd noʊ ækjəzeɪʃən, wɪzdəm. aɪ oʊnli sɛd, hæv ə kɛɹ wɪð jəɹ ɝbz."

"I made no accusation, Wisdom. I only said, have a care with your herbs."

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə lʊk fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ. "ðə fækt ɪz, ʃi nidz maɪ ɝbz, ən soʊ də ju." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz əsɛɹbɪk tə stɑɹt, ən ɡɹu mɔɹ tɑɹɾ əz ʃi spoʊk. "ðə fækt ɪz, ʃi kən oʊnli də soʊ mʌtʃ, ivən wɪð əɹ wʌn paʊɝ, ən ʃiz dʌn əbaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi kən wɪθaʊt kəlæpsɪŋ. ðə fækt ɪz, jəɹ sɔɹd kænɑt hɛlp əɹ naʊ, lɔɹɾ ə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz, bʌt maɪ ɝbz kæn."

She gave him a look from the corner of her eye. "The fact is, she needs my herbs, and so do you." Her voice was acerbic to start, and grew more tart as she spoke. "The fact is, she can only do so much, even with her One Power, and she has done about as much as she can without collapsing. The fact is, your sword cannot help her now, Lord of the Seven Towers, but my herbs can."

mɔɪɹeɪn leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn lænz ɑɹm. "bi əɾ iz, læn. ʃi minz noʊ hɑɹm. ʃi sɪmpli dʌz nɑt noʊ." ðə wɔɹɾɝ snɔɹɾɪd dɝɪsɪvli.

Moiraine laid a hand on Lan's arm. "Be at ease, Lan. She means no harm. She simply does not know." The Warder snorted derisively.

nɪneɪiv stɑp dɪɡɪŋ ɪn əɹ bæɡ ən lʊkt ət hɪm, fɹaʊnɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tə mɔɪɹeɪn ʃi spoʊk. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ mɛni θɪŋz aɪ doʊnt noʊ. wʌt θɪŋ ɪz ðɪs?"

Nynaeve stopped digging in her bag and looked at him, frowning, but it was to Moiraine she spoke. "There are many things I don't know. What thing is this?"

"fɔɹ wʌn," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd, "ɔl aɪ tʃɹuli niɾ ɪz ə lɪɾəl ɹɛst. fəɹ ənʌðɝ, aɪ əɡɹi wɪð ju. jəɹ skɪlz ən nɑlədʒ wɪl bi mɔɹ jusfəl ðən aɪ θɔt. naʊ, ɪf juv sʌmθɪŋ ðət wɪl hɛlp mi slip fəɹ ən aʊɝ ən nɑt liv mi ɡɹɑɡi - ?"

"For one," Moiraine replied, "all I truly need is a little rest. For another, I agree with you. Your skills and knowledge will be more useful than I thought. Now, if you have something that will help me sleep for an hour and not leave me groggy - ?"

"ə wik ti ʌv fɑksteɪl, mɛɹɪsɪn, ən - "

"A weak tea of foxtail, marisin, and - "

ɹænd mɪs ðə læst ʌv ɪɾ əz i fɑloʊd tɑm ɪndə ə ɹum bɪhaɪn ðə fɝst, ə tʃeɪmbɝ dʒʌst əz bɪɡ ən ivən ɛmptiɝ. hɪɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə dʌst, θɪk ən ʌndɪstɝbd əntɪl ðeɪ keɪm. nɑɾ ivən ðə tʃɹæks ə bɝdz əɹ smɔl ænəməlz mɑɹk ðə flɔɹ.

Rand missed the last of it as he followed Thom into a room behind the first, a chamber just as big and even emptier. Here was only the dust, thick and undisturbed until they came. Not even the tracks of birds or small animals marked the floor.

ɹænd bɪɡæn tə ənsæɾəl bɛlə ən klaʊd, ən tɑm, ɑldib ən ɪz ɡɛldɪŋ, ən pɛɹɪn, hɪz hɔɹs ən mændɑɹb. ɔl bʌt mæt. hi dʒɹɑpt ɪz ɹeɪnz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum. ðəɹ wɝ tu dɔɹweɪz fɹəm ðə ɹum bɪsaɪdz ðə wʌn baɪ wɪtʃ ðeɪ hæɾ ɛntɝd.

Rand began to unsaddle Bela and Cloud, and Thom, Aldieb and his gelding, and Perrin, his horse and Mandarb. All but Mat. He dropped his reins in the middle of the room. There were two doorways from the room besides the one by which they had entered.

"æli," mæt ənaʊnst, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz hɛd bæk ɪn fɹəm ðə fɝst. ðeɪ kəɾ ɔl si ðət mʌtʃ fɹəm wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ. ðə sɛkən dɔɹweɪ wɑz oʊnli ə blæk ɹɛktæŋɡəl ɪn ðə ɹɪɹ wɔl. mæt wɛn θɹu sloʊli, ən keɪm aʊt mʌtʃ fæstɝ, vɪɡɝəsli bɹʌʃɪŋ oʊl kɑbwɛbz aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛɹ. "nʌθɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ," hi sɛd, ɡɪvɪŋ ði æliweɪ ənʌðɝ lʊk.

"Alley," Mat announced, drawing his head back in from the first. They could all see that much from where they were. The second doorway was only a black rectangle in the rear wall. Mat went through slowly, and came out much faster, vigorously brushing old cobwebs out of his hair. "Nothing in there," he said, giving the alleyway another look.

"ju gɑnə teɪk kɛɹ ə jəɹ hɔɹs?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. hi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi fɪnɪʃt ɪz oʊn ən wɑz lɪftɪŋ ðə sæɾəl fɹəm mændɑɹb. stʃɹeɪnʒli, ðə fɪɹs-aɪd stæljən ɡeɪv ɪm noʊ tʃɹʌbəl əɾ ɔl, ðoʊ hi dɪd wɑtʃ pɛɹɪn. "noʊbɑdi ɪz gɑnə də ɪt fəɹ ju."

"You going to take care of your horse?" Perrin said. He had already finished his own and was lifting the saddle from Mandarb. Strangely, the fierce-eyed stallion gave him no trouble at all, though he did watch Perrin. "Nobody is going to do it for you."

mæt ɡeɪv ði æli wʌn læs lʊk ən wɛn tə hɪz hɔɹs wɪð ə saɪ.

Mat gave the alley one last look and went to his horse with a sigh.

əz ɹænd leɪd bɛləz sæɾəl ɑn ðə flɔɹ, hi noʊɾəst ðət mæt hæd teɪkən ɑn ə ɡlʌm stɛɹ. hɪz aɪz simd ə θaʊzən maɪlz əweɪ, ən i wɑz muvɪŋ baɪ ɹoʊt.

As Rand laid Bela's saddle on the floor, he noticed that Mat had taken on a glum stare. His eyes seemed a thousand miles away, and he was moving by rote.

"ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt, mæt?" ɹænd sɛd. mæt lɪftəd ðə sæɾəl fɹəm ɪz hɔɹs, ən stʊd hoʊldɪŋ ɪt. "mæt? mæt!"

"Are you all right, Mat?" Rand said. Mat lifted the saddle from his horse, and stood holding it. "Mat? Mat!"

mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑp ðə sæɾəl. "wʌt? oʊ. aɪ . . . aɪ wɑz dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ."

Mat gave a start and almost dropped the saddle. "What? Oh. I . . . I was just thinking."

"θɪŋkɪŋ?" pɛɹɪn huɾɪd fɹəm wɛɹ i wɑz ɹɪpleɪsɪŋ mændɑɹbz bɹaɪɾəl wɪð ə hækɑmɔɹ. "ju wɝ əslip."

"Thinking?" Perrin hooted from where he was replacing Mandarb's bridle with a hackamore. "You were asleep."

mæt skaʊld. "aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt . . . əbaʊt wʌt hæpən bæk ðɛɹ. əbaʊt ðoʊz wɝdz aɪ. . . ." ɛvɹibɑɾi tɝn tə lʊk əɾ ɪm ðɛn, nɑt dʒʌst ɹænd, ən i ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli. "wɛl, jə hɝd wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. ɪts əz ɪf səm dɛd mæn wɑz spikɪŋ wɪð maɪ maʊθ. aɪ doʊn laɪk ɪt." hɪz skaʊl ɡɹu dipɝ wən pɛɹɪn tʃʌkəld.

Mat scowled. "I was thinking about . . . about what happened back there. About those words I. . . ." Everybody turned to look at him then, not just Rand, and he shifted uneasily. "Well, you heard what Moiraine said. It's as if some dead man was speaking with my mouth. I don't like it." His scowl grew deeper when Perrin chuckled.

"æɛmənz wɔɹkɹi, ʃi sɛd - ɹaɪt? meɪbi jəɹ æɛmən kʌm bæk əɡɛn. ðə weɪ jə ɡoʊ ɑn əbaʊt haʊ dʌl ɛmənz fild ɪz, aɪd θɪŋk jə wəd laɪk ðət - biɪŋ ə kɪŋ ən hɪɹoʊ ɹibɔɹn."

"Aemon's warcry, she said - right? Maybe you're Aemon come back again. The way you go on about how dull Emond's Field is, I'd think you would like that - being a king and hero reborn."

"doʊn seɪ ðæt!" tɑm dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ; ɛvɹibɑɾi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm naʊ. "ðæɾ ɪz deɪnʒɝəs tɔk, stupəd tɔk. ðə dɛd kən bi ɹibɔɹn, əɹ teɪk ə lɪvɪŋ bɑɾi, ən ɪts nɑt sʌmθɪŋ tə spik ə laɪtli." hi tʊk ənʌðɝ bɹɛθ tə kɑm hɪmsɛlf bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "ði oʊl blʌd, ʃi sɛd. ðə blʌd, nɑɾ ə dɛd mæn. aɪv hɝd ðəɾ ɪt kən hæpən, səmtaɪmz. hɝd, ðoʊ aɪ nɛvɝ ɹɪli θɔt. . . . ɪt wɑz jəɹ ɹuts, bɔɪ. ə laɪn ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm jə tə jəɹ fɑðɝ tə jəɹ ɡɹændfɑðɝ, ɹaɪɾ ɑn bæk tə meɪnɛðɝən, ən meɪbi bɪɑnd. wɛl, naʊ jə noʊ jəɹ fæmli ɪz oʊld. jə ɔt tə lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ ət ðəɾ ən bi ɡlæd. moʊs pipəl doʊnt noʊ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ðən ðət ðeɪ hæɾ ə fɑðɝ."

"Don't say that!" Thom drew a deep breath; everybody stared at him now. "That is dangerous talk, stupid talk. The dead can be reborn, or take a living body, and it is not something to speak of lightly." He took another breath to calm himself before going on. "The old blood, she said. The blood, not a dead man. I've heard that it can happen, sometimes. Heard, though I never really thought. . . . It was your roots, boy. A line running from you to your father to your grandfather, right on back to Manetheren, and maybe beyond. Well, now you know your family is old. You ought to let it go at that and be glad. Most people don't know much more than that they had a father."

səm ʌv əs kæn ivən bi ʃʊɹ ə ðæt, ɹænd θɔt bɪɾɝli. meɪbi ðə wɪzdəm wɑz ɹaɪt. laɪt, aɪ hoʊp ʃi wɑz.

Some of us can't even be sure of that, Rand thought bitterly. Maybe the Wisdom was right. Light, I hope she was.

mæt nɑɾəd ət wʌt ðə ɡlimən sɛd. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪ ʃʊd. oʊnli . . . dʒju θɪŋk ɪts ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð wʌts hæpən tə ʌs? ðə tʃɹɑləks ən ɔl? aɪ min . . . oʊ, aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ aɪ min."

Mat nodded at what the gleeman said. "I suppose I should. Only . . . do you think it has anything to do with what's happened to us? The Trollocs and all? I mean . . . oh, I don't know what I mean."

"aɪ θɪŋk jə ɔt tə fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ seɪfli." tɑm pɹədust ɪz lɔŋ-stɛm paɪp fɹəm ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz kloʊk. "æn aɪ θɪŋk aɪm gɑnə hæv ə smoʊk." wɪð ə wæəl ə ðə paɪp ɪn ðɛɹ dɝɛkʃən, hi dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə fɹʌn ɹum.

"I think you ought to forget about it, and concentrate on getting out of here safely." Thom produced his long-stemmed pipe from inside his cloak. "And I think I am going to have a smoke." With a waggle of the pipe in their direction, he disappeared into the front room.

"wi ɑɹ ɔl ɪn ðɪs təɡɛðɝ, nɑt dʒʌst wʌn ʌv ʌs," ɹænd toʊl mæt.

"We are all in this together, not just one of us," Rand told Mat.

mæt ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ən læft, ə ʃɔɹt bɑɹk. "ɹaɪt. wɛl, spikɪŋ ə biɪŋ ɪn θɪŋz təɡɛðɝ, naʊ ðət wɝ dʌn wɪð ðə hɔɹsəz, waɪ doʊnt wi ɡoʊ si ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ə ðɪs sɪɾi. ə ɹil sɪɾi, ən noʊ kɹaʊdz tə dʒɑsəl jəɹ ɛlboʊ ən poʊk jə ɪn ðə ɹɪbz. noʊbɑdi lʊkɪŋ daʊn ðɛɹ lɔŋ noʊzɪz əɾ ʌs. ðɛɹz stɪl ən aʊɝ, meɪbi tu, ʌv deɪlaɪt lɛft."

Mat gave himself a shake, and laughed, a short bark. "Right. Well, speaking of being in things together, now that we're done with the horses, why don't we go see a little more of this city. A real city, and no crowds to jostle your elbow and poke you in the ribs. Nobody looking down their long noses at us. There's still an hour, maybe two, of daylight left."

"ɑɹən jə fɝɡɛɾɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks?" pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Aren't you forgetting the Trollocs?" Perrin said.

mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd skɔɹnfəli. "læn sɛd ðeɪ wʊdn kʌm ɪn hɪɹ, ɹɪmɛmbɝ? jə nid tə lɪsən tə wʌt pipəl seɪ."

Mat shook his head scornfully. "Lan said they wouldn't come in here, remember? You need to listen to what people say."

"aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "æn aɪ də lɪsən. ðɪs sɪɾi - ɑɹɪdhɔl? - wɑz ən ælaɪ ʌv meɪnɛðɝən. si? aɪ lɪsən."

"I remember," Perrin said. "And I do listen. This city - Aridhol? - was an ally of Manetheren. See? I listen."

"ɑɹɪdhɔl mʌst əv bɪn ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst sɪɾi ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz," ɹænd sɛd, "fɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks tə stɪl bi əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ɪt. ðeɪ wɝn əfɹeɪd tə kʌm ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd meɪnɛðɝən wɑz - haʊ dɪd ʃi pʊɾ ɪt? - ə θɔɹn tə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz fʊt."

"Aridhol must have been the greatest city in the Trolloc Wars," Rand said, "for the Trollocs to still be afraid of it. They weren't afraid to come into the Two Rivers, and Moiraine said Manetheren was - how did she put it? - a thorn to the Dark One's foot."

pɛɹɪn ɹeɪzd ɪz hænz. "doʊn mɛnʃən ðə ʃɛpɝɾ ə ðə naɪt. pliz?"

Perrin raised his hands. "Don't mention the Shepherd of the Night. Please?"

"wʌt dʒju seɪ?" mæt læft. "lɛts ɡoʊ."

"What do you say?" Mat laughed. "Let's go."

"wi ʃəɾ æsk mɔɪɹeɪn," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən mæt θɹu ʌp ɪz hænz.

"We should ask Moiraine," Perrin said, and Mat threw up his hands.

"æsk mɔɪɹeɪn? jə θɪŋk ʃɪl lɛɾ əs aʊɾ ə hɝ saɪt? ən wʌɾ əbaʊt nɪneɪiv? blʌɾ ən æʃəz, pɛɹɪn, waɪ nɑɾ æsk mɪstʃɹəs luhən waɪl jəɹ əbaʊɾ ɪt?"

"Ask Moiraine? You think she'll let us out of her sight? And what about Nynaeve? Blood and ashes, Perrin, why not ask Mistress Luhhan while you're about it?"

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktən əɡɹimənt, ən mæt tɝn tə ɹænd wɪð ə ɡɹɪn. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ju? ə ɹil sɪɾi? wɪð pæləsəz!" hi ɡeɪv ə slaɪ læf. "ænd noʊ waɪtkloʊks tə stɛɹ əɾ ʌs."

Perrin nodded reluctant agreement, and Mat turned to Rand with a grin. "What about you? A real city? With palaces!" He gave a sly laugh. "And no Whitecloaks to stare at us."

ɹænd ɡeɪv ɪm ə dɝɾi lʊk, bʌɾ i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə mɪnət. ðoʊz pæləsəz wɝ laɪk ə ɡlimənz teɪl. "ɔl ɹaɪt."

Rand gave him a dirty look, but he hesitated only a minute. Those palaces were like a gleeman's tale. "All right."

stɛpɪŋ sɔfli soʊ əz nɑt tə bi hɝɾ ɪn ðə fɹʌn ɹum, ðeɪ lɛf baɪ ði æli, fɑloʊɪŋ ɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə fɹʌn ə ðə bɪldɪŋ tə ə stʃɹiɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ðeɪ wɔkt kwɪkli, ən wən ðeɪ wɝ ə blɑk əweɪ fɹəm ðə waɪt stoʊn bɪldɪŋ mæt sʌɾənli bɹoʊk ɪndə ə keɪpɝɪŋ dæns.

Stepping softly so as not to be heard in the front room, they left by the alley, following it away from the front of the building to a street on the other side. They walked quickly, and when they were a block away from the white stone building Mat suddenly broke into a capering dance.

"fɹi." hi læft. "fɹi!" hi sloʊɾ əntɪl i wɑz tɝnɪŋ ə sɝkəl, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ən stɪl læfɪŋ. ði æftɝnun ʃædoʊz stʃɹɛtʃt lɔŋ ən dʒæɡd, ən ðə sɪŋkɪŋ sʌn meɪd ðə ɹuən sɪɾi ɡoʊldən. "dɪd jə ɛvɝ ivən dʒɹim ʌv ə pleɪs laɪk ðɪs? dɪd ju?"

"Free." He laughed. "Free!" He slowed until he was turning a circle, staring at everything and still laughing. The afternoon shadows stretched long and jagged, and the sinking sun made the ruined city golden. "Did you ever even dream of a place like this? Did you?"

pɛɹɪn læft, tu, bʌt ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. ðɪs wɑz nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðə sɪɾi ɪn ɪz fɝs dʒɹim, bʌt dʒʌs ðə seɪm. . . . "ɪf wɝ gɑnə si ɛniθɪŋ," hi sɛd, "wi hæd bɛɾɝ ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ɪt. ðəɹ ɪzən mʌtʃ deɪlaɪt lɛft."

Perrin laughed, too, but Rand shrugged uncomfortably. This was nothing like the city in his first dream, but just the same. . . . "If we're going to see anything," he said, "we had better get on with it. There isn't much daylight left."

mæt wɑntəd tə si ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɪt simd, ən i pʊl ði ʌðɝz əlɔŋ wɪð ɪz ɪnθuziæzəm. ðeɪ klaɪmd oʊvɝ dʌsti faʊntənz wɪð beɪsənz waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə hoʊld ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ɛmənz fild ən wɑndɝɾ ɪn ən aʊɾ ə stʃɹʌktʃɝz tʃoʊzən ət ɹændəm, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz ðə bɪɡəs ðeɪ kəd faɪnd. səm ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd, ən səm nɑt. ə pæləs wɑz pleɪnli ə pæləs, bʌt wʌt wɑz ə hjudʒ bɪldɪŋ ðət wɑz wʌn ɹaʊnd, waɪt doʊm əz bɪɡ əz ə hɪl aʊtsaɪɾ ən wʌn mɑnstʃɹəs ɹum ɪnsaɪd? ən ə wɔl pleɪs, oʊpən tə ðə skaɪ ən bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə hæv hɛld ɔl ʌv ɛmənz fild, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ɹoʊ ɑn ɹoʊ ɑn ɹoʊ ʌv stoʊn bɛntʃɪz?

Mat wanted to see everything, it seemed, and he pulled the others along with his enthusiasm. They climbed over dusty fountains with basins wide enough to hold everybody in Emond's Field and wandered in and out of structures chosen at random, but always the biggest they could find. Some they understood, and some not. A palace was plainly a palace, but what was a huge building that was one round, white dome as big as a hill outside and one monstrous room inside? And a walled place, open to the sky and big enough to have held all of Emond's Field, surrounded by row on row on row of stone benches?

mæt ɡɹu ɪmpeɪʃənt wən ðeɪ faʊnd nʌθɪŋ bʌt dʌst, əɹ ɹʌbəl, əɹ kʌlɝləs ɹæɡz ʌv wɔl hæŋʒɪŋz ðət kɹʌmbəld əɾ ə tʌtʃ. wʌns səm wʊɾən tʃɛɹz stʊd stækt əɡɛnst ə wɔl; ðeɪ ɔl fɛl tə bɪts wən pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə pɪk wʌn ʌp.

Mat grew impatient when they found nothing but dust, or rubble, or colorless rags of wall hangings that crumbled at a touch. Once some wooden chairs stood stacked against a wall; they all fell to bits when Perrin tried to pick one up.

ðə pæləsəz, wɪð ðɛɹ hjudʒ, ɛmpti tʃeɪmbɝz, səm ʌv wɪtʃ cʊɾə hɛl ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn wɪð ɹum tə spɛɹ ɑn ɛvɹi saɪɾ ən əbʌv əz wɛl, meɪd ɹænd θɪŋk tu mʌtʃ ə ðə pipəl u hæd wʌns fɪl ðɛm. hi θɔɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz cʊɾə stʊɾ ʌndɝ ðət ɹaʊn doʊm, ən əz fəɹ ðə pleɪs wɪð ðə stoʊn bɛntʃɪz. . . . hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɪmædʒən i kəd si ðə pipəl ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz, stɛɹɪŋ ɪn dɪsəpɹuvəl ət ðə θɹi ɪntʃɹuɾɝz dɪstɝbɪŋ ðɛɹ ɹɛst.

The palaces, with their huge, empty chambers, some of which could have held the Winespring Inn with room to spare on every side and above as well, made Rand think too much of the people who had once filled them. He thought everybody in the Two Rivers could have stood under that round dome, and as for the place with the stone benches. . . . He could almost imagine he could see the people in the shadows, staring in disapproval at the three intruders disturbing their rest.

faɪnəli ivən mæt taɪɝd, ɡɹæn əz ðə bɪldɪŋz wɝ, ən ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðəɾ i hæd hæɾ oʊnli ən aʊɝz slip ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ. ɛvɹiwʌn bɪɡæn tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt. jɔnɪŋ, ðeɪ sæɾ ɑn ðə stɛps ʌv ə tɔl bɪldɪŋ fɹʌntɪd baɪ ɹoʊ ɑn ɹoʊ ʌv tɔl stoʊn kɑləmz ən ɑɹɡjuɾ əbaʊt wʌt tə də nɛkst.

Finally even Mat tired, grand as the buildings were, and remembered that he had had only an hour's sleep the night before. Everyone began to remember that. Yawning, they sat on the steps of a tall building fronted by row on row of tall stone columns and argued about what to do next.

"ɡoʊ bæk," ɹænd sɛd, "ænd ɡɛt səm slip." hi pʊt ðə bæk ə hɪz hæn əɡɛnst ɪz maʊθ. wən i kəd tɔk əɡɛn, hi sɛd, "slip. ðæts ɔl aɪ wɑnt."

"Go back," Rand said, "and get some sleep." He put the back of his hand against his mouth. When he could talk again, he said, "Sleep. That's all I want."

"ju kən slip ɛnitaɪm," mæt sɛd dətɝmənədli. "lʊk ət wɛɹ wi ɑɹ. ə ɹuən sɪɾi. tʃɹɛʒɝ."

"You can sleep anytime," Mat said determinedly. "Look at where we are. A ruined city. Treasure."

"tʃɹɛʒɝ?" pɛɹɪnz dʒɔz kɹækt. "ðɛɹ ɪzən ɛni tʃɹɛʒɝ hɪɹ. ðəɹ ɪzən ɛniθɪŋ bʌt dʌst."

"Treasure?" Perrin's jaws cracked. "There isn't any treasure here. There isn't anything but dust."

ɹænd ʃeɪɾɪd ɪz aɪz əɡɛns ðə sʌn, ə ɹɛd bɔl sɪɾɪŋ kloʊs tə ðə ɹuftɑps. "ɪts ɡɛɾɪŋ leɪt, mæt. ɪɾəl bi dɑɹk sun."

Rand shaded his eyes against the sun, a red ball sitting close to the rooftops. "It's getting late, Mat. It'll be dark soon."

"ðɛɹ kəd bi tʃɹɛʒɝ," mæt meɪnteɪn staʊtli. "ɛniweɪ, aɪ wɑnə klaɪm wʌn ə ðə taʊɝz. lʊk ət ðət wʌn oʊvɝ ðɛɹ. ɪts hoʊl. əl bɛt jə kəd si fəɹ maɪlz fɹəm ʌp ðɛɹ. wʌt dʒju seɪ?"

"There could be treasure," Mat maintained stoutly. "Anyway, I want to climb one of the towers. Look at that one over there. It's whole. I'll bet you could see for miles from up there. What do you say?"

"ðə taʊɝz ɑɹ nɑt seɪf," sɛɾ ə mænz vɔɪs bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

"The towers are not safe," said a man's voice behind them.

ɹænd lɛp tə hɪz fiɾ ən spʌn ɝaʊn klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ dʒʌst əz kwɪk.

Rand leaped to his feet and spun around clutching his sword hilt, and the others were just as quick.

ə mæn stʊɾ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz ət ðə tɑp ə ðə stɛɹz. hi tʊk hæf ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd, ɹeɪzd ɪz hæn tə ʃild ɪz aɪz, ən stɛp bæk əɡɛn. "fɝɡɪv mi," hi sɛd smuðli. "aɪ hæv bɪn kwaɪɾ ə lɔŋ taɪm ɪn ðə dɑɹk ɪnsaɪd. maɪ aɪz ɑɹ nɑt jɛt juz tə ðə laɪt."

A man stood in the shadows among the columns at the top of the stairs. He took half a step forward, raised his hand to shield his eyes, and stepped back again. "Forgive me," he said smoothly. "I have been quite a long time in the dark inside. My eyes are not yet used to the light."

"hu ɑɹ ju?" ɹænd θɔt ðə mænz æksɛn saʊndəɾ ɑd, ivən æftɝ bɛɹlən; səm wɝdz i pɹənaʊnst stʃɹeɪnʒli, soʊ ɹænd kəd bɛɹli ʌndɝstæn ðɛm. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ hɪɹ? wi θɔt ðə sɪɾi wɑz ɛmpti."

"Who are you?" Rand thought the man's accent sounded odd, even after Baerlon; some words he pronounced strangely, so Rand could barely understand them. "What are you doing here? We thought the city was empty."

"aɪ æm mɔɹɾɪθ." hi pɔzd əz ɪf ɪkspɛktɪŋ əm tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə neɪm. wən nʌn ə ðɛm ɡeɪv ɛni saɪn ə duɪŋ soʊ, hi mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ ən wɛn ɑn. "aɪ kəɾ æsk ðə seɪm kwɛstʃənz ə ju. ðəɹ əz bɪn noʊ wʌn ɪn ɑɹɪdhɔl fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm. ə lɔŋ, lɔŋ taɪm. aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv θɔt tə faɪn θɹi jʌŋ mɛn wɑndɝɪŋ ɪts stʃɹits."

"I am Mordeth." He paused as if expecting them to recognize the name. When none of them gave any sign of doing so, he muttered something under his breath and went on. "I could ask the same questions of you. There has been no one in Aridhol for a long time. A long, long time. I would not have thought to find three young men wandering its streets."

"wɝ ɑn əɹ weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn," ɹænd sɛd. "wi stɑp tə teɪk ʃɛltɝ fəɹ ðə naɪt."

"We're on our way to Caemlyn," Rand said. "We stopped to take shelter for the night."

"keɪɛmlɪn," mɔɹɾɪθ sɛd sloʊli, ɹoʊlɪŋ ðə neɪm ɝaʊn ɪz tʌŋ, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ʃɛltɝ fəɹ ðə naɪt, jə seɪ? pɝhæps jəl dʒɔɪn mi."

"Caemlyn," Mordeth said slowly, rolling the name around his tongue, then shook his head. "Shelter for the night, you say? Perhaps you will join me."

"ju stɪl hævən sɛd wʌt jəɹ duɪŋ hɪɹ," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"You still haven't said what you're doing here," Perrin said.

"waɪ, aɪm ə tʃɹɛʒɝ hʌntɝ, ʌv kɔɹs."

"Why, I am a treasure hunter, of course."

"hæv jə faʊn ɛni?" mæt dɪmændəɾ ɪksaɪɾədli.

"Have you found any?" Mat demanded excitedly.

ɹænd θɔt mɔɹɾɪθ smaɪld, bʌɾ ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz i kəd nɑt bi ʃʊɹ. "aɪ hæv," ðə mæn sɛd. "mɔɹ ðən aɪ ɪkspɛktəd. mʌtʃ mɔɹ. mɔɹ ðən aɪ kən kæɹi əweɪ. aɪ nɛvɝ ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn θɹi stʃɹɔŋ, hɛlθi jʌŋ mɛn. ɪf jəl hɛlp mi muv wʌɾ aɪ kən teɪk tə wɛɹ maɪ hɔɹsəz ɑɹ, jə meɪ itʃ əv ə ʃɛɹ ə ðə ɹɛst. əz mʌtʃ əz jə kən kæɹi. wʌtɛvɝ aɪ liv wɪl bi ɡɔn, kæɹiɾ ɔf baɪ səm ʌðɝ tʃɹɛʒɝ hʌntɝ, bɪfɔɹ aɪ kən ɹɪtɝn fəɹ ɪt."

Rand thought Mordeth smiled, but in the shadows he could not be sure. "I have," the man said. "More than I expected. Much more. More than I can carry away. I never expected to find three strong, healthy young men. If you will help me move what I can take to where my horses are, you may each have a share of the rest. As much as you can carry. Whatever I leave will be gone, carried off by some other treasure hunter, before I can return for it."

"aɪ toʊl jə ðəɹ mʌs bi tʃɹɛʒɝ ɪn ə pleɪs laɪk ðɪs," mæt ɪkskleɪmd. hi dɑɹɾɪd ʌp ðə stɛɹz. "wil hɛlp jə kæɹi ɪt. dʒʌs teɪk əs tə ɪt." hi ən mɔɹɾɪθ muv dipɝ ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊz əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz.

"I told you there must be treasure in a place like this," Mat exclaimed. He darted up the stairs. "We'll help you carry it. Just take us to it." He and Mordeth moved deeper into the shadows among the columns.

ɹænd lʊkt ət pɛɹɪn. "wi kæn liv hɪm." pɛɹɪn ɡlænst ət ðə sɪŋkɪŋ sʌn, ən nɑɾəd.

Rand looked at Perrin. "We can't leave him." Perrin glanced at the sinking sun, and nodded.

ðeɪ wɛn ʌp ðə stɛɹz wɛɹəli, pɛɹɪn izɪŋ ɪz æks ɪn ɪts bɛlt lup. ɹændz hæn taɪɾənd ɑn ɪz sɔɹd. bʌt mæt ən mɔɹɾɪθ wɝ weɪɾɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz, mɔɹɾɪθ wɪð ɑɹmz foʊldəd, mæt piɹɪŋ ɪmpeɪʃənli ɪndə ði ɪntɪɹiɝ.

They went up the stairs warily, Perrin easing his axe in its belt loop. Rand's hand tightened on his sword. But Mat and Mordeth were waiting among the columns, Mordeth with arms folded, Mat peering impatiently into the interior.

"kʌm," mɔɹɾɪθ sɛd. "aɪ wɪl ʃoʊ jə ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ." hi slɪpt ɪnsaɪd, ən mæt fɑloʊd. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ði ʌðɝz tə də bʌt ɡoʊ ɑn.

"Come," Mordeth said. "I will show you the treasure." He slipped inside, and Mat followed. There was nothing for the others to do but go on.

ðə hɔl ɪnsaɪd wɑz ʃæɾoʊi, bʌɾ ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli mɔɹɾɪθ tɝn əsaɪɾ ən tʊk səm nɛɹoʊ stɛps ðət waʊn ɝaʊn ən daʊn θɹu dipɝ ən dipɝ dɑɹk əntɪl ðeɪ fʌmbəl ðɛɹ weɪ ɪn pɪtʃ-blæknəs. ɹænd fɛlt əlɔŋ ðə wɔl wɪð wʌn hænd, ənʃʊɹ ðəɹ wəd bi ə stɛp bɪloʊ əntɪl ɪz fʊt mɛɾ ɪt. ivən mæt bɪɡæn tə fil ənizi, dʒʌdʒɪŋ baɪ hɪz vɔɪs wən i sɛd, "ɪts ɑfli dɑɹk daʊn hɪɹ."

The hall inside was shadowy, but almost immediately Mordeth turned aside and took some narrow steps that wound around and down through deeper and deeper dark until they fumbled their way in pitch-blackness. Rand felt along the wall with one hand, unsure there would be a step below until his foot met it. Even Mat began to feel uneasy, judging by his voice when he said, "It's awfully dark down here."

"jɛs, jɛs," mɔɹɾɪθ ɹɪplaɪd. ðə mæn sim tə bi hævɪŋ noʊ tʃɹʌbəl əɾ ɔl wɪð ðə dɑɹk. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ laɪts bɪloʊ. kʌm."

"Yes, yes," Mordeth replied. The man seemed to be having no trouble at all with the dark. "There are lights below. Come."

ɪndid ðə waɪndɪŋ stɛɹz əbɹʌpli ɡeɪv weɪ tə ə kɔɹəɾɝ dɪmli lɪt baɪ skæɾɝd, smoʊki tɔɹtʃɪz sɛɾ ɪn aɪɝn skɑnsɪz ɑn ðə wɔlz. ðə flɪkɝɪŋ fleɪmz ən ʃædoʊz ɡeɪv ɹænd ɪz fɝst ɡʊd lʊk ət mɔɹɾɪθ, hu hɝiɾ ɑn wɪθaʊt pɔzɪŋ, moʊʃənɪŋ əm tə fɑloʊ.

Indeed the winding stairs abruptly gave way to a corridor dimly lit by scattered, smoky torches set in iron sconces on the walls. The flickering flames and shadows gave Rand his first good look at Mordeth, who hurried on without pausing, motioning them to follow.

ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɑɾ əbaʊt hɪm, ɹænd θɔt, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt pɪk aʊt wʌɾ ɪt wɑz, ɪɡzækli. mɔɹɾɪθ wɑz ə slik, sʌmwʌɾ oʊvɝfɛd mæn, wɪð dʒɹupɪŋ aɪlɪdz ðət meɪɾ ɪm sim tə bi haɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn sʌmθɪŋ ən stɛɹɪŋ. ʃɔɹt, ən kəmplitli bɔld, hi wɔkt əz ɪf i wɝ tɔlɝ ðən ɛni ʌv ðɛm. hɪz kloʊðz wɝ sɝɾənli laɪk nʌθɪŋ ɹænd hæɾ ɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ, iðɝ. taɪt blæk bɹitʃɪz ən sɑft ɹɛd buts wɪð ðə tɑps tɝn daʊn əɾ ɪz æŋkəlz. ə lɔŋ, ɹɛd vɛs θɪkli ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɪn ɡoʊld, ən ə snoʊi waɪt ʃɝt wɪð waɪd slivz, ðə pɔɪns ə hɪz kʌfs hæŋɪŋ ɔlmoʊs tə hɪz niz. sɝɾənli nɑt ðə kaɪndə kloʊðz ɪn wɪtʃ tə hʌn θɹu ə ɹuən sɪɾi ɪn sɝtʃ ə tʃɹɛʒɝ. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðət wɪtʃ meɪɾ ɪm sim stʃɹeɪnʒ, iðɝ.

There was something odd about him, Rand thought, but he could not pick out what it was, exactly. Mordeth was a sleek, somewhat overfed man, with drooping eyelids that made him seem to be hiding behind something and staring. Short, and completely bald, he walked as if he were taller than any of them. His clothes were certainly like nothing Rand had ever seen before, either. Tight black breeches and soft red boots with the tops turned down at his ankles. A long, red vest thickly embroidered in gold, and a snowy white shirt with wide sleeves, the points of his cuffs hanging almost to his knees. Certainly not the kind of clothes in which to hunt through a ruined city in search of treasure. But it was not that which made him seem strange, either.

ðən ðə kɔɹəɾɝ ɛndəɾ ɪn ə taɪl-wɔld ɹum, ən i fɝɡɑɾ əbaʊɾ ɛni ɑɾətiz mɔɹɾɪθ maɪt hæv. hɪz ɡæsp wɑz ən ɛkoʊ ʌv ɪz fɹɛnz'. hɪɹ, tu, laɪt keɪm fɹəm ə fju tɔɹtʃɪz steɪnɪŋ ðə silɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ smoʊk ən ɡɪvɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn mɔɹ ðən wʌn ʃædoʊ, bʌt ðət laɪt wɑz ɹəflɛktəɾ ə θaʊzən taɪmz baɪ ðə dʒɛmz ən ɡoʊl paɪld ɑn ðə flɔɹ, maʊnz ə kɔɪnz ən dʒuəlɹi, ɡoʊbləts ən pleɪts ən plæɾɝz, ɡɪldɪd, dʒɛm-ɛnkɹʌstɪd sɔɹdz ən dæɡɝz, ɔl hip təɡɛðɝ kɛɹləsli ɪn weɪst-haɪ maʊnz.

Then the corridor ended in a tile-walled room, and he forgot about any oddities Mordeth might have. His gasp was an echo of his friends'. Here, too, light came from a few torches staining the ceiling with their smoke and giving everyone more than one shadow, but that light was reflected a thousand times by the gems and gold piled on the floor, mounds of coins and jewelry, goblets and plates and platters, gilded, gem-encrusted swords and daggers, all heaped together carelessly in waist-high mounds.

wɪð ə kɹaɪ mæt ɹæn fɔɹwɝɾ ən fɛl tə hɪz niz ɪn fɹʌn ʌv wʌn ə ðə paɪlz. "sæks," hi sɛd bɹɛθləsli, pɔɪŋ θɹu ðə ɡoʊld. "wil nid sæks tə kæɹi ɔl ə ðɪs."

With a cry Mat ran forward and fell to his knees in front of one of the piles. "Sacks," he said breathlessly, pawing through the gold. "We'll need sacks to carry all of this."

"wi kæn kæɹi ɪɾ ɔl," ɹænd sɛd. hi lʊkt ɝaʊn hɛlpləsli; ɔl ðə ɡoʊl ðə mɝtʃəns bɹɔt tə ɛmənz fild ɪn ə jɪɹ wəd nɑɾ əv meɪd ðə θaʊzənθ pɑɹɾ ə dʒʌst wʌn ə ðoʊz maʊnz. "nɑt naʊ. ɪts ɔlmoʊs dɑɹk."

"We can't carry it all," Rand said. He looked around helplessly; all the gold the merchants brought to Emond's Field in a year would not have made the thousandth part of just one of those mounds. "Not now. It's almost dark."

pɛɹɪn pʊld ən æks fɹi, kɛɹləsli tɔsɪŋ bæk ðə ɡoʊl tʃeɪnz ðət hæd bɪn tæŋɡəld ɝaʊn ɪt. dʒuəlz ɡlɪɾɝd əlɔŋ ɪts ʃaɪni blæk hændəl, ən dɛləkət ɡoʊl skɹɑlwɝk kʌvɝd ðə twɪn bleɪdz. "təmɑɹoʊ, ðɛn," hi sɛd, hɛftɪŋ ði æks wɪð ə ɡɹɪn. "mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn wɪl ʌndɝstænd wən wi ʃoʊ ðɛm ðɪs."

Perrin pulled an axe free, carelessly tossing back the gold chains that had been tangled around it. Jewels glittered along its shiny black handle, and delicate gold scrollwork covered the twin blades. "Tomorrow, then," he said, hefting the axe with a grin. "Moiraine and Lan will understand when we show them this."

"ju ɑɹ nɑɾ əloʊn?" mɔɹɾɪθ sɛd. hi hæd lɛɾ əm ɹʌʃ pæst ɪm ɪndə ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ ɹum, bʌt naʊ hi fɑloʊd. "hu ɛls ɪz wɪð ju?"

"You are not alone?" Mordeth said. He had let them rush past him into the treasure room, but now he followed. "Who else is with you?"

mæt, ɹɪs dip ɪn ðə ɹɪtʃəz bɪfɔɹ hɪm, ænsɝɾ æbsənli. "mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn. ən ðən ðɛɹz nɪneɪiv, ən ɛɡwin, ən tɑm. hiz ə ɡlimən. wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn."

Mat, wrist deep in the riches before him, answered absently. "Moiraine and Lan. And then there's Nynaeve, and Egwene, and Thom. He's a gleeman. We're going to Tar Valon."

ɹænd kɑɾ ɪz bɹɛθ. ðən ðə saɪləns fɹəm mɔɹɾɪθ meɪɾ ɪm lʊk ət ðə mæn.

Rand caught his breath. Then the silence from Mordeth made him look at the man.

ɹeɪdʒ twɪstəd mɔɹɾɪθs feɪs, ən fɪɹ, tu. hɪz lɪps pʊl bæk fɹəm ɪz tiθ. "tɑɹ vəlɑn!" hi ʃʊk klɛntʃt fɪsts ət ðɛm. "tɑɹ vəlɑn! jə sɛd jə wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə ðɪs . . . ðɪs . . . keɪɛmlɪn! jə laɪd tə mi!"

Rage twisted Mordeth's face, and fear, too. His lips pulled back from his teeth. "Tar Valon!" He shook clenched fists at them. "Tar Valon! You said you were going to this . . . this . . . Caemlyn! You lied to me!"

"ɪf jə stɪl wɑnt," pɛɹɪn sɛd tə mɔɹɾɪθ, "wil kʌm bæk təmɑɹoʊ ən hɛlp ju." kɛɹfəli hi sɛt ði æks bæk ɑn ðə hip ə dʒɛm-ɛnkɹʌstɪd tʃæləsəz ən dʒuəlɹi. "ɪf jə wɑnt."

"If you still want," Perrin said to Mordeth, "we'll come back tomorrow and help you." Carefully he set the axe back on the heap of gem-encrusted chalices and jewelry. "If you want."

"noʊ. ðəɾ ɪz. . . ." pæntɪŋ, mɔɹɾɪθ ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf i kəd nɑt dɪsaɪd. "teɪk wʌt jə wɑnt. ɪksɛpt. . . . ɪksɛpt. . . ."

"No. That is. . . ." Panting, Mordeth shook his head as if he could not decide. "Take what you want. Except. . . . Except. . . ."

sʌɾənli ɹænd ɹilaɪzd wʌt hæd bɪn næɡɪŋ əɾ ɪm əbaʊt ðə mæn. ðə skæɾɝd tɔɹtʃɪz ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ hæd ɡɪvən itʃ ə ðɛm ə ɹɪŋ ə ʃædoʊz, dʒʌst əz ðə tɔɹtʃɪz ɪn ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ ɹum dɪd. oʊnli. . . . hi wɑz soʊ ʃɑkt i sɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt laʊd. "ju doʊn əv ə ʃædoʊ."

Suddenly Rand realized what had been nagging at him about the man. The scattered torches in the hallway had given each of them a ring of shadows, just as the torches in the treasure room did. Only. . . . He was so shocked he said it out loud. "You don't have a shadow."

ə ɡɑblət fɛl fɹəm mæts hænd wɪð ə kɹæʃ.

A goblet fell from Mat's hand with a crash.

mɔɹɾɪθ nɑɾəd, ən fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɪz flɛʃi aɪlɪdz oʊpən ɔl ðə weɪ. hɪz slik feɪs sʌɾənli əpɪɹd pɪntʃt ən hʌŋɡɹi. "soʊ." hi stʊd stʃɹeɪɾɝ, simɪŋ tɔlɝ. "ɪɾ ɪz dɪsaɪɾɪd." əbɹʌpli ðəɹ wɑz noʊ simɪŋ tə ɪt. laɪk ə bəlun mɔɹɾɪθ swɛld, dɪstɔɹɾəd, hɛd pɹɛst əɡɛns ðə silɪŋ, ʃoʊldɝz bʌɾɪŋ ðə wɔlz, fɪlɪŋ ði ɛn ə ðə ɹum, kʌɾɪŋ ɔf ɪskeɪp. hɑloʊ-tʃikt, tiθ bɛɹɾ ɪn ə ɹɪktəs snɑɹl, hi ɹitʃt aʊt wɪð hænz bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə ɪnɡʌlf ə mænz hɛd.

Mordeth nodded, and for the first time his fleshy eyelids opened all the way. His sleek face suddenly appeared pinched and hungry. "So." He stood straighter, seeming taller. "It is decided." Abruptly there was no seeming to it. Like a balloon Mordeth swelled, distorted, head pressed against the ceiling, shoulders butting the walls, filling the end of the room, cutting off escape. Hollow-cheeked, teeth bared in a rictus snarl, he reached out with hands big enough to engulf a man's head.

wɪð ə jɛl ɹænd lɛp bæk. hɪz fit tæŋɡəld ɪn ə ɡoʊl tʃeɪn, ən i kɹæʃt tə ðə flɔɹ, ðə wɪnd nɑkt aʊɾ ə hɪm. stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ, hi stʃɹʌɡəld ət ðə seɪm taɪm fəɹ ɪz sɔɹd, faɪɾɪŋ ɪz kloʊk, wɪtʃ hæd bɪkʌm ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðə hɪlt. ðə jɛlz ə hɪz fɹɛnz fɪl ðə ɹum, ən ðə klæʃ ʌv ɡoʊl plæɾɝz ən ɡoʊbləts klæɾɝɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ. sʌɾənli ən æɡənaɪz skɹim ʃɪvɝɾ ɪn ɹændz ɪɹz.

With a yell Rand leaped back. His feet tangled in a gold chain, and he crashed to the floor, the wind knocked out of him. Struggling for breath, he struggled at the same time for his sword, fighting his cloak, which had become wrapped around the hilt. The yells of his friends filled the room, and the clash of gold platters and goblets clattering across the floor. Suddenly an agonized scream shivered in Rand's ears.

ɔlmoʊst sɑbɪŋ, hi mænədʒ tə ɪnheɪl ət læst, dʒʌst əz i ɡɑt ðə sɔɹɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɪts ʃiθ. kɔʃəsli, hi ɡɑt tə hɪz fit, wʌndɝɪŋ wɪtʃ ə hɪz fɹɛnz hæd ɡɪvən ðət skɹim. pɛɹɪn lʊk bæk əɾ ɪm waɪd-aɪd fɹəm əkɹɔs ðə ɹum, kɹaʊtʃt ən hoʊldɪŋ ɪz æks bæk əz ɪf əbaʊt tə tʃɑp daʊn ə tʃɹi. mæt pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə tʃɹɛʒɝ paɪl, klʌtʃɪŋ ə dæɡɝ snætʃt fɹəm ðə tʃɹoʊv.

Almost sobbing, he managed to inhale at last, just as he got the sword out of its sheath. Cautiously, he got to his feet, wondering which of his friends had given that scream. Perrin looked back at him wide-eyed from across the room, crouched and holding his axe back as if about to chop down a tree. Mat peered around the side of a treasure pile, clutching a dagger snatched from the trove.

sʌmθɪŋ muvd ɪn ðə dipəs pɑɹɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz lɛf baɪ ðə tɔɹtʃɪz, ən ðeɪ ɔl dʒʌmpt. ɪt wɑz mɔɹɾɪθ, klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz niz tə hɪz tʃɛst ən hʌɾəld əz dip ɪndə ðə fɝθəs kɔɹnɝ əz i kəd ɡɛt.

Something moved in the deepest part of the shadows left by the torches, and they all jumped. It was Mordeth, clutching his knees to his chest and huddled as deep into the furthest corner as he could get.

"hi tʃɹɪkt ʌs," mæt pæntɪd. "ɪt wɑz səm kaɪndə tʃɹɪk."

"He tricked us," Mat panted. "It was some kind of trick."

mɔɹɾɪθ θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən weɪld; dʌst sɪftɪd daʊn əz ðə wɔlz tʃɹɛmbəld. "ju ɑɹ ɔl dɛd!" hi kɹaɪd. "ɔl dɛd!" ən i lɛpt ʌp, daɪvɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹum.

Mordeth threw back his head and wailed; dust sifted down as the walls trembled. "You are all dead!" he cried. "All dead!" And he leaped up, diving across the room.

ɹændz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt, ən i ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑp ðə sɔɹɾ əz wɛl. əz mɔɹɾɪθ dʌv θɹu ði ɛɹ, hi stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ən θɪnd, laɪk ə tɛnʒɹɪl ə smoʊk. əz θɪn əz ə fɪŋɡɝ i stʃɹʌk ə kɹæk ɪn ðə wɔl taɪlz ən vænɪʃt ɪndə ɪt. ə læs kɹaɪ hʌŋ ɪn ðə ɹum əz i vænɪʃt, feɪɾɪŋ sloʊli əweɪ æftɝ i wɑz ɡɔn.

Rand's jaw dropped, and he almost dropped the sword as well. As Mordeth dove through the air, he stretched out and thinned, like a tendril of smoke. As thin as a finger he struck a crack in the wall tiles and vanished into it. A last cry hung in the room as he vanished, fading slowly away after he was gone.

"ju ɑɹ ɔl dɛd!"

"You are all dead!"

"lɛts ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ," pɛɹɪn sɛd feɪnli, fɝmɪŋ ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ɪz æks waɪl i tʃɹaɪd tə feɪs ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ət wʌns. ɡoʊld ɔɹnəməns ən dʒɛmz skæɾɝd ənnoʊɾɪst ʌndɝ ɪz fit.

"Let's get out of here," Perrin said faintly, firming his grip on his axe while he tried to face every direction at once. Gold ornaments and gems scattered unnoticed under his feet.

"bʌt ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ," mæt pɹətɛstəd. "wi kæn dʒʌs liv ɪt naʊ."

"But the treasure," Mat protested. "We can't just leave it now."

"aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛniθɪŋ ə hɪz," pɛɹɪn sɛd, stɪl tɝnɪŋ wʌn weɪ æftɝ ənʌðɝ. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs ən ʃaʊɾəd ət ðə wɔlz. "ɪts jəɹ tʃɹɛʒɝ, jə hɪɹ? wəɹ nɑt teɪkɪŋ ɛni ʌv ɪt!"

"I don't want anything of his," Perrin said, still turning one way after another. He raised his voice and shouted at the walls. "It's your treasure, you hear? We are not taking any of it!"

ɹænd stɛɹɾ æŋɡɹəli ət mæt. "du jə wɑn ɪm kʌmɪŋ æftɝ ʌs? əɹ ɑɹ jə gɑnə weɪt hɪɹ stʌfɪŋ jəɹ pɑkəts əntɪl i kʌmz bæk wɪð tɛn mɔɹ laɪk hɪm?"

Rand stared angrily at Mat. "Do you want him coming after us? Or are you going to wait here stuffing your pockets until he comes back with ten more like him?"

mæt dʒʌs dʒɛstʃɝd tə ɔl ðə ɡoʊld ən dʒuəlz. bɪfɔɹ i kəd seɪ ɛniθɪŋ, ðoʊ, ɹænd sizd wʌn ə hɪz ɑɹmz ən pɛɹɪn ɡɹæb ði ʌðɝ. ðeɪ hʌsəld ɪm aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, mæt stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ əbaʊt ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ.

Mat just gestured to all the gold and jewels. Before he could say anything, though, Rand seized one of his arms and Perrin grabbed the other. They hustled him out of the room, Mat struggling and shouting about the treasure.

bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn tɛn stɛps daʊn ðə hɔl, ði ɔlɹɛɾi dɪm laɪt bɪhaɪn əm bɪɡæn tə feɪl. ðə tɔɹtʃɪz ɪn ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ ɹum wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ aʊt. mæt stɑpt ʃaʊɾɪŋ. ðeɪ heɪsən ðɛɹ stɛps. ðə fɝs tɔɹtʃ aʊtsaɪd ðə ɹum wɪŋkt aʊt, ðən ðə nɛkst. baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə waɪndɪŋ stɛɹz ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə dʒɹæɡ mæt ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ɹʌnɪŋ, wɪð ðə dɑɹk kloʊzɪŋ ɪn bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ivən ðə pɪtʃ-blæk ə ðə stɛɹz oʊnli meɪɾ əm hɛzəteɪɾ ən ɪnstənt, ðən ðeɪ spɛɾ ʌpwɝdz, ʃaʊɾɪŋ ət ðə tɑp ə ðɛɹ lʌŋz. ʃaʊɾɪŋ tə skɛɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət maɪt bi weɪɾɪŋ; ʃaʊɾɪŋ tə ɹimaɪn ðɛmsɛlvz ðeɪ wɝ stɪl əlaɪv.

Before they had gone ten steps down the hall, the already dim light behind them began to fail. The torches in the treasure room were going out. Mat stopped shouting. They hastened their steps. The first torch outside the room winked out, then the next. By the time they reached the winding stairs there was no need to drag Mat any longer. They were all running, with the dark closing in behind them. Even the pitch-black of the stairs only made them hesitate an instant, then they sped upwards, shouting at the top of their lungs. Shouting to scare anything that might be waiting; shouting to remind themselves they were still alive.

ðeɪ bɝst aʊɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl əbʌv, slaɪɾɪŋ ən fɔlɪŋ ɑn ðə dʌsti mɑɹbəl, skɹæmbəlɪŋ aʊt θɹu ðə kɑləmz, tə tʌmbəl daʊn ðə stɛɹz ən læn ɪn ə bɹuz hip ɪn ðə stʃɹit.

They burst out into the hall above, sliding and falling on the dusty marble, scrambling out through the columns, to tumble down the stairs and land in a bruised heap in the street.

ɹænd əntæŋɡəl hɪmsɛlf ən pɪk tæmz sɔɹɾ ʌp fɹəm ðə peɪvmənt, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn ənizəli. lɛs ðən hæf ə ðə sʌn stɪl ʃoʊɾ əbʌv ðə ɹuftɑps. ʃædoʊz ɹitʃt aʊt laɪk dɑɹk hænz, meɪd blækɝ baɪ ðə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ laɪt, nɪɹli fɪlɪŋ ðə stʃɹit. hi ʃɪvɝd. ðə ʃædoʊz lʊk laɪk mɔɹɾɪθ, ɹitʃɪŋ.

Rand untangled himself and picked Tam's sword up from the pavement, looking around uneasily. Less than half of the sun still showed above the rooftops. Shadows reached out like dark hands, made blacker by the remaining light, nearly filling the street. He shivered. The shadows looked like Mordeth, reaching.

"æt list wɝ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt." mæt ɡɑɾ ʌp fɹəm ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə paɪl, dʌstɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɔf ɪn ə ʃeɪki ɪməteɪʃən ə hɪz juʒəwəl mænɝ. "æn ət list aɪ - "

"At least we're out of it." Mat got up from the bottom of the pile, dusting himself off in a shaky imitation of his usual manner. "And at least I - "

"ɑɹ wi?" pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Are we?" Perrin said.

ɹænd nu ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən ðɪs taɪm. ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk pɹɪkəld. sʌmθɪŋ wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ əm fɹəm ðə dɑɹknəs ɪn ðə kɑləmz. hi spʌn ɝaʊnd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə bɪldɪŋz əkɹɔs ðə weɪ. hi kəd fil aɪz ɑn ɪm fɹəm ðɛɹ, tu. hɪz ɡɹɪp taɪɾənd ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, ðoʊ hi wʌndɝd wʌt ɡʊɾ ɪt wəd bi. wɑtʃɪŋ aɪz sim tə bi ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ði ʌðɝz lʊkt ɝaʊnd wɛɹəli; hi nu ðeɪ kəd fil ɪt, tu.

Rand knew it was not his imagination this time. The back of his neck prickled. Something was watching them from the darkness in the columns. He spun around, staring at the buildings across the way. He could feel eyes on him from there, too. His grip tightened on his sword hilt, though he wondered what good it would be. Watching eyes seemed to be everywhere. The others looked around warily; he knew they could feel it, too.

"wi steɪ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə stʃɹit," hi sɛd hɔɹsli. ðeɪ mɛɾ ɪz aɪz; ðeɪ lʊkt əz fɹaɪɾənd əz i fɛlt. hi swɑloʊd hɑɹd. "wi steɪ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə stʃɹit, kip aʊɾ ə ʃædoʊz əz mʌtʃ əz wi kæn, ən wɔk fæst."

"We stay in the middle of the street," he said hoarsely. They met his eyes; they looked as frightened as he felt. He swallowed hard. "We stay in the middle of the street, keep out of shadows as much as we can, and walk fast."

"wɔk vɛɹi fæst," mæt əɡɹid fɝvənli.

"Walk very fast," Mat agreed fervently.

ðə wɑtʃɝz fɑloʊd ðɛm. əɹ ɛls ðəɹ wɝ lɑts ʌv wɑtʃɝz, lɑts ʌv aɪz stɛɹɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi bɪldɪŋ. ɹænd kəd nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ muv, hɑɹɾ əz i tʃɹaɪd, bʌɾ i kəd fil ði aɪz, iɡɝ, hʌŋɡɹi. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɪtʃ wəd bi wɝs. θaʊzənz ʌv aɪz, əɹ dʒʌst ə fju, fɑloʊɪŋ ðɛm.

The watchers followed them. Or else there were lots of watchers, lots of eyes staring out of almost every building. Rand could not see anything move, hard as he tried, but he could feel the eyes, eager, hungry. He did not know which would be worse. Thousands of eyes, or just a few, following them.

ɪn ðə stʃɹɛtʃəz wɛɹ ðə sʌn stɪl ɹitʃt ðɛm, ðeɪ sloʊd, dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl, skwɪntɪŋ nɝvəsli ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs ðəɾ ɔlweɪz sim tə leɪ əhɛd. nʌn ə ðɛm wɑz iɡɝ tə ɛntɝ ðə ʃædoʊz; noʊ wʌn wɑz ɹɪli ʃʊɹ sʌmθɪŋ maɪt nɑt bi weɪɾɪŋ. ðə wɑtʃɝz' æntɪsəpeɪʃən wɑz ə pælpəbəl θɪŋ wɛnɛvɝ ʃædoʊz stʃɹɛtʃt əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit, bɑɹɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ. ðeɪ ɹæn θɹu ðoʊz dɑɹk pleɪsəz ʃaʊɾɪŋ. ɹænd θɔɾ i kəd hɪɹ dʒɹaɪ, ɹʌslɪŋ læftɝ.

In the stretches where the sun still reached them, they slowed, just a little, squinting nervously into the darkness that always seemed to lay ahead. None of them was eager to enter the shadows; no one was really sure something might not be waiting. The watchers' anticipation was a palpable thing whenever shadows stretched across the street, barring their way. They ran through those dark places shouting. Rand thought he could hear dry, rustling laughter.

ət læst, wɪð twaɪlaɪt fɔlɪŋ, ðeɪ keɪm ɪn saɪɾ ə ðə waɪt stoʊn bɪldɪŋ ðeɪ hæd lɛft wʌt sim laɪk deɪz əɡoʊ. sʌɾənli ðə wɑtʃɪŋ aɪz dɪpɑɹɾəd. bɪtwin wʌn stɛp ən ðə nɛkst, ðeɪ vænɪʃt ɪn ə blɪŋk. wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd ɹænd bɹoʊk ɪndə ə tʃɹɑt, fɑloʊd baɪ hɪz fɹɛnz, ðən ə fʊl ɹʌn ðəɾ oʊnli ɛndəd wən ðeɪ hɛɹd θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ ən kəlæpst, pæntɪŋ.

At last, with twilight falling, they came in sight of the white stone building they had left what seemed like days ago. Suddenly the watching eyes departed. Between one step and the next, they vanished in a blink. Without a word Rand broke into a trot, followed by his friends, then a full run that only ended when they hared through the doorway and collapsed, panting.

ə smɔl faɪɝ bɝn ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə taɪl flɔɹ, ðə smoʊk vænɪʃɪŋ θɹu ə hoʊl ɪn ðə silɪŋ ɪn ə weɪ ðət ɹimaɪndəd ɹænd ənplɛzənli ʌv mɔɹɾɪθ. ɛvɹiwʌn ɪksɛp læn wɑz ðɛɹ, ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ðə fleɪmz, ən ðɛɹ ɹiækʃənz vɛɹid kənsɪɾɝəbli. ɛɡwin, wɔɹmɪŋ əɹ hænz ət ðə faɪɝ, ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ əz ðə θɹi bɝst ɪndə ðə ɹum, klʌtʃɪŋ əɹ hænz tə hɝ θɹoʊt; wən ʃi sɔ hu ɪt wɑz, ə ɹɪliv saɪ spɔɪld əɹ ətɛmpt əɾ ə wɪðɝɪŋ lʊk. tɑm mɪɹli mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz paɪpɛstəm, bʌt ɹænd kɑt ðə wɝd "fulz" bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡlimən wɛn bæk tə poʊkɪŋ ðə fleɪmz wɪð ə stɪk.

A small fire burned in the middle of the tile floor, the smoke vanishing through a hole in the ceiling in a way that reminded Rand unpleasantly of Mordeth. Everyone except Lan was there, gathered around the flames, and their reactions varied considerably. Egwene, warming her hands at the fire, gave a start as the three burst into the room, clutching her hands to her throat; when she saw who it was, a relieved sigh spoiled her attempt at a withering look. Thom merely muttered something around his pipestem, but Rand caught the word "fools" before the gleeman went back to poking the flames with a stick.

"ju wʊl-hɛɾəd wɪɾəlɪŋz!" ðə wɪzdəm snæpt. ʃi bɹɪsəl fɹəm hɛd tə fʊt; hɝ aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd, ən bɹaɪt spɑts ə ɹɛd bɝn ɑn əɹ tʃiks. "waɪ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt dɪd jə ɹʌn ɔf laɪk ðæt? ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt? hæv jə noʊ sɛns əɾ ɔl? læn ɪz aʊt lʊkɪŋ fəɹ jə naʊ, ən jəl bi lʌkiɝ ðən jə dɪzɝv ɪf i dʌz nɑt paʊn səm sɛns ɪndə ðə lɑɾ ə jə wən i ɡɛts bæk."

"You wool-headed witlings!" the Wisdom snapped. She bristled from head to foot; her eyes glittered, and bright spots of red burned on her cheeks. "Why under the Light did you run off like that? Are you all right? Have you no sense at all? Lan is out looking for you now, and you'll be luckier than you deserve if he does not pound some sense into the lot of you when he gets back."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs bɪtʃɹeɪd noʊ ædʒəteɪʃən əɾ ɔl, bʌɾ əɹ hænz hæd lust ə waɪt-nʌkəld ɡɹɪp ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðɛm. wʌtɛvɝ nɪneɪiv hæd ɡɪvən əɹ mʌst əv hɛlpt, fəɹ ʃi wɑz ɑn əɹ fit. "ju ʃəd nɑɾ əv dʌn wʌt jə dɪd," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə vɔɪs əz klɪɹ ən sɝin əz ə wɔɾɝwʊd pɑnd. "wi wɪl spik ʌv ɪt leɪɾɝ. sʌmθɪŋ hæpən aʊt ðɛɹ, əɹ jə wəd nɑt bi fɔlɪŋ ɔl oʊvɝ wʌn ənʌðɝ laɪk ðɪs. tɛl mi."

The Aes Sedai's face betrayed no agitation at all, but her hands had loosed a white-knuckled grip on her dress at the sight of them. Whatever Nynaeve had given her must have helped, for she was on her feet. "You should not have done what you did," she said in a voice as clear and serene as a Waterwood pond. "We will speak of it later. Something happened out there, or you would not be falling all over one another like this. Tell me."

"ju sɛɾ ɪt wɑz seɪf," mæt kəmpleɪnd, skɹæmbəlɪŋ tə hɪz fit. "ju sɛɾ ɑɹɪdhɔl wɑz ən ælaɪ ʌv meɪnɛðɝən, ən tʃɹɑləks wʊdn kʌm ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, ən - "

"You said it was safe," Mat complained, scrambling to his feet. "You said Aridhol was an ally of Manetheren, and Trollocs wouldn't come into the city, and - "

mɔɪɹeɪn stɛp fɔɹwɝd soʊ sʌɾənli ðət mæt kʌɾ ɔf wɪð ɪz maʊθ oʊpən, ən ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn pɔzd ɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ ʌp, hæfweɪ kɹaʊtʃt əɹ ɑn ðɛɹ niz. "tʃɹɑləks? dɪd jə si tʃɹɑləks ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz?"

Moiraine stepped forward so suddenly that Mat cut off with his mouth open, and Rand and Perrin paused in getting up, halfway crouched or on their knees. "Trollocs? Did you see Trollocs inside the walls?"

ɹænd swɑloʊd. "nɑt tʃɹɑləks," hi sɛd, ən ɔl θɹi bɪɡæn tɔkɪŋ ɪksaɪɾədli, ɔl ət ðə seɪm taɪm.

Rand swallowed. "Not Trollocs," he said, and all three began talking excitedly, all at the same time.

ɛvɹiwʌn bɪɡæn ɪn ə dɪfɹən pleɪs. mæt stɑɹɾəd wɪð faɪndɪŋ ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ, saʊndɪŋ ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf i hæd dʌn ɪɾ əloʊn, waɪl pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn ɪkspleɪnɪŋ waɪ ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn ɔf ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs wɪθaʊt tɛlɪŋ ɛniwʌn. ɹænd dʒʌmpt ɹaɪt tə wʌɾ i θɔt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, miɾɪŋ ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ əmʌŋ ðə kɑləmz. bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɔl soʊ ɪksaɪɾəd ðət noʊbɑdi toʊld ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ði ɔɹɾɝ ɪt hæpənd; wɛnɛvɝ wʌn ə ðɛm θɔɾ ə sʌmθɪŋ, hi blɝɾɪd ɪɾ aʊt wɪð noʊ ɹəɡɑɹd fəɹ wʌt keɪm bɪfɔɹ əɹ æftɝ, əɹ fəɹ u wɑz seɪɪŋ wʌt. ðə wɑtʃɝz. ðeɪ ɔl bæbəld əbaʊt ðə wɑtʃɝz.

Everyone began in a different place. Mat started with finding the treasure, sounding almost as if he had done it alone, while Perrin began explaining why they had gone off in the first place without telling anyone. Rand jumped right to what he thought was important, meeting the stranger among the columns. But they were all so excited that nobody told anything in the order it happened; whenever one of them thought of something, he blurted it out with no regard for what came before or after, or for who was saying what. The watchers. They all babbled about the watchers.

ɪt meɪd ðə hoʊl teɪl kloʊs tə ɪnkoʊhɪɹənt, bʌt ðɛɹ fɪɹ keɪm θɹu. ɛɡwin bɪɡæn kæstɪŋ ənizi ɡlænsɪz ət ði ɛmpti wɪndoʊz fɹʌntɪŋ ðə stʃɹit. aʊt ðəɹ ðə læst ɹɛmnəns ə twaɪlaɪt wɝ feɪɾɪŋ; ðə faɪɝ sim vɛɹi smɔl ən dɪm. tɑm tʊk ɪz paɪp fɹəm bɪtwin ɪz tiθ ən lɪsənd wɪð ɪz hɛd kɑkt, fɹaʊnɪŋ. mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz ʃoʊd kənsɝn, bʌt nɑɾ ən əndu əmaʊnt. əntɪl. . . .

It made the whole tale close to incoherent, but their fear came through. Egwene began casting uneasy glances at the empty windows fronting the street. Out there the last remnants of twilight were fading; the fire seemed very small and dim. Thom took his pipe from between his teeth and listened with his head cocked, frowning. Moiraine's eyes showed concern, but not an undue amount. Until. . . .

sʌɾənli ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hɪst, ən ɡɹæbd ɹændz ɛlboʊ ɪn ə taɪt ɡɹɪp. "mɔɹɾɪθ! ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ə ðət neɪm? bi vɛɹi ʃʊɹ, ɔl ə ju. mɔɹɾɪθ?"

Suddenly the Aes Sedai hissed, and grabbed Rand's elbow in a tight grip. "Mordeth! Are you sure of that name? Be very sure, all of you. Mordeth?"

ðeɪ mɝmɝɾ ə kɔɹuzd "jɛs," teɪkən əbæk baɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɪntɛnsəɾi.

They murmured a chorused "Yes," taken aback by the Aes Sedai's intensity.

"dɪɾ i tʌtʃ ju?" ʃi æskt əm ɔl. "dɪɾ i ɡɪv jə ɛniθɪŋ, əɹ dɪd jə də ɛniθɪŋ fəɹ hɪm? aɪ mʌs noʊ."

"Did he touch you?" she asked them all. "Did he give you anything, or did you do anything for him? I must know."

"noʊ," ɹænd sɛd. "nʌn ʌv ʌs. nʌn ə ðoʊz θɪŋz."

"No," Rand said. "None of us. None of those things."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd əɡɹimənt, ən æɾəd, "ɔl i dɪd wɑz tʃɹaɪ tə kɪl ʌs. ɪzən ðəɾ ɪnʌf? hi swɛld ʌp əntɪl i fɪl hæf ðə ɹum, ʃaʊɾəd ðət wi wɝ ɔl dɛd mɛn, ðən vænɪʃt." hi muvd ɪz hæn tə dɛmənstʃɹeɪt. "laɪk smoʊk." ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə skwik.

Perrin nodded agreement, and added, "All he did was try to kill us. Isn't that enough? He swelled up until he filled half the room, shouted that we were all dead men, then vanished." He moved his hand to demonstrate. "Like smoke." Egwene gave a squeak.

mæt twɪstəɾ əweɪ pətʃələnli. "seɪf, jə sɛd! ɔl ðət tɔk əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks nɑt kʌmɪŋ hɪɹ. wʌt wɝ wi səpoʊz tə θɪŋk?"

Mat twisted away petulantly. "Safe, you said! All that talk about Trollocs not coming here. What were we supposed to think?"

"əpɛɹənli jə dɪd nɑt θɪŋk əɾ ɔl," ʃi sɛd, kuli kəmpoʊzd wʌns mɔɹ. "ɛniwʌn u θɪŋks wəd bi wɛɹi ʌv ə pleɪs ðət tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ əfɹeɪd tə ɛntɝ."

"Apparently you did not think at all," she said, coolly composed once more. "Anyone who thinks would be wary of a place that Trollocs are afraid to enter."

"mæts duɪŋ," nɪneɪiv sɛd, sɝɾənti ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. "hiz ɔlweɪz tɔkɪŋ səm mɪstʃəf əɹ ʌðɝ, ən ði ʌðɝz luz ðə lɪɾəl wɪts ðeɪ wɝ bɔɹn wɪð wən ðəɹ ɝaʊn hɪm."

"Mat's doing," Nynaeve said, certainty in her voice. "He's always talking some mischief or other, and the others lose the little wits they were born with when they're around him."

mɔɪɹeɪn nɑɾəd bɹifli, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ɹænd ən ɪz tu fɹɛnz. "leɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, ən ɑɹmi kæmpt wɪðɪn ðiz ɹuənz - tʃɹɑləks, dɑɹkfɹɛnz, mɹdʒɹɑl, dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz, θaʊzənz ɪn ɔl. wən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt kʌm aʊt, skaʊts wɝ sɛn ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz. ðə skaʊts faʊnd wɛpənz, bɪts ʌv ɑɹmɝ, ən blʌd splæɾɝd ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ən mɛsədʒəz skɹætʃt ɑn wɔlz ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk tʌŋ, kɔlɪŋ ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌn tə eɪɾ əm ɪn ðɛɹ læst aʊɝ. mɛn u keɪm leɪɾɝ faʊnd noʊ tʃɹeɪs ə ðə blʌɾ əɹ ðə mɛsədʒəz. ðeɪ hæd bɪn skaʊɝɾ əweɪ. hæfmən ən tʃɹɑləks ɹɪmɛmbɝ stɪl. ðəɾ ɪz wʌt kips əm aʊtsaɪd ðɪs pleɪs."

Moiraine nodded briefly, but her eyes remained on Rand and his two friends. "Late in the Trolloc Wars, an army camped within these ruins - Trollocs, Darkfriends, Myrddraal, Dreadlords, thousands in all. When they did not come out, scouts were sent inside the walls. The scouts found weapons, bits of armor, and blood splattered everywhere. And messages scratched on walls in the Trolloc tongue, calling on the Dark One to aid them in their last hour. Men who came later found no trace of the blood or the messages. They had been scoured away. Halfmen and Trollocs remember still. That is what keeps them outside this place."

"æn ðɪs ɪz wɛɹ jə pɪk fəɹ əs tə haɪd?" ɹænd sɛɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif. "wid bi seɪfɝ aʊt ðəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə aʊtʃɹʌn ðɛm."

"And this is where you picked for us to hide?" Rand said in disbelief. "We'd be safer out there trying to outrun them."

"ɪf jə hæd nɑt ɡɔn ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd peɪʃənli, "ju wəd noʊ ðəɾ aɪ sɛt wɔɹdz ɝaʊn ðɪs bɪldɪŋ. eɪ mɹdʒɹɑl wəd nɑɾ ivən noʊ ðiz wɔɹdz wɝ ðɛɹ, fəɹ ɪts ə dɪfɹən kaɪndə ivəl ðeɪ ɑɹ mɛn tə stɑp, bʌt wʌt ɹɪzaɪdz ɪn ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ wɪl nɑt kɹɔs ðɛm, əɹ ivən kʌm tu nɪɹ. ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ɪɾəl bi seɪf fəɹ əs tə ɡoʊ; ðiz θɪŋz kænɑt stæn ðə laɪɾ ə ðə sʌn. ðəl bi haɪɾɪŋ dip ɪn ði ɝθ."

"If you had not gone running off," Moiraine said patiently, "you would know that I set wards around this building. A Myrddraal would not even know these wards were there, for it is a different kind of evil they are meant to stop, but what resides in Shadar Logoth will not cross them, or even come too near. In the morning it will be safe for us to go; these things cannot stand the light of the sun. They will be hiding deep in the earth."

"ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ?" ɛɡwin sɛɾ ənsɝteɪnli. "aɪ θɔt jə sɛd ðɪs sɪɾi wɑz kɔld ɑɹɪdhɔl."

"Shadar Logoth?" Egwene said uncertainly. "I thought you said this city was called Aridhol."

"wʌns ɪt wɑz kɔld ɑɹɪdhɔl," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd, "ænd wɑz wʌn ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz, ðə lænz ðət meɪd ðə sɛkən kʌvənənt, ðə lænz ðət stʊɾ əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk wʌn fɹəm ðə fɝs deɪz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ɪn ðə deɪz wən θɔɹɪn ɑltɔɹən æl bæn wɑz kɪŋ ə meɪnɛðɝən, ðə kɪŋ ʌv ɑɹɪdhɔl wɑz beɪlwən meɪəl, beɪlwən aɪɝənhænd. ɪn ə twaɪlaɪɾ ə dɪspɛɹ dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, wən ɪt sim ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz mʌst ʃʊɹli kɑŋkɝ, ðə mæn kɔl mɔɹɾɪθ keɪm tə beɪlwənz kɔɹt."

"Once it was called Aridhol," Moiraine replied, "and was one of the Ten Nations, the lands that made the Second Covenant, the lands that stood against the Dark One from the first days after the Breaking of the World. In the days when Thorin al'Toren al Ban was King of Manetheren, the King of Aridhol was Balwen Mayel, Balwen Ironhand. In a twilight of despair during the Trolloc Wars, when it seemed the Father of Lies must surely conquer, the man called Mordeth came to Balwen's court."

"ðə seɪm mæn?" ɹænd ɪkskleɪmd, ən mæt sɛd, "ɪt kʊdn bi!" ə ɡlæns fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn saɪləns ðɛm. stɪlnəs fɪl ðə ɹum ɪksɛp fəɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz vɔɪs.

"The same man?" Rand exclaimed, and Mat said, "It couldn't be!" A glance from Moiraine silenced them. Stillness filled the room except for the Aes Sedai's voice.

"bɪfɔɹ mɔɹɾɪθ hæd bɪn lɔŋ ɪn ðə sɪɾi hi hæd beɪlwənz ɪɹ, ən sun i wɑz sɛkən oʊnli tə ðə kɪŋ. mɔɹɾɪθ wɪspɝd pɔɪzən ɪn beɪlwənz ɪɹ, ən ɑɹɪdhɔl bɪɡæn tə tʃeɪnʒ. ɑɹɪdhɔl dʒɹu ɪn ɑn ɪtsɛlf, hɑɹɾənd. ɪt wɑz sɛd ðət səm wəd ɹæðɝ si tʃɹɑləks kʌm ðən ðə mɛn ʌv ɑɹɪdhɔl. ðə vɪktɝi ʌv ðə laɪɾ ɪz ɔl. ðət wɑz ðə bæɾəlkɹi mɔɹɾɪθ ɡeɪv ðɛm, ən ðə mɛn ʌv ɑɹɪdhɔl ʃaʊɾəd ɪt waɪl ðɛɹ didz əbændən ðə laɪt.

"Before Mordeth had been long in the city he had Balwen's ear, and soon he was second only to the King. Mordeth whispered poison in Balwen's ear, and Aridhol began to change. Aridhol drew in on itself, hardened. It was said that some would rather see Trollocs come than the men of Aridhol. The victory of the Light is all. That was the battlecry Mordeth gave them, and the men of Aridhol shouted it while their deeds abandoned the Light.

"ðə stɔɹi ɪz tu lɔŋ tə tɛl ɪn fʊl, ən tu ɡɹɪm, ən oʊnli fɹæɡməns ɑɹ noʊn, ivən ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. haʊ θɔɹɪnz sʌn, kɑɹ, keɪm tə wɪn ɑɹɪdhɔl bæk tə ðə sɛkən kʌvənənt, ən beɪlwən sæɾ ɪz θɹoʊn, ə wɪðɝd ʃɛl wɪð ðə laɪɾ ə mædnəs ɪn ɪz aɪz, læfɪŋ waɪl mɔɹɾɪθ smaɪld əɾ ɪz saɪɾ ən ɔɹɾɝd ðə dɛθs ə kɑɹ ən ði ɛmbəsi əz fɹɛnz ə ðə dɑɹk. haʊ pɹɪns kɑɹ keɪm tə bi kɔl kɑɹ wʌn-hænd. haʊ hi ɪskeɪp ðə dʌnʒənz ʌv ɑɹɪdhɔl ən flɛɾ əloʊn tə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz wɪð mɔɹɾɪθs ənnætʃɹəl əsæsənz əɾ ɪz hilz. haʊ ðəɹ i mɛt ɹiə, hu dɪd nɑt noʊ hu hi wɑz, ən mɛɹid hɝ, ən sɛt ðə skn ɪn ðə pæɾɝn ðət lɛd tə hɪz dɛθ əɾ əɹ hænz, ən hɝz baɪ hɝ oʊn hæn bɪfɔɹ ɪz tum, ən ðə fɔl ʌv ɑlɛθ-lɔɹil. haʊ ði ɑɹmiz ə meɪnɛðɝən keɪm tə əvɛnʒ kɑɹ ən faʊn ðə ɡeɪts ʌv ɑɹɪdhɔl tɔɹn daʊn, noʊ lɪvɪŋ θɪŋ ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ wɝs ðən dɛθ. noʊ ɛnəmi hæd kʌm tə ɑɹɪdhɔl bʌɾ ɑɹɪdhɔl. səspɪʃən ən heɪt hæd ɡɪvən bɝθ tə sʌmθɪŋ ðət fɛɾ ɑn ðət wɪtʃ kɹieɪɾəd ɪt, sʌmθɪŋ lɑkt ɪn ðə bɛdʒɹɑk ɑn wɪtʃ ðə sɪɾi stʊd. mɑʃəɾɝ weɪts stɪl, hʌŋɡɝɪŋ. mɛn spoʊk ʌv ɑɹɪdhɔl noʊ mɔɹ. ðeɪ neɪmd ɪt ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ðə ʃædoʊ weɪts, əɹ mɔɹ sɪmpli, ʃædoʊz weɪɾɪŋ.

"The story is too long to tell in full, and too grim, and only fragments are known, even in Tar Valon. How Thorin's son, Caar, came to win Aridhol back to the Second Covenant, and Balwen sat his throne, a withered shell with the light of madness in his eyes, laughing while Mordeth smiled at his side and ordered the deaths of Caar and the embassy as Friends of the Dark. How Prince Caar came to be called Caar One-Hand. How he escaped the dungeons of Aridhol and fled alone to the Borderlands with Mordeth's unnatural assassins at his heels. How there he met Rhea, who did not know who he was, and married her, and set the skein in the Pattern that led to his death at her hands, and hers by her own hand before his tomb, and the fall of Aleth-Loriel. How the armies of Manetheren came to avenge Caar and found the gates of Aridhol torn down, no living thing inside the walls, but something worse than death. No enemy had come to Aridhol but Aridhol. Suspicion and hate had given birth to something that fed on that which created it, something locked in the bedrock on which the city stood. Mashadar waits still, hungering. Men spoke of Aridhol no more. They named it Shadar Logoth, the Place Where the Shadow Waits, or more simply, Shadow's Waiting.

"mɔɹɾɪθ əloʊn wɑz nɑt kənsum baɪ mɑʃəɾɝ, bʌɾ i wɑz snɛɹd baɪ ɪt, ən hi, tu, hæz weɪɾəd wɪðɪn ðiz wɔlz θɹu ðə lɔŋ sɛntʃɝiz. ʌðɝz əv sin hɪm. səm hiz ɪnfluəns θɹu ɡɪfs ðət twɪs ðə maɪn ən teɪn ðə spɪɹət, ðə teɪnt wæksɪŋ ən weɪnɪŋ əntɪl ɪt ɹulz . . . əɹ kɪlz. ɪf ɛvɝ i kənvɪnsɪz sʌmwʌn tə əkʌmpəni hɪm tə ðə wɔlz, tə ðə baʊndɝi ʌv mɑʃəɾɝz paʊɝ, hɪl bi eɪbəl tə kənsum ðə soʊl ə ðət pɝsən. mɔɹɾɪθ wɪl liv, wɛɹɪŋ ðə bɑɾi ʌv ðə wʌn i wɝs ðən kɪld, tə ɹik ɪz ivəl ɑn ðə wɝld əɡɛn."

"Mordeth alone was not consumed by Mashadar, but he was snared by it, and he, too, has waited within these walls through the long centuries. Others have seen him. Some he has influenced through gifts that twist the mind and taint the spirit, the taint waxing and waning until it rules . . . or kills. If ever he convinces someone to accompany him to the walls, to the boundary of Mashadar's power, he will be able to consume the soul of that person. Mordeth will leave, wearing the body of the one he worse than killed, to wreak his evil on the world again."

"ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ," pɛɹɪn mʌmbəld wən ʃi stɑpt. "hi wɑntəɾ əs tə hɛlp kæɹi ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ tə hɪz hɔɹsəz." hɪz feɪs wɑz hæɡɝd. "aɪl bɛt ðeɪ wɝ səpoʊz tə bi aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi sʌmwɛɹ." ɹænd ʃɪvɝd.

"The treasure," Perrin mumbled when she stopped. "He wanted us to help carry the treasure to his horses." His face was haggard. "I'll bet they were supposed to be outside the city somewhere." Rand shivered.

"bʌt wəɹ seɪf, naʊ, ɑɹənt wi?" mæt æskt. "hi dɪdnt ɡɪv əs ɛniθɪŋ, ən i dɪdn tʌtʃ ʌs. wɝ seɪf, ɑɹənt wi, wɪð ðə wɔɹdz jə sɛt?"

"But we are safe, now, aren't we?" Mat asked. "He didn't give us anything, and he didn't touch us. We're safe, aren't we, with the wards you set?"

"wi ɑɹ seɪf," mɔɪɹeɪn əɡɹid. "hi kænɑt kɹɔs ðə wɔɹd laɪnz, nɔɹ kən ɛni ʌðɝ dɛnəzən ə ðɪs pleɪs. ən ðeɪ mʌs haɪd fɹəm ðə sʌnlaɪt, soʊ wi kən liv seɪfli wʌns ɪts deɪ. naʊ, tʃɹaɪ tə slip. ðə wɔɹdz wɪl pɹətɛkt əs əntɪl læn ɹɪtɝnz."

"We are safe," Moiraine agreed. "He cannot cross the ward lines, nor can any other denizen of this place. And they must hide from the sunlight, so we can leave safely once it is day. Now, try to sleep. The wards will protect us until Lan returns."

"hi hæz bɪn ɡɔn ə lɔŋ taɪm." nɪneɪiv lʊkt wɝidli ət ðə naɪɾ aʊtsaɪd. fʊl dɑɹk hæd fɔlən, əz blæk əz pɪtʃ.

"He has been gone a long time." Nynaeve looked worriedly at the night outside. Full dark had fallen, as black as pitch.

"læn wɪl bi wɛl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd suðɪŋli, ən spɹɛɾ əɹ blæŋkəts bɪsaɪd ðə faɪɝ waɪl ʃi spoʊk. "hi wɑz plɛdʒ tə faɪt ðə dɑɹk wʌn bɪfɔɹ i lɛf ðə kɹeɪɾəl, ə sɔɹd pleɪst ɪn ɪz ɪnfən hænz. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ wəd noʊ ðə mɪnəɾ ə hɪz dɛθ ən ðə weɪ ʌv ɪt, dʒʌst əz i wəd noʊ maɪn. ɹɛst, nɪneɪiv. ɔl wɪl bi wɛl." bʌɾ əz ʃi wɑz ɹoʊlɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɪndə hɝ blæŋkəts, ʃi pɔzd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə stʃɹiɾ əz ɪf ʃi, tu, wʊɾə laɪk tə noʊ wʌt kɛp ðə wɔɹɾɝ.

"Lan will be well," Moiraine said soothingly, and spread her blankets beside the fire while she spoke. "He was pledged to fight the Dark One before he left the cradle, a sword placed in his infant hands. Besides, I would know the minute of his death and the way of it, just as he would know mine. Rest, Nynaeve. All will be well." But as she was rolling herself into her blankets, she paused, staring at the street as if she, too, would have liked to know what kept the Warder.

ɹændz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz fɛlt laɪk lɛɾ ən ɪz aɪz wɑntəd tə slaɪd ʃʌɾ ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn, jɛt slip dɪd nɑt kʌm kwɪkli, ən wʌns ɪt dɪd, hi dʒɹimd, mʌɾɝɪŋ ən kɪkɪŋ ɔf ɪz blæŋkəts. wən i woʊk, ɪt wɑz sʌɾənli, ən i lʊkt ɝaʊn fəɹ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd wɛɹ i wɑz.

Rand's arms and legs felt like lead and his eyes wanted to slide shut on their own, yet sleep did not come quickly, and once it did, he dreamed, muttering and kicking off his blankets. When he woke, it was suddenly, and he looked around for a moment before he remembered where he was.

ðə mun wɑz ʌp, ðə læs θɪn slɪvɝ bɪfɔɹ ðə nu mun, ɪts feɪn laɪt dɪfiɾəd baɪ ðə naɪt. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɑz stɪl əslip, ðoʊ nɑɾ ɔl saʊnli. ɛɡwin ən ɪz tu fɹɛnz twɪstəɾ ən mɝmɝɾ ɪnɔɾəbli. tɑmz snɔɹz, sɑft fəɹ wʌns, wɝ bɹoʊkən fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm baɪ hæf-fɔɹmd wɝdz. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl noʊ saɪn ə læn.

The moon was up, the last thin sliver before the new moon, its faint light defeated by the night. Everyone else was still asleep, though not all soundly. Egwene and his two friends twisted and murmured inaudibly. Thom's snores, soft for once, were broken from time to time by half-formed words. There was still no sign of Lan.

sʌɾənli hi fɛlt əz ɪf ðə wɔɹdz wɝ noʊ pɹətɛkʃən əɾ ɔl. ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl kəd bi aʊt ðəɹ ɪn ðə dɑɹk. tɛlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf i wɑz biɪŋ fulɪʃ, hi æɾəd wʊd tə ðə læs koʊlz ə ðə faɪɝ. ðə bleɪz wɑz tu smɔl tə ɡɪv mʌtʃ wɔɹmθ, bʌɾ ɪt ɡeɪv mɔɹ laɪt.

Suddenly he felt as if the wards were no protection at all. Anything at all could be out there in the dark. Telling himself he was being foolish, he added wood to the last coals of the fire. The blaze was too small to give much warmth, but it gave more light.

hi hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌt hæɾ əweɪkən ɪm fɹəm ɪz ənplɛzən dʒɹim. hi hæd bɪn ə lɪɾəl bɔɪ əɡɛn, kæɹiɪŋ tæmz sɔɹɾ ən wɪð ə kɹeɪɾəl stʃɹæp tə hɪz bæk, ɹʌnɪŋ θɹu ɛmpti stʃɹits, pɝsud baɪ mɔɹɾɪθ, hu ʃaʊɾəd ðəɾ i oʊnli wɑntəɾ ɪz hænd. ən ðəɹ hæd bɪn ən oʊl mæn u wɑtʃt əm ən kækəld wɪð mæd læftɝ ðə hoʊl taɪm.

He had no idea what had awakened him from his unpleasant dream. He had been a little boy again, carrying Tam's sword and with a cradle strapped to his back, running through empty streets, pursued by Mordeth, who shouted that he only wanted his hand. And there had been an old man who watched them and cackled with mad laughter the whole time.

hi ɡæðɝɾ ɪz blæŋkəts ən leɪ bæk, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə silɪŋ. hi wɑntəd vɛɹi mʌtʃ tə slip, ivən ɪf i hæd mɔɹ dʒɹimz laɪk ðə læst wʌn, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt meɪk ɪz aɪz kloʊs.

He gathered his blankets and lay back, staring at the ceiling. He wanted very much to sleep, even if he had more dreams like the last one, but he could not make his eyes close.

sʌɾənli ðə wɔɹɾɝ tʃɹɑɾəd saɪlənli aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹknəs ɪndə ðə ɹum. mɔɪɹeɪn keɪm əweɪk ən sæɾ ʌp əz ɪf i hæd ɹʌŋ ə bɛl. læn oʊpən ɪz hænd; θɹi smɔl ɑbʒɛkts fɛl tə ðə taɪlz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ wɪð ðə klɪŋk ʌv aɪɝn. θɹi blʌd-ɹɛd bædʒɪz ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ə hɔɹn skʌlz.

Suddenly the Warder trotted silently out of the darkness into the room. Moiraine came awake and sat up as if he had rung a bell. Lan opened his hand; three small objects fell to the tiles in front of her with the clink of iron. Three blood-red badges in the shape of horned skulls.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ tʃɹɑləks ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz," læn sɛd. "ðeɪ wɪl bi hɪɹ ɪn lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ən aʊɝ. ən ðə dɑvɑl ɑɹ ðə wɝst ə ðɛm." hi bɪɡæn weɪkɪŋ ði ʌðɝz.

"There are Trollocs inside the walls," Lan said. "They will be here in little more than an hour. And the Dha'vol are the worst of them." He began waking the others.

mɔɪɹeɪn smuðli bɪɡæn foʊldɪŋ əɹ blæŋkəts. "haʊ mɛni? də ðeɪ noʊ wəɹ hɪɹ?" ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɝdʒənsi əɾ ɔl.

Moiraine smoothly began folding her blankets. "How many? Do they know we are here?" She sounded as if there were no urgency at all.

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðeɪ du," læn ɹɪplaɪd. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ wɛl oʊvɝ ə hʌnʒɹəd, fɹaɪɾənd ɪnʌf tə kɪl ɛniθɪŋ ðət muvz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðə hæfmən ɑɹ hævɪŋ tə dʒɹaɪv əm - fɔɹ dʒʌs tə hændəl wʌn fɪst - ən ivən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl sim tə wɑnt nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən tə pæs θɹu ðə sɪɾi ən aʊɾ əz kwɪkli əz pɑsəbəl. ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ weɪ tə sɝtʃ, ən ðəɹ soʊ slɪpʃɑd ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt hɛɾɪŋ nɪɹli stʃɹeɪt fəɹ əs aɪ wəd seɪ wi hæd nʌθɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊt." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd.

"I don't think they do," Lan replied. "There are well over a hundred, frightened enough to kill anything that moves, including one another. The Halfmen are having to drive them - four just to handle one fist - and even the Myrddraal seem to want nothing more than to pass through the city and out as quickly as possible. They are not going out of their way to search, and they're so slipshod that if they were not heading nearly straight for us I would say we had nothing to worry about." He hesitated.

"ðɛɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls?"

"There is something else?"

"oʊnli ðɪs," læn sɛd sloʊli. "ðə mɹdʒɹɑl fɔɹs ðə tʃɹɑləks ɪndə ðə sɪɾi. wʌt fɔɹs ðə mɹdʒɹɑl?"

"Only this," Lan said slowly. "The Myrddraal forced the Trollocs into the city. What forced the Myrddraal?"

ɛvɹiwʌn hæd bɪn lɪsnɪŋ ɪn saɪləns. naʊ tɑm kɝst ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, ən ɛɡwin bɹiðd ə kwɛstʃən. "ðə dɑɹk wʌn?"

Everyone had been listening in silence. Now Thom cursed under his breath, and Egwene breathed a question. "The Dark One?"

"doʊn bi ə ful, ɡɝl," nɪneɪiv snæpt. "ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz baʊn ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ."

"Don't be a fool, girl," Nynaeve snapped. "The Dark One is bound in Shayol Ghul by the Creator."

"fɔɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ, ət list," mɔɪɹeɪn əɡɹid. "noʊ, ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz ɪz nɑɾ aʊt ðɛɹ, bʌt wi mʌs liv ɪn ɛni keɪs."

"For the time being, at least," Moiraine agreed. "No, the Father of Lies is not out there, but we must leave in any case."

nɪneɪiv aɪɾ əɹ nɛɹoʊli. "liv ðə pɹətɛkʃən ə ðə wɔɹdz, ən kɹɔs ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ɪn ðə naɪt."

Nynaeve eyed her narrowly. "Leave the protection of the wards, and cross Shadar Logoth in the night."

"ɔɹ steɪ hɪɹ ən feɪs ðə tʃɹɑləks," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "tə hoʊld əm ɔf hɪɹ wəd ɹikwaɪɝ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɪt wəd dɪstʃɹɔɪ ðə wɔɹdz ən ətʃɹæk ðə vɛɹi θɪŋ ðə wɔɹdz ɑɹ mɛn tə pɹətɛkt əɡɛnst. bɪsaɪdz, əz wɛl bɪld ə sɪɡnəl faɪɝ ətɑp wʌn ə ðoʊz taʊɝz fəɹ ɛvɹi hæfmən wɪðɪn twɛnti maɪlz. tə liv ɪz nɑt wʌɾ aɪ wəd tʃuz tə du, bʌt wəɹ ðə hɛɹ, ən ɪts ðə haʊnz u dɪkteɪt ðə tʃeɪs."

"Or stay here and face the Trollocs," Moiraine said. "To hold them off here would require the One Power. It would destroy the wards and attract the very thing the wards are meant to protect against. Besides, as well build a signal fire atop one of those towers for every Halfman within twenty miles. To leave is not what I would choose to do, but we are the hare, and it is the hounds who dictate the chase."

"wʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz?" mæt æskt. "wʌɾ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?"

"What if there are more outside the walls?" Mat asked. "What are we going to do?"

"wi wɪl juz maɪ ɝɪdʒənəl plæn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. læn lʊkt ət hɝ. ʃi hɛld ʌp ə hæn ən æɾəd, "wɪtʃ aɪ wɑz tu taɪɝd tə kæɹi aʊt bɪfɔɹ. bʌɾ aɪm ɹɛstəd, naʊ, θæŋks tə ðə wɪzdəm. wɪl meɪk fəɹ ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðɛɹ, wɪð əɹ bæks ɡɑɹɾəd baɪ ðə wɔɾɝ, aɪ kən ɹeɪz ə smɔlɝ wɔɹd ðət wɪl hoʊl ðə tʃɹɑləks ən hæfmən bæk əntɪl wi kən meɪk ɹæfs ən kɹɔs oʊvɝ. əɹ bɛɾɝ jɛt, wi meɪ ivən bi eɪbəl tə heɪl ə tʃɹeɪɾɝz boʊt kʌmɪŋ daʊn fɹəm sɑldɑiə."

"We will use my original plan," Moiraine said. Lan looked at her. She held up a hand and added, "Which I was too tired to carry out before. But I am rested, now, thanks to the Wisdom. We will make for the river. There, with our backs guarded by the water, I can raise a smaller ward that will hold the Trollocs and Halfmen back until we can make rafts and cross over. Or better yet, we may even be able to hail a trader's boat coming down from Saldaea."

ðə feɪsəz ə ði ɛmənz fildɝz lʊk blæŋk. læn noʊɾəst.

The faces of the Emond's Fielders looked blank. Lan noticed.

"tʃɹɑləks ən mɹdʒɹɑl loʊð dip wɔɾɝ. tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ tɛɹəfaɪɾ ʌv ɪt. niðɝ kən swɪm. eɪ hæfmən wɪl nɑt weɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən weɪs dip, ɪspɛʃli ɪf ɪts muvɪŋ. tʃɹɑləks woʊn də ivən ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ kən faɪn ɛni weɪ tə əvɔɪɾ ɪt."

"Trollocs and Myrddraal loathe deep water. Trollocs are terrified of it. Neither can swim. A Halfman will not wade anything more than waist deep, especially if it's moving. Trollocs won't do even that if they can find any way to avoid it."

"soʊ wʌns wi ɡɛɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ wɝ seɪf," ɹænd sɛd, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ nɑɾəd.

"So once we get across the river we're safe," Rand said, and the Warder nodded.

"ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɪl faɪn ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əz hɑɹd tə meɪk ðə tʃɹɑləks bɪld ɹæfs əz ɪt wɑz tə dʒɹaɪv əm ɪndə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, ən ɪf ðeɪ tʃɹaɪ tə meɪk əm kɹɔs ði ɑɹɪnɛl ðət weɪ, hæf wɪl ɹʌn əweɪ ən ðə ɹɛs pɹɑbli dʒɹaʊn."

"The Myrddraal will find it almost as hard to make the Trollocs build rafts as it was to drive them into Shadar Logoth, and if they try to make them cross the Arinelle that way, half will run away and the rest probably drown."

"ɡɛt tə jəɹ hɔɹsəz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "wi ɑɹ nɑɾ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ jɛt."

"Get to your horses," Moiraine said. "We are not across the river yet."


tʃæptɝ twɛnti


CHAPTER 20

dʌst ɑn ðə wɪnd


Dust on the Wind

əz ðeɪ lɛf ðə waɪt stoʊn bɪldɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ nɝvəsli ʃɪftɪŋ hɔɹsəz, ði aɪsi wɪn keɪm ɪn ɡʌsts, moʊnɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹuftɑps, wɪpɪŋ kloʊks laɪk bænɝz, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ θɪn klaʊdz əkɹɔs ðə θɪn slɪvɝ ə ðə mun. wɪð ə kwaɪət kəmæn tə steɪ kloʊs, læn lɛɾ ɔf daʊn ðə stʃɹit. ðə hɔɹsəz dænst ən tʌɡd ət ðə ɹeɪnz, iɡɝ tə bi əweɪ.

As they left the white stone building on their nervously shifting horses, the icy wind came in gusts, moaning across the rooftops, whipping cloaks like banners, driving thin clouds across the thin sliver of the moon. With a quiet command to stay close, Lan led off down the street. The horses danced and tugged at the reins, eager to be away.

ɹænd lʊkt ʌp wɛɹəli ət ðə bɪldɪŋz ðeɪ pæst, lumɪŋ naʊ ɪn ðə naɪt wɪð ðɛɹ ɛmpti wɪndoʊz laɪk aɪ sɑkəts. ʃædoʊz sim tə muv. əkeɪʒənəli ðəɹ wɑz ə klæɾɝ - ɹʌbəl tɑpəl baɪ ðə wɪnd. ət lis ði aɪz ɑɹ ɡɔn. hɪz ɹɪlif wɑz moʊməntɛɹi. waɪ ɑɹ ðeɪ ɡɔn?

Rand looked up warily at the buildings they passed, looming now in the night with their empty windows like eye sockets. Shadows seemed to move. Occasionally there was a clatter - rubble toppled by the wind. At least the eyes are gone. His relief was momentary. Why are they gone?

tɑm ən ði ɛmənz fildɝz meɪɾ ə klʌstɝ wɪð hɪm, ɔl kipɪŋ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə tʌtʃ wʌn ənʌðɝ. ɛɡwinz ʃoʊldɝz wɝ hʌntʃt, əz ɪf ʃi wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə iz bɛləz hʊvz tə ðə peɪvmənt. ɹænd dɪd nɑɾ ivən wɑnə bɹið. saʊn maɪɾ ətʃɹækt ətɛnʃən.

Thom and the Emond's Fielders made a cluster with him, all keeping close enough to touch one another. Egwene's shoulders were hunched, as if she were trying to ease Bela's hooves to the pavement. Rand did not even want to breathe. Sound might attract attention.

əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ə dɪstəns hæɾ oʊpən əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, sɛpɝeɪɾɪŋ əm fɹəm ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə tu wɝ ɪndɪstɪŋkt ʃeɪps ə ɡʊd θɝɾi peɪsɪz əhɛd.

Abruptly he realized that a distance had opened ahead of them, separating them from the Warder and the Aes Sedai. The two were indistinct shapes a good thirty paces ahead.

"wɝ fɔlɪŋ bɪhaɪnd," hi mɝmɝd, ən buɾɪd klaʊd tə ə kwɪkɝ stɛp. ə θɪn tɛnʒɹɪl ə sɪlvɝ-ɡɹeɪ fɑɡ dʒɹɪftəd loʊ əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹiɾ əhɛɾ ə hɪm.

"We're falling behind," he murmured, and booted Cloud to a quicker step. A thin tendril of silver-gray fog drifted low across the street ahead of him.

"stɑp!" ɪt wɑz ə stʃɹæŋɡəld ʃaʊt fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn, ʃɑɹp ən ɝdʒənt, bʌt pɪtʃt nɑt tə kæɹi fɑɹ.

"Stop!" It was a strangled shout from Moiraine, sharp and urgent, but pitched not to carry far.

ənsɝɾən, hi pʊld ʌp ʃɔɹt. ðə splɪntɝ ə fɑɡ leɪ kəmplitli əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit naʊ, sloʊli fæɾənɪŋ əz ɪf mɔɹ wɝ uzɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə bɪldɪŋz ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit. ɪt wɑz əz θɪk əz ə mænz ɑɹm naʊ. klaʊd wɪkɝɾ ən tʃɹaɪd tə bæk fɝðɝ əweɪ əz ɛɡwin ən tɑm ən ði ʌðɝz keɪm ʌp ɑn hɪm. ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, tu, tɔs ðɛɹ hɛdz ən bɹaɪɾəld əɡɛns kʌmɪŋ tu nɪɹ ðə fɑɡ.

Uncertain, he pulled up short. The splinter of fog lay completely across the street now, slowly fattening as if more were oozing out of the buildings on either side of the street. It was as thick as a man's arm now. Cloud whickered and tried to back further away as Egwene and Thom and the others came up on him. Their horses, too, tossed their heads and bridled against coming too near the fog.

læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn ɹoʊd sloʊli təwɔɹd ðə fɑɡ, ɡɹoʊn tə əz bɪɡ ɝaʊn əz ə lɛɡ, stɑpɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, wɛl bæk. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stʌɾid ðə bɹæntʃ ə mɪs ðət sɛpɝeɪɾəd ðɛm. ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd əɾ ə sʌɾən ɪtʃ ə fɪɹ bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz. ə feɪn laɪɾ əkʌmpənid ðə fɑɡ, ɡɹoʊɪŋ əz ðə fɑɡi tɛntəkəl bɪkeɪm fæɾɝ, bʌt stɪl oʊnli ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ðə munlaɪt. ðə hɔɹsəz ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli, ivən ɑldib ən mændɑɹb.

Lan and Moiraine rode slowly toward the fog, grown to as big around as a leg, stopping on the other side, well back. The Aes Sedai studied the branch of mist that separated them. Rand shrugged at a sudden itch of fear between his shoulder blades. A faint light accompanied the fog, growing as the foggy tentacle became fatter, but still only a little more than the moonlight. The horses shifted uneasily, even Aldieb and Mandarb.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" nɪneɪiv æskt.

"What is it?" Nynaeve asked.

"ði ivəl ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "mɑʃəɾɝ. ənsiɪŋ, ənθɪŋkɪŋ, muvɪŋ θɹu ðə sɪɾi əz eɪmləsli əz ə wɝm bɝoʊz θɹu ði ɝθ. ɪf ɪt tʌtʃəz ju, jəl daɪ." ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz lɛt ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz dæns ə fju kwɪk stɛps bæk, bʌt nɑt tu fɑɹ. əz mʌtʃ əz ɹænd wʊɾə ɡɪvən tə bi fɹi ʌv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʃi wɑz əz seɪf əz hoʊm kəmpɛɹd tə wʌt leɪ ɝaʊn ðɛm.

"The evil of Shadar Logoth," Moiraine replied. "Mashadar. Unseeing, unthinking, moving through the city as aimlessly as a worm burrows through the earth. If it touches you, you will die." Rand and the others let their horses dance a few quick steps back, but not too far. As much as Rand would have given to be free of the Aes Sedai, she was as safe as home compared to what lay around them.

"ðɛn haʊ də wi dʒɔɪn ju?" ɛɡwin sɛd. "kæn jə kɪl ɪt . . . klɪɹ ə weɪ?"

"Then how do we join you?" Egwene said. "Can you kill it . . . clear a way?"

mɔɪɹeɪnz læf wɑz bɪɾɝ ən ʃɔɹt. "mɑʃəɾɝ ɪz væst, ɡɝl, əz væst əz ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ɪtsɛlf. ðə hoʊl waɪt taʊɝ kəd nɑt kɪl ɪt. ɪf aɪ dæmədʒd ɪɾ ɪnʌf tə lɛt jə pæs, dʒɹɔɪŋ ðət mʌtʃ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ wəd pʊl ðə hæfmən laɪk ə tʃɹʌmpət kɔl. ən mɑʃəɾɝ wəd ɹʌʃ ɪn tə hil wʌtɛvɝ hɑɹm aɪ dɪd, ɹʌʃ ɪn ən pɝhæps kætʃ əs ɪn ɪts nɛt."

Moiraine's laugh was bitter and short. "Mashadar is vast, girl, as vast as Shadar Logoth itself. The whole White Tower could not kill it. If I damaged it enough to let you pass, drawing that much of the One Power would pull the Halfmen like a trumpet call. And Mashadar would rush in to heal whatever harm I did, rush in and perhaps catch us in its net."

ɹænd ɪkstʃeɪnʒd lʊks wɪð ɛɡwin, ðən æskt əɹ kwɛstʃən əɡɛn. mɔɪɹeɪn saɪd bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ.

Rand exchanged looks with Egwene, then asked her question again. Moiraine sighed before answering.

"aɪ də nɑt laɪk ɪt, bʌt wʌt mʌs bi dʌn, mʌs bi dʌn. ðɪs θɪŋ wɪl nɑt bi əbʌv ɡɹaʊn ɛvɹiwɛɹ. ʌðɝ stʃɹits wɪl bi klɪɹ. si ðət stɑɹ?" ʃi twɪstəɾ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə pɔɪn tə ə ɹɛd stɑɹ loʊ ɪn ði istɝn skaɪ. "kip ɑn təwɔɹd ðət stɑɹ, ən ɪɾəl bɹɪŋ jə tə ðə ɹɪvɝ. wʌtɛvɝ hæpənz, kip muvɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪvɝ. ɡoʊ əz kwɪkli əz jə kæn, bʌɾ əbʌv ɔl meɪk noʊ nɔɪz. ðəɹ ɑɹ stɪl ðə tʃɹɑləks, ɹɪmɛmbɝ. ən fɔɹ hæfmən."

"I do not like it, but what must be done, must be done. This thing will not be above ground everywhere. Other streets will be clear. See that star?" She twisted in her saddle to point to a red star low in the eastern sky. "Keep on toward that star, and it will bring you to the river. Whatever happens, keep moving toward the river. Go as quickly as you can, but above all make no noise. There are still the Trollocs, remember. And four Halfmen."

"bʌt haʊ wɪl wi faɪn jə əɡɛn?" ɛɡwin pɹətɛstəd.

"But how will we find you again?" Egwene protested.

"aɪ wɪl faɪn ju," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "bi əʃʊɹd, aɪ kən faɪn ju. naʊ bi ɔf. ðɪs θɪŋ ɪz ʌɾɝli maɪnləs, bʌɾ ɪt kən sɛns fud." ɪndid, ɹoʊps ə sɪlvɝ-ɡɹeɪ hæd lɪftəd fɹəm ðə lɑɹdʒɝ bɑɾi. ðeɪ dʒɹɪftəd, weɪvɝɪŋ, laɪk ðə tɛntəkəlz ʌv ə hʌnʒɹdʒɹmz ɑn ðə bɑɾəm ʌv ə wɔɾɝwʊd pɑnd.

"I will find you," Moiraine said. "Be assured, I can find you. Now be off. This thing is utterly mindless, but it can sense food." Indeed, ropes of silver-gray had lifted from the larger body. They drifted, wavering, like the tentacles of a hundredarms on the bottom of a Waterwood pond.

wən ɹænd lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ðə θɪk tʃɹʌŋk ʌv oʊpeɪk mɪst, ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ɡɔn. hi lɪkt ɪz lɪps ən mɛɾ ɪz kəmpænjənz' aɪz. ðeɪ wɝ əz nɝvəs əz i wɑz. ən sʌmθɪŋ wɝs: ðeɪ ɔl sim tə bi weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn ɛls tə muv fɝst. naɪɾ ən ɹuənz sɝaʊndəd ðɛm. ðə feɪdz wɝ aʊt ðɛɹ, sʌmwɛɹ, ən ðə tʃɹɑləks, meɪbi ɝaʊn ðə nɛks kɔɹnɝ. ðə tɛntəkəlz ə fɑɡ dʒɹɪftəd nɪɹɝ, hæfweɪ tə ðɛm naʊ, ən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ weɪvɝɪŋ. ðeɪ hæd tʃoʊzən ðɛɹ ɪntɛndəd pɹeɪ. sʌɾənli hi mɪs mɔɪɹeɪn vɛɹi mʌtʃ.

When Rand looked up from the thick trunk of opaque mist, the Warder and the Aes Sedai were gone. He licked his lips and met his companions' eyes. They were as nervous as he was. And something worse: they all seemed to be waiting for someone else to move first. Night and ruins surrounded them. The Fades were out there, somewhere, and the Trollocs, maybe around the next corner. The tentacles of fog drifted nearer, halfway to them now, and no longer wavering. They had chosen their intended prey. Suddenly he missed Moiraine very much.

ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz stɪl stɛɹɪŋ, wʌndɝɪŋ wɪtʃ weɪ tə ɡoʊ. hi tɝn klaʊd, ən ðə ɡɹeɪ bɹoʊk ɪndə ə hæf tʃɹɑt, tʌɡɪŋ əɡɛns ðə ɹeɪnz tə ɡoʊ fæstɝ. əz ɪf muvɪŋ fɝs hæd meɪɾ ɪm ðə liɾɝ, ɛvɹiwʌn fɑloʊd.

Everyone was still staring, wondering which way to go. He turned Cloud, and the gray broke into a half trot, tugging against the reins to go faster. As if moving first had made him the leader, everyone followed.

wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn ɡɔn, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn tə pɹətɛkt əm ʃəd mɔɹɾɪθ əpɪɹ. ən ðə tʃɹɑləks. ænd. . . . ɹænd fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ. hi wəd fɑloʊ ðə ɹɛd stɑɹ. hi kəd hoʊld ɑntu ðət θɔt.

With Moiraine gone, there was no one to protect them should Mordeth appear. And the Trollocs. And. . . . Rand forced himself to stop thinking. He would follow the red star. He could hold onto that thought.

θɹi taɪmz ðeɪ hæd tə bæktʃɹæk fɹəm ə stʃɹit blɑk fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd baɪ ə hɪl ə stoʊn ən bɹɪk ðə hɔɹsəz kəd nɛvɝ əv kɹɔst. ɹænd kəd hɪɹ ði ʌðɝz bɹiðɪŋ, ʃɔɹɾ ən ʃɑɹp, dʒʌst ʃaɪ ʌv pænɪk. hi ɡɹɪɾɪd ɪz tiθ tə stɑp ɪz oʊn pæntɪŋ. juv tə ət lis meɪk əm θɪŋk jəɹ nɑɾ əfɹeɪd. jəɹ duɪŋ ə ɡʊd dʒɑb, wʊl-hɛd! jəl ɡɛɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi aʊt seɪfli.

Three times they had to backtrack from a street blocked from side to side by a hill of stone and brick the horses could never have crossed. Rand could hear the others breathing, short and sharp, just shy of panic. He gritted his teeth to stop his own panting. You have to at least make them think you're not afraid. You're doing a good job, wool-head! You'll get everybody out safely.

ðeɪ ɹaʊndəd ðə nɛks kɔɹnɝ. ə wɔl ə fɑɡ beɪðd ðə bɹoʊkən peɪvmənt wɪð ə laɪɾ əz bɹaɪɾ əz ə fʊl mun. stʃɹimɝz əz θɪk əz ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz bɹoʊk ɔf təwɔɹd ðɛm. noʊbɑdi weɪɾəd. wilɪŋ, ðeɪ ɡæləpt əweɪ ɪn ə taɪt nɑt wɪð noʊ hid fəɹ ðə klæɾɝ ə hʊvz ðeɪ ɹeɪzd.

They rounded the next corner. A wall of fog bathed the broken pavement with a light as bright as a full moon. Streamers as thick as their horses broke off toward them. Nobody waited. Wheeling, they galloped away in a tight knot with no heed for the clatter of hooves they raised.

tu tʃɹɑləks stɛpt ɪndə ðə stʃɹit bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, nɑt tɛn spænz əweɪ.

Two Trollocs stepped into the street before them, not ten spans away.

fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðə hjumənz ən ðə tʃɹɑləks dʒʌst stɛɹɾ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, itʃ mɔɹ sɝpɹaɪz ðən ði ʌðɝ. ənʌðɝ pɛɹ ə tʃɹɑləks əpɪɹd, ən ənʌðɝ, ən ənʌðɝ, kəlaɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə wʌnz ɪn fɹʌnt, foʊldɪŋ ɪndə ə ʃɑk mæs ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə hjumənz. oʊnli fəɹ ən ɪnstən dɪd ðeɪ ɹɪmeɪn fɹoʊzən, ðoʊ. ɡʌɾɝəl haʊlz ɛkoʊd fɹəm ðə bɪldɪŋz, ən ðə tʃɹɑləks baʊndəd fɔɹwɝd. ðə hjumənz skæɾɝd laɪk kweɪl.

For an instant the humans and the Trollocs just stared at one another, each more surprised than the other. Another pair of Trollocs appeared, and another, and another, colliding with the ones in front, folding into a shocked mass at the sight of the humans. Only for an instant did they remain frozen, though. Guttural howls echoed from the buildings, and the Trollocs bounded forward. The humans scattered like quail.

ɹændz ɡɹeɪ ɹitʃt fʊl ɡæləp ɪn θɹi stʃɹaɪdz. "ðɪs weɪ!" hi ʃaʊɾəd, bʌɾ i hɝd ðə seɪm kɹaɪ fɹəm faɪv θɹoʊts. ə heɪsti ɡlæns oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ʃoʊɾ ɪm ɪz kəmpænjənz dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ ɪn əz mɛni dɝɛkʃənz, tʃɹɑləks pɝsuɪŋ əm ɔl.

Rand's gray reached full gallop in three strides. "This way!" he shouted, but he heard the same cry from five throats. A hasty glance over his shoulder showed him his companions disappearing in as many directions, Trollocs pursuing them all.

θɹi tʃɹɑləks ɹæn əɾ ɪz oʊn hilz, kætʃpoʊlz weɪvɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. hɪz skɪn kɹɔld əz i ɹilaɪz ðeɪ wɝ mætʃɪŋ klaʊd stʃɹaɪd fəɹ stʃɹaɪd. hi dʒɹɑp loʊ ɑn klaʊdz nɛk ən ɝdʒ ðə ɡɹeɪ ɑn, tʃeɪs baɪ θɪk kɹaɪz.

Three Trollocs ran at his own heels, catchpoles waving in the air. His skin crawled as he realized they were matching Cloud stride for stride. He dropped low on Cloud's neck and urged the gray on, chased by thick cries.

ðə stʃɹit nɛɹoʊɾ əhɛd, bɹoʊkən-tɑp bɪldɪŋz linɪŋ aʊt dʒɹʌŋkənli. sloʊli ði ɛmpti wɪndoʊz fɪld wɪð ə sɪlvɝi ɡloʊ, ə dɛns mɪs bʌlʒɪŋ aʊtwɝd. mɑʃəɾɝ.

The street narrowed ahead, broken-topped buildings leaning out drunkenly. Slowly the empty windows filled with a silvery glow, a dense mist bulging outward. Mashadar.

ɹænd ɹɪskt ə ɡlæns oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ðə tʃɹɑləks stɪl ɹæn lɛs ðən fɪfti peɪsɪz bæk; ðə laɪt fɹəm ðə fɑɡ wɑz ɪnʌf tə si ðɛm klɪɹli. eɪ feɪd ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn əm naʊ, ən ðeɪ sim tə fli ðə hæfmən əz mʌtʃ əz tə pɝsu ɹænd. əhɛɾ ə ɹænd, hæf ə dʌzən ɡɹeɪ tɛnʒɹəlz weɪvɝd fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊz, ə dʌzən, filɪŋ ði ɛɹ. klaʊd tɔst ɪz hɛɾ ən skɹimd, bʌt ɹænd dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪn bɹuɾəli, ən ðə hɔɹs lʌnʒd fɔɹwɝd waɪldli.

Rand risked a glance over his shoulder. The Trollocs still ran less than fifty paces back; the light from the fog was enough to see them clearly. A Fade rode behind them now, and they seemed to flee the Halfman as much as to pursue Rand. Ahead of Rand, half a dozen gray tendrils wavered from the windows, a dozen, feeling the air. Cloud tossed his head and screamed, but Rand dug his heels in brutally, and the horse lunged forward wildly.

ðə tɛnʒɹəlz stɪfən əz ɹænd ɡæləp bɪtwin ðɛm, bʌɾ i kɹaʊtʃt loʊ ɑn klaʊdz bæk ən ɹəfjuz tə lʊk ət ðɛm. ðə weɪ bɪɑnd wɑz klɪɹ. ɪf wʌn ə ðɛm tʌtʃəz mi. . . . laɪt! hi buɾɪd klaʊd hɑɹɾɝ, ən ðə hɔɹs lɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ɪndə ðə wɛlkəm ʃædoʊz. wɪð klaʊd stɪl ɹʌnɪŋ, hi lʊk bæk əz sun əz ðə ɡloʊ ʌv mɑʃəɾɝ bɪɡæn tə lɛsən.

The tendrils stiffened as Rand galloped between them, but he crouched low on Cloud's back and refused to look at them. The way beyond was clear. If one of them touches me. . . . Light! He booted Cloud harder, and the horse leaped forward into the welcome shadows. With Cloud still running, he looked back as soon as the glow of Mashadar began to lessen.

ðə weɪvɪŋ ɡɹeɪ tɛntəkəlz ə mɑʃəɾɝ blɑk hæf ðə stʃɹit, ən ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ bɔkɪŋ, bʌt ðə feɪd snætʃt ə wɪp fɹəm ɪts sæɾəlboʊ, kɹækɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə hɛdz ə ðə tʃɹɑləks wɪð ə saʊn laɪk ə laɪtnɪŋ boʊlt, pɑpɪŋ spɑɹks ɪn ði ɛɹ. kɹaʊtʃɪŋ, ðə tʃɹɑləks lɝtʃt æftɝ ɹænd. ðə hæfmən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, blæk kaʊl stʌɾiɪŋ mɑʃəɾɝz ɹitʃɪŋ ɑɹmz, bɪfɔɹ ɪt, tu, spɝd fɔɹwɝd.

The waving gray tentacles of Mashadar blocked half the street, and the Trollocs were balking, but the Fade snatched a whip from its saddlebow, cracking it over the heads of the Trollocs with a sound like a lightning bolt, popping sparks in the air. Crouching, the Trollocs lurched after Rand. The Halfman hesitated, black cowl studying Mashadar's reaching arms, before it, too, spurred forward.

ðə θɪkənɪŋ tɛntəkəlz ə fɑɡ swʌŋ ənsɝteɪnli fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən stʃɹʌk laɪk vaɪpɝz. ət lis tu lætʃt tə itʃ tʃɹɑlɑk, beɪðɪŋ əm ɪn ɡɹeɪ laɪt; mʌzəl hɛdz wɛn bæk tə skɹim, bʌt fɑɡ ɹoʊld oʊvɝ oʊpən maʊðz, ən ɪn, iɾɪŋ ðə haʊlz. fɔɹ lɛɡ-θɪk tɛntəkəlz wɪpt ɝaʊn ðə feɪd, ən ðə hæfmən ən ɪts blæk hɔɹs twɪtʃt əz ɪf dænsɪŋ, tɪl ðə kaʊl fɛl bæk, bɛɹɪŋ ðət peɪl, aɪləs feɪs. ðə feɪd ʃɹikt.

The thickening tentacles of fog swung uncertainly for a moment, then struck like vipers. At least two latched to each Trolloc, bathing them in gray light; muzzled heads went back to scream, but fog rolled over open mouths, and in, eating the howls. Four leg-thick tentacles whipped around the Fade, and the Halfman and its black horse twitched as if dancing, till the cowl fell back, baring that pale, eyeless face. The Fade shrieked.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saʊn fɹəm ðət kɹaɪ, ɛni mɔɹ ðən fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑləks, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ keɪm θɹu, ə pɪɹsɪŋ waɪn dʒʌs bɪɑn hɪɹɪŋ, laɪk ɔl ðə hɔɹnəts ɪn ðə wɝld, dɪɡɪŋ ɪndə ɹændz ɪɹz wɪð ɔl ðə fɪɹ ðət kəɾ ɪɡzɪst. klaʊd kənvʌlsd, əz ɪf hi, tu, hɝd, ən ɹæn hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ. ɹænd hʌŋ ɑn, pæntɪŋ, hɪz θɹoʊɾ əz dʒɹaɪ əz sænd.

There was no sound from that cry, any more than from the Trollocs, but something came through, a piercing whine just beyond hearing, like all the hornets in the world, digging into Rand's ears with all the fear that could exist. Cloud convulsed, as if he, too, heard, and ran harder than ever. Rand hung on, panting, his throat as dry as sand.

æftɝ ə taɪm i ɹilaɪzd i kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hɪɹ ðə saɪlənt ʃɹik ə ðə feɪd daɪɪŋ, ən sʌɾənli ðə klæɾɝ ə hɪz ɡæləp simd əz laʊɾ əz ʃaʊts. hi ɹeɪn klaʊd hɑɹd, stɑpɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ə dʒæɡd wɔl, ɹaɪt wɛɹ tu stʃɹits mɛt. ə neɪmləs mɑnjəmən ɹɪɹɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs bɪfɔɹ hɪm.

After a time he realized he could no longer hear the silent shriek of the Fade dying, and suddenly the clatter of his gallop seemed as loud as shouts. He reined Cloud hard, stopping beside a jagged wall, right where two streets met. A nameless monument reared in the darkness before him.

slʌmpt ɪn ðə sæɾəl, hi lɪsənd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə hɪɹ ɪksɛp ðə blʌd paʊndɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz. koʊl swɛt biɾɪd ɑn ɪz feɪs, ən i ʃɪvɝɾ əz ðə wɪn fleɪld ɪz kloʊk.

Slumped in the saddle, he listened, but there was nothing to hear except the blood pounding in his ears. Cold sweat beaded on his face, and he shivered as the wind flailed his cloak.

faɪnəli hi stʃɹeɪɾənd. stɑɹz spæŋɡəl ðə skaɪ wɛɹ ðə klaʊdz dɪd nɑt haɪd ðɛm, bʌt ðə ɹɛd stɑɹ loʊ ɪn ði ist wɑz izi tə mɑɹk. ɪz ɛnibəɾi ɛls əlaɪv tə si ɪt? wɝ ðeɪ fɹi, əɹ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑləks' hænz? ɛɡwin, laɪt blaɪn mi, waɪ dɪdn jə fɑloʊ mi? ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əlaɪv ən fɹi, ðeɪ wəd bi fɑloʊɪŋ ðət stɑɹ. ɪf nɑt. . . . ðə ɹuənz wɝ væst; hi kəd sɝtʃ fəɹ deɪz wɪθaʊt faɪndɪŋ ɛniwʌn, ɪf i kəd kip əweɪ fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑləks. ən ðə feɪdz, ən mɔɹɾɪθ, ən mɑʃəɾɝ. ɹɪlʌktənli hi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə meɪk fəɹ ðə ɹɪvɝ.

Finally he straightened. Stars spangled the sky where the clouds did not hide them, but the red star low in the east was easy to mark. Is anybody else alive to see it? Were they free, or in the Trollocs' hands? Egwene, Light blind me, why didn't you follow me? If they were alive and free, they would be following that star. If not. . . . The ruins were vast; he could search for days without finding anyone, if he could keep away from the Trollocs. And the Fades, and Mordeth, and Mashadar. Reluctantly he decided to make for the river.

hi ɡæðɝd ðə ɹeɪnz. ɑn ðə kɹɔsɪŋ stʃɹit, wʌn stoʊn fɛl əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ wɪð ə ʃɑɹp klɪk. hi fɹoʊz, nɑɾ ivən bɹiðɪŋ. hi wɑz hɪɾən ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz, wʌn stɛp fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ. fɹæntəkəli hi θɔɾ ə bækɪŋ ʌp. wʌt wɑz bɪhaɪn hɪm? wʌt wəd meɪk ə nɔɪz ən ɡɪv ɪm əweɪ? hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ən i wɑz əfɹeɪd tə teɪk ɪz aɪz fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə ðə bɪldɪŋ.

He gathered the reins. On the crossing street, one stone fell against another with a sharp click. He froze, not even breathing. He was hidden in the shadows, one step from the corner. Frantically he thought of backing up. What was behind him? What would make a noise and give him away? He could not remember, and he was afraid to take his eyes from the corner of the building.

dɑɹknəs bʌlkt ət ðət kɔɹnɝ, wɪð ðə lɔŋɡɝ dɑɹknəs ʌv ə ʃæf stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. kætʃpoʊl! ivən əz ðə θɔt flæʃt ɪndə ɹændz hɛd, hi dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪndə klaʊdz ɹɪbz ən ɪz sɔɹd flu fɹəm ðə skæbɝd; ə wɝdləs ʃaʊɾ əkʌmpəniɾ ɪz tʃɑɹdʒ, ən i swʌŋ ðə sɔɹd wɪð ɔl ə hɪz maɪt. oʊnli ə dɛspɹɪɾ ɛfɝt stɑp ðə bleɪd ʃɔɹt. wɪð ə jɛlp mæt tʌmbəl bæk, hæf fɔlɪŋ ɔf ɪz hɔɹs ən nɪɹli dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪz baʊ.

Darkness bulked at that corner, with the longer darkness of a shaft sticking out of it. Catchpole! Even as the thought flashed into Rand's head, he dug his heels into Cloud's ribs and his sword flew from the scabbard; a wordless shout accompanied his charge, and he swung the sword with all of his might. Only a desperate effort stopped the blade short. With a yelp Mat tumbled back, half falling off his horse and nearly dropping his bow.

ɹænd dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən loʊɝɾ ɪz sɔɹd. hɪz ɑɹm ʃʊk. "hæv jə sin ɛnibəɾi ɛls?" hi mænədʒd.

Rand drew a deep breath and lowered his sword. His arm shook. "Have you seen anybody else?" he managed.

mæt swɑloʊd hɑɹd bɪfɔɹ pʊlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɔkwɝdli bæk ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl. "aɪ . . . aɪ. . . . dʒʌs tʃɹɑləks." hi pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɪz θɹoʊt, ən lɪkt ɪz lɪps. "dʒʌs tʃɹɑləks. ju?"

Mat swallowed hard before pulling himself awkwardly back into his saddle. "I . . . I. . . . Just Trollocs." He put a hand to his throat, and licked his lips. "Just Trollocs. You?"

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðeɪ mʌs bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹitʃ ðə ɹɪvɝ. wi bɛɾɝ də ðə seɪm." mæt nɑɾəd saɪlənli, stɪl filɪŋ ɪz θɹoʊt, ən ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə ɹɛd stɑɹ.

Rand shook his head. "They must be trying to reach the river. We better do the same." Mat nodded silently, still feeling his throat, and they started toward the red star.

bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ hæd kʌvɝɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd spænz ðə kinɪŋ kɹaɪ ʌv ə tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹn ɹoʊz bɪhaɪn əm ɪn ðə dɛpθs ə ðə sɪɾi. ənʌðɝ ænsɝd, fɹəm aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz.

Before they had covered a hundred spans the keening cry of a Trolloc horn rose behind them in the depths of the city. Another answered, from outside the walls.

ɹænd ʃɪvɝd, bʌɾ i kɛp tə hɪz sloʊ peɪs, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə dɑɹkəs pleɪsəz ən əvɔɪɾɪŋ əm wən i kʊd. æftɝ wʌn dʒɝk əɾ ɪz ɹeɪnz əz ɪf i maɪt ɡæləp ɔf, mæt dɪd ðə seɪm. niðɝ hɔɹn saʊndəɾ əɡɛn, ən ɪt wɑz ɪn saɪləns ðət ðeɪ keɪm tə ən oʊpənɪŋ ɪn ðə vaɪn-ʃɹaʊɾɪd wɔl wɛɹ ə ɡeɪt hæd wʌns bɪn. oʊnli ðə taʊɝz ɹɪmeɪnd, stændɪŋ bɹoʊkən-tɑpt əɡɛns ðə blæk skaɪ.

Rand shivered, but he kept to his slow pace, watching the darkest places and avoiding them when he could. After one jerk at his reins as if he might gallop off, Mat did the same. Neither horn sounded again, and it was in silence that they came to an opening in the vine-shrouded wall where a gate had once been. Only the towers remained, standing broken-topped against the black sky.

mæt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ət ðə ɡeɪtweɪ, bʌt ɹænd sɛd sɔfli, "ɪz ɪɾ ɛni seɪfɝ ɪn hɪɹ ðən aʊt ðɛɹ?" hi dɪd nɑt sloʊ ðə ɡɹeɪ, ən æftɝ ə moʊmən mæt fɑloʊɾ ɪm aʊɾ ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lʊk ɛvɹi weɪ ət wʌns. ɹænd lɛɾ aʊɾ ə sloʊ bɹɛθ; hɪz maʊθ wɑz dʒɹaɪ. wɝ gɑnə meɪk ɪt. laɪt, wɝ gɑnə meɪk ɪt!

Mat hesitated at the gateway, but Rand said softly, "Is it any safer in here than out there?" He did not slow the gray, and after a moment Mat followed him out of Shadar Logoth, trying to look every way at once. Rand let out a slow breath; his mouth was dry. We're going to make it. Light, we're going to make it!

ðə wɔlz vænɪʃt bɪhaɪnd, swɑloʊd baɪ ðə naɪɾ ən ðə fɔɹəst. lɪsnɪŋ fəɹ ðə slaɪɾəst saʊnd, ɹænd kɛp ðə ɹɛd stɑɹ dɛɾ əhɛd.

The walls vanished behind, swallowed by the night and the forest. Listening for the slightest sound, Rand kept the red star dead ahead.

sʌɾənli tɑm ɡæləp baɪ fɹəm bɪhaɪnd, sloʊɪŋ oʊnli lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ʃaʊt, "ɹaɪd, jə fulz!" ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ hʌntɪŋ kɹaɪz ən kɹæʃɪz ɪn ðə bɹʌʃ bɪhaɪn ɪm ənaʊns ðə pɹɛzəns ə tʃɹɑləks ɑn ɪz tʃɹeɪl.

Suddenly Thom galloped by from behind, slowing only long enough to shout, "Ride, you fools!" A moment later hunting cries and crashes in the brush behind him announced the presence of Trollocs on his trail.

ɹænd dʌɡ ɪn ɪz hilz, ən klaʊd spɹæŋ æftɝ ðə ɡlimənz ɡɛldɪŋ. wʌt hæpənz wən wi ɡɛt tə ðə ɹɪvɝ wɪθaʊt mɔɪɹeɪn? laɪt, ɛɡwin!

Rand dug in his heels, and Cloud sprang after the gleeman's gelding. What happens when we get to the river without Moiraine? Light, Egwene!

pɛɹɪn sæɾ ɪz hɔɹs ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz, wɑtʃɪŋ ði oʊpən ɡeɪtweɪ, səm lɪɾəl dɪstəns ɔf jɛt, ən æbsənli ɹæn ɪz θʌm əlɔŋ ðə bleɪɾ ə hɪz æks. ɪt sim tə bi ə klɪɹ weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹuən sɪɾi, bʌɾ i hæd sæt ðəɹ fəɹ faɪv mɪnəts stʌɾiɪŋ ɪt. ðə wɪn tɔst ɪz ʃæɡi kɝlz ən tʃɹaɪd tə kæɹi hɪz kloʊk əweɪ, bʌɾ i pʊl ðə kloʊk bæk ɝaʊn ɪm wɪθaʊt ɹɪli noʊɾɪsɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ.

Perrin sat his horse in the shadows, watching the open gateway, some little distance off yet, and absently ran his thumb along the blade of his axe. It seemed to be a clear way out of the ruined city, but he had sat there for five minutes studying it. The wind tossed his shaggy curls and tried to carry his cloak away, but he pulled the cloak back around him without really noticing what he was doing.

hi nu ðət mæt, ən ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɪn ɛmənz fild, kənsɪɾɝd ɪm sloʊ ʌv θɔt. ɪt wɑz pɑɹtli kəz i wɑz bɪɡ ən juʒəwəli muv kɛɹfəli - hi hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn əfɹeɪɾ i maɪɾ æksədɛntəli bɹeɪk sʌmθɪŋ əɹ hɝt sʌmbɑɾi, sɪns i wɑz soʊ mʌtʃ bɪɡɝ ðən ðə bɔɪz i ɡɹu ʌp wɪð - bʌɾ i ɹɪli dɪd pɹəfɝ tə θɪŋk θɪŋz ɔl ðə weɪ θɹu ɪf i kʊd. kwɪk θɪŋkɪŋ, kɛɹləs θɪŋkɪŋ, hæd pʊt mæt ɪndə hɑt wɔɾɝ wʌn taɪm æftɝ ənʌðɝ, ən mæts kwɪk θɪŋkɪŋ juʒəwəli mænədʒ tə ɡɛt ɹænd, əɹ hɪm, əɹ boʊθ, ɪn ðə kʊkpɑɾ əlɔŋsaɪd mæt, tu.

He knew that Mat, and almost everyone else in Emond's Field, considered him slow of thought. It was partly because he was big and usually moved carefully - he had always been afraid he might accidentally break something or hurt somebody, since he was so much bigger than the boys he grew up with - but he really did prefer to think things all the way through if he could. Quick thinking, careless thinking, had put Mat into hot water one time after another, and Mat's quick thinking usually managed to get Rand, or him, or both, in the cookpot alongside Mat, too.

hɪz θɹoʊt taɪɾənd. laɪt, doʊn θɪŋk əbaʊt biɪŋ ɪn ə kʊkpɑt. hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɔɹɾɝ ɪz θɔts əɡɛn. kɛɹfəl θɔt wɑz ðə weɪ.

His throat tightened. Light, don't think about being in a cookpot. He tried to order his thoughts again. Careful thought was the way.

ðəɹ hæd bɪn səm sɔɹɾ ə skwɛɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ɡeɪt wʌns, wɪð ə hjudʒ faʊntən ɪn ɪts mɪɾəl. pɑɹɾ ə ðə faʊntən wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, ə klʌstɝ ə bɹoʊkən stætʃuz stændɪŋ ɪn ə bɪɡ, ɹaʊn beɪsən, ən soʊ wɑz ði oʊpən speɪs ɝaʊn ɪt. tə ɹitʃ ðə ɡeɪɾ i wəɾ əv tə ɹaɪd nɪɹli ə hʌnʒɹəd spænz wɪð oʊnli ðə naɪt tə ʃild ɪm fɹəm sɝtʃɪŋ aɪz. ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə plɛzən θɔt, iðɝ. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðoʊz ənsin wɑtʃɝz tu wɛl.

There had been some sort of square in front of the gate once, with a huge fountain in its middle. Part of the fountain was still there, a cluster of broken statues standing in a big, round basin, and so was the open space around it. To reach the gate he would have to ride nearly a hundred spans with only the night to shield him from searching eyes. That was not a pleasant thought, either. He remembered those unseen watchers too well.

hi kənsɪɾɝd ðə hɔɹnz i hæd hɝɾ ɪn ðə sɪɾi ə lɪɾəl waɪl ɝliɝ. hi hæɾ ɔlmoʊs tɝn bæk, θɪŋkɪŋ səm ə ði ʌðɝz maɪɾ əv bɪn teɪkən, bɪfɔɹ ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðəɾ i kəd nɑt də ɛniθɪŋ əloʊn ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn kæptʃɝd. nɑɾ əɡɛnst - wʌd læn seɪ - ə hʌnʒɹəd tʃɹɑləks ən fɔɹ feɪdz. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛd ɡɛt tə ðə ɹɪvɝ.

He considered the horns he had heard in the city a little while earlier. He had almost turned back, thinking some of the others might have been taken, before realizing that he could not do anything alone if they had been captured. Not against - what did Lan say - a hundred Trollocs and four Fades. Moiraine Sedai said get to the river.

hi wɛn bæk tə kənsɪɾɝeɪʃən ə ðə ɡeɪt. kɛɹfəl θɔt hæd nɑt ɡɪvən ɪm mʌtʃ, bʌɾ i hæd meɪɾ ɪz dɪsɪʒən. hi ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə dipɝ ʃædoʊ ɪndə ðə lɛsɝ dɑɹknəs.

He went back to consideration of the gate. Careful thought had not given him much, but he had made his decision. He rode out of the deeper shadow into the lesser darkness.

əz i dɪd, ənʌðɝ hɔɹs əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə skwɛɹ ən stɑpt. hi stɑpt, tu, ən fɛl fəɹ ɪz æks; ɪt ɡeɪv ɪm noʊ ɡɹeɪt sɛns ə kʌmfɝt. ɪf ðət dɑɹk ʃeɪp wɑz ə feɪd. . . .

As he did, another horse appeared from the far side of the square and stopped. He stopped, too, and felt for his axe; it gave him no great sense of comfort. If that dark shape was a Fade. . . .

"ɹænd?" keɪm ə sɑft, hɛzɪɾənt kɔl.

"Rand?" came a soft, hesitant call.

hi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ, ɹɪliv bɹɛθ. "ɪts pɛɹɪn, ɛɡwin," hi kɔl bæk, dʒʌst əz sɔfli. ɪt stɪl saʊndəd tu laʊɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs.

He let out a long, relieved breath. "It's Perrin, Egwene," he called back, just as softly. It still sounded too loud in the darkness.

ðə hɔɹsəz keɪm təɡɛðɝ nɪɹ ðə faʊntən.

The horses came together near the fountain.

"hæv jə sin ɛnibəɾi ɛls?" ðeɪ boʊθ æskt ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ən boʊθ ænsɝd baɪ ʃeɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz.

"Have you seen anybody else?" they both asked at the same time, and both answered by shaking their heads.

"ðeɪl bi ɔl ɹaɪt," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd, pæɾɪŋ bɛləz nɛk. "woʊn ðeɪ?"

"They'll be all right," Egwene muttered, patting Bela's neck. "Won't they?"

"mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ ən læn wɪl lʊk æftɝ ðɛm," pɛɹɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ðeɪ wɪl lʊk æftɝ ɔl ʌv əs wʌns wi ɡɛt tə ðə ɹɪvɝ." hi hoʊpt ɪt wɑz soʊ.

"Moiraine Sedai and Lan will look after them," Perrin replied. "They will look after all of us once we get to the river." He hoped it was so.

hi fɛlt ə ɡɹeɪt ɹɪlif wʌns ðeɪ wɝ bɪɑn ðə ɡeɪt, ivən ɪf ðəɹ wɝ tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə fɔɹəst. əɹ feɪdz. hi stɑp ðət laɪn ə θɔt. ðə bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz wɝ nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə kip ɪm fɹəm ɡaɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹɛd stɑɹ, ən ðeɪ wɝ bɪɑn mɔɹɾɪθs ɹitʃ naʊ. ðət wʌn hæd fɹaɪɾənd ɪm wɝs ðən ðə tʃɹɑləks ɛvɝ hæd.

He felt a great relief once they were beyond the gate, even if there were Trollocs in the forest. Or Fades. He stopped that line of thought. The bare branches were not enough to keep him from guiding on the red star, and they were beyond Mordeth's reach now. That one had frightened him worse than the Trollocs ever had.

sun ðeɪ wəd ɹitʃ ðə ɹɪvɝ ən mit mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ʃi wəd pʊɾ əm bɪɑn ðə tʃɹɑləks' ɹitʃ əz wɛl. hi bɪlivd ɪt kəz i niɾəd tə bɪliv. ðə wɪn skɹeɪp bɹæntʃəz təɡɛðɝ ən ɹʌsəl ðə livz ən niɾəlz ɑn ði ɛvɝɡɹinz. ə naɪthɔks loʊnli kɹaɪ dʒɹɪftəɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk, ən i ən ɛɡwin muv ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz kloʊsɝ təɡɛðɝ əz ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ hʌɾəlɪŋ fəɹ wɔɹmθ. ðeɪ wɝ vɛɹi mʌtʃ əloʊn.

Soon they would reach the river and meet Moiraine, and she would put them beyond the Trollocs' reach as well. He believed it because he needed to believe. The wind scraped branches together and rustled the leaves and needles on the evergreens. A nighthawk's lonely cry drifted in the dark, and he and Egwene moved their horses closer together as though they were huddling for warmth. They were very much alone.

eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹn saʊndəd sʌmwɛɹ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, kwɪk, weɪlɪŋ blæsts, ɝdʒɪŋ ðə hʌntɝz tə hɝi, hɝi. ðən θɪk, hæf-hjumən haʊlz ɹoʊz ɑn ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪl, spɝɾ ɑn baɪ ðə hɔɹn. haʊlz ðət ɡɹu ʃɑɹpɝ əz ðeɪ kɑt ðə hjumən sɛnt.

A Trolloc horn sounded somewhere behind them, quick, wailing blasts, urging the hunters to hurry, hurry. Then thick, half-human howls rose on their trail, spurred on by the horn. Howls that grew sharper as they caught the human scent.

pɛɹɪn pʊɾ ɪz hɔɹs tə ə ɡæləp, ʃaʊɾɪŋ, "kʌm ɑn!" ɛɡwin keɪm, boʊθ ə ðɛm buɾɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, hidləs ə nɔɪz, hidləs ə ðə bɹæntʃəz ðət slæpt ət ðɛm.

Perrin put his horse to a gallop, shouting, "Come on!" Egwene came, both of them booting their horses, heedless of noise, heedless of the branches that slapped at them.

əz ðeɪ ɹeɪs θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, ɡaɪɾəd əz mʌtʃ baɪ ɪnstɪŋkt əz baɪ ðə dɪm munlaɪt, bɛlə fɛl bɪhaɪnd. pɛɹɪn lʊk bæk. ɛɡwin kɪk ðə mɛɹ ən fleɪld əɹ wɪð ðə ɹeɪnz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz duɪŋ noʊ ɡʊd. baɪ ðɛɹ saʊnz, ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ kʌmɪŋ kloʊsɝ. hi dʒɹu ɪn ɪnʌf nɑt tə liv əɹ bɪhaɪnd.

As they raced through the trees, guided as much by instinct as by the dim moonlight, Bela fell behind. Perrin looked back. Egwene kicked the mare and flailed her with the reins, but it was doing no good. By their sounds, the Trollocs were coming closer. He drew in enough not to leave her behind.

"hɝi!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. hi kəd meɪk aʊt ðə tʃɹɑləks naʊ, hjudʒ dɑɹk ʃeɪps baʊndɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz, bɛloʊɪŋ ən snɑɹlɪŋ tə tʃɪl ðə blʌd. hi ɡɹɪp ðə hæft ə hɪz æks, hæŋɪŋ əɾ ɪz bɛlt, əntɪl ɪz nʌkəlz hɝt. "hɝi, ɛɡwin! hɝi!"

"Hurry!" he shouted. He could make out the Trollocs now, huge dark shapes bounding through the trees, bellowing and snarling to chill the blood. He gripped the haft of his axe, hanging at his belt, until his knuckles hurt. "Hurry, Egwene! Hurry!"

sʌɾənli hɪz hɔɹs skɹimd, ən i wɑz fɔlɪŋ, tʌmbəlɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə sæɾəl əz ðə hɔɹs dʒɹɑpt əweɪ bɪniθ hɪm. hi flʌŋ aʊɾ ɪz hænz tə bɹeɪs hɪmsɛlf ən splæʃt hɛdfɝst ɪndə aɪsi wɔɾɝ. hi hæd ɹɪɾən ɹaɪɾ ɔf ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə ʃɪɹ blʌf ɪndə ði ɑɹɪnɛl.

Suddenly his horse screamed, and he was falling, tumbling out of the saddle as the horse dropped away beneath him. He flung out his hands to brace himself and splashed headfirst into icy water. He had ridden right off the edge of a sheer bluff into the Arinelle.

ðə ʃɑk ə fɹizɪŋ wɔɾɝ ɹɪpt ə ɡæsp fɹəm hɪm, ən i swɑloʊd mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl bɪfɔɹ i mænədʒ tə faɪɾ ɪz weɪ tə ðə sɝfəs. hi fɛl mɔɹ ðən hɝɾ ənʌðɝ splæʃ, ən θɔt ðəɾ ɛɡwin mʌst əv kʌm ɹaɪɾ æftɝ hɪm. pæntɪŋ ən bloʊɪŋ, hi tʃɹɛɾɪd wɔɾɝ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi tə kip əfloʊt; hɪz koʊɾ ən kloʊk wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi sɑɾən, ən ɪz buts hæd fɪld. hi lʊkt ɝaʊn fəɹ ɛɡwin, bʌt sɔ oʊnli ðə ɡlɪn ə munlaɪɾ ɑn ðə blæk wɔɾɝ, ɹʌfəl baɪ ðə wɪnd.

The shock of freezing water ripped a gasp from him, and he swallowed more than a little before he managed to fight his way to the surface. He felt more than heard another splash, and thought that Egwene must have come right after him. Panting and blowing, he treaded water. It was not easy to keep afloat; his coat and cloak were already sodden, and his boots had filled. He looked around for Egwene, but saw only the glint of moonlight on the black water, ruffled by the wind.

"ɛɡwin? ɛɡwin!"

"Egwene? Egwene!"

ə spɪɹ flæʃt ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz aɪz ən θɹu wɔɾɝ ɪn ɪz feɪs. ʌðɝz splæʃt ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ ɝaʊn hɪm, tu. ɡʌɾɝəl vɔɪsəz ɹeɪzd ɪn ɑɹɡjəmən ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk, ən ðə tʃɹɑlɑk spɪɹz stɑp kʌmɪŋ, bʌɾ i ɡeɪv ʌp ɑn kɔlɪŋ fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ.

A spear flashed right in front of his eyes and threw water in his face. Others splashed into the river around him, too. Guttural voices raised in argument on the riverbank, and the Trolloc spears stopped coming, but he gave up on calling for the time being.

ðə kɝənt wɑʃt ɪm daʊnɹɪvɝ, bʌt ðə θɪk ʃaʊts ən snɑɹlz fɑloʊɾ əlɔŋ ðə bæŋk, kipɪŋ peɪs. ənduɪŋ ɪz kloʊk, hi lɛt ðə ɹɪvɝ teɪk ɪt. ə lɪɾəl lɛs weɪt tə dʒɹæɡ hɪm daʊn. dɔɡədli, hi sɛɾ aʊt swɪmɪŋ fəɹ ðə fɑɹ bæŋk. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ tʃɹɑləks ðɛɹ. hi hoʊpt.

The current washed him downriver, but the thick shouts and snarls followed along the bank, keeping pace. Undoing his cloak, he let the river take it. A little less weight to drag him down. Doggedly, he set out swimming for the far bank. There were no Trollocs there. He hoped.

hi swæm ðə weɪ ðeɪ dɪd bæk hoʊm, ɪn ðə pɑnz ɪn ðə wɔɾɝwʊd, stʃɹoʊkɪŋ wɪð boʊθ hænz, kɪkɪŋ wɪð boʊθ fit, kipɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə wɔɾɝ. ət list, hi tʃɹaɪd tə kip ɪz hɛɾ aʊɾ ə ðə wɔɾɝ; ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi. ivən wɪθaʊt ðə kloʊk, hɪz koʊɾ ən buts itʃ sim tə weɪ əz mʌtʃ əz i dɪd. ən ði æks dʒɹæɡd əɾ ɪz weɪst, θɹɛɾənɪŋ tə ɹoʊl ɪm oʊvɝ ɪf ɪt dɪd nɑt pʊl ɪm ʌndɝ. hi θɔɾ əbaʊt lɛɾɪŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ əv ðæt, tu; hi θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt mɔɹ ðən wʌns. ɪt wəd bi izi, mʌtʃ iziɝ ðən stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz buts, fəɹ ɪnstəns. bʌɾ ɛvɹi taɪm i θɔɾ ʌv ɪt, hi θɔɾ ə kɹɔlɪŋ aʊɾ ɑn ðə fɑɹ bæŋk tə faɪn tʃɹɑləks weɪɾɪŋ. ði æks wəd nɑt də hɪm mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ əɡɛns hæf ə dʌzən tʃɹɑləks - əɹ ivən əɡɛnst wʌn, meɪbi - bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən ɪz bɛɹ hænz.

He swam the way they did back home, in the ponds in the Waterwood, stroking with both hands, kicking with both feet, keeping his head out of the water. At least, he tried to keep his head out of the water; it was not easy. Even without the cloak, his coat and boots each seemed to weigh as much as he did. And the axe dragged at his waist, threatening to roll him over if it did not pull him under. He thought about letting the river have that, too; he thought about it more than once. It would be easy, much easier than struggling out of his boots, for instance. But every time he thought of it, he thought of crawling out on the far bank to find Trollocs waiting. The axe would not do him much good against half a dozen Trollocs - or even against one, maybe - but it was better than his bare hands.

æftɝ ə waɪl i wɑz nɑɾ ivən sɝɾən i wəd bi eɪbəl tə lɪf ði æks ɪf tʃɹɑləks wɝ ðɛɹ. hɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz bɪkeɪm lɛɾən; ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt tə muv ðɛm, ən ɪz feɪs noʊ lɔŋɡɝ keɪm əz fɑɹ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ wɪð itʃ stʃɹoʊk. hi kɔft fɹəm wɔɾɝ ðət wɛn ʌp ɪz noʊz. ə deɪ ət ðə fɔɹdʒ əz noʊ ɑdz ɑn ðɪs, hi θɔt wɛɹəli, ən dʒʌs ðən ɪz kɪkɪŋ fʊt stʃɹʌk sʌmθɪŋ. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əntɪl i kɪkt ɪɾ əɡɛn ðəɾ i ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. ðə bɑɾəm. hi wɑz ɪn ðə ʃæloʊz. hi wɑz əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ.

After a while he was not even certain he would be able to lift the axe if Trollocs were there. His arms and legs became leaden; it was an effort to move them, and his face no longer came as far out of the river with each stroke. He coughed from water that went up his nose. A day at the forge has no odds on this, he thought wearily, and just then his kicking foot struck something. It was not until he kicked it again that he realized what it was. The bottom. He was in the shallows. He was across the river.

sʌkɪŋ ɛɹ θɹu hɪz maʊθ, hi ɡɑt tə hɪz fit, splæʃɪŋ əbaʊɾ əz ɪz lɛɡz ɔlmoʊst ɡeɪv weɪ. hi fʌmbəld ɪz æks aʊɾ ʌv ɪts lup əz i flaʊndɝɾ əʃɔɹ, ʃɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd. hi dɪd nɑt si ɛni tʃɹɑləks. hi dɪd nɑt si ɛɡwin, iðɝ. dʒʌst ə fju skæɾɝd tʃɹiz əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk, ən ə munlaɪt ɹɪbən ɑn ðə wɔɾɝ.

Sucking air through his mouth, he got to his feet, splashing about as his legs almost gave way. He fumbled his axe out of its loop as he floundered ashore, shivering in the wind. He did not see any Trollocs. He did not see Egwene, either. Just a few scattered trees along the riverbank, and a moonlight ribbon on the water.

wən i hæɾ ɪz bɹɛθ əɡɛn, hi kɔl ðɛɹ neɪmz əɡɛn ən əɡɛn. feɪnt ʃaʊts fɹəm ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ænsɝd hɪm; ivən ət ðət dɪstəns i kəd meɪk aʊt ðə hɑɹʃ vɔɪsəz ə tʃɹɑləks. hɪz fɹɛnz dɪd nɑɾ ænsɝ, ðoʊ.

When he had his breath again, he called their names again and again. Faint shouts from the far side answered him; even at that distance he could make out the harsh voices of Trollocs. His friends did not answer, though.

ðə wɪn sɝdʒd, ɪts moʊn dʒɹaʊnɪŋ aʊt ðə tʃɹɑləks, ən i ʃɪvɝd. ɪt wɑz nɑt koʊld ɪnʌf tə fɹiz ðə wɔɾɝ soʊkɪŋ ɪz kloʊðz, bʌɾ ɪt fɛlt əz ɪf ɪt wɑz; ɪt slaɪs tə ðə boʊn wɪð ən aɪsi bleɪd. hʌɡɪŋ hɪmsɛlf wɑz oʊnli ə dʒɛstʃɝ ðət dɪd nɑt stɑp ðə ʃɪvɝɪŋ. əloʊn, hi klaɪm taɪɹədli ʌp ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk tə faɪnd ʃɛltɝ əɡɛns ðə wɪnd.

The wind surged, its moan drowning out the Trollocs, and he shivered. It was not cold enough to freeze the water soaking his clothes, but it felt as if it was; it sliced to the bone with an icy blade. Hugging himself was only a gesture that did not stop the shivering. Alone, he climbed tiredly up the riverbank to find shelter against the wind.

ɹænd pæɾəd klaʊdz nɛk, suðɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪ wɪð wɪspɝz. ðə hɔɹs tɔst ɪz hɛɾ ən dænst ɑn kwɪk fit. ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd bɪn lɛf bɪhaɪnd - əɹ soʊ ɪt simd - bʌt klaʊd hæd ðə smɛl ə ðɛm θɪk ɪn ɪz nɑstʃɹəlz. mæt ɹoʊd wɪð ən æɹoʊ nɑkt, wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ sɝpɹaɪzəz aʊɾ ə ðə naɪt, waɪl ɹænd ən tɑm pɪɹd θɹu ðə bɹæntʃəz, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɹɛd stɑɹ ðət wɑz ðɛɹ ɡaɪd. kipɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn vju hæd bɪn izi ɪnʌf, ivən wɪð ɔl ðə bɹæntʃəz oʊvɝhɛd, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪɾɪŋ stʃɹeɪt təwɔɹɾ ɪt. bʌt ðən mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks hæɾ əpɪɹd, əhɛd, ən ðeɪ wɛnt ɡæləpɪŋ ɔf tə ðə saɪd wɪð boʊθ pæks haʊlɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm. ðə tʃɹɑləks kəd kip ʌp wɪð ə hɔɹs, bʌɾ oʊnli fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əɹ soʊ, ən faɪnəli ðeɪ lɛf ðə pɝsuɾ ən ðə haʊlz bɪhaɪnd. bʌt wɪð ɔl ðə twɪsts ən tɝnz, ðeɪ hæd lɔs ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ stɑɹ.

Rand patted Cloud's neck, soothing the gray with whispers. The horse tossed his head and danced on quick feet. The Trollocs had been left behind - or so it seemed - but Cloud had the smell of them thick in his nostrils. Mat rode with an arrow nocked, watching for surprises out of the night, while Rand and Thom peered through the branches, searching for the red star that was their guide. Keeping it in view had been easy enough, even with all the branches overhead, so long as they were riding straight toward it. But then more Trollocs had appeared, ahead, and they went galloping off to the side with both packs howling after them. The Trollocs could keep up with a horse, but only for a hundred paces or so, and finally they left the pursuit and the howls behind. But with all the twists and turns, they had lost the guiding star.

"aɪ stɪl seɪ ɪts oʊvɝ ðɛɹ," mæt sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ ɔf tə hɪz ɹaɪt. "wi wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ nɔɹθ ət ði ɛnd, ən ðət minz ist ɪz ðət weɪ."

"I still say it's over there," Mat said, gesturing off to his right. "We were going north at the end, and that means east is that way."

"ðɛɹ ɪɾ ɪz," tɑm sɛɾ əbɹʌpli. hi pɔɪntəd θɹu ðə tæŋɡəl bɹæntʃəz tə ðɛɹ lɛft, stʃɹeɪɾ ət ðə ɹɛd stɑɹ. mæt mʌmbəl sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ.

"There it is," Thom said abruptly. He pointed through the tangled branches to their left, straight at the red star. Mat mumbled something under his breath.

aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ ɹænd kɑt ðə muvmən əz ə tʃɹɑlɑk lɛpt aʊt fɹəm bɪhaɪn ə tʃɹi wɪθaʊɾ ə saʊnd, swɪŋɪŋ ɪts kætʃpoʊl. ɹænd dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪn, ən ðə ɡɹeɪ baʊndəd fɔɹwɝd dʒʌst əz tu mɔɹ plʌnʒd fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz æftɝ ðə fɝst. ə nus bɹʌʃt ðə bæk ə ɹændz nɛk, sɛndɪŋ ə ʃɪvɝ daʊn ɪz spaɪn.

Out of the corner of his eye Rand caught the movement as a Trolloc leaped out from behind a tree without a sound, swinging its catchpole. Rand dug his heels in, and the gray bounded forward just as two more plunged from the shadows after the first. A noose brushed the back of Rand's neck, sending a shiver down his spine.

ən æɹoʊ tʊk wʌn ə ðə bɛstʃəl feɪsəz ɪn ði aɪ, ðən mæt swʌŋ ɪn bɪsaɪɾ ɪm əz ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz paʊndɪd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. ðeɪ wɝ ɹʌnɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɹɪvɝ, hi ɹilaɪzd, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz gɑnə də ɛni ɡʊd. ðə tʃɹɑləks spɛɾ æftɝ ðɛm, ɔlmoʊs kloʊs ɪnʌf tə ɹitʃ aʊɾ ən ɡɹæb ðə stʃɹimɪŋ teɪlz ə ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. hæf ə stɛp ɡeɪnd, ən ðə kætʃpoʊlz kəd dʒɹæɡ ðɛm boʊθ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ sæɾəlz.

An arrow took one of the bestial faces in the eye, then Mat swung in beside him as their horses pounded through the trees. They were running toward the river, he realized, but he was not sure it was going to do any good. The Trollocs sped after them, almost close enough to reach out and grab the streaming tails of their horses. Half a step gained, and the catchpoles could drag them both out of their saddles.

hi lin loʊ ɑn ðə ɡɹeɪz nɛk tə pʊt ðət mʌtʃ mɔɹ dɪstəns bɪtwin ɪz oʊn nɛk ən ðə nusəz. mæts feɪs wɑz nɪɹli bɛɹiɾ ɪn ɪz hɔɹsəz meɪn. bʌt ɹænd wʌndɝd wɛɹ tɑm wɑz. hæd ðə ɡlimən dɪsaɪɾɪd i wɑz bɛɾɝ ɔf ɑn ɪz oʊn, sɪns ɔl θɹi tʃɹɑləks hæd fæsən ɑn ðə bɔɪz?

He leaned low on the gray's neck to put that much more distance between his own neck and the nooses. Mat's face was nearly buried in his horse's mane. But Rand wondered where Thom was. Had the gleeman decided he was better off on his own, since all three Trollocs had fastened on the boys?

sʌɾənli tɑmz ɡɛldɪŋ ɡæləpt aʊɾ ə ðə naɪt, hɑɹd bɪhaɪn ðə tʃɹɑləks. ðə tʃɹɑləks hæɾ oʊnli taɪm ɪnʌf tə lʊk bæk ɪn sɝpɹaɪz bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡlimənz hænz wɪp bæk ən ðən fɔɹwɝd. munlaɪt flæʃt ɔf stil. wʌn tʃɹɑlɑk tʌmbəl fɔɹwɝd, ɹoʊlɪŋ oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ bɪfɔɹ lændɪŋ ɪn ə hip, waɪl ə sɛkən dʒɹɑp tə ɪts niz wɪð ə skɹim, klɔɪŋ əɾ ɪts bæk wɪð boʊθ hænz. ðə θɝd snɑɹəld, bɛɹɪŋ ə mʌzəlfəl ə ʃɑɹp tiθ, bʌɾ əz ɪts kəmpænjənz tɑpəld ɪt wɝld əweɪ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs. tɑmz hæn meɪd ðə wɪp-laɪk moʊʃən əɡɛn, ən ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ʃɹikt, bʌt ðə ʃɹiks feɪɾəd ɪndə ðə dɪstəns əz ɪt ɹæn.

Suddenly Thom's gelding galloped out of the night, hard behind the Trollocs. The Trollocs had only time enough to look back in surprise before the gleeman's hands whipped back and then forward. Moonlight flashed off steel. One Trolloc tumbled forward, rolling over and over before landing in a heap, while a second dropped to its knees with a scream, clawing at its back with both hands. The third snarled, baring a muzzleful of sharp teeth, but as its companions toppled it whirled away into the darkness. Thom's hand made the whip-like motion again, and the Trolloc shrieked, but the shrieks faded into the distance as it ran.

ɹænd ən mæt pʊld ʌp ən stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɡlimən.

Rand and Mat pulled up and stared at the gleeman.

"maɪ sɛkənd-bɛs naɪvz," tɑm mʌɾɝd, bʌɾ i meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə ɡɛt daʊn ən ɹɪtʃɹiv ðɛm. "ðæt wʌn wɪl bɹɪŋ ʌðɝz. aɪ hoʊp ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪzən tu fɑɹ. aɪ hoʊp. . . ." ɪnstɛɾ ə seɪɪŋ wʌɾ ɛls i hoʊpt, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ən sɛɾ ɔf əɾ ə kwɪk kæntɝ. ɹænd ən mæt fɛl ɪn bɪhaɪn hɪm.

"My second-best knives," Thom muttered, but he made no effort to get down and retrieve them. "That one will bring others. I hope the river isn't too far. I hope. . . ." Instead of saying what else he hoped, he shook his head and set off at a quick canter. Rand and Mat fell in behind him.

sun ðeɪ ɹitʃt ə loʊ bæŋk wɛɹ tʃɹiz ɡɹu ɹaɪt tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə naɪt-blæk wɔɾɝ, ɪts mun-stʃɹik sɝfəs ɹɪfəl baɪ ðə wɪnd. ɹænd kəd nɑt si ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ əɾ ɔl. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk ði aɪdiə ʌv kɹɔsɪŋ ɑn ə ɹæft ɪn ðə dɑɹk, bʌɾ i laɪk ði aɪdiə ʌv steɪɪŋ ɑn ðɪs saɪɾ ivən lɛs. əl swɪm ɪf aɪ hæv tə.

Soon they reached a low bank where trees grew right to the edge of the night-black water, its moon-streaked surface riffled by the wind. Rand could not see the far side at all. He did not like the idea of crossing on a raft in the dark, but he liked the idea of staying on this side even less. I'll swim if I have to.

sʌmwɛɹ əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ ə tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹn bɹeɪd, ʃɑɹp, kwɪk, ən ɝdʒən ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. ɪt wɑz ðə fɝst saʊn fɹəm ðə hɔɹnz sɪns ðeɪ hæd lɛf ðə ɹuənz. ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɪt mɛn səm ə ði ʌðɝz hæd bɪn kæptʃɝd.

Somewhere away from the river a Trolloc horn brayed, sharp, quick, and urgent in the darkness. It was the first sound from the horns since they had left the ruins. Rand wondered if it meant some of the others had been captured.

"noʊ jus steɪɪŋ hɪɹ ɔl naɪt," tɑm sɛd. "pɪk ə dɝɛkʃən. ʌpɹɪvɝ, əɹ daʊn?"

"No use staying here all night," Thom said. "Pick a direction. Upriver, or down?"

"bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði ʌðɝz kəd bi ɛniwɛɹ," mæt pɹətɛstəd. "ɛni weɪ wi tʃuz kəd dʒʌs teɪk əs fɝðɝ əweɪ."

"But Moiraine and the others could be anywhere," Mat protested. "Any way we choose could just take us further away."

"soʊ ɪt kʊd." klʌkɪŋ tə hɪz ɡɛldɪŋ, tɑm tɝn daʊnɹɪvɝ, hɛɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə bæŋk. "soʊ ɪt kʊd." ɹænd lʊkt ət mæt, hu ʃɹʌɡd, ən ðeɪ tɝn æftɝ hɪm.

"So it could." Clucking to his gelding, Thom turned downriver, heading along the bank. "So it could." Rand looked at Mat, who shrugged, and they turned after him.

fəɹ ə taɪm nʌθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd. ðə bæŋk wɑz haɪɝ ɪn səm pleɪsəz, loʊɝ ɪn ʌðɝz, ðə tʃɹiz ɡɹu θɪkɝ, əɹ θɪn aʊɾ ɪn smɔl klɪɹɪŋz, bʌt ðə naɪɾ ən ðə ɹɪvɝ ən ðə wɪnd wɝ ɔl ðə seɪm, koʊld ən blæk. ən noʊ tʃɹɑləks. ðət wɑz wʌn tʃeɪnʒ ɹænd wɑz ɡlæd tə fɔɹɡoʊ.

For a time nothing changed. The bank was higher in some places, lower in others, the trees grew thicker, or thinned out in small clearings, but the night and the river and the wind were all the same, cold and black. And no Trollocs. That was one change Rand was glad to forgo.

ðən i sɔ ə laɪɾ əhɛd, dʒʌst ə sɪŋɡəl pɔɪnt. əz ðeɪ dʒɹu kloʊsɝ i kəd si ðət ðə laɪt wɑz wɛl əbʌv ðə ɹɪvɝ, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɪn ə tʃɹi. tɑm kwɪkən ðə peɪs ən bɪɡæn tə hʌm ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ.

Then he saw a light ahead, just a single point. As they drew closer he could see that the light was well above the river, as if it were in a tree. Thom quickened the pace and began to hum under his breath.

faɪnəli ðeɪ kəd meɪk aʊt ðə sɔɹs ə ðə laɪt, ə læntɝn hɔɪstəɾ ətɑp wʌn ə ðə mæsts ʌv ə lɑɹdʒ tʃɹeɪɾɝz boʊt, taɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ðə naɪt bɪsaɪɾ ə smɔl klɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə tʃɹiz. ðə boʊt, ə ɡʊɾ eɪɾi fit lɔŋ, ʃɪftəd slaɪtli wɪð ðə kɝənt, tʌɡɪŋ əɡɛns ðə mʊɹɪŋ ɹoʊps taɪd tə tʃɹiz. ðə ɹɪɡɪŋ hʌmd ən kɹikt ɪn ðə wɪnd. ðə læntɝn dʌbəl ðə munlaɪɾ ɑn ðə dɛk, bʌt noʊ wʌn wɑz ɪn saɪt.

Finally they could make out the source of the light, a lantern hoisted atop one of the masts of a large trader's boat, tied up for the night beside a small clearing in the trees. The boat, a good eighty feet long, shifted slightly with the current, tugging against the mooring ropes tied to trees. The rigging hummed and creaked in the wind. The lantern doubled the moonlight on the deck, but no one was in sight.

"naʊ ðæt," tɑm sɛɾ əz i dɪsmaʊntɪd, "ɪz bɛɾɝ ðən ən ɛɛs sədaɪz ɹæft, ɪzən ɪt?" hi stʊd wɪð ɪz hænz ɑn ɪz hɪps, ən ivən ɪn ðə dɑɹk ɪz smʌɡnəs wɑz əpɛɹənt. "ɪt dʌzn lʊk əz ɪf ðɪs vɛsəl ɪz meɪd tə kæɹi hɔɹsəz, bʌt kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðə deɪnʒɝ hiz ɪn, wɪtʃ wəɹ gɑnə wɔɹn ɪm ʌv, ðə kæptən meɪ bi ɹizənəbəl. dʒʌs lemi də ɔl ðə tɔkɪŋ. ən bɹɪŋ jəɹ blæŋkəts ən sæɾəlbæɡz, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs."

"Now that," Thom said as he dismounted, "is better than an Aes Sedai's raft, isn't it?" He stood with his hands on his hips, and even in the dark his smugness was apparent. "It doesn't look as if this vessel is made to carry horses, but considering the danger he's in, which we are going to warn him of, the captain may be reasonable. Just let me do all the talking. And bring your blankets and saddlebags, just in case."

ɹænd klaɪm daʊn ən bɪɡæn əntiɪŋ ðə θɪŋz bɪhaɪn ɪz sæɾəl. "ju doʊn min tə liv wɪθaʊt ði ʌðɝz, də ju?"

Rand climbed down and began untying the things behind his saddle. "You don't mean to leave without the others, do you?"

tɑm hæd noʊ tʃæns tə seɪ wʌɾ i mɛn tə du. ɪndə ðə klɪɹɪŋ bɝs tu tʃɹɑləks, haʊlɪŋ ən weɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ kætʃpoʊlz, wɪð fɔɹ mɔɹ ɹaɪt bɪhaɪnd. ðə hɔɹsəz ɹɪɹɾ ən wɪnid. ʃaʊts ɪn ðə dɪstəns sɛd mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks wɝ ɑn ðə weɪ.

Thom had no chance to say what he meant to do. Into the clearing burst two Trollocs, howling and waving their catchpoles, with four more right behind. The horses reared and whinnied. Shouts in the distance said more Trollocs were on the way.

"ɑntu ðə boʊt!" tɑm ʃaʊɾəd. "kwɪk! liv ɔl ðæt! ɹʌn!" suɾɪŋ ɪz oʊn wɝdz, hi ɹæn fəɹ ðə boʊt, pætʃəz flæpɪŋ ən ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz ɑn ɪz bæk bæŋɪŋ təɡɛðɝ. "ju ɑn ðə boʊt!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "weɪk ʌp, jə fulz! tʃɹɑləks!"

"Onto the boat!" Thom shouted. "Quick! Leave all that! Run!" Suiting his own words, he ran for the boat, patches flapping and instrument cases on his back banging together. "You on the boat!" he shouted. "Wake up, you fools! Trollocs!"

ɹænd dʒɝkt ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl ən sæɾəlbæɡz fɹi ʌv ðə læs θɔŋ ən wɑz ɹaɪɾ ɑn ðə ɡlimənz hilz. tɔsɪŋ ɪz bɝɾənz oʊvɝ ðə ɹeɪl, hi vɔltəɾ æftɝ ðɛm. hi dʒʌs hæd taɪm tə si ə mæn kɝld ʌp ɑn ðə dɛk, bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə sɪɾ ʌp əz ɪf i hæɾ oʊnli ðət moʊmən əweɪkənd, wən ɪz fit keɪm daʊn ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə ðə fɛloʊ. ðə mæn ɡɹʌntɪd laʊdli, ɹænd stʌmbəld, ən ə hʊkt kætʃpoʊl slæmd ɪndə ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ dʒʌst wɛɹ i hæd kʌm oʊvɝ. ʃaʊts ɹoʊz ɔl oʊvɝ ðə boʊt, ən fit paʊndɪɾ əlɔŋ ðə dɛk.

Rand jerked his blanketroll and saddlebags free of the last thong and was right on the gleeman's heels. Tossing his burdens over the rail, he vaulted after them. He just had time to see a man curled up on the deck, beginning to sit up as if he had only that moment awakened, when his feet came down right on top of the fellow. The man grunted loudly, Rand stumbled, and a hooked catchpole slammed into the railing just where he had come over. Shouts rose all over the boat, and feet pounded along the deck.

hɛɹi hænz kɑt ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə kætʃpoʊl, ən ə ɡoʊt-hɔɹn hɛd lɪftəɾ əbʌv ɪt. ɔf bæləns, stʌmbəlɪŋ, ɹænd stɪl mænədʒ tə dʒɹɔ hɪz sɔɹɾ ən swɪŋ. wɪð ə skɹim ðə tʃɹɑlɑk dʒɹɑpt əweɪ.

Hairy hands caught the railing beside the catchpole, and a goat-horned head lifted above it. Off balance, stumbling, Rand still managed to draw his sword and swing. With a scream the Trolloc dropped away.

mɛn ɹæn ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɑn ðə boʊt, ʃaʊɾɪŋ, hækɪŋ mʊɹɪŋ laɪnz wɪð æksɪz. ðə boʊt lɝtʃt ən swʌŋ əz ɪf iɡɝ tə bi ɔf. ʌp ɪn ðə baʊ θɹi mɛn stʃɹʌɡəld wɪð ə tʃɹɑlɑk. sʌmwʌn θɹʌst oʊvɝ ðə saɪd wɪð ə spɪɹ, ðoʊ ɹænd kəd nɑt si wʌɾ i wɑz stæbɪŋ æt. ə bɑstʃɹɪŋ snæpt, ən snæpt əɡɛn. ðə mæn ɹænd hæd stɛpt ɑn skɹæbəld əweɪ fɹəm ɪm ɑn hænz ən niz, ðən flʌŋ ʌp ɪz hænz wən i sɔ ɹænd lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm.

Men ran everywhere on the boat, shouting, hacking mooring lines with axes. The boat lurched and swung as if eager to be off. Up in the bow three men struggled with a Trolloc. Someone thrust over the side with a spear, though Rand could not see what he was stabbing at. A bowstring snapped, and snapped again. The man Rand had stepped on scrabbled away from him on hands and knees, then flung up his hands when he saw Rand looking at him.

"spɛɹ mi!" hi kɹaɪd. "teɪk wʌtɛvɝ jə wɑnt, teɪk ðə boʊt, teɪk ɛvɹiθɪŋ, bʌt spɛɹ mi!"

"Spare me!" he cried. "Take whatever you want, take the boat, take everything, but spare me!"

sʌɾənli sʌmθɪŋ slæmd əkɹɔs ɹændz bæk, smæʃɪŋ ɪm tə ðə dɛk. hɪz sɔɹd skɪɾɝd əweɪ fɹəm ɪz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt hænd. oʊpənməðd, ɡæspɪŋ fəɹ ə bɹɛθ ðət wəd nɑt kʌm, hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹitʃ ðə sɔɹd. hɪz mʌsəlz ɹɪspɑndɪd wɪð æɡənaɪz sloʊnəs; hi ɹɪθ laɪk ə slʌɡ. ðə fɛloʊ hu wɑntəd tə bi spɛɹd ɡeɪv wʌn fɹaɪɾənd, kʌvtəs lʊk ət ðə sɔɹd, ðən vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊz.

Suddenly something slammed across Rand's back, smashing him to the deck. His sword skittered away from his outstretched hand. Openmouthed, gasping for a breath that would not come, he tried to reach the sword. His muscles responded with agonized slowness; he writhed like a slug. The fellow who wanted to be spared gave one frightened, covetous look at the sword, then vanished into the shadows.

peɪnfəli ɹænd mænədʒ tə lʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən nu hɪz lʌk hæd ɹʌn aʊt. ə wʊlf-mʌzəl tʃɹɑlɑk stʊd bælənst ɑn ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ, stɛɹɪŋ daʊn əɾ ɪm ən hoʊldɪŋ ðə splɪntɝɾ ɛn ə ðə kætʃpoʊl ðət hæd nɑk ðə wɪn aʊɾ ə hɪm. ɹænd stʃɹʌɡəl tə ɹitʃ ðə sɔɹd, tə muv, tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz muv dʒɝkəli, ən oʊnli hæf əz i wɑntəd. ðeɪ wɑbəld ən wɛn ɪn ɑd dɝɛkʃənz. hɪz tʃɛs fɛlt əz ɪf ɪt wɝ stʃɹæpt wɪð aɪɝn bænz; sɪlvɝ spɑts swæm ɪn ɪz aɪz. fɹæntəkəli hi hʌntəd fəɹ səm weɪ tə ɪskeɪp. taɪm sim tə sloʊ əz ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ɹeɪz ðə dʒæɡd poʊl əz ɪf tə spɪɹ ɪm wɪð ɪt. tə ɹænd ðə kɹitʃɝ əpɪɹd tə bi muvɪŋ əz ɪf ɪn ə dʒɹim. hi wɑtʃt ðə θɪk ɑɹm ɡoʊ bæk; hi kəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi fil ðə bɹoʊkən hæft ɹɪpɪŋ θɹu hɪz spaɪn, fil ðə peɪn ʌv ɪt tɛɹɪŋ ɪm oʊpən. hi θɔɾ ɪz lʌŋz wəd bɝst. aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ! laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə . . . ! ðə tʃɹɑlɑks ɑɹm stɑɹɾəd fɔɹwɝd, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðə splɪntɝd ʃæft, ən ɹænd faʊn ðə bɹɛθ fəɹ wʌn jɛl. "noʊ!"

Painfully Rand managed to look over his shoulder, and knew his luck had run out. A wolf-muzzled Trolloc stood balanced on the railing, staring down at him and holding the splintered end of the catchpole that had knocked the wind out of him. Rand struggled to reach the sword, to move, to get away, but his arms and legs moved jerkily, and only half as he wanted. They wobbled and went in odd directions. His chest felt as if it were strapped with iron bands; silver spots swam in his eyes. Frantically he hunted for some way to escape. Time seemed to slow as the Trolloc raised the jagged pole as if to spear him with it. To Rand the creature appeared to be moving as if in a dream. He watched the thick arm go back; he could already feel the broken haft ripping through his spine, feel the pain of it tearing him open. He thought his lungs would burst. I'm going to die! Light help me, I'm going to . . . ! The Trolloc's arm started forward, driving the splintered shaft, and Rand found the breath for one yell. "No!"

sʌɾənli ðə ʃɪp lɝtʃt, ən ə bum swʌŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz tə kætʃ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk əkɹɔs ðə tʃɛst wɪð ə kɹʌntʃ ə bɹeɪkɪŋ boʊnz, swipɪŋ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə saɪd.

Suddenly the ship lurched, and a boom swung out of the shadows to catch the Trolloc across the chest with a crunch of breaking bones, sweeping it over the side.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd leɪ pæntɪŋ ən stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə bum swɪŋɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ əbʌv hɪm. ðəɾ əz tə hæv juzd ʌp maɪ lʌk, hi θɔt. ðəɹ kæn bi ɛni mɔɹ æftɝ ðæt.

For a moment Rand lay panting and staring up at the boom swinging back and forth above him. That has to have used up my luck, he thought. There can't be any more after that.

ʃɑkəli hi ɡɑt tə hɪz fiɾ ən pɪkt ʌp ɪz sɔɹd, fəɹ wʌns hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn boʊθ hænz ðə weɪ læn hæd tɔt hɪm, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ lɛft ɑn wɪtʃ tə juz ɪt. ðə ɡæp ə blæk wɔɾɝ bɪtwin ðə boʊɾ ən ðə bæŋk wɑz waɪɾənɪŋ kwɪkli; ðə kɹaɪz ə ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ feɪɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪn ðə naɪt.

Shakily he got to his feet and picked up his sword, for once holding it in both hands the way Lan had taught him, but there was nothing left on which to use it. The gap of black water between the boat and the bank was widening quickly; the cries of the Trollocs were fading behind in the night.

əz i ʃiðd ɪz sɔɹɾ ən slʌmpt əɡɛns ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ, ə stɑki mæn ɪn ə koʊt ðət hʌŋ tə hɪz niz stʃɹoʊɾ ʌp ðə dɛk tə ɡlɛɹ ət hɪm. lɔŋ hɛɹ ðət fɛl tə hɪz θɪk ʃoʊldɝz ən ə bɪɹd ðət lɛft ɪz ʌpɝ lɪp bɛɹ fɹeɪmd ə ɹaʊn feɪs. ɹaʊn bʌt nɑt sɑft. ðə bum swʌŋ aʊɾ əɡɛn, ən ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn spɛɹd pɑɹɾ ə hɪz ɡlɛɹ fəɹ ðəɾ əz i kɑɾ ɪt; ɪt meɪɾ ə kɹɪsp splæɾ əɡɛnst ɪz bɹɔd pɑm.

As he sheathed his sword and slumped against the railing, a stocky man in a coat that hung to his knees strode up the deck to glare at him. Long hair that fell to his thick shoulders and a beard that left his upper lip bare framed a round face. Round but not soft. The boom swung out again, and the bearded man spared part of his glare for that as he caught it; it made a crisp splat against his broad palm.

"dʒɛlb!" hi bɛloʊd. "fɔɹtʃən! wɛɹ dʒju bi, dʒɛlb?" hi spoʊk soʊ fæst, wɪð ɔl ðə wɝdz ɹʌnɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, ðət ɹænd kəd bɛɹli ʌndɝstæn hɪm. "ju kən noʊ haɪd fɹəm mi ɑn maɪ oʊn ʃɪp! ɡɛt flɔɹən dʒɛlb aʊt hɪɹ!"

"Gelb!" he bellowed. "Fortune! Where do you be, Gelb?" He spoke so fast, with all the words running together, that Rand could barely understand him. "You can no hide from me on my own ship! Get Floran Gelb out here!"

ə kɹumən əpɪɹd wɪð ə bʊlz-aɪ læntɝn, ən tu mɔɹ pʊʃt ə nɛɹoʊ-feɪs mæn ɪndə ðə sɝkəl ə laɪɾ ɪt kæst. ɹænd ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə fɛloʊ hu hæɾ ɔfɝɾ ɪm ðə boʊt. ðə mænz aɪz ʃɪftəd fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd, nɛvɝ miɾɪŋ ðoʊz ə ðə stɑki mæn. ðə kæptən, ɹænd θɔt. ə bɹuz wɑz kʌmɪŋ ʌp ɑn dʒɛlbz fɔɹhɛd wɛɹ wʌn ə ɹændz buts hæd kɑt hɪm.

A crewman appeared with a bull's-eye lantern, and two more pushed a narrow-faced man into the circle of light it cast. Rand recognized the fellow who had offered him the boat. The man's eyes shifted from side to side, never meeting those of the stocky man. The captain, Rand thought. A bruise was coming up on Gelb's forehead where one of Rand's boots had caught him.

"wɝ jə noʊ səpoʊz tə sɪkjʊɹ ðɪs bum, dʒɛlb?" ðə kæptən æskt wɪð sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ kɑm, ðoʊ dʒʌst əz fæst əz bɪfɔɹ.

"Were you no supposed to secure this boom, Gelb?" the captain asked with surprising calm, though just as fast as before.

dʒɛlb lʊk tʃɹuli sɝpɹaɪzd. "bʌɾ aɪ dɪd. taɪɾ ɪt daʊn taɪt. aɪ ədmɪɾ ɪm ə lɪɾəl sloʊ əbaʊt θɪŋz naʊ ən ðɛn, kæptən doʊmən, bʌɾ aɪ ɡɛɾ əm dʌn."

Gelb looked truly surprised. "But I did. Tied it down tight. I admit I'm a little slow about things now and then, Captain Domon, but I get them done."

"soʊ jə bi sloʊ, də ju? noʊ soʊ sloʊ ət slipɪŋ. slipɪŋ wən jə ʃəd bi stændɪŋ wɑtʃ. wi kəd bi mɝɾɝd tə ə mæn, fəɹ ɔl ə ju."

"So you be slow, do you? No so slow at sleeping. Sleeping when you should be standing watch. We could be murdered to a man, for all of you."

"noʊ, kæptən, noʊ. ɪt wɑz hɪm." dʒɛlb pɔɪntəd stʃɹeɪɾ ət ɹænd. "aɪ wɑz ɑn ɡɑɹd, dʒʌs laɪk aɪ wɑz səpoʊz tə bi, wən i snikt ʌp ən hɪt mi wɪð ə klʌb." hi tʌtʃt ðə bɹuz ɑn ɪz hɛd, wɪnst, ən ɡlɛɹɾ ət ɹænd. "aɪ fɔt hɪm, bʌt ðən ðə tʃɹɑləks keɪm. hiz ɪn liɡ wɪð ðɛm, kæptən. eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd. ɪn liɡ wɪð ðə tʃɹɑləks."

"No, Captain, no. It was him." Gelb pointed straight at Rand. "I was on guard, just like I was supposed to be, when he sneaked up and hit me with a club." He touched the bruise on his head, winced, and glared at Rand. "I fought him, but then the Trollocs came. He's in league with them, Captain. A Darkfriend. In league with the Trollocs."

"ɪn liɡ wɪð maɪ eɪdʒd ɡɹændmʌðɝ!" kæptən doʊmən ɹɔɹd. "dɪɾ aɪ noʊ wɔɹn jə ðə læs taɪm, dʒɛlb? ət waɪtbɹɪdʒ, ɔf jə də ɡoʊ! ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə maɪ saɪt bɪfɔɹ aɪ pʊt jə ɔf naʊ." dʒɛlb dɑɹɾɪd aʊɾ ə ðə læntɝn laɪt, ən doʊmən stʊɾ oʊpənɪŋ ən kloʊzɪŋ ɪz hænz waɪl i stɛɹɾ ət nʌθɪŋ. "ðiz tʃɹɑləks də bi fɑloʊɪŋ mi. waɪ wɪl ðeɪ noʊ liv mi bi? waɪ?"

"In league with my aged grandmother!" Captain Domon roared. "Did I no warn you the last time, Gelb? At Whitebridge, off you do go! Get out of my sight before I put you off now." Gelb darted out of the lantern light, and Domon stood opening and closing his hands while he stared at nothing. "These Trollocs do be following me. Why will they no leave me be? Why?"

ɹænd lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə ɹeɪl ən wɑz ʃɑk tə faɪn ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪn saɪt. tu mɛn mæn ðə lɔŋ stɪɹɪŋ ɔɹ ðət stʌk aʊɾ oʊvɝ ðə stɝn, ən ðəɹ wɝ sɪks swips wɝkɪŋ tə ə saɪd naʊ, pʊlɪŋ ðə ʃɪp laɪk ə wɔɾɝbʌɡ fɝðɝ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ.

Rand looked over the rail and was shocked to find the riverbank no longer in sight. Two men manned the long steering oar that stuck out over the stern, and there were six sweeps working to a side now, pulling the ship like a waterbug further out into the river.

"kæptən," ɹænd sɛd, "wi hæv fɹɛnz bæk ðɛɹ. ɪf jə ɡoʊ bæk ən pɪk əm ʌp, aɪm ʃʊɹ ðəl ɹɪwɔɹd ju."

"Captain," Rand said, "we have friends back there. If you go back and pick them up, I am sure they'll reward you."

ðə kæptənz ɹaʊn feɪs swʌŋ təwɔɹd ɹænd, ən wən tɑm ən mæt əpɪɹɾ i ɪnkluɾəd əm ɪn ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃənləs stɛɹ əz wɛl.

The captain's round face swung toward Rand, and when Thom and Mat appeared he included them in his expressionless stare as well.

"kæptən," tɑm bɪɡæn wɪð ə baʊ, "əlaʊ mi tə - "

"Captain," Thom began with a bow, "allow me to - "

"ju kʌm bɪloʊ," kæptən doʊmən sɛd, "wɛɹ aɪ kən si wʌt mænɝ ə θɪŋ bi hɔld ʌp ɑn maɪ dɛk. kʌm. fɔɹtʃən dɛzɝt mi, sʌmbɑɾi sɪkjʊɹ ðɪs hɔɹn-kɝs bum!" əz kɹumɪn ɹʌʃt tə teɪk ðə bum, hi stʌmpt ɔf təwɔɹd ðə stɝn ə ðə boʊt. ɹænd ən ɪz tu kəmpænjənz fɑloʊd.

"You come below," Captain Domon said, "where I can see what manner of thing be hauled up on my deck. Come. Fortune desert me, somebody secure this horn-cursed boom!" As crewmen rushed to take the boom, he stumped off toward the stern of the boat. Rand and his two companions followed.

kæptən doʊmən hæɾ ə taɪɾi kæbən ɪn ðə stɝn, ɹitʃt baɪ klaɪmɪŋ daʊn ə ʃɔɹt læɾɝ, wɛɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɡeɪv ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ə biɪŋ ɪn ɪts pɹɑpɝ pleɪs, ɹaɪt daʊn tə ðə koʊts ən kloʊks hæŋɪŋ fɹəm pɛɡz ɑn ðə bæk ə ðə dɔɹ. ðə kæbən stʃɹɛtʃt ðə wɪdθ ə ðə ʃɪp, wɪð ə bɹɔd bɛd bɪlt əɡɛnst wʌn saɪɾ ən ə hɛvi teɪbəl bɪlt aʊt fɹəm ði ʌðɝ. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn tʃɛɹ, wɪð ə haɪ bæk ən stɝɾi ɑɹmz, ən ðə kæptən tʊk ðət hɪmsɛlf, moʊʃənɪŋ ði ʌðɝz tə faɪn pleɪsəz ɑn vɛɹiəs tʃɛsts ən bɛntʃɪz ðət wɝ ði oʊnli ʌðɝ fɝnɪʃɪŋz. ə laʊd hæɹəmf stɑp mæt fɹəm sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə bɛd.

Captain Domon had a tidy cabin in the stern, reached by climbing down a short ladder, where everything gave the impression of being in its proper place, right down to the coats and cloaks hanging from pegs on the back of the door. The cabin stretched the width of the ship, with a broad bed built against one side and a heavy table built out from the other. There was only one chair, with a high back and sturdy arms, and the captain took that himself, motioning the others to find places on various chests and benches that were the only other furnishings. A loud harrumph stopped Mat from sitting on the bed.

"naʊ," sɛd ðə kæptən wən ðeɪ wɝ ɔl siɾəd. "maɪ neɪm bi beɪl doʊmən, kæptən ən oʊnɝ ə ðə spɹeɪ, wɪtʃ bi ðɪs ʃɪp. naʊ hu bi ju, ən wɛɹ bi jə ɡoʊɪŋ aʊt hɪɹ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə noʊwɛɹ, ən waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ noʊ θɹoʊ jə oʊvɝ ðə saɪd fəɹ ðə tʃɹʌbəl juv bɹɔt mi?"

"Now," said the captain when they were all seated. "My name be Bayle Domon, captain and owner of the Spray, which be this ship. Now who be you, and where be you going out here in the middle of nowhere, and why should I no throw you over the side for the trouble you've brought me?"

ɹænd stɪl hæɾ əz mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl əz bɪfɔɹ ɪn fɑloʊɪŋ doʊmənz ɹæpəd spitʃ. wən i wɝkt aʊt ðə læs pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt ðə kæptən hæd sɛɾ i blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. θɹoʊ əs oʊvɝ ðə saɪd?

Rand still had as much trouble as before in following Domon's rapid speech. When he worked out the last part of what the captain had said he blinked in surprise. Throw us over the side?

mæt hɝidli sɛd, "wi dɪdn min tə kɑz jə ɛni tʃɹʌbəl. wɝ ɑn əɹ weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən ðən tə - "

Mat hurriedly said, "We didn't mean to cause you any trouble. We're on our way to Caemlyn, and then to - "

"æn ðən wɛɹ ðə wɪn teɪks ʌs," tɑm ɪntɝʌptɪd smuðli. "ðæts haʊ ɡlimən tʃɹævəl, laɪk dʌst ɑn ðə wɪnd. aɪm ə ɡlimən, jə ʌndɝstænd, tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn baɪ neɪm." hi ʃɪftəɾ ɪz kloʊk soʊ ðə mʌltəhud pætʃəz stɝd, əz ɪf ðə kæptən cʊɾə mɪs ðɛm. "ðiz tu kʌntʃɹi laʊts wɑnə bɪkʌm maɪ əpɹɛntəsɪz, ðoʊ aɪm nɑt jɛt ʃʊɹ aɪ wɑn ðɛm." ɹænd lʊkt ət mæt, hu ɡɹɪnd.

"And then where the wind takes us," Thom interrupted smoothly. "That's how gleemen travel, like dust on the wind. I am a gleeman, you understand, Thom Merrilin by name." He shifted his cloak so the multihued patches stirred, as if the captain could have missed them. "These two country louts want to become my apprentices, though I am not yet sure I want them." Rand looked at Mat, who grinned.

"ðæt bi ɔl vɛɹi wɛl, mæn," kæptən doʊmən sɛd plɑtʃədli, "bʌɾ ɪt tɛlz mi nʌθɪŋ. lɛs. fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi, ðət pleɪs bi ɑn noʊ ɹoʊd tə keɪɛmlɪn fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ aɪ ɛvɝ hɝd tɛl ʌv."

"That be all very well, man," Captain Domon said placidly, "but it tells me nothing. Less. Fortune prick me, that place be on no road to Caemlyn from anywhere I ever heard tell of."

"naʊ ðəɾ ɪz ə stɔɹi," tɑm sɛd, ən i stʃɹeɪɾəweɪ bɪɡæn tə ənfoʊld ɪt.

"Now that is a story," Thom said, and he straightaway began to unfold it.

əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə tɑm, hi hæd bɪn tʃɹæp baɪ ðə wɪntɝ snoʊz ɪn ə maɪnɪŋ taʊn ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪs bɪɑn bɛɹlən. waɪl ðəɹ i hɝd lɛdʒənz ʌv ə tʃɹɛʒɝ deɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, ɪn ðə lɔst ɹuən ʌv ə sɪɾi kɔld ɑɹɪdhɔl. naʊ ɪt dʒʌst soʊ hæpən ðəɾ i hæɾ ɝliɝ lɝn ðə loʊkeɪʃən ʌv ɑɹɪdhɔl fɹəm ə mæp ɡɪvən ɪm mɛni jɪɹz əɡoʊ baɪ ə daɪɪŋ fɹɛn ɪn ɪljən huz laɪf i hæd wʌns seɪvd, ə mæn u ɪkspaɪɹd bɹiðɪŋ ðət ðə mæp wəd meɪk tɑm ɹɪtʃ, wɪtʃ tɑm nɛvɝ bɪlivd əntɪl i hɝd ðə lɛdʒənz. wən ðə snoʊz mɛltəɾ ɪnʌf, hi sɛɾ aʊt wɪð ə fju kəmpænjənz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɪz tu wʊd-bi əpɹɛntəsɪz, ən æftɝ ə dʒɝni ʌv mɛni hɑɹdʃɪps ðeɪ æktʃəli  faʊn ðə ɹuən sɪɾi. bʌɾ ɪt tɝn aʊt ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ hæd bɪlɔŋ tə wʌn ə ðə dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz ðɛmsɛlvz, ən tʃɹɑləks hæd bɪn sɛn tə fɛtʃ ɪt bæk tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹi deɪnʒɝ ðeɪ ɹɪli hæd feɪst - tʃɹɑləks, mɹdʒɹɑl, dʒɹæɡkɝ, mɔɹɾɪθ, mɑʃəɾɝ - əseɪld əm ət wʌn pɔɪn əɹ ənʌðɝ ə ðə stɔɹi, ðoʊ ðə weɪ tɑm toʊld ɪt ðeɪ ɔl sim tə bi eɪmd əɾ ɪm pɝsənəli, ən tə hæv bɪn hændəl baɪ hɪm wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ædʒɹɔɪɑtnəs. wɪð mʌtʃ dɛɹɪŋ-du, moʊsli baɪ tɑm, ðeɪ ɪskeɪpt, pɝsud baɪ tʃɹɑləks, ðoʊ ðeɪ bɪkeɪm sɛpɝeɪɾəd ɪn ðə naɪt, əntɪl faɪnəli tɑm ən ɪz tu kəmpænjənz sɔt ɹɛfjudʒ ɑn ðə læs pleɪs lɛf tə ðɛm, kæptən doʊmənz moʊst wɛlkəm ʃɪp.

According to Thom, he had been trapped by the winter snows in a mining town in the Mountains of Mist beyond Baerlon. While there he heard legends of a treasure dating from the Trolloc Wars, in the lost ruin of a city called Aridhol. Now it just so happened that he had earlier learned the location of Aridhol from a map given him many years ago by a dying friend in Illian whose life he had once saved, a man who expired breathing that the map would make Thom rich, which Thom never believed until he heard the legends. When the snows melted enough, he set out with a few companions, including his two would-be apprentices, and after a journey of many hardships they actually found the ruined city. But it turned out the treasure had belonged to one of the Dreadlords themselves, and Trollocs had been sent to fetch it back to Shayol Ghul. Almost every danger they really had faced - Trollocs, Myrddraal, Draghkar, Mordeth, Mashadar - assailed them at one point or another of the story, though the way Thom told it they all seemed to be aimed at him personally, and to have been handled by him with the greatest adroitness. With much derring-do, mostly by Thom, they escaped, pursued by Trollocs, though they became separated in the night, until finally Thom and his two companions sought refuge on the last place left to them, Captain Domon's most welcome ship.

əz ðə ɡlimən fɪnɪʃt ʌp, ɹænd ɹilaɪzd ɪz maʊθ hæd bɪn hæŋɪŋ oʊpən fəɹ səm taɪm ən ʃʌɾ ɪt wɪð ə klɪk. wən i lʊkt ət mæt, hɪz fɹɛnd wɑz stɛɹɪŋ waɪd-aɪɾ ət ðə ɡlimən.

As the gleeman finished up, Rand realized his mouth had been hanging open for some time and shut it with a click. When he looked at Mat, his friend was staring wide-eyed at the gleeman.

kæptən doʊmən dʒɹʌmd ɪz fɪŋɡɝz ɑn ði ɑɹm ə hɪz tʃɛɹ. "ðæt bi ə teɪl mɛni foʊk wəd noʊ bɪliv. ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ dɪd si ðə tʃɹɑləks, dɪɾ aɪ noʊ."

Captain Domon drummed his fingers on the arm of his chair. "That be a tale many folk would no believe. Of course, I did see the Trollocs, did I no."

"ɛvɹi wɝd tʃɹu," tɑm sɛd blænli, "fɹʌm wʌn u lɪvd ɪt."

"Every word true," Thom said blandly, "from one who lived it."

"hæpən juv səm ə ðɪs tʃɹɛʒɝ wɪð ju?"

"Happen you have some of this treasure with you?"

tɑm spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli. "əlæs, wʌt lɪɾəl wi mænədʒ tə kæɹi əweɪ wɑz wɪð əɹ hɔɹsəz, wɪtʃ boʊltəd wən ðoʊz læs tʃɹɑləks əpɪɹd. ɔl aɪ hæv lɛft ɑɹ maɪ fluɾ ən maɪ hɑɹp, ə fju kɑpɝz, ən ðə kloʊðz ɑn maɪ bæk. bʌt bɪliv mi, jə wɑnt noʊ pɑɹɾ ə ðət tʃɹɛʒɝ. ɪts ðə teɪn ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. bɛs tə liv ɪt tə ðə ɹuənz ən ðə tʃɹɑləks."

Thom spread his hands regretfully. "Alas, what little we managed to carry away was with our horses, which bolted when those last Trollocs appeared. All I have left are my flute and my harp, a few coppers, and the clothes on my back. But believe me, you want no part of that treasure. It has the taint of the Dark One. Best to leave it to the ruins and the Trollocs."

"soʊ juv noʊ mʌni tə peɪ jəɹ pæsədʒ. aɪd noʊ lɛt maɪ oʊn bɹʌðɝ seɪl wɪð mi ɪf i kəd noʊ peɪ hɪz pæsədʒ, ɪspɛʃli ɪf i bɹɔt tʃɹɑləks bɪhaɪn ɪm tə hæk ʌp maɪ ɹeɪlɪŋz ən kʌɾ ʌp maɪ ɹɪɡɪŋ. waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ noʊ lɛt jə swɪm bæk wɛɹ jə keɪm fɹʌm, ən bi ɹɪɾ ə ju?"

"So you've no money to pay your passage. I'd no let my own brother sail with me if he could no pay his passage, especially if he brought Trollocs behind him to hack up my railings and cut up my rigging. Why should I no let you swim back where you came from, and be rid of you?"

"ju wʊdn dʒʌs pʊɾ əs əʃɔɹ?" mæt sɛd. "nɑt wɪð tʃɹɑləks ðɛɹ?"

"You wouldn't just put us ashore?" Mat said. "Not with Trollocs there?"

"hu sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ʃɔɹ?" doʊmən ɹɪplaɪd dʒɹaɪli. hi stʌɾid əm ə moʊmənt, ðən spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz flæɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "beɪl doʊmən bi ə ɹizənəbəl mæn. aɪd noʊ tɔs jə oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ɪf ðəɹ bi ə weɪ aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. naʊ, aɪ si wʌn ə jəɹ əpɹɛntəsɪz əz ə sɔɹd. aɪ niɾ ə ɡʊd sɔɹd, ən faɪn fɛloʊ ðəɾ aɪ bi, əl lɛt juv pæsədʒ fɑɹ əz waɪtbɹɪdʒ fəɹ ɪt."

"Who said anything about shore?" Domon replied dryly. He studied them a moment, then spread his hands flat on the table. "Bayle Domon be a reasonable man. I'd no toss you over the side if there be a way out of it. Now, I see one of your apprentices has a sword. I need a good sword, and fine fellow that I be, I'll let you have passage far as Whitebridge for it."

tɑm oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ən ɹænd spoʊk ʌp kwɪkli, "noʊ!" tæm hæd nɑt ɡɪvən ɪt tə hɪm tə tʃɹeɪɾ əweɪ. hi ɹæn ɪz hæn daʊn ðə hɪlt, filɪŋ ðə bɹɑnz hɛɹən. əz lɔŋ əz i hæɾ ɪt, ɪt wɑz əz ɪf tæm wɝ wɪð hɪm.

Thom opened his mouth, and Rand spoke up quickly, "No!" Tam had not given it to him to trade away. He ran his hand down the hilt, feeling the bronze heron. As long as he had it, it was as if Tam were with him.

doʊmən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wɛl, ɪf ɪt bi noʊ, ɪt bi noʊ. bʌt beɪl doʊmən noʊ ɡɪv fɹi pæsədʒ, nɑt tə hɪz oʊn mʌðɝ."

Domon shook his head. "Well, if it be no, it be no. But Bayle Domon no give free passage, not to his own mother."

ɹɪlʌktənli ɹænd ɛmptiɾ ɪz pɑkət. ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ, ə fju kɑpɝz ən ðə sɪlvɝ kɔɪn mɔɪɹeɪn hæd ɡɪvən hɪm. hi hɛld ɪɾ aʊt tə ðə kæptən. æftɝ ə sɛkənd, mæt saɪɾ ən dɪd ðə seɪm. tɑm ɡlɛɹd, bʌɾ ə smaɪl ɹipleɪst ɪt soʊ kwɪkli ðət ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪt hæd bɪn ðəɹ əɾ ɔl.

Reluctantly Rand emptied his pocket. There was not much, a few coppers and the silver coin Moiraine had given him. He held it out to the captain. After a second, Mat sighed and did the same. Thom glared, but a smile replaced it so quickly that Rand was not sure it had been there at all.

kæptən doʊmən dɛfli plʌk ðə tu fæt sɪlvɝ kɔɪnz aʊɾ ə ðə bɔɪz' hænz ən pɹədust ə smɔl sɛɾ ə skeɪlz ən ə klɪŋkɪŋ bæɡ fɹəm ə bɹæs-baʊn tʃɛs bɪhaɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ. æftɝ kɛɹfəl weɪɪŋ, hi dʒɹɑp ðə kɔɪnz ɪn ðə bæɡ ən ɹɪtɝn əm itʃ səm smɔlɝ sɪlvɝ ən kɑpɝ. moʊsli kɑpɝ. "æz fɑɹ əz waɪtbɹɪdʒ," hi sɛd, meɪkɪŋ ə niɾ ɛntʃɹi ɪn ə lɛðɝbaʊn lɛdʒɝ.

Captain Domon deftly plucked the two fat silver coins out of the boys' hands and produced a small set of scales and a clinking bag from a brass-bound chest behind his chair. After careful weighing, he dropped the coins in the bag and returned them each some smaller silver and copper. Mostly copper. "As far as Whitebridge," he said, making a neat entry in a leatherbound ledger.

"ðæts ə dɪɹ pæsədʒ dʒʌs tə waɪtbɹɪdʒ," tɑm ɡɹʌmbəld.

"That's a dear passage just to Whitebridge," Thom grumbled.

"plʌs dæmədʒəz tə maɪ vɛsəl," ðə kæptən ænsɝd plɑtʃədli. hi pʊt ðə skeɪlz ən ðə bæɡ bæk ɪn ðə tʃɛst ən kloʊzd ɪɾ ɪn ə sæɾəsfaɪd weɪ. "plʌs ə bɪt fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ tʃɹɑləks daʊn ɑn mi soʊ aɪ mʌst ɹʌn daʊnɹɪvɝ ɪn ðə naɪt wən ðəɹ bi ʃæloʊz əplɛnti tə paɪl mi ʌp."

"Plus damages to my vessel," the captain answered placidly. He put the scales and the bag back in the chest and closed it in a satisfied way. "Plus a bit for bringing Trollocs down on me so I must run downriver in the night when there be shallows aplenty to pile me up."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ði ʌðɝz?" ɹænd æskt. "wɪl jə teɪk ðɛm, tu? ðeɪ ʃʊɾə ɹitʃt ðə ɹɪvɝ baɪ naʊ, əɹ ðeɪ sun wɪl, ən ðəl si ðət læntɝn ɑn jəɹ mæst."

"What about the others?" Rand asked. "Will you take them, too? They should have reached the river by now, or they soon will, and they'll see that lantern on your mast."

kæptən doʊmənz aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "hæpən jə θɪŋk wi bi stændɪŋ stɪl, mæn? fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi, wi bi θɹi, fɔɹ maɪlz daʊnɹɪvɝ fɹəm wɛɹ jə keɪm əbɔɹd. tʃɹɑləks meɪk ðoʊz fɛloʊz pʊt ðɛɹ bæks ɪndə ði ɔɹz - ðeɪ noʊ tʃɹɑləks bɛɾɝ ðən ðeɪ laɪk - ən ðə kɝən hɛlps, tu. bʌɾ ɪt meɪks noʊ nɛvɝmaɪnd. aɪd noʊ pʊɾ ɪn əɡɛn tənaɪɾ ɪf maɪ oʊld ɡɹændmʌðɝ wɑz ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk. aɪ meɪ noʊ pʊɾ ɪn əɡɛn əɾ ɔl əntɪl aɪ ɹitʃ waɪtbɹɪdʒ. aɪv hæd maɪ fɪl ə tʃɹɑləks dɔɡɪŋ maɪ hilz lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ tənaɪt, ən əl əv noʊ mɔɹ kən aɪ hɛlp ɪt."

Captain Domon's eyebrows rose in surprise. "Happen you think we be standing still, man? Fortune prick me, we be three, four miles downriver from where you came aboard. Trollocs make those fellows put their backs into the oars - they know Trollocs better than they like - and the current helps, too. But it makes no nevermind. I'd no put in again tonight if my old grandmother was on the riverbank. I may no put in again at all until I reach Whitebridge. I've had my fill of Trollocs dogging my heels long before tonight, and I'll have no more can I help it."

tɑm lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntʃɹəstɪdli. "ju hæv hæɾ ɪnkaʊntɝz wɪð tʃɹɑləks bɪfɔɹ? leɪtli?"

Thom leaned forward interestedly. "You have had encounters with Trollocs before? Lately?"

doʊmən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, aɪɪŋ tɑm nɛɹoʊli, bʌt wən i spoʊk i mɪɹli saʊndəd dɪsɡʌstəd. "aɪ wɪntɝɾ ɪn sɑldɑiə, mæn. nɑt maɪ tʃɔɪs, bʌt ðə ɹɪvɝ fɹoʊz ɝli ən ði aɪs bɹoʊk ʌp leɪt. ðeɪ seɪ jə kən si ðə blaɪt fɹəm ðə haɪəs taʊɝz ɪn mɛɹədɑn, bʌɾ aɪv noʊ maɪn fəɹ ðæt. aɪv bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ, ən ðəɹ ɔlweɪz bi tɔk ə tʃɹɑləks ətækɪŋ ə fɑɹm əɹ ðə laɪk. ðɪs wɪntɝ pæst, ðoʊ, ðəɹ bi fɑɹmz bɝnɪŋ ɛvɹi naɪt. aɪ, ən hoʊl vɪlədʒəz, tu, bɪtaɪmz. ðeɪ ivən keɪm ɹaɪɾ ʌp tə ðə sɪɾi wɔlz. ən ɪf ðət noʊ bi bæɾ ɪnʌf, ðə pipəl bi ɔl seɪɪŋ ɪt mɛn ðə dɑɹk wʌn bi stɝɪŋ, ðət ðə læs deɪz bi kʌm." hi ɡeɪv ə ʃɪvɝ, ən skɹætʃt əɾ ɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf ðə θɔt meɪɾ ɪz skælp ɪtʃ. "aɪ kən noʊ weɪt tə ɡɛt bæk wɛɹ pipəl θɪŋk tʃɹɑləks bi dʒʌs teɪlz, ðə stɔɹiz aɪ tɛl bi tʃɹævəlɝz laɪz."

Domon hesitated, eyeing Thom narrowly, but when he spoke he merely sounded disgusted. "I wintered in Saldaea, man. Not my choice, but the river froze early and the ice broke up late. They say you can see the Blight from the highest towers in Maradon, but I've no mind for that. I've been there before, and there always be talk of Trollocs attacking a farm or the like. This winter past, though, there be farms burning every night. Aye, and whole villages, too, betimes. They even came right up to the city walls. And if that no be bad enough, the people be all saying it meant the Dark One be stirring, that the Last Days be come." He gave a shiver, and scratched at his head as if the thought made his scalp itch. "I can no wait to get back where people think Trollocs be just tales, the stories I tell be traveler's lies."

ɹænd stɑp lɪsnɪŋ. hi stɛɹɾ ət ði ɑpəzət wɔl ən θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz. ɪt hɑɹdli simd ɹaɪt fəɹ ɪm tə bi seɪf ɑn ðə spɹeɪ waɪl ðeɪ wɝ stɪl bæk ðəɹ ɪn ðə naɪt sʌmwɛɹ. ðə kæptənz kæbən dɪd nɑt sim soʊ kʌmftəɹbəl əz bɪfɔɹ.

Rand stopped listening. He stared at the opposite wall and thought about Egwene and the others. It hardly seemed right for him to be safe on the Spray while they were still back there in the night somewhere. The captain's cabin did not seem so comfortable as before.

hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd wən tɑm pʊld ɪm tə hɪz fit. ðə ɡlimən pʊʃt mæt ən ɪm təwɔɹd ðə læɾɝ wɪð əpɑlədʒiz oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ tə kæptən doʊmən fəɹ ðə kʌntʃɹi laʊts. ɹænd klaɪmd ʌp wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd.

He was surprised when Thom pulled him to his feet. The gleeman pushed Mat and him toward the ladder with apologies over his shoulder to Captain Domon for the country louts. Rand climbed up without a word.

wʌns ðeɪ wɝ ɑn dɛk tɑm lʊkt ɝaʊn kwɪkli tə meɪk ʃʊɹ i wəd nɑt bi oʊvɝhɝd, ðən ɡɹaʊld, "aɪ cʊɾə ɡɑɾən əs pæsədʒ fəɹ ə fju sɔŋz ən stɔɹiz ɪf jə tu hædn bɪn soʊ kwɪk tə ʃoʊ sɪlvɝ."

Once they were on deck Thom looked around quickly to make sure he would not be overheard, then growled, "I could have gotten us passage for a few songs and stories if you two hadn't been so quick to show silver."

"aɪm nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ," mæt sɛd. "hi saʊndəd sɪɹiəs əbaʊt θɹoʊɪŋ əs ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ tə mi."

"I'm not so sure," Mat said. "He sounded serious about throwing us in the river to me."

ɹænd wɔk sloʊli tə ðə ɹeɪl ən lin əɡɛnst ɪt, stɛɹɪŋ bæk ʌp ðə naɪt-ʃɹaʊɾɪd ɹɪvɝ. hi kəd nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ bʌt blæk, nɑɾ ivən ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk. æftɝ ə mɪnət tɑm pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt muv.

Rand walked slowly to the rail and leaned against it, staring back up the night-shrouded river. He could not see anything but black, not even the riverbank. After a minute Thom put a hand on his shoulder, but he did not move.

"ðɛɹ ɪzən ɛniθɪŋ jə kən du, læd. bɪsaɪdz, ðəɹ laɪkli seɪf wɪð ðə . . . wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn baɪ ðɪs taɪm. kən jə θɪŋk ʌv ɛni bɛɾɝ ðən ðoʊz tu fəɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə lɑɾ ə ðɛm klɪɹ?"

"There isn't anything you can do, lad. Besides, they're likely safe with the . . . with Moiraine and Lan by this time. Can you think of any better than those two for getting the lot of them clear?"

"aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə tɔk əɹ aʊɾ ə kʌmɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd.

"I tried to talk her out of coming," Rand said.

"ju dɪd wʌt jə kʊd, læd. noʊ wʌn kəɾ æsk mɔɹ."

"You did what you could, lad. No one could ask more."

"aɪ toʊld əɹ aɪd teɪk kɛɹ ə hɝ. aɪ ʃʊɾə tʃɹaɪd hɑɹɾɝ." ðə kɹik ə ðə swips ən ðə hʌm ə ðə ɹɪɡɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪn meɪɾ ə mɔɹnfəl tun. "aɪ ʃʊɾə tʃɹaɪd hɑɹɾɝ," hi wɪspɝd.

"I told her I'd take care of her. I should have tried harder." The creak of the sweeps and the hum of the rigging in the wind made a mournful tune. "I should have tried harder," he whispered.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiwʌn


CHAPTER 21

lɪsən tə ðə wɪnd


Listen to the Wind

sʌnɹaɪz kɹipɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ ɑɹɪnɛl faʊn ɪts weɪ ɪndə ðə hɑloʊ nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk wɛɹ nɪneɪiv sæt wɪð əɹ bæk əɡɛns ðə tʃɹʌŋk ʌv ə jʌŋ oʊk, bɹiðɪŋ ðə dip bɹɛθ ə slip. hɝ hɔɹs slɛpt, tu, hɛd daʊn ən lɛɡz spɹæəld ɪn ðə mænɝ ə hɔɹsəz. ðə ɹeɪnz wɝ ɹæpt ɝaʊn əɹ ɹɪst. əz sʌnlaɪt fɛl ɑn ðə hɔɹsəz aɪlɪdz, ði ænəməl oʊpən ɪts aɪz ən ɹeɪzd ɪts hɛd, dʒɝkɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz. nɪneɪiv keɪm əweɪk wɪð ə stɑɹt.

Sunrise creeping across the River Arinelle found its way into the hollow not far from the riverbank where Nynaeve sat with her back against the trunk of a young oak, breathing the deep breath of sleep. Her horse slept, too, head down and legs spraddled in the manner of horses. The reins were wrapped around her wrist. As sunlight fell on the horse's eyelids, the animal opened its eyes and raised its head, jerking the reins. Nynaeve came awake with a start.

fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi stɛɹd, wʌndɝɪŋ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz, ðən stɛɹɾ ɝaʊn ivən mɔɹ waɪldli wən ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd. bʌt ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ðə tʃɹiz, ən əɹ hɔɹs, ən ə kɑɹpəɾ ʌv oʊld, dʒɹaɪ livz əkɹɔs ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə hɑloʊ. ɪn ðə dipəs dɪmnəs, səm ə læs jɪɹz ʃæɾoʊʃhænd mʌʃɹumz meɪd ɹɪŋz ɑn ə fɔlən lɔɡ.

For a moment she stared, wondering where she was, then stared around even more wildly when she remembered. But there were only the trees, and her horse, and a carpet of old, dry leaves across the bottom of the hollow. In the deepest dimness, some of last year's shadowshand mushrooms made rings on a fallen log.

"ðə laɪt pɹəzɝv ju, wʊmən," ʃi mɝmɝd, sæɡɪŋ bæk, "ɪf jə kæn steɪ əweɪk wʌn naɪt." ʃi əntaɪd ðə ɹeɪnz ən məsɑʒd əɹ ɹɪst əz ʃi stʊd. "ju cʊɾə əweɪkən ɪn ə tʃɹɑlɑk kʊkpɑt."

"The Light preserve you, woman," she murmured, sagging back, "if you can't stay awake one night." She untied the reins and massaged her wrist as she stood. "You could have awakened in a Trolloc cookpot."

ðə dɛd livz ɹʌsəld əz ʃi klaɪm tə ðə lɪp ə ðə hɑloʊ ən pipt oʊvɝ. noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə hændfʊl ʌv æʃ tʃɹiz stʊd bɪtwin əɹ ən ðə ɹɪvɝ. ðɛɹ fɪʃɝd bɑɹk ən bɛɹ bɹæntʃəz meɪɾ əm sim dɛd. bɪɑnd, ðə waɪd blu-ɡɹin wɔɾɝ floʊd baɪ. ɛmpti. ɛmpti ʌv ɛniθɪŋ. skæɾɝd klʌmps ʌv ɛvɝɡɹinz, wɪloʊz ən fɹz, dɑɾəd ðə fɑɹ bæŋk, ən ðəɹ sim tə bi fjuɝ tʃɹiz ɔltəɡɛðɝ ðən ɑn əɹ saɪd. ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn əɹ ɛni ʌv ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz wɝ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ, ðeɪ wɝ wɛl hɪɾən. ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən ðeɪ hæd tə hæv kɹɔst, əɹ tʃɹaɪd tə kɹɔs, ɪn saɪɾ ʌv wɛɹ ʃi wɑz. ðeɪ kəd bi ɛniwɛɹ tɛn maɪlz ʌpɹɪvɝ əɹ daʊn. ɪf ðəɹ əlaɪv əɾ ɔl, æftɝ læs naɪt.

The dead leaves rustled as she climbed to the lip of the hollow and peeped over. No more than a handful of ash trees stood between her and the river. Their fissured bark and bare branches made them seem dead. Beyond, the wide blue-green water flowed by. Empty. Empty of anything. Scattered clumps of evergreens, willows and firs, dotted the far bank, and there seemed to be fewer trees altogether than on her side. If Moiraine or any of the younglings were over there, they were well hidden. Of course, there was no reason they had to have crossed, or tried to cross, in sight of where she was. They could be anywhere ten miles upriver or down. If they're alive at all, after last night.

æŋɡɹi wɪð hɝsɛlf fəɹ θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi, ʃi slɪd bæk daʊn ɪndə ðə hɑloʊ. nɑɾ ivən wɪntɝnaɪt, əɹ ðə bæɾəl bɪfɔɹ ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, hæd pɹipɛɹɾ əɹ fəɹ læs naɪt, fəɹ ðət θɪŋ, mɑʃəɾɝ. ɔl ðət fɹæntɪk ɡæləpɪŋ, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ɛniwʌn ɛls wɑz stɪl əlaɪv, wʌndɝɪŋ wən ʃi wɑz gɑnə kʌm feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð ə feɪd, əɹ tʃɹɑləks. ʃi hæd hɝd tʃɹɑləks ɡɹoʊlɪŋ ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ən ðə kwɪvɝɪŋ ʃɹiks ə tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹnz hæd tʃɪld əɹ dipɝ ðən ðə wɪn ɛvɝ kʊd, bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðət fɝst ɪnkaʊntɝ ɪn ðə ɹuənz ʃi sɔ tʃɹɑləks oʊnli wʌns, ən ðət wʌns ʃi wɑz aʊtsaɪd. tɛn əɹ soʊ ʌv əm sim tə spɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡɹaʊnd nɑt θɝɾi spænz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, baʊndɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əɹ ɑn ði ɪnstənt, haʊlɪŋ ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ, bɹændɪʃɪŋ hʊkt kætʃpoʊlz. jɛɾ əz ʃi pʊld əɹ hɔɹs ɝaʊnd, ðeɪ fɛl saɪlənt, lɪftɪŋ mʌzəlz tə snɪf ət ði ɛɹ. ʃi wɑtʃt, tu əstɑnɪʃt tə ɹʌn, əz ðeɪ tɝn ðɛɹ bæks ən vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə naɪt. ən ðət hæd bɪn ðə moʊs fɹaɪɾənɪŋ ʌv ɔl.

Angry with herself for thinking of the possibility, she slid back down into the hollow. Not even Winternight, or the battle before Shadar Logoth, had prepared her for last night, for that thing, Mashadar. All that frantic galloping, wondering if anyone else was still alive, wondering when she was going to come face-to-face with a Fade, or Trollocs. She had heard Trollocs growling and shouting in the distance, and the quivering shrieks of Trolloc horns had chilled her deeper than the wind ever could, but aside from that first encounter in the ruins she saw Trollocs only once, and that once she was outside. Ten or so of them seemed to spring out of the ground not thirty spans in front of her, bounding toward her on the instant, howling and shouting, brandishing hooked catchpoles. Yet as she pulled her horse around, they fell silent, lifting muzzles to sniff at the air. She watched, too astonished to run, as they turned their backs and vanished into the night. And that had been the most frightening of all.

"ðeɪ noʊ ðə smɛl ə hu ðeɪ wɑnt," ʃi toʊld əɹ hɔɹs, stændɪŋ ɪn ðə hɑloʊ, "æn ɪts nɑt mi. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz ɹaɪt, ɪt simz, ðə ʃɛpɝɾ ə ðə naɪt swɑloʊ hɝ ʌp."

"They know the smell of who they want," she told her horse, standing in the hollow, "and it is not me. The Aes Sedai is right, it seems, the Shepherd of the Night swallow her up."

ɹitʃɪŋ ə dɪsɪʒən, ʃi sɛɾ aʊt daʊnɹɪvɝ, liɾɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs. ʃi muv sloʊli, kipɪŋ ə wɛɹi wɑtʃ ɑn ðə fɔɹəst ɝaʊn hɝ; dʒʌs kəz ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd nɑt wɑntəɾ əɹ læs naɪt dɪd nɑt min ðeɪ wəd lɛɾ əɹ ɡoʊ ɪf ʃi stʌmbəld ɑn əm əɡɛn. əz mʌtʃ ətɛnʃən əz ʃi ɡeɪv ðə wʊdz, ʃi ɡeɪv ivən mɔɹ tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ. ɪf ði ʌðɝz hæd kɹɔs bɪloʊ hɝ dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt, ʃi ʃəd si səm saɪnz ə ðɛm, saɪnz ʃi maɪt mɪs fɹəm hɔɹsbæk. ʃi maɪɾ ivən kʌm ɑn əm ɔl stɪl ɑn ðɪs saɪd. ɪf ʃi faʊnd niðɝ, ðə ɹɪvɝ wəd teɪk əɹ tə waɪtbɹɪdʒ ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹoʊd fɹəm waɪtbɹɪdʒ tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən ɔl ðə weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɪf nid bi.

Reaching a decision, she set out downriver, leading her horse. She moved slowly, keeping a wary watch on the forest around her; just because the Trollocs had not wanted her last night did not mean they would let her go if she stumbled on them again. As much attention as she gave the woods, she gave even more to the ground in front of her. If the others had crossed below her during the night, she should see some signs of them, signs she might miss from horseback. She might even come on them all still on this side. If she found neither, the river would take her to Whitebridge eventually, and there was a road from Whitebridge to Caemlyn, and all the way to Tar Valon if need be.

ðə pɹɑspɛkt wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɪnʌf tə dɔn hɝ. bɪfɔɹ ðɪs ʃi hæd bɪn noʊ fɝðɝ fɹəm ɛmənz fil ðən hæd ðə bɔɪz. tɛɹən fɛɹi hæd sim stʃɹeɪnʒ tə hɝ; bɛɹlən wʊɾə hæɾ əɹ stɛɹɪŋ ɪn wʌndɝ ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn soʊ sɛɾ ɑn faɪndɪŋ ɛɡwin ən ði ʌðɝz. bʌt ʃi əlaʊd nʌn ə ðət tə wikən əɹ ɹizɑlv. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ʃi wəd faɪn ɛɡwin ən ðə bɔɪz. əɹ faɪn ə weɪ tə meɪk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ænsɝ fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ hæd hæpən tə ðɛm. wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ, ʃi vaʊd.

The prospect was almost enough to daunt her. Before this she had been no further from Emond's Field than had the boys. Taren Ferry had seemed strange to her; Baerlon would have had her staring in wonder if she had not been so set on finding Egwene and the others. But she allowed none of that to weaken her resolve. Sooner or later she would find Egwene and the boys. Or find a way to make the Aes Sedai answer for whatever had happened to them. One or the other, she vowed.

əɾ ɪntɝvəlz ʃi faʊn tʃɹæks, plɛnti ʌv ðɛm, bʌt juʒəwəli hɝ bɛst ɛfɝts kəd nɑt seɪ wɛðɝ ðoʊz u meɪɾ əm hæd bɪn sɝtʃɪŋ əɹ tʃeɪsɪŋ əɹ pɝsud. səm hæd bɪn meɪd baɪ buts ðət cʊɾə bɪlɔŋ tə hjumənz əɹ tʃɹɑləks iðɝ wʌn. ʌðɝz wɝ hʊfpɹɪns, laɪk ɡoʊts əɹ ɑksən; ðoʊz wɝ tʃɹɑləks fəɹ ʃʊɹ. bʌt nɛvɝ ə klɪɹ saɪn ðət ʃi kəd dɛfənətli seɪ keɪm fɹəm ɛni ʌv ðoʊz ʃi sɔt.

At intervals she found tracks, plenty of them, but usually her best efforts could not say whether those who made them had been searching or chasing or pursued. Some had been made by boots that could have belonged to humans or Trollocs either one. Others were hoofprints, like goats or oxen; those were Trollocs for sure. But never a clear sign that she could definitely say came from any of those she sought.

ʃi hæd kʌvɝd pɝhæps fɔɹ maɪlz wən ðə wɪn bɹɔɾ əɹ ə wɪf ʌv wʊdzmoʊk. ɪt keɪm fɹəm fɝðɝ daʊnɹɪvɝ, ən nɑt tu fɑɹ, ʃi θɔt. ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ taɪɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs tə ə fɝ tʃɹi, wɛl bæk fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ ɪn ə smɔl, θɪk stæn ʌv ɛvɝɡɹinz ðət ʃəd kip ði ænəməl hɪɾən. ðə smoʊk kəd min tʃɹɑləks, bʌt ði oʊnli weɪ tə faɪn aʊt wɑz tə lʊk. ʃi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðə jus tʃɹɑləks maɪt bi meɪkɪŋ ʌv ə faɪɝ.

She had covered perhaps four miles when the wind brought her a whiff of woodsmoke. It came from further downriver, and not too far, she thought. She hesitated only a moment before tying her horse to a fir tree, well back from the river in a small, thick stand of evergreens that should keep the animal hidden. The smoke could mean Trollocs, but the only way to find out was to look. She tried not to think about the use Trollocs might be making of a fire.

kɹaʊtʃɪŋ, ʃi slɪp fɹəm tʃɹi tə tʃɹi, mɛntəli kɝsɪŋ ðə skɝts ʃi hæd tə hoʊld ʌp aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. dʒɹɛsəz wɝ nɑt meɪd fəɹ stɔkɪŋ. ðə saʊn ʌv ə hɔɹs sloʊd hɝ, ən wən ʃi faɪnəli pɪɹd kɔʃəsli ɝaʊn ðə tʃɹʌŋk ʌv ən æʃ, ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz dɪsmaʊntɪŋ fɹəm ɪz blæk wɔɹhɔɹs ɪn ə smɔl klɪɹɪŋ ɑn ðə bæŋk. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sæɾ ɑn ə lɔɡ bɪsaɪɾ ə smɔl faɪɝ wɛɹ ə kɛɾəl ʌv wɔɾɝ wɑz dʒʌs kʌmɪŋ tə ə bɔɪl. hɝ waɪt mɛɹ bɹaʊz bɪhaɪn əɹ əmʌŋ spɑɹs widz. nɪneɪiv ɹɪmeɪnd wɛɹ ʃi wɑz.

Crouching, she slipped from tree to tree, mentally cursing the skirts she had to hold up out of the way. Dresses were not made for stalking. The sound of a horse slowed her, and when she finally peered cautiously around the trunk of an ash, the Warder was dismounting from his black warhorse in a small clearing on the bank. The Aes Sedai sat on a log beside a small fire where a kettle of water was just coming to a boil. Her white mare browsed behind her among sparse weeds. Nynaeve remained where she was.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔl ɡɔn," læn ənaʊnst ɡɹɪmli. "fɔɹ hæfmən stɑɹɾəd saʊθ əbaʊt tu aʊɝz bɪfɔɹ dɔn, əz nɪɹ əz aɪ kən tɛl - ðeɪ doʊn liv mʌtʃ tʃɹeɪs bɪhaɪnd - bʌt ðə tʃɹɑləks əv vænɪʃt. ivən ðə kɔɹpsəz, ən tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ nɑt noʊn fəɹ kæɹiɪŋ ɔf ðɛɹ dɛd. ənlɛs ðəɹ hʌŋɡɹi."

"They are all gone," Lan announced grimly. "Four Halfmen started south about two hours before dawn, as near as I can tell - they don't leave much trace behind - but the Trollocs have vanished. Even the corpses, and Trollocs are not known for carrying off their dead. Unless they're hungry."

mɔɪɹeɪn tɔst ə hændfʊl ə sʌmθɪŋ ɪndə ðə bɔɪlɪŋ wɔɾɝ ən muv ðə kɛɾəl fɹəm ðə faɪɝ. "wʌn kəɾ ɔlweɪz hoʊp ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn bæk ɪndə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ən bɪn kənsum baɪ ɪt, bʌt ðət wəd bi tu mʌtʃ tə wɪʃ fɔɹ."

Moiraine tossed a handful of something into the boiling water and moved the kettle from the fire. "One could always hope they had gone back into Shadar Logoth and been consumed by it, but that would be too much to wish for."

ðə dɪlɪʃəs oʊɾɝ ə ti dʒɹɪftəd tə nɪneɪiv. laɪt, doʊn lɛt maɪ stʌmək ɡɹʌmbəl.

The delicious odor of tea drifted to Nynaeve. Light, don't let my stomach grumble.

"ðɛɹ wɑz noʊ klɪɹ saɪn ə ðə bɔɪz, əɹ ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz. ðə tʃɹæks ɑɹ tu mʌɾəld tə tɛl ɛniθɪŋ." ɪn əɹ kənsilmənt, nɪneɪiv smaɪld; ðə wɔɹɾɝz feɪljɝ wɑz ə slaɪt vɪndəkeɪʃən ə hɝ oʊn. "bʌt ðɪs ʌðɝ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, mɔɪɹeɪn," læn wɛn ɑn, fɹaʊnɪŋ. hi weɪvd əweɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ɔfɝ ə ti ən bɪɡæn mɑɹtʃɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝ, wʌn hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt ən ɪz kloʊk tʃeɪnʒɪŋ kʌlɝz əz i tɝnd. "aɪ kəɾ æksɛp tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ivən ə hʌnʒɹəd tʃɹɑləks. bʌt ðɪs? ðəɹ mʌst əv bɪn ɔlmoʊst ə θaʊzən ɪn ðə hʌn fəɹ əs jɛstɝdeɪ."

"There was no clear sign of the boys, or any of the others. The tracks are too muddled to tell anything." In her concealment, Nynaeve smiled; the Warder's failure was a slight vindication of her own. "But this other is important, Moiraine," Lan went on, frowning. He waved away the Aes Sedai's offer of tea and began marching up and down in front of the fire, one hand on his sword hilt and his cloak changing colors as he turned. "I could accept Trollocs in the Two Rivers, even a hundred Trollocs. But this? There must have been almost a thousand in the hunt for us yesterday."

"wi wɝ vɛɹi lʌki ðət nɑɾ ɔl steɪd tə sɝtʃ ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl mʌst əv daʊɾɪd wi wəd haɪd ðɛɹ, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlsoʊ fɪɹd tə ɹɪtɝn tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl livɪŋ ivən ðə slaɪɾəst tʃæns ənkʌvɝd. ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑz nɛvɝ ə liniən mæstɝ."

"We were very lucky that not all stayed to search Shadar Logoth. The Myrddraal must have doubted we would hide there, but they also feared to return to Shayol Ghul leaving even the slightest chance uncovered. The Dark One was never a lenient master."

"doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə ɪveɪɾ ɪt. jə noʊ wʌɾ aɪm seɪɪŋ. ɪf ðoʊz θaʊzənd wɝ hɪɹ tə bi sɛn ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, waɪ wɝ ðeɪ nɑt? ðəɹ ɪz oʊnli wʌn ænsɝ. ðeɪ wɝ sɛn oʊnli æftɝ wi kɹɔs ðə tɛɹən, wən ɪt wɑz noʊn ðət wʌn mɹdʒɹɑl ən ə hʌnʒɹəd tʃɹɑləks wɝ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɪnʌf. haʊ? haʊ wɝ ðeɪ sɛnt? ɪf ə θaʊzən tʃɹɑləks kən bi bɹɔt soʊ fɑɹ saʊθ fɹəm ðə blaɪt, soʊ kwɪkli, ənsin - nɑt tə mɛnʃən biɪŋ teɪkən ɔf ðə seɪm weɪ - kən tɛn θaʊzən bi sɛn ɪndə ðə hɑɹɾ ə sɑldɑiə, əɹ ɝæfəl, əɹ ʃaɪnɝ? ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz kəd bi oʊvɝɹʌn ɪn ə jɪɹ."

"Don't try to evade it. You know what I am saying. If those thousand were here to be sent into the Two Rivers, why were they not? There is only one answer. They were sent only after we crossed the Taren, when it was known that one Myrddraal and a hundred Trollocs were no longer enough. How? How were they sent? If a thousand Trollocs can be brought so far south from the Blight, so quickly, unseen - not to mention being taken off the same way - can ten thousand be sent into the heart of Saldaea, or Arafel, or Shienar? The Borderlands could be overrun in a year."

"ðə hoʊl wɝld wɪl bi oʊvɝɹʌn ɪn faɪv ɪf wi də nɑt faɪn ðoʊz bɔɪz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɪmpli. "ðə kwɛstʃən wɝiz mi, ɔlsoʊ, bʌɾ aɪ hæv noʊ ænsɝz. ðə weɪz ɑɹ kloʊzd, ən ðəɹ əz nɑt bɪn ən ɛɛs sədaɪ paʊɝfəl ɪnʌf tə tʃɹævəl sɪns ðə taɪm ə mædnəs. ənlɛs wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɪz lus - ðə laɪt sɛn ɪts nɑt soʊ, jɛɾ əɹ ɛvɝ - ðəɹ ɪz stɪl noʊ wʌn u kæn. ɪn ɛni keɪs, aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ɔl ðə fɔɹseɪkən təɡɛðɝ kəd muv ə θaʊzən tʃɹɑləks. lɛɾ əs dil wɪð ðə pɹɑbləmz ðət feɪs əs hɪɹ ən naʊ; ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls mʌst weɪt."

"The whole world will be overrun in five if we do not find those boys," Moiraine said simply. "The question worries me, also, but I have no answers. The Ways are closed, and there has not been an Aes Sedai powerful enough to Travel since the Time of Madness. Unless one of the Forsaken is loose - the Light send it is not so, yet or ever - there is still no one who can. In any case, I do not think all the Forsaken together could move a thousand Trollocs. Let us deal with the problems that face us here and now; everything else must wait."

"ðə bɔɪz." ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən.

"The boys." It was not a question.

"aɪ hæv nɑt bɪn aɪɾəl waɪl jə wɝ əweɪ. wʌn ɪz əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ, ən əlaɪv. əz fəɹ ði ʌðɝz, ðəɹ wɑz ə feɪn tʃɹeɪs daʊnɹɪvɝ, bʌɾ ɪt feɪɾəd əweɪ əz aɪ faʊn ɪt. ðə bɑn hæd bɪn bɹoʊkən fəɹ aʊɝz bɪfɔɹ aɪ bɪɡæn maɪ sɝtʃ."

"I have not been idle while you were away. One is across the river, and alive. As for the others, there was a faint trace downriver, but it faded away as I found it. The bond had been broken for hours before I began my search."

kɹaʊtʃt bɪhaɪn əɹ tʃɹi, nɪneɪiv fɹaʊn ɪn pʌzəlmənt.

Crouched behind her tree, Nynaeve frowned in puzzlement.

læn stɑpt ɪz peɪsɪŋ. "ju θɪŋk ðə hæfmən hɛɾɪŋ saʊθ əv ðɛm?"

Lan stopped his pacing. "You think the Halfmen heading south have them?"

"pɝhæps." mɔɪɹeɪn pɔɹd hɝsɛlf ə kʌp ə ti bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "bʌɾ əl nɑɾ ədmɪt ðə pɑsəbɪləɾi ʌv əm biɪŋ dɛd. aɪ kænɑt. aɪ dɛɹ nɑt. jə noʊ haʊ mʌtʃ ɪz ət steɪk. aɪ mʌst əv ðoʊz jʌŋ mɛn. ðət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl wɪl hʌn ðɛm, aɪ ɪkspɛkt. ɑpəzɪʃən fɹəm wɪðɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ, ivən fɹəm ði æmɪɝlɪn sit, aɪ æksɛpt. ðəɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɪl æksɛpt oʊnli wʌn səluʃən. bʌt. . . ." sʌɾənli ʃi pʊɾ əɹ kʌp daʊn ən sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ. "ɪf jə wɑtʃ ðə wʊlf tu hɑɹd," ʃi mʌɾɝd, "ə maʊs wɪl baɪt jə ɑn ði æŋkəl." ən ʃi lʊkt ɹaɪɾ ət ðə tʃɹi bɪhaɪnd wɪtʃ nɪneɪiv wɑz haɪɾɪŋ. "mɪstʃɹəs ɑlmɹə, jə meɪ kʌm aʊt naʊ, ɪf jə wɪʃ."

"Perhaps." Moiraine poured herself a cup of tea before going on. "But I will not admit the possibility of them being dead. I cannot. I dare not. You know how much is at stake. I must have those young men. That Shayol Ghul will hunt them, I expect. Opposition from within the White Tower, even from the Amyrlin Seat, I accept. There are always Aes Sedai who will accept only one solution. But. . . ." Suddenly she put her cup down and sat up straight, grimacing. "If you watch the wolf too hard," she muttered, "a mouse will bite you on the ankle." And she looked right at the tree behind which Nynaeve was hiding. "Mistress al'Meara, you may come out now, if you wish."

nɪneɪiv skɹæmbəl tə hɝ fit, heɪstəli dʌstɪŋ dɛd livz fɹəm əɹ dʒɹɛs. læn hæd spʌn tə feɪs ðə tʃɹi əz sun əz mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz muvd; hɪz sɔɹd wɑz ɪn ɪz hæn bɪfɔɹ ʃi fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ nɪneɪivz neɪm. naʊ hi ʃiðd ɪɾ əɡɛn wɪð mɔɹ fɔɹs ðən wɑz stʃɹɪkli nɛsəsɛɹi. hɪz feɪs wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz ɪkspɹɛʃənləs əz ɛvɝ, bʌt nɪneɪiv θɔt ðəɹ wɑz ə tʌtʃ ə ʃəɡɹɪn əbaʊt ðə sɛɾ ə hɪz maʊθ. ʃi fɛlt ə stæb ə sæɾəsfækʃən; ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd nɑt noʊn ʃi wɑz ðɛɹ, ət list.

Nynaeve scrambled to her feet, hastily dusting dead leaves from her dress. Lan had spun to face the tree as soon as Moiraine's eyes moved; his sword was in his hand before she finished speaking Nynaeve's name. Now he sheathed it again with more force than was strictly necessary. His face was almost as expressionless as ever, but Nynaeve thought there was a touch of chagrin about the set of his mouth. She felt a stab of satisfaction; the Warder had not known she was there, at least.

sæɾəsfækʃən læstəɾ oʊnli ə moʊmənt, ðoʊ. ʃi fæsən əɹ aɪz ɑn mɔɪɹeɪn ən wɔk təwɔɹɾ əɹ pɝpəsfəli. ʃi wɑntəd tə ɹɪmeɪn koʊld ən kɑm, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs kwɪvɝd wɪð æŋɡɝ. "wʌɾ əv jə mɛʃt ɛɡwin ən ðə bɔɪz ɪn? wʌt fɪlθi ɛɛs sədaɪ plɑts ɑɹ jə plænɪŋ tə juz əm ɪn?"

Satisfaction lasted only a moment, though. She fastened her eyes on Moiraine and walked toward her purposefully. She wanted to remain cold and calm, but her voice quivered with anger. "What have you meshed Egwene and the boys in? What filthy Aes Sedai plots are you planning to use them in?"

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɪkt ʌp əɹ kʌp ən kɑmli sɪpt əɹ ti. wən nɪneɪiv wɑz kloʊs, ðoʊ, læn pʊɾ aʊɾ ən ɑɹm tə bɑɹ əɹ weɪ. ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə bɹʌʃ ði əbstʃɹʌkʃən əsaɪd, ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd wən ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɑɹm muv noʊ mɔɹ ðən ən oʊk bɹæntʃ wəd hæv. ʃi wɑz nɑt fɹeɪl, bʌɾ ɪz mʌsəlz wɝ laɪk aɪɝn.

The Aes Sedai picked up her cup and calmly sipped her tea. When Nynaeve was close, though, Lan put out an arm to bar her way. She tried to brush the obstruction aside, and was surprised when the Warder's arm moved no more than an oak branch would have. She was not frail, but his muscles were like iron.

"ti?" mɔɪɹeɪn ɔfɝd.

"Tea?" Moiraine offered.

"noʊ, aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛni ti. aɪ wəd nɑt dʒɹɪŋk jəɹ ti ɪf aɪ wɑz daɪɪŋ ə θɝst. jə woʊn juz ɛni ɛmənz fil foʊk ɪn jəɹ dɝɾi ɛɛs sədaɪ skimz."

"No, I don't want any tea. I would not drink your tea if I was dying of thirst. You won't use any Emond's Field folk in your dirty Aes Sedai schemes."

"ju hæv vɛɹi lɪɾəl ɹum tə tɔk, wɪzdəm." mɔɪɹeɪn ʃoʊd mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəst ɪn əɹ hɑt ti ðən ɪn ɛniθɪŋ ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ. "ju kən wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ jɝsɛlf, æftɝ ə fæʃən."

"You have very little room to talk, Wisdom." Moiraine showed more interest in her hot tea than in anything she was saying. "You can wield the One Power yourself, after a fashion."

nɪneɪiv pʊʃt ət lænz ɑɹm əɡɛn; ɪt stɪl dɪd nɑt muv, ən ʃi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɪt. "waɪ doʊn jə tʃɹaɪ kleɪmɪŋ aɪm ə tʃɹɑlɑk?"

Nynaeve pushed at Lan's arm again; it still did not move, and she decided to ignore it. "Why don't you try claiming I am a Trolloc?"

mɔɪɹeɪnz smaɪl wɑz soʊ noʊɪŋ ðət nɪneɪiv wɑntəd tə hɪt hɝ. "du jə θɪŋk aɪ kən stæn feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð ə wʊmən u kən tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ən tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ivən ɪf oʊnli naʊ ən ðɛn, wɪθaʊt noʊɪŋ wʌt ʃi ɪz? dʒʌst əz jə sɛns ðə pətɛnʃəl ɪn ɛɡwin. haʊ dʒju θɪŋk aɪ nu jə wɝ bɪhaɪn ðət tʃɹi? ɪf aɪ hæd nɑt bɪn dɪstʃɹæktəd, aɪ wʊɾə noʊn ðə moʊmən jə keɪm kloʊs. jə sɝɾənli ɑɹ nɑɾ ə tʃɹɑlɑk, fəɹ mi tə fil ði ivəl ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. soʊ wʌɾ aɪ sɛns, nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə, wɪzdəm ʌv ɛmənz fild ən ənnoʊɪŋ wildɝ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ?"

Moiraine's smile was so knowing that Nynaeve wanted to hit her. "Do you think I can stand face-to-face with a woman who can touch the True Source and channel the One Power, even if only now and then, without knowing what she is? Just as you sensed the potential in Egwene. How do you think I knew you were behind that tree? If I had not been distracted, I would have known the moment you came close. You certainly are not a Trolloc, for me to feel the evil of the Dark One. So what did I sense, Nynaeve al'Meara, Wisdom of Emond's Field and unknowing wielder of the One Power?"

læn wɑz lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət nɪneɪiv ɪn ə weɪ ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk; sɝpɹaɪzd ən spɛkjələɾɪv, ɪt sim tə hɝ, ðoʊ nʌθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd əbaʊɾ ɪz feɪs bʌɾ ɪz aɪz. ɛɡwin wɑz spɛʃəl; ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz noʊn ðæt. ɛɡwin wəd meɪk ə faɪn wɪzdəm. ðəɹ wɝkɪŋ təɡɛðɝ, ʃi θɔt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊt mi ɔf bæləns. "aɪ woʊn lɪsən tə ɛni mɔɹ ə ðɪs. jə - "

Lan was looking down at Nynaeve in a way she did not like; surprised and speculative, it seemed to her, though nothing had changed about his face but his eyes. Egwene was special; she had always known that. Egwene would make a fine Wisdom. They're working together, she thought, trying to put me off balance. "I won't listen to any more of this. You - "

"ju mʌs lɪsən," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd fɝmli. "aɪ hæd maɪ səspɪʃənz ɪn ɛmənz fild ivən bɪfɔɹ aɪ mɛt ju. pipəl toʊl mi haʊ əpsɛt ðə wɪzdəm wɑz ðət ʃi hæd nɑt pɹɪdɪktɪd ðə hɑɹd wɪntɝ ən ðə leɪtnəs ə spɹɪŋ. ðeɪ toʊl mi haʊ ɡʊd ʃi wɑz ət fɔɹtɛlɪŋ wɛðɝ, ət tɛlɪŋ ðə kɹɑps. ðeɪ toʊl mi haʊ wʌndɝfəl əɹ kjʊɹz wɝ, haʊ ʃi səmtaɪmz hild ɪnʒɝiz, ðət ʃʊɾə bɪn kɹɪpəlɪŋ, soʊ wɛl ðəɹ wɑz bɛɹli ə skɑɹ, ən nɑɾ ə lɪmp əɹ ə twɪnʒ. ði oʊnli ɪl wɝɾ aɪ hɝɾ əbaʊt jə wɑz fɹəm ə fju hu θɔt jə tu jʌŋ fəɹ ðə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi, ən ðəɾ oʊnli stʃɹɛŋθən maɪ səspɪʃənz. soʊ mʌtʃ skɪl soʊ jʌŋ."

"You must listen," Moiraine said firmly. "I had my suspicions in Emond's Field even before I met you. People told me how upset the Wisdom was that she had not predicted the hard winter and the lateness of spring. They told me how good she was at foretelling weather, at telling the crops. They told me how wonderful her cures were, how she sometimes healed injuries, that should have been crippling, so well there was barely a scar, and not a limp or a twinge. The only ill word I heard about you was from a few who thought you too young for the responsibility, and that only strengthened my suspicions. So much skill so young."

"mɪstʃɹəs bæɹən tɔt mi wɛl." ʃi tʃɹaɪd lʊkɪŋ ət læn, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz stɪl meɪɾ əɹ ənkʌmftəɹbəl, soʊ ʃi sɛɾəld fəɹ stɛɹɪŋ oʊvɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz hɛɾ ət ðə ɹɪvɝ. haʊ dɛɹ ðə vɪlədʒ ɡɑsəp ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ən aʊtləndɝ! "hu sɛɾ aɪ wɑz tu jʌŋ?" ʃi dɪmændəd.

"Mistress Barran taught me well." She tried looking at Lan, but his eyes still made her uncomfortable, so she settled for staring over the Aes Sedai's head at the river. How dare the village gossip in front of an outlander! "Who said I was too young?" she demanded.

mɔɪɹeɪn smaɪld, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə bi daɪvɝɾɪd. "ənlaɪk moʊst wɪmən u kleɪm tə lɪsən tə ðə wɪnd, jə æktʃəli  kæn, səmtaɪmz. ɪts əz nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə wɪnd, ʌv ɪts ɪz ʌv ɛɹ ən ɪts ɪz nɑt sʌmθɪŋ jə niɾəd tə bi tɔt; ɪt wɑz bɔɹn ɪndə ju, dʒʌst əz ɪt wɑz bɔɹn ɪndə ɛɡwin. juv hæv lɝn tə hændəl ɪt, wɪtʃ ʃi stɪl əz tə lɝn. tu mɪnəts æftɝ aɪ keɪm feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð ju, aɪ dʒju jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ aɪ sʌɾənli æsk jə ɪf jə wɝ ðə wɪzdəm? dʒju jə θɪŋk? ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃ jə fɹəm ɛni ʌðɝ pɹɪɾi jʌŋ wʊmən ɡɛɾɪŋ ɹɛɾi fəɹ fɛstəvəl. ivən lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə jʌŋ wɪzdəm aɪ ɪkspɛktəd sʌmwʌn hæf əɡɛn jəɹ eɪdʒ."

Moiraine smiled, refusing to be diverted. "Unlike most women who claim to listen to the wind, you actually can, sometimes. Oh, it has nothing to do with the wind, of course. It is of Air and Water. It is not something you needed to be taught; it was born into you, just as it was born into Egwene. But you have learned to handle it, which she still has to learn. Two minutes after I came face-to-face with you, I knew. Do you remember how I suddenly asked you if you were the Wisdom? Why, do you think? There was nothing to distinguish you from any other pretty young woman getting ready for Festival. Even looking for a young Wisdom I expected someone half again your age."

nɪneɪiv ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət miɾɪŋ ɔl tu wɛl; ðɪs wʊmən, mɔɹ sɛlf-pəzɛs ðən ɛniwʌn ɪn ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl, ɪn ə dʒɹɛs mɔɹ bjuɾəfəl ðən ɛni ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, ədʒɹɛsɪŋ əɹ əz ə tʃaɪld. ðən mɔɪɹeɪn hæd sʌɾənli blɪŋkt əz ɪf sɝpɹaɪzd ən aʊɾ ʌv ə klɪɹ skaɪ æskt. . . .

Nynaeve remembered that meeting all too well; this woman, more self-possessed than anyone in the Women's Circle, in a dress more beautiful than any she had ever seen, addressing her as a child. Then Moiraine had suddenly blinked as if surprised and out of a clear sky asked. . . .

ʃi lɪk lɪps ɡɔn əbɹʌpli dʒɹaɪ. ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ, ðə wɔɹɾɝz feɪs əz ənɹiɾəbəl əz ə stoʊn, ði ɛɛs sədaɪz sɪmpəθɛɾɪk jɛɾ ɪntɛnt. nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "noʊ! noʊ, ɪts ɪmpɑsəbəl. aɪ wəd noʊ. jə ɑɹ dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃɹɪk mi, ən ɪɾəl nɑt wɝk."

She licked lips gone abruptly dry. They were both looking at her, the Warder's face as unreadable as a stone, the Aes Sedai's sympathetic yet intent. Nynaeve shook her head. "No! No, it's impossible. I would know. You are just trying to trick me, and it will not work."

"ʌv kɔɹs jə də nɑt noʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd suðɪŋli. "waɪ ʃəd jə ivən səspɛkt? ɔl ə jəɹ laɪf juv hɝɾ əbaʊt lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə wɪnd. ɪn ɛni keɪs, jə wəɾ əz sun ənaʊns tə ɔl ʌv ɛmənz fil ðət jə wɝ ə dɑɹkfɹɛn əz ədmɪt tə jɝsɛlf, ivən ɪn ðə dipəst ɹisɛsəz ə jəɹ maɪnd, ðət juv ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, əɹ ðə dʒɹɛɾɪd ɛɛs sədaɪ." əmjuzmən flɪɾɪd əkɹɔs mɔɪɹeɪnz feɪs. "bʌɾ aɪ kən tɛl jə haʊ ɪt bɪɡæn."

"Of course you do not know," Moiraine said soothingly. "Why should you even suspect? All of your life you have heard about listening to the wind. In any case, you would as soon announce to all of Emond's Field that you were a Darkfriend as admit to yourself, even in the deepest recesses of your mind, that you have anything to do with the One Power, or the dreaded Aes Sedai." Amusement flitted across Moiraine's face. "But I can tell you how it began."

"aɪ doʊnt wɑnə hɪɹ ɛni mɔɹ ə jəɹ laɪz," ʃi sɛd, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn.

"I don't want to hear any more of your lies," she said, but the Aes Sedai went right on.

"pɝhæps əz mʌtʃ əz eɪɾ əɹ tɛn jɪɹz əɡoʊ - ði eɪdʒ vɛɹiz, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz kʌmz jʌŋ - ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ jə wɑntəd mɔɹ ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ɪn ðə wɝld, sʌmθɪŋ jə niɾəd. ən jə ɡɑɾ ɪt. ə bɹæntʃ sʌɾənli fɔlɪŋ wɛɹ jə kəd pʊl jɝsɛlf aʊɾ ʌv ə pɑn ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒɹaʊnɪŋ. ə fɹɛnd, əɹ ə pɛt, ɡɛɾɪŋ wɛl wən ɛvɹiwʌn θɔt ðeɪ wəd daɪ.

"Perhaps as much as eight or ten years ago - the age varies, but always comes young - there was something you wanted more than anything else in the world, something you needed. And you got it. A branch suddenly falling where you could pull yourself out of a pond instead of drowning. A friend, or a pet, getting well when everyone thought they would die.

"ju fɛl nʌθɪŋ spɛʃəl ət ðə taɪm, bʌɾ ə wik əɹ tɛn deɪz leɪɾɝ jə hæd jəɹ fɝst ɹiækʃən tə tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. pɝhæps fivɝ ən tʃɪlz ðət keɪm ɑn sʌɾənli ən pʊt jə tə bɛd, ðən dɪsəpɪɹɾ æftɝ oʊnli ə fju aʊɝz. nʌn ə ðə ɹiækʃənz, ən ðeɪ vɛɹi, læsts mɔɹ ðən ə fju aʊɝz. hɛdeɪks ən nʌmnəs ən ɪɡzɪlɝeɪʃən ɔl mɪks təɡɛðɝ, ən jə teɪkɪŋ fulɪʃ tʃænsəz əɹ æktɪŋ ɡɪɾi. ə spɛl ə dɪzinəs, wən jə tʃɹɪpt ən stʌmbəld wɛnɛvɝ jə tʃɹaɪd tə muv, wən jə kəd nɑt seɪ ə sɛntəns wɪθaʊt jəɹ tʌŋ mæŋɡəlɪŋ hæf ðə wɝdz. ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝz. dʒju ɹɪmɛmbɝ?"

"You felt nothing special at the time, but a week or ten days later you had your first reaction to touching the True Source. Perhaps fever and chills that came on suddenly and put you to bed, then disappeared after only a few hours. None of the reactions, and they vary, lasts more than a few hours. Headaches and numbness and exhilaration all mixed together, and you taking foolish chances or acting giddy. A spell of dizziness, when you tripped and stumbled whenever you tried to move, when you could not say a sentence without your tongue mangling half the words. There are others. Do you remember?"

nɪneɪiv sæt daʊn hɑɹɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd; hɝ lɛɡz wəd nɑt hoʊld əɹ ʌp. ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd, bʌt ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛɾ ɛniweɪ. ɪt hæd tə bi koʊɪnsɪɾəns. əɹ ɛls mɔɪɹeɪn hæɾ æsk mɔɹ kwɛstʃənz ɪn ɛmənz fil ðən ʃi hæd θɔt. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ æskt ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni kwɛstʃənz. ɪt hæd tə bi ðæt. læn ɔfɝɾ ə hænd, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən si ɪt.

Nynaeve sat down hard on the ground; her legs would not hold her up. She remembered, but she shook her head anyway. It had to be coincidence. Or else Moiraine had asked more questions in Emond's Field than she had thought. The Aes Sedai had asked a great many questions. It had to be that. Lan offered a hand, but she did not even see it.

"aɪ wɪl ɡoʊ fɝðɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd wən nɪneɪiv kɛp saɪlənt. "ju juz ðə paʊɝ tə hil iðɝ pɛɹɪn əɹ ɛɡwin ət səm taɪm. ən əfɪnəɾi dɪvɛləps. jə kən sɛns ðə pɹɛzəns ə sʌmwʌn juv hild. ɪn bɛɹlən jə keɪm stʃɹeɪt tə ðə stæɡ ən laɪən, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə nɪɹəst ɪn tə ɛni ɡeɪt baɪ wɪtʃ jə kəɾ əv ɛntɝd. ʌv ðə pipəl fɹəm ɛmənz fild, oʊnli pɛɹɪn ən ɛɡwin wɝ ət ði ɪn wən jə ɝaɪvd. wɑz ɪt pɛɹɪn, əɹ ɛɡwin? əɹ boʊθ?"

"I will go further," Moiraine said when Nynaeve kept silent. "You used the Power to Heal either Perrin or Egwene at some time. An affinity develops. You can sense the presence of someone you have Healed. In Baerlon you came straight to the Stag and Lion, though it was not the nearest inn to any gate by which you could have entered. Of the people from Emond's Field, only Perrin and Egwene were at the inn when you arrived. Was it Perrin, or Egwene? Or both?"

"ɛɡwin," nɪneɪiv mʌmbəld. ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz teɪkən ɪt fəɹ ɡɹæntəd ðət ʃi kəd səmtaɪmz tɛl u wɑz əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ əɹ ivən wən ʃi kəd nɑt si ðɛm; nɑɾ əntɪl naʊ hæd ʃi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz sʌmwʌn ɑn hum əɹ kjʊɹz hæd wɝkt ɔlmoʊs mɝækjələsli wɛl. ən ʃi hæɾ ɔlweɪz noʊn wən ðə mɛɾəsən wəd wɝk bɪɑn ɛkspɛkteɪʃənz, ɔlweɪz fɛl ðə sɝɾənti wən ʃi sɛd ðə kɹɑps wəd bi ɪspɛʃli ɡʊd, əɹ ðət ðə ɹeɪnz wəd kʌm ɝli əɹ leɪt. ðət wɑz ðə weɪ ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz səpoʊz tə bi. nɑɾ ɔl wɪsdəmz kəd lɪsən tə ðə wɪnd, bʌt ðə bɛs kʊd. ðət wɑz wʌt mɪstʃɹəs bæɹən ɔlweɪz sɛd, dʒʌst əz ʃi sɛd nɪneɪiv wəd bi wʌn ə ðə bɛst.

"Egwene," Nynaeve mumbled. She had always taken it for granted that she could sometimes tell who was approaching her even when she could not see them; not until now had she realized that it was always someone on whom her cures had worked almost miraculously well. And she had always known when the medicine would work beyond expectations, always felt the certainty when she said the crops would be especially good, or that the rains would come early or late. That was the way she thought it was supposed to be. Not all Wisdoms could listen to the wind, but the best could. That was what Mistress Barran always said, just as she said Nynaeve would be one of the best.

"ʃi hæd bɹeɪkboʊn fivɝ." ʃi kɛpt əɹ hɛd daʊn ən spoʊk tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "aɪ wɑz stɪl əpɹɛntəs tə mɪstʃɹəs bæɹən, ən ʃi sɛt mi tə wɑtʃ ɛɡwin. aɪ wɑz jʌŋ, ən aɪ dɪdnt noʊ ðə wɪzdəm hæɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɛl ɪn hænd. ɪts tɛɹəbəl tə wɑtʃ, bɹeɪkboʊn fivɝ. ðə tʃaɪld wɑz soʊkt wɪð swɛt, ɡɹoʊnɪŋ ən twɪstɪŋ əntɪl aɪ kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ aɪ dɪdn hɪɹ əɹ boʊnz snæpɪŋ. mɪstʃɹəs bæɹən hæd toʊl mi ðə fivɝ wəd bɹeɪk ɪn ənʌðɝ deɪ, tu ət ðə moʊst, bʌɾ aɪ θɔt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ mi ə kaɪndnəs. aɪ θɔɾ ɛɡwin wɑz daɪɪŋ. aɪ juz tə lʊk æftɝ əɹ səmtaɪmz wən ʃi wɑz ə tɑdlɝ - wən əɹ mʌðɝ wɑz bɪzi - ən aɪ stɑɹɾəd kɹaɪɪŋ kəz aɪ wɑz gɑnə hæv tə wɑtʃ əɹ daɪ. wən mɪstʃɹəs bæɹən keɪm bæk ən aʊɝ leɪɾɝ, ðə fivɝ hæd bɹoʊkən. ʃi wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd, bʌt ʃi meɪɾ oʊvɝ mi mɔɹ ðən ɛɡwin. aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔt ʃi bɪlivd aɪ hæd ɡɪvən ðə tʃaɪl sʌmθɪŋ ən wɑz tu fɹaɪɾənd tə ədmɪɾ ɪt. aɪ ɔlweɪz θɔt ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kʌmfɝt mi, tə meɪk ʃʊɹ aɪ nu aɪ hædn hɝɾ ɛɡwin. ə wik leɪɾɝ aɪ fɛl ɑn ðə flɔɹ ɪn əɹ sɪɾɪŋ ɹum, ʃeɪkɪŋ ən bɝnɪŋ ʌp baɪ tɝnz. ʃi bʌndəl mi ɪndə bɛd, bʌt baɪ sʌpɝtaɪm ɪt wɑz ɡɔn."

"She had breakbone fever." She kept her head down and spoke to the ground. "I was still apprentice to Mistress Barran, and she set me to watch Egwene. I was young, and I didn't know the Wisdom had everything well in hand. It's terrible to watch, breakbone fever. The child was soaked with sweat, groaning and twisting until I could not understand why I didn't hear her bones snapping. Mistress Barran had told me the fever would break in another day, two at the most, but I thought she was doing me a kindness. I thought Egwene was dying. I used to look after her sometimes when she was a toddler - when her mother was busy - and I started crying because I was going to have to watch her die. When Mistress Barran came back an hour later, the fever had broken. She was surprised, but she made over me more than Egwene. I always thought she believed I had given the child something and was too frightened to admit it. I always thought she was trying to comfort me, to make sure I knew I hadn't hurt Egwene. A week later I fell on the floor in her sitting room, shaking and burning up by turns. She bundled me into bed, but by suppertime it was gone."

ʃi dʒɹɑpt əɹ hɛɾ ɪn əɹ hænz əz ʃi fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tʃoʊz ə ɡʊɾ ɪɡzæmpəl, ʃi θɔt, laɪt bɝn hɝ! juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ laɪk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ə fɪlθi, dɑɹkfɹɛn ɛɛs sədaɪ!

She dropped her head in her hands as she finished speaking. The Aes Sedai chose a good example, she thought, Light burn her! Using the Power like an Aes Sedai. A filthy, Darkfriend Aes Sedai!

"ju wɝ vɛɹi lʌki," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, ən nɪneɪiv sæɾ ɪɹɛkt. læn stɛp bæk əz ɪf wʌt ðeɪ tɔkt əbaʊt wɑz nʌn ə hɪz bɪznəs, ən bɪzid hɪmsɛlf wɪð mændɑɹbz sæɾəl, nɑɾ ivən ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðɛm.

"You were very lucky," Moiraine said, and Nynaeve sat erect. Lan stepped back as if what they talked about was none of his business, and busied himself with Mandarb's saddle, not even glancing at them.

"lʌki!"

"Lucky!"

"ju hæv mænədʒd ə kɹud kəntʃɹoʊl oʊvɝ ðə paʊɝ, ivən ɪf tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs stɪl kʌmz ət ɹændəm. ɪf jə hæd nɑt, ɪt wʊɾə kɪl jə ɪvɛntʃəwəli. əz ɪt wɪl, ɪn ɔl pɹɑbəbɪləɾi, kɪl ɛɡwin ɪf jə mænədʒ tə stɑp əɹ fɹəm ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"You have managed a crude control over the Power, even if touching the True Source still comes at random. If you had not, it would have killed you eventually. As it will, in all probability, kill Egwene if you manage to stop her from going to Tar Valon."

"ɪf aɪ lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt. . . ." nɪneɪiv swɑloʊd hɑɹd. ɪt wɑz laɪk ædmɪɾɪŋ ɔl oʊvɝ əɡɛn ðət ʃi kəd də wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd. "ɪf aɪ lɝn tə kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt, soʊ kən ʃi. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid fəɹ əɹ tə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ɡɛt mɪkst ʌp ɪn jəɹ ɪntʃɹiɡz."

"If I learned to control it. . . ." Nynaeve swallowed hard. It was like admitting all over again that she could do what the Aes Sedai said. "If I learned to control it, so can she. There is no need for her to go to Tar Valon, and get mixed up in your intrigues."

mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd sloʊli. "ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝtʃ fəɹ ɡɝlz u kən tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ənɡwaɪɾɪd dʒʌst əz əsɪdwəsli əz wi sɝtʃ fəɹ mɛn u kən də soʊ. ɪts nɑɾ ə dɪzaɪɝ tə ɪnkɹis əɹ nʌmbɝz - əɹ ət list, nɑɾ oʊnli ðət - nɔɹ ɪz ɪɾ ə fɪɹ ðət ðoʊz wɪmən wɪl mɪsjuz ðə paʊɝ. ðə ɹʌf kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə paʊɝ ðeɪ meɪ ɡeɪn, ɪf ðə laɪt ʃaɪnz ɑn ðɛm, ɪz ɹɛɹli ɪnʌf tə də ɛni ɡɹeɪt dæmədʒ, ɪspɛʃli sɪns ði æktʃəwəl tʌtʃɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹs ɪz bɪɑn ðɛɹ kəntʃɹoʊl wɪθaʊɾ ə titʃɝ, ən kʌmz oʊnli ɹændəmli. ænd, ʌv kɔɹs, ðeɪ də nɑt sʌfɝ ðə mædnəs ðət dʒɹaɪvz mɛn tə ivəl əɹ twɪstəd θɪŋz. wi wɑnə seɪv ðɛɹ lɪvz. ðə laɪvz ə ðoʊz u nɛvɝ də mænədʒ ɛni kəntʃɹoʊl əɾ ɔl."

Moiraine shook her head slowly. "Aes Sedai search for girls who can touch the True Source unguided just as assiduously as we search for men who can do so. It is not a desire to increase our numbers - or at least, not only that - nor is it a fear that those women will misuse the Power. The rough control of the Power they may gain, if the Light shines on them, is rarely enough to do any great damage, especially since the actual touching of the Source is beyond their control without a teacher, and comes only randomly. And, of course, they do not suffer the madness that drives men to evil or twisted things. We want to save their lives. The lives of those who never do manage any control at all."

"ðə fivɝ ən tʃɪlz aɪ hæd kʊdn kɪl ɛniwʌn," nɪneɪiv ɪnsɪstəd. "nɑɾ ɪn θɹi əɹ fɔɹ aʊɝz. aɪ hæd ði ʌðɝ θɪŋz, tu, ən ðeɪ kʊdn kɪl ɛnibəɾi, iðɝ. ən ðeɪ stɑpt æftɝ ə fju mʌnθs. wʌɾ əbaʊt ðæt?"

"The fever and chills I had couldn't kill anyone," Nynaeve insisted. "Not in three or four hours. I had the other things, too, and they couldn't kill anybody, either. And they stopped after a few months. What about that?"

"ðoʊz wɝ oʊnli ɹiækʃənz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd peɪʃənli. "itʃ taɪm, ðə ɹiækʃən kʌmz kloʊsɝ tə ði æktʃəwəl tʌtʃɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹs, əntɪl ðə tu hæpən ɔlmoʊs təɡɛðɝ. æftɝ ðət ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ mɔɹ ɹiækʃənz ðət kən bi sin, bʌɾ ɪts əz ɪf ə klɑk əz bɪɡʌn tɪkɪŋ. ə jɪɹ. tu jɪɹz. aɪ noʊ wʌn wʊmən u læstəd faɪv jɪɹz. ʌv fɔɹ u hæv ði ɪnbɔɹn əbɪləɾi ðət jə ən ɛɡwin hæv, θɹi daɪ ɪf wi də nɑt faɪn əm ən tʃɹeɪn ðɛm. ɪts nɑɾ əz hɔɹəbəl ə dɛθ əz ðə mɛn daɪ, bʌt niðɝ ɪz ɪt pɹɪɾi, ɪf ɛni dɛθ kən bi kɔl soʊ. kənvʌlʃənz. skɹimɪŋ. ɪt teɪks deɪz, ən wʌns ɪt bɪɡɪnz ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ ðət kən bi dʌn tə stɑp ɪt, nɑt baɪ ɔl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn təɡɛðɝ."

"Those were only reactions," Moiraine said patiently. "Each time, the reaction comes closer to the actual touching of the Source, until the two happen almost together. After that there are no more reactions that can be seen, but it is as if a clock has begun ticking. A year. Two years. I know one woman who lasted five years. Of four who have the inborn ability that you and Egwene have, three die if we do not find them and train them. It is not as horrible a death as the men die, but neither is it pretty, if any death can be called so. Convulsions. Screaming. It takes days, and once it begins there is nothing that can be done to stop it, not by all the Aes Sedai in Tar Valon together."

"jɔɹ laɪɪŋ. ɔl ðoʊz kwɛstʃənz jə æskt ɪn ɛmənz fild. jə faʊn aʊɾ əbaʊɾ ɛɡwinz fivɝ bɹeɪkɪŋ, əbaʊt maɪ fivɝ ən tʃɪlz, ɔl ʌv ɪt. jə meɪɾ ɔl ə ðɪs ʌp."

"You're lying. All those questions you asked in Emond's Field. You found out about Egwene's fever breaking, about my fever and chills, all of it. You made all of this up."

"ju noʊ aɪ dɪd nɑt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd dʒɛnli.

"You know I did not," Moiraine said gently.

ɹɪlʌktənli, mɔɹ ɹɪlʌktənli ðən ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ dʌn ɛniθɪŋ ɪn əɹ laɪf, nɪneɪiv nɑɾəd. ɪt hæd bɪn ə læst stʌbɝn ɛfɝt tə dɪnaɪ wʌt wɑz pleɪn, ən ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɛni ɡʊɾ ɪn ðæt, haʊɛvɝ ənplɛzən ɪt maɪt bi. mɪstʃɹəs bæɹənz fɝst əpɹɛntəs hæd daɪd ðə weɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd wən nɪneɪiv wɑz stɪl pleɪɪŋ wɪð dɑlz, ən ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə jʌŋ wʊmən ɪn dɛvən ɹaɪɾ oʊnli ə fju jɪɹz əɡoʊ. ʃi hæd bɪn ə wɪzdəmz əpɹɛntəs, tu, wʌn u kəd lɪsən tə ðə wɪnd.

Reluctantly, more reluctantly than she had ever done anything in her life, Nynaeve nodded. It had been a last stubborn effort to deny what was plain, and there was never any good in that, however unpleasant it might be. Mistress Barran's first apprentice had died the way the Aes Sedai said when Nynaeve was still playing with dolls, and there had been a young woman in Deven Ride only a few years ago. She had been a Wisdom's apprentice, too, one who could listen to the wind.

"ju hæv ɡɹeɪt pətɛnʃəl, aɪ θɪŋk," mɔɪɹeɪn kəntɪnjud. "wɪð tʃɹeɪnɪŋ jə maɪt bɪkʌm ivən mɔɹ paʊɝfəl ðən ɛɡwin, ən aɪ bɪliv ʃi kən bɪkʌm wʌn ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪv sin ɪn sɛntʃɝiz."

"You have great potential, I think," Moiraine continued. "With training you might become even more powerful than Egwene, and I believe she can become one of the most powerful Aes Sedai we have seen in centuries."

nɪneɪiv pʊʃt hɝsɛlf bæk fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ʃi wəɾ əv fɹəm ə vaɪpɝ. "noʊ! əl əv nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð - " wɪð wʌt? maɪsɛlf? ʃi slʌmpt, ən əɹ vɔɪs bɪkeɪm hɛzɪɾənt. "aɪ wəɾ æsk jə nɑt tə tɛl ɛniwʌn əbaʊt ðɪs. pliz?" ðə wɝd nɪɹli stʌk ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt. ʃi wəd ɹæðɝ tʃɹɑləks hæɾ əpɪɹd ðən ʃi hæd bɪn fɔɹs tə seɪ pliz tə ðɪs wʊmən. bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn oʊnli nɑɾəd əsɛnt, ən səm ə hɝ spɪɹət ɹɪtɝnd. "nʌn ə ðɪs ɪkspleɪnz wʌt jə wɑnt wɪð ɹænd, ən mæt, ən pɛɹɪn."

Nynaeve pushed herself back from the Aes Sedai as she would have from a viper. "No! I'll have nothing to do with - " With what? Myself? She slumped, and her voice became hesitant. "I would ask you not to tell anyone about this. Please?" The word nearly stuck in her throat. She would rather Trollocs had appeared than she had been forced to say please to this woman. But Moiraine only nodded assent, and some of her spirit returned. "None of this explains what you want with Rand, and Mat, and Perrin."

"ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑns ðɛm," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ɪf ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑns ə θɪŋ, aɪ əpoʊz ɪt. kən ðəɹ bi ə sɪmpəlɝ ɹizən, əɹ ə bɛɾɝ?" ʃi fɪnɪʃt əɹ ti, wɑtʃɪŋ nɪneɪiv oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪm ə hɝ kʌp. "læn, wi mʌs bi ɡoʊɪŋ. saʊθ, aɪ θɪŋk. aɪ fɪɹ ðə wɪzdəm wɪl nɑt bi əkʌmpəniɪŋ ʌs."

"The Dark One wants them," Moiraine replied. "If the Dark One wants a thing, I oppose it. Can there be a simpler reason, or a better?" She finished her tea, watching Nynaeve over the rim of her cup. "Lan, we must be going. South, I think. I fear the Wisdom will not be accompanying us."

nɪneɪivz maʊθ taɪɾənd ət ðə weɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd "wɪzdəm"; ɪt sim tə sədʒɛst ʃi wɑz tɝnɪŋ əɹ bæk ɑn ɡɹeɪt θɪŋz ɪn feɪvɝ ə sʌmθɪŋ pɛɾi. ʃi dʌznt wɑn mi əlɔŋ. ʃiz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊt maɪ bæk ʌp soʊ əl ɡoʊ bæk hoʊm ən liv əm əloʊn wɪð hɝ. "oʊ, jɛs, əl bi ɡoʊɪŋ wɪð ju. jə kænɑt kip mi fɹəm ɪt."

Nynaeve's mouth tightened at the way the Aes Sedai said "Wisdom"; it seemed to suggest she was turning her back on great things in favor of something petty. She doesn't want me along. She's trying to put my back up so I'll go back home and leave them alone with her. "Oh, yes, I will be going with you. You cannot keep me from it."

"noʊ wʌn wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə kip jə fɹəm ɪt," læn sɛɾ əz i ɹidʒɔɪn ðɛm. hi ɛmptid ðə ti kɛɾəl oʊvɝ ðə faɪɝ ən stɝd ði æʃəz wɪð ə stɪk. "ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn?" hi sɛd tə mɔɪɹeɪn.

"No one will try to keep you from it," Lan said as he rejoined them. He emptied the tea kettle over the fire and stirred the ashes with a stick. "A part of the Pattern?" he said to Moiraine.

"pɝhæps soʊ," ʃi ɹɪplaɪd θɔtfəli. "aɪ ʃʊɾə spoʊkən tə mɪn əɡɛn."

"Perhaps so," she replied thoughtfully. "I should have spoken to Min again."

"ju si, nɪneɪiv, jə ɑɹ wɛlkəm tə kʌm." ðəɹ wɑz ə hɛzəteɪʃən ɪn ðə weɪ læn sɛɾ əɹ neɪm, ə hɪn ʌv ən ənspoʊkən "sədaɪ" æftɝ ɪt.

"You see, Nynaeve, you are welcome to come." There was a hesitation in the way Lan said her name, a hint of an unspoken "Sedai" after it.

nɪneɪiv bɹɪsəld, teɪkɪŋ ɪt fəɹ mɑkɝi, ən bɹɪsəld, tu, ət ðə weɪ ðeɪ spoʊk ə θɪŋz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ - θɪŋz ʃi nu nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt - wɪθaʊt ðə kɝɾəsi ʌv ən ɛkspləneɪʃən, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt ɡɪv əm ðə sæɾəsfækʃən ʌv æskɪŋ.

Nynaeve bristled, taking it for mockery, and bristled, too, at the way they spoke of things in front of her - things she knew nothing about - without the courtesy of an explanation, but she would not give them the satisfaction of asking.

ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɛn ɑn pɹipɛɹɪŋ fəɹ dɪpɑɹtʃɝ, hɪz ɛkənɑmɪkəl moʊʃənz soʊ ʃʊɹ ən swɪf ðəɾ i wɑz kwɪkli dʌn, sæɾəlbæɡz, blæŋkəts, ən ɔl fæsən bɪhaɪn ðə sæɾəlz ə mændɑɹb ən ɑldib.

The Warder went on preparing for departure, his economical motions so sure and swift that he was quickly done, saddlebags, blankets, and all fastened behind the saddles of Mandarb and Aldieb.

"aɪ wɪl fɛtʃ jəɹ hɔɹs," hi toʊl nɪneɪiv əz i fɪnɪʃt wɪð ðə læst sæɾəl taɪ.

"I will fetch your horse," he told Nynaeve as he finished with the last saddle tie.

hi stɑɹɾəd ʌp ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk, ən ʃi əlaʊd hɝsɛlf ə smɔl smaɪl. æftɝ ðə weɪ ʃi hæd wɑtʃt ɪm ʌndɪskʌvɝd, hi wɑz gɑnə tʃɹaɪ tə faɪn əɹ hɔɹs əneɪɾɪd. hi wəd lɝn ðət ʃi lɛf lɪɾəl ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv tʃɹæks wən ʃi wɑz stɔkɪŋ. ɪt wəd bi ə plɛʒɝ wən i keɪm bæk ɛmpti-hændəd.

He started up the riverbank, and she allowed herself a small smile. After the way she had watched him undiscovered, he was going to try to find her horse unaided. He would learn that she left little in the way of tracks when she was stalking. It would be a pleasure when he came back empty-handed.

"waɪ saʊθ?" ʃi æsk mɔɪɹeɪn. "aɪ hɝd jə seɪ wʌn ə ðə bɔɪz ɪz əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ. ən haʊ dʒju noʊ?"

"Why south?" she asked Moiraine. "I heard you say one of the boys is across the river. And how do you know?"

"aɪ ɡeɪv itʃ ə ðə bɔɪz ə toʊkən. ɪt kɹieɪɾəd ə bɑn ə sɔɹts bɪtwin əm ən mi. soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ ɑɹ əlaɪv ən əv ðoʊz kɔɪnz ɪn ðɛɹ pəzɛʃən, əl bi eɪbəl tə faɪn ðɛm." nɪneɪivz aɪz tɝn ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd ɡɔn, ən mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "nɑt laɪk ðæt. ɪɾ oʊnli əlaʊz mi tə dɪskʌvɝ ɪf ðeɪ stɪl lɪv, ən faɪn əm ʃəd wi bɪkʌm sɛpɝeɪɾəd. pɹuɾənt, dʒju nɑt θɪŋk, ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz?"

"I gave each of the boys a token. It created a bond of sorts between them and me. So long as they are alive and have those coins in their possession, I will be able to find them." Nynaeve's eyes turned in the direction the Warder had gone, and Moiraine shook her head. "Not like that. It only allows me to discover if they still live, and find them should we become separated. Prudent, do you not think, under the circumstances?"

"aɪ doʊn laɪk ɛniθɪŋ ðət kənɛks jə wɪð ɛniwʌn fɹəm ɛmənz fild," nɪneɪiv sɛd stʌbɝnli. "bʌɾ ɪf ɪɾəl hɛlp əs faɪn ðɛm. . . ."

"I don't like anything that connects you with anyone from Emond's Field," Nynaeve said stubbornly. "But if it will help us find them. . . ."

"ɪt wɪl. aɪ wəd ɡæðɝ ðə jʌŋ mæn əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ fɝst, ɪf aɪ kʊd." fəɹ ə moʊmən fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən tɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz vɔɪs. "hi ɪz oʊnli ə fju maɪlz fɹəm ʌs. bʌɾ aɪ kænɑɾ əfɔɹd tə teɪk ðə taɪm. hi ʃəd meɪk ɪz weɪ daʊn tə waɪtbɹɪdʒ seɪfli naʊ ðət ðə tʃɹɑləks əv ɡɔn. ðə tu hu wɛn daʊnɹɪvɝ meɪ nid mi mɔɹ. ðeɪv lɔs ðɛɹ kɔɪnz, ən mɹdʒɹɑl ɑɹ iðɝ pɝsuɪŋ əm əɹ ɛls tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪntɝsɛpt əs ɔl ət waɪtbɹɪdʒ." ʃi saɪd. "aɪ mʌs teɪk kɛɹ ə ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst nid fɝst."

"It will. I would gather the young man across the river first, if I could." For a moment frustration tinged the Aes Sedai's voice. "He is only a few miles from us. But I cannot afford to take the time. He should make his way down to Whitebridge safely now that the Trollocs have gone. The two who went downriver may need me more. They have lost their coins, and Myrddraal are either pursuing them or else trying to intercept us all at Whitebridge." She sighed. "I must take care of the greatest need first."

"ðə mɹdʒɹɑl kəɾ əv . . . cʊɾə kɪl ðɛm," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"The Myrddraal could have . . . could have killed them," Nynaeve said.

mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd slaɪtli, dɪnaɪɪŋ ðə sədʒɛstʃən əz ɪf ɪt wɝ tu tʃɹɪviəl tə bi kənsɪɾɝd. nɪneɪivz maʊθ taɪɾənd. "wɛɹ ɪz ɛɡwin, ðɛn? jə hævən ivən mɛnʃən hɝ."

Moiraine shook her head slightly, denying the suggestion as if it were too trivial to be considered. Nynaeve's mouth tightened. "Where is Egwene, then? You haven't even mentioned her."

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn ədmɪɾəd, "bʌɾ aɪ hoʊp ðət ʃiz seɪf."

"I do not know," Moiraine admitted, "but I hope that she is safe."

"ju doʊnt noʊ? jə hoʊp? ɔl ðət tɔk əbaʊt seɪvɪŋ əɹ laɪf baɪ teɪkɪŋ əɹ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ʃi kəd bi dɛd fəɹ ɔl jə noʊ!"

"You don't know? You hope? All that talk about saving her life by taking her to Tar Valon, and she could be dead for all you know!"

"aɪ kəd lʊk fəɹ əɹ ən əlaʊ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl mɔɹ taɪm bɪfɔɹ aɪ ɝaɪv tə hɛlp ðə tu jʌŋ mɛn u wɛn saʊθ. ɪts əm ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑns, nɑt hɝ. ðeɪ wəd nɑt bɑðɝ wɪð ɛɡwin, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðɛɹ tʃɹu kwɔɹi ɹɪmeɪnz ənkɔt."

"I could look for her and allow the Myrddraal more time before I arrive to help the two young men who went south. It is them the Dark One wants, not her. They would not bother with Egwene, so long as their true quarry remains uncaught."

nɪneɪiv ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ əɹ oʊn ɪnkaʊntɝ, bʌt ʃi ɹəfjuz tə ədmɪt ðə sɛns ʌv wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "soʊ ðə bɛs juv tə ɔfɝ ɪz ðət ʃi meɪ bi əlaɪv, ɪf ʃi wɑz lʌki. əlaɪv, meɪbi əloʊn, fɹaɪɾənd, ivən hɝt, deɪz fɹəm ðə nɪɹəs vɪlədʒ əɹ hɛlp ɪksɛp fəɹ ʌs. ən jə ɪntɛn tə liv hɝ."

Nynaeve remembered her own encounter, but she refused to admit the sense of what Moiraine said. "So the best you have to offer is that she may be alive, if she was lucky. Alive, maybe alone, frightened, even hurt, days from the nearest village or help except for us. And you intend to leave her."

"ʃi meɪ dʒʌst əz izəli bi seɪf wɪð ðə bɔɪ əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ. əɹ ɑn əɹ weɪ tə waɪtbɹɪdʒ wɪð ði ʌðɝ tu. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðəɹ ɑɹ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ tʃɹɑləks hɪɹ tə θɹɛɾən hɝ, ən ʃiz stʃɹɔŋ, ɪntɛlədʒənt, ən kwaɪt keɪpəbəl ə faɪndɪŋ əɹ weɪ tə waɪtbɹɪdʒ əloʊn, ɪf nid bi. wəd jə ɹæðɝ steɪ ɑn ðə tʃæns ðət ʃi meɪ nid hɛlp, əɹ dʒju wɑnə tʃɹaɪ tə hɛlp ðoʊz wi noʊ ɑɹ ɪn nid? wəd juv mi sɝtʃ fəɹ əɹ ən lɛt ðə bɔɪz - ən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl u ɑɹ ʃʊɹli pɝsuɪŋ əm - ɡoʊ? əz mʌtʃ əz aɪ hoʊp fəɹ ɛɡwinz seɪfti, nɪneɪiv, aɪ faɪɾ əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən fəɹ naʊ ðət sɛts maɪ pæθ."

"She may just as easily be safe with the boy across the river. Or on her way to Whitebridge with the other two. In any case, there are no longer Trollocs here to threaten her, and she is strong, intelligent, and quite capable of finding her way to Whitebridge alone, if need be. Would you rather stay on the chance that she may need help, or do you want to try to help those we know are in need? Would you have me search for her and let the boys - and the Myrddraal who are surely pursuing them - go? As much as I hope for Egwene's safety, Nynaeve, I fight against the Dark One, and for now that sets my path."

mɔɪɹeɪnz kɑm nɛvɝ slɪpt waɪl ʃi leɪɾ aʊt ðə hɔɹəbəl ɔltɝnəɾɪvz; nɪneɪiv wɑntəd tə skɹim ət hɝ. blɪŋkɪŋ bæk tɪɹz, ʃi tɝn əɹ feɪs soʊ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd nɑt si. laɪt, ə wɪzdəm ɪz səpoʊz tə lʊk æftɝ ɔl ə hɝ pipəl. waɪ də aɪ hæv tə tʃuz laɪk ðɪs?

Moiraine's calm never slipped while she laid out the horrible alternatives; Nynaeve wanted to scream at her. Blinking back tears, she turned her face so the Aes Sedai could not see. Light, a Wisdom is supposed to look after all of her people. Why do I have to choose like this?

"hɪɹ ɪz læn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, ɹaɪzɪŋ ən sɛɾəlɪŋ əɹ kloʊk əbaʊɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz.

"Here is Lan," Moiraine said, rising and settling her cloak about her shoulders.

tə nɪneɪiv ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə taɪni bloʊ əz ðə wɔɹɾɝ lɛɾ əɹ hɔɹs aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz. stɪl, hɝ lɪps θɪnd wən i hændəɾ əɹ ðə ɹeɪnz. ɪt wʊɾə bɪn ə smɔl bus tə hɝ spɪɹəts ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn ivən ə tʃɹeɪs ʌv ɡloʊɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz feɪs ɪnstɛɾ ə ðəɾ ɪnsʌfɝəbəl stoʊni kɑm. hɪz aɪz waɪɾənd wən i sɔ hɝ feɪs, ən ʃi tɝn əɹ bæk ɑn ɪm tə waɪp tɪɹz fɹəm əɹ tʃiks. haʊ dɛɹ i mɑk maɪ kɹaɪɪŋ!

To Nynaeve it was only a tiny blow as the Warder led her horse out of the trees. Still, her lips thinned when he handed her the reins. It would have been a small boost to her spirits if there had been even a trace of gloating on his face instead of that insufferable stony calm. His eyes widened when he saw her face, and she turned her back on him to wipe tears from her cheeks. How dare he mock my crying!

"ɑɹ jə kʌmɪŋ, wɪzdəm?" mɔɪɹeɪn æskt kuli.

"Are you coming, Wisdom?" Moiraine asked coolly.

ʃi tʊk wʌn læst, sloʊ lʊk ət ðə fɔɹəst, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ɛɡwin wɑz aʊt ðɛɹ, bɪfɔɹ sædli maʊntɪŋ əɹ hɔɹs. læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, tɝnɪŋ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz saʊθ. ʃi fɑloʊd, stɪf-bækt, ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə lɛt hɝsɛlf lʊk bæk; ɪnstɛd ʃi kɛpt əɹ aɪz ɑn mɔɪɹeɪn. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz soʊ kɑnfəɾənt ɪn əɹ paʊɝ ən əɹ plænz, ʃi θɔt, bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd nɑt faɪn ɛɡwin ən ðə bɔɪz, ɔl ə ðɛm, əlaɪv ən ənhɑɹmd, nɑɾ ɔl ə hɝ paʊɝ wəd pɹətɛk hɝ. nɑɾ ɔl əɹ paʊɝ. aɪ kən juz ɪt, wʊmən! jə toʊl mi soʊ jɝsɛlf. aɪ kən juz ɪɾ əɡɛns ju!

She took one last, slow look at the forest, wondering if Egwene was out there, before sadly mounting her horse. Lan and Moiraine were already in their saddles, turning their horses south. She followed, stiff-backed, refusing to let herself look back; instead she kept her eyes on Moiraine. The Aes Sedai was so confident in her power and her plans, she thought, but if they did not find Egwene and the boys, all of them, alive and unharmed, not all of her power would protect her. Not all her Power. I can use it, woman! You told me so yourself. I can use it against you!


tʃæptɝ twɛntiɾu


CHAPTER 22

eɪ pæθ tʃoʊzən


A Path Chosen

ɪn ə smɔl kɑps ə tʃɹiz, bɪniθ ə paɪl ə siɾɝ bɹæntʃəz ɹʌfli kʌɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk, pɛɹɪn slɛp lɔŋ æftɝ sʌnɹaɪz. ɪt wɑz ðə siɾɝ niɾəlz, pɹɪkɪŋ ɪm θɹu hɪz stɪl-dæmp kloʊðz, ðət faɪnəli pɹɪk θɹu hɪz ɪɡzɔstʃən əz wɛl. dip ɪn ə dʒɹim ʌv ɛmənz fild, ʌv wɝkɪŋ ət mæstɝ luhənz fɔɹdʒ, hi oʊpən ɪz aɪz ən stɛɹd, ʌnkɑmpɹihɛndɪŋ, ət ðə swit-smɛlɪŋ bɹæntʃəz ɪntɝwoʊvən oʊvɝ ɪz feɪs, sʌnlaɪt tʃɹɪklɪŋ θɹu.

In a small copse of trees, beneath a pile of cedar branches roughly cut in the dark, Perrin slept long after sunrise. It was the cedar needles, pricking him through his still-damp clothes, that finally pricked through his exhaustion as well. Deep in a dream of Emond's Field, of working at Master Luhhan's forge, he opened his eyes and stared, uncomprehending, at the sweet-smelling branches interwoven over his face, sunlight trickling through.

moʊst ə ðə bɹæntʃəz fɛl əweɪ əz i sæɾ ʌp ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, bʌt səm hʌŋ hæfəzɝdli fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ən ivən ɪz hɛd, meɪkɪŋ ɪm əpɪɹ sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ə tʃɹi hɪmsɛlf. ɛmənz fil feɪɾəd əz mɛmɹi ɹʌʃt bæk, soʊ vɪvəd ðət fəɹ ə moʊmən ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ simd mɔɹ ɹil ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪm naʊ.

Most of the branches fell away as he sat up in surprise, but some hung haphazardly from his shoulders, and even his head, making him appear something like a tree himself. Emond's Field faded as memory rushed back, so vivid that for a moment the night before seemed more real than anything around him now.

pæntɪŋ, fɹæntɪk, hi skɹæbəld ɪz æks aʊɾ ə ðə paɪl. hi klʌtʃt ɪɾ ɪn boʊθ hænz ən pɪɹɾ ɝaʊn kɔʃəsli, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ. nʌθɪŋ muvd. ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wɑz koʊld ən stɪl. ɪf ðəɹ wɝ tʃɹɑləks ɑn ði is bæŋk ə ði ɑɹɪnɛl, ðeɪ wɝ nɑt muvɪŋ, ət lis nɑt kloʊs tə hɪm. teɪkɪŋ ə dip, kɑmɪŋ bɹɛθ, hi loʊɝd ði æks tə hɪz niz, ən weɪɾəd ə moʊmən fəɹ ɪz hɑɹt tə stɑp paʊndɪŋ.

Panting, frantic, he scrabbled his axe out of the pile. He clutched it in both hands and peered around cautiously, holding his breath. Nothing moved. The morning was cold and still. If there were Trollocs on the east bank of the Arinelle, they were not moving, at least not close to him. Taking a deep, calming breath, he lowered the axe to his knees, and waited a moment for his heart to stop pounding.

ðə smɔl stæn ʌv ɛvɝɡɹinz sɝaʊndɪŋ ɪm wɑz ðə fɝst ʃɛltɝ i hæd faʊn læs naɪt. ɪt wɑz spɑɹs ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv lɪɾəl pɹətɛkʃən əɡɛnst wɑtʃɪŋ aɪz ɪf i stʊɾ ʌp. plʌkɪŋ bɹæntʃəz fɹəm ɪz hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz, hi pʊʃt əsaɪd ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz pɹɪkli blæŋkət, ðən kɹɔld ɑn hænz ən niz tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə kɑps. ðəɹ i leɪ stʌɾiɪŋ ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk ən skɹætʃɪŋ wɛɹ ðə niɾəlz hæd stæb hɪm.

The small stand of evergreens surrounding him was the first shelter he had found last night. It was sparse enough to give little protection against watching eyes if he stood up. Plucking branches from his head and shoulders, he pushed aside the rest of his prickly blanket, then crawled on hands and knees to the edge of the copse. There he lay studying the riverbank and scratching where the needles had stabbed him.

ðə kʌɾɪŋ wɪn ə ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ hæd feɪɾəd tə ə saɪlən bɹiz ðət bɛɹli ɹɪpəl ðə sɝfəs ə ðə wɔɾɝ. ðə ɹɪvɝ ɹæn baɪ, kɑm ən ɛmpti. ən waɪd. ʃʊɹli tu waɪɾ ən tu dip fəɹ feɪdz tə kɹɔs. ðə fɑɹ bæŋk əpɪɹɾ ə sɑləd mæs ə tʃɹiz əz fɑɹ əz i kəd si ʌpɹɪvɝ ən daʊn. sɝɾənli nʌθɪŋ muvd ɪn ɪz vju oʊvɝ ðɛɹ.

The cutting wind of the night before had faded to a silent breeze that barely rippled the surface of the water. The river ran by, calm and empty. And wide. Surely too wide and too deep for Fades to cross. The far bank appeared a solid mass of trees as far as he could see upriver and down. Certainly nothing moved in his view over there.

hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ hi fɛlt əbaʊt ðæt. feɪdz ən tʃɹɑləks i kəd də wɪθaʊt kwaɪɾ izəli, ivən ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, bʌɾ ə hoʊl lɪst ʌv wɝiz wʊɾə vænɪʃt wɪð ði əpɪɹəns ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝ, ɔɹ, ivən bɛɾɝ, ɛni ʌv ɪz fɹɛnz. ɪf wɪʃɪz wɝ wɪŋz, ʃip wəd flaɪ. ðət wɑz wʌt mɪstʃɹəs luhən ɔlweɪz sɛd.

He was not sure how he felt about that. Fades and Trollocs he could do without quite easily, even on the other side of the river, but a whole list of worries would have vanished with the appearance of the Aes Sedai, or the Warder, or, even better, any of his friends. If wishes were wings, sheep would fly. That was what Mistress Luhhan always said.

hi hæd nɑt sin ə saɪn ə hɪz hɔɹs sɪns ɹaɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə blʌf - hi hoʊpt ɪt hæd swʌm aʊɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ seɪfli - bʌɾ i wɑz mɔɹ juz tə wɔkɪŋ ðən ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɛniweɪ, ən ɪz buts wɝ staʊɾ ən wɛl soʊld. hi hæd nʌθɪŋ tə it, bʌɾ ɪz slɪŋ wɑz stɪl ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪz weɪst, ən ðəɾ əɹ ðə snɑɹəlaɪnz ɪn ɪz pɑkəɾ ɔt tə jild ə ɹæbəɾ ɪn ə lɪɾəl taɪm. ɛvɹiθɪŋ fəɹ meɪkɪŋ ə faɪɝ wɑz ɡɔn wɪð ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz, bʌt ðə siɾɝ tʃɹiz wəd jil tɪndɝ ən ə faɪɝboʊ wɪð ə bɪɾ ʌv wɝk.

He had not seen a sign of his horse since riding over the bluff - he hoped it had swum out of the river safely - but he was more used to walking than riding anyway, and his boots were stout and well soled. He had nothing to eat, but his sling was still wrapped around his waist, and that or the snarelines in his pocket ought to yield a rabbit in a little time. Everything for making a fire was gone with his saddlebags, but the cedar trees would yield tinder and a firebow with a bit of work.

hi ʃɪvɝɾ əz ðə bɹiz ɡʌstɪɾ ɪndə hɪz haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs. hɪz kloʊk wɑz sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ, ən ɪz koʊɾ ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls i wɔɹ wɝ stɪl klæmi koʊl fɹəm ðə soʊkɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ. hi hæd bɪn tu taɪɝd fəɹ ðə koʊld ən dæmp tə bɑðɝ ɪm læs naɪt, bʌt naʊ hi wɑz waɪɾ əweɪk tə ɛvɹi tʃɪl. dʒʌs ðə seɪm, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd əɡɛns hæŋɪŋ ɪz kloʊðz ɑn ðə bɹæntʃəz tə dʒɹaɪ. ɪf ðə deɪ wɑz nɑt pɹɪsaɪsli koʊld, ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ivən kloʊs tə wɔɹm.

He shivered as the breeze gusted into his hiding place. His cloak was somewhere in the river, and his coat and everything else he wore were still clammy cold from the soaking in the river. He had been too tired for the cold and damp to bother him last night, but now he was wide awake to every chill. Just the same, he decided against hanging his clothes on the branches to dry. If the day was not precisely cold, it was not even close to warm.

taɪm wɑz ðə pɹɑbləm, hi θɔt wɪð ə saɪ. dʒɹaɪ kloʊðz, wɪð ə lɪɾəl taɪm. ə ɹæbət tə ɹoʊst ən ə faɪɝ tə ɹoʊst ɪɾ oʊvɝ, wɪð ə lɪɾəl taɪm. hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld, ən i tʃɹaɪd tə fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊɾ iɾɪŋ ɔltəɡɛðɝ. ðəɹ wɝ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt jusəz fəɹ ðət taɪm. wʌn θɪŋ əɾ ə taɪm, ən ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt fɝst. ðət wɑz ɪz weɪ.

Time was the problem, he thought with a sigh. Dry clothes, with a little time. A rabbit to roast and a fire to roast it over, with a little time. His stomach rumbled, and he tried to forget about eating altogether. There were more important uses for that time. One thing at a time, and the most important first. That was his way.

hɪz aɪz fɑloʊd ðə stʃɹɔŋ floʊ ʌv ði ɑɹɪnɛl daʊnɹɪvɝ. hi wɑz ə stʃɹɔŋɝ swɪmɝ ðən ɛɡwin. ɪf ʃi hæd meɪɾ ɪɾ əkɹɔs. . . . noʊ, nɑɾ ɪf. ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ʃi hæd meɪɾ ɪɾ əkɹɔs wəd bi daʊnɹɪvɝ. hi dʒɹʌmd ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, weɪɪŋ, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ.

His eyes followed the strong flow of the Arinelle downriver. He was a stronger swimmer than Egwene. If she had made it across. . . . No, not if. The place where she had made it across would be downriver. He drummed on the ground with his fingers, weighing, considering.

hɪz dɪsɪʒən meɪd, hi weɪstəd noʊ taɪm ɪn pɪkɪŋ ʌp ɪz æks ən sɛɾɪŋ ɔf daʊn ðə ɹɪvɝ.

His decision made, he wasted no time in picking up his axe and setting off down the river.

ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði ɑɹɪnɛl læk ðə θɪk fɔɹəst ə ðə wɛs bæŋk. klʌmps ə tʃɹiz spɑɾəd əkɹɔs wʌt wəd bi ɡɹæslæn ɪf spɹɪŋ ɛvɝ keɪm. səm wɝ bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə bi kɔl θɪkəts, wɪð swɑðz ʌv ɛvɝɡɹinz əmʌŋ ðə bæɹən æʃ ən ɔldɝ ən hɑɹdɡəm. daʊn baɪ ðə ɹɪvɝ ðə stænz wɝ smɔlɝ ən nɑt soʊ taɪt. ðeɪ ɡeɪv pʊɹ kʌvɝ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ðə kʌvɝ ðəɹ wɑz.

This side of the Arinelle lacked the thick forest of the west bank. Clumps of trees spotted across what would be grassland if spring ever came. Some were big enough to be called thickets, with swathes of evergreens among the barren ash and alder and hardgum. Down by the river the stands were smaller and not so tight. They gave poor cover, but they were all the cover there was.

hi dæʃt fɹəm ɡɹoʊθ tə ɡɹoʊθ ɪn ə kɹaʊtʃ, θɹoʊɪŋ hɪmsɛlf daʊn wən i wɑz əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz tə stʌɾi ðə ɹɪvɝbɑŋks, ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ əz wɛl əz hɪz. ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd ðə ɹɪvɝ wəd bi ə bæɹiɝ tə feɪdz ən tʃɹɑləks, bʌt wəɾ ɪt? siɪŋ ɪm maɪt bi ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝkʌm ðɛɹ ɹɪlʌktəns tə kɹɔs dip wɔɾɝ. soʊ hi wɑtʃt kɛɹfəli fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə tʃɹiz ən ɹæn fɹəm wʌn haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs tə ðə nɛkst, fæst ən loʊ.

He dashed from growth to growth in a crouch, throwing himself down when he was among the trees to study the riverbanks, the far side as well as his. The Warder said the river would be a barrier to Fades and Trollocs, but would it? Seeing him might be enough to overcome their reluctance to cross deep water. So he watched carefully from behind the trees and ran from one hiding place to the next, fast and low.

hi kʌvɝd sɛvɹəl maɪlz ðət weɪ, ɪn spɝts, əntɪl sʌɾənli, hæfweɪ tə ðə bɛkənɪŋ ʃɛltɝ ʌv ə ɡɹoʊθ ʌv wɪloʊz, hi ɡɹʌntɪɾ ən stɑp dɛd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd. pætʃəz ə bɛɹ ɝθ spɑɾəd ðə mæɾɪd bɹaʊn ə læs jɪɹz ɡɹæs, ən ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv wʌn ə ðoʊz pætʃəz, ɹaɪɾ ʌndɝ ɪz noʊz, wɑz ə klɪɹ hʊfpɹɪnt. ə sloʊ smaɪl spɹɛɾ əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs. səm tʃɹɑləks hæd hʊvz, bʌɾ i daʊɾɪd ɪf ɛni wɔɹ hɔɹsʃuz, ɪspɛʃli hɔɹsʃuz wɪð ðə dʌbəl kɹɔsbɝ mæstɝ luhən æɾəd fəɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ.

He covered several miles that way, in spurts, until suddenly, halfway to the beckoning shelter of a growth of willows, he grunted and stopped dead, staring at the ground. Patches of bare earth spotted the matted brown of last year's grass, and in the middle of one of those patches, right under his nose, was a clear hoofprint. A slow smile spread across his face. Some Trollocs had hooves, but he doubted if any wore horseshoes, especially horseshoes with the double crossbar Master Luhhan added for strength.

fɝɡɛɾɪŋ pɑsəbəl aɪz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹɪvɝ, hi kæst əbaʊt fəɹ mɔɹ tʃɹæks. ðə pleɪɾəd kɑɹpəɾ ə dɛd ɡɹæs dɪd nɑt teɪk ɪmpɹɛʃənz wɛl, bʌɾ ɪz ʃɑɹp aɪz faʊn əm ɛniweɪ. ðə skænti tʃɹeɪl lɛɾ ɪm stʃɹeɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ tə ə dɛns stæn ə tʃɹiz, θɪk wɪð lɛðɝlif ən siɾɝ ðət meɪɾ ə wɔl əɡɛnst wɪn əɹ pɹaɪɪŋ aɪz. ðə spɹɛɾɪŋ bɹæntʃəz ʌv ə loʊn hɛmlɑk taʊɝɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪɾ ɔl.

Forgetting possible eyes on the other side of the river, he cast about for more tracks. The plaited carpet of dead grass did not take impressions well, but his sharp eyes found them anyway. The scanty trail led him straight away from the river to a dense stand of trees, thick with leatherleaf and cedar that made a wall against wind or prying eyes. The spreading branches of a lone hemlock towered in the middle of it all.

stɪl ɡɹɪnɪŋ, hi pʊʃt ɪz weɪ θɹu ði ɪntɝwoʊvən bɹæntʃəz, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ haʊ mʌtʃ nɔɪz i meɪd. əbɹʌpli hi stɛpt ɪndə ə lɪɾəl klɪɹɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə hɛmlɑk - ən stɑpt. bɪhaɪn ə smɔl faɪɝ, ɛɡwin kɹaʊtʃt, hɝ feɪs ɡɹɪm, wɪð ə θɪk bɹæntʃ hɛld laɪk ə klʌb ən əɹ bæk əɡɛns bɛləz flæŋk.

Still grinning, he pushed his way through the interwoven branches, not caring how much noise he made. Abruptly he stepped into a little clearing under the hemlock - and stopped. Behind a small fire, Egwene crouched, her face grim, with a thick branch held like a club and her back against Bela's flank.

"aɪ ɡɛs aɪ ʃʊɾə kɔld aʊt," hi sɛd wɪð ən əbæʃt ʃɹʌɡ.

"I guess I should have called out," he said with an abashed shrug.

tɔsɪŋ əɹ klʌb daʊn, ʃi ɹæn tə θɹoʊ hɝ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɪm. "aɪ θɔt jə hæd dʒɹaʊnd. jəɹ stɪl wɛt. hɪɹ, sɪt baɪ ðə faɪɝ ən wɔɹm jɝsɛlf. jə lɔs jəɹ hɔɹs, dɪdn ju?"

Tossing her club down, she ran to throw her arms around him. "I thought you had drowned. You're still wet. Here, sit by the fire and warm yourself. You lost your horse, didn't you?"

hi lɛɾ əɹ pʊʃ ɪm tə ə pleɪs baɪ ðə faɪɝ ən ɹʌbd ɪz hænz oʊvɝ ðə fleɪmz, ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ðə wɔɹmθ. ʃi pɹədust ən ɔɪl peɪpɝ pækət fɹəm əɹ sæɾəlbæɡz ən ɡeɪv ɪm səm bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz. ðə pækədʒ hæd bɪn soʊ taɪtli ɹæp ðəɾ ivən æftɝ ɪts dʌŋkɪŋ ðə fud wɑz dʒɹaɪ. hɪɹ jə wɝ wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt hɝ, ən ʃiz dʌn bɛɾɝ ðən jə dɪd.

He let her push him to a place by the fire and rubbed his hands over the flames, grateful for the warmth. She produced an oiled paper packet from her saddlebags and gave him some bread and cheese. The package had been so tightly wrapped that even after its dunking the food was dry. Here you were worrying about her, and she's done better than you did.

"bɛlə ɡɑt mi əkɹɔs," ɛɡwin sɛd, pæɾɪŋ ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ. "ʃi hɛɾəd əweɪ fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑləks ən dʒʌs toʊd mi əlɔŋ." ʃi pɔzd. "aɪ hævən sin ɛnibəɾi ɛls, pɛɹɪn."

"Bela got me across," Egwene said, patting the shaggy mare. "She headed away from the Trollocs and just towed me along." She paused. "I haven't seen anybody else, Perrin."

hi hɝd ði ənspoʊkən kwɛstʃən. ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli aɪɪŋ ðə pækət ðət ʃi wɑz ɹiɹæpɪŋ, hi lɪk ðə læs kɹʌmz fɹəm ɪz fɪŋɡɝz bɪfɔɹ spikɪŋ. "aɪv sin noʊ wʌn bʌt jə sɪns læs naɪt. noʊ feɪdz əɹ tʃɹɑləks, iðɝ; ðɛɹz ðæt."

He heard the unspoken question. Regretfully eyeing the packet that she was rewrapping, he licked the last crumbs from his fingers before speaking. "I've seen no one but you since last night. No Fades or Trollocs, either; there's that."

"ɹæn əz tə bi ɔl ɹaɪt," ɛɡwin sɛd, kwɪkli æɾɪŋ, "ðeɪ ɔl du. ðeɪv tə. ðəɹ pɹɑbli lʊkɪŋ fəɹ əs ɹaɪt naʊ. ðeɪ maɪt faɪn əs ɛnitaɪm naʊ. mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, æftɝ ɔl."

"Rand has to be all right," Egwene said, quickly adding, "they all do. They have to. They're probably looking for us right now. They might find us anytime now. Moiraine is an Aes Sedai, after all."

"aɪ kip biɪŋ ɹimaɪndəɾ ə ðæt," hi sɛd. "bɝn mi, aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəd fɝɡɛt."

"I keep being reminded of that," he said. "Burn me, I wish I could forget."

"aɪ dɪd nɑt hɪɹ jə kəmpleɪnɪŋ wən ʃi stɑp ðə tʃɹɑləks fɹəm kætʃɪŋ ʌs," ɛɡwin sɛd tɑɹtli.

"I did not hear you complaining when she stopped the Trollocs from catching us," Egwene said tartly.

"aɪ dʒʌst wɪʃ wi kəd də wɪθaʊt hɝ." hi ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli ʌndɝ əɹ stɛɾi ɡeɪz. "aɪ səpoʊz wi kænt, ðoʊ. aɪv bɪn θɪŋkɪŋ." hɝ aɪbɹaʊz ɹoʊz, bʌɾ i wɑz juz tə sɝpɹaɪz wɛnɛvɝ i kleɪmd ən aɪdiə. ivən wən ɪz aɪdiəz wɝ əz ɡʊɾ əz ðɛɹz, ðeɪ ɔlweɪz ɹɪmɛmbɝd haʊ dɪlɪbɝɪɾ i wɑz ɪn θɪŋkɪŋ ə ðɛm. "wi kən weɪt fəɹ læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn tə faɪn ʌs."

"I just wish we could do without her." He shrugged uncomfortably under her steady gaze. "I suppose we can't, though. I've been thinking." Her eyebrows rose, but he was used to surprise whenever he claimed an idea. Even when his ideas were as good as theirs, they always remembered how deliberate he was in thinking of them. "We can wait for Lan and Moiraine to find us."

"ʌv kɔɹs," ʃi kʌɾ ɪn. "mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛd ʃi wəd faɪn əs ɪf wi wɝ sɛpɝeɪɾəd."

"Of course," she cut in. "Moiraine Sedai said she would find us if we were separated."

hi lɛɾ əɹ fɪnɪʃ, ðən wɛn ɑn. "ɔɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks kəd faɪn ʌs, fɝst. mɔɪɹeɪn kəd bi dɛd, tu. ɔl ə ðɛm kəd bi. noʊ, ɛɡwin. aɪm sɑɹi, bʌt ðeɪ kəd bi. aɪ hoʊp ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔl seɪf. aɪ hoʊp ðəl wɔk ʌp tə ðɪs faɪɝ ɛni mɪnət. bʌt hoʊp ɪz laɪk ə pis ə stʃɹɪŋ wən jəɹ dʒɹaʊnɪŋ; ɪt dʒʌst ɪzən ɪnʌf tə ɡɛt jə aʊt baɪ ɪtsɛlf."

He let her finish, then went on. "Or the Trollocs could find us, first. Moiraine could be dead, too. All of them could be. No, Egwene. I'm sorry, but they could be. I hope they are all safe. I hope they'll walk up to this fire any minute. But hope is like a piece of string when you're drowning; it just isn't enough to get you out by itself."

ɛɡwin kloʊzd əɹ maʊθ ən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm wɪð əɹ dʒɔ sɛt. faɪnəli, ʃi sɛd, "ju wɑnə ɡoʊ daʊnɹɪvɝ tə waɪtbɹɪdʒ? ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ dʌzn faɪn əs hɪɹ, ðæts wɛɹ ʃɪl lʊk nɛkst."

Egwene closed her mouth and stared at him with her jaw set. Finally, she said, "You want to go downriver to Whitebridge? If Moiraine Sedai doesn't find us here, that's where she will look next."

"aɪ səpoʊz," hi sɛd sloʊli, "ðæt waɪtbɹɪdʒ ɪz wɛɹ wi ʃəd ɡoʊ. bʌt ðə feɪdz pɹɑbli noʊ ðæt, tu. ðæts wɛɹ ðəl bi lʊkɪŋ, ən ðɪs taɪm wi doʊn əv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ ə wɔɹɾɝ tə pɹətɛkt ʌs."

"I suppose," he said slowly, "that Whitebridge is where we should go. But the Fades probably know that, too. That's where they'll be looking, and this time we don't have an Aes Sedai or a Warder to protect us."

"aɪ səpoʊz jəɹ gɑnə sədʒɛst ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf sʌmwɛɹ, ðə weɪ mæt wɑntəd tə? haɪɾɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ ðə feɪdz ən tʃɹɑləks woʊn faɪn ʌs? əɹ mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, iðɝ?"

"I suppose you're going to suggest running off somewhere, the way Mat wanted to? Hiding somewhere the Fades and Trollocs won't find us? Or Moiraine Sedai, either?"

"doʊn θɪŋk aɪ hævən kənsɪɾɝd ɪt," hi sɛd kwaɪətli. "bʌɾ ɛvɹi taɪm wi θɪŋk wəɹ fɹi, feɪdz ən tʃɹɑləks faɪn əs əɡɛn. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf ðəɹ ɪz ɛnipleɪs wi kəd haɪd fɹəm ðɛm. aɪ doʊn laɪk ɪt mʌtʃ, bʌt wi nid mɔɪɹeɪn."

"Don't think I haven't considered it," he said quietly. "But every time we think we are free, Fades and Trollocs find us again. I don't know if there is anyplace we could hide from them. I don't like it much, but we need Moiraine."

"aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ðɛn, pɛɹɪn. wɛɹ də wi ɡoʊ?"

"I don't understand then, Perrin. Where do we go?"

hi blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ʃi wɑz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪz ænsɝ. weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə tɛl əɹ wʌt tə du. ɪt hæd nɛvɝ əkɝd tə hɪm ðət ʃi wəd lʊk tə hɪm tə teɪk ðə lɛd. ɛɡwin nɛvɝ laɪk duɪŋ wʌt sʌmwʌn ɛls hæd plæn aʊt, ən ʃi nɛvɝ lɛɾ ɛnibəɾi tɛl əɹ wʌt tə du. ɪksɛp meɪbi ðə wɪzdəm, ən i θɔt səmtaɪmz ʃi bɔkt ət ðæt. hi smuðd ðə dɝɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm wɪð ɪz hæn ən klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt ɹʌfli.

He blinked in surprise. She was waiting for his answer. Waiting for him to tell her what to do. It had never occurred to him that she would look to him to take the lead. Egwene never liked doing what someone else had planned out, and she never let anybody tell her what to do. Except maybe the Wisdom, and he thought sometimes she balked at that. He smoothed the dirt in front of him with his hand and cleared his throat roughly.

"ɪf ðɪs ɪz wɛɹ wəɹ naʊ, ən ðəɾ ɪz waɪtbɹɪdʒ," hi stæb ðə ɡɹaʊn twaɪs wɪð ɪz fɪŋɡɝ, "ðɛn keɪɛmlɪn ʃəd bi sʌmwɛɹ ɝaʊn hɪɹ." hi meɪɾ ə θɝd mɑɹk, ɔf tə ðə saɪd.

"If this is where we are now, and that is Whitebridge," he stabbed the ground twice with his finger, "then Caemlyn should be somewhere around here." He made a third mark, off to the side.

hi pɔzd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə θɹi dɑts ɪn ðə dɝt. hɪz ɪntaɪɝ plæn wɑz beɪst ɑn wʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ə hɝ fɑðɝz oʊl mæp. mæstɝ ælvɪɹ sɛɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt tu ækjɝət, ænd, ɛniweɪ, hi hæd nɛvɝ mun oʊvɝ ɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ɹænd ən mæt. bʌɾ ɛɡwin sɛd nʌθɪŋ. wən i lʊkt ʌp, ʃi wɑz stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm wɪð əɹ hænz ɪn əɹ læp.

He paused, looking at the three dots in the dirt. His entire plan was based on what he remembered of her father's old map. Master al'Vere said it was not too accurate, and, anyway, he had never mooned over it as much as Rand and Mat. But Egwene said nothing. When he looked up, she was still watching him with her hands in her lap.

"keɪɛmlɪn?" ʃi saʊndəd stʌnd.

"Caemlyn?" She sounded stunned.

"keɪɛmlɪn." hi dʒɹu ə laɪn ɪn ðə dɝt bɪtwin tu ʌv ðə dɑts. "əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ, ən stʃɹeɪɾ əkɹɔs. noʊbɑdi wəɾ ɪkspɛk ðæt. wɪl weɪt fəɹ əm ɪn keɪɛmlɪn." hi dʌstɪɾ ɪz hænz ən weɪɾəd. hi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd plæn, bʌt ʃʊɹli ʃi wəɾ əv əbdʒɛkʃənz naʊ. hi ɪkspɛktəd ʃi wəd teɪk tʃɑɹdʒ - ʃi wɑz ɔlweɪz bʊliɪŋ ɪm ɪndə sʌmθɪŋ - ən ðət wɑz ɔl ɹaɪt wɪð hɪm.

"Caemlyn." He drew a line in the dirt between two of the dots. "Away from the river, and straight across. Nobody would expect that. We'll wait for them in Caemlyn." He dusted his hands and waited. He thought it was a good plan, but surely she would have objections now. He expected she would take charge - she was always bullying him into something - and that was all right with him.

tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ʃi nɑɾəd. "ðɛɹ mʌs bi vɪlədʒəz. wi kən æsk dɝɛkʃənz."

To his surprise, she nodded. "There must be villages. We can ask directions."

"wʌt wɝiz mi," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "ɪz wʌt wi də ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dʌzn faɪn əs ðɛɹ. laɪt, huɾ ɛvɝ əv θɔɾ aɪd wɝi əbaʊt sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt? wʌɾ ɪf ʃi dʌzn kʌm tə keɪɛmlɪn? meɪbi ʃi θɪŋks wɝ dɛd. meɪbi ʃɪl teɪk ɹænd ən mæt stʃɹeɪt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"What worries me," Perrin said, "is what we do if the Aes Sedai doesn't find us there. Light, who'd ever have thought I'd worry about something like that? What if she doesn't come to Caemlyn? Maybe she thinks we're dead. Maybe she'll take Rand and Mat straight to Tar Valon."

"mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛd ʃi kəd faɪn ʌs," ɛɡwin sɛd fɝmli. "ɪf ʃi kən faɪn əs hɪɹ, ʃi kən faɪn əs ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ən ʃi wɪl."

"Moiraine Sedai said she could find us," Egwene said firmly. "If she can find us here, she can find us in Caemlyn, and she will."

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd sloʊli. "ɪf jə seɪ soʊ, bʌɾ ɪf ʃi dʌzn əpɪɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ɪn ə fju deɪz, wi ɡoʊ ɑn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən pʊɾ əɹ keɪs bɪfɔɹ ði æmɪɝlɪn sit." hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. tu wiks əɡoʊ jud nɛvɝ ivən sin ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən naʊ jəɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. laɪt! "əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə læn, ðɛɹz ə ɡʊd ɹoʊd fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn." hi lʊkt ət ði ɔɪl peɪpɝ pækət bɪsaɪɾ ɛɡwin ən klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "wʌt tʃæns ʌv ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz?"

Perrin nodded slowly. "If you say so, but if she doesn't appear in Caemlyn in a few days, we go on to Tar Valon and put our case before the Amyrlin Seat." He took a deep breath. Two weeks ago you'd never even seen an Aes Sedai, and now you're talking about the Amyrlin Seat. Light! "According to Lan, there's a good road from Caemlyn." He looked at the oiled paper packet beside Egwene and cleared his throat. "What chance of a little more bread and cheese?"

"ðɪs maɪɾ əv tə læst ə lɔŋ taɪm," ʃi sɛd, "ənlɛs juv bɛɾɝ lʌk wɪð snɛɹz ðən aɪ dɪd læs naɪt. ət lis ðə faɪɝ wɑz izi." ʃi læf sɔfli əz ɪf ʃi hæd meɪɾ ə dʒoʊk, tʌkɪŋ ðə pækət bæk ɪndə hɝ sæɾəlbæɡz.

"This might have to last a long time," she said, "unless you have better luck with snares than I did last night. At least the fire was easy." She laughed softly as if she had made a joke, tucking the packet back into her saddlebags.

əpɛɹənli ðəɹ wɝ lɪməts tə haʊ mʌtʃ liɾɝʃɪp ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə æksɛpt. hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld. "ɪn ðət keɪs," hi sɛd, stændɪŋ, "wi maɪɾ əz wɛl stɑɹt naʊ."

Apparently there were limits to how much leadership she was willing to accept. His stomach rumbled. "In that case," he said, standing, "we might as well start now."

"bʌt jəɹ stɪl wɛt," ʃi pɹətɛstəd.

"But you're still wet," she protested.

"aɪl wɔk maɪsɛlf dʒɹaɪ," hi sɛd fɝmli, ən bɪɡæn kɪkɪŋ dɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə faɪɝ. ɪf i wɑz ðə liɾɝ, ɪt wɑz taɪm tə stɑɹt liɾɪŋ. ðə wɪn fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ wɑz pɪkɪŋ ʌp.

"I'll walk myself dry," he said firmly, and began kicking dirt over the fire. If he was the leader, it was time to start leading. The wind from the river was picking up.


tʃæptɝ twɛntiθɹi


CHAPTER 23

wʊlfbɹəðɝ


Wolfbrother

fɹəm ðə stɑɹt pɛɹɪn nu ðə dʒɝni tə keɪɛmlɪn wɑz gɑnə bi fɑɹ fɹəm kʌmftəɹbəl, bɪɡɪnɪŋ wɪð ɛɡwinz ɪnsɪstəns ðət ðeɪ teɪk tɝnz ɹaɪɾɪŋ bɛlə. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ fɑɹ ɪt wɑz, ʃi sɛd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tu fɑɹ fəɹ əɹ tə bi ði oʊnli wʌn u ɹoʊd. hɝ dʒɔ fɝmd, ən əɹ aɪz stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm ənblɪŋkɪŋ.

From the start Perrin knew the journey to Caemlyn was going to be far from comfortable, beginning with Egwene's insistence that they take turns riding Bela. They did not know how far it was, she said, but it was too far for her to be the only one who rode. Her jaw firmed, and her eyes stared at him unblinking.

"aɪm tu bɪɡ tə ɹaɪd bɛlə," hi sɛd. "aɪm juz tə wɔkɪŋ, ən aɪd ɹæðɝ."

"I'm too big to ride Bela," he said. "I'm used to walking, and I'd rather."

"æn aɪm nɑt juz tə wɔkɪŋ?" ɛɡwin sɛd ʃɑɹpli.

"And I am not used to walking?" Egwene said sharply.

"ðæɾ ɪzənt wʌɾ aɪ - "

"That isn't what I - "

"ɪm ði oʊnli wʌn huz səpoʊz tə ɡɛt sæɾəlsɔɹ, ɪz ðəɾ ɪt? ən wən jə wɔk tɪl jəɹ fiɾ ɑɹ ɹɛɾi tə fɔl ɔf, jəl ɪkspɛk mi tə lʊk æftɝ ju."

"I'm the only one who's supposed to get saddlesore, is that it? And when you walk till your feet are ready to fall off, you'll expect me to look after you."

"lɛɾ ɪt bi," hi bɹiðd wən ʃi lʊk laɪk ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "ɛniweɪ, jəl teɪk ðə fɝs tɝn." hɝ feɪs tɝn ivən mɔɹ stʌbɝn, bʌɾ i ɹəfjuz tə lɛɾ əɹ ɡɛɾ ə wɝɾ ɪn ɛdʒwaɪz. "ɪf jə woʊnt ɡɛɾ ɪn ðə sæɾəl baɪ jɝsɛlf, əl pʊt jə ðɛɹ."

"Let it be," he breathed when she looked like going on. "Anyway, you'll take the first turn." Her face turned even more stubborn, but he refused to let her get a word in edgewise. "If you won't get in the saddle by yourself, I'll put you there."

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə stɑɹɾəld lʊk, ən ə smɔl smaɪl kɝvd əɹ lɪps. "ɪn ðət keɪs. . . ." ʃi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɝ əbaʊt tə læf, bʌt ʃi klaɪmd ʌp.

She gave him a startled look, and a small smile curved her lips. "In that case. . . ." She sounded as if she were about to laugh, but she climbed up.

hi ɡɹʌmbəl tə hɪmsɛlf əz i tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ. liɾɝz ɪn stɔɹiz nɛvɝ hæd tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðɪs sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ.

He grumbled to himself as he turned away from the river. Leaders in stories never had to put up with this sort of thing.

ɛɡwin dɪɾ ɪnsɪst ɑn ɪm teɪkɪŋ ɪz tɝnz, ən wɛnɛvɝ i tʃɹaɪd tə əvɔɪɾ ɪt, ʃi bʊliɾ ɪm ɪndə ðə sæɾəl. blæksmɪθɪŋ dɪd nɑt lɛn ɪtsɛlf tə ə slɛndɝ bɪld, ən bɛlə wɑz nɑt vɛɹi lɑɹdʒ əz hɔɹsəz wɛnt. ɛvɹi taɪm i pʊɾ ɪz fʊɾ ɪn ðə stɝəp ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ lʊkt əɾ ɪm wɪð wʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ wɑz ɹipɹoʊtʃ. smɔl θɪŋz, pɝhæps, bʌt ðeɪ ɪɹəteɪɾəd. sun i flɪntʃt wɛnɛvɝ ɛɡwin ənaʊnst, "ɪts jəɹ tɝn, pɛɹɪn."

Egwene did insist on him taking his turns, and whenever he tried to avoid it, she bullied him into the saddle. Blacksmithing did not lend itself to a slender build, and Bela was not very large as horses went. Every time he put his foot in the stirrup the shaggy mare looked at him with what he was sure was reproach. Small things, perhaps, but they irritated. Soon he flinched whenever Egwene announced, "It's your turn, Perrin."

ɪn stɔɹiz liɾɝz sɛldəm flɪntʃt, ən ðeɪ wɝ nɛvɝ bʊlid. bʌt, hi ɹəflɛktəd, ðeɪ nɛvɝ hæd tə dil wɪð ɛɡwin, iðɝ.

In stories leaders seldom flinched, and they were never bullied. But, he reflected, they never had to deal with Egwene, either.

ðəɹ wɝ oʊnli ʃɔɹt ɹæʃənz ə bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz tə bɪɡɪn wɪð, ən wʌt ðəɹ wɑz ɡeɪv aʊt baɪ ði ɛn ə ðə fɝs deɪ. pɛɹɪn sɛt snɛɹz əlɔŋ laɪkli ɹæbət ɹʌnz - ðeɪ lʊkt oʊld, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz wɝθ ə tʃæns - waɪl ɛɡwin bɪɡæn leɪɪŋ ə faɪɝ. wən i wɑz dʌn, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə tʃɹaɪ hɪz hænd wɪð ɪz slɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə laɪt feɪld ɔltəɡɛðɝ. ðeɪ hæd nɑt sin ə saɪn ʌv ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl əlaɪv, bʌt. . . . tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, hi dʒʌmpt ə skɹɔni ɹæbəɾ ɔlmoʊst ət wʌns. hi wɑz soʊ sɝpɹaɪzd wən ɪt bɝs fɹəm ʌndɝ ə bʊʃ ɹaɪt bɪniθ ɪz fit ðəɾ ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst ɡɑɾ əweɪ, bʌɾ i fɛtʃt ɪɾ ət fɔɹɾi peɪsɪz, dʒʌst əz ɪt wɑz dɑɹɾɪŋ ɝaʊn ə tʃɹi.

There were only short rations of bread and cheese to begin with, and what there was gave out by the end of the first day. Perrin set snares along likely rabbit runs - they looked old, but it was worth a chance - while Egwene began laying a fire. When he was done, he decided to try his hand with his sling before the light failed altogether. They had not seen a sign of anything at all alive, but. . . . To his surprise, he jumped a scrawny rabbit almost at once. He was so surprised when it burst from under a bush right beneath his feet that it almost got away, but he fetched it at forty paces, just as it was darting around a tree.

wən i keɪm bæk tə ðə kæmp wɪð ðə ɹæbət, ɛɡwin hæd bɹoʊkən lɪmz ɔl leɪd fəɹ ðə faɪɝ, bʌt ʃi wɑz nilɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə paɪl wɪð əɹ aɪz kloʊzd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ? jə kænt wɪʃ ə faɪɝ."

When he came back to the camp with the rabbit, Egwene had broken limbs all laid for the fire, but she was kneeling beside the pile with her eyes closed. "What are you doing? You can't wish a fire."

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə dʒʌmp əɾ ɪz fɝst wɝdz, ən twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn tə stɛɹ əɾ ɪm wɪð ə hæn tə hɝ θɹoʊt. "ju . . . jə stɑɹɾəld mi."

Egwene gave a jump at his first words, and twisted around to stare at him with a hand to her throat. "You . . . you startled me."

"aɪ wɑz lʌki," hi sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹæbət. "ɡɛt jəɹ flɪn ən stil. wi it wɛl tənaɪt, ət list."

"I was lucky," he said, holding up the rabbit. "Get your flint and steel. We eat well tonight, at least."

"aɪ doʊn əv ə flɪnt," ʃi sɛd sloʊli. "ɪt wɑz ɪn maɪ pɑkət, ən aɪ lɔst ɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ."

"I don't have a flint," she said slowly. "It was in my pocket, and I lost it in the river."

"ðɛn haʊ . . . ?"

"Then how . . . ?"

"ɪt wɑz soʊ izi bæk ðəɹ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk, pɛɹɪn. dʒʌs ðə weɪ mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ ʃoʊd mi. aɪ dʒʌst ɹitʃt aʊt, ænd. . . ." ʃi dʒɛstʃɝɾ əz ɪf ɡɹæspɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ, ðən lɛɾ əɹ hæn fɔl wɪð ə saɪ. "aɪ kæn faɪn ɪt, naʊ."

"It was so easy back there on the riverbank, Perrin. Just the way Moiraine Sedai showed me. I just reached out, and. . . ." She gestured as if grasping for something, then let her hand fall with a sigh. "I can't find it, now."

pɛɹɪn lɪkt ɪz lɪps ənizəli. "ðə . . . ðə paʊɝ?" ʃi nɑɾəd, ən i stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. "ɑɹ jə kɹeɪzi? aɪ min . . . ðə wʌn paʊɝ! jə kæn dʒʌs pleɪ ɝaʊnd wɪð sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt."

Perrin licked his lips uneasily. "The . . . the Power?" She nodded, and he stared at her. "Are you crazy? I mean . . . the One Power! You can't just play around with something like that."

"ɪt wɑz soʊ izi, pɛɹɪn. aɪ kən də ɪt. aɪ kən tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ."

"It was so easy, Perrin. I can do it. I can channel the Power."

hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪl meɪk ə faɪɝboʊ, ɛɡwin. pɹɑməs jə woʊn tʃɹaɪ ðɪs . . . ðɪs . . . θɪŋ əɡɛn."

He took a deep breath. "I'll make a firebow, Egwene. Promise you won't try this . . . this . . . thing again."

"aɪ wɪl nɑt." hɝ dʒɔ fɝmd ɪn ə weɪ ðət meɪɾ ɪm saɪ. "wʊd jə ɡɪv ʌp ðəɾ æks ə jʊɹz, pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə? wəd jə wɔk ɝaʊnd wɪð wʌn hæn taɪd bɪhaɪn jəɹ bæk? aɪ woʊn də ɪt!"

"I will not." Her jaw firmed in a way that made him sigh. "Would you give up that axe of yours, Perrin Aybara? Would you walk around with one hand tied behind your back? I won't do it!"

"aɪl meɪk ðə faɪɝboʊ," hi sɛd wɛɹəli. "æt list, doʊn tʃɹaɪ ɪɾ əɡɛn tənaɪt? pliz?"

"I'll make the firebow," he said wearily. "At least, don't try it again tonight? Please?"

ʃi ækwiɛst ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli, ən ivən æftɝ ðə ɹæbət wɑz ɹoʊstɪŋ ɑn ə spɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə fleɪmz, hi hæd ðə filɪŋ ʃi fɛlt ʃi cʊɾə dʌn ɪt bɛɾɝ. ʃi wəd nɑt ɡɪv ʌp tʃɹaɪɪŋ, iðɝ, ɛvɹi naɪt, ðoʊ ðə bɛst ʃi ɛvɝ dɪd wɑz ə tʃɹɪkəl ə smoʊk ðət vænɪʃt ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli. hɝ aɪz dɛɹɾ ɪm tə seɪ ə wɝd, ən i waɪzli kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt.

She acquiesced grudgingly, and even after the rabbit was roasting on a spit over the flames, he had the feeling she felt she could have done it better. She would not give up trying, either, every night, though the best she ever did was a trickle of smoke that vanished almost immediately. Her eyes dared him to say a word, and he wisely kept his mouth shut.

æftɝ ðət wʌn hɑt mil, ðeɪ səbsɪstɪɾ ɑn kɔɹs waɪl təbɝz ən ə fju jʌŋ ʃuts. wɪð stɪl noʊ saɪn ə spɹɪŋ, nʌn ʌv ɪt wɑz plɛntəfəl, ən nʌn ʌv ɪt teɪsti, iðɝ. niðɝ kəmpleɪnd, bʌt nɑɾ ə mil pæst wɪθaʊt wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ saɪɪŋ ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli, ən ðeɪ boʊθ nu ɪt wɑz fəɹ ðə tæŋ ʌv ə bɪɾ ə tʃiz, əɹ ivən ðə smɛl ə bɹɛd. ə faɪn ə mʌʃɹumz - kwinz kɹaʊnz, ðə bɛst - wʌn æftɝnun ɪn ə ʃeɪɾi pɑɹɾ ə ðə fɔɹəst wɑz ɪnʌf tə sim ə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹit. ðeɪ ɡɑbəld əm daʊn, læfɪŋ ən tɛlɪŋ stɔɹiz fɹəm bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild, stɔɹiz ðət bɪɡæn, "du jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ wən - " bʌt ðə mʌʃɹumz dɪd nɑt læs lɔŋ, ən niðɝ dɪd ðə læftɝ. ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl mɝθ ɪn hʌŋɡɝ.

After that one hot meal, they subsisted on coarse wild tubers and a few young shoots. With still no sign of spring, none of it was plentiful, and none of it tasty, either. Neither complained, but not a meal passed without one or the other sighing regretfully, and they both knew it was for the tang of a bit of cheese, or even the smell of bread. A find of mushrooms - Queen's Crowns, the best - one afternoon in a shady part of the forest was enough to seem a great treat. They gobbled them down, laughing and telling stories from back in Emond's Field, stories that began, "Do you remember when - " but the mushrooms did not last long, and neither did the laughter. There was little mirth in hunger.

wɪtʃɛvɝ wɑz wɔkɪŋ kæɹiɾ ə slɪŋ, ɹɛɾi tə lɛt flaɪ ət ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə ɹæbəɾ əɹ skwɝəl, bʌt ði oʊnli taɪm iðɝ hɝld ə stoʊn wɑz ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. ðə snɛɹz ðeɪ sɛt soʊ kɛɹfəli itʃ ivnɪŋ jildəd nʌθɪŋ ət dɔn, ən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt dɛɹ steɪ ə deɪ ɪn wʌn pleɪs tə liv ðə snɛɹz aʊt. niðɝ ə ðɛm nu haʊ fɑɹ ɪt wɑz tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən niðɝ wəd fil seɪf əntɪl ðeɪ ɡɑt ðɛɹ, ɪf ðɛn. pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn tə wʌndɝ ɪf ɪz stʌmək kəd ʃɹɪŋk ɪnʌf tə meɪk ə hoʊl ɔl ðə weɪ θɹu hɪz mɪɾəl.

Whichever was walking carried a sling, ready to let fly at the sight of a rabbit or squirrel, but the only time either hurled a stone was in frustration. The snares they set so carefully each evening yielded nothing at dawn, and they did not dare stay a day in one place to leave the snares out. Neither of them knew how far it was to Caemlyn, and neither would feel safe until they got there, if then. Perrin began to wonder if his stomach could shrink enough to make a hole all the way through his middle.

ðeɪ meɪd ɡʊd taɪm, əz i sɔ ɪt, bʌɾ əz ðeɪ ɡɑt fɑɹðɝ ən fɑɹðɝ fɹəm ði ɑɹɪnɛl wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ə vɪlədʒ, əɹ ivən ə fɑɹmhaʊs wɛɹ ðeɪ kəɾ æsk dɝɛkʃənz, hɪz daʊts əbaʊɾ ɪz oʊn plæn ɡɹu. ɛɡwin kəntɪnjud tə əpɪɹ aʊtwɝdli əz kɑnfəɾənt əz wən ðeɪ sɛɾ aʊt, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ʃi wəd seɪ ɪt wʊɾə bɪn bɛɾɝ tə ɹɪsk ðə tʃɹɑləks ðən tə wɑndɝ ɝaʊn lɔs fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛɹ lɪvz. ʃi nɛvɝ dɪd, bʌɾ i kɛpt ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɪt.

They made good time, as he saw it, but as they got farther and farther from the Arinelle without seeing a village, or even a farmhouse where they could ask directions, his doubts about his own plan grew. Egwene continued to appear outwardly as confident as when they set out, but he was sure that sooner or later she would say it would have been better to risk the Trollocs than to wander around lost for the rest of their lives. She never did, but he kept expecting it.

tu deɪz fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ ðə læn tʃeɪnʒd tə θɪkli fɔɹəstəd hɪlz, əz ɡɹɪp baɪ ðə teɪl ɛn ʌv wɪntɝ əz ɛvɹiwɛɹ ɛls, ən ə deɪ æftɝ ðət ðə hɪlz flæɾənd aʊɾ əɡɛn, ðə dɛns fɔɹəs bɹoʊkən baɪ ɡleɪdz, ɔfən ə maɪl əɹ mɔɹ əkɹɔs. snoʊ stɪl leɪ ɪn hɪɾən hɑloʊz, ən ði ɛɹ wɑz bɹɪsk ʌv ə mɔɹnɪŋ, ən ðə wɪn koʊld ɔlweɪz. noʊwɛɹ dɪd ðeɪ si ə ɹoʊd, əɹ ə plaʊd fild, əɹ tʃɪmni smoʊk ɪn ðə dɪstəns, əɹ ɛni ʌðɝ saɪn ə hjumən hæbəteɪʃən - ət list, nʌn wɛɹ mɛn stɪl dwɛlt.

Two days from the river the land changed to thickly forested hills, as gripped by the tail end of winter as everywhere else, and a day after that the hills flattened out again, the dense forest broken by glades, often a mile or more across. Snow still lay in hidden hollows, and the air was brisk of a morning, and the wind cold always. Nowhere did they see a road, or a plowed field, or chimney smoke in the distance, or any other sign of human habitation - at least, none where men still dwelt.

wʌns ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ə tɔl stoʊn ɹæmpɑɹts ɪnsɝkəld ə hɪltɑp. pɑɹts ə ɹufləs stoʊn haʊsəz stʊɾ ɪnsaɪd ðə fɔlən sɝkəl. ðə fɔɹəs hæd lɔŋ swɑloʊɾ ɪt; tʃɹiz ɡɹu ɹaɪt θɹu ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ən spaɪɾɝwɛbz ʌv oʊl kɹipɝ ɛnvɛləp ðə bɪɡ stoʊn blɑks. ənʌðɝ taɪm ðeɪ keɪm ɑn ə stoʊn taʊɝ, bɹoʊkən-tɑpt ən bɹaʊn wɪð oʊl mɔs, linɪŋ ɑn ðə hjudʒ oʊk huz θɪk ɹuts wɝ sloʊli tɑpəlɪŋ ɪt. bʌt ðeɪ faʊnd noʊ pleɪs wɛɹ mɛn hæd bɹiðd ɪn lɪvɪŋ ɹimɛmbɹəns. mɛmɹiz ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ kɛpt əm əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹuənz ən hɝid ðɛɹ fʊtstɛps əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ wʌns mɔɹ dip ɪn pleɪsəz ðət sim nɛvɝ tə hæv noʊn ə hjumən fʊtstɛp.

Once the remains of tall stone ramparts encircled a hilltop. Parts of roofless stone houses stood inside the fallen circle. The forest had long swallowed it; trees grew right through everything, and spiderwebs of old creeper enveloped the big stone blocks. Another time they came on a stone tower, broken-topped and brown with old moss, leaning on the huge oak whose thick roots were slowly toppling it. But they found no place where men had breathed in living remembrance. Memories of Shadar Logoth kept them away from the ruins and hurried their footsteps until they were once more deep in places that seemed never to have known a human footstep.

dʒɹimz pleɪɡd pɛɹɪnz slip, fɪɹfəl dʒɹimz. bælzəmən wɑz ɪn ðɛm, tʃeɪsɪŋ ɪm θɹu meɪzɪz, hʌntɪŋ hɪm, bʌt pɛɹɪn nɛvɝ mɛɾ ɪm feɪs-tə-feɪs, soʊ fɑɹ əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd. ən ðɛɹ dʒɝni hæd bɪn ɪnʌf tə bɹɪŋ ə fju bæd dʒɹimz. ɛɡwin kəmpleɪn ə naɪtmɛɹz əbaʊt ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, ɪspɛʃli ðə tu naɪts æftɝ ðeɪ faʊn ðə ɹuən fɔɹɾ ən ði əbændən taʊɝ. pɛɹɪn kɛpt ɪz oʊn kaʊnsəl ivən wən i woʊk swɛɾɪŋ ən ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹk. ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ tə hɪm tə liɾ əm seɪfli tə keɪɛmlɪn, nɑt ʃɛɹ wɝiz əbaʊt wɪtʃ ðeɪ kəd də nʌθɪŋ.

Dreams plagued Perrin's sleep, fearful dreams. Ba'alzamon was in them, chasing him through mazes, hunting him, but Perrin never met him face-to-face, so far as he remembered. And their journey had been enough to bring a few bad dreams. Egwene complained of nightmares about Shadar Logoth, especially the two nights after they found the ruined fort and the abandoned tower. Perrin kept his own counsel even when he woke sweating and shaking in the dark. She was looking to him to lead them safely to Caemlyn, not share worries about which they could do nothing.

hi wɑz wɔkɪŋ ət bɛləz hɛd, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðeɪ wəd faɪn ɛniθɪŋ tə it ðɪs ivnɪŋ, wən i fɝs kɑt ðə smɛl. ðə mɛɹ flɛɹɾ əɹ nɑstʃɹəlz ən swʌŋ əɹ hɛɾ ɪn ðə nɛks moʊmənt. hi sizd əɹ bɹaɪɾəl bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd wɪkɝ.

He was walking at Bela's head, wondering if they would find anything to eat this evening, when he first caught the smell. The mare flared her nostrils and swung her head in the next moment. He seized her bridle before she could whicker.

"ðæts smoʊk," ɛɡwin sɛɾ ɪksaɪɾədli. ʃi lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ðə sæɾəl, dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. "ə kʊkfaɪɝ. sʌmbɑɾi ɪz ɹoʊstɪŋ dɪnɝ. ɹæbət."

"That's smoke," Egwene said excitedly. She leaned forward in the saddle, drew a deep breath. "A cookfire. Somebody is roasting dinner. Rabbit."

"meɪbi," pɛɹɪn sɛd kɔʃəsli, ən əɹ iɡɝ smaɪl feɪɾəd. hi ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɪz slɪŋ fəɹ ðə wɪkəd hæf-mun ə ði æks. hɪz hænz oʊpən ən kloʊzd ənsɝteɪnli ɑn ðə θɪk hæft. ɪt wɑz ə wɛpən, bʌt niðɝ ɪz hɪɾən pɹæktəs bɪhaɪn ðə fɔɹdʒ nɔɹ lænz titʃɪŋz hæd ɹɪli pɹipɛɹɾ ɪm tə juz ɪɾ əz wʌn. ivən ðə bæɾəl bɪfɔɹ ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ wɑz tu veɪɡ ɪn ɪz maɪn tə ɡɪv ɪm ɛni kɑnfəɾəns. hi kəd nɛvɝ kwaɪt mænədʒ ðət vɔɪd ðət ɹænd ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ tɔkt əbaʊt, iðɝ.

"Maybe," Perrin said cautiously, and her eager smile faded. He exchanged his sling for the wicked half-moon of the axe. His hands opened and closed uncertainly on the thick haft. It was a weapon, but neither his hidden practice behind the forge nor Lan's teachings had really prepared him to use it as one. Even the battle before Shadar Logoth was too vague in his mind to give him any confidence. He could never quite manage that void that Rand and the Warder talked about, either.

sʌnlaɪt slæntəd θɹu ðə tʃɹiz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən ðə fɔɹəst wɑz ə stɪl mæs ə dæpəld ʃædoʊz. ðə feɪn smɛl ʌv wʊdzmoʊk dʒɹɪftəɾ ɝaʊn ðɛm, tɪŋd wɪð ði ɝoʊmə ʌv kʊkɪŋ mit. ɪt kəd bi ɹæbət, hi θɔt, ən ɪz stʌmək ɡɹʌmbəld. ən ɪt kəd bi sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, hi ɹimaɪndəd hɪmsɛlf. hi lʊkt əɾ ɛɡwin; ʃi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. ðəɹ wɝ ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾiz tə biɪŋ liɾɝ.

Sunlight slanted through the trees behind them, and the forest was a still mass of dappled shadows. The faint smell of woodsmoke drifted around them, tinged with the aroma of cooking meat. It could be rabbit, he thought, and his stomach grumbled. And it could be something else, he reminded himself. He looked at Egwene; she was watching him. There were responsibilities to being leader.

"weɪt hɪɹ," hi sɛd sɔfli. ʃi fɹaʊnd, bʌɾ i kʌɾ əɹ ɔf əz ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ. "æn bi kwaɪət! wi doʊnt noʊ hu ɪɾ ɪz, jɛt." ʃi nɑɾəd. ɹɪlʌktənli, bʌt ʃi dɪɾ ɪt. pɛɹɪn wʌndɝd waɪ ðət dɪd nɑt wɝk wən i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk əɹ teɪk ɪz tɝn ɹaɪɾɪŋ. dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə sɔɹs ə ðə smoʊk.

"Wait here," he said softly. She frowned, but he cut her off as she opened her mouth. "And be quiet! We don't know who it is, yet." She nodded. Reluctantly, but she did it. Perrin wondered why that did not work when he was trying to make her take his turn riding. Drawing a deep breath, he started for the source of the smoke.

hi hæd nɑt spɛn əz mʌtʃ taɪm ɪn ðə fɔɹəsts ɝaʊn ɛmənz fild əz ɹænd əɹ mæt, bʌt stɪl i hæd dʌn ɪz ʃɛɹ ə hʌntɪŋ ɹæbəts. hi kɹɛp fɹəm tʃɹi tə tʃɹi wɪθaʊt soʊ mʌtʃ əz snæpɪŋ ə twɪɡ. ɪt wɑz nɑt lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ i wɑz piɹɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə boʊl ʌv ə tɔl oʊk wɪð spɹɛɾɪŋ, sɝpəntaɪn lɪmz ðət bɛn tə tʌtʃ ðə ɡɹaʊn ðən ɹoʊz əɡɛn. bɪɑn leɪ ə kæmpfaɪɝ, ən ə lin, sʌn-bɹaʊn mæn wɑz linɪŋ əɡɛnst wʌn ə ðə lɪmz nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ðə fleɪmz.

He had not spent as much time in the forests around Emond's Field as Rand or Mat, but still he had done his share of hunting rabbits. He crept from tree to tree without so much as snapping a twig. It was not long before he was peering around the bole of a tall oak with spreading, serpentine limbs that bent to touch the ground then rose again. Beyond lay a campfire, and a lean, sun-browned man was leaning against one of the limbs not far from the flames.

ət list i wɑz nɑɾ ə tʃɹɑlɑk, bʌɾ i wɑz ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɪst fɛloʊ pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ, hɪz kloʊðz ɔl sim tə bi meɪd fɹəm ænəməl skɪnz, wɪð ðə fɝ stɪl ɑn, ivən ɪz buts ən ði ɑd, flæt-tɑpt ɹaʊn kæp ɑn ɪz hɛd. hɪz kloʊk wɑz ə kɹeɪzi kwɪlt ə ɹæbəɾ ən skwɝəl; hɪz tʃɹaʊzɝz əpɪɹd tə bi meɪd fɹəm ðə lɔŋ-hɛɹd haɪɾ ʌv ə bɹaʊn ən waɪt ɡoʊt. ɡæðɝɾ ət ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk wɪð ə kɔɹd, hɪz ɡɹeɪɪŋ bɹaʊn hɛɹ hʌŋ tə hɪz weɪst. ə θɪk bɪɹd fæn əkɹɔs hæf ɪz tʃɛst. ə lɔŋ naɪf hʌŋ əɾ ɪz bɛlt, ɔlmoʊst ə sɔɹd, ən ə baʊ ən kwɪvɝ stʊd pɹɑpt əɡɛnst ə lɪm kloʊs tə hænd.

At least he was not a Trolloc, but he was the strangest fellow Perrin had ever seen. For one thing, his clothes all seemed to be made from animal skins, with the fur still on, even his boots and the odd, flat-topped round cap on his head. His cloak was a crazy quilt of rabbit and squirrel; his trousers appeared to be made from the long-haired hide of a brown and white goat. Gathered at the back of his neck with a cord, his graying brown hair hung to his waist. A thick beard fanned across half his chest. A long knife hung at his belt, almost a sword, and a bow and quiver stood propped against a limb close to hand.

ðə mæn lin bæk wɪð ɪz aɪz kloʊzd, əpɛɹənli əslip, bʌt pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt stɝ fɹəm ɪz kənsilmənt. sɪks stɪks slæntəɾ oʊvɝ ðə fɛloʊz faɪɝ, ən ɑn itʃ stɪk ə ɹæbət wɑz skjuɝd, ɹoʊstəd bɹaʊn ən naʊ ən ðən dʒɹɪpɪŋ dʒus ðət hɪst ɪn ðə fleɪmz. ðə smɛl ə ðɛm, soʊ kloʊs, meɪɾ ɪz maʊθ wɔɾɝ.

The man leaned back with his eyes closed, apparently asleep, but Perrin did not stir from his concealment. Six sticks slanted over the fellow's fire, and on each stick a rabbit was skewered, roasted brown and now and then dripping juice that hissed in the flames. The smell of them, so close, made his mouth water.

"ju dʌn dʒɹulɪŋ?" ðə mæn oʊpənd wʌn aɪ ən kɑkt ɪɾ ət pɛɹɪnz haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs. "ju ən jəɹ fɹɛn maɪɾ əz wɛl sɪɾ ən əv ə baɪt. aɪ hævən sin jə it mʌtʃ ðə læs kʌpəl ə deɪz."

"You done drooling?" The man opened one eye and cocked it at Perrin's hiding place. "You and your friend might as well sit and have a bite. I haven't seen you eat much the last couple of days."

pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən stʊd sloʊli, stɪl ɡɹɪpɪŋ ɪz æks taɪtli. "juv bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ mi fəɹ tu deɪz?"

Perrin hesitated, then stood slowly, still gripping his axe tightly. "You've been watching me for two days?"

ðə mæn tʃʌkəl dip ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. "jɛs, aɪ bɪn wɑtʃɪŋ ju. ən ðət pɹɪɾi ɡɝl. pʊʃəz jə ɝaʊn laɪk ə bæntəm ɹustɝ, dʌznt ʃi? hɝd ju, moʊsli. ðə hɔɹs ɪz ði oʊnli wʌn ə jə dʌzn tʃɹæmpəl ɝaʊn laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə bi hɝd faɪv maɪlz ɔf. jə gɑnə æsk əɹ ɪn, əɹ ɑɹ jə ɪntɛndɪŋ tə iɾ ɔl ðə ɹæbət jɝsɛlf?"

The man chuckled deep in his throat. "Yes, I been watching you. And that pretty girl. Pushes you around like a bantam rooster, doesn't she? Heard you, mostly. The horse is the only one of you doesn't trample around loud enough to be heard five miles off. You going to ask her in, or are you intending to eat all the rabbit yourself?"

pɛɹɪn bɹɪsəld; hi nu hi dɪd nɑt meɪk mʌtʃ nɔɪz. jə kəd nɑt ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə ə ɹæbəɾ ɪn ðə wɔɾɝwʊd tə fɛtʃ ɪt wɪð ə slɪŋ ɪf jə meɪd nɔɪz. bʌt ðə smɛl ə ɹæbət meɪɾ ɪm ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz hʌŋɡɹi, tu, nɑt tə mɛnʃən weɪɾɪŋ tə dɪskʌvɝ ɪf ɪt wɑz ə tʃɹɑlɑk faɪɝ ðeɪ hæd smɛld.

Perrin bristled; he knew he did not make much noise. You could not get close enough to a rabbit in the Waterwood to fetch it with a sling if you made noise. But the smell of rabbit made him remember that Egwene was hungry, too, not to mention waiting to discover if it was a Trolloc fire they had smelled.

hi slɪp ðə hæft ə hɪz æks θɹu ðə bɛlt lup ən ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs. "ɛɡwin! ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt! ɪts ɹæbət!" ɔfɝɪŋ ɪz hænd, hi æɾəd ɪn ə mɔɹ nɔɹməl toʊn, "maɪ neɪm ɪz pɛɹɪn. pɛɹɪn eɪbɑɹə."

He slipped the haft of his axe through the belt loop and raised his voice. "Egwene! It's all right! It is rabbit!" Offering his hand, he added in a more normal tone, "My name is Perrin. Perrin Aybara."

ðə mæn kənsɪɾɝd ɪz hæn bɪfɔɹ teɪkɪŋ ɪɾ ɔkwɝdli, əz ɪf ənjuz tə ʃeɪkɪŋ hænz. "aɪm kɔld ɛlaɪəs," hi sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ʌp. "ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə."

The man considered his hand before taking it awkwardly, as if unused to shaking hands. "I'm called Elyas," he said, looking up. "Elyas Machera."

pɛɹɪn ɡæspt, ən nɪɹli dʒɹɑpt ɛlaɪəsəz hænd. ðə mænz aɪz wɝ jɛloʊ, laɪk bɹaɪt, pɑlɪʃt ɡoʊld. səm mɛmɹi tɪkəld ət ðə bæk ə pɛɹɪnz maɪnd, ðən flɛd. ɔl i kəd θɪŋk ə ɹaɪt ðən wɑz ðəɾ ɔl ə ðə tʃɹɑləks' aɪz i hæd sin hæd bɪn ɔlmoʊs blæk.

Perrin gasped, and nearly dropped Elyas's hand. The man's eyes were yellow, like bright, polished gold. Some memory tickled at the back of Perrin's mind, then fled. All he could think of right then was that all of the Trollocs' eyes he had seen had been almost black.

ɛɡwin əpɪɹd, kɔʃəsli liɾɪŋ bɛlə. ʃi taɪd ðə mɛɹz ɹeɪnz tə wʌn ə ðə smɔlɝ bɹæntʃəz ə ði oʊk, ən meɪd pəlaɪt saʊnz wən pɛɹɪn ɪntʃɹədust əɹ tə ɛlaɪəs, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz kɛp dʒɹɪftɪŋ tə ðə ɹæbəts. ʃi dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs ðə mænz aɪz. wən ɛlaɪəs moʊʃən əm tə ðə fud, ʃi fɛl tə wɪð ə wɪl. pɛɹɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə mɪnət lɔŋɡɝ bɪfɔɹ dʒɔɪnɪŋ hɝ.

Egwene appeared, cautiously leading Bela. She tied the mare's reins to one of the smaller branches of the oak, and made polite sounds when Perrin introduced her to Elyas, but her eyes kept drifting to the rabbits. She did not seem to notice the man's eyes. When Elyas motioned them to the food, she fell to with a will. Perrin hesitated only a minute longer before joining her.

ɛlaɪəs weɪɾəd saɪlənli waɪl ðeɪ eɪt. pɛɹɪn wɑz soʊ hʌŋɡɹi hi tɔɹ ɔf pisəz ə mit soʊ hɑɾ i hæd tə dʒʌɡəl əm fɹəm hæn tə hæn bɪfɔɹ i kəd hoʊld əm ɪn ɪz maʊθ. ivən ɛɡwin ʃoʊd lɪɾəl ə hɝ juʒəwəl nitnəs; ɡɹisi dʒus ɹæn daʊn əɹ tʃɪn. deɪ feɪɾəd ɪndə twaɪlaɪt bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə sloʊ daʊn, munləs dɑɹknəs kloʊzɪŋ ɪn ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝ, ən ðən ɛlaɪəs spoʊk.

Elyas waited silently while they ate. Perrin was so hungry he tore off pieces of meat so hot he had to juggle them from hand to hand before he could hold them in his mouth. Even Egwene showed little of her usual neatness; greasy juice ran down her chin. Day faded into twilight before they began to slow down, moonless darkness closing in around the fire, and then Elyas spoke.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ aʊt hɪɹ? ðəɹ ɪzən ə haʊs ɪnsaɪd fɪfti maɪlz ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən."

"What are you doing out here? There isn't a house inside fifty miles in any direction."

"wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd. "pɝhæps jə kəd - " hɝ aɪbɹaʊz lɪftəd kuli əz ɛlaɪəs θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən ɹɔɹd wɪð læftɝ. pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət hɪm, ə ɹæbət lɛɡ hæf ɹeɪz tə hɪz maʊθ.

"We're going to Caemlyn," Egwene said. "Perhaps you could - " Her eyebrows lifted coolly as Elyas threw back his head and roared with laughter. Perrin stared at him, a rabbit leg half raised to his mouth.

"keɪɛmlɪn?" ɛlaɪəs wizd wən i kəd tɔk əɡɛn. "ðə pæθ jəɹ fɑloʊɪŋ, ðə laɪn juv teɪkən ðə læs tu deɪz, jəl pæs ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz əɹ mɔɹ nɔɹθ ə keɪɛmlɪn."

"Caemlyn?" Elyas wheezed when he could talk again. "The path you're following, the line you've taken the last two days, you'll pass a hundred miles or more north of Caemlyn."

"wi wɝ gɑnə æsk dɝɛkʃənz," ɛɡwin sɛd dɪfɛnsɪvli. "wi dʒʌs hævən faʊn ɛni vɪlədʒəz əɹ fɑɹmz, jɛt."

"We were going to ask directions," Egwene said defensively. "We just haven't found any villages or farms, yet."

"ænd nʌn jə wɪl," ɛlaɪəs sɛd, tʃʌklɪŋ. "ðə weɪ jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ, jə kən tʃɹævəl ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld wɪθaʊt siɪŋ ənʌðɝ hjumən. ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf jə mænədʒ tə klaɪm ðə spaɪn - ɪt kən bi dʌn, səm pleɪsəz - jə kəd faɪn pipəl ɪn ði il weɪst, bʌt jə wʊdn laɪk ɪt ðɛɹ. jud bɹɔɪl baɪ deɪ, ən fɹiz baɪ naɪt, ən daɪ ʌv θɝst ɛnitaɪm. ɪt teɪks ən ilmən tə faɪnd wɔɾɝ ɪn ðə weɪst, ən ðeɪ doʊn laɪk stʃɹeɪnʒɝz mʌtʃ. noʊ, nɑt mʌtʃ, aɪd seɪ." hi sɛɾ ɔf ɪndə ənʌðɝ, mɔɹ fjʊɹiəs, bɝst ə læftɝ, ðɪs taɪm æktʃəli  ɹoʊlɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. "nɑt mʌtʃ əɾ ɔl," hi mænədʒd.

"And none you will," Elyas said, chuckling. "The way you're going, you can travel all the way to the Spine of the World without seeing another human. Of course, if you managed to climb the Spine - it can be done, some places - you could find people in the Aiel Waste, but you wouldn't like it there. You'd broil by day, and freeze by night, and die of thirst anytime. It takes an Aielman to find water in the Waste, and they don't like strangers much. No, not much, I'd say." He set off into another, more furious, burst of laughter, this time actually rolling on the ground. "Not much at all," he managed.

pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli. ɑɹ wi iɾɪŋ wɪð ə mædmæn?

Perrin shifted uneasily. Are we eating with a madman?

ɛɡwin fɹaʊnd, bʌt ʃi weɪɾəd əntɪl ɛlaɪəsəz mɝθ feɪɾəd ə lɪɾəl, ðən sɛd, "pɝhæps jə kəd ʃoʊ əs ðə weɪ. jə sim tə noʊ ə ɡʊd dil mɔɹ əbaʊt wɛɹ pleɪsəz ɑɹ ðən wi du."

Egwene frowned, but she waited until Elyas's mirth faded a little, then said, "Perhaps you could show us the way. You seem to know a good deal more about where places are than we do."

ɛlaɪəs stɑp læfɪŋ. ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz hɛd, hi ɹipleɪst ɪz ɹaʊn fɝ kæp, wɪtʃ hæd fɔlən ɔf waɪl i wɑz ɹoʊlɪŋ əbaʊt, ən stɛɹɾ əɾ əɹ fɹəm ʌndɝ loʊɝd bɹaʊz. "aɪ doʊn mʌtʃ laɪk pipəl," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs. "sɪɾiz ɑɹ fʊl ə pipəl. aɪ doʊnt ɡoʊ nɪɹ vɪlədʒəz, əɹ ivən fɑɹmz, vɛɹi ɔfən. vɪlɪdʒɝz, fɑɹmɝz, ðeɪ doʊn laɪk maɪ fɹɛnz. aɪ wʊdn ivən əv hɛlp jə ɪf jə hædn bɪn stʌmbəlɪŋ ɝaʊn əz hɛlpləs ən ɪnəsən əz nubɔɹn kʌbz."

Elyas stopped laughing. Raising his head, he replaced his round fur cap, which had fallen off while he was rolling about, and stared at her from under lowered brows. "I don't much like people," he said in a flat voice. "Cities are full of people. I don't go near villages, or even farms, very often. Villagers, farmers, they don't like my friends. I wouldn't even have helped you if you hadn't been stumbling around as helpless and innocent as newborn cubs."

"bʌɾ ət lis jə kən tɛl əs wɪtʃ weɪ tə ɡoʊ," ʃi ɪnsɪstəd. "ɪf jə dɝɛkt əs tə ðə nɪɹəs vɪlədʒ, ivən ɪf ɪts fɪfti maɪlz əweɪ, ʃʊɹli ðəl ɡɪv əs dɝɛkʃənz tə keɪɛmlɪn."

"But at least you can tell us which way to go," she insisted. "If you direct us to the nearest village, even if it's fifty miles away, surely they'll give us directions to Caemlyn."

"bi stɪl," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. "maɪ fɹɛnz ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ."

"Be still," Elyas said. "My friends are coming."

bɛlə sʌɾənli wɪniɾ ɪn fɪɹ, ən bɪɡæn dʒɝkɪŋ tə pʊl əɹ ɹeɪnz fɹi. pɛɹɪn hæf ɹoʊz əz ʃeɪps əpɪɹɾ ɔl ɝaʊn əm ɪn ðə dɑɹkənɪŋ fɔɹəst. bɛlə ɹɪɹɾ ən twɪstəd, skɹimɪŋ.

Bela suddenly whinnied in fear, and began jerking to pull her reins free. Perrin half rose as shapes appeared all around them in the darkening forest. Bela reared and twisted, screaming.

"kwaɪət ðə mɛɹ," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. "ðeɪ woʊn hɝt hɝ. əɹ ju, ɪf jəɹ stɪl."

"Quiet the mare," Elyas said. "They won't hurt her. Or you, if you're still."

fɔɹ wʊlvz stɛpt ɪndə ðə faɪɹlaɪt, ʃæɡi, weɪst-haɪ fɔɹmz wɪð dʒɔz ðət kəd bɹeɪk ə mænz lɛɡ. əz ɪf ðə pipəl wɝ nɑt ðəɹ ðeɪ wɔkt ʌp tə ðə faɪɝ ən leɪ daʊn bɪtwin ðə hjumənz. ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs əmʌŋ ðə tʃɹiz faɪɹlaɪt ɹəflɛktəɾ ɔf ði aɪz ə mɔɹ wʊlvz, ɑn ɔl saɪdz.

Four wolves stepped into the firelight, shaggy, waist-high forms with jaws that could break a man's leg. As if the people were not there they walked up to the fire and lay down between the humans. In the darkness among the trees firelight reflected off the eyes of more wolves, on all sides.

jɛloʊ aɪz, pɛɹɪn θɔt. laɪk ɛlaɪəsəz aɪz. ðət wɑz wʌɾ i hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ. kɛɹfəli wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wʊlvz əmʌŋ ðɛm, hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz æks.

Yellow eyes, Perrin thought. Like Elyas's eyes. That was what he had been trying to remember. Carefully watching the wolves among them, he reached for his axe.

"aɪ wəd nɑt də ðæt," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. "ɪf ðeɪ θɪŋk jə min hɑɹm, ðəl stɑp biɪŋ fɹɛnli."

"I would not do that," Elyas said. "If they think you mean harm, they'll stop being friendly."

ðeɪ wɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, ðoʊz fɔɹ wʊlvz, pɛɹɪn sɔ. hi hæd ðə filɪŋ ðəɾ ɔl ðə wʊlvz, ðoʊz ɪn ðə tʃɹiz, əz wɛl, wɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm. ɪt meɪɾ ɪz skɪn ɪtʃ. kɔʃəsli hi muvd ɪz hænz əweɪ fɹəm ði æks. hi ɪmædʒən i kəd fil ðə tɛnʃən iz əmʌŋ ðə wʊlvz. sloʊli hi sæt bæk daʊn; hɪz hænz ʃʊk əntɪl i ɡɹɪpt ɪz niz tə stɑp ðɛm. ɛɡwin wɑz soʊ stɪf ʃi ɔlmoʊs kwɪvɝd. wʌn wʊlf, kloʊs tə blæk wɪð ə laɪɾɝ ɡɹeɪ pætʃ ɑn ɪz feɪs, leɪ nɪɹli tʌtʃɪŋ hɝ.

They were staring at him, those four wolves, Perrin saw. He had the feeling that all the wolves, those in the trees, as well, were staring at him. It made his skin itch. Cautiously he moved his hands away from the axe. He imagined he could feel the tension ease among the wolves. Slowly he sat back down; his hands shook until he gripped his knees to stop them. Egwene was so stiff she almost quivered. One wolf, close to black with a lighter gray patch on his face, lay nearly touching her.

bɛlə hæd sist əɹ skɹimɪŋ ən ɹɪɹɪŋ. ɪnstɛd ʃi stʊd tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ ən ʃɪftɪŋ ɪn ən ətɛmp tə kip ɔl ə ðə wʊlvz ɪn vju, kɪkɪŋ əkeɪʒənəli tə ʃoʊ ðə wʊlvz ðət ʃi kʊd, ɪntɛndɪŋ tə sɛl əɹ laɪf dɪɹli. ðə wʊlvz sim tə ɪɡnɔɹ əɹ ən ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. tʌŋz lɑlɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ maʊðz, ðeɪ weɪɾəd ət ðɛɹ iz.

Bela had ceased her screaming and rearing. Instead she stood trembling and shifting in an attempt to keep all of the wolves in view, kicking occasionally to show the wolves that she could, intending to sell her life dearly. The wolves seemed to ignore her and everyone else. Tongues lolling out of their mouths, they waited at their ease.

"ðɛɹ," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. "ðæts bɛɾɝ."

"There," Elyas said. "That's better."

"ɑɹ ðeɪ teɪm?" ɛɡwin æsk feɪnli, ən hoʊpfəli, tu. "ðeɪɹ . . . pɛts?"

"Are they tame?" Egwene asked faintly, and hopefully, too. "They're . . . pets?"

ɛlaɪəs snɔɹɾɪd. "wʊlvz doʊn teɪm, ɡɝl, nɑɾ ivən əz wɛl əz mɛn. ðəɹ maɪ fɹɛnz. wi kip itʃ ʌðɝ kʌmpəni, hʌn təɡɛðɝ, kɑnvɝs, æftɝ ə fæʃən. dʒʌs laɪk ɛni fɹɛnz. ɪzən ðət ɹaɪt, dæpəl?" ə wʊlf wɪð fɝ ðət feɪɾəd θɹu ə dʌzən ʃeɪdz ʌv ɡɹeɪ, dɑɹk ən laɪt, tɝn əɹ hɛd tə lʊk ət hɪm.

Elyas snorted. "Wolves don't tame, girl, not even as well as men. They're my friends. We keep each other company, hunt together, converse, after a fashion. Just like any friends. Isn't that right, Dapple?" A wolf with fur that faded through a dozen shades of gray, dark and light, turned her head to look at him.

"ju tɔk tə ðɛm?" pɛɹɪn mɑɹvəld.

"You talk to them?" Perrin marveled.

"ɪɾ ɪzən ɪɡzækli tɔkɪŋ," ɛlaɪəs ɹɪplaɪd sloʊli. "ðə wɝdz doʊn mæɾɝ, ən ðeɪ ɑɹən ɪɡzækli ɹaɪt, iðɝ. hɝ neɪm ɪzən dæpəl. ɪts sʌmθɪŋ ðət minz ðə weɪ ʃædoʊz pleɪ ɑn ə fɔɹəs pul əɾ ə mɪdwɪntɝ dɔn, wɪð ðə bɹiz ɹɪpəlɪŋ ðə sɝfəs, ən ðə tæŋ ʌv aɪs wən ðə wɔɾɝ tʌtʃəz ðə tʌŋ, ən ə hɪn ə snoʊ bɪfɔɹ naɪtfɔl ɪn ði ɛɹ. bʌt ðəɾ ɪzən kwaɪɾ ɪt, iðɝ. jə kæn seɪ ɪɾ ɪn wɝdz. ɪts mɔɹ ʌv ə filɪŋ. ðæts ðə weɪ wʊlvz tɔk. ði ʌðɝz ɑɹ bɝn, hɑpɝ, ən wɪnd." bɝn hæɾ ən oʊl skɑɹ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ðət maɪɾ ɪkspleɪn ɪz neɪm, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt ði ʌðɝ tu wʊlvz tə ɡɪv ɛni ɪndəkeɪʃən ʌv wʌt ðɛɹ neɪmz maɪt min.

"It isn't exactly talking," Elyas replied slowly. "The words don't matter, and they aren't exactly right, either. Her name isn't Dapple. It's something that means the way shadows play on a forest pool at a midwinter dawn, with the breeze rippling the surface, and the tang of ice when the water touches the tongue, and a hint of snow before nightfall in the air. But that isn't quite it, either. You can't say it in words. It's more of a feeling. That's the way wolves talk. The others are Burn, Hopper, and Wind." Burn had an old scar on his shoulder that might explain his name, but there was nothing about the other two wolves to give any indication of what their names might mean.

fəɹ ɔl ðə mænz ɡɹʌfnəs, pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ɛlaɪəs wɑz pliz tə hæv ðə tʃæns tə tɔk tə ənʌðɝ hjumən. hi simd iɡɝ ɪnʌf tə də ɪt, ət list. pɛɹɪn aɪd ðə wʊlvz' tiθ ɡlɪsnɪŋ ɪn ðə faɪɹlaɪɾ ən θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə tə kip ɪm tɔkɪŋ. "haʊ . . . haʊ dɪd jə lɝn tə tɔk tə wʊlvz, ɛlaɪəs?"

For all the man's gruffness, Perrin thought Elyas was pleased to have the chance to talk to another human. He seemed eager enough to do it, at least. Perrin eyed the wolves' teeth glistening in the firelight and thought it might be a good idea to keep him talking. "How . . . how did you learn to talk to wolves, Elyas?"

"ðeɪ faʊn aʊt," ɛlaɪəs ɹɪplaɪd, "aɪ dɪdnt. nɑɾ ət fɝst. ðæts ɔlweɪz ðə weɪ ʌv ɪt, aɪ ʌndɝstænd. ðə wʊlvz faɪn ju, nɑt jə ðɛm. səm pipəl θɔt mi tʌtʃt baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kəz wʊlvz stɑɹɾəd əpɪɹɪŋ wɛɹɛvɝ aɪ wɛnt. aɪ səpoʊz aɪ θɔt soʊ, tu, səmtaɪmz. moʊs disən foʊk bɪɡæn tə əvɔɪd mi, ən ðə wʌnz u sɔt mi aʊt wɝn ðə kaɪn aɪ wɑntəd tə noʊ, wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ. ðən aɪ noʊɾəst ðəɹ wɝ taɪmz wən ðə wʊlvz sim tə noʊ wʌɾ aɪ wɑz θɪŋkɪŋ, tə ɹɪspɑn tə wʌt wɑz ɪn maɪ hɛd. ðət wɑz ðə ɹil bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðeɪ wɝ kjʊɹiəs əbaʊt mi. wʊlvz kən sɛns pipəl, juʒəwəli, bʌt nɑt laɪk ðɪs. ðeɪ wɝ ɡlæd tə faɪn mi. ðeɪ seɪ ɪts bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm sɪns ðeɪ hʌntəd wɪð mɛn, ən wən ðeɪ seɪ ə lɔŋ taɪm, ðə filɪŋ aɪ ɡɛɾ ɪz laɪk ə koʊld wɪn haʊlɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ daʊn fɹəm ðə fɝs deɪ."

"They found out," Elyas replied, "I didn't. Not at first. That's always the way of it, I understand. The wolves find you, not you them. Some people thought me touched by the Dark One, because wolves started appearing wherever I went. I suppose I thought so, too, sometimes. Most decent folk began to avoid me, and the ones who sought me out weren't the kind I wanted to know, one way or another. Then I noticed there were times when the wolves seemed to know what I was thinking, to respond to what was in my head. That was the real beginning. They were curious about me. Wolves can sense people, usually, but not like this. They were glad to find me. They say it's been a long time since they hunted with men, and when they say a long time, the feeling I get is like a cold wind howling all the way down from the First Day."

"aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə mɛn hʌntɪŋ wɪð wʊlvz," ɛɡwin sɛd. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli stɛɾi, bʌt ðə fæk ðət ðə wʊlvz wɝ dʒʌs laɪɪŋ ðəɹ sim tə ɡɪv əɹ hɑɹt.

"I never heard of men hunting with wolves," Egwene said. Her voice was not entirely steady, but the fact that the wolves were just lying there seemed to give her heart.

ɪf ɛlaɪəs hɝd hɝ, hi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn. "wʊlvz ɹɪmɛmbɝ θɪŋz dɪfɹənli fɹəm ðə weɪ pipəl du," hi sɛd. hɪz stʃɹeɪnʒ aɪz tʊk ɑn ə fɑɹəweɪ lʊk, əz ɪf i wɝ dʒɹɪftɪŋ ɔf ɑn ðə floʊ ʌv mɛmɹi hɪmsɛlf. "ɛvɹi wʊlf ɹɪmɛmbɝz ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ɔl wʊlvz, əɹ ət lis ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ɪt. laɪk aɪ sɛd, ɪt kæn bi pʊɾ ɪndə wɝdz vɛɹi wɛl. ðeɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn pɹeɪ saɪd-baɪ-saɪd wɪð mɛn, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz soʊ lɔŋ əɡoʊ ðəɾ ɪts mɔɹ laɪk ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ə ʃædoʊ ðən ə mɛmɹi."

If Elyas heard her, he gave no sign. "Wolves remember things differently from the way people do," he said. His strange eyes took on a faraway look, as if he were drifting off on the flow of memory himself. "Every wolf remembers the history of all wolves, or at least the shape of it. Like I said, it can't be put into words very well. They remember running down prey side-by-side with men, but it was so long ago that it's more like the shadow of a shadow than a memory."

"ðæts vɛɹi ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," ɛɡwin sɛd, ən ɛlaɪəs lʊkt əɾ əɹ ʃɑɹpli. "noʊ, aɪ min ɪt. ɪɾ ɪz." ʃi wɛɾ əɹ lɪps. "kʊd . . . ɑ . . . kəd jə titʃ əs tə tɔk tə ðɛm?"

"That's very interesting," Egwene said, and Elyas looked at her sharply. "No, I mean it. It is." She wet her lips. "Could . . . ah . . . could you teach us to talk to them?"

ɛlaɪəs snɔɹɾɪd əɡɛn. "ɪt kæn bi tɔt. səm kən də ɪt, səm kænt. ðeɪ seɪ hi kæn." hi pɔɪntəɾ ət pɛɹɪn.

Elyas snorted again. "It can't be taught. Some can do it, some can't. They say he can." He pointed at Perrin.

pɛɹɪn lʊkt əɾ ɛlaɪəsəz fɪŋɡɝ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə naɪf. hi ɹɪli ɪz ə mædmæn. ðə wʊlvz wɝ stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm əɡɛn. hi ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli.

Perrin looked at Elyas's finger as if it were a knife. He really is a madman. The wolves were staring at him again. He shifted uncomfortably.

"ju seɪ jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn," ɛlaɪəs sɛd, "bʌt ðət stɪl dʌzn ɪkspleɪn wʌt jəɹ duɪŋ aʊt hɪɹ, deɪz fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ." hi tɔs bæk ɪz fɝ-pætʃ kloʊk ən leɪ daʊn ɑn ɪz saɪd, pɹɑpt ɑn wʌn ɛlboʊ ən weɪɾɪŋ ɪkspɛktənli.

"You say you're going to Caemlyn," Elyas said, "but that still doesn't explain what you're doing out here, days from anywhere." He tossed back his fur-patch cloak and lay down on his side, propped on one elbow and waiting expectantly.

pɛɹɪn ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin. ɝli ɑn ðeɪ hæd kənkɑktəɾ ə stɔɹi fəɹ wən ðeɪ faʊn pipəl, tə ɪkspleɪn wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ wɪθaʊt bɹɪŋɪŋ əm ɛni tʃɹʌbəl. wɪθaʊt lɛɾɪŋ ɛniwʌn noʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɹɪli fɹʌm, əɹ wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɹɪli ɡoʊɪŋ, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. hu nu wʌt kɛɹləs wɝd maɪt ɹitʃ ə feɪdz ɪɹ? ðeɪ hæd wɝkt ɑn ɪɾ ɛvɹi deɪ, pætʃɪŋ ɪt təɡɛðɝ, hoʊnɪŋ aʊt flɔz. ən ðeɪ hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd ɛɡwin wɑz ðə wʌn tə tɛl ɪt. ʃi wɑz bɛɾɝ wɪð wɝdz ðən i wɑz, ən ʃi kleɪmd ʃi kəɾ ɔlweɪz tɛl wən i wɑz laɪɪŋ baɪ hɪz feɪs.

Perrin glanced at Egwene. Early on they had concocted a story for when they found people, to explain where they were going without bringing them any trouble. Without letting anyone know where they were really from, or where they were really going, eventually. Who knew what careless word might reach a Fade's ear? They had worked on it every day, patching it together, honing out flaws. And they had decided Egwene was the one to tell it. She was better with words than he was, and she claimed she could always tell when he was lying by his face.

ɛɡwin bɪɡæn ət wʌns, smuðli. ðeɪ wɝ fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ, fɹəm sɑldɑiə, fɹəm fɑɹmz aʊtsaɪɾ ə taɪni vɪlədʒ. niðɝ ə ðɛm hæd bɪn mɔɹ ðən twɛnti maɪlz fɹəm hoʊm ɪn ðɛɹ hoʊl lɪvz bɪfɔɹ ðɪs. bʌt ðeɪ hæd hɝd ɡlimənz stɔɹiz, ən mɝtʃəns' teɪlz, ən ðeɪ wɑntəd tə si səm ə ðə wɝld. keɪɛmlɪn, ən ɪljən. ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, ən meɪbi ivən ðə feɪbəld aɪlənz ə ðə si foʊk.

Egwene began at once, smoothly. They were from the north, from Saldaea, from farms outside a tiny village. Neither of them had been more than twenty miles from home in their whole lives before this. But they had heard gleemen's stories, and merchants' tales, and they wanted to see some of the world. Caemlyn, and Illian. The Sea of Storms, and maybe even the fabled islands of the Sea Folk.

pɛɹɪn lɪsənd wɪð sæɾəsfækʃən. nɑɾ ivən tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn cʊɾə meɪɾ ə bɛɾɝ teɪl fɹəm ðə lɪɾəl ðeɪ nu ʌv ðə wɝld aʊtsaɪd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, əɹ wʌn bɛɾɝ suɾəd tə ðɛɹ nidz.

Perrin listened with satisfaction. Not even Thom Merrilin could have made a better tale from the little they knew of the world outside the Two Rivers, or one better suited to their needs.

"fɹʌm sɑldɑiə, ɛ?" ɛlaɪəs sɛd wən ʃi wɑz dʌn.

"From Saldaea, eh?" Elyas said when she was done.

pɛɹɪn nɑɾəd. "ðæts ɹaɪt. wi θɔɾ əbaʊt siɪŋ mɛɹədɑn fɝst. aɪd ʃʊɹli laɪk tə si ðə kɪŋ. bʌt ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi wəd bi ðə fɝs pleɪs əɹ fɑðɝz wəd lʊk."

Perrin nodded. "That's right. We thought about seeing Maradon first. I'd surely like to see the King. But the capital city would be the first place our fathers would look."

ðət wɑz ɪz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt, tə meɪk ɪt pleɪn ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn tə mɛɹədɑn. ðət weɪ noʊ wʌn wəɾ ɪkspɛkt əm tə noʊ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə sɪɾi, dʒʌst ɪn keɪs ðeɪ ɹæn ɪndə sʌmwʌn u ɹɪli hæd bɪn ðɛɹ. ɪt wɑz ɔl ə lɔŋ weɪ fɹəm ɛmənz fild ən ði ɪvɛns ʌv wɪntɝnaɪt. noʊbɑdi hɪɹɪŋ ðə teɪl wəɾ əv ɛni ɹizən tə θɪŋk ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

That was his part of it, to make it plain they had never been to Maradon. That way no one would expect them to know anything about the city, just in case they ran into someone who really had been there. It was all a long way from Emond's Field and the events of Winternight. Nobody hearing the tale would have any reason to think of Tar Valon, or Aes Sedai.

"kwaɪɾ ə stɔɹi." ɛlaɪəs nɑɾəd. "jɛs, kwaɪɾ ə stɔɹi. ðɛɹz ə fju θɪŋz ɹɔŋ wɪð ɪt, bʌt ðə meɪn θɪŋ ɪz dæpəl sɛz ɪts ɔl ə lʌmp ə laɪz. ɛvɹi læst wɝd."

"Quite a story." Elyas nodded. "Yes, quite a story. There's a few things wrong with it, but the main thing is Dapple says it's all a lump of lies. Every last word."

"laɪz!" ɛɡwin ɪkskleɪmd. "waɪ wəd wi laɪ?"

"Lies!" Egwene exclaimed. "Why would we lie?"

ðə fɔɹ wʊlvz hæd nɑt muvd, bʌt ðeɪ noʊ lɔŋɡɝ sim tə bi dʒʌs laɪɪŋ ðəɹ ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝ; ðeɪ kɹaʊtʃt, ɪnstɛd, ən ðɛɹ jɛloʊ aɪz wɑtʃt ði ɛmənz fildɝz wɪθaʊt blɪŋkɪŋ.

The four wolves had not moved, but they no longer seemed to be just lying there around the fire; they crouched, instead, and their yellow eyes watched the Emond's Fielders without blinking.

pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt seɪ ɛniθɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪz hæn stʃɹeɪd tə ði æks əɾ ɪz weɪst. ðə fɔɹ wʊlvz ɹoʊz tə ðɛɹ fiɾ ɪn wʌn kwɪk muvmənt, ən ɪz hæn fɹoʊz. ðeɪ meɪd noʊ saʊnd, bʌt ðə θɪk hækəlz ɑn ðɛɹ nɛks stʊɾ ɪɹɛkt. wʌn ə ðə wʊlvz bæk ʌndɝ ðə tʃɹiz ɹeɪzd ə ɡɹoʊlɪŋ haʊl ɪndə ðə naɪt. ʌðɝz ænsɝd, faɪv, tɛn, twɛnti, tɪl ðə dɑɹknəs ɹɪpəld wɪð ðɛm. əbɹʌpli ðeɪ, tu, wɝ stɪl. koʊl swɛt tʃɹɪkəl daʊn pɛɹɪnz feɪs.

Perrin did not say anything, but his hand strayed to the axe at his waist. The four wolves rose to their feet in one quick movement, and his hand froze. They made no sound, but the thick hackles on their necks stood erect. One of the wolves back under the trees raised a growling howl into the night. Others answered, five, ten, twenty, till the darkness rippled with them. Abruptly they, too, were still. Cold sweat trickled down Perrin's face.

"ɪf jə θɪŋk. . . ." ɛɡwin stɑp tə swɑloʊ. dɪspaɪt ðə tʃɪl ɪn ði ɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz swɛɾ ɑn əɹ feɪs, tu. "ɪf jə θɪŋk wəɹ laɪɪŋ, ðən jəl pɹɑbli pɹəfɝ ðət wi meɪk əɹ oʊn kæmp fəɹ ðə naɪt, əweɪ fɹəm jʊɹz."

"If you think. . . ." Egwene stopped to swallow. Despite the chill in the air there was sweat on her face, too. "If you think we are lying, then you'll probably prefer that we make our own camp for the night, away from yours."

"ɔɹɾənɛɹəli aɪ wʊd, ɡɝl. bʌt ɹaɪt naʊ aɪ wɑnə noʊ əbaʊt ðə tʃɹɑləks. ən ðə hæfmən." pɛɹɪn stʃɹʌɡəl tə kip ɪz feɪs ɪmpæsɪv, ən hoʊpt i wɑz duɪŋ bɛɾɝ əɾ ɪt ðən ɛɡwin. ɛlaɪəs wɛn ɑn ɪn ə kɑnvɝseɪʃənəl toʊn. "dæpəl sɛz ʃi smɛl hæfmən ən tʃɹɑləks ɪn jəɹ maɪnz waɪl jə wɝ tɛlɪŋ ðət ful stɔɹi. ðeɪ ɔl dɪd. jəɹ mɪkst ʌp wɪð tʃɹɑləks, sʌmhaʊ, ən ði aɪləs. wʊlvz heɪt tʃɹɑləks ən hæfmən wɝs ðən waɪldfaɪɝ, wɝs ðən ɛniθɪŋ, ən soʊ də aɪ.

"Ordinarily I would, girl. But right now I want to know about the Trollocs. And the Halfmen." Perrin struggled to keep his face impassive, and hoped he was doing better at it than Egwene. Elyas went on in a conversational tone. "Dapple says she smelled Halfmen and Trollocs in your minds while you were telling that fool story. They all did. You're mixed up with Trollocs, somehow, and the Eyeless. Wolves hate Trollocs and Halfmen worse than wildfire, worse than anything, and so do I.

"bɝn wɑns tə bi dʌn wɪð ju. ɪt wɑz tʃɹɑləks ɡeɪv ɪm ðət mɑɹk wən i wɑz ə jɝlɪŋ. hi sɛz ɡeɪm ɪz skɛɹs, ən jəɹ fæɾɝ ðən ɛni dɪɹ hiz sin ɪn mʌnθs, ən wi ʃəd bi dʌn wɪð ju. bʌt bɝn ɪz ɔlweɪz ɪmpeɪʃənt. waɪ doʊn jə tɛl mi əbaʊɾ ɪt? aɪ hoʊp jəɹ nɑt dɑɹkfɹɛnz. aɪ doʊn laɪk kɪlɪŋ pipəl æftɝ aɪv fɛd ðɛm. dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ðəl noʊ ɪf jə laɪ, ən ivən dæpəl ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi nɪɹ əz əpsɛɾ əz bɝn." hɪz aɪz, əz jɛloʊ əz ðə wʊlvz' aɪz, blɪŋk noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðɛɹz dɪd. ðeɪ ɑɹ ə wʊlfs aɪz, pɛɹɪn θɔt.

"Burn wants to be done with you. It was Trollocs gave him that mark when he was a yearling. He says game is scarce, and you're fatter than any deer he's seen in months, and we should be done with you. But Burn is always impatient. Why don't you tell me about it? I hope you're not Darkfriends. I don't like killing people after I've fed them. Just remember, they'll know if you lie, and even Dapple is already near as upset as Burn." His eyes, as yellow as the wolves' eyes, blinked no more than theirs did. They are a wolf's eyes, Perrin thought.

ɛɡwin wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, hi ɹilaɪzd, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə dɪsaɪd wʌt ðeɪ ʃəd du. laɪt, sʌɾənli ɪm ðə liɾɝ əɡɛn. ðeɪ hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd fɹəm ðə fɝs ðət ðeɪ kəd nɑt ɹɪsk tɛlɪŋ ðə ɹil stɔɹi tə ɛniwʌn, bʌɾ i sɔ noʊ tʃæns fəɹ əm tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ ivən ɪf i mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ɪz æks aʊt bɪfɔɹ. . . .

Egwene was looking at him, he realized, waiting for him to decide what they should do. Light, suddenly I'm the leader again. They had decided from the first that they could not risk telling the real story to anyone, but he saw no chance for them to get away even if he managed to get his axe out before. . . .

dæpəl ɡɹaʊl dip ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, ən ðə saʊnd wɑz teɪkən ʌp baɪ ði ʌðɝ θɹi ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝ, ðən baɪ ðə wʊlvz ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. ðə mɛnəsɪŋ ɹʌmbəl fɪl ðə naɪt.

Dapple growled deep in her throat, and the sound was taken up by the other three around the fire, then by the wolves in the darkness. The menacing rumble filled the night.

"ɔl ɹaɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd kwɪkli. "ɔl ɹaɪt!" ðə ɡɹoʊlɪŋ kʌɾ ɔf, ʃɑɹp ən sʌɾən. ɛɡwin ənklɛntʃt əɹ hænz ən nɑɾəd. "ɪɾ ɔl stɑɹɾəd ə fju deɪz bɪfɔɹ wɪntɝnaɪt," pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn, "wɛn əɹ fɹɛn mæt sɔ ə mæn ɪn ə blæk kloʊk. . . ."

"All right," Perrin said quickly. "All right!" The growling cut off, sharp and sudden. Egwene unclenched her hands and nodded. "It all started a few days before Winternight," Perrin began, "when our friend Mat saw a man in a black cloak. . . ."

ɛlaɪəs nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən əɹ ðə weɪ hi leɪ ɑn ɪz saɪd, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə tɪlt ə hɪz hɛd ðət spoʊk ʌv ɪɹz pɹɪkɪŋ ʌp. ðə fɔɹ wʊlvz sæt daʊn əz pɛɹɪn wɛn ɑn; hi hæd ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ðeɪ wɝ lɪsnɪŋ, tu. ðə stɔɹi wɑz ə lɔŋ wʌn, ən i toʊld ɔlmoʊst ɔl ʌv ɪt. ðə dʒɹim i ən ði ʌðɝz hæd hæɾ ɪn bɛɹlən, ðoʊ, hi kɛp tə hɪmsɛlf. hi weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə wʊlvz tə meɪk səm saɪn ðeɪ hæd kɑt ði oʊmɪʃən, bʌt ðeɪ oʊnli wɑtʃt. dæpəl sim fɹɛnli, bɝn æŋɡɹi. hi wɑz hɔɹs baɪ ðə taɪm i fɪnɪʃt.

Elyas never changed his expression or the way he lay on his side, but there was something about the tilt of his head that spoke of ears pricking up. The four wolves sat down as Perrin went on; he had the impression they were listening, too. The story was a long one, and he told almost all of it. The dream he and the others had had in Baerlon, though, he kept to himself. He waited for the wolves to make some sign they had caught the omission, but they only watched. Dapple seemed friendly, Burn angry. He was hoarse by the time he finished.

". . . ən ɪf ʃi dʌzn faɪn əs ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, wɪl ɡoʊ ɑn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. wi doʊn əv ɛni tʃɔɪs ɪksɛp tə ɡɛt hɛlp fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ."

". . . and if she doesn't find us in Caemlyn, we'll go on to Tar Valon. We don't have any choice except to get help from the Aes Sedai."

"tʃɹɑləks ən hæfmən ðɪs fɑɹ saʊθ," ɛlaɪəs mjuzd. "naʊ ðæts sʌmθɪŋ tə kənsɪɾɝ." hi ɹuɾəd bɪhaɪn ɪm ən tɔs pɛɹɪn ə haɪd wɔɾɝbæɡ, nɑt ɹɪli lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. hi əpɪɹd tə bi θɪŋkɪŋ. hi weɪɾəd əntɪl pɛɹɪn hæd dʒɹʌŋk ən ɹipleɪs ðə plʌɡ bɪfɔɹ i spoʊk əɡɛn. "aɪ doʊn hoʊld wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, ðoʊz ðət laɪk hʌntɪŋ fəɹ mɛn u mɛs wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ðeɪ wɑntəd tə dʒɛntəl mi, wʌns. aɪ toʊld əm tə ðɛɹ feɪsəz ðeɪ wɝ blæk ədʒɑ; sɝv ðə dɑɹk wʌn, aɪ sɛd, ən ðeɪ dɪdn laɪk ðəɾ əɾ ɔl. ðeɪ kʊdn kætʃ mi, ðoʊ, wʌns aɪ ɡɑɾ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd tʃɹaɪ. jɛs, ðeɪ dɪd. kʌm tə ðæt, aɪ daʊɾ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd teɪk kaɪnli tə mi, æftɝ ðæt. aɪ hæd tə kɪl ə kʌpəl ʌv wɔɹɾɝz. bæd bɪznəs, ðæt, kɪlɪŋ wɔɹɾɝz. doʊn laɪk ɪt."

"Trollocs and Halfmen this far south," Elyas mused. "Now that's something to consider." He rooted behind him and tossed Perrin a hide waterbag, not really looking at him. He appeared to be thinking. He waited until Perrin had drunk and replaced the plug before he spoke again. "I don't hold with Aes Sedai. The Red Ajah, those that like hunting for men who mess with the One Power, they wanted to gentle me, once. I told them to their faces they were Black Ajah; served the Dark One, I said, and they didn't like that at all. They couldn't catch me, though, once I got into the forest, but they did try. Yes, they did. Come to that, I doubt any Aes Sedai would take kindly to me, after that. I had to kill a couple of Warders. Bad business, that, killing Warders. Don't like it."

"ðɪs tɔkɪŋ tə wʊlvz," pɛɹɪn sɛɾ ənizəli. "ɪt . . . ɪts tə də wɪð ðə paʊɝ?"

"This talking to wolves," Perrin said uneasily. "It . . . it has to do with the Power?"

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt," ɛlaɪəs ɡɹaʊld. "wʊdn əv wɝkt ɑn mi, dʒɛntəlɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt meɪd mi mæd, ðɛm wɑntɪŋ tə tʃɹaɪ. ðɪs ɪz ən oʊl θɪŋ, bɔɪ. oʊldɝ ðən ɛɛs sədaɪ. oʊldɝ ðən ɛnibəɾi juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ. oʊld əz hjumənkaɪnd. oʊld əz wʊlvz. ðeɪ doʊn laɪk ðəɾ iðɝ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. oʊl θɪŋz kʌmɪŋ əɡɛn. aɪm nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn. ðəɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ θɪŋz, ʌðɝ foʊk. meɪks ɛɛs sədaɪ nɝvəs, meɪks əm mʌɾɝ əbaʊɾ eɪntʃən bæɹiɝz wikənɪŋ. θɪŋz ɑɹ bɹeɪkɪŋ əpɑɹt, ðeɪ seɪ. ðəɹ əfɹeɪd ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɪl ɡɛt lus, ɪz wʌt. jud θɪŋk aɪ wɑz tə bleɪm, ðə weɪ səm ə ðɛm lʊkt ət mi. ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, ɛniweɪ, bʌt səm ʌðɝz, tu. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit. . . . ɑə! aɪ kip klɪɹ ə ðɛm, moʊsli, ən klɪɹ ə fɹɛnz ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, əz wɛl. jə wɪl, tu, ɪf jəɹ smɑɹt."

"Of course not," Elyas growled. "Wouldn't have worked on me, gentling, but it made me mad, them wanting to try. This is an old thing, boy. Older than Aes Sedai. Older than anybody using the One Power. Old as humankind. Old as wolves. They don't like that either, Aes Sedai. Old things coming again. I'm not the only one. There are other things, other folk. Makes Aes Sedai nervous, makes them mutter about ancient barriers weakening. Things are breaking apart, they say. They're afraid the Dark One will get loose, is what. You'd think I was to blame, the way some of them looked at me. Red Ajah, anyway, but some others, too. The Amyrlin Seat. . . . Aaaah! I keep clear of them, mostly, and clear of friends of Aes Sedai, as well. You will, too, if you're smart."

"aɪd laɪk nʌθɪŋ bɛɾɝ ðən tə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"I'd like nothing better than to stay away from Aes Sedai," Perrin said.

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ɪm ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. hi hoʊpt ʃi wəd nɑt bɝst aʊt ðət ʃi wɑntəd tə bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. bʌt ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ, ðoʊ hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd, ən pɛɹɪn wɛn ɑn.

Egwene gave him a sharp look. He hoped she would not burst out that she wanted to be an Aes Sedai. But she said nothing, though her mouth tightened, and Perrin went on.

"ɪɾ ɪzən əz ɪf wɪv ə tʃɔɪs. wiv hæd tʃɹɑləks tʃeɪsɪŋ ʌs, ən feɪdz, ən dʒɹæɡkɝ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ bʌt dɑɹkfɹɛnz. wi kæn haɪd, ən wi kæn faɪt bæk əloʊn. soʊ hu ɪz gɑnə hɛlp ʌs? hu ɛls ɪz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf, ɪksɛpt ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

"It isn't as if we have a choice. We've had Trollocs chasing us, and Fades, and Draghkar. Everything but Darkfriends. We can't hide, and we can't fight back alone. So who is going to help us? Who else is strong enough, except Aes Sedai?"

ɛlaɪəs wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə taɪm, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə wʊlvz, moʊst ɔfən ət dæpəl əɹ bɝn. pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəd nɝvəsli ən tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə wɑtʃ. wən i wɑtʃt i hæd ðə filɪŋ ðəɾ i kəɾ ɔlmoʊs hɪɹ wʌɾ ɛlaɪəs ən ðə wʊlvz wɝ seɪɪŋ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ. ivən ɪf ɪt hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə paʊɝ, hi wɑntəd noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. hi hæd tə bi meɪkɪŋ səm kɹeɪzi dʒoʊk. aɪ kæn tɔk tə wʊlvz. wʌn ə ðə wʊlvz - hɑpɝ, hi θɔt - lʊkt əɾ ɪm ən sim tə ɡɹɪn. hi wʌndɝd haʊ hi hæd pʊɾ ə neɪm tə hɪm.

Elyas was silent for a time, looking at the wolves, most often at Dapple or Burn. Perrin shifted nervously and tried not to watch. When he watched he had the feeling that he could almost hear what Elyas and the wolves were saying to one another. Even if it had nothing to do with the Power, he wanted no part of it. He had to be making some crazy joke. I can't talk to wolves. One of the wolves - Hopper, he thought - looked at him and seemed to grin. He wondered how he had put a name to him.

"ju kəd steɪ wɪð mi," ɛlaɪəs sɛd faɪnəli. "wɪð ʌs." ɛɡwinz aɪbɹaʊz ʃɑɾ ʌp, ən pɛɹɪnz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən. "wɛl, wʌt kəd bi seɪfɝ?" ɛlaɪəs tʃælənʒd. "tʃɹɑləks wɪl teɪk ɛni tʃæns ðeɪ ɡɛt tə kɪl ə wʊlf baɪ ɪtsɛlf, bʌt ðəl ɡoʊ maɪlz aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ weɪ tə əvɔɪɾ ə pæk. ən jə woʊn əv tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, iðɝ. ðeɪ doʊn ɔfən kʌm ɪndə ðiz wʊdz."

"You could stay with me," Elyas said finally. "With us." Egwene's eyebrows shot up, and Perrin's mouth dropped open. "Well, what could be safer?" Elyas challenged. "Trollocs will take any chance they get to kill a wolf by itself, but they'll go miles out of their way to avoid a pack. And you won't have to worry about Aes Sedai, either. They don't often come into these woods."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ." pɛɹɪn əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə wʊlvz tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm. wʌn wɑz dæpəl, ən i kəd fil əɹ aɪz ɑn hɪm. "fɔɹ wʌn θɪŋ, ɪɾ ɪzən dʒʌs ðə tʃɹɑləks."

"I don't know." Perrin avoided looking at the wolves to either side of him. One was Dapple, and he could feel her eyes on him. "For one thing, it isn't just the Trollocs."

ɛlaɪəs tʃʌkəl koʊldli. "aɪv sin ə pæk pʊl daʊn wʌn ə ði aɪləs, tu. lɔs hæf ðə pæk, bʌt ðeɪ wʊdnt ɡɪv ʌp wʌns ðeɪ hæɾ ɪts sɛnt. tʃɹɑləks, mɹdʒɹɑl, ɪts ɔl wʌn tə ðə wʊlvz. ɪts jə ðeɪ ɹɪli wɑnt, bɔɪ. ðeɪv hɝɾ ʌv ʌðɝ mɛn u kən tɔk tə wʊlvz, bʌt jəɹ ðə fɝs ðeɪv ɛvɝ mɛt bɪsaɪdz mi. ðəl æksɛp jəɹ fɹɛnd, tu, ðoʊ, ən jəl ɔl bi seɪfɝ hɪɹ ðən ɪn ɛni sɪɾi. ðɛɹz dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn sɪɾiz."

Elyas chuckled coldly. "I've seen a pack pull down one of the Eyeless, too. Lost half the pack, but they wouldn't give up once they had its scent. Trollocs, Myrddraal, it's all one to the wolves. It's you they really want, boy. They've heard of other men who can talk to wolves, but you're the first they've ever met besides me. They'll accept your friend, too, though, and you'll all be safer here than in any city. There's Darkfriends in cities."

"lɪsən," pɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɝdʒənli, "aɪ wɪʃ jud stɑp seɪɪŋ ðæt. aɪ kænt - də ðət . . . wʌt jə du, wʌt jəɹ seɪɪŋ."

"Listen," Perrin said urgently, "I wish you'd stop saying that. I can't - do that . . . what you do, what you're saying."

"æz jə wɪʃ, bɔɪ. pleɪ ðə ɡoʊt, ɪf juv ə maɪn tə. doʊn jə wɑnə bi seɪf?"

"As you wish, boy. Play the goat, if you've a mind to. Don't you want to be safe?"

"aɪm nɑt dɪsivɪŋ maɪsɛlf. ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ tə dɪsiv maɪsɛlf əbaʊt. ɔl wi wɑnt - "

"I'm not deceiving myself. There's nothing to deceive myself about. All we want - "

"wi ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn," ɛɡwin spoʊk ʌp fɝmli. "æn ðən tə tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"We are going to Caemlyn," Egwene spoke up firmly. "And then to Tar Valon."

kloʊzɪŋ ɪz maʊθ, pɛɹɪn mɛɾ əɹ æŋɡɹi lʊk wɪð wʌn ə hɪz oʊn. hi nu ðət ʃi fɑloʊɾ ɪz lɛd wən ʃi wɑntəd tə ən nɑt wən ʃi dɪd nɑt, bʌt ʃi kəɾ ət lis lɛɾ ɪm ænsɝ fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ju, pɛɹɪn?" hi sɛd, ən ænsɝd hɪmsɛlf. "mi? wɛl, lemi θɪŋk. jɛs. jɛs, aɪ θɪŋk əl ɡoʊ ɑn." hi tɝn ə maɪl smaɪl ɑn hɝ. "wɛl, ɛɡwin, ðət meɪks boʊθ ʌv ʌs. aɪ ɡɛs aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ wɪð ju, ət ðæt. ɡʊd tə tɔk ðiz θɪŋz aʊt bɪfɔɹ meɪkɪŋ ə dɪsɪʒən, ɪzən ɪt?" ʃi blʌʃt, bʌt ðə sɛɾ ə hɝ dʒɔ nɛvɝ lɛsənd.

Closing his mouth, Perrin met her angry look with one of his own. He knew that she followed his lead when she wanted to and not when she did not, but she could at least let him answer for himself. "What about you, Perrin?" he said, and answered himself. "Me? Well, let me think. Yes. Yes, I think I'll go on." He turned a mild smile on her. "Well, Egwene, that makes both of us. I guess I'm going with you, at that. Good to talk these things out before making a decision, isn't it?" She blushed, but the set of her jaw never lessened.

ɛlaɪəs ɡɹʌntɪd. "dæpəl sɛd ðæts wʌt jud dɪsaɪd. ʃi sɛd ðə ɡɝlz plæntəd fɝmli ɪn ðə hjumən wɝld, waɪl ju" - hi nɑɾəd ət pɛɹɪn -  "stæn hæfweɪ bɪtwin. ʌndɝ ðə sɝkəmstænsəz, aɪ səpoʊz wid bɛɾɝ ɡoʊ saʊθ wɪð ju. ʌðɝwaɪz, jəl pɹɑbli stɑɹv tə dɛθ, əɹ ɡɛt lɔst, əɹ - "

Elyas grunted. "Dapple said that's what you'd decide. She said the girl's planted firmly in the human world, while you" - he nodded at Perrin -  "stand halfway between. Under the circumstances, I suppose we'd better go south with you. Otherwise, you'll probably starve to death, or get lost, or - "

əbɹʌpli bɝn stʊɾ ʌp, ən ɛlaɪəs tɝn ɪz hɛd tə ɹəɡɑɹd ðə bɪɡ wʊlf. æftɝ ə moʊmən dæpəl ɹoʊz, tu. ʃi muv kloʊsɝ tə ɛlaɪəs, soʊ ðət ʃi ɔlsoʊ wɑz miɾɪŋ bɝnz stɛɹ. ðə təbloʊ wɑz fɹoʊzən fəɹ lɔŋ mɪnəts, ðən bɝn wɝld ən vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə naɪt. dæpəl ʃʊk hɝsɛlf, ðən ɹɪzumd əɹ pleɪs, flɑpɪŋ daʊn əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ hæd hæpənd.

Abruptly Burn stood up, and Elyas turned his head to regard the big wolf. After a moment Dapple rose, too. She moved closer to Elyas, so that she also was meeting Burn's stare. The tableau was frozen for long minutes, then Burn whirled and vanished into the night. Dapple shook herself, then resumed her place, flopping down as if nothing had happened.

ɛlaɪəs mɛt pɛɹɪnz kwɛstʃənɪŋ aɪz. "dæpəl ɹʌnz ðɪs pæk," hi ɪkspleɪnd. "sʌm ə ðə meɪlz kəd bɛst əɹ ɪf ðeɪ tʃælənʒd, bʌt ʃiz smɑɹɾɝ ðən ɛni ʌv ðɛm, ən ðeɪ ɔl noʊ ɪt. ʃiz seɪv ðə pæk mɔɹ ðən wʌns. bʌt bɝn θɪŋks ðə pæk ɪz weɪstɪŋ taɪm wɪð jə θɹi. heɪɾɪŋ tʃɹɑləks ɪz əbaʊɾ ɔl ðəɹ ɪz tə hɪm, ən ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ tʃɹɑləks ðɪs fɑɹ saʊθ i wɑns tə bi ɔf kɪlɪŋ ðɛm."

Elyas met Perrin's questioning eyes. "Dapple runs this pack," he explained. "Some of the males could best her if they challenged, but she's smarter than any of them, and they all know it. She's saved the pack more than once. But Burn thinks the pack is wasting time with you three. Hating Trollocs is about all there is to him, and if there are Trollocs this far south he wants to be off killing them."

"wi kwaɪɾ ʌndɝstænd," ɛɡwin sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɹɪlivd. "wi ɹɪli kən faɪn əɹ oʊn weɪ . . . wɪð səm dɝɛkʃənz, ʌv kɔɹs, ɪf jəl ɡɪv ðɛm."

"We quite understand," Egwene said, sounding relieved. "We really can find our own way . . . with some directions, of course, if you'll give them."

ɛlaɪəs weɪvd ə hænd. "aɪ sɛd dæpəl lidz ðɪs pæk, dɪdn aɪ? ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, əl stɑɹt saʊθ wɪð ju, ən soʊ wɪl ðeɪ." ɛɡwin lʊkt əz ɪf ðət wɑz nɑt ðə bɛs nuz ʃi kəɾ əv hɝd.

Elyas waved a hand. "I said Dapple leads this pack, didn't I? In the morning, I'll start south with you, and so will they." Egwene looked as if that was not the best news she could have heard.

pɛɹɪn sæt ɹæpt ɪn ɪz oʊn saɪləns. hi kəd fil bɝn livɪŋ. ən ðə skɑɹd meɪl wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn; ə dʌzən ʌðɝz, ɔl jʌŋ meɪlz, loʊpt æftɝ hɪm. hi wɑntəd tə bɪliv ɪt wɑz ɔl ɛlaɪəs pleɪɪŋ ɑn ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt. dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ ðə dɪpɑɹɾɪŋ wʊlvz feɪɾəd fɹəm ɪz maɪnd, hi fɛlt ə θɔɾ i nu keɪm fɹəm bɝn, əz ʃɑɹp ən klɪɹ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɪz oʊn θɔt. heɪtʃɹəd. heɪtʃɹəɾ ən ðə teɪst ə blʌd.

Perrin sat wrapped in his own silence. He could feel Burn leaving. And the scarred male was not the only one; a dozen others, all young males, loped after him. He wanted to believe it was all Elyas playing on his imagination, but he could not. Just before the departing wolves faded from his mind, he felt a thought he knew came from Burn, as sharp and clear as if it were his own thought. Hatred. Hatred and the taste of blood.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifɔɹ


CHAPTER 24

flaɪt daʊn ði ɑɹɪnɛl


Flight Down the Arinelle

wɔɾɝ dʒɹɪpt ɪn ðə dɪstəns, hɑloʊ splæʃəz ɛkoʊɪŋ ən ɹitʃoʊɪŋ, luzɪŋ ðɛɹ sɔɹs fɝɛvɝ. ðəɹ wɝ stoʊn bɹɪdʒəz ən ɹeɪləs ɹæmps ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ɔl spɹaʊɾɪŋ ɔf fɹəm bɹɔd, flæt-tɑp stoʊn spaɪɹz, ɔl pɑlɪʃt ən smuð ən stʃɹikt wɪð ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊld. lɛvəl ɑn lɛvəl, ðə meɪz stʃɹɛtʃt ʌp ən daʊn θɹu ðə mɝk, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni əpɛɹən bɪɡɪnɪŋ əɹ ɛnd. ɛvɹi bɹɪdʒ lɛd tə ə spaɪɹ, ɛvɹi ɹæmp tə ənʌðɝ spaɪɹ, ʌðɝ bɹɪdʒəz. wʌtɛvɝ dɝɛkʃən ɹænd lʊkt, əz fɑɹ əz ɪz aɪ kəd meɪk aʊɾ ɪn ðə dɪmnəs ɪt wɑz ðə seɪm, əbʌv əz wɛl əz bɪloʊ. ðəɹ wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf laɪt tə si klɪɹli, ən i wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɡlæɾ ʌv ɪt. səm ə ðoʊz ɹæmps lɛd tə plætfɔɹmz ðət hæd tə bi dɝɛkli əbʌv ðə wʌnz bɪloʊ. hi kəd nɑt si ðə beɪs ʌv ɛni ʌv ðɛm. hi pɹɛst, sikɪŋ fɹiɾəm, noʊɪŋ ɪt wɑz ən ɪluʒən. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɪluʒən.

Water dripped in the distance, hollow splashes echoing and reechoing, losing their source forever. There were stone bridges and railless ramps everywhere, all sprouting off from broad, flat-topped stone spires, all polished and smooth and streaked with red and gold. Level on level, the maze stretched up and down through the murk, without any apparent beginning or end. Every bridge led to a spire, every ramp to another spire, other bridges. Whatever direction Rand looked, as far as his eye could make out in the dimness it was the same, above as well as below. There was not enough light to see clearly, and he was almost glad of it. Some of those ramps led to platforms that had to be directly above the ones below. He could not see the base of any of them. He pressed, seeking freedom, knowing it was an illusion. Everything was illusion.

hi nu ði ɪluʒən; hi hæd fɑloʊɾ ɪt tu mɛni taɪmz nɑt tə noʊ. haʊɛvɝ fɑɹ i wɛnt, ʌp əɹ daʊn əɹ ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən, ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə ʃaɪni stoʊn. stoʊn, bʌt ðə dæŋknəs ə dip, fɹɛʃ-tɝn ɝθ pɝmieɪɾɪd ði ɛɹ, ən ðə sɪkli switnəs ə dəkeɪ. ðə smɛl ʌv ə ɡɹeɪv oʊpən aʊɾ ʌv ɪts taɪm. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə bɹið, bʌt ðə smɛl fɪld ɪz nɑstʃɹəlz. ɪt klʌŋ tə hɪz skɪn laɪk ɔɪl.

He knew the illusion; he had followed it too many times not to know. However far he went, up or down or in any direction, there was only the shiny stone. Stone, but the dankness of deep, fresh-turned earth permeated the air, and the sickly sweetness of decay. The smell of a grave opened out of its time. He tried not to breathe, but the smell filled his nostrils. It clung to his skin like oil.

ə flɪkɝ ə moʊʃən kɑɾ ɪz aɪ, ən i fɹoʊz wɛɹ i wɑz, hæf kɹaʊtʃt əɡɛns ðə pɑlɪʃt ɡɑɹdwəl ɝaʊnd wʌn ə ðə spaɪɹ tɑps. ɪt wɑz noʊ haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs. fɹəm ə θaʊzən pleɪsəz ə wɑtʃɝ cʊɾə sin hɪm. ʃædoʊ fɪl ði ɛɹ, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ noʊ dipɝ ʃædoʊz ɪn wɪtʃ tə haɪd. ðə laɪt dɪd nɑt kʌm fɹəm læmps, əɹ læntɝnz, əɹ tɔɹtʃɪz; ɪt wɑz sɪmpli ðɛɹ, sətʃ əz ɪt wɑz, əz ɪf ɪt sipt aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ. ɪnʌf baɪ wɪtʃ tə si, æftɝ ə fæʃən; ɪnʌf baɪ wɪtʃ tə bi sin. bʌt stɪlnəs ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl pɹətɛkʃən.

A flicker of motion caught his eye, and he froze where he was, half crouched against the polished guardwall around one of the spire tops. It was no hiding place. From a thousand places a watcher could have seen him. Shadow filled the air, but there were no deeper shadows in which to hide. The light did not come from lamps, or lanterns, or torches; it was simply there, such as it was, as if it seeped out of the air. Enough by which to see, after a fashion; enough by which to be seen. But stillness gave a little protection.

ðə muvmən keɪm əɡɛn, ən naʊ ɪt wɑz klɪɹ. ə mæn stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp ə dɪstən ɹæmp, kɛɹləs ə ðə læk ə ɹeɪlɪŋz ən ðə dʒɹɑp tə nʌθɪŋ bɪloʊ. ðə mænz kloʊk ɹɪpəld wɪð ɪz steɪtli heɪst, ən ɪz hɛd tɝnd, sɝtʃɪŋ, sɝtʃɪŋ. ðə dɪstəns wɑz tu fɑɹ fəɹ ɹænd tə si mɔɹ ðən ðə ʃeɪp ɪn ðə mɝk, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt nid tə bi kloʊsɝ tə noʊ ðə kloʊk wɑz ðə ɹɛɾ ə fɹɛʃ blʌd, ðət ðə sɝtʃɪŋ aɪz bleɪz laɪk tu fɝnəsəz.

The movement came again, and now it was clear. A man striding up a distant ramp, careless of the lack of railings and the drop to nothing below. The man's cloak rippled with his stately haste, and his head turned, searching, searching. The distance was too far for Rand to see more than the shape in the murk, but he did not need to be closer to know the cloak was the red of fresh blood, that the searching eyes blazed like two furnaces.

hi tʃɹaɪd tʃɹeɪsɪŋ ðə meɪz wɪð ɪz aɪz, tə si haʊ mɛni kənɛkʃənz bælzəmən niɾəd bɪfɔɹ ɹitʃɪŋ hɪm, ðən ɡeɪv ɪɾ ʌp əz jusləs. dɪstənsəz wɝ dɪsivɪŋ hɪɹ, ənʌðɝ lɛsən i hæd lɝnd. wʌt sim fɑɹ əweɪ maɪt bi ɹitʃt baɪ tɝnɪŋ ə kɔɹnɝ; wʌɾ əpɪɹd kloʊs kəd bi aʊɾ ə ɹitʃ ɔltəɡɛðɝ. ði oʊnli θɪŋ tə du, əz ɪt hæd bɪn fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, wɑz tə kip muvɪŋ. kip muvɪŋ, ən nɑt θɪŋk. θɪŋkɪŋ wɑz deɪnʒɝəs, hi nu.

He tried tracing the maze with his eyes, to see how many connections Ba'alzamon needed before reaching him, then gave it up as useless. Distances were deceiving here, another lesson he had learned. What seemed far away might be reached by turning a corner; what appeared close could be out of reach altogether. The only thing to do, as it had been from the beginning, was to keep moving. Keep moving, and not think. Thinking was dangerous, he knew.

jɛt, əz i tɝn əweɪ fɹəm bælzəmənz dɪstən fɔɹm, hi kəd nɑt hɛlp wʌndɝɪŋ əbaʊt mæt. wɑz mæt sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðɪs meɪz? əɹ ɑɹ ðəɹ tu meɪzɪz, tu bælzəmənz? hɪz maɪn skɪɾɝd əweɪ fɹəm ðæt; ɪt wɑz tu dʒɹɛdfəl tə dwɛl ɑn. ɪz ðɪs laɪk bɛɹlən? ðən waɪ kæn i faɪn mi? ðət wɑz ə lɪɾəl bɛɾɝ. ə smɔl kʌmfɝt. kʌmfɝt? blʌɾ ən æʃəz, wɛɹz ðə kʌmfɝɾ ɪn ɪt?

Yet, as he turned away from Ba'alzamon's distant form, he could not help wondering about Mat. Was Mat somewhere in this maze? Or are there two mazes, two Ba'alzamons? His mind skittered away from that; it was too dreadful to dwell on. Is this like Baerlon? Then why can't he find me? That was a little better. A small comfort. Comfort? Blood and ashes, where's the comfort in it?

ðəɹ hæd bɪn tu əɹ θɹi kloʊs bɹʌʃɪz, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ əm klɪɹli, bʌt fəɹ ə lɔŋ, lɔŋ taɪm - haʊ lɔŋ? - hi hæd ɹʌn waɪl bælzəmən veɪnli pɝsud. wɑz ðɪs laɪk bɛɹlən, əɹ wɑz ɪɾ oʊnli ə naɪtmɛɹ, oʊnli ə dʒɹim laɪk ʌðɝ mɛnz dʒɹimz?

There had been two or three close brushes, though he could not remember them clearly, but for a long, long time - how long? - he had run while Ba'alzamon vainly pursued. Was this like Baerlon, or was it only a nightmare, only a dream like other men's dreams?

fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ðən - dʒʌs fəɹ ðə lɛŋθ ə taɪm ɪt tʊk tə teɪk ə bɹɛθ - hi nu waɪ ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs tə θɪŋk, wʌɾ ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs tə θɪŋk əbaʊt. əz ɪt hæd bɪfɔɹ, ɛvɹi taɪm i əlaʊd hɪmsɛlf tə θɪŋk ʌv wʌt sɝaʊndəɾ ɪm əz ə dʒɹim, ði ɛɹ ʃɪmɝd, klaʊɾɪŋ ɪz aɪz. ɪt tɝn tə dʒɛl, hoʊldɪŋ hɪm. dʒʌs fəɹ ən ɪnstənt.

For an instant, then - just for the length of time it took to take a breath - he knew why it was dangerous to think, what it was dangerous to think about. As it had before, every time he allowed himself to think of what surrounded him as a dream, the air shimmered, clouding his eyes. It turned to jell, holding him. Just for an instant.

ðə ɡɹɪɾi hit pɹɪkəld ɪz skɪn, ən ɪz θɹoʊt hæd lɔŋ sɪns ɡɔn dʒɹaɪ əz i tʃɹɑɾəd daʊn ðə θɔɹn-hɛdʒ meɪz. haʊ lɔŋ hæɾ ɪt bɪn naʊ? hɪz swɛɾ ɪvæpɝeɪɾəd bɪfɔɹ ɪt hæɾ ə tʃæns tə bid, ən ɪz aɪz bɝnd. oʊvɝhɛd - ən nɑt tu fɑɹ oʊvɝhɛd, ət ðət - bɔɪl fjʊɹiəs, stili klaʊdz stʃɹikt wɪð blæk, bʌt nɑɾ ə bɹɛθ ʌv ɛɹ stɝɾ ɪn ðə meɪz. fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔɾ ɪt hæd bɪn dɪfɹənt, bʌt ðə θɔɾ ɪvæpɝeɪɾəd ɪn ðə hit. hi hæd bɪn hɪɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm. ɪt wɑz deɪnʒɝəs tə θɪŋk, hi nu ðæt.

The gritty heat prickled his skin, and his throat had long since gone dry as he trotted down the thorn-hedge maze. How long had it been now? His sweat evaporated before it had a chance to bead, and his eyes burned. Overhead - and not too far overhead, at that - boiled furious, steely clouds streaked with black, but not a breath of air stirred in the maze. For a moment he thought it had been different, but the thought evaporated in the heat. He had been here a long time. It was dangerous to think, he knew that.

smuð stoʊnz, peɪl ən ɹaʊndəd, meɪɾ ə skɛtʃi peɪvmənt, hæf bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə boʊn-dʒɹaɪ dʌs ðət ɹoʊz ɪn pʌfs əɾ ivən ɪz laɪɾəst stɛp. ɪt tɪkəld ɪz noʊz, θɹɛɾənɪŋ ə sniz ðət maɪt ɡɪv ɪm əweɪ; wən i tʃɹaɪd tə bɹið θɹu hɪz maʊθ, dʌs klɔɡd ɪz θɹoʊɾ əntɪl i tʃoʊkt.

Smooth stones, pale and rounded, made a sketchy pavement, half buried in the bone-dry dust that rose in puffs at even his lightest step. It tickled his nose, threatening a sneeze that might give him away; when he tried to breathe through his mouth, dust clogged his throat until he choked.

ðɪs wɑz ə deɪnʒɝəs pleɪs; hi nu ðæt, tu. əhɛɾ ə hɪm i kəd si θɹi oʊpənɪŋz ɪn ðə haɪ wɔl ə θɔɹnz, ðən ðə weɪ kɝvd aʊɾ ə saɪt. bælzəmən kəd bi əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ ɛni wʌn ə ðoʊz kɔɹnɝz ət ðət vɛɹi moʊmənt. ðəɹ hæd bɪn tu əɹ θɹi ɪnkaʊntɝz ɔlɹɛɾi, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ mʌtʃ bɪɑn ðət ðeɪ hæd hæpən ən i hæɾ ɪskeɪpt . . . sʌmhaʊ. deɪnʒɝəs tə θɪŋk tu mʌtʃ.

This was a dangerous place; he knew that, too. Ahead of him he could see three openings in the high wall of thorns, then the way curved out of sight. Ba'alzamon could be approaching any one of those corners at that very moment. There had been two or three encounters already, though he could not remember much beyond that they had happened and he had escaped . . . somehow. Dangerous to think too much.

pæntɪŋ ɪn ðə hit, hi stɑp tə ɪɡzæmɪn ðə meɪz wɔl. θɪkli woʊvən θɔɹn bʊʃəz, bɹaʊn ən dɛd-lʊkɪŋ, wɪð kɹuəl blæk θɔɹnz laɪk ɪntʃ-lɔŋ hʊks. tu tɔl tə si oʊvɝ, tu dɛns tə si θɹu. dʒɪnʒɝli hi tʌtʃt ðə wɔl, ən ɡæspt. dɪspaɪɾ ɔl ɪz kɛɹ, ə θɔɹn pɪɹst ɪz fɪŋɡɝ, bɝnɪŋ laɪk ə hɑt niɾəl. hi stʌmbəl bæk, hɪz hilz kætʃɪŋ ɑn ðə stoʊnz, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hæn ən skæɾɝɪŋ θɪk dʒɹɑps ə blʌd. ðə bɝn bɪɡæn tə səbsaɪd, bʌɾ ɪz hoʊl hæn θɹɑbd.

Panting in the heat, he stopped to examine the maze wall. Thickly woven thorn bushes, brown and dead-looking, with cruel black thorns like inch-long hooks. Too tall to see over, too dense to see through. Gingerly he touched the wall, and gasped. Despite all his care, a thorn pierced his finger, burning like a hot needle. He stumbled back, his heels catching on the stones, shaking his hand and scattering thick drops of blood. The burn began to subside, but his whole hand throbbed.

əbɹʌpli hi fɝɡɑt ðə peɪn. hɪz hil hæɾ oʊvɝtɝnd wʌn ə ðə smuð stoʊnz, kɪkt ɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə dʒɹaɪ ɡɹaʊnd. hi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt, ən ɛmpti aɪ sɑkəts stɛɹd bæk. ə skʌl. ə hjumən skʌl. hi lʊkt əlɔŋ ðə pæθweɪ əɾ ɔl ðə smuð, peɪl stoʊnz, ɔl ɪɡzækli əlaɪk. hi ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fit heɪstəli, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt muv wɪθaʊt wɔkɪŋ ɑn ðɛm, ən i kəd nɑt steɪ stɪl wɪθaʊt stændɪŋ ɑn ðɛm. ə stʃɹeɪ θɔt tʊk veɪɡ ʃeɪp, ðət θɪŋz maɪt nɑt bi wʌt ðeɪ simd, bʌɾ i pʊʃt ɪt daʊn ɹuθləsli. θɪŋkɪŋ wɑz deɪnʒɝəs hɪɹ.

Abruptly he forgot the pain. His heel had overturned one of the smooth stones, kicked it out of the dry ground. He stared at it, and empty eye sockets stared back. A skull. A human skull. He looked along the pathway at all the smooth, pale stones, all exactly alike. He shifted his feet hastily, but he could not move without walking on them, and he could not stay still without standing on them. A stray thought took vague shape, that things might not be what they seemed, but he pushed it down ruthlessly. Thinking was dangerous here.

hi tʊk ə ʃeɪki hoʊld ɑn hɪmsɛlf. steɪɪŋ ɪn wʌn pleɪs wɑz deɪnʒɝəs, tu. ðət wɑz wʌn ə ðə θɪŋz i nu dɪmli bʌt wɪð sɝɾənti. ðə floʊ ʌv blʌd fɹəm ɪz fɪŋɡɝ hæd dwɪndəl tə ə sloʊ dʒɹɪp, ən ðə θɹəb wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɡɔn. sʌkɪŋ ɪz fɪŋɡɝɾɪp, hi stɑɹɾəd daʊn ðə pæθ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən i hæpən tə bi feɪsɪŋ. wʌn weɪ wɑz əz ɡʊɾ əz ənʌðɝ ɪn hɪɹ.

He took a shaky hold on himself. Staying in one place was dangerous, too. That was one of the things he knew dimly but with certainty. The flow of blood from his finger had dwindled to a slow drip, and the throb was almost gone. Sucking his fingertip, he started down the path in the direction he happened to be facing. One way was as good as another in here.

naʊ hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd hɪɹɪŋ wʌns ðət jə kəd ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ʌv ə meɪz baɪ ɔlweɪz tɝnɪŋ ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən. ət ðə fɝst oʊpənɪŋ ɪn ðə wɔl ə θɔɹnz i tɝn ɹaɪt, ðən ɹaɪɾ əɡɛn ət ðə nɛkst. ən faʊn hɪmsɛlf feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð bælzəmən.

Now he remembered hearing once that you could get out of a maze by always turning in the same direction. At the first opening in the wall of thorns he turned right, then right again at the next. And found himself face-to-face with Ba'alzamon.

sɝpɹaɪz flɪɾɪd əkɹɔs bælzəmənz feɪs, ən ɪz blʌd-ɹɛd kloʊk sɛɾəld əz i stɑpt ʃɔɹt. fleɪmz sɔɹɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz, bʌɾ ɪn ðə hiɾ ə ðə meɪz ɹænd bɛɹli fɛl ðɛm.

Surprise flitted across Ba'alzamon's face, and his blood-red cloak settled as he stopped short. Flames soared in his eyes, but in the heat of the maze Rand barely felt them.

"haʊ lɔŋ dʒju θɪŋk jə kən ɪveɪd mi, bɔɪ? haʊ lɔŋ dʒju θɪŋk jə kən ɪveɪd jəɹ feɪt? jə ɑɹ maɪn!"

"How long do you think you can evade me, boy? How long do you think you can evade your fate? You are mine!"

stʌmbəlɪŋ bæk, ɹænd wʌndɝd waɪ hi wɑz fʌmbəlɪŋ əɾ ɪz bɛlt, əz ɪf fəɹ ə sɔɹd. "laɪt hɛlp mi," hi mʌɾɝd. "laɪt hɛlp mi." hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt.

Stumbling back, Rand wondered why he was fumbling at his belt, as if for a sword. "Light help me," he muttered. "Light help me." He could not remember what it meant.

"ðə laɪt wɪl nɑt hɛlp ju, bɔɪ, ən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld wɪl nɑt sɝv ju. jə ɑɹ maɪ haʊnd, ən ɪf jəl nɑt kɔɹs ət maɪ kəmænd, əl stʃɹæŋɡəl jə wɪð ðə kɔɹps ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt!"

"The Light will not help you, boy, and the Eye of the World will not serve you. You are my hound, and if you will not course at my command, I will strangle you with the corpse of the Great Serpent!"

bælzəmən stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɪz hænd, ən sʌɾənli ɹænd nu ə weɪ tə ɪskeɪp, ə mɪsti, hæf-fɔɹmd mɛmɹi ðət skɹim deɪnʒɝ, bʌt nʌθɪŋ tə ðə deɪnʒɝ ə biɪŋ tʌtʃt baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

Ba'alzamon stretched out his hand, and suddenly Rand knew a way to escape, a misty, half-formed memory that screamed danger, but nothing to the danger of being touched by the Dark One.

"ə dʒɹim!" ɹænd ʃaʊɾəd. "ðɪs ɪz ə dʒɹim!"

"A dream!" Rand shouted. "This is a dream!"

bælzəmənz aɪz bɪɡæn tə waɪɾən, ɪn sɝpɹaɪz əɹ æŋɡɝ əɹ boʊθ, ðən ði ɛɹ ʃɪmɝd, ən ɪz fitʃɝz blɝd, ən feɪɾəd.

Ba'alzamon's eyes began to widen, in surprise or anger or both, then the air shimmered, and his features blurred, and faded.

ɹænd tɝn əbaʊɾ ɪn wʌn spɑt, stɛɹɪŋ. stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪz oʊn ɪmədʒ θɹoʊn bæk əɾ ɪm ə θaʊzændfoʊld. tɛn θaʊzændfoʊld. əbʌv wɑz blæknəs, ən blæknəs bɪloʊ, bʌɾ ɔl ɝaʊn ɪm stʊd mɪɹɝz, mɪɹɝz sɛɾ əɾ ɛvɹi æŋɡəl, mɪɹɝz əz fɑɹ əz i kəd si, ɔl ʃoʊɪŋ hɪm, kɹaʊtʃt ən tɝnɪŋ, stɛɹɪŋ waɪd-aɪɾ ən fɹaɪɾənd.

Rand turned about in one spot, staring. Staring at his own image thrown back at him a thousandfold. Ten thousandfold. Above was blackness, and blackness below, but all around him stood mirrors, mirrors set at every angle, mirrors as far as he could see, all showing him, crouched and turning, staring wide-eyed and frightened.

ə ɹɛd blɝ dʒɹɪftəɾ əkɹɔs ðə mɪɹɝz. hi spʌn, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kætʃ ɪt, bʌɾ ɪn ɛvɹi mɪɹɝ ɪt dʒɹɪftəd bɪhaɪn ɪz oʊn ɪmədʒ ən vænɪʃt. ðən ɪt wɑz bæk əɡɛn, bʌt nɑɾ əz ə blɝ. bælzəmən stʃɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə mɪɹɝz, tɛn θaʊzən bælzəmənz, sɝtʃɪŋ, kɹɔsɪŋ ən ɹɛkɹɔsɪŋ ðə sɪlvɝi mɪɹɝz.

A red blur drifted across the mirrors. He spun, trying to catch it, but in every mirror it drifted behind his own image and vanished. Then it was back again, but not as a blur. Ba'alzamon strode across the mirrors, ten thousand Ba'alzamons, searching, crossing and recrossing the silvery mirrors.

hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɹəflɛkʃən ə hɪz oʊn feɪs, peɪl ən ʃɪvɝɪŋ ɪn ðə naɪf-ɛdʒ koʊld. bælzəmənz ɪmədʒ ɡɹu bɪhaɪn hɪz, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm; nɑt siɪŋ, bʌt stɛɹɪŋ stɪl. ɪn ɛvɹi mɪɹɝ, ðə fleɪmz ə bælzəmənz feɪs ɹeɪdʒ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ɪnvɛləpɪŋ, kənsumɪŋ, mɝdʒɪŋ. hi wɑntəd tə skɹim, bʌɾ ɪz θɹoʊt wɑz fɹoʊzən. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn feɪs ɪn ðoʊz ɛnləs mɪɹɝz. hɪz oʊn feɪs. bælzəmənz feɪs. wʌn feɪs.

He found himself staring at the reflection of his own face, pale and shivering in the knife-edge cold. Ba'alzamon's image grew behind his, staring at him; not seeing, but staring still. In every mirror, the flames of Ba'alzamon's face raged behind him, enveloping, consuming, merging. He wanted to scream, but his throat was frozen. There was only one face in those endless mirrors. His own face. Ba'alzamon's face. One face.

ɹænd dʒɝkt, ən oʊpən ɪz aɪz. dɑɹknəs, lɛsən oʊnli slaɪtli baɪ ə peɪl laɪt. bɛɹli bɹiðɪŋ, hi muv nʌθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ɪz aɪz. ə ɹʌf wʊl blæŋkət kʌvɝɾ ɪm tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ən ɪz hɛd wɑz kɹæɾəld ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz. hi kəd fil smuð wʊɾən plæŋks ʌndɝ ɪz hænz. dɛk plæŋks. ɹɪɡɪŋ kɹikt ɪn ðə naɪt. hi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ. hi wɑz ɑn ðə spɹeɪ. ɪt wɑz oʊvɝ . . . fəɹ ənʌðɝ naɪt, ət list.

Rand jerked, and opened his eyes. Darkness, lessened only slightly by a pale light. Barely breathing, he moved nothing except his eyes. A rough wool blanket covered him to his shoulders, and his head was cradled on his arms. He could feel smooth wooden planks under his hands. Deck planks. Rigging creaked in the night. He let out a long breath. He was on the Spray. It was over . . . for another night, at least.

wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ i pʊɾ ɪz fɪŋɡɝ ɪn ɪz maʊθ. ət ðə teɪst ə blʌd, hi stɑp bɹiðɪŋ. sloʊli hi pʊɾ ɪz hæn kloʊs tə hɪz feɪs, tə wɛɹ i kəd si ɪn ðə dɪm munlaɪt, tə wɛɹ i kəd wɑtʃ ðə biɾ ə blʌd fɔɹm ɑn ɪz fɪŋɡɝɾɪp. blʌd fɹəm ðə pɹɪk ʌv ə θɔɹn.

Without thinking he put his finger in his mouth. At the taste of blood, he stopped breathing. Slowly he put his hand close to his face, to where he could see in the dim moonlight, to where he could watch the bead of blood form on his fingertip. Blood from the prick of a thorn.

ðə spɹeɪ meɪd heɪst sloʊli daʊn ði ɑɹɪnɛl. ðə wɪn keɪm stʃɹɔŋ, bʌt fɹəm dɝɛkʃənz ðət meɪd ðə seɪlz jusləs. wɪð ɔl kæptən doʊmənz dɪmæn fəɹ spid, ðə vɛsəl kɹɛpt əlɔŋ. baɪ naɪɾ ə mæn ɪn ðə baʊz kæst ə tæloʊd lɛd baɪ læntɝn laɪt, kɔlɪŋ bæk ðə dɛpθ tə ðə stɪɹsmən, waɪl ðə kɝən kæɹiɾ əɹ daʊnɹɪvɝ əɡɛns ðə wɪnd wɪð ðə swips pʊld ɪn. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɹɑks tə fɪɹ ɪn ði ɑɹɪnɛl, bʌt ʃæloʊz ən ʃoʊlz ðəɹ wɝ əplɛnti, wɛɹ ə boʊt kəd ɡoʊ hɑɹɾ əɡɹaʊn tə ɹɪmeɪn, baʊz ən mɔɹ dʌɡ ɪndə ðə mʌd, əntɪl hɛlp keɪm. ɪf ɪt wɑz hɛlp ðət keɪm fɝst. baɪ deɪ ðə swips wɝk fɹəm sʌnɹaɪz tə sʌnsɛt, bʌt ðə wɪn fɔɾ əm əz ɪf ɪt wɑntəd tə pʊʃ ðə boʊt bæk ʌpɹɪvɝ.

The Spray made haste slowly down the Arinelle. The wind came strong, but from directions that made the sails useless. With all Captain Domon's demand for speed, the vessel crept along. By night a man in the bows cast a tallowed lead by lantern light, calling back the depth to the steersman, while the current carried her downriver against the wind with the sweeps pulled in. There were no rocks to fear in the Arinelle, but shallows and shoals there were aplenty, where a boat could go hard aground to remain, bows and more dug into the mud, until help came. If it was help that came first. By day the sweeps worked from sunrise to sunset, but the wind fought them as if it wanted to push the boat back upriver.

ðeɪ dɪd nɑt pʊɾ ɪn tə ʃɔɹ, niðɝ baɪ deɪ nɔɹ baɪ naɪt. beɪl doʊmən dʒɹoʊv boʊɾ ən kɹu əlaɪk hɑɹd, ɹeɪlɪŋ ət ðə kɑntʃɹɛɹi wɪnz, kɝsɪŋ ðə sloʊ peɪs. hi blɪstɝd ðə kɹu fəɹ slʌɡɑɝdz ət ði ɔɹz ən fleɪɾ əm wɪð ɪz tʌŋ fəɹ ɛvɹi mɪshændəld laɪn, hɪz loʊ, hɑɹd vɔɪs peɪntɪŋ tʃɹɑləks tɛn fit tɔl əmʌŋ əm ɑn ðə dɛk, ɹɪpɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ θɹoʊts. fəɹ tu deɪz ðət wɑz ɪnʌf tə sɛn ɛvɹi mæn lipɪŋ. ðən ðə ʃɑk ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ətæk bɪɡæn tə feɪd, ən mɛn bɪɡæn tə mʌɾɝ əbaʊɾ ən aʊɝ tə stʃɹɛtʃ ðɛɹ lɛɡz əʃɔɹ, ən əbaʊt ðə deɪnʒɝz ə ɹʌnɪŋ daʊnɹɪvɝ ɪn ðə dɑɹk.

They did not put in to shore, neither by day nor by night. Bayle Domon drove boat and crew alike hard, railing at the contrary winds, cursing the slow pace. He blistered the crew for sluggards at the oars and flayed them with his tongue for every mishandled line, his low, hard voice painting Trollocs ten feet tall among them on the deck, ripping out their throats. For two days that was enough to send every man leaping. Then the shock of the Trolloc attack began to fade, and men began to mutter about an hour to stretch their legs ashore, and about the dangers of running downriver in the dark.

ðə kɹu kɛp ðɛɹ ɡɹʌmbəlz kwaɪət, wɑtʃɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝz ə ðɛɹ aɪz tə meɪk ʃʊɹ kæptən doʊmən wɑz nɑt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ, bʌɾ i sim tə hɪɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ sɛɾ ɑn ɪz boʊt. itʃ taɪm ðə ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋz bɪɡæn, hi saɪlənli bɹɔɾ aʊt ðə lɔŋ, saɪð-laɪk sɔɹɾ ən kɹuli hʊkt æks ðət hæd bɪn faʊn ɑn ðə dɛk æftɝ ði ətæk. hi wəd hæŋ əm ɑn ðə mæs fəɹ ən aʊɝ, ən ðoʊz u hæd bɪn wundəd wəd fɪŋɡɝ ðɛɹ bændədʒəz, ən ðə mʌɾɝɪŋz kwaɪəɾəd fəɹ ə deɪ əɹ soʊ, ət list, əntɪl wʌn əɹ ənʌðɝ ə ðə kɹu bɪɡæn θɪŋkɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ ðət ʃʊɹli ðeɪ hæd lɛf ðə tʃɹɑləks fɑɹ bɪhaɪn baɪ naʊ, ən ðə saɪkəl bɪɡæn jɛɾ əɡɛn.

The crew kept their grumbles quiet, watching out of the corners of their eyes to make sure Captain Domon was not close enough to hear, but he seemed to hear everything said on his boat. Each time the grumblings began, he silently brought out the long, scythe-like sword and cruelly hooked axe that had been found on the deck after the attack. He would hang them on the mast for an hour, and those who had been wounded would finger their bandages, and the mutterings quieted for a day or so, at least, until one or another of the crew began thinking once more that surely they had left the Trollocs far behind by now, and the cycle began yet again.

ɹænd noʊɾəst ðət tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn steɪd klɪɹ ə ðə kɹu wən ðeɪ bɪɡæn wɪspɝɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ən fɹaʊnɪŋ, ðoʊ juʒəwəli hi wɑz slæpɪŋ bæks ən tɛlɪŋ dʒoʊks ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒɪŋ bæntɝ ɪn ə weɪ ðət pʊɾ ə ɡɹɪn ɑn ivən ðə hɑɹɾəst-wɝkɪŋ mæn. tɑm wɑtʃt ðoʊz sikɹəɾɪv mʌɾɝz wɪð ə wɛɹi aɪ waɪl əpɪɹɪŋ tə bi əbzɔɹbd ɪn laɪɾɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ-stɛm paɪp, əɹ tunɪŋ ɪz hɑɹp, əɹ ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛpt peɪɪŋ ɛni maɪn əɾ ɔl tə ðə kɹu. ɹænd dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə θɹi hu hæd kʌm əbɔɹd tʃeɪs baɪ tʃɹɑləks hum ðə kɹu sim tə bleɪm, bʌt ɹæðɝ flɔɹən dʒɛlb.

Rand noticed that Thom Merrilin stayed clear of the crew when they began whispering together and frowning, though usually he was slapping backs and telling jokes and exchanging banter in a way that put a grin on even the hardest-working man. Thom watched those secretive mutters with a wary eye while appearing to be absorbed in lighting his long-stemmed pipe, or tuning his harp, or almost anything except paying any mind at all to the crew. Rand did not understand why. It was not the three who had come aboard chased by Trollocs whom the crew seemed to blame, but rather Floran Gelb.

fəɹ ðə fɝs deɪ əɹ tu dʒɛlbz wɪɹi fɪɡjɝ kəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz bi faʊn ədʒɹɛsɪŋ ɛni kɹumən i kəd kɔɹnɝ, tɛlɪŋ ɪz vɝʒən ə ðə naɪt ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz keɪm ɑn bɔɹd. dʒɛlbz mænɝ slɪd fɹəm blʌstɝ tə waɪnz ən bæk əɡɛn, ən ɪz lɪp ɔlweɪz kɝld wən i pɔɪntəd tə tɑm əɹ mæt, əɹ ɪspɛʃli ɹænd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə leɪ ðə bleɪm ɑn ðɛm.

For the first day or two Gelb's wiry figure could almost always be found addressing any crewman he could corner, telling his version of the night Rand and the others came on board. Gelb's manner slid from bluster to whines and back again, and his lip always curled when he pointed to Thom or Mat, or especially Rand, trying to lay the blame on them.

"ðeɪɹ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz," dʒɛlb pliɾəd, kwaɪətli ən wɪð ən aɪ aʊt fəɹ ðə kæptən. "wʌt də wi noʊ ʌv ðɛm? ðə tʃɹɑləks keɪm wɪð ðɛm, ðæts wʌt wi noʊ. ðəɹ ɪn liɡ."

"They're strangers," Gelb pleaded, quietly and with an eye out for the captain. "What do we know of them? The Trollocs came with them, that's what we know. They're in league."

"fɔɹtʃən, dʒɛlb, stoʊ ɪt," ɡɹaʊld ə mæn wɪð ɪz hɛɹ ɪn ə pɪɡteɪl ən ə smɔl blu stɑɹ tætuɾ ɑn ɪz tʃik. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ət dʒɛlb əz i kɔɪld ə laɪn ɑn dɛk, wɝkɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn wɪð ɪz bɛɹ toʊz. ɔl ðə seɪlɝz wɛn bɛɹfʊt dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld; buts kəd slɪp ɑn ə wɛt dɛk. "jud kɔl jəɹ mʌðɝ dɑɹkfɹɛn ɪf ɪɾəd lɛt jə slæk. ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm mi!" hi spæɾ ɑn dʒɛlbz fʊɾ ən wɛn bæk tə ðə laɪn.

"Fortune, Gelb, stow it," growled a man with his hair in a pigtail and a small blue star tattooed on his cheek. He did not look at Gelb as he coiled a line on deck, working it in with his bare toes. All the sailors went barefoot despite the cold; boots could slip on a wet deck. "You'd call your mother Darkfriend if it'd let you slack. Get away from me!" He spat on Gelb's foot and went back to the line.

ɔl ðə kɹu ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə wɑtʃ dʒɛlb hæd nɑt kɛpt, ən ðə pɪɡteɪl mænz wɑz ðə pəlaɪɾəst ɹɪspɑns i ɡɑt. noʊ wʌn ivən wɑntəd tə wɝk wɪð hɪm. dʒɛlb faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɹɛləɡeɪɾɪd tə sɑlətɛɹi tæsks, ɔl ə ðɛm fɪlθi, sətʃ əz skɹʌbɪŋ ðə ɡæliz ɡɹisi pɑts, əɹ kɹɔlɪŋ ɪndə ðə bɪlʒz ɑn ɪz bɛli tə sɝtʃ fəɹ liks əmʌŋ jɪɹz ə slaɪm. sun i stɑp tɔkɪŋ tə ɛniwʌn. hɪz ʃoʊldɝz tʊk ɑn ə dɪfɛnsɪv hʌntʃ, ən ɪnʒɝd saɪləns bɪkeɪm ɪz stæns - ðə mɔɹ pipəl wɑtʃɪŋ, ðə mɔɹ ɪnʒɝd, ðoʊ ɪɾ ɝn ɪm noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə ɡɹʌnt. wən dʒɛlbz aɪz fɛl ɑn ɹænd, haʊɛvɝ, əɹ ɑn mæt əɹ tɑm, mɝɾɝ flæʃt əkɹɔs ɪz lɔŋ-noʊz feɪs.

All the crew remembered the watch Gelb had not kept, and the pigtailed man's was the politest response he got. No one even wanted to work with him. Gelb found himself relegated to solitary tasks, all of them filthy, such as scrubbing the galley's greasy pots, or crawling into the bilges on his belly to search for leaks among years of slime. Soon he stopped talking to anyone. His shoulders took on a defensive hunch, and injured silence became his stance - the more people watching, the more injured, though it earned him no more than a grunt. When Gelb's eyes fell on Rand, however, or on Mat or Thom, murder flashed across his long-nosed face.

wən ɹænd mɛnʃən tə mæt ðət dʒɛlb wəd kɑz əm tʃɹʌbəl sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, mæt lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə boʊt, seɪɪŋ, "kæn wi tʃɹʌst ɛni ʌv ðɛm? ɛni əɾ ɔl?" ðən i wɛn ɔf tə faɪn ə pleɪs wɛɹ i kəd bi əloʊn, əɹ əz əloʊn əz i kəd ɡɛɾ ɑn ə boʊt lɛs ðən θɝɾi peɪsɪz fɹəm ɪts ɹeɪz baʊ tə ðə stɝnpoʊst wɛɹ ðə stɪɹɪŋ ɔɹz wɝ maʊntəd. mæt hæd spɛn tu mʌtʃ taɪm əloʊn sɪns ðə naɪɾ ət ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ; bɹuɾɪŋ, əz ɹænd sɔ ɪt.

When Rand mentioned to Mat that Gelb would cause them trouble sooner or later, Mat looked around the boat, saying, "Can we trust any of them? Any at all?" Then he went off to find a place where he could be alone, or as alone as he could get on a boat less than thirty paces from its raised bow to the sternpost where the steering oars were mounted. Mat had spent too much time alone since the night at Shadar Logoth; brooding, as Rand saw it.

tɑm sɛd, "tʃɹʌbəl woʊn kʌm fɹəm dʒɛlb, bɔɪ, ɪf ɪt kʌmz. nɑt jɛt, ət list. nʌn ə ðə kɹu wɪl bæk hɪm, ən i hæzən ðə nɝv tə tʃɹaɪ ɛniθɪŋ əloʊn. bʌt ði ʌðɝz, naʊ . . . ? doʊmən ɔlmoʊst simz tə θɪŋk ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ tʃeɪsɪŋ hɪm, pɝsənəli, bʌt ðə ɹɛst ɑɹ bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk ðə deɪnʒɝ ɪz pæst. ðeɪ maɪt dʒʌs dɪsaɪd ðeɪv hæɾ ɪnʌf. ðəɹ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv ɪt, əz ɪɾ ɪz." hi hɪtʃt ɪz pætʃ-kʌvɝd kloʊk, ən ɹænd hæd ðə filɪŋ i wɑz tʃɛkɪŋ ɪz hɪɾən naɪvz - hɪz sɛkənd-bɛst sɛt. "ɪf ðeɪ mjuɾəni, bɔɪ, ðeɪ woʊn liv pæsənʒɝz bɪhaɪn tə tɛl ðə teɪl. ðə kwinz ɹɪt maɪt nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ fɔɹs ðɪs fɑɹ fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn, bʌɾ ivən ə vɪlədʒ meɪɝ wɪl də sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðæt." ðət wɑz wən ɹænd, tu, bɪɡæn tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə bi noʊɾəst wən i wɑtʃt ðə kɹumɪn.

Thom said, "Trouble won't come from Gelb, boy, if it comes. Not yet, at least. None of the crew will back him, and he hasn't the nerve to try anything alone. But the others, now . . . ? Domon almost seems to think the Trollocs are chasing him, personally, but the rest are beginning to think the danger is past. They might just decide they have had enough. They're on the edge of it, as it is." He hitched his patch-covered cloak, and Rand had the feeling he was checking his hidden knives - his second-best set. "If they mutiny, boy, they won't leave passengers behind to tell the tale. The Queen's Writ might not have much force this far from Caemlyn, but even a village mayor will do something about that." That was when Rand, too, began trying not to be noticed when he watched the crewmen.

tɑm dɪɾ ɪz pɑɹɾ ɪn daɪvɝɾɪŋ ðə kɹu fɹəm θɔts ə mjuɾəni. hi toʊl stɔɹiz, wɪð ɔl ðə flɝɪʃəz, ɛvɹi mɔɹnɪŋ ən ɛvɹi naɪt, ən ɪn bɪtwin i pleɪɾ ɛni sɔŋ ðeɪ ɹɪkwɛstɪd. tə səpɔɹt ðə noʊʃən ðət ɹænd ən mæt wɑntəd tə bi əpɹɛntəs ɡlimən, hi sɛɾ əsaɪɾ ə taɪm itʃ deɪ fəɹ lɛsənz, ən ðət wɑz ən ɛntɝteɪnmən fəɹ ðə kɹu, əz wɛl. hi wəd nɑt lɛɾ iðɝ ə ðɛm tʌtʃ ɪz hɑɹp, ʌv kɔɹs, ən ðɛɹ sɛʃənz wɪð ðə flut pɹədus peɪnd wɪnsəz, ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, ət list, ən læftɝ fɹəm ðə kɹu ivən waɪl ðeɪ wɝ kʌvɝɪŋ ðɛɹ ɪɹz.

Thom did his part in diverting the crew from thoughts of mutiny. He told stories, with all the flourishes, every morning and every night, and in between he played any song they requested. To support the notion that Rand and Mat wanted to be apprentice gleemen, he set aside a time each day for lessons, and that was an entertainment for the crew, as well. He would not let either of them touch his harp, of course, and their sessions with the flute produced pained winces, in the beginning, at least, and laughter from the crew even while they were covering their ears.

hi tɔt ðə bɔɪz səm ə ði iziɝ stɔɹiz, ə lɪɾəl sɪmpəl tʌmbəlɪŋ, ænd, ʌv kɔɹs, dʒʌɡəlɪŋ. mæt kəmpleɪn əbaʊt wʌt tɑm dɪmændəɾ ə ðɛm, bʌt tɑm blu aʊɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz ən ɡlɛɹd ɹaɪt bæk.

He taught the boys some of the easier stories, a little simple tumbling, and, of course, juggling. Mat complained about what Thom demanded of them, but Thom blew out his mustaches and glared right back.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ tə pleɪ ət titʃɪŋ, bɔɪ. aɪ iðɝ titʃ ə θɪŋ, əɹ aɪ doʊnt. naʊ! ivən ə kʌntʃɹi bʌmpkɪn ɔt tə bi eɪbəl tə də ə sɪmpəl hændstænd. ʌp jə ɡoʊ."

"I don't know how to play at teaching, boy. I either teach a thing, or I don't. Now! Even a country bumpkin ought to be able to do a simple handstand. Up you go."

kɹumɪn u wɝ nɑt wɝkɪŋ ɔlweɪz ɡæðɝd, skwɑɾɪŋ ɪn ə sɝkəl ɝaʊn ðə θɹi. səm ivən tʃɹaɪd ðɛɹ hæn ət ðə lɛsənz tɑm tɔt, læfɪŋ ət ðɛɹ oʊn fʌmbəlɪŋz. dʒɛlb stʊɾ əloʊn ən wɑtʃt ɪɾ ɔl dɑɹkli, heɪɾɪŋ əm ɔl.

Crewmen who were not working always gathered, squatting in a circle around the three. Some even tried their hand at the lessons Thom taught, laughing at their own fumblings. Gelb stood alone and watched it all darkly, hating them all.

ə ɡʊd pɑɹɾ ʌv itʃ deɪ ɹænd spɛn linɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ʃɔɹ. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɾ i ɹɪli ɪkspɛktəd tə si ɛɡwin əɹ ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz sʌɾənli əpɪɹ ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝbæŋk, bʌt ðə boʊt tʃɹævəl soʊ sloʊli ðəɾ i səmtaɪmz hoʊp fəɹ ɪt. ðeɪ kəd kætʃ ʌp wɪθaʊt ɹaɪɾɪŋ tu hɑɹd. ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ɪskeɪpt. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ stɪl əlaɪv.

A good part of each day Rand spent leaning on the railing, staring at the shore. It was not that he really expected to see Egwene or any of the others suddenly appear on the riverbank, but the boat traveled so slowly that he sometimes hoped for it. They could catch up without riding too hard. If they had escaped. If they were still alive.

ðə ɹɪvɝ ɹoʊld ɑn wɪθaʊɾ ɛni saɪn ə laɪf, nɔɹ ɛni boʊt tə bi sin ɪksɛp ðə spɹeɪ. bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt tə seɪ ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ tə si, ən wʌndɝ æt. ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə fɝs deɪ, ði ɑɹɪnɛl ɹæn bɪtwin haɪ blʌfs ðət stʃɹɛtʃt fəɹ hæf ə maɪl ɑn iðɝ saɪd. fəɹ ðət hoʊl lɛŋθ ðə stoʊn hæd bɪn kʌɾ ɪndə fɪɡjɝz, mɛn ən wɪmən ə hʌnʒɹəd fit tɔl, wɪð kɹaʊnz pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ əm kɪŋz ən kwinz. noʊ tu wɝ əlaɪk ɪn ðət ɹɔɪəl pɹəsɛʃən, ən lɔŋ jɪɹz sɛpɝeɪɾəd ðə fɝs fɹəm ðə læst. wɪn ən ɹeɪn hæd wɔɹn ðoʊz ət ðə nɔɹθ ɛn smuð ən ɔlmoʊs fitʃɝləs, wɪð feɪsəz ən dɪteɪlz bɪkʌmɪŋ mɔɹ dɪstɪŋkt əz ðeɪ wɛn saʊθ. ðə ɹɪvɝ læpt ɝaʊn ðə stætʃuz' fit, fit wɑʃt tə smuð nʌbz, ðoʊz ðət wɝ nɑt ɡɔn kəmplitli. haʊ lɔŋ əv ðeɪ stʊd ðɛɹ, ɹænd wʌndɝd. haʊ lɔŋ fəɹ ðə ɹɪvɝ tə wɛɹ əweɪ soʊ mʌtʃ stoʊn? nʌn ə ðə kɹu soʊ mʌtʃ əz lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ðɛɹ wɝk, ðeɪ hæd sin ði eɪntʃən kɑɹvɪŋz soʊ mɛni taɪmz bɪfɔɹ.

The river rolled on without any sign of life, nor any boat to be seen except the Spray. But that was not to say there was nothing to see, and wonder at. In the middle of the first day, the Arinelle ran between high bluffs that stretched for half a mile on either side. For that whole length the stone had been cut into figures, men and women a hundred feet tall, with crowns proclaiming them kings and queens. No two were alike in that royal procession, and long years separated the first from the last. Wind and rain had worn those at the north end smooth and almost featureless, with faces and details becoming more distinct as they went south. The river lapped around the statues' feet, feet washed to smooth nubs, those that were not gone completely. How long have they stood there, Rand wondered. How long for the river to wear away so much stone? None of the crew so much as looked up from their work, they had seen the ancient carvings so many times before.

ənʌðɝ taɪm, wən ði istwɝd ʃɔɹ hæd bɪkʌm flæt ɡɹæslæn əɡɛn, bɹoʊkən oʊnli əkeɪʒənəli baɪ θɪkəts; ðə sʌn ɡlɪntɪɾ ɔf sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə dɪstəns. "wʌt kən ðət bi?" ɹænd wʌndɝɾ əlaʊd. "ɪt lʊks laɪk mɛɾəl."

Another time, when the eastward shore had become flat grassland again, broken only occasionally by thickets; the sun glinted off something in the distance. "What can that be?" Rand wondered aloud. "It looks like metal."

kæptən doʊmən wɑz wɔkɪŋ baɪ, ən i pɔzd, skwɪntɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɡlɪnt. "ɪt də bi mɛɾəl," hi sɛd. hɪz wɝdz stɪl ɹæn təɡɛðɝ, bʌt ɹænd hæd kʌm tə ʌndɝstænd wɪθaʊt hævɪŋ tə pʌzəl ɪɾ aʊt. "ə taʊɝ ə mɛɾəl. aɪ hæv sin ɪt kloʊs ʌp, ən aɪ noʊ. ɹɪvɝ tʃɹeɪɾɝz juz ɪɾ əz ə mɑɹkɝ. wi bi tɛn deɪz fɹəm waɪtbɹɪdʒ ət ðə ɹeɪt wi ɡoʊ."

Captain Domon was walking by, and he paused, squinting toward the glint. "It do be metal," he said. His words still ran together, but Rand had come to understand without having to puzzle it out. "A tower of metal. I have seen it close up, and I know. River traders use it as a marker. We be ten days from Whitebridge at the rate we go."

"ə mɛɾəl taʊɝ?" ɹænd sɛd, ən mæt, sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəd wɪð ɪz bæk əɡɛnst ə bæɹəl, ɹaʊz fɹəm ɪz bɹuɾɪŋ tə lɪsən.

"A metal tower?" Rand said, and Mat, sitting cross-legged with his back against a barrel, roused from his brooding to listen.

ðə kæptən nɑɾəd. "aɪ. ʃaɪnɪŋ stil, baɪ ðə lʊk ən fil ʌv ɪt, bʌt noʊ ə spɑɾ ə ɹʌst. tu hʌnʒɹəd fit haɪ, ɪt bi, əz bɪɡ ɝaʊn əz ə haʊs, wɪð noʊ ə mɑɹk ɑn ɪɾ ən nɛvɝ ən oʊpənɪŋ tə bi faʊnd."

The captain nodded. "Aye. Shining steel, by the look and feel of it, but no a spot of rust. Two hundred feet high, it be, as big around as a house, with no a mark on it and never an opening to be found."

"aɪl bɛt ðɛɹz tʃɹɛʒɝ ɪnsaɪd," mæt sɛd. hi stʊɾ ʌp ən stɛɹd təwɔɹd ðə fɑɹ taʊɝ əz ðə ɹɪvɝ kæɹid ðə spɹeɪ bɪɑn ɪt. "ə θɪŋ laɪk ðət mʌst əv bɪn meɪd tə pɹətɛk sʌmθɪŋ væljəbəl."

"I'll bet there's treasure inside," Mat said. He stood up and stared toward the far tower as the river carried the Spray beyond it. "A thing like that must have been made to protect something valuable."

"meɪæp, læd," ðə kæptən ɹʌmbəld. "ðɛɹ bi stʃɹeɪnʒɝ θɪŋz ɪn ðə wɝl ðən ðɪs, ðoʊ. ɑn tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ, wʌn ə ðə si foʊks aɪlz, ðəɹ bi ə stoʊn hæn fɪfti fit haɪ stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə hɪl, klʌtʃɪŋ ə kɹɪstəl sfɪɹ əz bɪɡ əz ðɪs vɛsəl. ðəɹ bi tʃɹɛʒɝ ʌndɝ ðət hɪl ɪf ðəɹ bi tʃɹɛʒɝ ɛniwɛɹ, bʌt ði aɪlən pipəl wɑnt noʊ pɑɹɾ ə dɪɡɪŋ ðɛɹ, ən ðə si foʊk kɛɹ fəɹ nɔt bʌt seɪlɪŋ ðɛɹ ʃɪps ən sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ ðə kɔɹəmʊɹ, ðɛɹ tʃoʊzən wʌn."

"Mayhap, lad," the captain rumbled. "There be stranger things in the world than this, though. On Tremalking, one of the Sea Folk's isles, there be a stone hand fifty feet high sticking out of a hill, clutching a crystal sphere as big as this vessel. There be treasure under that hill if there be treasure anywhere, but the island people want no part of digging there, and the Sea Folk care for naught but sailing their ships and searching for the Coramoor, their Chosen One."

"aɪd dɪɡ," mæt sɛd. "haʊ fɑɹ ɪz ðɪs . . . tʃɹɛmælkɪŋ?" ə klʌmp ə tʃɹiz slɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ taʊɝ, bʌɾ i stɛɹɾ əz ɪf i kəd si ɪt jɛt.

"I'd dig," Mat said. "How far is this . . . Tremalking?" A clump of trees slid in front of the shining tower, but he stared as if he could see it yet.

kæptən doʊmən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "noʊ, læd, ɪt noʊ bi ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ ðət meɪks fəɹ siɪŋ ðə wɝld. ɪf jə faɪn jɝsɛlf ə fɪsfəl ʌv ɡoʊld, əɹ səm dɛd kɪŋz dʒuəlz, ɔl wɛl ən ɡʊd, bʌɾ ɪt bi ðə stʃɹeɪnʒnəs jə si ðət pʊlz jə tə ðə nɛks hɝaɪzən. ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ - ðət bi ə pɔɹɾ ɑn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən - pɑɹɾ ə ðə pɑnɑɹtʃəz pæləs wɝ bɪlt ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, soʊ ɪt bi sɛd. ðəɹ bi ə wɔl ðəɹ wɪð ə fɹiz ʃoʊɪŋ ænəməlz noʊ mæn lɪvɪŋ əz ɛvɝ sin."

Captain Domon shook his head. "No, lad, it no be the treasure that makes for seeing the world. If you find yourself a fistful of gold, or some dead king's jewels, all well and good, but it be the strangeness you see that pulls you to the next horizon. In Tanchico - that be a port on the Aryth Ocean - part of the Panarch's Palace were built in the Age of Legends, so it be said. There be a wall there with a frieze showing animals no man living has ever seen."

"ɛni tʃaɪl kən dʒɹɔ ən ænəməl noʊbɑdiz ɛvɝ sin," ɹænd sɛd, ən ðə kæptən tʃʌkəld.

"Any child can draw an animal nobody's ever seen," Rand said, and the captain chuckled.

"aɪ, læd, soʊ ðeɪ kæn. bʌt kən ə tʃaɪl meɪk ðə boʊnz ə ðoʊz ænəməlz? ɪn tæntʃəkoʊ ðeɪv ðɛm, ɔl fæsən təɡɛðɝ laɪk ði ænəməl wɑz. ðeɪ stæn ɪn ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə pɑnɑɹtʃəz pæləs wɛɹ ɛni kən ɛntɝ ən si. ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ lɛft ə θaʊzənd wʌndɝz bɪhaɪnd, ən ðəɹ bɪn hæf ə dʌzən ɛmpaɪɝz əɹ mɔɹ sɪns, səm ɹaɪvəlɪŋ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz, ɛvɹi wʌn livɪŋ θɪŋz tə si ən faɪnd. laɪtstɪks ən ɹeɪzɝleɪs ən hɑɹtstoʊn. ə kɹɪstəl læɾəs kʌvɝɪŋ ən aɪlənd, ən ɪt hʌmz wən ðə mun ɪz ʌp. ə maʊntən hɑloʊɾ ɪndə ə boʊl, ən ɪn ɪts sɛntɝ, ə sɪlvɝ spaɪk ə hʌnʒɹəd spænz haɪ, ən ɛni hu kʌmz wɪðɪn ə maɪl ʌv ɪt, daɪz. ɹʌstəd ɹuənz, ən bɹoʊkən bɪts, ən θɪŋz faʊn ɑn ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə si, θɪŋz nɑɾ ivən ði oʊldəs bʊks noʊ ðə minɪŋ ʌv aɪv ɡæðɝɾ ə fju, maɪsɛlf. θɪŋz jə nɛvɝ dʒɹimd ʌv, ɪn mɔɹ pleɪsəz ðən jə kən si ɪn tɛn laɪftaɪmz. ðət bi ðə stʃɹeɪnʒnəs ðət wɪl dʒɹɔ jə ɑn."

"Aye, lad, so they can. But can a child make the bones of those animals? In Tanchico they have them, all fastened together like the animal was. They stand in a part of the Panarch's Palace where any can enter and see. The Breaking left a thousand wonders behind, and there been half a dozen empires or more since, some rivaling Artur Hawkwing's, every one leaving things to see and find. Lightsticks and razorlace and heartstone. A crystal lattice covering an island, and it hums when the moon is up. A mountain hollowed into a bowl, and in its center, a silver spike a hundred spans high, and any who comes within a mile of it, dies. Rusted ruins, and broken bits, and things found on the bottom of the sea, things not even the oldest books know the meaning of I've gathered a few, myself. Things you never dreamed of, in more places than you can see in ten lifetimes. That be the strangeness that will draw you on."

"wi juz tə dɪɡ ʌp boʊnz ɪn ðə sæn hɪlz," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. "stʃɹeɪnʒ boʊnz. ðəɹ wɑz pɑɹɾ ʌv ə fɪʃ - aɪ θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ə fɪʃ - əz bɪɡ əz ðɪs boʊt, wʌns. səm sɛɾ ɪt wɑz bæd lʌk, dɪɡɪŋ ɪn ðə hɪlz."

"We used to dig up bones in the Sand Hills," Rand said slowly. "Strange bones. There was part of a fish - I think it was a fish - as big as this boat, once. Some said it was bad luck, digging in the hills."

ðə kæptən aɪɾ ɪm ʃɹudli. "ju θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt hoʊm ɔlɹɛɾi, læd, ən jə dʒʌst sɛɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðə wɝld? ðə wɝld wɪl pʊɾ ə hʊk ɪn jəɹ maʊθ. jəl sɛɾ ɔf tʃeɪsɪŋ ðə sʌnsɛt, jə weɪɾ ən si . . . ən ɪf jə ɛvɝ ɡoʊ bæk, jəɹ vɪlədʒəl noʊ bi bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə hoʊl ju."

The captain eyed him shrewdly. "You thinking about home already, lad, and you just set out in the world? The world will put a hook in your mouth. You'll set off chasing the sunset, you wait and see . . . and if you ever go back, your village'll no be big enough to hold you."

"noʊ!" hi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. haʊ lɔŋ hæɾ ɪt bɪn sɪns i hæd θɔɾ ə hoʊm, ʌv ɛmənz fild? ən wʌɾ ə tæm? ɪt hæd tə bi deɪz. ɪt fɛlt laɪk mʌnθs. "aɪ wɪl ɡoʊ hoʊm, wʌn deɪ, wən aɪ kæn. əl ɹeɪz ʃip, laɪk . . . laɪk maɪ fɑðɝ, ən ɪf aɪ nɛvɝ liv əɡɛn ɪɾəl bi tu sun. ɪzən ðət ɹaɪt, mæt? əz sun əz wi kən wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ hoʊm ən fɝɡɛɾ ɔl ðɪs ivən ɪɡzɪsts."

"No!" He gave a start. How long had it been since he had thought of home, of Emond's Field? And what of Tam? It had to be days. It felt like months. "I will go home, one day, when I can. I'll raise sheep, like . . . like my father, and if I never leave again it will be too soon. Isn't that right, Mat? As soon as we can we're going home and forget all this even exists."

wɪð ə vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt mæt pʊld əweɪ fɹəm stɛɹɪŋ ʌpɹɪvɝ æftɝ ðə vænɪʃt taʊɝ. "wʌt? oʊ. jɛs, ʌv kɔɹs. wɪl ɡoʊ hoʊm. ʌv kɔɹs." əz i tɝn tə ɡoʊ, ɹænd hɝɾ ɪm mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. "aɪl bɛɾ i dʒʌs dʌznt wɑn ɛnibəɾi ɛls ɡoʊɪŋ æftɝ ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ." hi dɪd nɑt sim tə ɹilaɪz i hæd spoʊkən əlaʊd.

With a visible effort Mat pulled away from staring upriver after the vanished tower. "What? Oh. Yes, of course. We'll go home. Of course." As he turned to go, Rand heard him muttering under his breath. "I'll bet he just doesn't want anybody else going after the treasure." He did not seem to realize he had spoken aloud.

fɔɹ deɪz ɪndə ðɛɹ tʃɹɪp daʊnɹɪvɝ faʊn ɹænd ətɑp ðə mæst, sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə blʌn ɛnd wɪð ɪz lɛɡz ɹæpt ɪn ðə steɪz. ðə spɹeɪ ɹoʊl dʒɛnli ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ, bʌt fɪfti fiɾ əbʌv ðə wɔɾɝ ðəɾ izi ɹoʊl meɪd ðə tɑp ə ðə mæst sweɪ bæk ən fɔɹθ θɹu waɪɾ ɑɹks. hi θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən læft ɪndə ðə wɪn ðət blu ɪn ɪz feɪs.

Four days into their trip downriver found Rand atop the mast, sitting on the blunt end with his legs wrapped in the stays. The Spray rolled gently on the river, but fifty feet above the water that easy roll made the top of the mast sway back and forth through wide arcs. He threw back his head and laughed into the wind that blew in his face.

ði ɔɹz wɝ aʊt, ən fɹəm hɪɹ ðə boʊt lʊk laɪk səm twɛlv-lɛɡəd spaɪɾɝ kɹipɪŋ daʊn ði ɑɹɪnɛl. hi hæd bɪn əz haɪ əz ðɪs bɪfɔɹ, ɪn tʃɹiz bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, bʌt ðɪs taɪm ðəɹ wɝ noʊ bɹæntʃəz tə blɑk ɪz vju. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn dɛk, ðə seɪlɝz ət ðə swips, mɛn ɑn ðɛɹ niz skɹʌbɪŋ ðə dɛk wɪð smuðstoʊnz, mɛn duɪŋ θɪŋz wɪð laɪnz ən hætʃkʌvɝz, lʊk soʊ ɑd wən sin fɹəm ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd, ɔl skwɑɾ ən fɔɹʃɔɹɾənd, ðəɾ i hæd spɛn ən aʊɝ dʒʌst stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əm ən tʃʌklɪŋ.

The oars were out, and from here the boat looked like some twelve-legged spider creeping down the Arinelle. He had been as high as this before, in trees back in the Two Rivers, but this time there were no branches to block his view. Everything on deck, the sailors at the sweeps, men on their knees scrubbing the deck with smoothstones, men doing things with lines and hatchcovers, looked so odd when seen from right overhead, all squat and foreshortened, that he had spent an hour just staring at them and chuckling.

hi stɪl tʃʌkəld wɛnɛvɝ i lʊk daʊn ət ðɛm, bʌt naʊ hi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɹɪvɝbɑŋks floʊɪŋ baɪ. ðət wɑz ðə weɪ ɪt simd, əz ɪf i wɝ stɪl - ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə sweɪɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ, ʌv kɔɹs - ən ðə bæŋks slɪd sloʊli baɪ, tʃɹiz ən hɪlz mɑɹtʃɪŋ əlɔŋ tə iðɝ saɪd. hi wɑz stɪl, ən ðə hoʊl wɝl muv pæs hɪm.

He still chuckled whenever he looked down at them, but now he was staring at the riverbanks flowing by. That was the way it seemed, as if he were still - except for the swaying back and forth, of course - and the banks slid slowly by, trees and hills marching along to either side. He was still, and the whole world moved past him.

ɑn sʌɾən ɪmpəls i ənɹæpt ɪz lɛɡz fɹəm ðə steɪz bɹeɪsɪŋ ðə mæst ən hɛld ɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz aʊt tə iðɝ saɪd, bælənsɪŋ əɡɛns ðə sweɪ. fəɹ θɹi kəmpliɾ ɑɹks i kɛpt ɪz bæləns laɪk ðæt, ðən sʌɾənli ɪt wɑz ɡɔn. ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz wɪndmɪlɪŋ, hi tɑpəl fɔɹwɝɾ ən ɡɹæb ðə fɔɹsteɪ. lɛɡz spleɪd tə iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə mæst, nʌθɪŋ hoʊldɪŋ ɪm tə hɪz pɹikɛɹiəs pɝtʃ bʌɾ ɪz tu hænz ɑn ðə steɪ, hi læft. ɡʌlpɪŋ hjudʒ bɹɛθs ə ðə fɹɛʃ, koʊld wɪnd, hi læft wɪð ði ɪɡzɪlɝeɪʃən ʌv ɪt.

On sudden impulse he unwrapped his legs from the stays bracing the mast and held his arms and legs out to either side, balancing against the sway. For three complete arcs he kept his balance like that, then suddenly it was gone. Arms and legs windmilling, he toppled forward and grabbed the forestay. Legs splayed to either side of the mast, nothing holding him to his precarious perch but his two hands on the stay, he laughed. Gulping huge breaths of the fresh, cold wind, he laughed with the exhilaration of it.

"læd," keɪm tɑmz hɔɹs vɔɪs. "læd, ɪf jəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɹeɪk jəɹ ful nɛk, doʊn də ɪt baɪ fɔlɪŋ ɑn mi."

"Lad," came Thom's hoarse voice. "Lad, if you're trying to break your fool neck, don't do it by falling on me."

ɹænd lʊk daʊn. tɑm klʌŋ tə ðə ɹætlaɪnz dʒʌs bɪloʊ hɪm, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ðə læs fju fit ɡɹɪmli. laɪk ɹænd, ðə ɡlimən hæd lɛft ɪz kloʊk bɪloʊ. "tɑm," hi sɛd dɪlaɪɾɪdli. "tɑm, wən dɪd jə kʌm ʌp hɪɹ?"

Rand looked down. Thom clung to the ratlines just below him, staring up the last few feet grimly. Like Rand, the gleeman had left his cloak below. "Thom," he said delightedly. "Thom, when did you come up here?"

"wɛn jə wʊdn peɪ ɛni ətɛnʃən tə pipəl ʃaʊɾɪŋ ət ju. bɝn mi, bɔɪ, juv ɡɑɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi θɪŋkɪŋ juv ɡɔn mæd."

"When you wouldn't pay any attention to people shouting at you. Burn me, boy, you've got everybody thinking you've gone mad."

hi lʊk daʊn ən wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si ɔl ðə feɪsəz stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm. oʊnli mæt, sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ʌp ɪn ðə baʊz wɪð ɪz bæk tə ðə mæst, wɑz nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. ivən ðə mɛn ət ði ɔɹz hæd ðɛɹ aɪz ɹeɪzd, lɛɾɪŋ ðɛɹ stʃɹoʊk ɡoʊ ɹæɡəd. ən noʊ wʌn wɑz bɪɹeɪɾɪŋ əm fəɹ ɪt. ɹænd twɪstəɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɝaʊn tə lʊk ʌndɝ ɪz ɑɹm ət ðə stɝn. kæptən doʊmən stʊd baɪ ðə stɪɹɪŋ ɔɹ, hæm-laɪk fɪsts ɑn ɪz hɪps, ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm ətɑp ðə mæst. hi tɝn bæk tə ɡɹɪn ət tɑm. "ju wɑn mi tə kʌm daʊn, ðɛn?"

He looked down and was surprised to see all the faces staring up at him. Only Mat, sitting cross-legged up in the bows with his back to the mast, was not looking at him. Even the men at the oars had their eyes raised, letting their stroke go ragged. And no one was berating them for it. Rand twisted his head around to look under his arm at the stern. Captain Domon stood by the steering oar, ham-like fists on his hips, glaring at him atop the mast. He turned back to grin at Thom. "You want me to come down, then?"

tɑm nɑɾəd vɪɡɝəsli. "aɪ wəɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾ ɪt ɡɹeɪtli."

Thom nodded vigorously. "I would appreciate it greatly."

"ɔl ɹaɪt." ʃɪftɪŋ ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə fɔɹsteɪ, hi spɹæŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ɔf ðə mæs tɑp. hi hɝd tɑm baɪɾ ɔf ən oʊθ əz ɪz fɔl wɑz kʌt ʃɔɹɾ ən i dæŋɡəl fɹəm ðə fɔɹsteɪ baɪ hɪz hænz. ðə ɡlimən skaʊld ət hɪm, wʌn hæn hæf stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt tə kætʃ hɪm. hi ɡɹɪn ət tɑm əɡɛn. "aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ daʊn naʊ."

"All right." Shifting his grip on the forestay, he sprang forward off the mast top. He heard Thom bite off an oath as his fall was cut short and he dangled from the forestay by his hands. The gleeman scowled at him, one hand half stretched out to catch him. He grinned at Thom again. "I'm going down now."

swɪŋɪŋ ɪz lɛɡz ʌp, hi hʊkt wʌn ni oʊvɝ ðə θɪk laɪn ðət ɹæn fɹəm ðə mæs tə ðə baʊ, ðən kɑɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə kɹʊk ə hɪz ɛlboʊ ən lɛt ɡoʊ wɪð ɪz hænz. sloʊli, ðən wɪð ɪnkɹisɪŋ spid, hi slɪd daʊn. dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə baʊ hi dʒɹɑp tə hɪz fiɾ ɑn ðə dɛk ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə mæt, tʊk wʌn stɛp tə kætʃ ɪz bæləns, ən tɝn tə feɪs ðə boʊt wɪð ɑɹmz spɹɛd waɪd, ðə weɪ tɑm dɪɾ æftɝ ə tʌmbəlɪŋ tʃɹɪk.

Swinging his legs up, he hooked one knee over the thick line that ran from the mast to the bow, then caught it in the crook of his elbow and let go with his hands. Slowly, then with increasing speed, he slid down. Just short of the bow he dropped to his feet on the deck right in front of Mat, took one step to catch his balance, and turned to face the boat with arms spread wide, the way Thom did after a tumbling trick.

skæɾɝd klæpɪŋ ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə kɹu, bʌɾ i wɑz lʊkɪŋ daʊn ət mæt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən ət wʌt mæt hɛld, hɪɾən fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls baɪ hɪz bɑɾi. ə kɝv dæɡɝ wɪð ə ɡoʊl skæbɝd wɝkt ɪn stʃɹeɪnʒ sɪmbəlz. faɪn ɡoʊld waɪɝ ɹæp ðə hɪlt, wɪtʃ wɑz kæp baɪ ə ɹubi əz bɪɡ əz ɹændz θʌmneɪl, ən ðə kwɪlənz wɝ ɡoʊldən-skeɪl sɝpəns bɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ fæŋz.

Scattered clapping rose from the crew, but he was looking down at Mat in surprise, and at what Mat held, hidden from everyone else by his body. A curved dagger with a gold scabbard worked in strange symbols. Fine gold wire wrapped the hilt, which was capped by a ruby as big as Rand's thumbnail, and the quillons were golden-scaled serpents baring their fangs.

mæt kəntɪnjud tə slaɪd ðə dæɡɝ ɪn ən aʊɾ ʌv ɪts ʃiθ fəɹ ə moʊmənt. stɪl pleɪɪŋ wɪð ðə dæɡɝ i ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd sloʊli; hɪz aɪz hæɾ ə fɑɹəweɪ lʊk. sʌɾənli ðeɪ foʊkəst ɑn ɹænd, ən i ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən stʌf ðə dæɡɝ ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt.

Mat continued to slide the dagger in and out of its sheath for a moment. Still playing with the dagger he raised his head slowly; his eyes had a faraway look. Suddenly they focused on Rand, and he gave a start and stuffed the dagger under his coat.

ɹænd skwɑɾɪd ɑn ɪz hilz, wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz kɹɔst ɑn ɪz niz. "wɛɹ dɪd jə ɡɛt ðæt?" mæt sɛd nʌθɪŋ, lʊkɪŋ kwɪkli tə si ɪf ɛniwʌn ɛls wɑz kloʊs baɪ. ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn, fəɹ ə wʌndɝ. "ju dɪdn teɪk ɪt fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, dɪd ju?"

Rand squatted on his heels, with his arms crossed on his knees. "Where did you get that?" Mat said nothing, looking quickly to see if anyone else was close by. They were alone, for a wonder. "You didn't take it from Shadar Logoth, did you?"

mæt stɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "ɪts jəɹ fɔlt. jʊɹz ən pɛɹɪnz. ðə tu ʌv jə pʊl mi əweɪ fɹəm ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ, ən aɪ hæɾ ɪɾ ɪn maɪ hænd. mɔɹɾɪθ dɪdnt ɡɪv ɪt tə mi. aɪ tʊk ɪt, soʊ mɔɪɹeɪnz wɔɹnɪŋz əbaʊɾ ɪz ɡɪfs doʊn kaʊnt. jə woʊn tɛl ɛnibəɾi, ɹænd. ðeɪ maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə stil ɪt."

Mat stared at him. "It's your fault. Yours and Perrin's. The two of you pulled me away from the treasure, and I had it in my hand. Mordeth didn't give it to me. I took it, so Moiraine's warnings about his gifts don't count. You won't tell anybody, Rand. They might try to steal it."

"aɪ woʊn tɛl ɛnibəɾi," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪ θɪŋk kæptən doʊmən ɪz ɑnəst, bʌɾ aɪ wʊdn pʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ pæs ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm, ɪspɛʃli dʒɛlb."

"I won't tell anybody," Rand said. "I think Captain Domon is honest, but I wouldn't put anything past the rest of them, especially Gelb."

"nɑɾ ɛnibəɾi," mæt ɪnsɪstəd. "nɑt doʊmən, nɑt tɑm, nɑɾ ɛnibəɾi. wɝ ði oʊnli tu lɛft fɹəm ɛmənz fild, ɹænd. wi kæn əfɔɹd tə tʃɹʌst ɛnibəɾi ɛls."

"Not anybody," Mat insisted. "Not Domon, not Thom, not anybody. We're the only two left from Emond's Field, Rand. We can't afford to trust anybody else."

"ðeɪɹ əlaɪv, mæt. ɛɡwin, ən pɛɹɪn. aɪ noʊ ðəɹ əlaɪv." mæt lʊkt əʃeɪmd. "aɪl kip jəɹ sikɹət, ðoʊ. dʒʌs ðə tu ʌv ʌs. ət list wi doʊn əv tə wɝi əbaʊt mʌni naʊ. wi kən sɛl ɪt fəɹ ɪnʌf tə tʃɹævəl tə tɑɹ vəlɑn laɪk kɪŋz."

"They're alive, Mat. Egwene, and Perrin. I know they're alive." Mat looked ashamed. "I'll keep your secret, though. Just the two of us. At least we don't have to worry about money now. We can sell it for enough to travel to Tar Valon like kings."

"ʌv kɔɹs," mæt sɛɾ æftɝ ə mɪnət. "ɪf wɪv tə. dʒʌs doʊn tɛl ɛnibəɾi əntɪl aɪ seɪ soʊ."

"Of course," Mat said after a minute. "If we have to. Just don't tell anybody until I say so."

"aɪ sɛɾ aɪ wʊdnt. lɪsən, hæv jə hæɾ ɛni mɔɹ dʒɹimz sɪns wi keɪm ɑn ðə boʊt? laɪk ɪn bɛɹlən? ðɪs ɪz ðə fɝs tʃæns aɪv hæd tə æsk wɪθaʊt sɪks pipəl lɪsnɪŋ."

"I said I wouldn't. Listen, have you had any more dreams since we came on the boat? Like in Baerlon? This is the first chance I've had to ask without six people listening."

mæt tɝn ɪz hɛɾ əweɪ, ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. "meɪbi."

Mat turned his head away, giving him a sidelong look. "Maybe."

"wʌt dʒju min, meɪbi? iðɝ juv əɹ jə hævənt."

"What do you mean, maybe? Either you have or you haven't."

"ɔl ɹaɪt, ɔl ɹaɪt, aɪ hæv. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt. aɪ doʊn ivən wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt. ɪt dʌzn də ɛni ɡʊd."

"All right, all right, I have. I don't want to talk about it. I don't even want to think about it. It doesn't do any good."

bɪfɔɹ iðɝ ə ðɛm kəd seɪ mɔɹ tɑm keɪm stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ ʌp ðə dɛk, hɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ɑɹm. ðə wɪnd wɪpt ɪz waɪt hɛɹ əbaʊt, ən ɪz lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz sim tə bɹɪsəl. "aɪ mænədʒ tə kənvɪns ðə kæptən jə ɑɹən kɹeɪzi," hi ənaʊnst, "ðæɾ ɪt wɑz pɑɹɾ ə jəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ." hi kɑt hoʊld ə ðə fɔɹsteɪ ən ʃʊk ɪt. "ðæt ful stʌn ə jʊɹz, slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ðə ɹoʊp, hɛlpt, bʌt jə ɑɹ lʌki jə dɪdn bɹeɪk jəɹ ful nɛk."

Before either of them could say more Thom came striding up the deck, his cloak over his arm. The wind whipped his white hair about, and his long mustaches seemed to bristle. "I managed to convince the captain you aren't crazy," he announced, "that it was part of your training." He caught hold of the forestay and shook it. "That fool stunt of yours, sliding down the rope, helped, but you are lucky you didn't break your fool neck."

ɹændz aɪz wɛn tə ðə fɔɹsteɪ ən fɑloʊɾ ɪɾ ʌp tə ðə tɑp ə ðə mæst, ən əz ðeɪ dɪɾ ɪz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən. hi hæd slɪd daʊn ðæt. ən i hæd bɪn sɪɾɪŋ ɑn tɑp ʌv. . . .

Rand's eyes went to the forestay and followed it up to the top of the mast, and as they did his mouth dropped open. He had slid down that. And he had been sitting on top of. . . .

sʌɾənli hi kəd si hɪmsɛlf ʌp ðɛɹ, ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz spɹɛd waɪd. hi sæt daʊn hɑɹd, ən bɛɹli kɑt hɪmsɛlf ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɛndɪŋ ʌp flæɾ ɑn ɪz bæk. tɑm wɑz lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm θɔtfəli.

Suddenly he could see himself up there, arms and legs spread wide. He sat down hard, and barely caught himself short of ending up flat on his back. Thom was looking at him thoughtfully.

"aɪ dɪdnt noʊ jə hæd sətʃ ə ɡʊd hɛd fəɹ haɪts, læd. wi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə pleɪ ɪn ɪljən, əɹ ɛbu dɑɹ, əɹ ivən tɛɹ. pipəl ɪn ðə bɪɡ sɪɾiz ɪn ðə saʊθ laɪk taɪtʃɹoʊp wɔkɝz ən slækwaɪɹ ɑɹɾəsts."

"I didn't know you had such a good head for heights, lad. We might be able to play in Illian, or Ebou Dar, or even Tear. People in the big cities in the south like tightrope walkers and slackwire artists."

"wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə - " ət ðə læs mɪnət ɹænd ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə lʊk ɝaʊn fəɹ ɛniwʌn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ. sɛvɹəl ə ðə kɹu wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛm, ɪnkluɾɪŋ dʒɛlb, ɡlɛɹɪŋ əz juʒəwəl, bʌt nʌn kəd hɪɹ wʌɾ i wɑz seɪɪŋ. "tə tɑɹ vəlɑn," hi fɪnɪʃt. mæt ʃɹʌɡd əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ɔl ðə seɪm tə hɪm wɛɹ ðeɪ wɛnt.

"We're going to - " At the last minute Rand remembered to look around for anyone close enough to overhear. Several of the crew were watching them, including Gelb, glaring as usual, but none could hear what he was saying. "To Tar Valon," he finished. Mat shrugged as if it were all the same to him where they went.

"æt ðə moʊmənt, læd," tɑm sɛd, sɛɾəlɪŋ daʊn bɪsaɪd ðɛm, "bʌt təmɑɹoʊ . . . hu noʊz? ðæts ðə weɪ wɪð ə ɡlimənz laɪf." hi tʊk ə hændfʊl ə kʌlɝd bɔlz fɹəm wʌn ə hɪz waɪd slivz. "sɪns aɪ hæv jə daʊn aʊɾ ə ði ɛɹ, wɪl wɝk ɑn ðə tʃɹɪpəl kɹɔsoʊvɝ."

"At the moment, lad," Thom said, settling down beside them, "but tomorrow . . . who knows? That's the way with a gleeman's life." He took a handful of colored balls from one of his wide sleeves. "Since I have you down out of the air, we'll work on the triple crossover."

ɹændz ɡeɪz dʒɹɪftəd tə ðə tɑp ə ðə mæst, ən i ʃɪvɝd. wʌts hæpənɪŋ tə mi? laɪt, wʌt? hi hæd tə faɪn aʊt. hi hæd tə ɡɛt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪfɔɹ i ɹɪli dɪd ɡoʊ mæd.

Rand's gaze drifted to the top of the mast, and he shivered. What's happening to me? Light, what? He had to find out. He had to get to Tar Valon before he really did go mad.


tʃæptɝ twɛntifaɪv


CHAPTER 25

ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl


The Traveling People

bɛlə wɔkt əlɔŋ plɑtʃədli ʌndɝ ðə wik sʌn əz ɪf ðə θɹi wʊlvz tʃɹɑɾɪŋ nɑt fɑɹ ɔf wɝ oʊnli vɪlədʒ dɑɡz, bʌt ðə weɪ ʃi ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz əɾ əm fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm, ʃoʊɪŋ waɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊnd, ɪndəkeɪɾəd ʃi fɛl nʌθɪŋ ə ðə sɔɹt. ɛɡwin, ɑn ðə mɛɹz bæk, wɑz dʒʌst əz bæd. ʃi wɑtʃt ðə wʊlvz kɑnstənli fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɝ aɪ, ən səmtaɪmz ʃi twɪstəɾ ɪn ðə sæɾəl tə lʊk ɝaʊnd. pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi wɑz hʌntɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə pæk, ðoʊ ʃi dɪnaɪɾ ɪɾ æŋɡɹəli wən i sədʒɛstəɾ əz mʌtʃ, dɪnaɪd biɪŋ əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə wʊlvz ðət peɪs ðɛm, dɪnaɪd wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ðə ɹɛst ə ðə pæk əɹ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ʌp tə. ʃi dɪnaɪd, ən wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn lʊkɪŋ, taɪt-aɪɾ ən wɛɾɪŋ əɹ lɪps ənizəli.

Bela walked along placidly under the weak sun as if the three wolves trotting not far off were only village dogs, but the way she rolled her eyes at them from time to time, showing white all the way around, indicated she felt nothing of the sort. Egwene, on the mare's back, was just as bad. She watched the wolves constantly from the corner of her eye, and sometimes she twisted in the saddle to look around. Perrin was sure she was hunting for the rest of the pack, though she denied it angrily when he suggested as much, denied being afraid of the wolves that paced them, denied worrying about the rest of the pack or what it was up to. She denied, and went right on looking, tight-eyed and wetting her lips uneasily.

ðə ɹɛst ə ðə pæk wɑz fɑɹ dɪstənt; hi cʊɾə toʊld əɹ ðæt. wʌt ɡʊd, ivən ɪf ʃi bɪliv mi? ɪspɛʃli ɪf ʃi dɪd. hi wɑz ə noʊ maɪn tə oʊpən ðət bæskəɾ ə sneɪks əntɪl i hæd tə. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt haʊ hi nu. ðə fɝ-klæd mæn loʊpt əhɛɾ ə ðɛm, səmtaɪmz lʊkɪŋ ɔlmoʊs laɪk ə wʊlf hɪmsɛlf, ən i nɛvɝ lʊkt ɝaʊnd wən dæpəl, hɑpɝ, ən wɪn əpɪɹd, bʌɾ i nu, tu.

The rest of the pack was far distant; he could have told her that. What good, even if she believed me? Especially if she did. He was of no mind to open that basket of snakes until he had to. He did not want to think about how he knew. The fur-clad man loped ahead of them, sometimes looking almost like a wolf himself, and he never looked around when Dapple, Hopper, and Wind appeared, but he knew, too.

ði ɛmənz fildɝz hæd wækən ət dɔn ðət fɝs mɔɹnɪŋ tə faɪn ɛlaɪəs kʊkɪŋ mɔɹ ɹæbəɾ ən wɑtʃɪŋ əm oʊvɝ ɪz fʊl bɪɹd wɪθaʊt mʌtʃ ɪkspɹɛʃən. ɪksɛp fəɹ dæpəl, hɑpɝ, ən waɪnd, noʊ wʊlvz wɝ tə bi sin. ɪn ðə peɪl, ɝli deɪlaɪt, dip ʃeɪd stɪl lɪŋɡɝɾ ʌndɝ ðə bɪɡ oʊk, ən ðə bɛɹ tʃɹiz bɪɑn lʊk laɪk fɪŋɡɝz stʃɹɪp tə ðə boʊn.

The Emond's Fielders had wakened at dawn that first morning to find Elyas cooking more rabbit and watching them over his full beard without much expression. Except for Dapple, Hopper, and Wind, no wolves were to be seen. In the pale, early daylight, deep shade still lingered under the big oak, and the bare trees beyond looked like fingers stripped to the bone.

"ðeɪɹ ɝaʊnd," ɛlaɪəs ænsɝd wən ɛɡwin æskt wɛɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə pæk hæd ɡɔn. "kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɛlp, ɪf nid bi. fɑɹ ɪnʌf ɔf tə əvɔɪɾ ɛni hjumən tʃɹʌbəl wi ɡɛɾ ɪntu. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ðɛɹz ɔlweɪz tʃɹʌbəl wən ðɛɹz tu hjumənz təɡɛðɝ. ɪf wi nid ðɛm, ðəl bi ðɛɹ."

"They're around," Elyas answered when Egwene asked where the rest of the pack had gone. "Close enough to help, if need be. Far enough off to avoid any human trouble we get into. Sooner or later there's always trouble when there's two humans together. If we need them, they'll be there."

sʌmθɪŋ tɪkəl ðə bæk ə pɛɹɪnz maɪn əz i ɹɪp fɹi ə baɪɾ ə ɹoʊst ɹæbət. ə dɝɛkʃən, veɪɡli sɛnst. ʌv kɔɹs! ðæts wɛɹ ðeɪ. . . . ðə hɑt dʒusəz ɪn ɪz maʊθ əbɹʌpli lɔst ɔl teɪst. hi pɪkt ət ðə təbɝz ɛlaɪəs hæd kʊkt ɪn ðə koʊlz - ðeɪ teɪstəd sʌmθɪŋ laɪk tɝnəps - bʌɾ ɪz æpətaɪt wɑz ɡɔn.

Something tickled the back of Perrin's mind as he ripped free a bite of roast rabbit. A direction, vaguely sensed. Of course! That's where they. . . . The hot juices in his mouth abruptly lost all taste. He picked at the tubers Elyas had cooked in the coals - they tasted something like turnips - but his appetite was gone.

wən ðeɪ hæd stɑɹɾəd aʊɾ ɛɡwin ɪnsɪstəd ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn teɪk ə tɝn ɹaɪɾɪŋ, ən pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑɾ ivən bɑðɝ tə ɑɹɡju.

When they had started out Egwene insisted that everyone take a turn riding, and Perrin did not even bother to argue.

"fɝs tɝn ɪz jʊɹz," hi toʊl hɝ.

"First turn is yours," he told her.

ʃi nɑɾəd. "æn ðən ju, ɛlaɪəs."

She nodded. "And then you, Elyas."

"maɪ oʊn lɛɡz ɑɹ ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ mi," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. hi lʊkt ət bɛlə, ən ðə mɛɹ ɹoʊld əɹ aɪz əz ɪf i wɝ wʌn ə ðə wʊlvz. "bɪsaɪdz, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ʃi wɑns mi ɹaɪɾɪŋ hɝ."

"My own legs are good enough for me," Elyas said. He looked at Bela, and the mare rolled her eyes as if he were one of the wolves. "Besides, I don't think she wants me riding her."

"ðæts nɑnsɛns," ɛɡwin ɹɪplaɪd fɝmli. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn biɪŋ stʌbɝn əbaʊɾ ɪt. ðə sɛnsəbəl θɪŋ ɪz fəɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi tə ɹaɪd səmtaɪmz. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə jə wɪv ə lɔŋ weɪ stɪl tə ɡoʊ."

"That's nonsense," Egwene replied firmly. "There is no point in being stubborn about it. The sensible thing is for everybody to ride sometimes. According to you we have a long way still to go."

"aɪ sɛd noʊ, ɡɝl."

"I said no, girl."

ʃi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ən pɛɹɪn wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ʃi wəd səksiɾ ɪn bʊliɪŋ ɛlaɪəs ðə weɪ ʃi dɪd hɪm, wən i ɹilaɪzd ʃi wɑz stændɪŋ ðəɹ wɪð əɹ maʊθ oʊpən, nɑt seɪɪŋ ə wɝd. ɛlaɪəs wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ, dʒʌs lʊkɪŋ, wɪð ðoʊz jɛloʊ wʊlfs aɪz. ɛɡwin stɛp bæk fɹəm ðə ɹɔ-boʊn mæn, ən lɪkt əɹ lɪps, ən stɛp bæk əɡɛn. bɪfɔɹ ɛlaɪəs tɝn əweɪ, ʃi hæd bækt ɔl ðə weɪ tə bɛlə ən skɹæmbəld ʌp ɑntu ðə mɛɹz bæk. əz ðə mæn tɝn tə liɾ əm saʊθ, pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ɪz ɡɹɪn wɑz ə ɡʊd dil laɪk ə wʊlfs, tu.

She took a deep breath, and Perrin was wondering if she would succeed in bullying Elyas the way she did him, when he realized she was standing there with her mouth open, not saying a word. Elyas was looking at her, just looking, with those yellow wolf's eyes. Egwene stepped back from the raw-boned man, and licked her lips, and stepped back again. Before Elyas turned away, she had backed all the way to Bela and scrambled up onto the mare's back. As the man turned to lead them south, Perrin thought his grin was a good deal like a wolf's, too.

fəɹ θɹi deɪz ðeɪ tʃɹævəld ɪn ðət mænɝ, wɔkɪŋ ən ɹaɪɾɪŋ saʊθ ən ist ɔl deɪ, stɑpɪŋ oʊnli wən twaɪlaɪt θɪkənd. ɛlaɪəs sim tə skɔɹn ðə heɪst ə sɪɾi mɛn, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪn weɪstɪŋ taɪm wən ðəɹ wɑz sʌmwɛɹ tə ɡoʊ.

For three days they traveled in that manner, walking and riding south and east all day, stopping only when twilight thickened. Elyas seemed to scorn the haste of city men, but he did not believe in wasting time when there was somewhere to go.

ðə θɹi wʊlvz wɝ sɛldəm sin. itʃ naɪt ðeɪ keɪm tə ðə faɪɝ fəɹ ə taɪm, ən səmtaɪmz ɪn ðə deɪ ðeɪ ʃoʊd ðɛmsɛlvz bɹifli, əpɪɹɪŋ kloʊs ət hænd wən list ɪkspɛktəɾ ən vænɪʃɪŋ ɪn ðə seɪm mænɝ. pɛɹɪn nu ðeɪ wɝ aʊt ðɛɹ, ðoʊ, ən wɛɹ. hi nu wən ðeɪ wɝ skaʊɾɪŋ ðə pæθ əhɛɾ ən wən ðeɪ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ðə bæktʃɹeɪl. hi nu wən ðeɪ lɛf ðə pæks juʒəwəl hʌntɪŋ ɡɹaʊnz, ən dæpəl sɛn ðə pæk bæk tə weɪt fəɹ hɝ. səmtaɪmz ðə θɹi ðət ɹɪmeɪn feɪɾəd fɹəm ɪz maɪnd, bʌt lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si əɡɛn, hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə ðɛm ɹɪtɝnɪŋ. ivən wən ðə tʃɹiz dwɪndəl tə waɪd-skæɾɝd ɡɹoʊvz sɛpɝeɪɾəd baɪ ɡɹeɪt swɑðz ʌv wɪntɝ-dɛd ɡɹæs, ðeɪ wɝ əz ɡoʊsts wən ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑnə bi sin, bʌɾ i cʊɾə pɔɪntəɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ stʃɹeɪɾ əɾ əm əɾ ɛni taɪm. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ haʊ hi nu, ən i tʃɹaɪd tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf ðəɾ ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən pleɪɪŋ tʃɹɪks, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd noʊ ɡʊd. dʒʌst əz ɛlaɪəs nu, hi nu.

The three wolves were seldom seen. Each night they came to the fire for a time, and sometimes in the day they showed themselves briefly, appearing close at hand when least expected and vanishing in the same manner. Perrin knew they were out there, though, and where. He knew when they were scouting the path ahead and when they were watching the backtrail. He knew when they left the pack's usual hunting grounds, and Dapple sent the pack back to wait for her. Sometimes the three that remained faded from his mind, but long before they were close enough to see again, he was aware of them returning. Even when the trees dwindled to wide-scattered groves separated by great swathes of winter-dead grass, they were as ghosts when they did not want to be seen, but he could have pointed a finger straight at them at any time. He did not know how he knew, and he tried to convince himself that it was just his imagination playing tricks, but it did no good. Just as Elyas knew, he knew.

hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt wʊlvz, bʌt ðeɪ kɹɛpt ɪndə hɪz θɔts ɔl ðə seɪm. hi hæd nɑt dʒɹimd əbaʊt bælzəmən sɪns miɾɪŋ ɛlaɪəs ən ðə wʊlvz. hɪz dʒɹimz, əz mʌtʃ əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ə ðɛm ɑn weɪkɪŋ, wɝ ʌv ɛvɹideɪ θɪŋz, dʒʌst əz i maɪɾ əv dʒɹimd ət hoʊm . . . bɪfɔɹ bɛɹlən . . . bɪfɔɹ wɪntɝnaɪt. nɔɹməl dʒɹimz - wɪð wʌn ədɪʃən. ɪn ɛvɹi dʒɹim i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðəɹ wɑz ə pɔɪnt wɛɹ i stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm mæstɝ luhənz fɔɹdʒ tə waɪp ðə swɛt fɹəm ɪz feɪs, əɹ tɝn fɹəm dænsɪŋ wɪð ðə vɪlədʒ ɡɝlz ɑn ðə ɡɹin, əɹ lɪftəɾ ɪz hɛd fɹəm ə bʊk ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, ən wɛðɝ i wɑz aʊtsaɪɾ əɹ ʌndɝ ə ɹuf, ðəɹ wɑz ə wʊlf kloʊs tə hænd. ɔlweɪz ðə wʊlfs bæk wɑz tə hɪm, ən ɔlweɪz i nu - ɪn ðə dʒɹimz ɪt sim ðə nɔɹməl kɔɹs ə θɪŋz, ivən əɾ ælsbɛt luhənz dɪnɝ teɪbəl - ðət ðə wʊlfs jɛloʊ aɪz wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ fəɹ wʌt maɪt kʌm, ɡɑɹɾɪŋ əɡɛnst wʌt maɪt kʌm. oʊnli wən i wɑz əweɪk dɪd ðə dʒɹimz sim stʃɹeɪnʒ.

He tried not thinking about wolves, but they crept into his thoughts all the same. He had not dreamed about Ba'alzamon since meeting Elyas and the wolves. His dreams, as much as he remembered of them on waking, were of everyday things, just as he might have dreamed at home . . . before Baerlon . . . before Winternight. Normal dreams - with one addition. In every dream he remembered there was a point where he straightened from Master Luhhan's forge to wipe the sweat from his face, or turned from dancing with the village girls on the Green, or lifted his head from a book in front of the fireplace, and whether he was outside or under a roof, there was a wolf close to hand. Always the wolf's back was to him, and always he knew - in the dreams it seemed the normal course of things, even at Alsbet Luhhan's dinner table - that the wolf's yellow eyes were watching for what might come, guarding against what might come. Only when he was awake did the dreams seem strange.

θɹi deɪz ðeɪ dʒɝnid, wɪð dæpəl, hɑpɝ, ən wɪn bɹɪŋɪŋ əm ɹæbəts ən skwɝəlz, ən ɛlaɪəs pɔɪntɪŋ aʊt plæns, fju ʌv wɪtʃ pɛɹɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd, əz ɡʊd tə it. wʌns ə ɹæbət bɝst aʊɾ ɔlmoʊs fɹəm ʌndɝ bɛləz hʊvz; bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn kəd ɡɛɾ ə stoʊn ɪn ɪz slɪŋ, ɛlaɪəs skjuɝɾ ɪt wɪð ɪz lɔŋ naɪf ət twɛnti peɪsɪz. ənʌðɝ taɪm ɛlaɪəs bɹɔt daʊn ə fæt fɛzənt, ɑn ðə wɪŋ, wɪð ɪz baʊ. ðeɪ eɪt fɑɹ bɛɾɝ ðən ðeɪ hæd wən ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn, bʌt pɛɹɪn wəɾ əz sun əv ɡɔn bæk ɑn ʃɔɹt ɹæʃənz ɪf ɪt hæd mɛn dɪfɹən kʌmpəni. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ ɛɡwin fɛlt, bʌɾ i wʊɾə bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə ɡoʊ hʌŋɡɹi ɪf i kəd də ɪt wɪθaʊt ðə wʊlvz. θɹi deɪz, ɪndə ði æftɝnun.

Three days they journeyed, with Dapple, Hopper, and Wind bringing them rabbits and squirrels, and Elyas pointing out plants, few of which Perrin recognized, as good to eat. Once a rabbit burst out almost from under Bela's hooves; before Perrin could get a stone in his sling, Elyas skewered it with his long knife at twenty paces. Another time Elyas brought down a fat pheasant, on the wing, with his bow. They ate far better than they had when on their own, but Perrin would as soon have gone back on short rations if it had meant different company. He was not sure how Egwene felt, but he would have been willing to go hungry if he could do it without the wolves. Three days, into the afternoon.

ə stæn ə tʃɹiz leɪ əhɛd, lɑɹdʒɝ ðən moʊs ðeɪ hæd sin, ə ɡʊd fɔɹ maɪlz əkɹɔs. ðə sʌn sæt loʊ ɪn ðə wɛstɝn skaɪ, pʊʃɪŋ slæntəd ʃædoʊz ɔf tə ðɛɹ ɹaɪt, ən ðə wɪnd wɑz pɪkɪŋ ʌp. pɛɹɪn fɛl ðə wʊlvz ɡɪv oʊvɝ kɔɹɾɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn əm ən stɑɹt fɔɹwɝd, nɑt hɝiɪŋ. ðeɪ hæd smɛld ən sin nʌθɪŋ deɪnʒɝəs. ɛɡwin wɑz teɪkɪŋ əɹ tɝn ɑn bɛlə. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə stɑɹt lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə kæmp fəɹ ðə naɪt, ən ðə bɪɡ kɑps wəd sɝv ðə pɝpəs wɛl.

A stand of trees lay ahead, larger than most they had seen, a good four miles across. The sun sat low in the western sky, pushing slanted shadows off to their right, and the wind was picking up. Perrin felt the wolves give over quartering behind them and start forward, not hurrying. They had smelled and seen nothing dangerous. Egwene was taking her turn on Bela. It was time to start looking for a camp for the night, and the big copse would serve the purpose well.

əz ðeɪ keɪm kloʊs tə ðə tʃɹiz, θɹi mæstəfs bɝs fɹəm kʌvɝ, bɹɔdmuzəl dɑɡz əz tɔl əz ðə wʊlvz ən ivən hɛviɝ, tiθ bɛɹɾ ɪn laʊd, ɹʌmbəlɪŋ snɑɹlz. ðeɪ stɑpt ʃɔɹɾ əz sun əz ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ði oʊpən, bʌt noʊ mɔɹ ðən θɝɾi fit sɛpɝeɪɾəd əm fɹəm ðə θɹi pipəl, ən ðɛɹ dɑɹk aɪz kɪndəld wɪð ə kɪlɪŋ laɪt.

As they came close to the trees, three mastiffs burst from cover, broadmuzzled dogs as tall as the wolves and even heavier, teeth bared in loud, rumbling snarls. They stopped short as soon as they were in the open, but no more than thirty feet separated them from the three people, and their dark eyes kindled with a killing light.

bɛlə, ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ɛdʒ fɹəm ðə wʊlvz, wɪniɾ ən ɔlmoʊst ənsiɾɪd ɛɡwin, bʌt pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɪz slɪŋ wɝlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ən ɪnstənt. noʊ nid tə juz ði æks ɑn dɑɡz; ə stoʊn ɪn ðə ɹɪbz wəd sɛn ðə wɝs dɔɡ ɹʌnɪŋ.

Bela, already on edge from the wolves, whinnied and almost unseated Egwene, but Perrin had his sling whirling around his head in an instant. No need to use the axe on dogs; a stone in the ribs would send the worst dog running.

ɛlaɪəs weɪvd ə hæn əɾ ɪm wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz fɹəm ðə stɪf-lɛɡəd dɑɡz. "st! nʌn ə ðət naʊ!"

Elyas waved a hand at him without taking his eyes from the stiff-legged dogs. "Hssst! None of that now!"

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ə pʌzəl fɹaʊn, bʌt lɛt ðə slɪŋ sloʊ ɪts spɪn ən faɪnəli fɔl tə hɪz saɪd. ɛɡwin mænədʒ tə ɡɛt bɛlə ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl; ʃi ən ðə mɛɹ boʊθ wɑtʃt ðə dɑɡz wɛɹəli.

Perrin gave him a puzzled frown, but let the sling slow its spin and finally fall to his side. Egwene managed to get Bela under control; she and the mare both watched the dogs warily.

ðə mæstəfs' hækəlz stʊd stɪf, ən ðɛɹ ɪɹz wɝ leɪd bæk, ən ðɛɹ ɡɹaʊlz saʊndəd laɪk ɝθkweɪks. əbɹʌpli ɛlaɪəs ɹeɪzd wʌn fɪŋɡɝ ʃoʊldɝ haɪ ən wɪsəld, ə lɔŋ, ʃɹɪl wɪsəl ðət ɹoʊz haɪɝ ən haɪɝ ən dɪd nɑɾ ɛnd. ðə ɡɹaʊlz kʌɾ ɔf ɹæədli. ðə dɑɡz stɛp bæk, waɪnɪŋ ən tɝnɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz əz ɪf ðeɪ wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ bʌt wɝ hɛld. ðɛɹ aɪz ɹɪmeɪn lɑk tə ɛlaɪəsəz fɪŋɡɝ.

The mastiffs' hackles stood stiff, and their ears were laid back, and their growls sounded like earthquakes. Abruptly Elyas raised one finger shoulder high and whistled, a long, shrill whistle that rose higher and higher and did not end. The growls cut off raggedly. The dogs stepped back, whining and turning their heads as if they wanted to go but were held. Their eyes remained locked to Elyas's finger.

sloʊli ɛlaɪəs loʊɝɾ ɪz hænd, ən ðə pɪtʃ ə hɪz wɪsəl loʊɝd wɪð ɪt. ðə dɑɡz fɑloʊd, əntɪl ðeɪ leɪ flæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, tʌŋz lɑlɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ maʊðz. θɹi teɪlz wæɡd.

Slowly Elyas lowered his hand, and the pitch of his whistle lowered with it. The dogs followed, until they lay flat on the ground, tongues lolling from their mouths. Three tails wagged.

"si," ɛlaɪəs sɛd, wɔkɪŋ tə ðə dɑɡz. "ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ wɛpənz." ðə mæstəfs lɪkt ɪz hænz, ən i skɹætʃt ðɛɹ bɹɔd hɛdz ən fɑndəl ðɛɹ ɪɹz. "ðeɪ lʊk minɝ ðən ðeɪ ɑɹ. ðeɪ mɛn tə fɹaɪɾən əs ɔf, ən ðeɪ wʊdn əv bɪɾən ənlɛs wi tʃɹaɪd tə ɡoʊ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz. ɛniweɪ, ðɛɹz noʊ wɝi ʌv ðæt, naʊ. wi kən meɪk ðə nɛks θɪkɪt bɪfɔɹ fʊl dɑɹk."

"See," Elyas said, walking to the dogs. "There's no need for weapons." The mastiffs licked his hands, and he scratched their broad heads and fondled their ears. "They look meaner than they are. They meant to frighten us off, and they wouldn't have bitten unless we tried to go into the trees. Anyway, there's no worry of that, now. We can make the next thicket before full dark."

wən pɛɹɪn lʊkt əɾ ɛɡwin, hɝ maʊθ wɑz hæŋɪŋ oʊpən. hi ʃʌɾ ɪz oʊn maʊθ wɪð ə klɪk ə tiθ.

When Perrin looked at Egwene, her mouth was hanging open. He shut his own mouth with a click of teeth.

stɪl pæɾɪŋ ðə dɑɡz, ɛlaɪəs stʌɾid ðə stæn ə tʃɹiz. "ðɛɹəl bi tuætɑn hɪɹ. ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl." ðeɪ stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm blæŋkli, ən i æɾəd, "tɪŋkɝz."

Still patting the dogs, Elyas studied the stand of trees. "There'll be Tuatha'an here. The Traveling People." They stared at him blankly, and he added, "Tinkers."

"tɪŋkɝz?" pɛɹɪn ɪkskleɪmd. "aɪv ɔlweɪz wɑntəd tə si ðə tɪŋkɝz. ðeɪ kæmp əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ fɹəm tɛɹən fɛɹi səmtaɪmz, bʌt ðeɪ doʊn kʌm daʊn ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, əz fɑɹ əz aɪ noʊ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ nɑt."

"Tinkers?" Perrin exclaimed. "I've always wanted to see the Tinkers. They camp across the river from Taren Ferry sometimes, but they don't come down into the Two Rivers, as far as I know. I don't know why not."

ɛɡwin snɪft. "pɹɑbli kəz ðə tɛɹən fɛɹi foʊk ɑɹ əz ɡɹeɪt θivz əz ðə tɪŋkɝz. ðeɪd noʊ daʊɾ ɛn ʌp stilɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ blaɪnd. mæstɝ ɛlaɪəs, ɪf ðəɹ ɹɪli ɑɹ tɪŋkɝz kloʊz baɪ, ʃʊdnt wi ɡoʊ ɑn? wi doʊnt wɑn bɛlə stoʊlən, ən . . . wɛl, wi də nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ ɛls, bʌɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi noʊz tɪŋkɝz wɪl stil ɛniθɪŋ."

Egwene sniffed. "Probably because the Taren Ferry folk are as great thieves as the Tinkers. They'd no doubt end up stealing each other blind. Master Elyas, if there really are Tinkers close by, shouldn't we go on? We don't want Bela stolen, and . . . well, we do not have much else, but everybody knows Tinkers will steal anything."

"ɪnkluɾɪŋ ɪnfəns?" ɛlaɪəs æsk dʒɹaɪli. "kɪdnæp tʃɪlʒɹən, ən ɔl ðæt?" hi spæt, ən ʃi blʌʃt. ðoʊz stɔɹiz əbaʊt beɪbiz wɝ toʊl səmtaɪmz, bʌt moʊst ɔfən baɪ sɛn bui əɹ wʌn ə ðə kɑplɪnz əɹ kɔŋɡɝz. ði ʌðɝ teɪlz, ɛvɹibɑɾi nu. "ðə tɪŋkɝz meɪk mi sɪk səmtaɪmz, bʌt ðeɪ doʊn stil ɛni mɔɹ ðən moʊs foʊks. ə ɡʊd bɪt lɛs ðən səm aɪ noʊ."

"Including infants?" Elyas asked dryly. "Kidnap children, and all that?" He spat, and she blushed. Those stories about babies were told sometimes, but most often by Cenn Buie or one of the Coplins or Congars. The other tales, everybody knew. "The Tinkers make me sick sometimes, but they don't steal any more than most folks. A good bit less than some I know."

"ɪt wɪl bi ɡɛɾɪŋ dɑɹk sun, ɛlaɪəs," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wi hæv tə kæmp sʌmwɛɹ. waɪ nɑt wɪð ðɛm, ɪf ðəl əv ʌs?" mɪstʃɹəs luhən hæɾ ə tɪŋkɝ-mɛndɪd pɑt ðət ʃi kleɪmd wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən nu. mæstɝ luhən wɑz nɑt tu hæpi əbaʊɾ ɪz waɪfs pɹeɪz ə ðə tɪŋkɝ wɝk, bʌt pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə si haʊ ɪt wɑz dʌn. jɛt ðəɹ wɑz ə ɹɪlʌktəns əbaʊɾ ɛlaɪəs ðəɾ i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd. "ɪz ðəɹ səm ɹizən wi ʃʊdnt?"

"It will be getting dark soon, Elyas," Perrin said. "We have to camp somewhere. Why not with them, if they'll have us?" Mistress Luhhan had a Tinker-mended pot that she claimed was better than new. Master Luhhan was not too happy about his wife's praise of the Tinker work, but Perrin wanted to see how it was done. Yet there was a reluctance about Elyas that he did not understand. "Is there some reason we shouldn't?"

ɛlaɪəs ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, bʌt ðə ɹɪlʌktəns wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, ɪn ðə sɛɾ ə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən ðə taɪtnəs ə hɪz maʊθ. "meɪ əz wɛl. dʒʌs doʊn peɪ ɛni maɪn tə wʌt ðeɪ seɪ. lɑɾ ə fulɪʃnəs. moʊs taɪmz ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl də θɪŋz ɛni wɪtʃ weɪ, bʌt ðɛɹz taɪmz ðeɪ sɛɾ ə stɔɹ baɪ fɔɹmæləɾi, soʊ jə də wʌɾ aɪ du. ən kip jəɹ sikɹəts. noʊ nid tə tɛl ðə wɝld ɛvɹiθɪŋ."

Elyas shook his head, but the reluctance was still there, in the set of his shoulders and the tightness of his mouth. "May as well. Just don't pay any mind to what they say. Lot of foolishness. Most times the Traveling People do things any which way, but there's times they set a store by formality, so you do what I do. And keep your secrets. No need to tell the world everything."

ðə dɑɡz tʃɹeɪld əlɔŋ bɪsaɪd ðɛm, wæɡɪŋ ðɛɹ teɪlz, əz ɛlaɪəs lɛd ðə weɪ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz. pɛɹɪn fɛl ðə wʊlvz sloʊ, ən nu ðeɪ wəd nɑɾ ɛntɝ. ðeɪ wɝ nɑɾ əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə dɑɡz - ðeɪ wɝ kəntɛmptʃuəs ə dɑɡz, hu hæd ɡɪvən ʌp fɹiɾəm tə slip baɪ ə faɪɝ - bʌt pipəl ðeɪ əvɔɪɾəd.

The dogs trailed along beside them, wagging their tails, as Elyas led the way into the trees. Perrin felt the wolves slow, and knew they would not enter. They were not afraid of the dogs - they were contemptuous of dogs, who had given up freedom to sleep by a fire - but people they avoided.

ɛlaɪəs wɔkt ʃʊɹli, əz ɪf i nu ðə weɪ, ən nɪɹ ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə stæn ðə tɪŋkɝz' wæɡənz əpɪɹd, skæɾɝd əmʌŋ ði oʊk ən æʃ.

Elyas walked surely, as if he knew the way, and near the center of the stand the Tinkers' wagons appeared, scattered among the oak and ash.

laɪk ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls ɪn ɛmənz fild, pɛɹɪn hæd hɝɾ ə ɡʊd dil əbaʊt ðə tɪŋkɝz ivən ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ sin ɛni, ən ðə kæmp wɑz dʒʌst wʌɾ i ɪkspɛktəd. ðɛɹ wæɡənz wɝ smɔl haʊsəz ɑn wilz, tɔl wʊɾən bɑksəz lækɝɾ ən peɪntəɾ ɪn bɹaɪt kʌlɝz, ɹɛdz ən bluz ən jɛloʊz ən ɡɹinz ən səm hjuz tə wɪtʃ i kəd nɑt pʊɾ ə neɪm. ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ əbaʊt wɝk ðət wɑz dɪsəpɔɪntɪŋli ɛvɹideɪ, kʊkɪŋ, soʊɪŋ, tɛndɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən, mɛndɪŋ hɑɹnəs, bʌt ðɛɹ kloʊðz wɝ ivən mɔɹ kʌlɝfəl ðən ðə wæɡənz - ən simɪŋli tʃoʊzən ət ɹændəm; səmtaɪmz koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz, əɹ dʒɹɛs ən ʃɔl, wɛn təɡɛðɝ ɪn ə weɪ ðət hɝɾ ɪz aɪz. ðeɪ lʊk laɪk bʌɾɝflaɪz ɪn ə fild ʌv waɪldflaʊɹz.

Like everyone else in Emond's Field, Perrin had heard a good deal about the Tinkers even if he had never seen any, and the camp was just what he expected. Their wagons were small houses on wheels, tall wooden boxes lacquered and painted in bright colors, reds and blues and yellows and greens and some hues to which he could not put a name. The Traveling People were going about work that was disappointingly everyday, cooking, sewing, tending children, mending harness, but their clothes were even more colorful than the wagons - and seemingly chosen at random; sometimes coat and breeches, or dress and shawl, went together in a way that hurt his eyes. They looked like butterflies in a field of wildflowers.

fɔɹ əɹ faɪv mɛn ɪn dɪfɹən pleɪsəz ɝaʊn ðə kæmp pleɪd fɪɾəlz ən fluts, ən ə fju pipəl dæns laɪk ɹeɪnboʊ-hjud hʌmɪŋbɝdz. tʃɪlʒɹən ən dɑɡz ɹæn pleɪɪŋ əmʌŋ ðə kʊkfaɪɝz. ðə dɑɡz wɝ mæstəfs dʒʌs laɪk ðoʊz ðət hæd kənfɹʌntəd ðə tʃɹævəlɝz, bʌt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən tʌɡd ət ðɛɹ ɪɹz ən teɪlz ən klaɪmd ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, ən ðə mæsɪv dɑɡz æksɛptɪɾ ɪɾ ɔl plɑtʃədli. ðə θɹi wɪð ɛlaɪəs, tʌŋz hæŋɪŋ aʊt, lʊkt ʌp ət ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn əz ɪf i wɝ ðɛɹ bɛs fɹɛnd. pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ðeɪ wɝ stɪl bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə ɹitʃ ə mænz θɹoʊt waɪl bɛɹli ɡɛɾɪŋ ðɛɹ fɹʌn fiɾ ɔf ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Four or five men in different places around the camp played fiddles and flutes, and a few people danced like rainbow-hued hummingbirds. Children and dogs ran playing among the cookfires. The dogs were mastiffs just like those that had confronted the travelers, but the children tugged at their ears and tails and climbed on their backs, and the massive dogs accepted it all placidly. The three with Elyas, tongues hanging out, looked up at the bearded man as if he were their best friend. Perrin shook his head. They were still big enough to reach a man's throat while barely getting their front feet off the ground.

əbɹʌpli ðə mjuzɪk stɑpt, ən i ɹilaɪzd ɔl ðə tɪŋkɝz wɝ lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm ən ɪz kəmpænjənz. ivən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ən dɑɡz stʊd stɪl ən wɑtʃt, wɛɹəli, əz ɪf ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə flaɪt.

Abruptly the music stopped, and he realized all the Tinkers were looking at him and his companions. Even the children and dogs stood still and watched, warily, as if on the point of flight.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saʊn əɾ ɔl, ðən ə wɪɹi mæn, ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹɾ ən ʃɔɹt, stɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ən baʊd ɡɹeɪvli tə ɛlaɪəs. hi wɔɹ ə haɪ-kɑlɝd ɹɛd koʊt, ən bæɡi, bɹaɪt ɡɹin tʃɹaʊzɝz tʌkt ɪndə ni buts. "ju ɑɹ wɛlkəm tə əɹ faɪɝz. dʒju noʊ ðə sɔŋ?"

For a moment there was no sound at all, then a wiry man, gray-haired and short, stepped forward and bowed gravely to Elyas. He wore a high-collared red coat, and baggy, bright green trousers tucked into knee boots. "You are welcome to our fires. Do you know the song?"

ɛlaɪəs baʊɾ ɪn ðə seɪm weɪ, boʊθ hænz pɹɛs tə hɪz tʃɛst. "jɔɹ wɛlkəm wɔɹmz maɪ spɪɹət, mɑɾi, əz jəɹ faɪɝz wɔɹm ðə flɛʃ, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt noʊ ðə sɔŋ."

Elyas bowed in the same way, both hands pressed to his chest. "Your welcome warms my spirit, Mahdi, as your fires warm the flesh, but I do not know the song."

"ðɛn wi sik stɪl," ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn ɪntoʊnd. "æz ɪt wɑz, soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi, ɪf wi bʌt ɹɪmɛmbɝ, sik, ən faɪnd." hi swɛpt ən ɑɹm təwɔɹd ðə faɪɝz wɪð ə smaɪl, ən ɪz vɔɪs tʊk ɑn ə tʃɪɹfəl laɪtnəs. "ðə mil ɪz ɔlmoʊst ɹɛɾi. dʒɔɪn ʌs, pliz."

"Then we seek still," the gray-haired man intoned. "As it was, so shall it be, if we but remember, seek, and find." He swept an arm toward the fires with a smile, and his voice took on a cheerful lightness. "The meal is almost ready. Join us, please."

əz ɪf ðət hæd bɪn ə sɪɡnəl ðə mjuzɪk spɹæŋ ʌp əɡɛn, ən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən tʊk ʌp ðɛɹ læftɝ ən ɹæn wɪð ðə dɑɡz. ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə kæmp wɛn bæk tə wʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn duɪŋ dʒʌst əz ðoʊ ðə nukʌmɝz wɝ lɔŋ-æksɛptɪd fɹɛnz.

As if that had been a signal the music sprang up again, and the children took up their laughter and ran with the dogs. Everyone in the camp went back to what they had been doing just as though the newcomers were long-accepted friends.

ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðoʊ, ən lʊkt əɾ ɛlaɪəs. "jɔɹ . . . ʌðɝ fɹɛnz? ðəl steɪ əweɪ? ðeɪ fɹaɪɾən ðə pʊɹ dɑɡz soʊ."

The gray-haired man hesitated, though, and looked at Elyas. "Your . . . other friends? They will stay away? They frighten the poor dogs so."

"ðeɪl steɪ əweɪ, ɹən." ɛlaɪəsəz hɛdʃeɪk hæɾ ə tʌtʃ ə skɔɹn. "ju ʃəd noʊ ðət baɪ naʊ."

"They'll stay away, Raen." Elyas's headshake had a touch of scorn. "You should know that by now."

ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz əz ɪf tə seɪ nʌθɪŋ wɑz ɛvɝ sɝɾən. əz i tɝn tə liɾ əm ɪndə ðə kæmp, ɛɡwin dɪsmaʊntɪɾ ən muv kloʊs tə ɛlaɪəs. "ju tu ɑɹ fɹɛnz?" ə smaɪlɪŋ tɪŋkɝ əpɪɹd tə teɪk bɛlə; ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ðə ɹeɪnz ʌp ɹɪlʌktənli, æftɝ ə ɹaɪ snɔɹt fɹəm ɛlaɪəs.

The gray-haired man spread his hands as if to say nothing was ever certain. As he turned to lead them into the camp, Egwene dismounted and moved close to Elyas. "You two are friends?" A smiling Tinker appeared to take Bela; Egwene gave the reins up reluctantly, after a wry snort from Elyas.

"wi noʊ itʃ ʌðɝ," ðə fɝ-klæd mæn ɹɪplaɪd kɝtli.

"We know each other," the fur-clad man replied curtly.

"hɪz neɪm ɪz mɑɾi?" pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"His name is Mahdi?" Perrin said.

ɛlaɪəs ɡɹaʊl sʌmθɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. "hɪz neɪmz ɹən. mɑɾiz ɪz taɪɾəl. sikɝ. hiz ðə liɾɝ ə ðɪs bænd. jə kən kɔl ɪm sikɝ ɪf ði ʌðɝ saʊnz ɑd. hi woʊn maɪnd."

Elyas growled something under his breath. "His name's Raen. Mahdi's his title. Seeker. He's the leader of this band. You can call him Seeker if the other sounds odd. He won't mind."

"wʌt wɑz ðəɾ əbaʊɾ ə sɔŋ?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"What was that about a song?" Egwene asked.

"ðæts waɪ ðeɪ tʃɹævəl," ɛlaɪəs sɛd, "ɔɹ soʊ ðeɪ seɪ. ðəɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə sɔŋ. ðæts wʌt ðə mɑɾi siks. ðeɪ seɪ ðeɪ lɔst ɪt dʊɹɪŋ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən ɪf ðeɪ kən faɪn ɪɾ əɡɛn, ðə pɛɹədaɪs ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz wɪl ɹɪtɝn." hi ɹæn ɪz aɪ ɝaʊn ðə kæmp ən snɔɹɾɪd. "ðeɪ doʊn ivən noʊ wʌt ðə sɔŋ ɪz; ðeɪ kleɪm ðəl noʊ ɪt wən ðeɪ faɪn ɪt. ðeɪ doʊnt noʊ haʊ ɪts səpoʊz tə bɹɪŋ pɛɹədaɪs, iðɝ, bʌt ðeɪv bɪn lʊkɪŋ nɪɹ tə θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz, ɛvɝ sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ. aɪ ɪkspɛk ðəl bi lʊkɪŋ əntɪl ðə wil stɑps tɝnɪŋ."

"That's why they travel," Elyas said, "or so they say. They're looking for a song. That's what the Mahdi seeks. They say they lost it during the Breaking of the World, and if they can find it again, the paradise of the Age of Legends will return." He ran his eye around the camp and snorted. "They don't even know what the song is; they claim they'll know it when they find it. They don't know how it's supposed to bring paradise, either, but they've been looking near to three thousand years, ever since the Breaking. I expect they'll be looking until the Wheel stops turning."

ðeɪ ɹitʃt ɹənz faɪɝ, ðɛn, ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə kæmp. ðə sikɝz wæɡən wɑz jɛloʊ tʃɹɪmd ɪn ɹɛd, ən ðə spoʊks ʌv ɪts tɔl, ɹɛd-ɹɪmd wilz ɔltɝneɪɾəd ɹɛɾ ən jɛloʊ. ə plʌmp wʊmən, əz ɡɹeɪ əz ɹən bʌt smuð-tʃik stɪl, keɪm aʊɾ ə ðə wæɡən ən pɔzd ɑn ðə stɛps əɾ ɪts bæk ɛnd, stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ ə blu-fɹɪnd ʃɔl ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. hɝ blaʊs wɑz jɛloʊ ən əɹ skɝt ɹɛd, boʊθ bɹaɪt. ðə kɑmbəneɪʃən meɪd pɛɹɪn blɪŋk, ən ɛɡwin meɪɾ ə stʃɹæŋɡəl saʊnd.

They reached Raen's fire, then, in the middle of the camp. The Seeker's wagon was yellow trimmed in red, and the spokes of its tall, red-rimmed wheels alternated red and yellow. A plump woman, as gray as Raen but smooth-cheeked still, came out of the wagon and paused on the steps at its back end, straightening a blue-fringed shawl on her shoulders. Her blouse was yellow and her skirt red, both bright. The combination made Perrin blink, and Egwene made a strangled sound.

wən ʃi sɔ ðə pipəl fɑloʊɪŋ ɹən, ðə wʊmən keɪm daʊn wɪð ə wɛlkəmɪŋ smaɪl. ʃi wɑz ilə, ɹənz waɪf, ə hɛd tɔlɝ ðən əɹ hʌzbənd, ən ʃi sun meɪd pɛɹɪn fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt ðə kʌlɝz ə hɝ kloʊðz. ʃi hæɾ ə mʌðɝlaɪnəs ðət ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ə mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ ən hæɾ ɪm filɪŋ wɛlkəm fɹəm əɹ fɝst smaɪl.

When she saw the people following Raen, the woman came down with a welcoming smile. She was Ila, Raen's wife, a head taller than her husband, and she soon made Perrin forget about the colors of her clothes. She had a motherliness that reminded him of Mistress al'Vere and had him feeling welcome from her first smile.

ilə ɡɹiɾəd ɛlaɪəs əz ən oʊld əkweɪntəns, bʌt wɪð ə dɪstəns ðət sim tə peɪn ɹən. ɛlaɪəs ɡeɪv əɹ ə dʒɹaɪ ɡɹɪn ən ə nɑd. pɛɹɪn ən ɛɡwin ɪntʃɹədus ðɛmsɛlvz, ən ʃi klæsp ðɛɹ hænz ɪn boʊθ ə hɝz wɪð mʌtʃ mɔɹ wɔɹmθ ðən ʃi hæd ʃoʊn ɛlaɪəs, ivən hʌɡɪŋ ɛɡwin.

Ila greeted Elyas as an old acquaintance, but with a distance that seemed to pain Raen. Elyas gave her a dry grin and a nod. Perrin and Egwene introduced themselves, and she clasped their hands in both of hers with much more warmth than she had shown Elyas, even hugging Egwene.

"waɪ, jəɹ lʌvli, tʃaɪld," ʃi sɛd, kʌpɪŋ ɛɡwinz tʃɪn ən smaɪlɪŋ. "æn tʃɪl tə ðə boʊn, tu, aɪ ɪkspɛkt. jə sɪt kloʊs tə ðə faɪɝ, ɛɡwin. ɔl ə jə sɪt. sʌpɝ ɪz ɔlmoʊst ɹɛɾi."

"Why, you're lovely, child," she said, cupping Egwene's chin and smiling. "And chilled to the bone, too, I expect. You sit close to the fire, Egwene. All of you sit. Supper is almost ready."

fɔlən lɔɡz hæd bɪn pʊld ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝ fəɹ sɪɾɪŋ. ɛlaɪəs ɹəfjuzd ivən ðət kənsɛʃən tə sɪvəlɪzeɪʃən. hi laʊnʒd ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɪnstɛd. aɪɝn tʃɹaɪpɑdz hɛl tu smɔl kɛɾəlz oʊvɝ ðə fleɪmz, ən ən ʌvən ɹɛstəɾ ɪn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə koʊlz. ilə tɛndəd ðɛm.

Fallen logs had been pulled around the fire for sitting. Elyas refused even that concession to civilization. He lounged on the ground, instead. Iron tripods held two small kettles over the flames, and an oven rested in the edge of the coals. Ila tended them.

əz pɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ teɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ pleɪsəz, ə slɛndɝ jʌŋ mæn wɛɹɪŋ ɡɹin stʃɹaɪps stʃɹoʊld ʌp tə ðə faɪɝ. hi ɡeɪv ɹən ə hʌɡ ən ilə ə kɪs, ən ɹæn ə kul aɪ oʊvɝ ɛlaɪəs ən ði ɛmənz fildɝz. hi wɑz əbaʊt ðə seɪm eɪdʒ əz pɛɹɪn, ən i muvd əz ɪf i wɝ əbaʊt tə bɪɡɪn dænsɪŋ wɪð ɪz nɛkst stɛp.

As Perrin and the others were taking their places, a slender young man wearing green stripes strolled up to the fire. He gave Raen a hug and Ila a kiss, and ran a cool eye over Elyas and the Emond's Fielders. He was about the same age as Perrin, and he moved as if he were about to begin dancing with his next step.

"wɛl, ɛɹæm" - ilə smaɪl fɑnli - "ju hæv dɪsaɪɾɪd tə it wɪð jəɹ oʊld ɡɹændpɛɹəns fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ, hæv ju?" hɝ smaɪl slɪɾ oʊvɝ tə ɛɡwin əz ʃi bɛn tə stɝ ə kɛɾəl hæŋɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə kʊkfaɪɝ. "aɪ wʌndɝ waɪ?"

"Well, Aram" - Ila smiled fondly - "you have decided to eat with your old grandparents for a change, have you?" Her smile slid over to Egwene as she bent to stir a kettle hanging over the cookfire. "I wonder why?"

ɛɹæm sɛɾəld tə ən izi kɹaʊtʃ wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz kɹɔst ɑn ɪz niz, əkɹɔs ðə faɪɝ fɹəm ɛɡwin. "aɪ æm ɛɹæm," hi toʊld əɹ ɪn ə loʊ, kɑnfəɾənt vɔɪs. hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ simd əwɛɹ ðəɾ ɛniwʌn wɑz ðəɹ ɪksɛp hɝ. "aɪ hæv weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə fɝst ɹoʊz ə spɹɪŋ, ən naʊ aɪ faɪn ɪɾ ət maɪ ɡɹændfɑðɝz faɪɝ."

Aram settled to an easy crouch with his arms crossed on his knees, across the fire from Egwene. "I am Aram," he told her in a low, confident voice. He no longer seemed aware that anyone was there except her. "I have waited for the first rose of spring, and now I find it at my grandfather's fire."

pɛɹɪn weɪɾəd fəɹ ɛɡwin tə snɪkɝ, ðən sɔ ðət ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ bæk əɾ ɛɹæm. hi lʊkt ət ðə jʌŋ tɪŋkɝ əɡɛn. ɛɹæm hæd mɔɹ ðən ɪz ʃɛɹ ʌv ɡʊd lʊks, hi ədmɪɾəd. æftɝ ə mɪnət pɛɹɪn nu hu ðə fɛloʊ ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm ʌv. wɪl ælsin, hu hæɾ ɔl ðə ɡɝlz stɛɹɪŋ ən wɪspɝɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk wɛnɛvɝ i keɪm ʌp fɹəm dɛvən ɹaɪd tə ɛmənz fild. wɪl kɔɹɾɪd ɛvɹi ɡɝl ɪn saɪt, ən mænədʒ tə kənvɪns ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðɛm ðəɾ i wɑz dʒʌs biɪŋ pəlaɪt tə ɔl ði ʌðɝz.

Perrin waited for Egwene to snicker, then saw that she was staring back at Aram. He looked at the young Tinker again. Aram had more than his share of good looks, he admitted. After a minute Perrin knew who the fellow reminded him of. Wil al'Seen, who had all the girls staring and whispering behind his back whenever he came up from Deven Ride to Emond's Field. Wil courted every girl in sight, and managed to convince every one of them that he was just being polite to all the others.

"ðoʊz dɑɡz ə jʊɹz," pɛɹɪn sɛd laʊdli, ən ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, "lʊk əz bɪɡ əz bɛɹz. aɪm sɝpɹaɪz jə lɛt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən pleɪ wɪð ðɛm."

"Those dogs of yours," Perrin said loudly, and Egwene gave a start, "look as big as bears. I'm surprised you let the children play with them."

ɛɹæmz smaɪl slɪpt, bʌt wən i lʊkt ət pɛɹɪn ɪt keɪm bæk əɡɛn, ivən mɔɹ ʃʊɹ ðən bɪfɔɹ. "ðeɪ wɪl nɑt hɑɹm ju. ðeɪ meɪk ə ʃoʊ tə fɹaɪɾən əweɪ deɪnʒɝ, ən wɔɹn ʌs, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹeɪn əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif."

Aram's smile slipped, but when he looked at Perrin it came back again, even more sure than before. "They will not harm you. They make a show to frighten away danger, and warn us, but they are trained according to the Way of the Leaf."

"ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif?" ɛɡwin sɛd. "wʌɾ ɪz ðæt?"

"The Way of the Leaf?" Egwene said. "What is that?"

ɛɹæm dʒɛstʃɝd tə ðə tʃɹiz, hɪz aɪz fæsən ɪntɛnli ɑn hɝz. "ðə lif lɪvz ɪts əpɔɪntəd taɪm, ən dʌz nɑt stʃɹʌɡəl əɡɛns ðə wɪn ðət kæɹiz ɪɾ əweɪ. ðə lif dʌz noʊ hɑɹm, ən faɪnəli fɔlz tə nɝɪʃ nu livz. soʊ ɪt ʃəd bi wɪð ɔl mɛn. ən wɪmən." ɛɡwin stɛɹd bæk ət hɪm, ə feɪn blʌʃ ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn əɹ tʃiks.

Aram gestured to the trees, his eyes fastened intently on hers. "The leaf lives its appointed time, and does not struggle against the wind that carries it away. The leaf does no harm, and finally falls to nourish new leaves. So it should be with all men. And women." Egwene stared back at him, a faint blush rising in her cheeks.

"bʌt wʌt dʌz ðət min?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. ɛɹæm ɡeɪv ɪm ən ɪɹəteɪɾəd ɡlæns, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɹən u ænsɝd.

"But what does that mean?" Perrin said. Aram gave him an irritated glance, but it was Raen who answered.

"ɪt minz ðət noʊ mæn ʃəd hɑɹm ənʌðɝ fəɹ ɛni ɹizən wʌtsoʊɛvɝ." ðə sikɝz aɪz flɪkɝd tə ɛlaɪəs. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ ɪkskjus fəɹ vaɪələns. nʌn. nɑɾ ɛvɝ."

"It means that no man should harm another for any reason whatsoever." The Seeker's eyes flickered to Elyas. "There is no excuse for violence. None. Not ever."

"wʌɾ ɪf sʌmbɑɾi ətæks ju?" pɛɹɪn ɪnsɪstəd. "wʌɾ ɪf sʌmbɑɾi hɪts ju, əɹ tʃɹaɪz tə ɹɑb ju, əɹ kɪl ju?"

"What if somebody attacks you?" Perrin insisted. "What if somebody hits you, or tries to rob you, or kill you?"

ɹən saɪd, ə peɪʃən saɪ, əz ɪf pɛɹɪn wɑz dʒʌs nɑt siɪŋ wʌt wɑz soʊ klɪɹ tə hɪm. "ɪf ə mæn hɪt mi, aɪ wəɾ æsk ɪm waɪ hi wɑntəd tə də sətʃ ə θɪŋ. ɪf i stɪl wɑntəd tə hɪt mi, aɪ wəd ɹʌn əweɪ, əz aɪ wəɾ ɪf i wɑntəd tə ɹɑb əɹ kɪl mi. mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðəɾ aɪ lɛɾ ɪm teɪk wʌɾ i wɑntəd, ivən maɪ laɪf, ðən ðəɾ aɪ ʃəd də vaɪələns. ən aɪ wəd hoʊp ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt hɑɹm tu ɡɹeɪtli."

Raen sighed, a patient sigh, as if Perrin was just not seeing what was so clear to him. "If a man hit me, I would ask him why he wanted to do such a thing. If he still wanted to hit me, I would run away, as I would if he wanted to rob or kill me. Much better that I let him take what he wanted, even my life, than that I should do violence. And I would hope that he was not harmed too greatly."

"bʌt jə sɛd jə wʊdn hɝt hɪm," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "aɪ wəd nɑt, bʌt vaɪələns hɑɹmz ðə wʌn u dʌz ɪɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ðə wʌn u ɹəsivz ɪt." pɛɹɪn lʊk daʊtfəl. "ju kəd kʌt daʊn ə tʃɹi wɪð jəɹ æks," ɹən sɛd. "ði æks dʌz vaɪələns tə ðə tʃɹi, ən ɪskeɪps ənhɑɹmd. ɪz ðət haʊ jə si ɪt? wʊɾ ɪz sɑf kəmpɛɹd tə stil, bʌt ðə ʃɑɹp stil ɪz dʌld əz ɪt tʃɑps, ən ðə sæp ə ðə tʃɹi wɪl ɹʌst ən pɪɾ ɪt. ðə maɪɾi æks dʌz vaɪələns tə ðə hɛlpləs tʃɹi, ən ɪz hɑɹm baɪ ɪt. soʊ ɪts wɪð mɛn, ðoʊ ðə hɑɹm ɪz ɪn ðə spɪɹət."

"But you said you wouldn't hurt him," Perrin said. "I would not, but violence harms the one who does it as much as the one who receives it." Perrin looked doubtful. "You could cut down a tree with your axe," Raen said. "The axe does violence to the tree, and escapes unharmed. Is that how you see it? Wood is soft compared to steel, but the sharp steel is dulled as it chops, and the sap of the tree will rust and pit it. The mighty axe does violence to the helpless tree, and is harmed by it. So it is with men, though the harm is in the spirit."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"ɪnʌf," ɛlaɪəs ɡɹaʊld, kʌɾɪŋ pɛɹɪn ɔf. "ɹən, ɪts bæɾ ɪnʌf jə tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kənvɝt vɪlədʒ jʌŋɡəlɪŋz tə ðət nɑnsɛns - ɪt ɡɛts jə ɪn tʃɹʌbəl ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwɛɹ jə ɡoʊ, dʌzn ɪt? - bʌɾ aɪ dɪdn bɹɪŋ ðɪs lɑt hɪɹ fəɹ jə tə wɝk ɑn ðɛm. liv oʊvɝ."

"Enough," Elyas growled, cutting Perrin off. "Raen, it's bad enough you trying to convert village younglings to that nonsense - it gets you in trouble almost everywhere you go, doesn't it? - but I didn't bring this lot here for you to work on them. Leave over."

"æn liv əm tə ju?" ilə sɛd, ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ɝbz bɪtwin əɹ pɑmz ən lɛɾɪŋ əm tʃɹɪkəl ɪndə wʌn ə ðə kɛɾəlz. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz kɑm, bʌɾ əɹ hænz ɹʌb ði ɝbz fjʊɹiəsli. "wɪl jə titʃ əm jəɹ weɪ, tə kɪl əɹ daɪ? wɪl jə lɛɾ əm tə ðə feɪt jə sik fəɹ jɝsɛlf, daɪɪŋ əloʊn wɪð oʊnli ðə ɹeɪvənz ən jəɹ . . . jəɹ fɹɛnz tə skwɑbəl oʊvɝ jəɹ bɑɾi?"

"And leave them to you?" Ila said, grinding herbs between her palms and letting them trickle into one of the kettles. Her voice was calm, but her hands rubbed the herbs furiously. "Will you teach them your way, to kill or die? Will you lead them to the fate you seek for yourself, dying alone with only the ravens and your . . . your friends to squabble over your body?"

"bi ət pis, ilə," ɹən sɛd dʒɛnli, əz ɪf i hæd hɝd ðɪs ɔl ən mɔɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz. "hi hæz bɪn wɛlkəm tə əɹ faɪɝ, maɪ waɪf."

"Be at peace, Ila," Raen said gently, as if he had heard this all and more a hundred times. "He has been welcomed to our fire, my wife."

ilə səbsaɪɾɪd, bʌt pɛɹɪn noʊɾəst ðət ʃi meɪd noʊ əpɑlədʒi. ɪnstɛd ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɛlaɪəs ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd sædli, ðən dʌstɪɾ əɹ hænz ən bɪɡæn teɪkɪŋ spunz ən pɑɾɝi boʊlz fɹəm ə ɹɛd tʃɛst ɑn ðə saɪɾ ə ðə wæɡən.

Ila subsided, but Perrin noticed that she made no apology. Instead she looked at Elyas and shook her head sadly, then dusted her hands and began taking spoons and pottery bowls from a red chest on the side of the wagon.

ɹən tɝn bæk tə ɛlaɪəs. "maɪ oʊl fɹɛnd, haʊ mɛni taɪmz mʌst aɪ tɛl jə ðət wi də nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə kənvɝɾ ɛniwʌn. wən vɪlədʒ pipəl ɑɹ kjʊɹiəs əbaʊɾ əɹ weɪz, wi ænsɝ ðɛɹ kwɛstʃənz. ɪts moʊst ɔfən ðə jʌŋ u æsk, tʃɹu, ən səmtaɪmz wʌn ə ðɛm wɪl kʌm wɪð əs wən wi dʒɝni ɑn, bʌɾ ɪts ə ðɛɹ oʊn fɹi wɪl."

Raen turned back to Elyas. "My old friend, how many times must I tell you that we do not try to convert anyone. When village people are curious about our ways, we answer their questions. It is most often the young who ask, true, and sometimes one of them will come with us when we journey on, but it is of their own free will."

"ju tʃɹaɪ tɛlɪŋ ðət tə səm fɑɹm waɪf huz dʒʌs faʊn aʊɾ əɹ sʌn əɹ dɔɾɝ əz ɹʌn ɔf wɪð jə tɪŋkɝz," ɛlaɪəs sɛd ɹaɪli. "ðæts waɪ ðə bɪɡɝ taʊnz woʊn ivən lɛt jə kæmp nɪɹbaɪ. vɪlədʒəz pʊɾ ʌp wɪð jə fəɹ jəɹ mɛndɪŋ θɪŋz, bʌt ðə sɪɾiz doʊnt niɾ ɪt, ən ðeɪ doʊn laɪk jə tɔkɪŋ ðɛɹ jʌŋ foʊks ɪndə ɹʌnɪŋ ɔf."

"You try telling that to some farm wife who's just found out her son or daughter has run off with you Tinkers," Elyas said wryly. "That's why the bigger towns won't even let you camp nearby. Villages put up with you for your mending things, but the cities don't need it, and they don't like you talking their young folks into running off."

"aɪ wəd nɑt noʊ wʌt ðə sɪɾiz əlaʊ." ɹənz peɪʃəns simd ɪnɪɡzɔstəbəl. hi sɝɾənli dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə bi ɡɛɾɪŋ æŋɡɹi əɾ ɔl. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɔlweɪz vaɪələn mɛn ɪn sɪɾiz. ɪn ɛni keɪs, aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ðə sɔŋ kəd bi faʊn ɪn ə sɪɾi."

"I would not know what the cities allow." Raen's patience seemed inexhaustible. He certainly did not appear to be getting angry at all. "There are always violent men in cities. In any case, I do not think the song could be found in a city."

"aɪ doʊn min tə əfɛn ju, sikɝ," pɛɹɪn sɛd sloʊli, "bʌt. . . . wɛl, aɪ doʊn lʊk fəɹ vaɪələns. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪv ivən ɹɛsəld ɛnibəɾi ɪn jɪɹz, ɪksɛp fəɹ fistdeɪ ɡeɪmz. bʌɾ ɪf sʌmbɑɾi hɪt mi, aɪd hɪɾ ɪm bæk. ɪf aɪ dɪdnt, aɪ wəd dʒʌs bi ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋ ɪm tə θɪŋk i kəd hɪt mi wɛnɛvɝ i wɑntəd tə. səm pipəl θɪŋk ðeɪ kən teɪk ædvæntɪdʒ ʌv ʌðɝz, ən ɪf jə doʊn lɛɾ əm noʊ ðeɪ kænt, ðəl dʒʌst ɡoʊ ɝaʊn bʊliɪŋ ɛnibəɾi wikɝ ðən ðeɪ ɑɹ."

"I don't mean to offend you, Seeker," Perrin said slowly, "but. . . . Well, I don't look for violence. I don't think I've even wrestled anybody in years, except for feastday games. But if somebody hit me, I'd hit him back. If I didn't, I would just be encouraging him to think he could hit me whenever he wanted to. Some people think they can take advantage of others, and if you don't let them know they can't, they'll just go around bullying anybody weaker than they are."

"sʌm pipəl," ɛɹæm sɛd wɪð ə hɛvi sædnəs, "kæn nɛvɝ oʊvɝkʌm ðɛɹ bæzɝ ɪnstɪŋks." hi sɛɾ ɪt wɪð ə lʊk ət pɛɹɪn ðət meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ i wɑz nɑt tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə bʊliz pɛɹɪn spoʊk ʌv.

"Some people," Aram said with a heavy sadness, "can never overcome their baser instincts." He said it with a look at Perrin that made it clear he was not talking about the bullies Perrin spoke of.

"aɪl bɛt jə ɡɛt tə ɹʌn əweɪ ə lɑt," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən ðə jʌŋ tɪŋkɝz feɪs taɪɾənd ɪn ə weɪ ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif.

"I'll bet you get to run away a lot," Perrin said, and the young Tinker's face tightened in a way that had nothing to do with the Way of the Leaf.

"aɪ θɪŋk ɪts ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ," ɛɡwin sɛd, ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət pɛɹɪn, "tə mit sʌmwʌn u dʌzn bɪliv ɪz mʌsəlz kən sɑlv ɛvɹi pɹɑbləm."

"I think it is interesting," Egwene said, glaring at Perrin, "to meet someone who doesn't believe his muscles can solve every problem."

ɛɹæmz ɡʊd spɪɹəts ɹɪtɝnd, ən i stʊd, ɔfɝɪŋ əɹ ɪz hænz wɪð ə smaɪl. "lɛt mi ʃoʊ jə əɹ kæmp. ðəɹ ɪz dænsɪŋ."

Aram's good spirits returned, and he stood, offering her his hands with a smile. "Let me show you our camp. There is dancing."

"aɪ wəd laɪk ðæt." ʃi smaɪl bæk.

"I would like that." She smiled back.

ilə stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm teɪkɪŋ loʊvz ə bɹɛd fɹəm ðə smɔl aɪɝn ʌvən. "bʌt sʌpɝ ɪz ɹɛɾi, ɛɹæm."

Ila straightened from taking loaves of bread from the small iron oven. "But supper is ready, Aram."

"aɪl it wɪð mʌðɝ," ɛɹæm sɛɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əz i dʒɹu ɛɡwin əweɪ fɹəm ðə wæɡən baɪ hɝ hænd. "wi wɪl boʊθ it wɪð mʌðɝ." hi flæʃt ə tʃɹaɪʌmfən smaɪl ət pɛɹɪn. ɛɡwin wɑz læfɪŋ əz ðeɪ ɹæn.

"I'll eat with mother," Aram said over his shoulder as he drew Egwene away from the wagon by her hand. "We will both eat with mother." He flashed a triumphant smile at Perrin. Egwene was laughing as they ran.

pɛɹɪn ɡɑt tə hɪz fit, ðən stɑpt. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪf ʃi kəd kʌm tə ɛni hɑɹm, nɑɾ ɪf ðə kæmp fɑloʊd ðɪs weɪ ʌv ðə lif əz ɹən sɛd. lʊkɪŋ ət ɹən ən ilə, boʊθ stɛɹɪŋ dɪdʒɛktɪdli æftɝ ðɛɹ ɡɹændsʌn, hi sɛd, "aɪm sɑɹi. aɪm ə ɡɛst, ən aɪ ʃʊdn əv - "

Perrin got to his feet, then stopped. It was not as if she could come to any harm, not if the camp followed this Way of the Leaf as Raen said. Looking at Raen and Ila, both staring dejectedly after their grandson, he said, "I'm sorry. I am a guest, and I shouldn't have - "

"doʊn bi fulɪʃ," ilə sɛd suðɪŋli. "ɪt wɑz ɪz fɔlt, nɑt jʊɹz. sɪt daʊn ən it."

"Don't be foolish," Ila said soothingly. "It was his fault, not yours. Sit down and eat."

"ɛɹæm ɪz ə tʃɹʌbəl jʌŋ mæn," ɹən æɾəd sædli. "hi ɪz ə ɡʊd bɔɪ, bʌt səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk i faɪnz ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif ə hɑɹd weɪ. səm du, aɪ fɪɹ. pliz. maɪ faɪɝ ɪz jʊɹz. pliz?"

"Aram is a troubled young man," Raen added sadly. "He is a good boy, but sometimes I think he finds the Way of the Leaf a hard way. Some do, I fear. Please. My fire is yours. Please?"

pɛɹɪn sæt bæk daʊn sloʊli, stɪl filɪŋ ɑkwɝd. "wʌt hæpənz tə sʌmbɑɾi hu kæn fɑloʊ ðə weɪ?" hi æskt. "eɪ tɪŋkɝ, aɪ min."

Perrin sat back down slowly, still feeling awkward. "What happens to somebody who can't follow the Way?" he asked. "A Tinker, I mean."

ɹən ən ilə ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə wɝid lʊk, ən ɹən sɛd, "ðeɪ liv ʌs. ðə lɔst ɡoʊ tə lɪv ɪn ðə vɪlədʒəz."

Raen and Ila exchanged a worried look, and Raen said, "They leave us. The Lost go to live in the villages."

ilə stɛɹɾ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən əɹ ɡɹændsʌn hæd ɡɔn. "ðə lɔs kænɑt bi hæpi." ʃi saɪd, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz plæsəɾ əɡɛn wən ʃi hændəɾ aʊt ðə boʊlz ən spunz.

Ila stared in the direction her grandson had gone. "The Lost cannot be happy." She sighed, but her face was placid again when she handed out the bowls and spoons.

pɛɹɪn stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd, wɪʃɪŋ i hæd nɑɾ æskt, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ tɔk waɪl ilə fɪl ðɛɹ boʊlz wɪð ə θɪk vɛdʒtəbəl stu ən hændəɾ aʊt θɪk slaɪsəz ə hɝ kɹʌsti bɹɛd, nɔɹ waɪl ðeɪ eɪt. ðə stu wɑz dɪlɪʃəs, ən pɛɹɪn fɪnɪʃt θɹi boʊlz bɪfɔɹ i stɑpt. ɛlaɪəs, hi noʊɾəd wɪð ə ɡɹɪn, ɛmptid fɔɹ.

Perrin stared at the ground, wishing he had not asked, and there was no more talk while Ila filled their bowls with a thick vegetable stew and handed out thick slices of her crusty bread, nor while they ate. The stew was delicious, and Perrin finished three bowls before he stopped. Elyas, he noted with a grin, emptied four.

æftɝ ðə mil ɹən fɪld ɪz paɪp, ən ɛlaɪəs pɹədust ɪz oʊn ən stʌft ɪt fɹəm ɹənz ɔɪlskɪn paʊtʃ. wən ðə laɪɾɪŋ ən tæmpɪŋ ən ɹɪlaɪɾɪŋ wɝ dʌn, ðeɪ sɛɾəld bæk ɪn saɪləns. ilə tʊk aʊɾ ə bʌndəl ə nɪɾɪŋ. ðə sʌn wɑz oʊnli ə bleɪz ə ɹɛɾ əbʌv ðə tʃɹitɑps tə ðə wɛst. ðə kæmp hæd sɛɾəld ɪn fəɹ ðə naɪt, bʌt ðə bʌsəl dɪd nɑt sloʊ, oʊnli tʃeɪnʒd. ðə mjuzɪʃənz u hæd bɪn pleɪɪŋ wən ðeɪ ɛntɝd ðə kæmp hæd bɪn ɹipleɪs baɪ ʌðɝz, ən ivən mɔɹ pipəl ðən bɪfɔɹ dænst ɪn ðə laɪɾ ə ðə faɪɝz, ðɛɹ ʃædoʊz lipɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wæɡənz. sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə kæmp ə kɔɹəs ə meɪl vɔɪsəz ɹoʊz. pɛɹɪn slɪd daʊn ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə lɔɡ ən sun fɛl hɪmsɛlf doʊzɪŋ.

After the meal Raen filled his pipe, and Elyas produced his own and stuffed it from Raen's oilskin pouch. When the lighting and tamping and relighting were done, they settled back in silence. Ila took out a bundle of knitting. The sun was only a blaze of red above the treetops to the west. The camp had settled in for the night, but the bustle did not slow, only changed. The musicians who had been playing when they entered the camp had been replaced by others, and even more people than before danced in the light of the fires, their shadows leaping against the wagons. Somewhere in the camp a chorus of male voices rose. Perrin slid down in front of the log and soon felt himself dozing.

æftɝ ə taɪm ɹən sɛd, "hæv jə vɪzəɾəd ɛni ʌv ðə tuætɑn, ɛlaɪəs, sɪns jə wɝ wɪð əs læst spɹɪŋ?"

After a time Raen said, "Have you visited any of the Tuatha'an, Elyas, since you were with us last spring?"

pɛɹɪnz aɪz dʒɹɪftəɾ oʊpən ən hæf ʃʌɾ əɡɛn.

Perrin's eyes drifted open and half shut again.

"noʊ," ɛlaɪəs ɹɪplaɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz paɪpɛstəm. "aɪ doʊn laɪk biɪŋ ɝaʊn tu mɛni pipəl ət wʌns."

"No," Elyas replied around his pipestem. "I don't like being around too many people at once."

ɹən tʃʌkəld. "ɪspɛʃli pipəl u lɪv ɪn ə weɪ soʊ ɑpəzət tə jəɹ oʊn, ɛ? noʊ, maɪ oʊl fɹɛnd, doʊnt wɝi. aɪ ɡeɪv ʌp jɪɹz əɡoʊ hoʊpɪŋ jə wəd kʌm tə ðə weɪ. bʌɾ aɪ hæv hɝɾ ə stɔɹi sɪns læst wi mɛt, ən ɪf juv nɑt hɝɾ ɪt jɛt, ɪt maɪɾ ɪntʃɹəs ju. ɪɾ ɪntʃɹəsts mi, ən aɪ hæv hɝɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn ən əɡɛn, ɛvɹi taɪm wi miɾ ʌðɝz ə ðə pipəl."

Raen chuckled. "Especially people who live in a way so opposite to your own, eh? No, my old friend, don't worry. I gave up years ago hoping you would come to the Way. But I have heard a story since last we met, and if you have not heard it yet, it might interest you. It interests me, and I have heard it again and again, every time we meet others of the People."

"aɪl lɪsən."

"I'll listen."

"ɪt bɪɡɪnz ɪn ðə spɹɪŋ tu jɪɹz əɡoʊ, wɪð ə bæn ə ðə pipəl u wɝ kɹɔsɪŋ ðə weɪs baɪ ðə nɔɹðɝn ɹut."

"It begins in the spring two years ago, with a band of the People who were crossing the Waste by the northern route."

pɛɹɪnz aɪz ʃɑɾ oʊpən. "ðə weɪst? ði il weɪst? ðeɪ wɝ kɹɔsɪŋ ði il weɪst?"

Perrin's eyes shot open. "The Waste? The Aiel Waste? They were crossing the Aiel Waste?"

"sʌm pipəl kən ɛntɝ ðə weɪst wɪθaʊt biɪŋ bɑðɝd," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. "ɡlimən. pɛdlɝz, ɪf ðəɹ ɑnəst. ðə tuætɑn kɹɔs ðə weɪst ɔl ðə taɪm. mɝtʃəns fɹəm kɛɹhin juz tə, bɪfɔɹ ðə tʃɹi, ən ði il wɔɹ."

"Some people can enter the Waste without being bothered," Elyas said. "Gleemen. Peddlers, if they're honest. The Tuatha'an cross the Waste all the time. Merchants from Cairhien used to, before the Tree, and the Aiel War."

"ði ilmɛn əvɔɪɾ ʌs," ɹən sɛd sædli, "ðoʊ mɛni ʌv əs əv tʃɹaɪd tə spik wɪð ðɛm. ðeɪ wɑtʃ əs fɹəm ə dɪstəns, bʌt ðəl nɑt kʌm nɪɹ ʌs, nɔɹ lɛɾ əs kʌm nɪɹ ðɛm. səmtaɪmz aɪ wɝi ðət ðeɪ maɪt noʊ ðə sɔŋ, ðoʊ aɪ səpoʊz ɪɾ ɪzən laɪkli. əmʌŋ il, mɛn də nɑt sɪŋ, jə noʊ. ɪzən ðət stʃɹeɪnʒ? fɹəm ðə taɪm ən il bɔɪ bɪkʌmz ə mæn hɪl nɑt sɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt bæɾəl tʃæns, əɹ ðɛɹ dɝdʒ fəɹ ðə sleɪn. aɪ hæv hɝɾ əm sɪŋɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ dɛd, ən oʊvɝ ðoʊz ðeɪv kɪld. ðət sɔŋ ɪz wʌn tə meɪk ðə stoʊnz wip." ilə, lɪsnɪŋ, nɑɾəd əɡɹimən oʊvɝ əɹ nɪɾɪŋ.

"The Aielmen avoid us," Raen said sadly, "though many of us have tried to speak with them. They watch us from a distance, but they will not come near us, nor let us come near them. Sometimes I worry that they might know the song, though I suppose it isn't likely. Among Aiel, men do not sing, you know. Isn't that strange? From the time an Aiel boy becomes a man he will not sing anything but battle chants, or their dirge for the slain. I have heard them singing over their dead, and over those they have killed. That song is one to make the stones weep." Ila, listening, nodded agreement over her knitting.

pɛɹɪn dɪd səm kwɪk ɹiθɪŋkɪŋ. hi hæd θɔt ðə tɪŋkɝz mʌs bi əfɹeɪɾ ɔl ðə taɪm, wɪð ɔl ðɪs tɔk ə ɹʌnɪŋ əweɪ, bʌt noʊ wʌn u wɑz əfɹeɪd wəɾ ivən θɪŋk ə kɹɔsɪŋ ði il weɪst. fɹəm wʌɾ i hæd hɝd, noʊ wʌn u wɑz seɪn wəd tʃɹaɪ kɹɔsɪŋ ðə weɪst.

Perrin did some quick rethinking. He had thought the Tinkers must be afraid all the time, with all this talk of running away, but no one who was afraid would even think of crossing the Aiel Waste. From what he had heard, no one who was sane would try crossing the Waste.

"ɪf ðɪs ɪz səm stɔɹi əbaʊɾ ə sɔŋ," ɛlaɪəs bɪɡæn, bʌt ɹən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"If this is some story about a song," Elyas began, but Raen shook his head.

"noʊ, maɪ oʊl fɹɛnd, nɑɾ ə sɔŋ. aɪm nɑt ʃʊɹ aɪ noʊ wʌɾ ɪts əbaʊt." hi tɝn ɪz ətɛnʃən tə pɛɹɪn. "jʌŋ il ɔfən tʃɹævəl ɪndə ðə blaɪt. səm ə ðə jʌŋ mɛn ɡoʊ əloʊn, θɪŋkɪŋ fəɹ səm ɹizən ðət ðeɪv bɪn kɔl tə kɪl ðə dɑɹk wʌn. moʊst ɡoʊ ɪn smɔl ɡɹups. tə hʌn tʃɹɑləks." ɹən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd sædli, ən wən i wɛn ɑn ɪz vɔɪs wɑz hɛvi. "tu jɪɹz əɡoʊ ə bæn ə ðə pipəl kɹɔsɪŋ ðə weɪst əbaʊɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz saʊθ ə ðə blaɪt faʊnd wʌn ə ðiz ɡɹups."

"No, my old friend, not a song. I am not sure I know what it is about." He turned his attention to Perrin. "Young Aiel often travel into the Blight. Some of the young men go alone, thinking for some reason that they have been called to kill the Dark One. Most go in small groups. To hunt Trollocs." Raen shook his head sadly, and when he went on his voice was heavy. "Two years ago a band of the People crossing the Waste about a hundred miles south of the Blight found one of these groups."

"jʌŋ wɪmən," ilə pʊɾ ɪn, əz sɑɹoʊfəl əz əɹ hʌzbənd. "lɪɾəl mɔɹ ðən ɡɝlz."

"Young women," Ila put in, as sorrowful as her husband. "Little more than girls."

pɛɹɪn meɪɾ ə sɝpɹaɪz saʊnd, ən ɛlaɪəs ɡɹɪn əɾ ɪm ɹaɪli.

Perrin made a surprised sound, and Elyas grinned at him wryly.

"il ɡɝlz doʊn əv tə tɛn haʊs ən kʊk ɪf ðeɪ doʊnt wɑn tə, bɔɪ. ðə wʌnz u wɑnə bi wɔɹiɝz, ɪnstɛd, dʒɔɪn wʌn ə ðə wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz, fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ, ðə meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ, ən faɪt ɹaɪɾ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə mɛn."

"Aiel girls don't have to tend house and cook if they don't want to, boy. The ones who want to be warriors, instead, join one of the warrior societies, Far Dareis Mai, the Maidens of the Spear, and fight right alongside the men."

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. ɛlaɪəs tʃʌkəld əɾ ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Perrin shook his head. Elyas chuckled at his expression.

ɹən tʊk ʌp ðə stɔɹi əɡɛn, dɪsteɪst ən pɝplɛksəɾi mɪŋɡəld ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "ðə jʌŋ wɪmən wɝ ɔl dɛɾ ɪksɛpt wʌn, ən ʃi wɑz daɪɪŋ. ʃi kɹɔl tə ðə wæɡənz. ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ʃi nu ðeɪ wɝ tuætɑn. hɝ loʊθɪŋ aʊtweɪɾ əɹ peɪn, bʌt ʃi hæɾ ə mɛsədʒ soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hɝ ðət ʃi mʌs pæs ɪɾ ɑn tə sʌmwʌn, ivən ʌs, bɪfɔɹ ʃi daɪd. mɛn wɛn tə si ɪf ðeɪ kəd hɛlp ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz - ðəɹ wɑz ə tʃɹeɪl ə hɝ blʌd tə fɑloʊ - bʌɾ ɔl wɝ dɛd, ən soʊ wɝ θɹi taɪmz ðɛɹ nʌmbɝ ɪn tʃɹɑləks."

Raen took up the story again, distaste and perplexity mingled in his voice. "The young women were all dead except one, and she was dying. She crawled to the wagons. It was clear she knew they were Tuatha'an. Her loathing outweighed her pain, but she had a message so important to her that she must pass it on to someone, even us, before she died. Men went to see if they could help any of the others - there was a trail of her blood to follow - but all were dead, and so were three times their number in Trollocs."

ɛlaɪəs sæɾ ʌp, hɪz paɪp ɔlmoʊs fɔlɪŋ fɹəm bɪtwin ɪz tiθ. "ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz ɪndə ðə weɪst? ɪmpɑsəbəl! jɛvɪk ɹ, ðæts wʌt tʃɹɑləks kɔl ðə weɪst. ðə daɪɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd. ðeɪ wʊdnt ɡoʊ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz ɪndə ðə weɪst ɪf ɔl ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ɪn ðə blaɪt wɝ dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðɛm."

Elyas sat up, his pipe almost falling from between his teeth. "A hundred miles into the Waste? Impossible! Djevik K'Shar, that's what Trollocs call the Waste. The Dying Ground. They wouldn't go a hundred miles into the Waste if all the Myrddraal in the Blight were driving them."

"ju noʊ ən ɑfəl lɑɾ əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks, ɛlaɪəs," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"You know an awful lot about Trollocs, Elyas," Perrin said.

"ɡoʊ ɑn wɪð jəɹ stɔɹi," ɛlaɪəs toʊld ɹən ɡɹʌflaɪ.

"Go on with your story," Elyas told Raen gruffly.

"fɹʌm tʃɹoʊfiz ði il kæɹid, ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs ðeɪ wɝ kʌmɪŋ bæk fɹəm ðə blaɪt. ðə tʃɹɑləks hæd fɑloʊd, bʌt baɪ ðə tʃɹæks oʊnli ə fju lɪv tə ɹɪtɝn æftɝ kɪlɪŋ ði il. əz fəɹ ðə ɡɝl, ʃi wəd nɑt lɛɾ ɛniwʌn tʌtʃ hɝ, ivən tə tɛn əɹ wunz. bʌt ʃi siz ðə sikɝ ə ðət bæn baɪ hɪz koʊt, ən ðɪs ɪz wʌt ʃi sɛd, wɝd fəɹ wɝd. 'lifblaɪɾɝ minz tə blaɪn ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld, lɔst wʌn. hi minz tə sleɪ ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt. wɔɹn ðə pipəl, lɔst wʌn. saɪtbɝnɝ kʌmz. tɛl əm tə stæn ɹɛɾi fəɹ i hu kʌmz wɪð ðə dɔn. tɛl ðɛm. . . .' ən ðən ʃi daɪd. lifblaɪɾɝ ən saɪtbɝnɝ," ɹən æɾəd tə pɛɹɪn, "ɑɹ il neɪmz fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstæn ənʌðɝ wɝɾ ʌv ɪt. jɛt ʃi θɔɾ ɪɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪnʌf tə əpɹoʊtʃ ðoʊz ʃi ɑbviəsli dɪspaɪzd, tə pæs ɪɾ ɑn wɪð əɹ læs bɹɛθ. bʌt tə hu? wəɹ aʊɝsɛlvz, ðə pipəl, bʌɾ aɪ hɑɹdli θɪŋk ʃi mɛn ɪt fəɹ ʌs. ði il? ðeɪ wəd nɑt lɛɾ əs tɛl əm ɪf wi tʃɹaɪd." hi saɪd hɛvəli. "ʃi kɔld əs ðə lɔst. aɪ nɛvɝ nu bɪfɔɹ haʊ mʌtʃ ðeɪ loʊð ʌs." ilə sɛɾ əɹ nɪɾɪŋ ɪn əɹ læp ən tʌtʃt ɪz hɛd dʒɛnli.

"From trophies the Aiel carried, it was obvious they were coming back from the Blight. The Trollocs had followed, but by the tracks only a few lived to return after killing the Aiel. As for the girl, she would not let anyone touch her, even to tend her wounds. But she seized the Seeker of that band by his coat, and this is what she said, word for word. 'Leafblighter means to blind the Eye of the World, Lost One. He means to slay the Great Serpent. Warn the People, Lost One. Sightburner comes. Tell them to stand ready for He Who Comes With the Dawn. Tell them. . . .' And then she died. Leafblighter and Sightburner," Raen added to Perrin, "are Aiel names for the Dark One, but I don't understand another word of it. Yet she thought it important enough to approach those she obviously despised, to pass it on with her last breath. But to who? We are ourselves, the People, but I hardly think she meant it for us. The Aiel? They would not let us tell them if we tried." He sighed heavily. "She called us the Lost. I never knew before how much they loathe us." Ila set her knitting in her lap and touched his head gently.

"sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ lɝn ɪn ðə blaɪt," ɛlaɪəs mjuzd. "bʌt nʌn ʌv ɪt meɪks sɛns. sleɪ ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt? kɪl taɪm ɪtsɛlf? ən blaɪn ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld? əz wɛl seɪ hiz gɑnə stɑɹv ə ɹɑk. meɪbi ʃi wɑz bæbəlɪŋ, ɹən. wundəd, daɪɪŋ, ʃi cʊɾə lɔst əɹ ɡɹɪp ɑn wʌt wɑz ɹil. meɪbi ʃi dɪdn ivən noʊ hu ðoʊz tuætɑn wɝ."

"Something they learned in the Blight," Elyas mused. "But none of it makes sense. Slay the Great Serpent? Kill time itself? And blind the Eye of the World? As well say he's going to starve a rock. Maybe she was babbling, Raen. Wounded, dying, she could have lost her grip on what was real. Maybe she didn't even know who those Tuatha'an were."

"ʃi nu wʌt ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ, ən tə hum ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ ɪt. sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə hɝ ðən əɹ oʊn laɪf, ən wi kænɑɾ ivən ʌndɝstæn ɪt. wən aɪ sɔ jə wɔkɪŋ ɪndə əɹ kæmp, aɪ θɔt pɝhæps wi wəd faɪn ði ænsɝ ət læst, sɪns jə wɝ" - ɛlaɪəs meɪɾ ə kwɪk moʊʃən wɪð ɪz hænd, ən ɹən tʃeɪnʒd wʌɾ i hæd bɪn gɑnə seɪ - "ɑɹ ə fɹɛnd, ən noʊ mɛni stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz."

"She knew what she was saying, and to whom she was saying it. Something more important to her than her own life, and we cannot even understand it. When I saw you walking into our camp, I thought perhaps we would find the answer at last, since you were" - Elyas made a quick motion with his hand, and Raen changed what he had been going to say - "are a friend, and know many strange things."

"nɑɾ əbaʊt ðɪs," ɛlaɪəs sɛɾ ɪn ə toʊn ðət pʊɾ ən ɛn tə tɔk. ðə saɪləns ɝaʊn ðə kæmpfaɪɝ wɑz bɹoʊkən oʊnli baɪ ðə mjuzɪk ən læftɝ dʒɹɪftɪŋ fɹəm ʌðɝ pɑɹts ə ðə naɪt-ʃɹaʊɾɪd kæmp.

"Not about this," Elyas said in a tone that put an end to talk. The silence around the campfire was broken only by the music and laughter drifting from other parts of the night-shrouded camp.

laɪɪŋ wɪð ɪz ʃoʊldɝz pɹɑpt ɑn wʌn ə ðə lɔɡz ɝaʊn ðə faɪɝ, pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd pʌzəlɪŋ aʊt ði il wʊmənz mɛsədʒ, bʌɾ ɪt meɪd noʊ mɔɹ sɛns tə hɪm ðən ɪt hæd tə ɹən əɹ ɛlaɪəs. ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld. ðət hæd bɪn ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz, mɔɹ ðən wʌns, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðoʊz dʒɹimz. ɛlaɪəs, naʊ. ðəɹ wɑz ə kwɛstʃən ðəɹ i wəd laɪk ænsɝd. wʌt hæd ɹən bɪn əbaʊt tə seɪ əbaʊt ðə bɪɹɾəd mæn, ən waɪ hæɾ ɛlaɪəs kʌɾ ɪm ɔf? hi hæd noʊ lʌk wɪð ðæt, iðɝ. hi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪmædʒən wʌɾ il ɡɝlz wɝ laɪk - ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə ðə blaɪt, wɛɹ oʊnli wɔɹɾɝz wɛn ðəɾ i hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝd; faɪɾɪŋ tʃɹɑləks - wən i hɝɾ ɛɡwin kʌmɪŋ bæk, sɪŋɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf.

Lying with his shoulders propped on one of the logs around the fire, Perrin tried puzzling out the Aiel woman's message, but it made no more sense to him than it had to Raen or Elyas. The Eye of the World. That had been in his dreams, more than once, but he did not want to think about those dreams. Elyas, now. There was a question there he would like answered. What had Raen been about to say about the bearded man, and why had Elyas cut him off? He had no luck with that, either. He was trying to imagine what Aiel girls were like - going into the Blight, where only Warders went that he had ever heard; fighting Trollocs - when he heard Egwene coming back, singing to herself.

skɹæmbəlɪŋ tə hɪz fit, hi wɛn tə miɾ əɹ ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə faɪɹlaɪt. ʃi stɑpt ʃɔɹt, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm wɪð əɹ hɛd tɪltəd tə wʌn saɪd. ɪn ðə dɑɹk i kəd nɑt ɹɛɾ əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən.

Scrambling to his feet, he went to meet her at the edge of the firelight. She stopped short, looking at him with her head tilted to one side. In the dark he could not read her expression.

"juv bɪn ɡɔn ə lɔŋ taɪm," hi sɛd. "dɪd juv fʌn?"

"You've been gone a long time," he said. "Did you have fun?"

"wi eɪt wɪð ɪz mʌðɝ," ʃi ænsɝd. "æn ðən wi dænst . . . ən læft. ɪt simz laɪk fɝɛvɝ sɪns aɪ dænst."

"We ate with his mother," she answered. "And then we danced . . . and laughed. It seems like forever since I danced."

"hi ɹimaɪnz mi ʌv wɪl ælsin. jə ɔlweɪz hæd sɛns ɪnʌf nɑt tə lɛt wɪl pʊt jə ɪn ɪz pɑkət."

"He reminds me of Wil al'Seen. You always had sense enough not to let Wil put you in his pocket."

"ɛɹæm ɪz ə dʒɛntəl bɔɪ hu ɪz fʌn tə bi wɪð," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs. "hi meɪks mi læf."

"Aram is a gentle boy who is fun to be with," she said in a tight voice. "He makes me laugh."

pɛɹɪn saɪd. "aɪm sɑɹi. aɪm ɡlæd jə hæd fʌn dænsɪŋ."

Perrin sighed. "I'm sorry. I'm glad you had fun dancing."

əbɹʌpli ʃi flʌŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɪm, wipɪŋ ɑn ɪz ʃɝt. ɔkwɝdli hi pæɾəd əɹ hɛɹ. ɹænd wəd noʊ wʌt tə du, hi θɔt. ɹænd hæɾ ən izi weɪ wɪð ɡɝlz. nɑt laɪk hɪm, hu nɛvɝ nu wʌt tə də əɹ seɪ. "aɪ toʊl jə aɪm sɑɹi, ɛɡwin. aɪ ɹɪli æm ɡlæd jə hæd fʌn dænsɪŋ. ɹɪli."

Abruptly she flung her arms around him, weeping on his shirt. Awkwardly he patted her hair. Rand would know what to do, he thought. Rand had an easy way with girls. Not like him, who never knew what to do or say. "I told you I'm sorry, Egwene. I really am glad you had fun dancing. Really."

"tɛl mi ðəɹ əlaɪv," ʃi mʌmbəld ɪndə hɪz tʃɛst.

"Tell me they're alive," she mumbled into his chest.

"wʌt?"

"What?"

ʃi pʊʃt bæk tə ɑɹmz lɛŋθ, hɝ hænz ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz, ən lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪm ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. "ɹæn ən mæt. ði ʌðɝz. tɛl mi ðeɪ ɑɹ əlaɪv."

She pushed back to arm's length, her hands on his arms, and looked up at him in the darkness. "Rand and Mat. The others. Tell me they are alive."

hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən lʊkt ɝaʊn ənsɝteɪnli. "ðeɪ ɑɹ əlaɪv," hi sɛd faɪnəli.

He took a deep breath and looked around uncertainly. "They are alive," he said finally.

"ɡʊd." ʃi skɹʌbd əɾ əɹ tʃiks wɪð kwɪk fɪŋɡɝz. "ðæɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ wɑntəd tə hɪɹ. ɡʊd naɪt, pɛɹɪn. slip wɛl." stændɪŋ ɑn tɪptoʊ, ʃi bɹʌʃt ə kɪs əkɹɔs ɪz tʃik ən hɝid pæst ɪm bɪfɔɹ i kəd spik.

"Good." She scrubbed at her cheeks with quick fingers. "That is what I wanted to hear. Good night, Perrin. Sleep well." Standing on tiptoe, she brushed a kiss across his cheek and hurried past him before he could speak.

hi tɝn tə wɑtʃ hɝ. ilə ɹoʊz tə mit hɝ, ən ðə tu wɪmən wɛn ɪndə ðə wæɡən tɔkɪŋ kwaɪətli. ɹænd maɪɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt, hi θɔt, bʌɾ aɪ doʊnt.

He turned to watch her. Ila rose to meet her, and the two women went into the wagon talking quietly. Rand might understand it, he thought, but I don't.

ɪn ðə dɪstənt naɪt ðə wʊlvz haʊl ðə fɝs θɪn slɪvɝ ə ðə nu mun təwɔɹd ðə hɝaɪzən, ən i ʃɪvɝd. təmɑɹoʊ wəd bi taɪm ɪnʌf tə wɝi əbaʊt ðə wʊlvz əɡɛn. hi wɑz ɹɔŋ. ðeɪ wɝ weɪɾɪŋ tə ɡɹiɾ ɪm ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz.

In the distant night the wolves howled the first thin sliver of the new moon toward the horizon, and he shivered. Tomorrow would be time enough to worry about the wolves again. He was wrong. They were waiting to greet him in his dreams.


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɪks


CHAPTER 26

waɪtbɹɪdʒ


Whitebridge

ðə læst ənstɛɾi noʊɾ ʌv wʌt hæd bɪn bɛɹli ɹɛkəɡnaɪzəbəl əz "ðə wɪn ðət ʃeɪks ðə wɪloʊ" feɪɾəd mɝsɪfəli əweɪ, ən mæt loʊɝd tɑmz ɡoʊld-ænd-sɪlvɝ-tʃeɪs flut. ɹænd tʊk ɪz hænz fɹəm ɪz ɪɹz. ə seɪlɝ kɔɪlɪŋ ə laɪn ɑn ðə dɛk nɪɹbaɪ hivd ə laʊd saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif. fəɹ ə moʊmən ði oʊnli saʊnz wɝ ðə wɔɾɝ slæpɪŋ əɡɛns ðə hʌl, ðə ɹɪðmɪk kɹik ə ði ɔɹz, ən naʊ ən əɡɛn ðə hʌm ə ɹɪɡɪŋ stʃɹʌm baɪ ðə wɪnd. ðə wɪn blu dɛɾ ɑn tə ðə spɹeɪz baʊ, ən ðə jusləs seɪlz wɝ fɝld.

The last unsteady note of what had been barely recognizable as "The Wind That Shakes the Willow" faded mercifully away, and Mat lowered Thom's gold-and-silver-chased flute. Rand took his hands from his ears. A sailor coiling a line on the deck nearby heaved a loud sigh of relief. For a moment the only sounds were the water slapping against the hull, the rhythmic creak of the oars, and now and again the hum of rigging strummed by the wind. The wind blew dead on to the Spray's bow, and the useless sails were furled.

"aɪ səpoʊz aɪ ʃəd θæŋk ju," tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn mʌɾɝd faɪnəli, "fɔɹ titʃɪŋ mi haʊ tʃɹu ði oʊl seɪɪŋ ɪz. titʃ ɪm haʊ jə wɪl, ə pɪɡ wɪl nɛvɝ pleɪ ðə flut." ðə seɪlɝ bɝst aʊt læfɪŋ, ən mæt ɹeɪz ðə fluɾ əz ɪf tə θɹoʊ ɪɾ ət hɪm. dɛfli, tɑm snæɡd ði ɪnstʃɹəmən fɹəm mæts fɪst ən fɪɾəd ɪɾ ɪndə ɪts hɑɹd lɛðɝ keɪs. "aɪ θɔɾ ɔl jə ʃɛpɝdz waɪld əweɪ ðə taɪm wɪð ðə flɑk pleɪɪŋ ðə paɪps əɹ ðə flut. ðət wɪl ʃoʊ mi tə tʃɹʌst wʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ fɝsthænd."

"I suppose I should thank you," Thom Merrilin muttered finally, "for teaching me how true the old saying is. Teach him how you will, a pig will never play the flute." The sailor burst out laughing, and Mat raised the flute as if to throw it at him. Deftly, Thom snagged the instrument from Mat's fist and fitted it into its hard leather case. "I thought all you shepherds whiled away the time with the flock playing the pipes or the flute. That will show me to trust what I don't know firsthand."

"ɹænz ðə ʃɛpɝd," mæt ɡɹʌmbəld. "hi pleɪz ðə paɪps, nɑt mi."

"Rand's the shepherd," Mat grumbled. "He plays the pipes, not me."

"jɛs, wɛl, hi dʌz əv ə lɪɾəl æptətud. pɝhæps wi hæd bɛɾɝ wɝk ɑn dʒʌɡəlɪŋ, bɔɪ. ət lis jə ʃoʊ səm tælən fəɹ ðæt."

"Yes, well, he does have a little aptitude. Perhaps we had better work on juggling, boy. At least you show some talent for that."

"tɑm," ɹænd sɛd, "aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ jəɹ tʃɹaɪɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd." hi ɡlænst ət ðə seɪlɝ ən loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "æftɝ ɔl, wi ɑɹən ɹɪli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɪkʌm ɡlimən. ɪts oʊnli sʌmθɪŋ tə haɪd bɪhaɪn əntɪl wi faɪn mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði ʌðɝz."

"Thom," Rand said, "I don't know why you're trying so hard." He glanced at the sailor and lowered his voice. "After all, we aren't really trying to become gleemen. It's only something to hide behind until we find Moiraine and the others."

tɑm tʌɡd əɾ ən ɛn ə hɪz mʌstæʃ ən sim tə bi stʌɾiɪŋ ðə smuð, dɑɹk bɹaʊn lɛðɝ ə ðə flut keɪs ɑn ɪz niz. "wʌɾ ɪf jə doʊn faɪn ðɛm, bɔɪ? ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ tə seɪ ðəɹ ivən stɪl əlaɪv."

Thom tugged at an end of his mustache and seemed to be studying the smooth, dark brown leather of the flute case on his knees. "What if you don't find them, boy? There's nothing to say they're even still alive."

"ðeɪɹ əlaɪv," ɹænd sɛd fɝmli. hi tɝn tə mæt fəɹ səpɔɹt, bʌt mæts aɪbɹaʊz wɝ pɪntʃt daʊn ɑn ɪz noʊz, ən ɪz maʊθ wɑz ə θɪn laɪn, ən ɪz aɪz wɝ fɪkst ɑn ðə dɛk. "wɛl, spik ʌp," ɹænd toʊl hɪm. "ju kæn bi ðət mæɾ oʊvɝ nɑt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə pleɪ ðə flut. aɪ kæn iðɝ, nɑt vɛɹi wɛl. jə nɛvɝ wɑntəd tə pleɪ ðə flut bɪfɔɹ."

"They're alive," Rand said firmly. He turned to Mat for support, but Mat's eyebrows were pinched down on his nose, and his mouth was a thin line, and his eyes were fixed on the deck. "Well, speak up," Rand told him. "You can't be that mad over not being able to play the flute. I can't either, not very well. You never wanted to play the flute before."

mæt lʊkt ʌp, stɪl fɹaʊnɪŋ. "wʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ dɛd?" hi sɛd sɔfli. "wi hæv tə æksɛp fæks, ɹaɪt?"

Mat looked up, still frowning. "What if they are dead?" he said softly. "We have to accept facts, right?"

ət ðət moʊmən ðə lʊkaʊɾ ɪn ðə baʊ sæŋ aʊt, "waɪtbɹɪdʒ! waɪtbɹɪdʒ əhɛd!"

At that moment the lookout in the bow sang out, "Whitebridge! Whitebridge ahead!"

fəɹ ə lɔŋ mɪnət, ənwɪlɪŋ tə bɪliv ðət mæt kəd seɪ sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðət soʊ kæʒəwəli, ɹænd hɛld ɪz fɹɛnz ɡeɪz əmɪd ðə skɹæmbəl ə seɪlɝz pɹipɛɹɪŋ tə pʊɾ ɪn. mæt ɡlaʊɝɾ əɾ ɪm wɪð ɪz hɛd pʊl daʊn bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ðəɹ wɑz soʊ mʌtʃ ɹænd wɑntəd tə seɪ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ɪɾ ɔl ɪndə wɝdz. ðeɪ hæd tə bɪliv ði ʌðɝz wɝ əlaɪv. ðeɪ hæd tə. waɪ? næɡd ə vɔɪs ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz hɛd. soʊ ɪɾəl ɔl tɝn aʊt laɪk wʌn ə tɑmz stɔɹiz? ðə hɪɹoʊz faɪn ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ ən dɪfit ðə vɪlən ən laɪv hæpəli ɛvɝ æftɝ? səm ə hɪz stɔɹiz doʊn ɛn ðət weɪ. səmtaɪmz ivən hɪɹoʊz daɪ. ɑɹ jə ə hɪɹoʊ, ɹænd ælθɹ? ɑɹ jə ə hɪɹoʊ, ʃifɝɾɝ?

For a long minute, unwilling to believe that Mat could say something like that so casually, Rand held his friend's gaze amid the scramble of sailors preparing to put in. Mat glowered at him with his head pulled down between his shoulders. There was so much Rand wanted to say, but he could not manage to get it all into words. They had to believe the others were alive. They had to. Why? nagged a voice in the back of his head. So it will all turn out like one of Thom's stories? The heroes find the treasure and defeat the villain and live happily ever after? Some of his stories don't end that way. Sometimes even heroes die. Are you a hero, Rand al'Thor? Are you a hero, sheepherder?

əbɹʌpli mæt flʌʃt ən pʊld ɪz aɪz əweɪ. fɹid fɹəm ɪz θɔts, ɹænd dʒʌmpt ʌp tə muv θɹu ðə hɝli-bɝli tə ðə ɹeɪl. mæt keɪm æftɝ ɪm sloʊli, nɑɾ ivən meɪkɪŋ ən ɛfɝt tə dɑdʒ ðə seɪlɝz u ɹæn əkɹɔs ɪz pæθ.

Abruptly Mat flushed and pulled his eyes away. Freed from his thoughts, Rand jumped up to move through the hurly-burly to the rail. Mat came after him slowly, not even making an effort to dodge the sailors who ran across his path.

mɛn dæʃt əbaʊt ðə boʊt, bɛɹ fit θʌmpɪŋ ðə dɛk, hɔlɪŋ ɑn ɹoʊps, taɪɪŋ ɔf səm laɪnz ən əntiɪŋ ʌðɝz. səm bɹɔɾ ʌp bɪɡ ɔɪlskɪn bæɡz stʌft ɔlmoʊs tə bɝstɪŋ wɪð wʊl, waɪl ʌðɝz ɹɛɾid keɪbəlz əz θɪk əz ɹændz ɹɪst. dɪspaɪt ðɛɹ heɪst, ðeɪ muvd wɪð ði əʃʊɹəns ə mɛn u hæd dʌn ɪɾ ɔl ə θaʊzən taɪmz bɪfɔɹ, bʌt kæptən doʊmən stʌmpt ʌp ən daʊn ðə dɛk ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz ən kɝsɪŋ ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt muv fæst ɪnʌf tə sut hɪm.

Men dashed about the boat, bare feet thumping the deck, hauling on ropes, tying off some lines and untying others. Some brought up big oilskin bags stuffed almost to bursting with wool, while others readied cables as thick as Rand's wrist. Despite their haste, they moved with the assurance of men who had done it all a thousand times before, but Captain Domon stumped up and down the deck shouting orders and cursing those who did not move fast enough to suit him.

ɹændz ətɛnʃən wɑz ɔl fəɹ wʌt leɪ əhɛd, kʌmɪŋ pleɪnli ɪndə saɪɾ əz ðeɪ ɹaʊndəɾ ə slaɪt bɛn ə ði ɑɹɪnɛl. hi hæd hɝɾ ʌv ɪt, ɪn sɔŋ ən stɔɹi ən pɛdlɝz' teɪlz, bʌt naʊ hi wəɾ æktʃəli  si ðə lɛdʒənd.

Rand's attention was all for what lay ahead, coming plainly into sight as they rounded a slight bend of the Arinelle. He had heard of it, in song and story and peddlers' tales, but now he would actually see the legend.

ðə waɪt bɹɪdʒ ɑɹtʃt haɪ oʊvɝ ðə waɪd wɔɾɝz, twaɪs əz haɪ əz ðə spɹeɪz mæst ən mɔɹ, ən fɹəm ɛn tə ɛn ɪt ɡlimd mɪlki waɪɾ ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt, ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə laɪɾ əntɪl ɪt sim tə ɡloʊ. spaɪɾɝi pɪɹz ə ðə seɪm stʌf plʌnʒd ɪndə ðə stʃɹɔŋ kɝəns, əpɪɹɪŋ tu fɹeɪl tə səpɔɹt ðə weɪɾ ən wɪdθ ə ðə bɹɪdʒ. ɪt lʊkt ɔl ʌv wʌn pis, əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn kɑɹv fɹəm ə sɪŋɡəl stoʊn əɹ moʊldəd baɪ ə dʒaɪəns hænd, bɹɔɾ ən tɔl, lipɪŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ wɪð ən ɛɹi ɡɹeɪs ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪd ði aɪ fɝɡɛɾ ɪts saɪz. ɔl ɪn ɔl ɪt dwɔɹf ðə taʊn ðət spɹɔld əbaʊɾ ɪts fʊɾ ɑn ði is bæŋk, ðoʊ waɪtbɹɪdʒ wɑz lɑɹdʒɝ baɪ fɑɹ ðən ɛmənz fild, wɪð haʊsəz ə stoʊn ən bɹɪk əz tɔl əz ðoʊz ɪn tɛɹən fɛɹi ən wʊɾən dɑks laɪk θɪn fɪŋɡɝz stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə ɹɪvɝ. smɔl boʊts dɑɾəd ði ɑɹɪnɛl θɪkli, fɪʃɝmɪn hɔlɪŋ ðɛɹ nɛts. ən oʊvɝ ɪɾ ɔl ðə waɪt bɹɪdʒ taʊɝɾ ən ʃoʊn.

The White Bridge arched high over the wide waters, twice as high as the Spray's mast and more, and from end to end it gleamed milky white in the sunlight, gathering the light until it seemed to glow. Spidery piers of the same stuff plunged into the strong currents, appearing too frail to support the weight and width of the bridge. It looked all of one piece, as if it had been carved from a single stone or molded by a giant's hand, broad and tall, leaping the river with an airy grace that almost made the eye forget its size. All in all it dwarfed the town that sprawled about its foot on the east bank, though Whitebridge was larger by far than Emond's Field, with houses of stone and brick as tall as those in Taren Ferry and wooden docks like thin fingers sticking out into the river. Small boats dotted the Arinelle thickly, fishermen hauling their nets. And over it all the White Bridge towered and shone.

"ɪt lʊks laɪk ɡlæs," ɹænd sɛd tə noʊ wʌn ɪn pɝtɪkjəlɝ.

"It looks like glass," Rand said to no one in particular.

kæptən doʊmən pɔz bɪhaɪn ɪm ən tʌkt ɪz θʌmz bɪhaɪn ɪz bɹɔd bɛlt. "neɪ, læd. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt bi, ɪt noʊ bi ɡlæs. nɛvɝ soʊ hɑɹd ðə ɹeɪnz kʌm, ɪt noʊ bi slɪpɝi, ən ðə bɛs tʃɪzəl ən ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəst ɑɹm noʊ meɪk ə mɑɹk ɑn ɪt."

Captain Domon paused behind him and tucked his thumbs behind his broad belt. "Nay, lad. Whatever it be, it no be glass. Never so hard the rains come, it no be slippery, and the best chisel and the strongest arm no make a mark on it."

"ə ɹɛmnən fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz," tɑm sɛd. "aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz θɔɾ ɪt mʌs bi."

"A remnant from the Age of Legends," Thom said. "I have always thought it must be."

ðə kæptən ɡeɪv ə daʊɝ ɡɹʌnt. "meɪæp. bʌt stɪl jusfəl dɪspaɪt. kəd bi sʌmwʌn ɛls bɪlt ɪt. dʌz noʊ hæv tə bi ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk, fɔɹtʃən pɹɪk mi. ɪt noʊ hæz tə bi soʊ oʊld əz ɔl ðæt. pʊt jəɹ bæk ɪndə ɪt, jə blʌɾi ful!" hi hɝiɾ ɔf daʊn ðə dɛk.

The captain gave a dour grunt. "Mayhap. But still useful despite. Could be someone else built it. Does no have to be Aes Sedai work, Fortune prick me. It no has to be so old as all that. Put your back into it, you bloody fool!" He hurried off down the deck.

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ivən mɔɹ wʌndɝɪŋli. fɹəm ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. meɪd baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðɛn. ðət wɑz waɪ kæptən doʊmən fɛl ðə weɪ hi dɪd, fəɹ ɔl ɪz tɔk əbaʊt ðə wʌndɝ ən stʃɹeɪnʒnəs ə ðə wɝld. ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝk. wʌn θɪŋ tə hɪɹ əbaʊɾ ɪt, ənʌðɝ tə si ɪt, ən tʌtʃ ɪt. jə noʊ ðæt, doʊn ju? fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɪt sim tə ɹænd ðəɾ ə ʃædoʊ ɹɪpəl θɹu ðə mɪlk-waɪt stʃɹʌktʃɝ. hi pʊld ɪz aɪz əweɪ, tə ðə dɑks kʌmɪŋ nɪɹɝ, bʌt ðə bɹɪdʒ stɪl lumd ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz vɪʒən.

Rand stared even more wonderingly. From the Age of Legends. Made by Aes Sedai, then. That was why Captain Domon felt the way he did, for all his talk about the wonder and strangeness of the world. Aes Sedai work. One thing to hear about it, another to see it, and touch it. You know that, don't you? For an instant it seemed to Rand that a shadow rippled through the milk-white structure. He pulled his eyes away, to the docks coming nearer, but the bridge still loomed in the corner of his vision.

"wi meɪɾ ɪt, tɑm," hi sɛd, ðən fɔɹst ə læf. "ænd noʊ mjuɾəni."

"We made it, Thom," he said, then forced a laugh. "And no mutiny."

ðə ɡlimən oʊnli hæɹəmft ən blu aʊɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz, bʌt tu seɪlɝz ɹɛɾiɪŋ ə keɪbəl nɪɹbaɪ ɡeɪv ɹænd ə ʃɑɹp ɡlæns, ðən bɛn kwɪkli bæk tə ðɛɹ wɝk. hi stɑp læfɪŋ ən tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lʊk ət ðə tu fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ði əpɹoʊtʃ tə waɪtbɹɪdʒ.

The gleeman only harrumphed and blew out his mustaches, but two sailors readying a cable nearby gave Rand a sharp glance, then bent quickly back to their work. He stopped laughing and tried not to look at the two for the rest of the approach to Whitebridge.

ðə spɹeɪ kɝv smuðli ɪn bɪsaɪd ðə fɝs dɑk, θɪk tɪmbɝz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn hɛvi, tɑɹ-koʊɾəd paɪlɪŋz, ən stɑpt wɪð ə bækɪŋ ʌv ɔɹz ðət swɝl ðə wɔɾɝ tə fɹɔθ ɝaʊn ðə bleɪdz. əz ði ɔɹz wɝ dʒɹɔn ɪn, seɪlɝz tɔs keɪbəlz tə mɛn ɑn ðə dɑk, hu fæsən əm ɔf wɪð ə flɝɪʃ, waɪl ʌðɝ kɹumɪn slʌŋ ðə bæɡz ʌv wʊl oʊvɝ ðə saɪd tə pɹətɛk ðə hʌl fɹəm ðə dɑk paɪlɪŋz.

The Spray curved smoothly in beside the first dock, thick timbers sitting on heavy, tar-coated pilings, and stopped with a backing of oars that swirled the water to froth around the blades. As the oars were drawn in, sailors tossed cables to men on the dock, who fastened them off with a flourish, while other crewmen slung the bags of wool over the side to protect the hull from the dock pilings.

bɪfɔɹ ðə boʊt wɑz ivən pʊl snʌɡ əɡɛns ðə dɑk, kæɹɪdʒɪz əpɪɹɾ ət ði ɛn ə ðə dɑk, tɔl ən lækɝd ʃaɪni blæk, itʃ wʌn wɪð ə neɪm peɪntəɾ ɑn ðə dɔɹ ɪn lɑɹdʒ lɛɾɝz, ɡoʊld əɹ skɑɹlət. ðə kæɹɪdʒɪz' pæsənʒɝz hɝiɾ ʌp ðə ɡæŋplæŋk əz sun əz ɪt dʒɹɑpt ɪn pleɪs, smuð-feɪs mɛn ɪn lɔŋ vɛlvət koʊts ən sɪlk-laɪn kloʊks ən klɔθ slɪpɝz, itʃ fɑloʊd baɪ ə pleɪnli dʒɹɛst sɝvən kæɹiɪŋ ɪz aɪɝn-baʊn mʌnibɑks.

Before the boat was even pulled snug against the dock, carriages appeared at the end of the dock, tall and lacquered shiny black, each one with a name painted on the door in large letters, gold or scarlet. The carriages' passengers hurried up the gangplank as soon as it dropped in place, smooth-faced men in long velvet coats and silk-lined cloaks and cloth slippers, each followed by a plainly dressed servant carrying his iron-bound moneybox.

ðeɪ əpɹoʊtʃt kæptən doʊmən wɪð peɪntəd smaɪlz ðət slɪpt wən i əbɹʌpli ɹɔɹɾ ɪn ðɛɹ feɪsəz. "ju!" hi θɹʌst ə θɪk fɪŋɡɝ pæs ðɛm, stɑpɪŋ flɔɹən dʒɛlb ɪn ɪz tʃɹæks ət ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə boʊt. ðə bɹuz ɑn dʒɛlbz fɔɹhɛd fɹəm ɹændz but hæd feɪɾəd əweɪ, bʌɾ i stɪl fɪŋɡɝd ðə spɑt fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm əz ɪf tə ɹimaɪn hɪmsɛlf. "juv slɛpt ɑn wɑtʃ fəɹ ðə læs taɪm ɑn maɪ vɛsəl! əɹ ɑn ɛni vɛsəl, ɪf aɪ hæv maɪ weɪ ʌv ɪt. tʃuz jəɹ oʊn saɪd - ðə dɑk əɹ ðə ɹɪvɝ - bʌɾ ɔf maɪ vɛsəl naʊ!"

They approached Captain Domon with painted smiles that slipped when he abruptly roared in their faces. "You!" He thrust a thick finger past them, stopping Floran Gelb in his tracks at the length of the boat. The bruise on Gelb's forehead from Rand's boot had faded away, but he still fingered the spot from time to time as if to remind himself. "You've slept on watch for the last time on my vessel! Or on any vessel, if I have my way of it. Choose your own side - the dock or the river - but off my vessel now!"

dʒɛlb hʌntʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ən ɪz aɪz ɡlɪɾɝd heɪɾ ət ɹænd ən ɪz fɹɛnz, ət ɹænd ɪspɛʃli, ə pɔɪzənəs ɡlɛɹ. ðə wɪɹi mæn lʊkt ɝaʊn ðə dɛk fəɹ səpɔɹt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl hoʊp ɪn ðət lʊk. wʌn baɪ wʌn, ɛvɹi mæn ɪn ðə kɹu stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ ən stɛɹd bæk koʊldli. dʒɛlb wɪltɪd vɪzəbli, bʌt ðən ɪz ɡlɛɹ ɹɪtɝnd, twaɪs əz stʃɹɔŋ əz ɪt hæd bɪn. wɪð ə mʌɾɝd kɝs i dɑɹɾɪd bɪloʊ tə ðə kɹuz kɔɹɾɝz. doʊmən sɛn tu mɛn æftɝ ɪm tə si hi dɪd noʊ mɪstʃəf ən dɪsmɪst ɪm wɪð ə ɡɹʌnt. wən ðə kæptən tɝn bæk tə ðɛm, ðə mɝtʃəns tʊk ʌp ðɛɹ smaɪlz ən baʊz əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ bɪn ɪntɝʌptɪd.

Gelb hunched his shoulders, and his eyes glittered hate at Rand and his friends, at Rand especially, a poisonous glare. The wiry man looked around the deck for support, but there was little hope in that look. One by one, every man in the crew straightened from what he was doing and stared back coldly. Gelb wilted visibly, but then his glare returned, twice as strong as it had been. With a muttered curse he darted below to the crew's quarters. Domon sent two men after him to see he did no mischief and dismissed him with a grunt. When the captain turned back to them, the merchants took up their smiles and bows as if they had never been interrupted.

əɾ ə wɝd fɹəm tɑm, mæt ən ɹænd bɪɡæn ɡæðɝɪŋ ðɛɹ θɪŋz təɡɛðɝ. ðəɹ wɑz nɑt mʌtʃ əsaɪd fɹəm ðə kloʊðz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, nɑt fəɹ ɛni ʌv ðɛm. ɹænd hæɾ ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl ən sæɾəlbæɡz, ən ɪz fɑðɝz sɔɹd. hi hɛl ðə sɔɹd fəɹ ə mɪnət, ən hoʊmsɪknəs ɹoʊld oʊvɝ ɪm soʊ stʃɹɔŋli ðəɾ ɪz aɪz stʌŋ. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf i wəɾ ɛvɝ si tæm əɡɛn. əɹ hoʊm? hoʊm. gɑnə spɛn ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ laɪf ɹʌnɪŋ, ɹʌnɪŋ ən əfɹeɪɾ ə jəɹ oʊn dʒɹimz. wɪð ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ saɪ hi slɪp ðə bɛlt ɝaʊn ɪz weɪst oʊvɝ ɪz koʊt.

At a word from Thom, Mat and Rand began gathering their things together. There was not much aside from the clothes on their backs, not for any of them. Rand had his blanketroll and saddlebags, and his father's sword. He held the sword for a minute, and homesickness rolled over him so strongly that his eyes stung. He wondered if he would ever see Tam again. Or home? Home. Going to spend the rest of your life running, running and afraid of your own dreams. With a shuddering sigh he slipped the belt around his waist over his coat.

dʒɛlb keɪm bæk ɑn dɛk, fɑloʊd baɪ hɪz twɪn ʃædoʊz. hi lʊk stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛd, bʌt ɹænd kəd stɪl fil heɪtʃɹəd kʌmɪŋ ɔf ɪm ɪn weɪvz. bæk ɹɪdʒəɾ ən feɪs dɑɹk, dʒɛlb wɔk stɪf-lɛɡəd daʊn ðə ɡæŋplæŋk ən pʊʃt ɹʌfli ɪndə ðə θɪn kɹaʊɾ ɑn ðə dɑk. ɪn ə mɪnəɾ i wɑz ɡɔn fɹəm saɪt, vænɪʃt bɪɑn ðə mɝtʃəns' kæɹɪdʒɪz.

Gelb came back on deck, followed by his twin shadows. He looked straight ahead, but Rand could still feel hatred coming off him in waves. Back rigid and face dark, Gelb walked stiff-legged down the gangplank and pushed roughly into the thin crowd on the dock. In a minute he was gone from sight, vanished beyond the merchants' carriages.

ðəɹ wɝ nɑɾ ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni pipəl ɑn ðə dɑk, ən ðoʊz wɝ ə pleɪnli dʒɹɛs mɪks ʌv wɝkmɪn, fɪʃɝmɪn mɛndɪŋ nɛts, ən ə fju taʊnzpipəl u hæd kʌm aʊt tə si ðə fɝs boʊɾ ə ðə jɪɹ tə kʌm daʊnɹɪvɝ fɹəm sɑldɑiə. nʌn ə ðə ɡɝlz wɑz ɛɡwin ən noʊ wʌn lʊk ðə lis bɪt laɪk mɔɪɹeɪn, əɹ læn, əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls ɹænd wɑz hoʊpɪŋ tə si.

There were not a great many people on the dock, and those were a plainly dressed mix of workmen, fishermen mending nets, and a few townspeople who had come out to see the first boat of the year to come downriver from Saldaea. None of the girls was Egwene and no one looked the least bit like Moiraine, or Lan, or anyone else Rand was hoping to see.

"meɪbi ðeɪ dɪdn kʌm daʊn tə ðə dɑk," hi sɛd.

"Maybe they didn't come down to the dock," he said.

"meɪbi," tɑm ɹɪplaɪd kɝtli. hi sɛɾəld ɪz ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz ɑn ɪz bæk wɪð kɛɹ. "ju tu kip ən aɪ aʊt fəɹ dʒɛlb. hɪl meɪk tʃɹʌbəl ɪf i kæn. wi wɑnə pæs θɹu waɪtbɹɪdʒ soʊ sɔfli ðət noʊbɑdi ɹɪmɛmbɝz wi wɝ hɪɹ faɪv mɪnəts æftɝ wɝ ɡɔn."

"Maybe," Thom replied curtly. He settled his instrument cases on his back with care. "You two keep an eye out for Gelb. He will make trouble if he can. We want to pass through Whitebridge so softly that nobody remembers we were here five minutes after we're gone."

ðɛɹ kloʊks flæpt ɪn ðə wɪn əz ðeɪ wɔk tə ðə ɡæŋplæŋk. mæt kæɹiɾ ɪz baʊ kɹɔst ɪn fɹʌn ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. ivən æftɝ ɔl ðɛɹ deɪz ɑn ðə boʊt, ɪt stɪl ɡɑɾ ə fju lʊks fɹəm ðə kɹumɪn; ðɛɹ baʊz wɝ ʃɔɹɾ əfɛɹz.

Their cloaks flapped in the wind as they walked to the gangplank. Mat carried his bow crossed in front on his chest. Even after all their days on the boat, it still got a few looks from the crewmen; their bows were short affairs.

kæptən doʊmən lɛf ðə mɝtʃəns tə ɪntɝsɛp tɑm ət ðə ɡæŋplæŋk.

Captain Domon left the merchants to intercept Thom at the gangplank.

"ju bi livɪŋ mi naʊ, ɡlimən? kən aɪ noʊ tɔk jə ɪndə kəntɪnjuɪŋ ɑn? aɪ bi ɡoʊɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ daʊn tə ɪljən, wɛɹ foʊk əv ə pɹɑpɝ ɹəɡɑɹd fəɹ ɡlimən. ðəɹ bi noʊ faɪnɝ pleɪs ɪn ðə wɝl fəɹ jəɹ ɑɹt. aɪd ɡɛt jə ðəɹ ɪn ɡʊd taɪm fəɹ ðə fist ə sɪfæn. ðə kɑmpətɪʃənz, jə noʊ. ə hʌnʒɹəd ɡoʊl mɑɹks fəɹ ðə bɛs tɛlɪŋ ə ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn."

"You be leaving me now, gleeman? Can I no talk you into continuing on? I be going all the way down to Illian, where folk have a proper regard for gleemen. There be no finer place in the world for your art. I'd get you there in good time for the Feast of Sefan. The competitions, you know. A hundred gold marks for the best telling of The Great Hunt of the Horn."

"ə ɡɹeɪt pɹaɪz, kæptən," tɑm ɹɪplaɪd wɪð ən ɪlæbɹət baʊ ən ə flɝɪʃ ə hɪz kloʊk ðət sɛt ðə pætʃəz tə flʌɾɝɪŋ, "ænd ɡɹeɪt kɑmpətɪʃənz, wɪtʃ ɹaɪtli dʒɹɔ ɡlimən fɹəm ðə hoʊl wɝld oʊvɝ. bʌt," hi æɾəd dʒɹaɪli, "aɪ fɪɹ wi kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹd ðə fɛɹ ət ðə ɹeɪts jə tʃɑɹdʒ."

"A great prize, Captain," Thom replied with an elaborate bow and a flourish of his cloak that set the patches to fluttering, "and great competitions, which rightly draw gleemen from the whole world over. But," he added dryly, "I fear we could not afford the fare at the rates you charge."

"aɪ, wɛl, əz tə ðæt. . . ." ðə kæptən pɹədust ə lɛðɝ pɝs fɹəm ɪz koʊt pɑkəɾ ən tɔst ɪt tə tɑm. ɪt klɪŋkt wən tɑm kɑɾ ɪt. "jɔɹ fɛɹz bæk, ən ə bɪt mɔɹ bɪsaɪdz. ðə dæmədʒ wɑz noʊ soʊ bæɾ əz aɪ θɔt, ən juv wɝk jəɹ weɪ ən mɔɹ wɪð jəɹ teɪlz ən jəɹ hɑɹp. aɪ kəd meɪbi mænədʒ əz mʌtʃ əɡɛn ɪf jə steɪ əbɔɹd tə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz. ən aɪ wəd sɛt jə əʃɔɹ ɪn ɪljən. ə ɡʊd ɡlimən kən meɪk ɪz fɔɹtʃən ðɛɹ, ivən əsaɪd fɹəm ðə kɑmpətɪʃənz."

"Aye, well, as to that. . . ." The captain produced a leather purse from his coat pocket and tossed it to Thom. It clinked when Thom caught it. "Your fares back, and a bit more besides. The damage was no so bad as I thought, and you've worked your way and more with your tales and your harp. I could maybe manage as much again if you stay aboard to the Sea of Storms. And I would set you ashore in Illian. A good gleeman can make his fortune there, even aside from the competitions."

tɑm hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, weɪɪŋ ðə pɝs ɑn ɪz pɑm, bʌt ɹænd spoʊk ʌp. "wɝ miɾɪŋ fɹɛnz hɪɹ, kæptən, ən ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn tə keɪɛmlɪn təɡɛðɝ. wɪl əv tə si ɪljən ənʌðɝ taɪm."

Thom hesitated, weighing the purse on his palm, but Rand spoke up. "We're meeting friends here, Captain, and going on to Caemlyn together. We'll have to see Illian another time."

tɑmz maʊθ twɪstəd ɹaɪli, ðən i blu aʊɾ ɪz lɔŋ mʌstæʃɪz ən tʌk ðə pɝs ɪndə hɪz pɑkət. "pɝhæps ɪf ðə pipəl wəɹ tə miɾ ɑɹ nɑt hɪɹ, kæptən."

Thom's mouth twisted wryly, then he blew out his long mustaches and tucked the purse into his pocket. "Perhaps if the people we are to meet are not here, Captain."

"aɪ," doʊmən sɛd saʊɝli. "ju θɪŋk ɑn ɪt. tu bæɾ aɪ kən noʊ kip dʒɛlb əbɔɹd tə teɪk ði ʌðɝz' æŋɡɝ, bʌɾ aɪ də wʌɾ aɪ seɪ əl du. aɪ səpoʊz aɪ mʌst iz ʌp naʊ, ivən ɪf ɪt minz teɪkɪŋ θɹi taɪmz əz lɔŋ tə ɹitʃ ɪljən əz aɪ ʃʊd. wɛl, meɪæp ðoʊz tʃɹɑləks wɝ æftɝ jə θɹi."

"Aye," Domon said sourly. "You think on it. Too bad I can no keep Gelb aboard to take the others' anger, but I do what I say I will do. I suppose I must ease up now, even if it means taking three times as long to reach Illian as I should. Well, mayhap those Trollocs were after you three."

ɹænd blɪŋk bʌt kɛp saɪlənt, bʌt mæt wɑz nɑt soʊ kɔʃəs. "waɪ dʒju θɪŋk ðeɪ wɝnt?" hi dɪmændəd. "ðeɪ wɝ æftɝ ðə seɪm tʃɹɛʒɝ wi wɝ hʌntɪŋ."

Rand blinked but kept silent, but Mat was not so cautious. "Why do you think they weren't?" he demanded. "They were after the same treasure we were hunting."

"meɪæp," ðə kæptən ɡɹʌntɪd, saʊndɪŋ ʌnkənvɪnst. hi koʊm θɪk fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɪz bɪɹd, ðən pɔɪntəɾ ət ðə pɑkət wɛɹ tɑm hæd pʊt ðə pɝs. "twaɪs ðəɾ ɪf jə kʌm bæk tə kip ðə mɛnz maɪnz ɔf haʊ hɑɹɾ aɪ wɝk ðɛm. θɪŋk ɑn ɪt. aɪ seɪl wɪð ðə fɝs laɪɾ ɑn ðə mɑɹoʊ." hi tɝn ɑn ɪz hil ən stʃɹoʊd bæk tə ðə mɝtʃəns, ɑɹmz spɹɛɾɪŋ waɪɾ əz i bɪɡæn ən əpɑlədʒi fəɹ kipɪŋ əm weɪɾɪŋ.

"Mayhap," the captain grunted, sounding unconvinced. He combed thick fingers through his beard, then pointed at the pocket where Thom had put the purse. "Twice that if you come back to keep the men's minds off how hard I work them. Think on it. I sail with the first light on the morrow." He turned on his heel and strode back to the merchants, arms spreading wide as he began an apology for keeping them waiting.

tɑm stɪl hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bʌt ɹænd hʌsəld ɪm daʊn ðə ɡæŋplæŋk wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ ɪm ə tʃæns tə ɑɹɡju, ən ðə ɡlimən lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi hɝɾɪd. ə mɝmɝ pæs θɹu ðə pipəl ɑn ðə dɑk əz ðeɪ sɔ tɑmz pætʃ-kʌvɝd kloʊk, ən səm kɔld aʊt tə dɪskʌvɝ wɛɹ i wəd bi pɝfɔɹmɪŋ. soʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ nɑt biɪŋ noʊɾəst, ɹænd θɔt, dɪsmeɪd. baɪ sʌndaʊn ɪt wəd bi ɔl oʊvɝ waɪtbɹɪdʒ ðət ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡlimən ɪn taʊn. hi hɝid tɑm əlɔŋ, ðoʊ, ən tɑm, ɹæpt ɪn sʌlki saɪləns, dɪd nɑɾ ivən tʃɹaɪ tə sloʊ daʊn ɪnʌf tə pɹin ʌndɝ ði ətɛnʃən.

Thom still hesitated, but Rand hustled him down the gangplank without giving him a chance to argue, and the gleeman let himself be herded. A murmur passed through the people on the dock as they saw Thom's patch-covered cloak, and some called out to discover where he would be performing. So much for not being noticed, Rand thought, dismayed. By sundown it would be all over Whitebridge that there was a gleeman in town. He hurried Thom along, though, and Thom, wrapped in sulky silence, did not even try to slow down enough to preen under the attention.

ðə kæɹɪdʒ dʒɹaɪvɝz lʊk daʊn ət tɑm wɪð ɪntʃɹəs fɹəm ðɛɹ haɪ pɝtʃɪz, bʌɾ əpɛɹənli ðə dɪɡnəɾi ʌv ðɛɹ pəzɪʃənz fɝbeɪd ʃaʊɾɪŋ. wɪð noʊ aɪdiə ʌv wɛɹ tə ɡoʊ ɪɡzækli, ɹænd tɝn ʌp ðə stʃɹit ðət ɹæn əlɔŋ ðə ɹɪvɝ ən ʌndɝ ðə bɹɪdʒ.

The carriage drivers looked down at Thom with interest from their high perches, but apparently the dignity of their positions forbade shouting. With no idea of where to go exactly, Rand turned up the street that ran along the river and under the bridge.

"wi nid tə faɪn mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði ʌðɝz," hi sɛd. "æn fæst. wi ʃʊɾə θɔɾ ə tʃeɪnʒɪŋ tɑmz kloʊk."

"We need to find Moiraine and the others," he said. "And fast. We should have thought of changing Thom's cloak."

tɑm sʌɾənli ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf ən stɑp dɛd. "æn ɪnkipɝ wɪl bi eɪbəl tə tɛl əs ɪf ðəɹ hɪɹ, əɹ ɪf ðeɪv pæs θɹu. ðə ɹaɪɾ ɪnkipɝ. ɪnkipɝz əv ɔl ðə nuz ən ɡɑsəp. ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹən hɪɹ. . . ."hi lʊk bæk ən fɔɹθ fɹəm ɹænd tə mæt. "wi hæv tə tɔk, wi θɹi." kloʊk swɝlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz æŋkəlz, hi sɛɾ ɔf ɪndə ðə taʊn, əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ. ɹænd ən mæt hæd tə stɛp kwɪkli tə kip ʌp.

Thom suddenly shook himself and stopped dead. "An innkeeper will be able to tell us if they're here, or if they've passed through. The right innkeeper. Innkeepers have all the news and gossip. If they aren't here. . . ."He looked back and forth from Rand to Mat. "We have to talk, we three." Cloak swirling around his ankles, he set off into the town, away from the river. Rand and Mat had to step quickly to keep up.

ðə bɹɔd, mɪlk-waɪɾ ɑɹtʃ ðət ɡeɪv ðə taʊn ɪts neɪm dɑməneɪɾəd waɪtbɹɪdʒ əz mʌtʃ kloʊs ʌp əz ɪt dɪd fɹəm əfɑɹ, bʌt wʌns ɹænd wɑz ɪn ðə stʃɹits i ɹilaɪz ðət ðə taʊn wɑz ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz bɪɡ əz bɛɹlən, ðoʊ nɑt soʊ kɹaʊɾəd wɪð pipəl. ə fju kɑɹts muvd ɪn ðə stʃɹits, pʊl baɪ hɔɹs əɹ ɑks əɹ dɑŋki əɹ mæn, bʌt noʊ kæɹɪdʒɪz. ðoʊz moʊs laɪkli ɔl bɪlɔŋ tə ðə mɝtʃəns ən wɝ klʌstɝd daʊn ət ðə dɑk.

The broad, milk-white arch that gave the town its name dominated Whitebridge as much close up as it did from afar, but once Rand was in the streets he realized that the town was every bit as big as Baerlon, though not so crowded with people. A few carts moved in the streets, pulled by horse or ox or donkey or man, but no carriages. Those most likely all belonged to the merchants and were clustered down at the dock.

ʃɑps ʌv ɛvɹi dɪskɹɪpʃən laɪn ðə stʃɹits, ən mɛni ʌv ðə tʃɹeɪdzmən wɝkt ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛɹ ɛstæblɪʃməns, ʌndɝ ðə saɪnz swɪŋɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd. ðeɪ pæst ə mæn mɛndɪŋ pɑts, ən ə teɪlɝ hoʊldɪŋ foʊlz ə klɔθ ʌp tə ðə laɪt fəɹ ə kʌstəmɝ. ə ʃumeɪkɝ, sɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɪz dɔɹweɪ, tæpt ɪz hæmɝ ɑn ðə hil ʌv ə but. hɔkɝz kɹaɪd ðɛɹ sɝvəsəz ət ʃɑɹpənɪŋ naɪvz ən sɪzɝz, əɹ tʃɹaɪd tə ɪntʃɹəs ðə pæsɝzbi ɪn ðɛɹ skɪmpi tʃɹeɪz ə fɹuɾ əɹ vɛdʒtəbəlz, bʌt nʌn wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ mʌtʃ ɪntʃɹəst. ʃɑps sɛlɪŋ fud hæd ðə seɪm pɪɾəfəl dɪspleɪz ə pɹədus ɹænd ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɹəm bɛɹlən. ivən ðə fɪʃmɑŋɡɝz dɪspleɪɾ oʊnli smɔl paɪlz ə smɔl fɪʃ, fəɹ ɔl ðə boʊts ɑn ðə ɹɪvɝ. taɪmz wɝ nɑt ɹɪli hɑɹd jɛt, bʌɾ ɛvɹiwʌn kəd si wʌt wɑz kʌmɪŋ ɪf ðə wɛðɝ dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ sun, ən ðoʊz feɪsəz ðət wɝ nɑt fɪkst ɪndə wɝid fɹaʊnz sim tə stɛɹ ət sʌmθɪŋ ənsin, sʌmθɪŋ ənplɛzənt.

Shops of every description lined the streets, and many of the tradesmen worked in front of their establishments, under the signs swinging in the wind. They passed a man mending pots, and a tailor holding folds of cloth up to the light for a customer. A shoemaker, sitting in his doorway, tapped his hammer on the heel of a boot. Hawkers cried their services at sharpening knives and scissors, or tried to interest the passersby in their skimpy trays of fruit or vegetables, but none was getting much interest. Shops selling food had the same pitiful displays of produce Rand remembered from Baerlon. Even the fishmongers displayed only small piles of small fish, for all the boats on the river. Times were not really hard yet, but everyone could see what was coming if the weather did not change soon, and those faces that were not fixed into worried frowns seemed to stare at something unseen, something unpleasant.

wɛɹ ðə waɪt bɹɪdʒ keɪm daʊn ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə taʊn wɑz ə bɪɡ skwɛɹ, peɪvd wɪð stoʊnz wɔɹn baɪ dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz ə fiɾ ən wæɡən wilz. ɪnz sɝaʊndəd ðə skwɛɹ, ən ʃɑps, ən tɔl, ɹɛd bɹɪk haʊsəz wɪð saɪnz aʊt fɹʌn bɛɹɪŋ ðə seɪm neɪmz ɹænd hæd sin ɑn ðə kæɹɪdʒɪz ət ðə dɑk. ɪt wɑz ɪndə wʌn ə ðoʊz ɪnz, simɪŋli tʃoʊzən ət ɹændəm, ðət tɑm dʌkt. ðə saɪn oʊvɝ ðə dɔɹ, swɪŋɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd, hæɾ ə stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ mæn wɪð ə bʌndəl ɑn ɪz bæk ɑn wʌn saɪɾ ən ðə seɪm mæn wɪð ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ə pɪloʊ ɑn ði ʌðɝ, ən pɹoʊkleɪm ðə weɪfɛɹɝz' ɹɛst.

Where the White Bridge came down in the center of the town was a big square, paved with stones worn by generations of feet and wagon wheels. Inns surrounded the square, and shops, and tall, red brick houses with signs out front bearing the same names Rand had seen on the carriages at the dock. It was into one of those inns, seemingly chosen at random, that Thom ducked. The sign over the door, swinging in the wind, had a striding man with a bundle on his back on one side and the same man with his head on a pillow on the other, and proclaimed The Wayfarers' Rest.

ðə kɑmən ɹum stʊɾ ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə fæɾ ɪnkipɝ dʒɹɔɪŋ eɪl fɹəm ə bæɹəl ən tu mɛn ɪn ɹʌf wɝkmənz kloʊðz stɛɹɪŋ ɡlʌmli ɪndə ðɛɹ mʌɡz əɾ ə teɪbəl ɪn ðə bæk. oʊnli ði ɪnkipɝ lʊkt ʌp wən ðeɪ keɪm ɪn. ə ʃoʊldɝ-haɪ wɔl splɪt ðə ɹum ɪn tu fɹəm fɹʌn tə bæk, wɪð teɪbəlz ən ə bleɪzɪŋ faɪɝpleɪs ɑn itʃ saɪd. ɹænd wʌndɝɾ aɪdli ɪf ɔl ɪnkipɝz wɝ fæɾ ən luzɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛɹ.

The common room stood empty except for the fat innkeeper drawing ale from a barrel and two men in rough workman's clothes staring glumly into their mugs at a table in the back. Only the innkeeper looked up when they came in. A shoulder-high wall split the room in two from front to back, with tables and a blazing fireplace on each side. Rand wondered idly if all innkeepers were fat and losing their hair.

ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ bɹɪskli, tɑm kɑmɛntəd tə ði ɪnkipɝ ɑn ðə leɪt koʊld ən ɔɹɾɝd hɑt spaɪst waɪn, ðən æɾəd kwaɪətli, "ɪz ðəɹ sʌmwɛɹ maɪ fɹɛnz ən aɪ kəd tɔk wɪθaʊt biɪŋ dɪstɝbd?"

Rubbing his hands together briskly, Thom commented to the innkeeper on the late cold and ordered hot spiced wine, then added quietly, "Is there somewhere my friends and I could talk without being disturbed?"

ði ɪnkipɝ nɑɾəd tə ðə loʊ wɔl. "ði ʌðɝ saɪd ðæts əz bɛst aɪv ɡɑɾ ənlɛs jə wɑnə teɪk ə ɹum. fəɹ wən seɪlɝz kʌm ʌp fɹəm ðə ɹɪvɝ. simz laɪk hæf ðə kɹuz ɡɑt ɡɹʌdʒɪz əɡɛns ði ʌðɝ hæf. aɪ woʊn əv maɪ pleɪs bɹoʊk ʌp baɪ faɪts, soʊ aɪ kip əm əpɑɹt." hi hæd bɪn aɪɪŋ tɑmz kloʊk ðə hoʊl waɪl, ən naʊ hi kɑkt ɪz hɛd tə wʌn saɪd, ə slaɪ lʊk ɪn ɪz aɪz. "ju steɪɪŋ? hævən hæɾ ə ɡlimən hɪɹ ɪn səm taɪm. foʊks wəd peɪ ɹil ɡʊd fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ əz wəd teɪk ðɛɹ maɪnz ɔf θɪŋz. aɪɾ ivən teɪk səm ɔf ɑn jəɹ ɹum ən milz."

The innkeeper nodded to the low wall. "The other side that's as best I've got unless you want to take a room. For when sailors come up from the river. Seems like half the crews got grudges against the other half. I won't have my place broke up by fights, so I keep them apart." He had been eyeing Thom's cloak the whole while, and now he cocked his head to one side, a sly look in his eyes. "You staying? Haven't had a gleeman here in some time. Folks would pay real good for something as would take their minds off things. I'd even take some off on your room and meals."

ənnoʊɾɪst, ɹænd θɔt ɡlʌmli.

Unnoticed, Rand thought glumly.

"ju ɑɹ tu dʒɛnɝəs," tɑm sɛd wɪð ə smuð baʊ. "pɝhæps əl teɪk ʌp jəɹ ɔfɝ. bʌt fəɹ naʊ, ə lɪɾəl pɹaɪvəsi."

"You are too generous," Thom said with a smooth bow. "Perhaps I will take up your offer. But for now, a little privacy."

"aɪl bɹɪŋ jəɹ waɪn. ɡʊd mʌni hɪɹ fəɹ ə ɡlimən."

"I'll bring your wine. Good money here for a gleeman."

ðə teɪbəlz ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl wɝ ɔl ɛmpti, bʌt tɑm tʃoʊz wʌn ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə speɪs. "soʊ noʊ wʌn kən lɪsən wɪθaʊɾ əs noʊɪŋ," hi ɪkspleɪnd. "dɪd jə hɪɹ ðət fɛloʊ? hɪl teɪk səm ɔf. waɪ, aɪd dʌbəl ɪz kʌstəm dʒʌs baɪ sɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ. ɛni ɑnəst ɪnkipɝ ɡɪvz ə ɡlimən ɹum ən bɔɹɾ ən ə ɡʊd bɪt bɪsaɪdz."

The tables on the far side of the wall were all empty, but Thom chose one right in the middle of the space. "So no one can listen without us knowing," he explained. "Did you hear that fellow? He'll take some off. Why, I'd double his custom just by sitting here. Any honest innkeeper gives a gleeman room and board and a good bit besides."

ðə bɛɹ teɪbəl wɑz nʌn tu klin, ən ðə flɔɹ hæd nɑt bɪn swɛpt ɪn deɪz ɪf nɑt wiks. ɹænd lʊkt ɝaʊn ən ɡɹɪməst. mæstɝ ælvɪɹ wəd nɑɾ əv lɛɾ ɪz ɪn ɡɛt ðət dɝɾi ɪf i hæd hæd tə klaɪm aʊɾ ʌv ə sɪkb tə si tə ɪt. "wɝ oʊnli æftɝ ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. ɹɪmɛmbɝ?"

The bare table was none too clean, and the floor had not been swept in days if not weeks. Rand looked around and grimaced. Master al'Vere would not have let his inn get that dirty if he had had to climb out of a sickbed to see to it. "We're only after information. Remember?"

"waɪ hɪɹ?" mæt dɪmændəd. "wi pæst ʌðɝ ɪnz ðət lʊkt klinɝ."

"Why here?" Mat demanded. "We passed other inns that looked cleaner."

"stʃɹeɪɾ ɑn fɹəm ðə bɹɪdʒ," tɑm sɛd, "ɪz ðə ɹoʊd tə keɪɛmlɪn. ɛniwʌn pæsɪŋ θɹu waɪtbɹɪdʒ kʌmz θɹu ðɪs skwɛɹ, ənlɛs ðəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ baɪ ɹɪvɝ, ən wi noʊ jəɹ fɹɛnz ɑɹən duɪŋ ðæt. ɪf ðəɹ ɪz noʊ wɝɾ ə ðɛm hɪɹ, ɪt dʌzn ɪɡzɪst. lemi də ðə tɔkɪŋ. ðɪs əz tə bi dʌn kɛɹfəli."

"Straight on from the bridge," Thom said, "is the road to Caemlyn. Anyone passing through Whitebridge comes through this square, unless they're going by river, and we know your friends aren't doing that. If there is no word of them here, it doesn't exist. Let me do the talking. This has to be done carefully."

dʒʌs ðən ði ɪnkipɝ əpɪɹd, θɹi bæɾɝd pjuɾɝ mʌɡz ɡɹɪpt ɪn wʌn fɪs baɪ ðə hændəlz. ðə fæt mæn flɪkt ət ðə teɪbəl wɪð ə taʊəl, sɛt ðə mʌɡz daʊn, ən tʊk tɑmz mʌni. "ɪf jə steɪ, jə woʊn əv tə peɪ fəɹ jəɹ dʒɹɪŋks. ɡʊd waɪn, hɪɹ."

Just then the innkeeper appeared, three battered pewter mugs gripped in one fist by the handles. The fat man flicked at the table with a towel, set the mugs down, and took Thom's money. "If you stay, you won't have to pay for your drinks. Good wine, here."

tɑmz smaɪl tʌtʃt oʊnli hɪz maʊθ. "aɪ wɪl θɪŋk ɑn ɪt, ɪnkipɝ. wʌt nuz ɪz ðɛɹ? wɪv bɪn əweɪ fɹəm hɪɹɪŋ θɪŋz."

Thom's smile touched only his mouth. "I will think on it, innkeeper. What news is there? We have been away from hearing things."

"bɪɡ nuz, ðæts wʌt. bɪɡ nuz."

"Big news, that's what. Big news."

ði ɪnkipɝ dʒɹeɪp ðə taʊəl oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən pʊld ʌp ə tʃɛɹ. hi kɹɔst ɪz ɑɹmz ɑn ðə teɪbəl, tʊk ɹut wɪð ə lɔŋ saɪ, seɪɪŋ wʌɾ ə kʌmfɝɾ ɪt wɑz tə ɡɛɾ ɔf ɪz fit. hɪz neɪm wɑz bɑɹɾɪm, ən i wɛn ɑn əbaʊɾ ɪz fiɾ ɪn dɪteɪl, əbaʊt kɔɹnz ən bunjənz ən haʊ mʌtʃ taɪm i spɛn stændɪŋ ən wʌɾ i soʊkt əm ɪn, əntɪl tɑm mɛnʃən ðə nuz, əɡɛn, ən ðən i ʃɪftəɾ oʊvɝ wɪð hɑɹdli ə pɔz.

The innkeeper draped the towel over his shoulder and pulled up a chair. He crossed his arms on the table, took root with a long sigh, saying what a comfort it was to get off his feet. His name was Bartim, and he went on about his feet in detail, about corns and bunions and how much time he spent standing and what he soaked them in, until Thom mentioned the news, again, and then he shifted over with hardly a pause.

ðə nuz wɑz dʒʌst əz bɪɡ əz i sɛɾ ɪt wɑz. lɑɡən, ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, hæd bɪn kæptʃɝɾ æftɝ ə bɪɡ bæɾəl nɪɹ luɡɹd waɪl i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə muv ɪz ɑɹmi fɹəm ɡildən tə tɛɹ. ðə pɹɑfəsiz, ðeɪ ʌndɝstʊd? tɑm nɑɾəd, ən bɑɹɾɪm wɛn ɑn. ðə ɹoʊdz ɪn ðə saʊθ wɝ pækt wɪð pipəl, ðə lʌki wʌnz wɪð wʌt ðeɪ kəd kæɹi ɑn ðɛɹ bæks. θaʊzənz fliɪŋ ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz.

The news was just as big as he said it was. Logain, the false Dragon, had been captured after a big battle near Lugard while he was trying to move his army from Ghealdan to Tear. The Prophecies, they understood? Thom nodded, and Bartim went on. The roads in the south were packed with people, the lucky ones with what they could carry on their backs. Thousands fleeing in all directions.

"nʌn" - bɑɹɾɪm tʃʌkəld ɹaɪli - "səpɔɹɾəd lɑɡən, ʌv kɔɹs. oʊ, noʊ, jə woʊn faɪn mɛni tə ədmɪt tə ðæt, nɑt naʊ. dʒʌst ɹɛfjudʒiz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ə seɪf pleɪs dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹʌbəlz."

"None" - Bartim chuckled wryly - "supported Logain, of course. Oh, no, you won't find many to admit to that, not now. Just refugees trying to find a safe place during the troubles."

ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪn ɪnvɑlvd ɪn teɪkɪŋ lɑɡən, ʌv kɔɹs. bɑɹɾɪm spæɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ wən i sɛd ðæt, ən əɡɛn wən i sɛd ðeɪ wɝ teɪkɪŋ ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən nɔɹθ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. bɑɹɾɪm wɑz ə disən mæn, hi sɛd, ə ɹɪspɛktəbəl mæn, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəɾ ɔl ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə blaɪt wɛɹ ðeɪ keɪm fɹəm ən teɪk tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪð ðɛm, əz fɑɹ əz i wɑz kənsɝnd. hi wəd ɡɛt noʊ kloʊsɝ tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ðən ə θaʊzən maɪlz, ɪf i hæɾ ɪz weɪ. ʌv kɔɹs, ðeɪ wɝ stɑpɪŋ əɾ ɛvɹi vɪlədʒ ən taʊn ɑn ðə weɪ nɔɹθ tə dɪspleɪ lɑɡən, soʊ hi hæd hɝd. tə ʃoʊ pipəl ðət ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən hæd bɪn teɪkən ən ðə wɝld wɑz seɪf əɡɛn. hi wʊɾə laɪk tə si ðæt, ivən ɪf ɪt dɪd min ɡɛɾɪŋ kloʊs tə ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi wɑz hæfweɪ tɛmptəd tə ɡoʊ tə keɪɛmlɪn.

Aes Sedai had been involved in taking Logain, of course. Bartim spat on the floor when he said that, and again when he said they were taking the false Dragon north to Tar Valon. Bartim was a decent man, he said, a respectable man, and Aes Sedai could all go back to the Blight where they came from and take Tar Valon with them, as far as he was concerned. He would get no closer to an Aes Sedai than a thousand miles, if he had his way. Of course, they were stopping at every village and town on the way north to display Logain, so he had heard. To show people that the false Dragon had been taken and the world was safe again. He would have liked to see that, even if it did mean getting close to Aes Sedai. He was halfway tempted to go to Caemlyn.

"ðeɪl bi teɪkɪŋ ɪm ðəɹ tə ʃoʊ tə kwin mɔɹɡeɪs." ði ɪnkipɝ tʌtʃt ɪz fɔɹhɛd ɹɪspɛkfəli. "aɪv nɛvɝ sin ðə kwin. mæn ɔt tə si hɪz oʊn kwin, doʊn jə θɪŋk?"

"They'll be taking him there to show to Queen Morgase." The innkeeper touched his forehead respectfully. "I've never seen the Queen. Man ought to see his own Queen, don't you think?"

lɑɡən kəd də "θɪŋz," ən ðə weɪ bɑɹɾɪmz aɪz ʃɪftəɾ ən ɪz tʌŋ dɑɹɾɪd əkɹɔs ɪz lɪps meɪɾ ɪt klɪɹ wʌɾ i mɛnt. hi hæd sin ðə læs fɔls dʒɹæɡən, tu jɪɹz əɡoʊ, wən i wɑz pɝeɪɾɪd θɹu ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd, bʌt ðət wɑz dʒʌst səm fɛloʊ hu θɔɾ i kəd meɪk hɪmsɛlf ə kɪŋ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ nid fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðət taɪm. soʊlʒɝz hæd hæɾ ɪm tʃeɪn ʌp ɑn ə wæɡən. ə sʌlən-lʊkɪŋ fɛloʊ hu moʊn ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə wæɡoʊnbd, kʌvɝɪŋ ɪz hɛd wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz wɛnɛvɝ pipəl θɹu stoʊnz əɹ poʊkt ɪm wɪð stɪks. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə lɑɾ ə ðæt, ən ðə soʊlʒɝz hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ tə stɑp ɪt, əz lɔŋ əz ðeɪ dɪd nɑt kɪl ðə fɛloʊ. bɛs tə lɛt ðə pipəl si hi wɑz nʌθɪŋ spɛʃəl æftɝ ɔl. hi kəd nɑt də "θɪŋz." ðɪs lɑɡən wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ tə si, ðoʊ. sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ bɑɹɾɪm tə tɛl ɪz ɡɹæntʃɪlʒɹən əbaʊt. ɪf oʊnli ði ɪn wəd lɛɾ ɪm ɡɛɾ əweɪ.

Logain could do "things," and the way Bartim's eyes shifted and his tongue darted across his lips made it clear what he meant. He had seen the last false Dragon, two years ago, when he was paraded through the countryside, but that was just some fellow who thought he could make himself a king. There had been no need for Aes Sedai, that time. Soldiers had had him chained up on a wagon. A sullen-looking fellow who moaned in the middle of the wagonbed, covering his head with his arms whenever people threw stones or poked him with sticks. There had been a lot of that, and the soldiers had done nothing to stop it, as long as they did not kill the fellow. Best to let the people see he was nothing special after all. He could not do "things." This Logain would be something to see, though. Something for Bartim to tell his grandchildren about. If only the inn would let him get away.

ɹænd lɪsənd wɪð ən ɪntʃɹəs ðət dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bi feɪkt. wən pdən feɪn hæd bɹɔt wɝd tə ɛmənz fild ʌv ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, ə mæn æktʃəli  wildɪŋ ðə paʊɝ, ɪt hæd bɪn ðə bɪɡəs nuz tə kʌm ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪn jɪɹz. wʌt hæd hæpən sɪns hæd pʊʃt ɪt tə ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪnd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ pipəl wəd bi tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt fəɹ jɪɹz, ən tɛlɪŋ ðɛɹ ɡɹæntʃɪlʒɹən əbaʊt, tu. bɑɹɾɪm wəd pɹɑbli tɛl ɪz ðəɾ i hæd sin lɑɡən wɛðɝ i dɪɾ əɹ nɑt. noʊbɑdi wəɾ ɛvɝ θɪŋk wʌt hæpən tə səm vɪlədʒ foʊk fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz wɝθ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, nɑɾ ənlɛs ðeɪ wɝ tu ɹɪvɝz pipəl ðɛmsɛlvz.

Rand listened with an interest that did not have to be faked. When Padan Fain had brought word to Emond's Field of a false Dragon, a man actually wielding the Power, it had been the biggest news to come into the Two Rivers in years. What had happened since had pushed it to the back of his mind, but it was still the sort of thing people would be talking about for years, and telling their grandchildren about, too. Bartim would probably tell his that he had seen Logain whether he did or not. Nobody would ever think what happened to some village folk from the Two Rivers was worth talking about, not unless they were Two Rivers people themselves.

"ðæt," tɑm sɛd, "wʊd bi sʌmθɪŋ tə meɪk ə stɔɹi ʌv, ə stɔɹi ðeɪd tɛl fəɹ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ hæd bɪn ðɛɹ." hi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɑz ðə sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ, ən ɹænd θɔɾ ɪt ɹɪli wɑz. "aɪ maɪt tʃɹaɪ tə si hɪm ɛniweɪ. jə dɪdn seɪ wʌt ɹut ðeɪ wɝ teɪkɪŋ. pɝhæps ðəɹ ɑɹ səm ʌðɝ tʃɹævəlɝz ɝaʊnd? ðeɪ maɪɾ əv hɝd ðə ɹut."

"That," Thom said, "would be something to make a story of, a story they'd tell for a thousand years. I wish I had been there." He sounded as if it was the simple truth, and Rand thought it really was. "I might try to see him anyway. You didn't say what route they were taking. Perhaps there are some other travelers around? They might have heard the route."

bɑɹɾɪm weɪvd ə ɡɹʌbi hæn dɪsmɪsɪvli. "nɔɹθ, ðæts ɔl ɛnibəɾi noʊz ɝaʊn hɪɹ. jə wɑnə si hɪm, ɡoʊ tə keɪɛmlɪn. ðæts ɔl aɪ noʊ, ən ɪf ðɛɹz ɛniθɪŋ tə noʊ ɪn waɪtbɹɪdʒ, aɪ noʊ ɪt."

Bartim waved a grubby hand dismissively. "North, that's all anybody knows around here. You want to see him, go to Caemlyn. That's all I know, and if there's anything to know in Whitebridge, I know it."

"noʊ daʊt jə du," tɑm sɛd smuðli. "aɪ ɪkspɛkt ə lɑɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz pæsɪŋ θɹu stɑp hɪɹ. jəɹ saɪn kɑt maɪ aɪ fɹəm ðə fʊɾ ə ðə waɪt bɹɪdʒ."

"No doubt you do," Thom said smoothly. "I expect a lot of strangers passing through stop here. Your sign caught my eye from the foot of the White Bridge."

"nɑt dʒʌs fɹəm ðə wɛst, əl əv jə noʊ. tu deɪz əɡoʊ ðəɹ wɑz ə fɛloʊ ɪn hɪɹ, ən ɪliɑnɝ, wɪð ə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən ɔl dʌn ʌp wɪð silz ən ɹɪbənz. ɹɛɾ ɪt ɹaɪɾ aʊt ðəɹ ɪn ðə skwɛɹ. sɛd hiz teɪkɪŋ ɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, meɪbi ivən tə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, ɪf ðə pæsəz ɑɹ oʊpən. sɛd ðeɪv sɛn mɛn tə ɹiɾ ɪɾ ɪn ɛvɹi læn ɪn ðə wɝld." ði ɪnkipɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst. aɪ hɪɹ ðəɹ kʌvɝd wɪð fɑɡ ɔl ðə jɪɹ ɹaʊnd, ən ðɛɹz θɪŋz ɪn ðə fɑɡ wɪl stʃɹɪp ðə flɛʃ ɔf jəɹ boʊnz bɪfɔɹ jə kən ɹʌn." mæt snɪkɝd, ɝnɪŋ ə ʃɑɹp lʊk fɹəm bɑɹɾɪm.

"Not just from the west, I'll have you know. Two days ago there was a fellow in here, an Illianer, with a proclamation all done up with seals and ribbons. Read it right out there in the square. Said he's taking it all the way to the Mountains of Mist, maybe even to the Aryth Ocean, if the passes are open. Said they've sent men to read it in every land in the world." The innkeeper shook his head. "The Mountains of Mist. I hear they're covered with fog all the year round, and there's things in the fog will strip the flesh off your bones before you can run." Mat snickered, earning a sharp look from Bartim.

tɑm lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntɛnli. "wʌt dɪd ðə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən seɪ?"

Thom leaned forward intently. "What did the proclamation say?"

"waɪ, ðə hʌn fəɹ ðə hɔɹn, ʌv kɔɹs," bɑɹɾɪm ɪkskleɪmd. "dɪdn aɪ seɪ ðæt? ði ɪliɑnɝz ɑɹ kɔlɪŋ ɑn ɛvɹibɑɾi əz wɪl swɛɹ ðɛɹ laɪvz tə ðə hʌn tə ɡæðɝ ɪn ɪljən. kən jə ɪmædʒən ðæt? swɛɹɪŋ jəɹ laɪf tə ə lɛdʒənd? aɪ səpoʊz ðəl faɪn səm fulz. ðɛɹz ɔlweɪz fulz ɝaʊnd. ðɪs fɛloʊ kleɪm ði ɛn ə ðə wɝld ɪz kʌmɪŋ. ðə læs bæɾəl wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn." hi tʃʌkəld, bʌɾ ɪt hæɾ ə hɑloʊ saʊnd, ə mæn læfɪŋ tə kənvɪns hɪmsɛlf sʌmθɪŋ ɹɪli wɑz wɝθ læfɪŋ æt. "ɡɛs ðeɪ θɪŋk ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ əz tə bi faʊn bɪfɔɹ ɪt hæpənz. naʊ wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ə ðæt?" hi tʃuɾ ə nʌkəl pɛnsɪvli fəɹ ə mɪnət. "kɔɹs, aɪ doʊnt noʊ əz aɪ kəɾ ɑɹɡju wɪð əm æftɝ ðɪs wɪntɝ. ðə wɪntɝ, ən ðɪs fɛloʊ lɑɡən, ən ðoʊz ʌðɝ tu bɪfɔɹ, əz wɛl. waɪ ɔl ðiz fɛloʊz ðə læs fju jɪɹz kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən? ən ðə wɪntɝ. mʌs min sʌmθɪŋ. wʌt dʒju θɪŋk?"

"Why, the hunt for the Horn, of course," Bartim exclaimed. "Didn't I say that? The Illianers are calling on everybody as will swear their lives to the hunt to gather in Illian. Can you imagine that? Swearing your life to a legend? I suppose they'll find some fools. There's always fools around. This fellow claimed the end of the world is coming. The last battle with the Dark One." He chuckled, but it had a hollow sound, a man laughing to convince himself something really was worth laughing at. "Guess they think the Horn of Valere has to be found before it happens. Now what do you think of that?" He chewed a knuckle pensively for a minute. "Course, I don't know as I could argue with them after this winter. The winter, and this fellow Logain, and those other two before, as well. Why all these fellows the last few years claiming to be the Dragon? And the winter. Must mean something. What do you think?"

tɑm dɪd nɑt sim tə hɪɹ hɪm. ɪn ə sɑf vɔɪs ðə ɡlimən bɪɡæn tə ɹəsaɪt tə hɪmsɛlf.

Thom did not seem to hear him. In a soft voice the gleeman began to recite to himself.

"ɪn ðə læst, lɔɹn faɪt 'ɡeɪns ðə fɔl ə lɔŋ naɪt, ðə maʊntənz stænd ɡɑɹd, ən ðə dɛd ʃæl bi wɔɹd, fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪz noʊ bɑɹ tə maɪ kɔl."

"In the last, lorn fight 'gainst the fall of long night, the mountains stand guard, and the dead shall be ward, for the grave is no bar to my call."

"ðæts ɪt." bɑɹɾɪm ɡɹɪn əz ɪf i kəɾ ɔlɹɛɾi si ðə kɹaʊdz hændɪŋ ɪm ðɛɹ mʌni waɪl ðeɪ lɪsən tə tɑm. "ðæts ɪt. ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn. jə tɛl ðət wʌn, ən ðəl bi hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɹæftɝz ɪn hɪɹ. ɛvɹibɑɾiz hɝɾ əbaʊt ðə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən."

"That's it." Bartim grinned as if he could already see the crowds handing him their money while they listened to Thom. "That's it. The Great Hunt of the Horn. You tell that one, and they'll be hanging from the rafters in here. Everybody's heard about the proclamation."

tɑm stɪl sim tə bi ə θaʊzən maɪlz əweɪ, soʊ ɹænd sɛd, "wɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ səm fɹɛnz u wɝ kʌmɪŋ ðɪs weɪ. fɹəm ðə wɛst. hæv ðəɹ bɪn mɛni stʃɹeɪnʒɝz pæsɪŋ θɹu ɪn ðə læst wik əɹ tu?"

Thom still seemed to be a thousand miles away, so Rand said, "We're looking for some friends who were coming this way. From the west. Have there been many strangers passing through in the last week or two?"

"sʌm," bɑɹɾɪm sɛd sloʊli. "ðɛɹz ɔlweɪz sʌm, fɹəm ist ən wɛs boʊθ." hi lʊkt əɾ itʃ ə ðɛm ɪn tɝn, sʌɾənli wɛɹi. "wʌt də ðeɪ lʊk laɪk, ðiz fɹɛnz ə jʊɹz?"

"Some," Bartim said slowly. "There's always some, from east and west both." He looked at each of them in turn, suddenly wary. "What do they look like, these friends of yours?"

ɹænd oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, bʌt tɑm, əbɹʌpli bæk fɹəm wɛɹɛvɝ i hæd bɪn, ɡeɪv ɪm ə ʃɑɹp, saɪlənsɪŋ lʊk. wɪð ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd saɪ ðə ɡlimən tɝn tə ði ɪnkipɝ. "tu mɛn ən θɹi wɪmən," hi sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. "ðeɪ meɪ bi təɡɛðɝ, əɹ meɪbi nɑt." hi ɡeɪv θʌmneɪl skɛtʃəz, peɪntɪŋ itʃ wʌn ɪn dʒʌst ə fju wɝdz, ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛniwʌn u hæd sin əm tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ əweɪ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ u ðeɪ wɝ.

Rand opened his mouth, but Thom, abruptly back from wherever he had been, gave him a sharp, silencing look. With an exasperated sigh the gleeman turned to the innkeeper. "Two men and three women," he said reluctantly. "They may be together, or maybe not." He gave thumbnail sketches, painting each one in just a few words, enough for anyone who had seen them to recognize without giving away anything about who they were.

bɑɹɾɪm ɹʌbd wʌn hæn oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, dɪsɹeɪnʒɪŋ ɪz θɪnɪŋ hɛɹ, ən stʊɾ ʌp sloʊli. "fɝɡɛɾ əbaʊt pɝfɔɹmɪŋ hɪɹ, ɡlimən. ɪn fækt, aɪɾ əpɹiʃieɪɾ ɪɾ ɪf jə dʒɹæŋk jəɹ waɪn ən lɛft. liv waɪtbɹɪdʒ, ɪf jəɹ smɑɹt."

Bartim rubbed one hand over his head, disarranging his thinning hair, and stood up slowly. "Forget about performing here, gleeman. In fact, I'd appreciate it if you drank your wine and left. Leave Whitebridge, if you're smart."

"sʌmwʌn ɛls əz bɪn æskɪŋ æftɝ ðɛm?" tɑm tʊk ə dʒɹɪŋk, əz ɪf ði ænsɝ wɝ ðə list ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld, ən ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət ði ɪnkipɝ. "hu wəd ðət bi?"

"Someone else has been asking after them?" Thom took a drink, as if the answer were the least important thing in the world, and raised an eyebrow at the innkeeper. "Who would that be?"

bɑɹɾɪm skɹʌbd ɪz hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ əɡɛn ən ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fiɾ ɑn ðə pɔɪn ʌv wɔkɪŋ əweɪ, ðən nɑɾəd tə hɪmsɛlf. "əbaʊɾ ə wik əɡoʊ, əz nɪɹ əz aɪ kən seɪ, ə wizəli fɛloʊ keɪm oʊvɝ ðə bɹɪdʒ. kɹeɪzi, ɛvɹibɑɾi θɔt. ɔlweɪz tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, nɛvɝ stɑp muvɪŋ ivən wən i wɑz stændɪŋ stɪl. æskt əbaʊt ðə seɪm pipəl . . . səm ə ðɛm. hi æsk laɪk ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt, ðən æktəd laɪk i dɪdn kɛɹ wʌt ði ænsɝ wɑz. hæf ðə taɪm i wɑz seɪɪŋ əz i hæd tə weɪt hɪɹ fəɹ ðɛm, ən ði ʌðɝ hæf əz i hæd tə ɡoʊ ɑn, hi wɑz ɪn ə hɝi. wʌn mɪnəɾ i wɑz waɪnɪŋ ən bɛɡɪŋ, ðə nɛks meɪkɪŋ dɪmænz laɪk ə kɪŋ. nɪɹ ɡɑt hɪmsɛlf ə θɹæʃɪŋ ə taɪm əɹ tu, kɹeɪzi əɹ nɑt. ðə wɑtʃ ɔlmoʊs tʊk ɪm ɪn kʌstəɾi fəɹ ɪz oʊn seɪfti. hi wɛn ɔf təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn ðət seɪm deɪ, tɔkɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf ən kɹaɪɪŋ. kɹeɪzi, laɪk aɪ sɛd."

Bartim scrubbed his hand through his hair again and shifted his feet on the point of walking away, then nodded to himself. "About a week ago, as near as I can say, a weaselly fellow came over the bridge. Crazy, everybody thought. Always talking to himself, never stopped moving even when he was standing still. Asked about the same people . . . some of them. He asked like it was important, then acted like he didn't care what the answer was. Half the time he was saying as he had to wait here for them, and the other half as he had to go on, he was in a hurry. One minute he was whining and begging, the next making demands like a king. Near got himself a thrashing a time or two, crazy or not. The Watch almost took him in custody for his own safety. He went off toward Caemlyn that same day, talking to himself and crying. Crazy, like I said."

ɹænd lʊkt ət tɑm ən mæt kwɛstʃənɪŋli, ən ðeɪ boʊθ ʃʊk ðɛɹ hɛdz. ɪf ðɪs wizəli fɛloʊ wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ðɛm, hi wɑz stɪl noʊbɑdi ðeɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd.

Rand looked at Thom and Mat questioningly, and they both shook their heads. If this weaselly fellow was looking for them, he was still nobody they recognized.

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ðə seɪm pipəl i wɑntəd?" ɹænd æskt.

"Are you sure it was the same people he wanted?" Rand asked.

"sʌm ə ðɛm. ðə faɪɾɪŋ mæn, ən ðə wʊmən ɪn sɪlk. bʌɾ ɪt wɑzn əm əz i kɛɹɾ əbaʊt. ɪt wɑz θɹi kʌntʃɹi bɔɪz." hɪz aɪz slɪɾ əkɹɔs ɹænd ən mæt ən əweɪ əɡɛn soʊ fæs ðət ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf i hæd ɹɪli sin ðə lʊk əɹ ɪmædʒən ɪt. "hi wɑz dɛspɹɪt tə faɪn ðɛm. bʌt kɹeɪzi, laɪk aɪ sɛd."

"Some of them. The fighting man, and the woman in silk. But it wasn't them as he cared about. It was three country boys." His eyes slid across Rand and Mat and away again so fast that Rand was not sure if he had really seen the look or imagined it. "He was desperate to find them. But crazy, like I said."

ɹænd ʃɪvɝd, ən wʌndɝɾ u ðə kɹeɪzi mæn kəd bi, ən waɪ hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ðɛm. eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd? wəd bælzəmən juz ə mædmæn?

Rand shivered, and wondered who the crazy man could be, and why he was looking for them. A Darkfriend? Would Ba'alzamon use a madman?

"hi wɑz kɹeɪzi, bʌt ði ʌðɝ wʌn. . . ." bɑɹɾɪmz aɪz ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli, ən ɪz tʌŋ ɹæn oʊvɝ ɪz lɪps əz ɪf i kəd nɑt faɪn ɪnʌf spɪt tə mɔɪsən ðɛm. "nɛks deɪ . . . nɛks deɪ ði ʌðɝ wʌn keɪm fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm." hi fɛl saɪlənt.

"He was crazy, but the other one. . . ." Bartim's eyes shifted uneasily, and his tongue ran over his lips as if he could not find enough spit to moisten them. "Next day . . . next day the other one came for the first time." He fell silent.

"ði ʌðɝ wʌn?" tɑm pɹɑmptəd faɪnəli.

"The other one?" Thom prompted finally.

bɑɹɾɪm lʊkt ɝaʊnd, ɔlðoʊ ðɛɹ saɪɾ ə ðə dɪvaɪɾəd ɹum wɑz stɪl ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ðɛm. hi ivən ɹeɪzd ʌp ɑn ɪz toʊz ən lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə loʊ wɔl. wən i faɪnəli spoʊk, ɪt wɑz ɪn ə wɪspɝd ɹʌʃ.

Bartim looked around, although their side of the divided room was still empty except for them. He even raised up on his toes and looked over the low wall. When he finally spoke, it was in a whispered rush.

"ɔl ɪn blæk i ɪz. kips ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk pʊld ʌp soʊ jə kæn si hɪz feɪs, bʌt jə kən fil ɪm lʊkɪŋ ət ju, fil ɪt laɪk ən aɪsɪkəl ʃʌvd ɪndə jəɹ spaɪn. hi . . . hi spoʊk tə mi." hi flɪntʃt ən stɑp tə tʃu əɾ ɪz lɪp bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "saʊndəd laɪk ə sneɪk kɹɔlɪŋ θɹu dɛd livz. fɛɹ tɝn maɪ stʌmək tə aɪs. ɛvɹi taɪm əz i kʌmz bæk, hi æsks ðə seɪm kwɛstʃənz. seɪm kwɛstʃənz ðə kɹeɪzi mæn æskt. noʊbɑdi ɛvɝ siz ɪm kʌmɪŋ - hiz dʒʌs ðəɹ ɔl ʌv ə sʌɾən, deɪ əɹ naɪt, fɹizɪŋ jə wɛɹ jə stænd. pipəl ɑɹ stɑɹɾɪŋ tə lʊk oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. wɝst ʌv ɪɾ ɪz, ðə ɡəttɛndɝz kleɪm əz hiz nɛvɝ pæs θɹu ɛni ʌv ðə ɡeɪts, kʌmɪŋ əɹ ɡoʊɪŋ."

"All in black he is. Keeps the hood of his cloak pulled up so you can't see his face, but you can feel him looking at you, feel it like an icicle shoved into your spine. He . . . he spoke to me." He flinched and stopped to chew at his lip before going on. "Sounded like a snake crawling through dead leaves. Fair turned my stomach to ice. Every time as he comes back, he asks the same questions. Same questions the crazy man asked. Nobody ever sees him coming - he's just there all of a sudden, day or night, freezing you where you stand. People are starting to look over their shoulders. Worst of it is, the gatetenders claim as he's never passed through any of the gates, coming or going."

ɹænd wɝkt ət kipɪŋ ɪz feɪs blæŋk; hi klɛntʃt ɪz dʒɔ əntɪl ɪz tiθ ætʃt. mæt skaʊld, ən tɑm stʌɾid ɪz waɪn. ðə wɝd nʌn ə ðɛm wɑntəd tə seɪ hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ bɪtwin ðɛm. mɹdʒɹɑl.

Rand worked at keeping his face blank; he clenched his jaw until his teeth ached. Mat scowled, and Thom studied his wine. The word none of them wanted to say hung in the air between them. Myrddraal.

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪf aɪ ɛvɝ mɛɾ ɛniwʌn laɪk ðæt," tɑm sɛɾ æftɝ ə mɪnət.

"I think I'd remember if I ever met anyone like that," Thom said after a minute.

bɑɹɾɪmz hɛd bɑb fjʊɹiəsli. "bɝn mi, bʌt jə wʊd. laɪts tʃɹuθ, jə wʊd. hi . . . hi wɑns ðə seɪm lɑɾ əz ðə kɹeɪzi mæn, oʊnli hi sɛz əz ðɛɹz ə ɡɝl wɪð ðɛm. ænd" - hi ɡlænst saɪdweɪz ət tɑm -  "æn ə waɪt-hɛɹd ɡlimən."

Bartim's head bobbed furiously. "Burn me, but you would. Light's truth, you would. He . . . he wants the same lot as the crazy man, only he says as there's a girl with them. And" - he glanced sideways at Thom -  "and a white-haired gleeman."

tɑmz aɪbɹaʊz ʃɑɾ ʌp ɪn wʌt ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ wɑz ənfeɪən sɝpɹaɪz. "ə waɪt-hɛɹd ɡlimən? wɛl, aɪm hɑɹdli ði oʊnli ɡlimən ɪn ðə wɝld wɪð ə lɪɾəl eɪdʒ ɑn hɪm. aɪ əʃʊɹ ju, aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðɪs fɛloʊ, ən i kən əv noʊ ɹizən tə bi lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mi."

Thom's eyebrows shot up in what Rand was sure was unfeigned surprise. "A white-haired gleeman? Well, I'm hardly the only gleeman in the world with a little age on him. I assure you, I don't know this fellow, and he can have no reason to be looking for me."

"ðæts əz meɪ bi," bɑɹɾɪm sɛd ɡlʌmli. "hi dɪdn seɪ ɪɾ ɪn soʊ mɛni wɝdz, bʌɾ aɪ ɡɑt ði ɪmpɹɛʃən əz i wəd bi vɛɹi dɪsplizd wɪð ɛniwʌn əz tʃɹaɪd tə hɛlp ðiz pipəl, əɹ tʃɹaɪd tə haɪɾ əm fɹəm hɪm. ɛniweɪ, əl tɛl jə wʌɾ aɪ toʊl hɪm. aɪ hævən sin ɛni ʌv ðɛm, nɔɹ hɝd tɛl ə ðɛm, ən ðæts ðə tʃɹuθ. nɑɾ ɛni ʌv ðɛm," hi fɪnɪʃt pɔɪntɪdli. əbɹʌpli hi slæp tɑmz mʌni daʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "dʒʌs fɪnɪʃ jəɹ waɪn ən ɡoʊ. ɔl ɹaɪt? ɔl ɹaɪt?" ən i tʃɹʌndəld əweɪ əz fæst əz i kʊd, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

"That's as may be," Bartim said glumly. "He didn't say it in so many words, but I got the impression as he would be very displeased with anyone as tried to help these people, or tried to hide them from him. Anyway, I'll tell you what I told him. I haven't seen any of them, nor heard tell of them, and that's the truth. Not any of them," he finished pointedly. Abruptly he slapped Thom's money down on the table. "Just finish your wine and go. All right? All right?" And he trundled away as fast as he could, looking over his shoulder.

"eɪ feɪd," mæt bɹiðd wən ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ɡɔn. "aɪ ʃʊɾə noʊn ðeɪd bi lʊkɪŋ fəɹ əs hɪɹ."

"A Fade," Mat breathed when the innkeeper was gone. "I should have known they'd be looking for us here."

"æn hɪl bi bæk," tɑm sɛd, linɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə teɪbəl ən loʊɝɪŋ ɪz vɔɪs. "aɪ seɪ wi snik bæk tə ðə boʊɾ ən teɪk kæptən doʊmən ʌp ɑn ɪz ɔfɝ. ðə hʌnt wɪl sɛntɝ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd tə keɪɛmlɪn waɪl wɝ ɑn əɹ weɪ tə ɪljən, ə θaʊzən maɪlz fɹəm wɛɹ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ɪkspɛkt ʌs."

"And he'll be back," Thom said, leaning across the table and lowering his voice. "I say we sneak back to the boat and take Captain Domon up on his offer. The hunt will center on the road to Caemlyn while we're on our way to Illian, a thousand miles from where the Myrddraal expect us."

"noʊ," ɹænd sɛd fɝmli. "wi weɪt fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði ʌðɝz ɪn waɪtbɹɪdʒ, əɹ wi ɡoʊ ɑn tə keɪɛmlɪn. wʌn əɹ ði ʌðɝ, tɑm. ðæts wʌt wi dɪsaɪɾɪd."

"No," Rand said firmly. "We wait for Moiraine and the others in Whitebridge, or we go on to Caemlyn. One or the other, Thom. That's what we decided."

"ðæts kɹeɪzd, bɔɪ. θɪŋz əv tʃeɪnʒd. jə lɪsən tə mi. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðɪs ɪnkipɝ sɛz, wən ə mɹdʒɹɑl stɛɹz ət hɪm, hɪl tɛl ɔl əbaʊɾ əs daʊn tə wʌt wi hæd tə dʒɹɪŋk ən haʊ mʌtʃ dʌst wi hæɾ ɑn əɹ buts." ɹænd ʃɪvɝd, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə feɪdz aɪləs stɛɹ. "æz fəɹ keɪɛmlɪn. . . . jə θɪŋk ðə hæfmən doʊnt noʊ jə wɑnə ɡɛt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn? ɪts ə ɡʊd taɪm tə bi ɑn ə boʊt hɛɾəd saʊθ."

"That's crazed, boy. Things have changed. You listen to me. No matter what this innkeeper says, when a Myrddraal stares at him, he'll tell all about us down to what we had to drink and how much dust we had on our boots." Rand shivered, remembering the Fade's eyeless stare. "As for Caemlyn. . . . You think the Halfmen don't know you want to get to Tar Valon? It's a good time to be on a boat headed south."

"noʊ, tɑm." ɹænd hæd tə fɔɹs ðə wɝdz aʊt, θɪŋkɪŋ ə biɪŋ ə θaʊzən maɪlz fɹəm wɛɹ ðə feɪdz wɝ lʊkɪŋ, bʌɾ i tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən mænədʒ tə fɝm ɪz vɔɪs. "noʊ."

"No, Thom." Rand had to force the words out, thinking of being a thousand miles from where the Fades were looking, but he took a deep breath and managed to firm his voice. "No."

"θɪŋk, bɔɪ. ɪljən! ðəɹ ɪzən ə ɡɹændɝ sɪɾi ɑn ðə feɪs ə ði ɝθ. ən ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn! ðəɹ hæzən bɪn ə hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn ɪn nɪɹ fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. ə hoʊl nu saɪkəl ə stɔɹiz weɪɾɪŋ tə bi meɪd. dʒʌs θɪŋk. jə nɛvɝ dʒɹimd ʌv ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ɪt. baɪ ðə taɪm ðə mɹdʒɹɑl fɪɡjɝ aʊt wɛɹ juv ɡɔn tə, jəl bi oʊld ən ɡɹeɪ ən soʊ taɪɝɾ ʌv wɑtʃɪŋ jəɹ ɡɹæntʃɪlʒɹən jə woʊn kɛɹ ɪf ðeɪ də faɪn ju."

"Think, boy. Illian! There isn't a grander city on the face of the earth. And the Great Hunt of the Horn! There hasn't been a Hunt of the Horn in near four hundred years. A whole new cycle of stories waiting to be made. Just think. You never dreamed of anything like it. By the time the Myrddraal figure out where you've gone to, you'll be old and gray and so tired of watching your grandchildren you won't care if they do find you."

ɹændz feɪs tʊk ɑn ə stʌbɝn sɛt. "haʊ mɛni taɪmz də aɪ hæv tə seɪ noʊ? ðəl faɪn əs wɛɹɛvɝ wi ɡoʊ. ðɛɹəd bi feɪdz weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ɪljən, tu. ən haʊ də wi ɪskeɪp ðə dʒɹimz? aɪ wɑnə noʊ wʌts hæpənɪŋ tə mi, tɑm, ən waɪ. aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn ɪf aɪ kæn; wɪθaʊɾ əɹ ɪf aɪ hæv tə. əloʊn, ɪf aɪ hæv tə. aɪ nid tə noʊ."

Rand's face took on a stubborn set. "How many times do I have to say no? They'll find us wherever we go. There'd be Fades waiting in Illian, too. And how do we escape the dreams? I want to know what's happening to me, Thom, and why. I'm going to Tar Valon. With Moiraine if I can; without her if I have to. Alone, if I have to. I need to know."

"bʌɾ ɪljən, bɔɪ! ən ə seɪf weɪ aʊt, daʊnɹɪvɝ waɪl ðəɹ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ jə ɪn ənʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, ə dʒɹim kæn hɝt ju."

"But Illian, boy! And a safe way out, downriver while they're looking for you in another direction. Blood and ashes, a dream can't hurt you."

ɹænd kɛp saɪlənt. ə dʒɹim kæn hɝt? də dʒɹim θɔɹnz dʒɹɔ ɹil blʌd? hi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt i hæd toʊl tɑm əbaʊt ðət dʒɹim, tu. dʒju dɛɹ tɛl ɛnibəɾi? bælzəmən ɪz ɪn jəɹ dʒɹimz, bʌt wʌts bɪtwin dʒɹimɪŋ ən weɪkɪŋ, naʊ? hu dʒju dɛɹ tə tɛl ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz tʌtʃɪŋ ju?

Rand kept silent. A dream can't hurt? Do dream thorns draw real blood? He almost wished he had told Thom about that dream, too. Do you dare tell anybody? Ba'alzamon is in your dreams, but what's between dreaming and waking, now? Who do you dare to tell that the Dark One is touching you?

tɑm sim tə ʌndɝstænd. ðə ɡlimənz feɪs sɔfənd. "ivən ðoʊz dʒɹimz, læd. ðeɪ ɑɹ stɪl dʒʌs dʒɹimz, ɑɹən ðeɪ? fəɹ ðə laɪts seɪk, mæt, tɔk tə hɪm. aɪ noʊ jə doʊnt wɑnə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ət list."

Thom seemed to understand. The gleeman's face softened. "Even those dreams, lad. They are still just dreams, aren't they? For the Light's sake, Mat, talk to him. I know you don't want to go to Tar Valon, at least."

mæts feɪs ɹɛɾənd, hæf ɪmbɛɹəsmən ən hæf æŋɡɝ. hi əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət ɹænd ən skaʊld ət tɑm ɪnstɛd. "waɪ ɑɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə ɔl ðɪs fʌs ən bɑðɝ? jə wɑnə ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə boʊt? ɡoʊ bæk tə ðə boʊt. wɪl teɪk kɛɹ ʌv aʊɝsɛlvz."

Mat's face reddened, half embarrassment and half anger. He avoided looking at Rand and scowled at Thom instead. "Why are you going to all this fuss and bother? You want to go back to the boat? Go back to the boat. We'll take care of ourselves."

ðə ɡlimənz θɪn ʃoʊldɝz ʃʊk wɪð saɪlən læftɝ, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs wɑz æŋɡɝ taɪt. "ju θɪŋk jə noʊ ɪnʌf əbaʊt mɹdʒɹɑl tə ɪskeɪp baɪ jɝsɛlf, də ju? jəɹ ɹɛɾi tə wɔk ɪndə tɑɹ vəlɑn əloʊn ən hæn jɝsɛlf oʊvɝ tə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit? kən jə ivən tɛl wʌn ədʒɑ fɹəm ənʌðɝ? ðə laɪt bɝn mi, bɔɪ, ɪf jə θɪŋk jə kən ivən ɡɛt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn əloʊn, jə tɛl mi tə ɡoʊ."

The gleeman's thin shoulders shook with silent laughter, but his voice was anger tight. "You think you know enough about Myrddraal to escape by yourself, do you? You're ready to walk into Tar Valon alone and hand yourself over to the Amyrlin Seat? Can you even tell one Ajah from another? The Light burn me, boy, if you think you can even get to Tar Valon alone, you tell me to go."

"ɡoʊ," mæt ɡɹaʊld, slaɪɾɪŋ ə hæn ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk. ɹænd ɹilaɪzd wɪð ə ʃɑk ðəɾ i wɑz ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, meɪbi ivən ɹɛɾi tə juz ɪt.

"Go," Mat growled, sliding a hand under his cloak. Rand realized with a shock that he was gripping the dagger from Shadar Logoth, maybe even ready to use it.

ɹɔkəs læftɝ bɹoʊk aʊɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə loʊ wɔl dɪvaɪɾɪŋ ðə ɹum, ən ə skɔɹnfəl vɔɪs spoʊk ʌp laʊdli.

Raucous laughter broke out on the other side of the low wall dividing the room, and a scornful voice spoke up loudly.

"tʃɹɑləks? pʊɾ ɑn ə ɡlimənz kloʊk, mæn! jəɹ dʒɹʌŋk! tʃɹɑləks! bɔɹɾɝlənd feɪbəlz!"

"Trollocs? Put on a gleeman's cloak, man! You're drunk! Trollocs! Borderland fables!"

ðə wɝdz daʊst æŋɡɝ laɪk ə pɑɾ ə koʊld wɔɾɝ. ivən mæt hæf tɝn tə ðə wɔl, aɪz waɪɾənɪŋ.

The words doused anger like a pot of cold water. Even Mat half turned to the wall, eyes widening.

ɹænd stʊd dʒʌst ɪnʌf tə si oʊvɝ ðə wɔl, ðən dʌk bæk daʊn əɡɛn wɪð ə sɪŋkɪŋ filɪŋ ɪn ɪz stʌmək. flɔɹən dʒɛlb sæɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl, ət ðə teɪbəl ɪn ðə bæk wɪð ðə tu mɛn u hæd bɪn ðəɹ wən ðeɪ keɪm ɪn. ðeɪ wɝ læfɪŋ ət hɪm, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ lɪsnɪŋ. bɑɹɾɪm wɑz waɪpɪŋ ə teɪbəl ðət bædli niɾəd ɪt, nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət dʒɛlb ən ðə tu mɛn, bʌɾ i wɑz lɪsnɪŋ, tu, skɹʌbɪŋ wʌn spɑɾ oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ wɪð ɪz taʊəl ən linɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əm əntɪl i simd ɔlmoʊst ɹɛɾi tə fɔl oʊvɝ.

Rand stood just enough to see over the wall, then ducked back down again with a sinking feeling in his stomach. Floran Gelb sat on the other side of the wall, at the table in the back with the two men who had been there when they came in. They were laughing at him, but they were listening. Bartim was wiping a table that badly needed it, not looking at Gelb and the two men, but he was listening, too, scrubbing one spot over and over with his towel and leaning toward them until he seemed almost ready to fall over.

"dʒɛlb," ɹænd wɪspɝɾ əz i dʒɹɑp bæk ɪndə hɪz tʃɛɹ, ən ði ʌðɝz tɛnst. tɑm swɪfli stʌɾid ðɛɹ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹum.

"Gelb," Rand whispered as he dropped back into his chair, and the others tensed. Thom swiftly studied their side of the room.

ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl ðə sɛkən mænz vɔɪs tʃaɪmd ɪn. "noʊ, noʊ, ðəɹ juz tə bi tʃɹɑləks. bʌt ðeɪ kɪld əm ɔl ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz."

On the other side of the wall the second man's voice chimed in. "No, no, there used to be Trollocs. But they killed them all in the Trolloc Wars."

"bɔɹɾɝlənd feɪbəlz!" ðə fɝs mæn ɹɪpiɾɪd.

"Borderland fables!" the first man repeated.

"ɪts tʃɹu, aɪ tɛl ju," dʒɛlb pɹətɛstəd laʊdli. "aɪv bɪn ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. aɪv sin tʃɹɑləks, ən ðiz wɝ tʃɹɑləks əz ʃʊɹ əz aɪm sɪɾɪŋ hɪɹ. ðoʊz θɹi kleɪm ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ tʃeɪsɪŋ ðɛm, bʌɾ aɪ noʊ bɛɾɝ. ðæts waɪ aɪ wʊdn steɪ ɑn ðə spɹeɪ. aɪv hæd maɪ səspɪʃənz əbaʊt beɪl doʊmən fəɹ səm taɪm, bʌt ðoʊz θɹi ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz fəɹ ʃʊɹ. aɪ tɛl ju. . . ." læftɝ ən kɔɹs dʒoʊks dʒɹaʊn aʊt ðə ɹɛst ʌv wʌt dʒɛlb hæd tə seɪ.

"It's true, I tell you," Gelb protested loudly. "I've been in the Borderlands. I've seen Trollocs, and these were Trollocs as sure as I'm sitting here. Those three claimed the Trollocs were chasing them, but I know better. That's why I wouldn't stay on the Spray. I've had my suspicions about Bayle Domon for some time, but those three are Darkfriends for sure. I tell you. . . ." Laughter and coarse jokes drowned out the rest of what Gelb had to say.

haʊ lɔŋ, ɹænd wʌndɝd, bɪfɔɹ ði ɪnkipɝ hɝɾ ə dɪskɹɪpʃən ʌv "ðoʊz θɹi"? ɪf i hæd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ɪf i dɪd nɑt dʒʌs lip tə ðə θɹi stʃɹeɪnʒɝz i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sin. ði oʊnli dɔɹ fɹəm ðɛɹ hæf ə ðə kɑmən ɹum wəd teɪk əm ɹaɪt pæs dʒɛlbz teɪbəl.

How long, Rand wondered, before the innkeeper heard a description of "those three"? If he had not already. If he did not just leap to the three strangers he had already seen. The only door from their half of the common room would take them right past Gelb's table.

"meɪbi ðə boʊɾ ɪzən sətʃ ə bæɾ aɪdiə," mæt mʌɾɝd, bʌt tɑm ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"Maybe the boat isn't such a bad idea," Mat muttered, but Thom shook his head.

"nɑɾ ɛnimɔɹ." ðə ɡlimən spoʊk sɔfli ən fæst. hi pʊld aʊt ðə lɛðɝ pɝs kæptən doʊmən hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ən heɪstəli dɪvaɪɾəd ðə mʌni ɪndə θɹi paɪlz. "ðæt stɔɹi wɪl bi ɔl θɹu ðə taʊn ɪn ən aʊɝ, wɛðɝ ɛnibəɾi bɪlivz ɪɾ əɹ nɑt, ən ðə hæfmən kəd hɪɹ ɛni taɪm. doʊmən ɪzən seɪlɪŋ əntɪl təmɑɹoʊ mɔɹnɪŋ. ət bɛs hɪl əv tʃɹɑləks tʃeɪsɪŋ ɪm ɔl ðə weɪ tə ɪljən. wɛl, hiz hæf ɪkspɛktɪŋ ɪt fəɹ səm ɹizən, bʌt ðət woʊn də əs ɛni ɡʊd. ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪt bʌt tə ɹʌn, ən ɹʌn hɑɹd."

"Not anymore." The gleeman spoke softly and fast. He pulled out the leather purse Captain Domon had given him and hastily divided the money into three piles. "That story will be all through the town in an hour, whether anybody believes it or not, and the Halfman could hear any time. Domon isn't sailing until tomorrow morning. At best he'll have Trollocs chasing him all the way to Illian. Well, he's half expecting it for some reason, but that won't do us any good. There's nothing for it but to run, and run hard."

mæt kwɪkli stʌf ðə kɔɪnz tɑm ʃʌvd ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm ɪndə hɪz pɑkət. ɹænd pɪkt ɪz paɪl ʌp mɔɹ sloʊli. ðə kɔɪn mɔɪɹeɪn hæd ɡɪvən ɪm wɑz nɑɾ əmʌŋ ðɛm. doʊmən hæd ɡɪvən ən ikwəl weɪɾ ə sɪlvɝ, bʌt ɹænd, fəɹ səm ɹizən i kəd nɑt fæðəm, wɪʃt i hæd ði ɛɛs sədaɪz kɔɪn ɪnstɛd. stʌfɪŋ ðə mʌni ɪn ɪz pɑkət, hi lʊkt ə kwɛstʃən ət ðə ɡlimən.

Mat quickly stuffed the coins Thom shoved in front of him into his pocket. Rand picked his pile up more slowly. The coin Moiraine had given him was not among them. Domon had given an equal weight of silver, but Rand, for some reason he could not fathom, wished he had the Aes Sedai's coin instead. Stuffing the money in his pocket, he looked a question at the gleeman.

"ɪn keɪs wɝ sɛpɝeɪɾəd," tɑm ɪkspleɪnd. "wi pɹɑbli woʊn bi, bʌɾ ɪf ɪt dʌz hæpən . . . wɛl, jə tu wɪl meɪk aʊɾ ɔl ɹaɪt baɪ jʊɹsɛlvz. jəɹ ɡʊd lædz. dʒʌs kip klɪɹ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, fəɹ jəɹ laɪvz."

"In case we're separated," Thom explained. "We probably won't be, but if it does happen . . . well, you two will make out all right by yourselves. You're good lads. Just keep clear of Aes Sedai, for your lives."

"aɪ θɔt jə wɝ steɪɪŋ wɪð ʌs," ɹænd sɛd.

"I thought you were staying with us," Rand said.

"aɪ æm, bɔɪ. aɪ æm. bʌt ðəɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ kloʊs, naʊ, ən ðə laɪɾ oʊnli noʊz. wɛl, noʊ mæɾɝ. ɪɾ ɪzən laɪkli ɛniθɪŋ wɪl hæpən." tɑm pɔzd, lʊkɪŋ ət mæt. "aɪ hoʊp jə noʊ lɔŋɡɝ maɪn mi steɪɪŋ wɪð ju," hi sɛd dʒɹaɪli.

"I am, boy. I am. But they're getting close, now, and the Light only knows. Well, no matter. It isn't likely anything will happen." Thom paused, looking at Mat. "I hope you no longer mind me staying with you," he said dryly.

mæt ʃɹʌɡd. hi aɪɾ itʃ ə ðɛm, ðən ʃɹʌɡd əɡɛn. "aɪm dʒʌst ɑn ɛdʒ. aɪ kæn sim tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ʌv ɪt. ɛvɹi taɪm wi stɑp fəɹ ə bɹɛθ, ðəɹ ðɛɹ, hʌntɪŋ ʌs. aɪ fil laɪk sʌmbɑɾiz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə bæk ə maɪ hɛɾ ɔl ðə taɪm. wʌɾ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ tə du?"

Mat shrugged. He eyed each of them, then shrugged again. "I'm just on edge. I can't seem to get rid of it. Every time we stop for a breath, they're there, hunting us. I feel like somebody's staring at the back of my head all the time. What are we going to do?"

ðə læftɝ ɪɹʌptəɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl, bɹoʊkən əɡɛn baɪ dʒɛlb, tʃɹaɪɪŋ laʊdli tə kənvɪns ðə tu mɛn ðəɾ i wɑz tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ. haʊ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ, ɹænd wʌndɝd. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ bɑɹɾɪm hæd tə pʊt təɡɛðɝ dʒɛlbz θɹi ən ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm.

The laughter erupted on the other side of the wall, broken again by Gelb, trying loudly to convince the two men that he was telling the truth. How much longer, Rand wondered. Sooner or later Bartim had to put together Gelb's three and the three of them.

tɑm izd ɪz tʃɛɹ ən ɹoʊz, bʌt kɛpt ɪz haɪt kɹaʊtʃt. noʊ wʌn lʊkɪŋ kæʒəwəli təwɔɹd ðə wɔl fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪd kəd si hɪm. hi moʊʃən fəɹ əm tə fɑloʊ, wɪspɝɪŋ, "bi vɛɹi kwaɪət."

Thom eased his chair and rose, but kept his height crouched. No one looking casually toward the wall from the other side could see him. He motioned for them to follow, whispering, "Be very quiet."

ðə wɪndoʊz ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs ɑn ðɛɹ saɪɾ ə ðə wɔl lʊkt aʊɾ ɪndə ən æliweɪ. tɑm stʌɾid wʌn ə ðə wɪndoʊz kɛɹfəli bɪfɔɹ dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp dʒʌst ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə skwiz θɹu. ɪt bɛɹli meɪɾ ə saʊnd, nʌθɪŋ ðət cʊɾə bɪn hɝd θɹi fiɾ əweɪ oʊvɝ ðə læfɪŋ ɑɹɡjəmən ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə loʊ wɔl.

The windows on either side of the fireplace on their side of the wall looked out into an alleyway. Thom studied one of the windows carefully before drawing it up just enough for them to squeeze through. It barely made a sound, nothing that could have been heard three feet away over the laughing argument on the other side of the low wall.

wʌns ɪn ði æli, mæt stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə stʃɹit ɹaɪɾ əweɪ, bʌt tɑm kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹm. "nɑt soʊ fæst," ðə ɡlimən toʊl hɪm. "nɑt tɪl wi noʊ wʌt wɝ duɪŋ." tɑm loʊɝd ðə wɪndoʊ əɡɛn əz mʌtʃ əz i kəd fɹəm aʊtsaɪd, ən tɝn tə stʌɾi ði æli.

Once in the alley, Mat started for the street right away, but Thom caught his arm. "Not so fast," the gleeman told him. "Not till we know what we're doing." Thom lowered the window again as much as he could from outside, and turned to study the alley.

ɹænd fɑloʊd tɑmz aɪz. ɪksɛp fəɹ hæf ə dʌzən ɹeɪn bæɹəlz əɡɛns ði ɪn ən ðə nɛks bɪldɪŋ, ə teɪlɝ ʃɑp, ði æli wɑz ɛmpti, ðə hɑɹd-pæk dɝt dʒɹaɪ ən dʌsti.

Rand followed Thom's eyes. Except for half a dozen rain barrels against the inn and the next building, a tailor shop, the alley was empty, the hard-packed dirt dry and dusty.

"waɪ ɑɹ jə duɪŋ ðɪs?" mæt dɪmændəɾ əɡɛn. "jud bi seɪfɝ ɪf jə lɛft ʌs. waɪ ɑɹ jə steɪɪŋ wɪð ʌs?"

"Why are you doing this?" Mat demanded again. "You'd be safer if you left us. Why are you staying with us?"

tɑm stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmənt. "aɪ hæɾ ə nɛfju, oʊɪn," hi sɛd wɛɹəli, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk. hi meɪɾ ə paɪl wɪð ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl əz i tɔkt, kɛɹfəli sɛɾɪŋ ɪz keɪst ɪnstʃɹəməns ɑn tɑp. "maɪ bɹʌðɝz oʊnli sʌn, maɪ oʊnli lɪvɪŋ kɪn. hi ɡɑɾ ɪn tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ aɪ wɑz tu bɪzi wɪð . . . ʌðɝ θɪŋz. aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ aɪ kəɾ əv dʌn, bʌt wən aɪ faɪnəli tʃɹaɪd, ɪt wɑz tu leɪt. oʊɪn daɪɾ ə fju jɪɹz leɪɾɝ. jə kəd seɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ kɪl hɪm." hi stʃɹeɪɾənd ʌp, nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət ðɛm. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz stɪl lɛvəl, bʌt ɹænd ɡlɪmps tɪɹz ɪn ɪz aɪz əz i tɝn ɪz hɛɾ əweɪ. "ɪf aɪ kən kip jə tu fɹi ʌv tɑɹ vəlɑn, meɪbi aɪ kən stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ oʊɪn. weɪt hɪɹ." stɪl əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ aɪz, hi hɝid tə ðə maʊθ ə ði æli, sloʊɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ɪt. æftɝ wʌn kwɪk lʊk ɝaʊnd, hi stʃɹoʊl kæʒəwəli ɪndə ðə stʃɹiɾ ən aʊɾ ə saɪt.

Thom stared at him for a long moment. "I had a nephew, Owyn," he said wearily, shrugging out of his cloak. He made a pile with his blanketroll as he talked, carefully setting his cased instruments on top. "My brother's only son, my only living kin. He got in trouble with the Aes Sedai, but I was too busy with . . . other things. I don't know what I could have done, but when I finally tried, it was too late. Owyn died a few years later. You could say Aes Sedai killed him." He straightened up, not looking at them. His voice was still level, but Rand glimpsed tears in his eyes as he turned his head away. "If I can keep you two free of Tar Valon, maybe I can stop thinking about Owyn. Wait here." Still avoiding their eyes, he hurried to the mouth of the alley, slowing before he reached it. After one quick look around, he strolled casually into the street and out of sight.

mæt hæf ɹoʊz tə fɑloʊ, ðən sɛɾəld bæk. "hi woʊn liv ðiz," hi sɛd, tʌtʃɪŋ ðə lɛðɝ ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz. "ju bɪliv ðət stɔɹi?"

Mat half rose to follow, then settled back. "He won't leave these," he said, touching the leather instrument cases. "You believe that story?"

ɹænd skwɑɾɪd peɪʃənli bɪsaɪd ðə ɹeɪn bæɹəlz. "wʌts ðə mæɾɝ wɪð ju, mæt? jə ɑɹən laɪk ðɪs. aɪ hævən hɝd jə læf ɪn deɪz."

Rand squatted patiently beside the rain barrels. "What's the matter with you, Mat? You aren't like this. I haven't heard you laugh in days."

"aɪ doʊn laɪk biɪŋ hʌntəd laɪk ə ɹæbət," mæt snæpt. hi saɪd, lɛɾɪŋ ɪz hɛd fɔl bæk əɡɛns ðə bɹɪk wɔl ə ði ɪn. ivən laɪk ðəɾ i sim tɛns. hɪz aɪz ʃɪftəd wɛɹəli. "sɑɹi. ɪts ðə ɹʌnɪŋ, ən ɔl ðiz stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, ən . . . ən dʒʌst ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ɪt meɪks mi dʒʌmpi. aɪ lʊk ət sʌmbɑɾi, ən aɪ kæn hɛlp wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf hiz gɑnə tɛl ðə feɪdz əbaʊɾ ʌs, əɹ tʃiɾ ʌs, əɹ ɹɑb ʌs, ɔɹ. . . . laɪt, ɹænd, dʌzn ɪt meɪk jə nɝvəs?"

"I don't like being hunted like a rabbit," Mat snapped. He sighed, letting his head fall back against the brick wall of the inn. Even like that he seemed tense. His eyes shifted warily. "Sorry. It's the running, and all these strangers, and . . . and just everything. It makes me jumpy. I look at somebody, and I can't help wondering if he's going to tell the Fades about us, or cheat us, or rob us, or. . . . Light, Rand, doesn't it make you nervous?"

ɹænd læft, ə kwɪk bɑɹk ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz θɹoʊt. "aɪm tu skɛɹd tə bi nɝvəs."

Rand laughed, a quick bark in the back of his throat. "I'm too scared to be nervous."

"wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd tə hɪz nɛfju?"

"What do you think the Aes Sedai did to his nephew?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ," ɹænd sɛɾ ənizəli. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl ðəɾ i nu ʌv fəɹ ə mæn tə ɡɛɾ ɪndə wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ. "nɑt laɪk ʌs, aɪ ɡɛs."

"I don't know," Rand said uneasily. There was only one kind of trouble that he knew of for a man to get into with Aes Sedai. "Not like us, I guess."

"noʊ. nɑt laɪk ʌs."

"No. Not like us."

fəɹ ə taɪm ðeɪ lin əɡɛns ðə wɔl, nɑt tɔkɪŋ. ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ haʊ lɔŋ ðeɪ weɪɾəd. ə fju mɪnəts, pɹɑbli, bʌɾ ɪt fɛlt laɪk ən aʊɝ, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ tɑm tə kʌm bæk, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ bɑɹɾɪm ən dʒɛlb tə oʊpən ðə wɪndoʊ ən dɪnaʊns əm fəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðən ə mæn tɝn ɪn ət ðə maʊθ ə ði æli, ə tɔl mæn wɪð ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk pʊld ʌp tə haɪɾ ɪz feɪs, ə kloʊk blæk əz naɪɾ əɡɛns ðə laɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit.

For a time they leaned against the wall, not talking. Rand was not sure how long they waited. A few minutes, probably, but it felt like an hour, waiting for Thom to come back, waiting for Bartim and Gelb to open the window and denounce them for Darkfriends. Then a man turned in at the mouth of the alley, a tall man with the hood of his cloak pulled up to hide his face, a cloak black as night against the light of the street.

ɹænd skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fit, wʌn hæn ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðə hɪlt ə tæmz sɔɹd soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ ɪz nʌkəlz hɝt. hɪz maʊθ wɛn dʒɹaɪ, ən noʊ əmaʊn ə swɑloʊɪŋ hɛlpt. mæt ɹoʊz tə ə kɹaʊtʃ wɪð wʌn hæn ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk.

Rand scrambled to his feet, one hand wrapped around the hilt of Tam's sword so hard that his knuckles hurt. His mouth went dry, and no amount of swallowing helped. Mat rose to a crouch with one hand under his cloak.

ðə mæn keɪm kloʊsɝ, ən ɹændz θɹoʊt ɡɹu taɪɾɝ wɪð ɛvɹi stɛp. əbɹʌpli ðə mæn stɑpt ən tɔs bæk ɪz kaʊl. ɹændz niz ɔlmoʊst ɡeɪv weɪ. ɪt wɑz tɑm.

The man came closer, and Rand's throat grew tighter with every step. Abruptly the man stopped and tossed back his cowl. Rand's knees almost gave way. It was Thom.

"wɛl, ɪf jə doʊn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz mi" - ðə ɡlimən ɡɹɪnd - "aɪ ɡɛs ɪts ə ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf dɪsɡaɪz fəɹ ðə ɡeɪts."

"Well, if you don't recognize me" - the gleeman grinned - "I guess it's a good enough disguise for the gates."

tɑm pʊʃt pæst əm ən bɪɡæn tʃɹænsfɝɪŋ θɪŋz fɹəm ɪz pætʃ-kʌvɝd kloʊk tə hɪz nu wʌn soʊ nɪmbli ðət ɹænd kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ ɛni ʌv ðɛm. ðə nu kloʊk wɑz dɑɹk bɹaʊn, ɹænd sɔ naʊ. hi dʒɹu ə dip, ɹæɡəd bɹɛθ; hɪz θɹoʊt stɪl fɛlt əz ɪf ɪt wɝ klʌtʃt ɪn ə fɪst. bɹaʊn, nɑt blæk. mæt stɪl hæɾ ɪz hæn ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk, ən i stɛɹɾ ət tɑmz bæk əz ɪf i wɝ θɪŋkɪŋ ə juzɪŋ ðə hɪɾən dæɡɝ.

Thom pushed past them and began transferring things from his patch-covered cloak to his new one so nimbly that Rand could not make out any of them. The new cloak was dark brown, Rand saw now. He drew a deep, ragged breath; his throat still felt as if it were clutched in a fist. Brown, not black. Mat still had his hand under his cloak, and he stared at Thom's back as if he were thinking of using the hidden dagger.

tɑm ɡlænst ʌp ət ðɛm, ðən ɡeɪv əm ə ʃɑɹpɝ lʊk. "ðɪs ɪz noʊ taɪm tə ɡɛt skɪɾɪʃ." dɛfli hi bɪɡæn foʊldɪŋ ɪz oʊl kloʊk ɪndə ə bʌndəl ɝaʊn ɪz ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz, ɪnsaɪɾ aʊt soʊ ðə pætʃəz wɝ hɪɾən. "wil wɔk aʊɾ ə hɪɹ wʌn əɾ ə taɪm, dʒʌs kloʊs ɪnʌf tə kip itʃ ʌðɝ ɪn saɪt. ʃʊdn bi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪspɛʃli, ðət weɪ. kæn jə slaʊtʃ?" hi æɾəd tə ɹænd. "ðæt haɪɾ ə jʊɹz ɪz əz bæɾ əz ə bænɝ." hi slʌŋ ðə bʌndəl əkɹɔs ɪz bæk ən stʊd, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz hʊd bæk ʌp. hi lʊk nʌθɪŋ laɪk ə waɪt-hɛɹd ɡlimən. hi wɑz dʒʌst ənʌðɝ tʃɹævəlɝ, ə mæn tu pʊɹ tə əfɔɹɾ ə hɔɹs, mʌtʃ lɛs ə kæɹɪdʒ. "lɛts ɡoʊ. wiv weɪstəd tu mʌtʃ taɪm ɔlɹɛɾi."

Thom glanced up at them, then gave them a sharper look. "This is no time to get skittish." Deftly he began folding his old cloak into a bundle around his instrument cases, inside out so the patches were hidden. "We'll walk out of here one at a time, just close enough to keep each other in sight. Shouldn't be remembered especially, that way. Can't you slouch?" he added to Rand. "That height of yours is as bad as a banner." He slung the bundle across his back and stood, drawing his hood back up. He looked nothing like a white-haired gleeman. He was just another traveler, a man too poor to afford a horse, much less a carriage. "Let's go. We've wasted too much time already."

ɹænd əɡɹid fɝvənli, bʌɾ ivən soʊ hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ stɛpɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði æli ɪndə ðə skwɛɹ. nʌn ə ðə spɑɹs skæɾɝɪŋ ə pipəl ɡeɪv əm ə sɛkən lʊk - moʊs dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ əm əɾ ɔl - bʌɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz nɑɾɪd, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə kɹaɪ ʌv dɑɹkfɹɛn ðət kəd tɝn ɔɹɾənɛɹi pipəl ɪndə ə mɑb bɛn ɑn mɝɾɝ. hi ɹæn ɪz aɪz əkɹɔs ði oʊpən ɛɹiə, oʊvɝ pipəl muvɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɑn ðɛɹ deɪli bɪznəs, ən wən i bɹɔɾ əm bæk ə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑz hæfweɪ əkɹɔs ðə skwɛɹ.

Rand agreed fervently, but even so he hesitated before stepping out of the alley into the square. None of the sparse scattering of people gave them a second look - most did not look at them at all - but his shoulders knotted, waiting for the cry of Darkfriend that could turn ordinary people into a mob bent on murder. He ran his eyes across the open area, over people moving about on their daily business, and when he brought them back a Myrddraal was halfway across the square.

wɛɹ ðə feɪd hæd kʌm fɹʌm, hi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɡɛs, bʌɾ ɪt stʃɹoʊd təwɔɹd ðə θɹi ʌv əm wɪð ə sloʊ dɛdlinəs, ə pɹɛɾətɝ wɪð ðə pɹeɪ ʌndɝ ɪts ɡeɪz. pipəl ʃaɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə blæk-kloʊkt ʃeɪp, əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪt. ðə skwɛɹ bɪɡæn tə ɛmpti aʊɾ əz pipəl dɪsaɪɾɪd ðeɪ wɝ niɾəd ɛlswɛɹ.

Where the Fade had come from, he could not begin to guess, but it strode toward the three of them with a slow deadliness, a predator with the prey under its gaze. People shied away from the black-cloaked shape, avoided looking at it. The square began to empty out as people decided they were needed elsewhere.

ðə blæk kaʊl fɹoʊz ɹænd wɛɹ i stʊd. hi tʃɹaɪd tə sʌmən ʌp ðə vɔɪd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz laɪk fʌmbəlɪŋ æftɝ smoʊk. ðə feɪdz hɪɾən ɡeɪz naɪfɛd tə hɪz boʊnz ən tɝn ɪz mɛɹoʊ tə aɪsɪkəlz.

The black cowl froze Rand where he stood. He tried to summon up the void, but it was like fumbling after smoke. The Fade's hidden gaze knifed to his bones and turned his marrow to icicles.

"doʊn lʊk əɾ ɪts feɪs," tɑm mʌɾɝd. hɪz vɔɪs ʃʊk ən kɹækt, ən ɪt saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i wɝ fɔɹsɪŋ ðə wɝdz aʊt. "ðə laɪt bɝn ju, doʊn lʊk əɾ ɪts feɪs!"

"Don't look at its face," Thom muttered. His voice shook and cracked, and it sounded as if he were forcing the words out. "The Light burn you, don't look at its face!"

ɹænd tɔɹ ɪz aɪz əweɪ - hi ɔlmoʊst ɡɹoʊnd; ɪt fɛlt laɪk tɛɹɪŋ ə litʃ ɔf ə hɪz feɪs - bʌɾ ivən stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə stoʊnz ə ðə skwɛɹ i kəd stɪl si ðə mɹdʒɹɑl kʌmɪŋ, ə kæt pleɪɪŋ wɪð maɪs, əmjuzd ət ðɛɹ fibəl ɛfɝts tə ɪskeɪp, əntɪl faɪnəli ðə dʒɔz snæpt ʃʌt. ðə feɪd hæd hæv ðə dɪstəns. "ɑɹ wi dʒʌs gɑnə stæn hɪɹ?" hi mʌmbəld. "wi hæv tə ɹʌn . . . ɡɛɾ əweɪ." bʌɾ i kəd nɑt meɪk ɪz fit muv.

Rand tore his eyes away - he almost groaned; it felt like tearing a leech off of his face - but even staring at the stones of the square he could still see the Myrddraal coming, a cat playing with mice, amused at their feeble efforts to escape, until finally the jaws snapped shut. The Fade had halved the distance. "Are we just going to stand here?" he mumbled. "We have to run . . . get away." But he could not make his feet move.

mæt hæd ðə ɹubi-hɪltɪd dæɡɝ aʊɾ ət læst, ɪn ə tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ hænd. hɪz lɪps wɝ dʒɹɔn bæk fɹəm ɪz tiθ, ə snɑɹl ən ə ɹɪktəs ə fɪɹ.

Mat had the ruby-hilted dagger out at last, in a trembling hand. His lips were drawn back from his teeth, a snarl and a rictus of fear.

"θɪŋk. . . ." tɑm stɑp tə swɑloʊ, ən wɛn ɑn hɔɹsli. "θɪŋk jə kən aʊtʃɹʌn ɪt, də ju, bɔɪ?" hi bɪɡæn tə mʌɾɝ tə hɪmsɛlf; ði oʊnli wɝd ɹænd kəd meɪk aʊt wɑz "oʊɪn." əbɹʌpli tɑm ɡɹaʊld, "aɪ nɛvɝ ʃʊɾə ɡɑɾən mɪkst ʌp wɪð jə bɔɪz. ʃəd nɛvɝ hæv." hi ʃɹʌɡd ðə bʌndəld ɡlimənz kloʊk ɔf ə hɪz bæk ən θɹʌst ɪɾ ɪndə ɹændz ɑɹmz. "teɪk kɛɹ ə ðæt. wən aɪ seɪ ɹʌn, jə ɹʌn ən doʊn stɑp əntɪl jə ɡɛt tə keɪɛmlɪn. ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ. ən ɪn. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðæt, ɪn keɪs. . . . dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt."

"Think. . . ." Thom stopped to swallow, and went on hoarsely. "Think you can outrun it, do you, boy?" He began to mutter to himself; the only word Rand could make out was "Owyn." Abruptly Thom growled, "I never should have gotten mixed up with you boys. Should never have." He shrugged the bundled gleeman's cloak off of his back and thrust it into Rand's arms. "Take care of that. When I say run, you run and don't stop until you get to Caemlyn. The Queen's Blessing. An inn. Remember that, in case. . . . Just remember it."

"aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd," ɹænd sɛd. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑz nɑt twɛnti peɪsɪz əweɪ, naʊ. hɪz fit fɛlt laɪk lɛd weɪts.

"I don't understand," Rand said. The Myrddraal was not twenty paces away, now. His feet felt like lead weights.

"dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt!" tɑm snɑɹəld. "ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ. naʊ. ɹʌn!"

"Just remember it!" Thom snarled. "The Queen's Blessing. Now. RUN!"

hi ɡeɪv əm ə pʊʃ, wʌn hæn ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ ʌv itʃ ə ðɛm, tə ɡɛɾ əm stɑɹɾəd, ən ɹænd stʌmbəld əweɪ ɪn ə lɝtʃɪŋ ɹʌn wɪð mæt əɾ ɪz saɪd.

He gave them a push, one hand on the shoulder of each of them, to get them started, and Rand stumbled away in a lurching run with Mat at his side.

"ɹʌn!" tɑm spɹæŋ ɪndə moʊʃən, tu, wɪð ə lɔŋ, wɝdləs ɹɔɹ. nɑɾ æftɝ ðɛm, bʌt təwɔɹd ðə mɹdʒɹɑl. hɪz hænz flɝɪʃt əz ɪf i wɝ pɝfɔɹmɪŋ əɾ ɪz bɛst, ən dæɡɝz əpɪɹd. ɹænd stɑpt, bʌt mæt pʊld ɪm əlɔŋ.

"RUN!" Thom sprang into motion, too, with a long, wordless roar. Not after them, but toward the Myrddraal. His hands flourished as if he were performing at his best, and daggers appeared. Rand stopped, but Mat pulled him along.

ðə feɪd wɑz dʒʌst əz stɑɹɾəld. ɪts lizɝli peɪs fɔltɝɾ ɪn mɪd-stʃɹaɪd. ɪts hæn swɛp təwɔɹd ðə hɪlt ə ðə blæk sɔɹd hæŋɪŋ əɾ ɪts weɪst, bʌt ðə ɡlimənz lɔŋ lɛɡz kʌvɝd ðə dɪstəns kwɪkli. tɑm kɹæʃt ɪndə ðə mɹdʒɹɑl bɪfɔɹ ðə blæk bleɪd wɑz hæf dʒɹɔn, ən boʊθ wɛn daʊn ɪn ə θɹæʃɪŋ hip. ðə fju pipəl stɪl ɪn ðə skwɛɹ flɛd.

The Fade was just as startled. Its leisurely pace faltered in mid-stride. Its hand swept toward the hilt of the black sword hanging at its waist, but the gleeman's long legs covered the distance quickly. Thom crashed into the Myrddraal before the black blade was half drawn, and both went down in a thrashing heap. The few people still in the square fled.

"ɹʌn!" ði ɛɹ ɪn ðə skwɛɹ flæʃt ən aɪ-sɪɹɪŋ blu, ən tɑm bɪɡæn tə skɹim, bʌɾ ivən ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə skɹim i mænədʒd ə wɝd. "ɹʌn!"

"RUN!" The air in the square flashed an eye-searing blue, and Thom began to scream, but even in the middle of the scream he managed a word. "RUN!"

ɹænd oʊbeɪd. ðə ɡlimənz skɹimz pɝsud hɪm.

Rand obeyed. The gleeman's screams pursued him.

klʌtʃɪŋ tɑmz bʌndəl tə hɪz tʃɛst, hi ɹæn əz hɑɹɾ əz i kʊd. pænɪk spɹɛd fɹəm ðə skwɛɹ aʊt θɹu ðə taʊn əz ɹænd ən mæt flɛɾ ɑn ðə kɹɛst ʌv ə weɪv ə fɪɹ. ʃɑpkipɝz əbændən ðɛɹ ɡʊdz əz ðə bɔɪz pæst. ʃʌɾɝz bæŋ daʊn oʊvɝ stɔɹfɹɑns, ən fɹaɪɾənd feɪsəz əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz ə haʊsəz, ðən vænɪʃt. pipəl u hæd nɑt bɪn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si ɹæn θɹu ðə stʃɹits waɪldli, peɪɪŋ noʊ hid. ðeɪ bʌmpt ɪndə wʌn ənʌðɝ, ən ðoʊz u wɝ nɑk daʊn skɹæmbəl tə ðɛɹ fiɾ əɹ wɝ tʃɹæmpəld. waɪtbɹɪdʒ ɹɔɪld laɪk ə kɪkt æntɪl.

Clutching Thom's bundle to his chest, he ran as hard as he could. Panic spread from the square out through the town as Rand and Mat fled on the crest of a wave of fear. Shopkeepers abandoned their goods as the boys passed. Shutters banged down over storefronts, and frightened faces appeared in the windows of houses, then vanished. People who had not been close enough to see ran through the streets wildly, paying no heed. They bumped into one another, and those who were knocked down scrambled to their feet or were trampled. Whitebridge roiled like a kicked anthill.

əz i ən mæt paʊndɪd təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪts, ɹænd əbɹʌpli ɹɪmɛmbɝd wʌt tɑm hæd sɛɾ əbaʊɾ ɪz haɪt. wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ daʊn, hi kɹaʊtʃt əz bɛst i kəd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ əz ɪf i wɑz kɹaʊtʃɪŋ. bʌt ðə ɡeɪts ðɛmsɛlvz, θɪk wʊd baʊnd wɪð blæk aɪɝn stʃɹæps, stʊɾ oʊpən. ðə tu ɡəttɛndɝz, ɪn stil kæps ən meɪl tunɪks wɔɹn oʊvɝ tʃip-lʊkɪŋ ɹɛd koʊts wɪð waɪt kɑlɝz, fɪŋɡɝd ðɛɹ hælbɝdz ən stɛɹɾ ənizəli ɪndə ðə taʊn. wʌn ə ðɛm ɡlænst ət ɹænd ən mæt, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ði oʊnli wʌnz ɹʌnɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɡeɪts. ə stɛɾi stʃɹim bɔɪl θɹu, pæntɪŋ mɛn klʌtʃɪŋ waɪvz, wipɪŋ wɪmən kæɹiɪŋ beɪbz ən dʒɹæɡɪŋ kɹaɪɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən, peɪl-feɪs kɹæfsmən stɪl ɪn ðɛɹ eɪpɹənz, stɪl hidləsli ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðɛɹ tulz.

As he and Mat pounded toward the gates, Rand abruptly remembered what Thom had said about his height. Without slowing down, he crouched as best he could without looking as if he was crouching. But the gates themselves, thick wood bound with black iron straps, stood open. The two gatetenders, in steel caps and mail tunics worn over cheap-looking red coats with white collars, fingered their halberds and stared uneasily into the town. One of them glanced at Rand and Mat, but they were not the only ones running out of the gates. A steady stream boiled through, panting men clutching wives, weeping women carrying babes and dragging crying children, pale-faced craftsmen still in their aprons, still heedlessly gripping their tools.

ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ wʌn u kəd tɛl wɪtʃ weɪ ðeɪ hæd ɡɔn, ɹænd θɔɾ əz i ɹæn, deɪzd. tɑm. oʊ, laɪt seɪv mi, tɑm.

There would be no one who could tell which way they had gone, Rand thought as he ran, dazed. Thom. Oh, Light save me, Thom.

mæt stæɡɝd bɪsaɪd hɪm, kɑɾ ɪz bæləns, ən ðeɪ ɹæn əntɪl ðə læst ə ðə fliɪŋ pipəl hæd fɔlən əweɪ, ɹæn əntɪl ðə taʊn ən ðə waɪt bɹɪdʒ wɝ fɑɹ aʊɾ ə saɪt bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

Mat staggered beside him, caught his balance, and they ran until the last of the fleeing people had fallen away, ran until the town and the White Bridge were far out of sight behind them.

faɪnəli ɹænd fɛl tə hɪz niz ɪn ðə dʌst, pʊlɪŋ ɛɹ ɹæədli ɪndə hɪz ɹɔ θɹoʊt wɪð ɡɹeɪt ɡʌlps. ðə ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn stʃɹɛtʃt ɛmpti əntɪl ɪt wɑz lɔs tə saɪɾ əmʌŋ bɛɹ tʃɹiz. mæt plʌkt ət hɪm.

Finally Rand fell to his knees in the dust, pulling air raggedly into his raw throat with great gulps. The road behind stretched empty until it was lost to sight among bare trees. Mat plucked at him.

"kʌm ɑn. kʌm ɑn." mæt pæntɪd ðə wɝdz. swɛɾ ən dʌst stʃɹikt ɪz feɪs, ən i lʊkt ɹɛɾi tə kəlæps. "wi hæv tə kip ɡoʊɪŋ."

"Come on. Come on." Mat panted the words. Sweat and dust streaked his face, and he looked ready to collapse. "We have to keep going."

"tɑm," ɹænd sɛd. hi taɪɾənd ɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ðə bʌndəl ə tɑmz kloʊk; ði ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz wɝ hɑɹd lʌmps ɪnsaɪd. "tɑm."

"Thom," Rand said. He tightened his arms around the bundle of Thom's cloak; the instrument cases were hard lumps inside. "Thom."

"hiz dɛd. jə sɔ. jə hɝd. laɪt, ɹænd, hiz dɛd!"

"He's dead. You saw. You heard. Light, Rand, he's dead!"

"ju θɪŋk ɛɡwin ən mɔɪɹeɪn ən ðə ɹɛst ɑɹ dɛd, tu. ɪf ðəɹ dɛd, waɪ ɑɹ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl stɪl hʌntɪŋ ðɛm? ænsɝ mi ðæt?"

"You think Egwene and Moiraine and the rest are dead, too. If they're dead, why are the Myrddraal still hunting them? Answer me that?"

mæt dʒɹɑp tə hɪz niz ɪn ðə dʌs bɪsaɪd hɪm. "ɔl ɹaɪt. meɪbi ðeɪ ɑɹ əlaɪv. bʌt tɑm - jə sɔ! blʌɾ ən æʃəz, ɹænd, ðə seɪm θɪŋ kən hæpən tə ʌs."

Mat dropped to his knees in the dust beside him. "All right. Maybe they are alive. But Thom - You saw! Blood and ashes, Rand, the same thing can happen to us."

ɹænd nɑɾəd sloʊli. ðə ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn əm wɑz stɪl ɛmpti. hi hæd bɪn hæfweɪ ɪkspɛktɪŋ - hoʊpɪŋ, ət list - tə si tɑm əpɪɹ, stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋ, bloʊɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz mʌstæʃɪz tə tɛl əm haʊ mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl ðeɪ wɝ. ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. hi stʃɹʌɡəl tə hɪz fiɾ ən slʌŋ tɑmz bʌndəl ɑn ɪz bæk əlɔŋsaɪɾ ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl. mæt stɛɹɾ ʌp ət hɪm, nɛɹoʊ-aɪɾ ən wɛɹi.

Rand nodded slowly. The road behind them was still empty. He had been halfway expecting - hoping, at least - to see Thom appear, striding along, blowing out his mustaches to tell them how much trouble they were. The Queen's Blessing in Caemlyn. He struggled to his feet and slung Thom's bundle on his back alongside his blanketroll. Mat stared up at him, narrow-eyed and wary.

"lɛts ɡoʊ," ɹænd sɛd, ən stɑɹɾəd daʊn ðə ɹoʊd təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn. hi hɝd mæt mʌɾɝɪŋ, ən æftɝ ə moʊmən i kɑɾ ʌp tə ɹænd.

"Let's go," Rand said, and started down the road toward Caemlyn. He heard Mat muttering, and after a moment he caught up to Rand.

ðeɪ tʃɹʌdʒd əlɔŋ ðə dʌsti ɹoʊd, hɛdz daʊn ən nɑt tɔkɪŋ. ðə wɪn spɔn dʌstdɛv ɪlz ðət wɝld əkɹɔs ðɛɹ pæθ. səmtaɪmz ɹænd lʊk bæk, bʌt ðə ɹoʊd bɪhaɪnd wɑz ɔlweɪz ɛmpti.

They trudged along the dusty road, heads down and not talking. The wind spawned dustdev ils that whirled across their path. Sometimes Rand looked back, but the road behind was always empty.


tʃæptɝ twɛntisɛvən


CHAPTER 27

ʃɛltɝ fɹəm ðə stɔɹm


Shelter From the Storm

pɛɹɪn fɹɛɾɪd oʊvɝ ðə deɪz spɛnt wɪð ðə tuætɑn, tʃɹævlɪŋ saʊθ ən ist ɪn ə lizɝli fæʃən. ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl sɔ noʊ nid tə hɝi; ðeɪ nɛvɝ dɪd. ðə kʌlɝfəl wæɡənz dɪd nɑt ɹoʊl aʊɾ ʌv ə mɔɹnɪŋ əntɪl ðə sʌn wɑz wɛl əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən, ən ðeɪ stɑpt əz ɝli əz mɪɾ æftɝnun ɪf ðeɪ keɪm əkɹɔs ə kəndʒinjəl spɑt. ðə dɑɡz tʃɹɑɾəd izəli əlɔŋsaɪd ðə wæɡənz, ən ɔfən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən dɪd, tu. ðeɪ hæd noʊ dɪfəkəlti ɪn kipɪŋ ʌp. ɛni sədʒɛstʃən ðət ðeɪ maɪt ɡoʊ fɝðɝ, əɹ mɔɹ kwɪkli, wɑz mɛt wɪð læftɝ, əɹ pɝhæps, "ɑ, bʌt wəd jə meɪk ðə pʊɹ hɔɹsəz wɝk soʊ hɑɹd?"

Perrin fretted over the days spent with the Tuatha'an, traveling south and east in a leisurely fashion. The Traveling People saw no need to hurry; they never did. The colorful wagons did not roll out of a morning until the sun was well above the horizon, and they stopped as early as mid afternoon if they came across a congenial spot. The dogs trotted easily alongside the wagons, and often the children did, too. They had no difficulty in keeping up. Any suggestion that they might go further, or more quickly, was met with laughter, or perhaps, "Ah, but would you make the poor horses work so hard?"

hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ ɛlaɪəs dɪd nɑt ʃɛɹ ɪz filɪŋz. ɛlaɪəs wəd nɑt ɹaɪɾ ɑn ðə wæɡənz - hi pɹəfɝd tə wɔk, səmtaɪmz ləpɪŋ əlɔŋ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kɑləm - bʌɾ i nɛvɝ sədʒɛstəd livɪŋ, əɹ pɹɛsɪŋ ɑn əhɛd.

He was surprised that Elyas did not share his feelings. Elyas would not ride on the wagons - he preferred to walk, sometimes loping along at the head of the column - but he never suggested leaving, or pressing on ahead.

ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ bɪɹɾəd mæn ɪn ɪz stʃɹeɪnʒ skɪn kloʊðz wɑz soʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ðə dʒɛntəl tuætɑn ðəɾ i stʊɾ aʊt wɛɹɛvɝ i wɛn əmʌŋ ðə wæɡənz. ivən fɹəm əkɹɔs ðə kæmp ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ ɛlaɪəs fəɹ wʌn ə ðə pipəl, ən nɑt dʒʌs kəz ə kloʊðz. ɛlaɪəs muvd wɪð ðə leɪzi ɡɹeɪs ʌv ə wʊlf, oʊnli ɛmfəsaɪz baɪ hɪz skɪnz ən ɪz fɝ hæt, ɹeɪɾieɪtɪŋ deɪnʒɝ əz nætʃɹəli əz ə faɪɝ ɹeɪɾieɪtəd hit, ən ðə kɑntʃɹæst wɪð ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl wɑz ʃɑɹp. jʌŋ ən oʊld, ðə pipəl wɝ dʒɔɪfəl ɑn ðɛɹ fit. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ deɪnʒɝ ɪn ðɛɹ ɡɹeɪs, oʊnli dɪlaɪt. ðɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹən dɑɹɾɪd əbaʊt fɪld wɪð ðə pjʊɹ zɛst ə muvɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ əmʌŋ ðə tuætɑn, ɡɹeɪbɛɪɹdz ən ɡɹændmʌðɝz, tu, stɪl stɛp laɪtli, ðɛɹ wɔk ə steɪtli dæns noʊ lɛs ɪɡzubɝən fəɹ ɪts dɪɡnəɾi. ɔl ðə pipəl simd ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə dænsɪŋ, ivən wən stændɪŋ stɪl, ivən dʊɹɪŋ ðə ɹɛɹ taɪmz wən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mjuzɪk ɪn ðə kæmp. fɪɾəlz ən fluts, dʌlsɪmɝz ən zɪðɝz ən dʒɹʌmz spʌn hɑɹməni ən kaʊntɝpɔɪn ɝaʊn ðə wæɡənz əɾ ɔlmoʊst ɛni aʊɝ, ɪn kæmp əɹ ɑn ðə muv. dʒɔɪəs sɔŋz, mɛɹi sɔŋz, læfɪŋ sɔŋz, sæd sɔŋz; ɪf sʌmwʌn wɑz əweɪk ɪn ðə kæmp ðəɹ wɑz juʒəwəli mjuzɪk.

The strange bearded man in his strange skin clothes was so different from the gentle Tuatha'an that he stood out wherever he went among the wagons. Even from across the camp there was no mistaking Elyas for one of the People, and not just because of clothes. Elyas moved with the lazy grace of a wolf, only emphasized by his skins and his fur hat, radiating danger as naturally as a fire radiated heat, and the contrast with the Traveling People was sharp. Young and old, the People were joyful on their feet. There was no danger in their grace, only delight. Their children darted about filled with the pure zest of moving, of course, but among the Tuatha'an, graybeards and grandmothers, too, still stepped lightly, their walk a stately dance no less exuberant for its dignity. All the People seemed on the point of dancing, even when standing still, even during the rare times when there was no music in the camp. Fiddles and flutes, dulcimers and zithers and drums spun harmony and counterpoint around the wagons at almost any hour, in camp or on the move. Joyous songs, merry songs, laughing songs, sad songs; if someone was awake in the camp there was usually music.

ɛlaɪəs mɛt fɹɛnli nɑdz ən smaɪlz əɾ ɛvɹi wæɡən i pæst, ən ə tʃɪɹfəl wɝɾ əɾ ɛni faɪɝ wɛɹ i pɔzd. ðɪs mʌs bi ðə feɪs ðə pipəl ɔlweɪz ʃoʊd tə aʊtsaɪɾɝz - oʊpən, smaɪlɪŋ feɪsəz. bʌt pɛɹɪn hæd lɝn ðət hɪɾən bɪniθ ðə sɝfəs wɑz ðə wɛɹinɪs ʌv ə hæf-teɪm dɪɹ. sʌmθɪŋ dip leɪ bɪhaɪn ðə smaɪlz dɝɛktəɾ ət ði ɛmənz fildɝz, sʌmθɪŋ ðət wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ seɪf, sʌmθɪŋ ðət feɪɾəd oʊnli slaɪtli oʊvɝ ðə deɪz. wɪð ɛlaɪəs ðə wɛɹinɪs wɑz stʃɹɔŋ, laɪk dip sʌmɝ hit ʃɪmɝɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ən ɪt dɪd nɑt feɪd. wən i wɑz nɑt lʊkɪŋ ðeɪ wɑtʃt ɪm oʊpənli əz ɪf ənʃʊɹ wʌɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə du. wən i wɔkt əkɹɔs ðə kæmp, fit ɹɛɾi fəɹ dænsɪŋ simd ɹɛɾi fəɹ flaɪt, əz wɛl.

Elyas met friendly nods and smiles at every wagon he passed, and a cheerful word at any fire where he paused. This must be the face the People always showed to outsiders - open, smiling faces. But Perrin had learned that hidden beneath the surface was the wariness of a half-tame deer. Something deep lay behind the smiles directed at the Emond's Fielders, something that wondered if they were safe, something that faded only slightly over the days. With Elyas the wariness was strong, like deep summer heat shimmering in the air, and it did not fade. When he was not looking they watched him openly as if unsure what he was going to do. When he walked across the camp, feet ready for dancing seemed ready for flight, as well.

ɛlaɪəs wɑz sɝɾənli noʊ mɔɹ kʌmftəɹbəl wɪð ðɛɹ weɪ ʌv ðə lif ðən ðeɪ wɝ wɪð hɪm. hɪz maʊθ wɔɹ ə pɝmənən twɪst wən i wɑz ɝaʊn ðə tuætɑn. ɪt wɑz nɑt kwaɪt kɑndəsɛnʃən ən sɝɾənli nɑt kəntɛmpt, bʌt lʊkt əz ðoʊ hi wəd ɹæðɝ bi ɛlswɛɹ ðən wɛɹ i wɑz, ɔlmoʊst ɛniwɛɹ ɛls. jɛt wɛnɛvɝ pɛɹɪn bɹɔɾ ʌp livɪŋ, ɛlaɪəs meɪd suðɪŋ nɔɪzɪz əbaʊt ɹɛstɪŋ, dʒʌs fəɹ ə fju deɪz.

Elyas was certainly no more comfortable with their Way of the Leaf than they were with him. His mouth wore a permanent twist when he was around the Tuatha'an. It was not quite condescension and certainly not contempt, but looked as though he would rather be elsewhere than where he was, almost anywhere else. Yet whenever Perrin brought up leaving, Elyas made soothing noises about resting, just for a few days.

"ju hæd hɑɹd deɪz bɪfɔɹ jə mɛt mi," ɛlaɪəs sɛd, ðə θɝɾ əɹ fɔɹθ taɪm i æskt, "æn jəl əv hɑɹɾɝ stɪl əhɛd, wɪð tʃɹɑləks ən hæfmən æftɝ ju, ən ɛɛs sədaɪ fəɹ fɹɛnz." hi ɡɹɪn ɝaʊn ə maʊθfʊl ʌv iləz dʒɹaɪd-æpəl paɪ. pɛɹɪn stɪl faʊn ɪz jɛloʊ-aɪd ɡeɪz dɪskənsɝɾɪŋ, ivən wən i wɑz smaɪlɪŋ. pɝhæps ivən mɔɹ wən i wɑz smaɪlɪŋ; smaɪlz sɛldəm tʌtʃt ðoʊz hʌntɝz aɪz. ɛlaɪəs laʊnʒd bɪsaɪd ɹənz faɪɝ, əz juʒəwəl ɹəfjuzɪŋ tə sɪɾ ɑn ðə lɔɡz dʒɹɔn ʌp fəɹ ðə pɝpəs. "doʊn bi ɪn sətʃ ə blʌɾi hɝi tə pʊt jɝsɛlf ɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ hænz."

"You had hard days before you met me," Elyas said, the third or fourth time he asked, "and you'll have harder still ahead, with Trollocs and Halfmen after you, and Aes Sedai for friends." He grinned around a mouthful of Ila's dried-apple pie. Perrin still found his yellow-eyed gaze disconcerting, even when he was smiling. Perhaps even more when he was smiling; smiles seldom touched those hunter's eyes. Elyas lounged beside Raen's fire, as usual refusing to sit on the logs drawn up for the purpose. "Don't be in such a bloody hurry to put yourself in Aes Sedai hands."

"wʌɾ ɪf ðə feɪdz faɪn ʌs? wʌts tə kip əm fɹəm ɪɾ ɪf wi dʒʌst sɪt hɪɹ, weɪɾɪŋ? θɹi wʊlvz kæn hoʊld əm ɔf, ən ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl woʊn bi ɛni hɛlp. ðeɪ woʊn ivən dɪfɛn ðɛmsɛlvz. ðə tʃɹɑləks wɪl bʊtʃɝ ðɛm, ən ɪɾəl bi əɹ fɔlt. ɛniweɪ, wɪv tə liv əm sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ. ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl bi sunɝ."

"What if the Fades find us? What's to keep them from it if we just sit here, waiting? Three wolves can't hold them off, and the Traveling People won't be any help. They won't even defend themselves. The Trollocs will butcher them, and it will be our fault. Anyway, we have to leave them sooner or later. It might as well be sooner."

"sʌmθɪŋ tɛlz mi tə weɪt. dʒʌst ə fju deɪz."

"Something tells me to wait. Just a few days."

"sʌmθɪŋ!"

"Something!"

"ɹɪlæks, læd. teɪk laɪf əz ɪt kʌmz. ɹʌn wən juv tə, faɪt wən jə mʌst, ɹɛst wən jə kæn."

"Relax, lad. Take life as it comes. Run when you have to, fight when you must, rest when you can."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt, sʌmθɪŋ?"

"What are you talking about, something?"

"hæv səm ə ðɪs paɪ. ilə dʌzn laɪk mi, bʌt ʃi ʃʊɹli fidz mi wɛl wən aɪ vɪzət. ɔlweɪz ɡʊd fuɾ ɪn ðə pipəlz kæmps."

"Have some of this pie. Ila doesn't like me, but she surely feeds me well when I visit. Always good food in the People's camps."

"wʌt 'sʌmθɪŋ'?" pɛɹɪn dɪmændəd. "ɪf jə noʊ sʌmθɪŋ jə ɑɹən tɛlɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs. . . ."

"What 'something'?" Perrin demanded. "If you know something you aren't telling the rest of us. . . ."

ɛlaɪəs fɹaʊn ət ðə pis ə paɪ ɪn ɪz hænd, ðən sɛɾ ɪt daʊn ən dʌstɪɾ ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ. "sʌmθɪŋ," hi sɛd faɪnəli, wɪð ə ʃɹʌɡ ʌv ɪz ʃoʊldɝz əz ɪf i dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt kəmplitli hɪmsɛlf. "sʌmθɪŋ tɛlz mi ɪts ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə weɪt. ə fju mɔɹ deɪz. aɪ doʊnt ɡɛt filɪŋz laɪk ðɪs ɔfən, bʌt wən aɪ du, aɪv lɝn tə tʃɹʌs ðɛm. ðeɪv seɪv maɪ laɪf ɪn ðə pæst. ðɪs taɪm ɪts dɪfɹənt, sʌmhaʊ, bʌɾ ɪts ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðæts klɪɹ. jə wɑnə ɹʌn ɑn, ðən ɹʌn ɑn. nɑt mi."

Elyas frowned at the piece of pie in his hand, then set it down and dusted his hands together. "Something," he said finally, with a shrug of his shoulders as if he did not understand it completely himself. "Something tells me it's important to wait. A few more days. I don't get feelings like this often, but when I do, I've learned to trust them. They've saved my life in the past. This time it's different, somehow, but it's important. That's clear. You want to run on, then run on. Not me."

ðət wɑz ɔl i wəd seɪ, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni taɪmz pɛɹɪn æskt. hi leɪ əbaʊt, tɔkɪŋ wɪð ɹən, iɾɪŋ, næpɪŋ wɪð ɪz hæɾ oʊvɝ ɪz aɪz, ən ɹəfjuz tə dɪskʌs livɪŋ. sʌmθɪŋ toʊld ɪm tə weɪt. sʌmθɪŋ toʊld ɪm ɪt wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. hi wəd noʊ wən ɪt wɑz taɪm tə ɡoʊ. hæv səm paɪ, læd. doʊn læðɝ jɝsɛlf. tʃɹaɪ səm ə ðɪs stu. ɹɪlæks.

That was all he would say, no matter how many times Perrin asked. He lay about, talking with Raen, eating, napping with his hat over his eyes, and refused to discuss leaving. Something told him to wait. Something told him it was important. He would know when it was time to go. Have some pie, lad. Don't lather yourself. Try some of this stew. Relax.

pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf ɹɪlæks. ət naɪɾ i wɑndɝɾ əmʌŋ ðə ɹeɪnboʊ wæɡənz wɝiɪŋ, əz mʌtʃ kəz noʊ wʌn ɛls sim tə si ɛniθɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊɾ əz fəɹ ɛni ʌðɝ ɹizən. ðə tuætɑn sæŋ ən dænst, kʊkt ən eɪɾ ɝaʊn ðɛɹ kæmpfaɪɝz - fɹuts ən nʌts, bɛɹiz ən vɛdʒtəbəlz; ðeɪ eɪt noʊ mit - ən wɛn əbaʊɾ ə mɪɹiəd dəmɛstɪk tʃɔɹz əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ ə kɛɹ ɪn ðə wɝld. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ɹæn ən pleɪɾ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, haɪd-ænd-sik əmʌŋ ðə wæɡənz, klaɪmɪŋ ɪn ðə tʃɹiz ɝaʊn ðə kæmp, læfɪŋ ən ɹoʊlɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ðə dɑɡz. nɑɾ ə kɛɹ ɪn ðə wɝld, fəɹ ɛniwʌn.

Perrin could not make himself relax. At night he wandered among the rainbow wagons worrying, as much because no one else seemed to see anything to worry about as for any other reason. The Tuatha'an sang and danced, cooked and ate around their campfires - fruits and nuts, berries and vegetables; they ate no meat - and went about a myriad domestic chores as if they had not a care in the world. The children ran and played everywhere, hide-and-seek among the wagons, climbing in the trees around the camp, laughing and rolling on the ground with the dogs. Not a care in the world, for anyone.

wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛm, hi ɪtʃt tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ. ɡoʊ, bɪfɔɹ wi bɹɪŋ ðə hʌntɝz daʊn ɑn ðɛm. ðeɪ tʊk əs ɪn, ən wi ɹipeɪ ðɛɹ kaɪndnəs baɪ ɛndeɪnʒɝɪŋ ðɛm. ət lis ðeɪv ɹizən tə bi laɪthɑɹɾɪd. nʌθɪŋ ɪz hʌntɪŋ ðɛm. bʌt ðə ɹɛst ʌv ʌs. . . .

Watching them, he itched to get away. Go, before we bring the hunters down on them. They took us in, and we repay their kindness by endangering them. At least they have reason to be lighthearted. Nothing is hunting them. But the rest of us. . . .

ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə ɡɛɾ ə wɝd wɪð ɛɡwin. iðɝ ʃi wɑz tɔkɪŋ wɪð ilə, ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ ɪn ə weɪ ðət sɛd noʊ mɛn wɝ wɛlkəm, əɹ ʃi wɑz dænsɪŋ wɪð ɛɹæm, swɪŋɪŋ ɹaʊn ən ɹaʊn tə ðə fluts ən fɪɾəlz ən dʒɹʌmz, tə tunz ðə tuætɑn hæd ɡæðɝd fɹəm ɔl oʊvɝ ðə wɝld, əɹ tə ðə ʃɑɹp, tʃɹɪlɪŋ sɔŋz ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl ðɛmsɛlvz, ʃɑɹp wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ kwɪk əɹ sloʊ. ðeɪ nu mɛni sɔŋz, səm i ɹɛkəɡnaɪz fɹəm hoʊm, ðoʊ ɔfən ʌndɝ dɪfɹənt neɪmz ðən ðeɪ wɝ kɔld ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. "θɹi ɡɝlz ɪn ðə mɛdoʊ," fəɹ ɪnstəns, ðə tɪŋkɝz neɪmd "pɹɪɾi meɪdz dænsɪŋ," ən ðeɪ sɛd "ðə wɪn fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ" wɑz kɔld "hɑɹd ɹeɪn fɔlɪŋ" ɪn səm lænz ən "bɛɹɪnz ɹitʃɹit" ɪn ʌðɝz. wən i æskt, nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ, fəɹ "ðə tɪŋkɝ əz maɪ pɑts," ðeɪ fɛl ɔl oʊvɝ ðɛmsɛlvz læfɪŋ. ðeɪ nu ɪt, bʌɾ əz "tɔs ðə fɛðɝz."

It was hard to get a word with Egwene. Either she was talking with Ila, their heads together in a way that said no men were welcome, or she was dancing with Aram, swinging round and round to the flutes and fiddles and drums, to tunes the Tuatha'an had gathered from all over the world, or to the sharp, trilling songs of the Traveling People themselves, sharp whether they were quick or slow. They knew many songs, some he recognized from home, though often under different names than they were called in the Two Rivers. "Three Girls in the Meadow," for instance, the Tinkers named "Pretty Maids Dancing," and they said "The Wind From the North" was called "Hard Rain Falling" in some lands and "Berin's Retreat" in others. When he asked, not thinking, for "The Tinker Has My Pots," they fell all over themselves laughing. They knew it, but as "Toss the Feathers."

hi kəɾ ʌndɝstænd wɑntɪŋ tə dæns tə ðə pipəlz sɔŋz. bæk ɪn ɛmənz fil noʊ wʌn kənsɪɾɝd ɪm mɔɹ ðən ən æɾəkwət dænsɝ, bʌt ðiz sɔŋz tʌɡd əɾ ɪz fit, ən i θɔɾ i hæd nɛvɝ dænst soʊ lɔŋ, əɹ soʊ hɑɹd, əɹ soʊ wɛl ɪn ɪz laɪf. hɪpnɑɾɪk, ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪz blʌd paʊn ɪn ɹɪðəm tə ðə dʒɹʌmz.

He could understand wanting to dance to the People's songs. Back in Emond's Field no one considered him more than an adequate dancer, but these songs tugged at his feet, and he thought he had never danced so long, or so hard, or so well in his life. Hypnotic, they made his blood pound in rhythm to the drums.

ɪt wɑz ðə sɛkən ivnɪŋ wən fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm pɛɹɪn sɔ wɪmən dæns tə səm ə ðə sloʊ sɔŋz. ðə faɪɝz bɝn loʊ, ən ðə naɪt hʌŋ kloʊs ɝaʊn ðə wæɡənz, ən fɪŋɡɝz tæpt ə sloʊ ɹɪðəm ɑn ðə dʒɹʌmz. fɝst wʌn dʒɹʌm, ðən ənʌðɝ, əntɪl ɛvɹi dʒɹʌm ɪn ðə kæmp kɛp ðə seɪm loʊ, ɪnsɪstən bit. ðəɹ wɑz saɪləns ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə dʒɹʌmz. ə ɡɝl ɪn ə ɹɛd dʒɹɛs sweɪɾ ɪndə ðə laɪt, lusənɪŋ əɹ ʃɔl. stʃɹɪŋz ə bidz hʌŋ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ən ʃi hæd kɪkt ɔf əɹ ʃuz. ə flut bɪɡæn ðə mɛləɾi, weɪlɪŋ sɔfli, ən ðə ɡɝl dænst. aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt ɑɹmz spɹɛɾ əɹ ʃɔl bɪhaɪn hɝ; hɝ hɪps ənʒəleɪtɪd əz əɹ bɛɹ fit ʃʌfəl tə ðə biɾ ə ðə dʒɹʌmz. ðə ɡɝlz dɑɹk aɪz fæsən ɑn pɛɹɪn, ən əɹ smaɪl wɑz əz sloʊ əz əɹ dæns. ʃi tɝn ɪn smɔl sɝkəlz, smaɪlɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət hɪm.

It was the second evening when for the first time Perrin saw women dance to some of the slow songs. The fires burned low, and the night hung close around the wagons, and fingers tapped a slow rhythm on the drums. First one drum, then another, until every drum in the camp kept the same low, insistent beat. There was silence except for the drums. A girl in a red dress swayed into the light, loosening her shawl. Strings of beads hung in her hair, and she had kicked off her shoes. A flute began the melody, wailing softly, and the girl danced. Outstretched arms spread her shawl behind her; her hips undulated as her bare feet shuffled to the beat of the drums. The girl's dark eyes fastened on Perrin, and her smile was as slow as her dance. She turned in small circles, smiling over her shoulder at him.

hi swɑloʊd hɑɹd. ðə hiɾ ɪn ɪz feɪs wɑz nɑt fɹəm ðə faɪɝ. ə sɛkənd ɡɝl dʒɔɪn ðə fɝst, ðə fɹɪnʒ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃɔlz ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪn taɪm tə ðə dʒɹʌmz ən ðə sloʊ ɹoʊteɪʃən ə ðɛɹ hɪps. ðeɪ smaɪld ət hɪm, ən i klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt hɔɹsli. hi wɑz əfɹeɪd tə lʊk ɝaʊnd; hɪz feɪs wɑz əz ɹɛɾ əz ə bit, ən ɛniwʌn u wɑz nɑt wɑtʃɪŋ ðə dænsɝz wɑz pɹɑbli læfɪŋ ət hɪm. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt.

He swallowed hard. The heat in his face was not from the fire. A second girl joined the first, the fringe on their shawls shaking in time to the drums and the slow rotation of their hips. They smiled at him, and he cleared his throat hoarsely. He was afraid to look around; his face was as red as a beet, and anyone who was not watching the dancers was probably laughing at him. He was sure of it.

əz kæʒəwəli əz i kəd mænədʒ, hi slɪɾ ɔf ðə lɔɡ əz ɪf i wɝ dʒʌst ɡɛɾɪŋ kʌmftəɹbəl, bʌɾ i kɛɹfəli ɛndəɾ ʌp lʊkɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə faɪɝ, əweɪ fɹəm ðə dænsɝz. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðəɾ ɪn ɛmənz fild. dænsɪŋ wɪð ðə ɡɝlz ɑn ðə ɡɹin ɑn ə fistdeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ivən kʌm kloʊs. fəɹ wʌns i wɪʃt ðət ðə wɪnd wəd pɪk ʌp, tə kul ɪm ɔf.

As casually as he could manage, he slid off the log as if he were just getting comfortable, but he carefully ended up looking away from the fire, away from the dancers. There was nothing like that in Emond's Field. Dancing with the girls on the Green on a feastday did not even come close. For once he wished that the wind would pick up, to cool him off.

ðə ɡɝlz dænst ɪndə hɪz fild ə vju əɡɛn, oʊnli naʊ ðeɪ wɝ θɹi. wʌn ɡeɪv ɪm ə slaɪ wɪŋk. hɪz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd fɹæntəkəli. laɪt, hi θɔt. wʌt də aɪ də naʊ? wʌt wəd ɹænd du? hi noʊz əbaʊt ɡɝlz.

The girls danced into his field of view again, only now they were three. One gave him a sly wink. His eyes darted frantically. Light, he thought. What do I do now? What would Rand do? He knows about girls.

ðə dænsɪŋ ɡɝlz læf sɔfli; bidz klɪkt əz ðeɪ tɔs ðɛɹ lɔŋ hɛɹ ɑn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ən i θɔɾ ɪz feɪs wəd bɝn ʌp. ðən ə slaɪtli oʊldɝ wʊmən dʒɔɪn ðə ɡɝlz, tə ʃoʊ ðɛm haʊ ɪt wɑz dʌn. wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn, hi ɡeɪv ʌp ɔltəɡɛðɝ ən ʃʌɾ ɪz aɪz. ivən bɪhaɪn ɪz aɪlɪdz ðɛɹ læftɝ tɔntɪɾ ən tɪkəld. ivən bɪhaɪn ɪz aɪlɪdz i kəd stɪl si ðɛm. swɛt biɾɪd ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛd, ən i wɪʃt fəɹ ðə wɪnd.

The dancing girls laughed softly; beads clicked as they tossed their long hair on their shoulders, and he thought his face would burn up. Then a slightly older woman joined the girls, to show them how it was done. With a groan, he gave up altogether and shut his eyes. Even behind his eyelids their laughter taunted and tickled. Even behind his eyelids he could still see them. Sweat beaded on his forehead, and he wished for the wind.

əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ɹən ðə ɡɝlz dɪd nɑt dæns ðət dæns ɔfən, ən ðə wɪmən ɹɛɹli dɪd, ən əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ɛlaɪəs ɪt wɑz θæŋks tə pɛɹɪnz blʌʃəz ðət ðeɪ dɪd soʊ ɛvɹi naɪt ðɛɹæftɝ.

According to Raen the girls did not dance that dance often, and the women rarely did, and according to Elyas it was thanks to Perrin's blushes that they did so every night thereafter.

"aɪ hæv tə θæŋk ju," ɛlaɪəs toʊl hɪm, hɪz toʊn soʊbɝ ən sɑləm. "ɪts dɪfɹənt wɪð jə jʌŋ fɛloʊz, bʌɾ ət maɪ eɪdʒ ɪt teɪks mɔɹ ðən ə faɪɝ tə wɔɹm maɪ boʊnz." pɛɹɪn skaʊld. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛlaɪəsəz bæk əz i wɔkt əweɪ ðət sɛɾ ivən ɪf nʌθɪŋ ʃoʊd, hi wɑz læfɪŋ ɪnsaɪd.

"I have to thank you," Elyas told him, his tone sober and solemn. "It's different with you young fellows, but at my age it takes more than a fire to warm my bones." Perrin scowled. There was something about Elyas's back as he walked away that said even if nothing showed, he was laughing inside.

pɛɹɪn sun lɝn bɛɾɝ ðən tə lʊk əweɪ fɹəm ðə dænsɪŋ wɪmən ən ɡɝlz, ðoʊ ðə wɪŋks ən smaɪlz stɪl meɪɾ ɪm wɪʃ i kʊd. wʌn wʊɾə bɪn ɔl ɹaɪt, meɪbi - bʌt faɪv əɹ sɪks, wɪð ɛvɹiwʌn wɑtʃɪŋ. . . . hi nɛvɝ dɪɾ ɪntaɪɝli kɑŋkɝ ɪz blʌʃəz.

Perrin soon learned better than to look away from the dancing women and girls, though the winks and smiles still made him wish he could. One would have been all right, maybe - but five or six, with everyone watching. . . . He never did entirely conquer his blushes.

ðən ɛɡwin bɪɡæn lɝnɪŋ ðə dæns. tu ʌv ðə ɡɝlz u hæd dæns ðət fɝs naɪt tɔt hɝ, klæpɪŋ ðə ɹɪðəm waɪl ʃi ɹɪpiɾɪd ðə ʃʌflɪŋ stɛps wɪð ə bɑɹoʊd ʃɔl sweɪɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. pɛɹɪn stɑɹɾəd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ, ðən dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz waɪzɝ nɑt tə kɹæk ɪz tiθ. wən ðə ɡɝlz æɾəd ðə hɪp muvməns ɛɡwin stɑɹɾəd læfɪŋ, ən ðə θɹi ɡɝlz fɛl ɡɪɡəlɪŋ ɪndə wʌn ənʌðɝz ɑɹmz. bʌɾ ɛɡwin pɝsəvɪɹd, wɪð əɹ aɪz ɡlɪsnɪŋ ən bɹaɪt spɑts ə kʌlɝ ɪn əɹ tʃiks.

Then Egwene began learning the dance. Two of the girls who had danced that first night taught her, clapping the rhythm while she repeated the shuffling steps with a borrowed shawl swaying behind her. Perrin started to say something, then decided it was wiser not to crack his teeth. When the girls added the hip movements Egwene started laughing, and the three girls fell giggling into one another's arms. But Egwene persevered, with her eyes glistening and bright spots of color in her cheeks.

ɛɹæm wɑtʃt əɹ dænsɪŋ wɪð ə hɑt, hʌŋɡɹi ɡeɪz. ðə hænsəm jʌŋ tuætɑn hæd ɡɪvən əɹ ə stʃɹɪŋ ə blu bidz ðət ʃi wɔɹ ɔl ðə taɪm. wɝid fɹaʊnz naʊ ɹipleɪs ðə smaɪlz ilə hæd wɔɹn wən ʃi fɝs noʊɾəst əɹ ɡɹændsʌnz ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ɛɡwin. pɛɹɪn ɹizɑlv tə kip ə kloʊs aɪ ɑn jʌŋ mæstɝ ɛɹæm.

Aram watched her dancing with a hot, hungry gaze. The handsome young Tuatha'an had given her a string of blue beads that she wore all the time. Worried frowns now replaced the smiles Ila had worn when she first noticed her grandson's interest in Egwene. Perrin resolved to keep a close eye on young Master Aram.

wʌns i mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ɛɡwin əloʊn, bɪsaɪɾ ə wæɡən peɪntəɾ ɪn ɡɹin ən jɛloʊ. "ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ jɝsɛlf, ɑɹən ju?" hi sɛd.

Once he managed to get Egwene alone, beside a wagon painted in green and yellow. "Enjoying yourself, aren't you?" he said.

"waɪ ʃʊdn aɪ?" ʃi fɪŋɡɝd ðə blu bidz ɝaʊn əɹ nɛk, smaɪlɪŋ ət ðɛm. "wi doʊn ɔl əv tə wɝk ət biɪŋ mɪzɝəbəl, ðə weɪ jə du. doʊnt wi dɪzɝv ə lɪɾəl tʃæns tə ɛndʒɔɪ aʊɝsɛlvz?"

"Why shouldn't I?" She fingered the blue beads around her neck, smiling at them. "We don't all have to work at being miserable, the way you do. Don't we deserve a little chance to enjoy ourselves?"

ɛɹæm stʊd nɑt fɑɹ ɔf - hi nɛvɝ ɡɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ɛɡwin - wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst, ə lɪɾəl smaɪl ɑn ɪz feɪs, hæf smʌɡnəs ən hæf tʃælənʒ. pɛɹɪn loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "aɪ θɔt jə wɑntəd tə ɡɛt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. jə woʊn lɝn tə bi ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hɪɹ."

Aram stood not far off - he never got far from Egwene - with his arms folded across his chest, a little smile on his face, half smugness and half challenge. Perrin lowered his voice. "I thought you wanted to get to Tar Valon. You won't learn to be an Aes Sedai here."

ɛɡwin tɔst əɹ hɛd. "æn aɪ θɔt jə dɪdn laɪk mi wɑntɪŋ tə bɪkʌm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ," ʃi sɛd, tu switli.

Egwene tossed her head. "And I thought you didn't like me wanting to become an Aes Sedai," she said, too sweetly.

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz, dʒju bɪliv wɝ seɪf hɪɹ? ɑɹ ðiz pipəl seɪf wɪð əs hɪɹ? eɪ feɪd kəd faɪn əs ɛnitaɪm."

"Blood and ashes, do you believe we're safe here? Are these people safe with us here? A Fade could find us anytime."

hɝ hæn tʃɹɛmbəld ɑn ðə bidz. ʃi loʊɝɾ ɪɾ ən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "wʌtɛvɝ ɪz gɑnə hæpən wɪl hæpən wɛðɝ wi liv tədeɪ əɹ nɛkst wik. ðæts wʌɾ aɪ bɪliv naʊ. ɛndʒɔɪ jɝsɛlf, pɛɹɪn. ɪt maɪt bi ðə læs tʃæns wi hæv."

Her hand trembled on the beads. She lowered it and took a deep breath. "Whatever is going to happen will happen whether we leave today or next week. That's what I believe now. Enjoy yourself, Perrin. It might be the last chance we have."

ʃi bɹʌʃt ɪz tʃik sædli wɪð əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ðən ɛɹæm hɛld aʊɾ ɪz hæn tə hɝ, ən ʃi dɑɹɾɪd tə hɪm, ɔlɹɛɾi læfɪŋ əɡɛn. əz ðeɪ ɹæn əweɪ tə wɛɹ fɪɾəlz sæŋ, ɛɹæm flæʃt ə tʃɹaɪʌmfənt ɡɹɪn oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət pɛɹɪn əz ɪf tə seɪ, ʃiz nɑt jʊɹz, bʌt ʃɪl bi maɪn.

She brushed his cheek sadly with her fingers. Then Aram held out his hand to her, and she darted to him, already laughing again. As they ran away to where fiddles sang, Aram flashed a triumphant grin over his shoulder at Perrin as if to say, she is not yours, but she will be mine.

ðeɪ wɝ ɔl fɔlɪŋ tu mʌtʃ ʌndɝ ðə spɛl ə ðə pipəl, pɛɹɪn θɔt. ɛlaɪəs ɪz ɹaɪt. ðeɪ doʊn əv tə tʃɹaɪ tə kənvɝt jə tə ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif. ɪt sips ɪndə ju.

They were all falling too much under the spell of the People, Perrin thought. Elyas is right. They don't have to try to convert you to the Way of the Leaf. It seeps into you.

ilə hæd teɪkən wʌn lʊk əɾ ɪm hʌɾəlɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə wɪnd, ðən pɹədust ə θɪk wʊl kloʊk aʊɾ ə hɝ wæɡən; ə dɑɹk ɡɹin kloʊk, hi wɑz pliz tə si, æftɝ ɔl ðə ɹɛdz ən jɛloʊz. əz i swʌŋ ɪt ɹaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, θɪŋkɪŋ wʌɾ ə wʌndɝ ɪt wɑz ðət ðə kloʊk wɑz bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ hɪm, ilə sɛd pɹɪmli, "ɪt kəd fɪt bɛɾɝ." ʃi ɡlænst ət ði æks əɾ ɪz bɛlt, ən wən ʃi lʊkt ʌp əɾ ɪm əɹ aɪz wɝ sæɾ əbʌv əɹ smaɪl. "ɪt kəd fɪt mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ."

Ila had taken one look at him huddling out of the wind, then produced a thick wool cloak out of her wagon; a dark green cloak, he was pleased to see, after all the reds and yellows. As he swung it round his shoulders, thinking what a wonder it was that the cloak was big enough for him, Ila said primly, "It could fit better." She glanced at the axe at his belt, and when she looked up at him her eyes were sad above her smile. "It could fit much better."

ɔl ðə tɪŋkɝz dɪd ðæt. ðɛɹ smaɪlz nɛvɝ slɪpt, ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɛni hɛzəteɪʃən ɪn ðɛɹ ɪnvɪteɪʃənz tə dʒɔɪn əm fəɹ ə dʒɹɪŋk əɹ tə lɪsən tə ðə mjuzɪk, bʌt ðɛɹ aɪz ɔlweɪz tʌtʃt ði æks, ən i kəd fil wʌt ðeɪ θɔt. ə tul ə vaɪələns. ðəɹ ɪz nɛvɝ ɛni ɪkskjus fəɹ vaɪələns tə ənʌðɝ hjumən biɪŋ. ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif.

All the Tinkers did that. Their smiles never slipped, there was never any hesitation in their invitations to join them for a drink or to listen to the music, but their eyes always touched the axe, and he could feel what they thought. A tool of violence. There is never any excuse for violence to another human being. The Way of the Leaf.

səmtaɪmz i wɑntəd tə ʃaʊɾ ət ðɛm. ðəɹ wɝ tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə wɝld, ən feɪdz. ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz u wəd kʌt daʊn ɛvɹi lif. ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑz aʊt ðɛɹ, ən ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif wəd bɝn ɪn bælzəmənz aɪz. stʌbɝnli hi kəntɪnjud tə wɛɹ ði æks. hi tʊk tə kipɪŋ ɪz kloʊk θɹoʊn bæk, ivən wən ɪt wɑz wɪndi, soʊ ðə hæf-mun bleɪd wɑz nɛvɝ hɪɾən. naʊ ən əɡɛn ɛlaɪəs lʊkt kwɪtsɪkli ət ðə wɛpən hæŋɪŋ hɛvi əɾ ɪz saɪɾ ən ɡɹɪn ət hɪm, ðoʊz jɛloʊ aɪz simɪŋ tə ɹiɾ ɪz maɪnd. ðəɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ ɪm kʌvɝ ði æks. ɔlmoʊst.

Sometimes he wanted to shout at them. There were Trollocs in the world, and Fades. There were those who would cut down every leaf. The Dark One was out there, and the Way of the Leaf would burn in Ba'alzamon's eyes. Stubbornly he continued to wear the axe. He took to keeping his cloak thrown back, even when it was windy, so the half-moon blade was never hidden. Now and again Elyas looked quizzically at the weapon hanging heavy at his side and grinned at him, those yellow eyes seeming to read his mind. That almost made him cover the axe. Almost.

ɪf ðə tuætɑn kæmp wɑz ə sɔɹs ə kɑnstən ɪɹɪteɪʃən, ət list ɪz dʒɹimz wɝ nɔɹməl ðɛɹ. səmtaɪmz i woʊk ʌp swɛɾɪŋ fɹəm ə dʒɹim ə tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz stɔɹmɪŋ ɪndə ðə kæmp, ɹeɪnboʊ-kʌlɝd wæɡənz tɝnɪŋ tə bɑnfaɪɝz fɹəm hɝl tɔɹtʃɪz, pipəl fɔlɪŋ ɪn pulz ə blʌd, mɛn ən wɪmən ən tʃɪlʒɹən u ɹæn ən skɹimd ən daɪd bʌt meɪd noʊ ɛfɝt tə dɪfɛn ðɛmsɛlvz əɡɛnst slæʃɪŋ saɪð-laɪk sɔɹdz. naɪɾ æftɝ naɪɾ i boʊltəɾ əpɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk, pæntɪŋ ən ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ɪz æks bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪz ðə wæɡənz wɝ nɑɾ ɪn fleɪmz, ðət noʊ blʌɾi-mʌzəld ʃeɪps snɑɹəld oʊvɝ tɔɹn ən twɪstəd bɑɾiz lɪɾɝɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd. bʌt ðoʊz wɝ ɔɹɾənɛɹi naɪtmɛɹz, ən ɑdli kʌmfɝɾɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ weɪ. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛvɝ ə pleɪs fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn tə bi ɪn ɪz dʒɹimz, ɪt wɑz ɪn ðoʊz, bʌɾ i wɑz nɑt. noʊ bælzəmən. dʒʌst ɔɹɾənɛɹi naɪtmɛɹz.

If the Tuatha'an camp was a source of constant irritation, at least his dreams were normal there. Sometimes he woke up sweating from a dream of Trollocs and Fades storming into the camp, rainbow-colored wagons turning to bonfires from hurled torches, people falling in pools of blood, men and women and children who ran and screamed and died but made no effort to defend themselves against slashing scythe-like swords. Night after night he bolted upright in the dark, panting and reaching for his axe before he realized the wagons were not in flames, that no bloody-muzzled shapes snarled over torn and twisted bodies littering the ground. But those were ordinary nightmares, and oddly comforting in their way. If there was ever a place for the Dark One to be in his dreams, it was in those, but he was not. No Ba'alzamon. Just ordinary nightmares.

hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə ðə wʊlvz, ðoʊ, wən i wɑz əweɪk. ðeɪ kɛp ðɛɹ dɪstəns fɹəm ðə kæmps, ən fɹəm ðə kæɹəvæn ɑn ðə muv, bʌɾ i ɔlweɪz nu wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ. hi kəd fil ðɛɹ kəntɛmp fəɹ ðə dɑɡz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə tuætɑn. nɔɪzi bists u hæd fɝɡɑɾən wʌt ðɛɹ dʒɔz wɝ fɔɹ, hæd fɝɡɑɾən ðə teɪst ʌv wɔɹm blʌd; ðeɪ maɪt fɹaɪɾən hjumənz, bʌt ðeɪ wəd slɪŋk əweɪ ɑn ðɛɹ bɛliz ɪf ðə pæk ɛvɝ keɪm. itʃ deɪ hɪz əwɛɹnəs wɑz ʃɑɹpɝ, mɔɹ klɪɹ.

He was aware of the wolves, though, when he was awake. They kept their distance from the camps, and from the caravan on the move, but he always knew where they were. He could feel their contempt for the dogs guarding the Tuatha'an. Noisy beasts who had forgotten what their jaws were for, had forgotten the taste of warm blood; they might frighten humans, but they would slink away on their bellies if the pack ever came. Each day his awareness was sharper, more clear.

dæpəl ɡɹu mɔɹ ɪmpeɪʃənt wɪð ɛvɹi sʌnsɛt. ðəɾ ɛlaɪəs wɑntəd tə də ðɪs θɪŋ ə teɪkɪŋ ðə hjumənz saʊθ meɪɾ ɪt wɝθ duɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪf ɪt mʌs bi dʌn, ðən lɛɾ ɪt bi dʌn. lɛt ðɪs sloʊ tʃɹævəl ɛnd. wʊlvz wɝ mɛn tə ɹoʊm, ən ʃi dɪd nɑt laɪk biɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə pæk soʊ lɔŋ. ɪmpeɪʃəns bɝn ɪn wɪnd, tu. hʌntɪŋ wɑz wɝs ðən pʊɹ hɪɹ, ən i dɪspaɪz lɪvɪŋ ɑn fil maɪs, sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ kʌbz tə stɔk waɪl lɝnɪŋ tə hʌnt, fɪt fud fəɹ ði oʊld, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ eɪbəl tə pʊl daʊn ə dɪɹ əɹ hæmstʃɹɪŋ ə waɪld ɑks. səmtaɪmz wɪn θɔt ðət bɝn hæd bɪn ɹaɪt; liv hjumən tʃɹʌbəlz tə hjumənz. bʌɾ i wɑz wɛɹi ʌv sətʃ θɔts wən dæpəl wɑz ɝaʊnd, ən ivən mɔɹ soʊ ɝaʊn hɑpɝ. hɑpɝ wɑz ə skɑɹɾ ən ɡɹɪzəl faɪɾɝ, ɪmpæsɪv wɪð ðə nɑlədʒ ə jɪɹz, wɪð ɡaɪl ðət mɔɹ ðən meɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ ʌv wɪtʃ eɪdʒ maɪɾ əv ɹɑb hɪm. fəɹ hjumənz i kɛɹd nʌθɪŋ, bʌt dæpəl wɪʃt ðɪs θɪŋ dʌn, ən hɑpɝ wəd weɪɾ əz ʃi weɪɾəd ən ɹʌn əz ʃi ɹæn. wʊlf əɹ mæn, bʊl əɹ bɛɹ, wʌtɛvɝ tʃælənʒd dæpəl wəd faɪn hɑpɝz dʒɔz weɪɾɪŋ tə sɛn ɪm tə ðə lɔŋ slip. ðət wɑz ðə hoʊl ə laɪf fəɹ hɑpɝ, ən ðət kɛpt wɪn kɔʃəs, ən dæpəl sim tə ɪɡnɔɹ ðə θɔts ə boʊθ.

Dapple grew more impatient with every sunset. That Elyas wanted to do this thing of taking the humans south made it worth doing, but if it must be done, then let it be done. Let this slow travel end. Wolves were meant to roam, and she did not like being away from the pack so long. Impatience burned in Wind, too. Hunting was worse than poor here, and he despised living on field mice, something for cubs to stalk while learning to hunt, fit food for the old, no longer able to pull down a deer or hamstring a wild ox. Sometimes Wind thought that Burn had been right; leave human troubles to humans. But he was wary of such thoughts when Dapple was around, and even more so around Hopper. Hopper was a scarred and grizzled fighter, impassive with the knowledge of years, with guile that more than made up for anything of which age might have robbed him. For humans he cared nothing, but Dapple wished this thing done, and Hopper would wait as she waited and run as she ran. Wolf or man, bull or bear, Whatever challenged Dapple would find Hopper's jaws waiting to send him to the long sleep. That was the whole of life for Hopper, and that kept Wind cautious, and Dapple seemed to ignore the thoughts of both.

ɔl ʌv ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ɪn pɛɹɪnz maɪnd. fɝvənli hi wɪʃt fəɹ keɪɛmlɪn, fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn ən tɑɹ vəlɑn. ivən ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ænsɝz, ðəɹ kəd bi ən ɛn tə ɪt. ɛlaɪəs lʊkt ət hɪm, ən i wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə jɛloʊ-aɪd mæn nu. pliz, lɛt ðəɹ bi ən ɛnd.

All of it was clear in Perrin's mind. Fervently he wished for Caemlyn, for Moiraine and Tar Valon. Even if there were no answers, there could be an end to it. Elyas looked at him, and he was sure the yellow-eyed man knew. Please, let there be an end.

ðə dʒɹim bɪɡæn mɔɹ plɛzənli ðən moʊst i hæɾ ə leɪt. hi wɑz əɾ ælsbɛt luhənz kɪtʃən teɪbəl, ʃɑɹpənɪŋ ɪz æks wɪð ə stoʊn. mɪstʃɹəs luhən nɛvɝ əlaʊd fɔɹdʒ wɝk, əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət smækt ʌv ɪt, tə bi bɹɔɾ ɪndə ðə haʊs. mæstɝ luhən ivən hæd tə teɪk əɹ naɪvz aʊtsaɪd tə ʃɑɹpən ðɛm. bʌt ʃi tɛndəɾ əɹ kʊkɪŋ ən nɛvɝ sɛɾ ə wɝɾ əbaʊt ði æks. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ ivən seɪ ɛniθɪŋ wən ə wʊlf ɛntɝd fɹəm dipɝ ɪn ðə haʊs ən kɝld ʌp bɪtwin pɛɹɪn ən ðə dɔɹ tə ðə jɑɹd. pɛɹɪn wɛn ɑn ʃɑɹpənɪŋ; ɪt wəd bi taɪm tə juz ɪt, sun.

The dream began more pleasantly than most he had of late. He was at Alsbet Luhhan's kitchen table, sharpening his axe with a stone. Mistress Luhhan never allowed forge work, or anything that smacked of it, to be brought into the house. Master Luhhan even had to take her knives outside to sharpen them. But she tended her cooking and never said a word about the axe. She did not even say anything when a wolf entered from deeper in the house and curled up between Perrin and the door to the yard. Perrin went on sharpening; it would be time to use it, soon.

əbɹʌpli ðə wʊlf ɹoʊz, ɹʌmbəlɪŋ dip ɪn ɪts θɹoʊt, ðə θɪk ɹʌf ə fɝ ɑn ɪts nɛk ɹaɪzɪŋ. bælzəmən stɛpt ɪndə ðə kɪtʃən fɹəm ðə jɑɹd. mɪstʃɹəs luhən wɛn ɑn wɪð əɹ kʊkɪŋ.

Abruptly the wolf rose, rumbling deep in its throat, the thick ruff of fur on its neck rising. Ba'alzamon stepped into the kitchen from the yard. Mistress Luhhan went on with her cooking.

pɛɹɪn skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fit, ɹeɪzɪŋ ði æks, bʌt bælzəmən ɪɡnɔɹd ðə wɛpən, kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə wʊlf, ɪnstɛd. fleɪmz dænst wɛɹ ɪz aɪz ʃəd bi. "ɪz ðɪs wʌt juv tə pɹətɛk ju? wɛl, aɪ hæv feɪs ðɪs bɪfɔɹ. mɛni taɪmz bɪfɔɹ."

Perrin scrambled to his feet, raising the axe, but Ba'alzamon ignored the weapon, concentrating on the wolf, instead. Flames danced where his eyes should be. "Is this what you have to protect you? Well, I have faced this before. Many times before."

hi kɹʊkəɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ, ən ðə wʊlf haʊld əz faɪɝ bɝst aʊɾ ʌv ɪts aɪz ən ɪɹz ən maʊθ, aʊɾ ʌv ɪts skɪn. ðə stɛntʃ ə bɝnɪŋ miɾ ən hɛɹ fɪl ðə kɪtʃən. ælsbɛt luhən lɪftəd ðə lɪɾ ɑn ə pɑɾ ən stɝd wɪð ə wʊɾən spun.

He crooked a finger, and the wolf howled as fire burst out of its eyes and ears and mouth, out of its skin. The stench of burning meat and hair filled the kitchen. Alsbet Luhhan lifted the lid on a pot and stirred with a wooden spoon.

pɛɹɪn dʒɹɑp ði æks ən dʒʌmp fɔɹwɝd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə biɾ aʊt ðə fleɪmz wɪð ɪz hænz. ðə wʊlf kɹʌmpəl tə blæk æʃ bɪtwin ɪz pɑmz. stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ʃeɪpləs paɪl ə tʃɑɹ ɑn mɪstʃɹəs luhənz klin-swɛp flɔɹ, hi bækt əweɪ. hi wɪʃt i kəd waɪp ðə ɡɹisi sʊt fɹəm ɪz hænz, bʌt ðə θɔɾ ə skɹʌbɪŋ ɪɾ ɔf ɑn ɪz kloʊðz tɝn ɪz stʌmək. hi snætʃt ʌp ði æks, ɡɹɪpɪŋ ðə hæft əntɪl ɪz nʌkəlz kɹækt.

Perrin dropped the axe and jumped forward, trying to beat out the flames with his hands. The wolf crumpled to black ash between his palms. Staring at the shapeless pile of char on Mistress Luhhan's clean-swept floor, he backed away. He wished he could wipe the greasy soot from his hands, but the thought of scrubbing it off on his clothes turned his stomach. He snatched up the axe, gripping the haft until his knuckles cracked.

"liv mi əloʊn!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. mɪstʃɹəs luhən tæp ðə spun ɑn ðə ɹɪm ə ðə pɑɾ ən ɹipleɪs ðə lɪd, hʌmɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf.

"Leave me alone!" he shouted. Mistress Luhhan tapped the spoon on the rim of the pot and replaced the lid, humming to herself.

"ju kænɑt ɹʌn fɹəm mi," bælzəmən sɛd. "ju kænɑt haɪd fɹəm mi. ɪf jə ɑɹ ðə wʌn, jə ɑɹ maɪn." ðə hit fɹəm ðə faɪɝz ə hɪz feɪs fɔɹs pɛɹɪn əkɹɔs ðə kɪtʃən əntɪl ɪz bæk keɪm ʌp əɡɛns ðə wɔl. mɪstʃɹəs luhən oʊpən ði ʌvən tə tʃɛk əɹ bɹɛd. "ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld wɪl kənsum ju," bælzəmən sɛd. "aɪ mɑɹk jə maɪn!" hi flʌŋ aʊɾ ɪz klɛntʃt hæn əz ɪf θɹoʊɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ; wən ɪz fɪŋɡɝz oʊpənd, ə ɹeɪvən stʃɹikt ət pɛɹɪnz feɪs.

"You cannot run from me," Ba'alzamon said. "You cannot hide from me. If you are the one, you are mine." The heat from the fires of his face forced Perrin across the kitchen until his back came up against the wall. Mistress Luhhan opened the oven to check her bread. "The Eye of the World will consume you," Ba'alzamon said. "I mark you mine!" He flung out his clenched hand as if throwing something; when his fingers opened, a raven streaked at Perrin's face.

pɛɹɪn skɹimd əz ðə blæk bik pɪɹst ɪz lɛft aɪ . . .

Perrin screamed as the black beak pierced his left eye . . .

. . . ən sæɾ ʌp, klʌtʃɪŋ ɪz feɪs, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə slipɪŋ wæɡənz ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl. sloʊli hi loʊɝɾ ɪz hænz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ peɪn, noʊ blʌd. bʌɾ i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt, ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə stæbɪŋ æɡəni.

. . . and sat up, clutching his face, surrounded by the sleeping wagons of the Traveling People. Slowly he lowered his hands. There was no pain, no blood. But he could remember it, remember the stabbing agony.

hi ʃʌɾɝəd, ən sʌɾənli ɛlaɪəs wɑz skwɑɾɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ɪn ðə pɹidɔn, wʌn hæn aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt əz ɪf tə ʃeɪk ɪm əweɪk. bɪɑn ðə tʃɹiz wɛɹ ðə wæɡənz leɪ, ðə wʊlvz haʊld, wʌn ʃɑɹp kɹaɪ fɹəm θɹi θɹoʊts. hi ʃɛɹd ðɛɹ sɛnseɪʃənz. faɪɝ. peɪn. faɪɝ. heɪt. heɪt! kɪl!

He shuddered, and suddenly Elyas was squatting beside him in the predawn, one hand outstretched as if to shake him awake. Beyond the trees where the wagons lay, the wolves howled, one sharp cry from three throats. He shared their sensations. Fire. Pain. Fire. Hate. Hate! Kill!

"jɛs," ɛlaɪəs sɛd sɔfli. "ɪɾ ɪz taɪm. ɡɛɾ ʌp, bɔɪ. ɪts taɪm fəɹ əs tə ɡoʊ."

"Yes," Elyas said softly. "It is time. Get up, boy. It's time for us to go."

pɛɹɪn skɹæmbəld aʊɾ ə hɪz blæŋkəts. waɪl i wɑz stɪl bʌndəlɪŋ ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl, ɹən keɪm aʊɾ ə hɪz wæɡən, ɹʌbɪŋ slip fɹəm ɪz aɪz. ðə sikɝ ɡlænst ət ðə skaɪ ən fɹoʊz hæfweɪ daʊn ðə stɛps, hɪz hænz stɪl ɹeɪz tə hɪz feɪs. oʊnli hɪz aɪz muvd əz i stʌɾid ðə skaɪ ɪntɛnli, ðoʊ pɛɹɪn kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd wʌɾ i wɑz lʊkɪŋ æt. ə fju klaʊdz hʌŋ ɪn ði ist, ʌndɝsaɪdz stʃɹikt wɪð pɪŋk fɹəm ðə sʌn jɛt tə ɹaɪz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɛls tə si. ɹən sim tə lɪsən, əz wɛl, ən smɛl ði ɛɹ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saʊn ɪksɛp ðə wɪn ɪn ðə tʃɹiz ən noʊ smɛl bʌt ðə feɪn smoʊki ɹɛmnən ə læs naɪts kæmpfaɪɝz.

Perrin scrambled out of his blankets. While he was still bundling his blanketroll, Raen came out of his wagon, rubbing sleep from his eyes. The Seeker glanced at the sky and froze halfway down the steps, his hands still raised to his face. Only his eyes moved as he studied the sky intently, though Perrin could not understand what he was looking at. A few clouds hung in the east, undersides streaked with pink from the sun yet to rise, but there was nothing else to see. Raen seemed to listen, as well, and smell the air, but there was no sound except the wind in the trees and no smell but the faint smoky remnant of last night's campfires.

ɛlaɪəs ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ɪz oʊn skænti bɪlɔŋɪŋz, ən ɹən keɪm ðə ɹɛst ə ðə weɪ daʊn. "wi mʌs tʃeɪnʒ ðə dɝɛkʃən wi tʃɹævəl, maɪ oʊl fɹɛnd." ðə sikɝ lʊkt ənizəli ət ðə skaɪ əɡɛn. "wi ɡoʊ ənʌðɝ weɪ ðɪs deɪ. wɪl jə bi kʌmɪŋ wɪð ʌs?" ɛlaɪəs ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən ɹən nɑɾəd əz ɪf i hæd noʊn ɔl əlɔŋ. "wɛl, teɪk kɛɹ, maɪ oʊl fɹɛnd. ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt tədeɪ. . . ." hi stɑɹɾəd tə lʊk ʌp wʌns mɔɹ, bʌt pʊld ɪz aɪz bæk daʊn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹoʊz əbʌv ðə wæɡən tɑps. "aɪ θɪŋk ðə wæɡənz wɪl ɡoʊ ist. pɝhæps ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. pɝhæps wɪl faɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ, ən steɪ ðəɹ əwaɪl."

Elyas returned with his own scanty belongings, and Raen came the rest of the way down. "We must change the direction we travel, my old friend." The Seeker looked uneasily at the sky again. "We go another way this day. Will you be coming with us?" Elyas shook his head, and Raen nodded as if he had known all along. "Well, take care, my old friend. There is something about today. . . ." He started to look up once more, but pulled his eyes back down before they rose above the wagon tops. "I think the wagons will go east. Perhaps all the way to the Spine of the World. Perhaps we'll find a stedding, and stay there awhile."

"tʃɹʌbəl nɛvɝ ɛntɝz ðə stɛɾɪŋ," ɛlaɪəs əɡɹid. "bʌt ði oʊɡiɝ ɑɹ nʌn tu oʊpən tə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz."

"Trouble never enters the stedding," Elyas agreed. "But the Ogier are none too open to strangers."

"ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz oʊpən tə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl," ɹən sɛd, ən ɡɹɪnd. "bɪsaɪdz, ivən oʊɡiɝ əv pɑts ən θɪŋz tə mɛnd. kʌm, lɛɾ əs əv səm bɹɛkfəst, ən wɪl tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt."

"Everyone is open to the Traveling People," Raen said, and grinned. "Besides, even Ogier have pots and things to mend. Come, let us have some breakfast, and we'll talk about it."

"noʊ taɪm," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. "wi muv ɑn tədeɪ, tu. əz sun əz pɑsəbəl. ɪts ə deɪ fəɹ muvɪŋ, ɪt simz."

"No time," Elyas said. "We move on today, too. As soon as possible. It's a day for moving, it seems."

ɹən tʃɹaɪd tə kənvɪns ɪm tə ət list steɪ lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ fud, ən wən ilə əpɪɹd fɹəm ðə wæɡən wɪð ɛɡwin, ʃi æɾəd əɹ ɑɹɡjəməns, ðoʊ nɑɾ əz stʃɹɛnjuəsli əz əɹ hʌzbənd. ʃi sɛɾ ɔl ə ðə ɹaɪt wɝdz, bʌɾ əɹ pəlaɪtnəs wɑz stɪf, ən ɪt wɑz pleɪn ʃi wəd bi ɡlæd tə si ɛlaɪəsəz bæk, ɪf nɑɾ ɛɡwinz.

Raen tried to convince him to at least stay long enough for food, and when Ila appeared from the wagon with Egwene, she added her arguments, though not as strenuously as her husband. She said all of the right words, but her politeness was stiff, and it was plain she would be glad to see Elyas's back, if not Egwene's.

ɛɡwin dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs ðə ɹɪɡɹɛtfəl, saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊks ilə ɡeɪv hɝ. ʃi æskt wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn, ən pɛɹɪn pɹipɛɹd hɪmsɛlf fəɹ əɹ tə seɪ ʃi wɑntəd tə steɪ wɪð ðə tuætɑn, bʌt wən ɛlaɪəs ɪkspleɪnd ʃi oʊnli nɑɾəd θɔtfəli ən hɝid bæk ɪndə ðə wæɡən tə ɡæðɝ əɹ θɪŋz.

Egwene did not notice the regretful, sidelong looks Ila gave her. She asked what was going on, and Perrin prepared himself for her to say she wanted to stay with the Tuatha'an, but when Elyas explained she only nodded thoughtfully and hurried back into the wagon to gather her things.

faɪnəli ɹən θɹu ʌp ɪz hænz. "ɔl ɹaɪt. aɪ doʊnt noʊ ðəɾ aɪ hæv ɛvɝ lɛɾ ə vɪzəɾɝ liv ðɪs kæmp wɪθaʊɾ ə fɛɹwɛl fist, bʌt. . . ." ənsɝteɪnli, hɪz aɪz ɹeɪz təwɔɹd ðə skaɪ əɡɛn. "wɛl, wi niɾ ən ɝli stɑɹɾ aʊɝsɛlvz, aɪ θɪŋk. pɝhæps wɪl iɾ əz wi dʒɝni. bʌɾ ət lis lɛɾ ɛvɹiwʌn seɪ ɡʊdbaɪ."

Finally Raen threw up his hands. "All right. I don't know that I have ever let a visitor leave this camp without a farewell feast, but. . . ." Uncertainly, his eyes raised toward the sky again. "Well, we need an early start ourselves, I think. Perhaps we will eat as we journey. But at least let everyone say goodbye."

ɛlaɪəs stɑɹɾəd tə pɹoʊtɛst, bʌt ɹən wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi hɝiɪŋ fɹəm wæɡən tə wæɡən, paʊndɪŋ ɑn ðə dɔɹz wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn əweɪk. baɪ ðə taɪm ə tɪŋkɝ keɪm, liɾɪŋ bɛlə, ðə hoʊl kæmp hæd tɝn aʊɾ ɪn ðɛɹ faɪnəst ən bɹaɪɾəst, ə mæs ə kʌlɝ ðət meɪd ɹən ən iləz ɹɛd-ænd-jɛloʊ wæɡən sim ɔlmoʊs pleɪn. ðə bɪɡ dɑɡz stʃɹoʊl θɹu ðə kɹaʊd wɪð ðɛɹ tʌŋz lɑlɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ maʊðz, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn tə skɹætʃ ðɛɹ ɪɹz, waɪl pɛɹɪn ən ði ʌðɝz ɛndʒjʊɹd hændʃeɪk æftɝ hændʃeɪk ən hʌɡ æftɝ hʌɡ. ðə ɡɝlz u hæd dænst ɛvɹi naɪt wəd nɑt bi kəntɛnt wɪð ʃeɪkɪŋ hænz, ən ðɛɹ hʌɡz meɪd pɛɹɪn sʌɾənli wɪʃ i wɑz nɑt livɪŋ æftɝ ɔl - əntɪl i ɹɪmɛmbɝd haʊ mɛni ʌðɝz wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ, ən ðən ɪz feɪs ɔlmoʊs mætʃt ðə sikɝz wæɡən.

Elyas started to protest, but Raen was already hurrying from wagon to wagon, pounding on the doors where there was no one awake. By the time a Tinker came, leading Bela, the whole camp had turned out in their finest and brightest, a mass of color that made Raen and Ila's red-and-yellow wagon seem almost plain. The big dogs strolled through the crowd with their tongues lolling out of their mouths, looking for someone to scratch their ears, while Perrin and the others endured handshake after handshake and hug after hug. The girls who had danced every night would not be content with shaking hands, and their hugs made Perrin suddenly wish he was not leaving after all - until he remembered how many others were watching, and then his face almost matched the Seeker's wagon.

ɛɹæm dʒɹu ɛɡwin ə lɪɾəl əsaɪd. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt hɪɹ wʌɾ i hæd tə seɪ tə hɝ oʊvɝ ðə nɔɪz ʌv ɡʊdbaɪz, bʌt ʃi kɛpt ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd, sloʊli ət fɝst, ðən mɔɹ fɝmli əz i bɪɡæn tə dʒɛstʃɝ pliɾɪŋli. hɪz feɪs ʃɪftəd fɹəm pliɾɪŋ tə ɑɹɡjuɪŋ, bʌt ʃi kəntɪnjud tə ʃeɪk əɹ hɛd stʌbɝnli əntɪl ilə ɹɛskjuɾ əɹ wɪð ə fju ʃɑɹp wɝdz tə hɝ ɡɹændsʌn. skaʊlɪŋ, ɛɹæm pʊʃt əweɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd, əbændənɪŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ðə fɛɹwɛl. ilə wɑtʃt ɪm ɡoʊ, hɛzəteɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə kɔlɪŋ ɪm bæk. ʃiz ɹɪlivd, tu, pɛɹɪn θɔt. ɹɪlivd i dʌznt wɑnə ɡoʊ wɪð əs - wɪð ɛɡwin.

Aram drew Egwene a little aside. Perrin could not hear what he had to say to her over the noise of goodbyes, but she kept shaking her head, slowly at first, then more firmly as he began to gesture pleadingly. His face shifted from pleading to arguing, but she continued to shake her head stubbornly until Ila rescued her with a few sharp words to her grandson. Scowling, Aram pushed away through the crowd, abandoning the rest of the farewell. Ila watched him go, hesitating on the point of calling him back. She's relieved, too, Perrin thought. Relieved he doesn't want to go with us - with Egwene.

wən i hæd ʃeɪkən ɛvɹi hæn ɪn ðə kæmp ət list wʌns ən hʌɡd ɛvɹi ɡɝl ət lis twaɪs, ðə kɹaʊd muv bæk, oʊpənɪŋ ə lɪɾəl speɪs ɝaʊn ɹən ən ilə, ən ðə θɹi vɪzəɾɝz.

When he had shaken every hand in the camp at least once and hugged every girl at least twice, the crowd moved back, opening a little space around Raen and Ila, and the three visitors.

"ju keɪm ɪn pis," ɹən ɪntoʊnd, boʊɪŋ fɔɹməli, hænz ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. "dɪpɑɹt naʊ ɪn pis. ɔlweɪz wɪl əɹ faɪɝz wɛlkəm ju, ɪn pis. ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif ɪz pis."

"You came in peace," Raen intoned, bowing formally, hands on his chest. "Depart now in peace. Always will our fires welcome you, in peace. The Way of the Leaf is peace."

"pis bi ɑn jə ɔlweɪz," ɛlaɪəs ɹɪplaɪd, "æn ɑn ɔl ðə pipəl." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən æɾəd, "aɪ wɪl faɪn ðə sɔŋ, əɹ ənʌðɝ wɪl faɪn ðə sɔŋ, bʌt ðə sɔŋ wɪl bi sʌŋ, ðɪs jɪɹ əɹ ɪn ə jɪɹ tə kʌm. əz ɪt wʌns wɑz, soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi əɡɛn, wɝld wɪθaʊɾ ɛnd."

"Peace be on you always," Elyas replied, "and on all the People." He hesitated, then added, "I will find the song, or another will find the song, but the song will be sung, this year or in a year to come. As it once was, so shall it be again, world without end."

ɹən blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, ən ilə lʊkt kəmplitli flæbɝɡæstɪd, bʌɾ ɔl ði ʌðɝ tuætɑn mɝmɝɾ ɪn ɹɪplaɪ, "wɝld wɪθaʊɾ ɛnd. wɝld ən taɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɛnd." ɹən ən ɪz waɪf hɝidli sɛd ðə seɪm æftɝ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls.

Raen blinked in surprise, and Ila looked completely flabbergasted, but all the other Tuatha'an murmured in reply, "World without end. World and time without end." Raen and his wife hurriedly said the same after everyone else.

ðən ɪt ɹɪli wɑz taɪm tə ɡoʊ. ə fju læs fɛɹwɛlz, ə fju læst ædmənɪʃənz tə teɪk kɛɹ, ə fju læst smaɪlz ən wɪŋks, ən ðeɪ wɝ meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə kæmp. ɹən əkʌmpəniɾ əm əz fɑɹ əz ði ɛdʒ ə ðə tʃɹiz, ə pɛɹ ə ðə dɑɡz kəvɔɹɾɪŋ baɪ hɪz saɪd.

Then it really was time to go. A few last farewells, a few last admonitions to take care, a few last smiles and winks, and they were making their way out of the camp. Raen accompanied them as far as the edge of the trees, a pair of the dogs cavorting by his side.

"tʃɹuli, maɪ oʊl fɹɛnd, jə mʌs teɪk ɡɹeɪt kɛɹ. ðɪs deɪ. . . . ðəɹ ɪz wɪkədnəs lus ɪn ðə wɝld, aɪ fɪɹ, ən wʌtɛvɝ jə pɹitɛnd, jə ɑɹ nɑt soʊ wɪkəd ðəɾ ɪɾəl nɑt ɡɑbəl jə ʌp."

"Truly, my old friend, you must take great care. This day. . . . There is wickedness loose in the world, I fear, and Whatever you pretend, you are not so wicked that it will not gobble you up."

"pis bi ɑn ju," ɛlaɪəs sɛd.

"Peace be on you," Elyas said.

"æn ɑn ju," ɹən sɛd sædli.

"And on you," Raen said sadly.

wən ɹən wɑz ɡɔn, ɛlaɪəs skaʊld ət faɪndɪŋ ði ʌðɝ tu lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. "soʊ aɪ doʊn bɪliv ɪn ðɛɹ ful sɔŋ," hi ɡɹaʊld. "noʊ nid tə meɪk əm fil bæd baɪ mɛsɪŋ ʌp ðɛɹ sɛɹəmoʊni, wɑz ðɛɹ? aɪ toʊl jə ðeɪ sɛɾ ə stɔɹ baɪ sɛɹəmoʊni səmtaɪmz."

When Raen was gone, Elyas scowled at finding the other two looking at him. "So I don't believe in their fool song," he growled. "No need to make them feel bad by messing up their ceremony, was there? I told you they set a store by ceremony sometimes."

"ʌv kɔɹs," ɛɡwin sɛd dʒɛnli. "noʊ niɾ əɾ ɔl." ɛlaɪəs tɝn əweɪ mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf.

"Of course," Egwene said gently. "No need at all." Elyas turned away muttering to himself.

dæpəl, wɪnd, ən hɑpɝ keɪm tə ɡɹiɾ ɛlaɪəs, nɑt fɹɑlɪkɪŋ əz ðə dɑɡz hæd dʌn, bʌɾ ə dɪɡnəfaɪd miɾɪŋ ʌv ikwəlz. pɛɹɪn kɑt wʌt pæs bɪtwin ðɛm. faɪɝ aɪz. peɪn. hɑɹtfæŋ. dɛθ. hɑɹtfæŋ. pɛɹɪn nu wʌt ðeɪ mɛnt. ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðeɪ wɝ tɛlɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪz dʒɹim. ðɛɹ dʒɹim.

Dapple, Wind, and Hopper came to greet Elyas, not frolicking as the dogs had done, but a dignified meeting of equals. Perrin caught what passed between them. Fire eyes. Pain. Heartfang. Death. Heartfang. Perrin knew what they meant. The Dark One. They were telling about his dream. Their dream.

hi ʃɪvɝɾ əz ðə wʊlvz ɹeɪnʒd aʊɾ əhɛd, skaʊɾɪŋ ðə weɪ. ɪt wɑz ɛɡwinz tɝn tə ɹaɪd bɛlə, ən i wɔk bɪsaɪd hɝ. ɛlaɪəs lɛd, əz juʒəwəl, ə stɛɾi, ɡɹaʊnd-iɾɪŋ peɪs.

He shivered as the wolves ranged out ahead, scouting the way. It was Egwene's turn to ride Bela, and he walked beside her. Elyas led, as usual, a steady, ground-eating pace.

pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪz dʒɹim. hi hæd θɔt ðət ðə wʊlvz meɪɾ əm seɪf. nɑt kəmplit. æksɛpt. fʊl hɑɹt. fʊl maɪnd. jə stɪl stʃɹʌɡəl. oʊnli kəmplit wən jə æksɛpt.

Perrin did not want to think about his dream. He had thought that the wolves made them safe. Not complete. Accept. Full heart. Full mind. You still struggle. Only complete when you accept.

hi fɔɹs ðə wʊlvz aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd, ən blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. hi hæd nɑt noʊn i kəd də ðæt. hi dɪtɝmənd nɑt tə lɛɾ əm bæk ɪn əɡɛn. ivən ɪn dʒɹimz? hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf ðə θɔt wɑz ɪz əɹ ðɛɹz.

He forced the wolves out of his head, and blinked in surprise. He had not known he could do that. He determined not to let them back in again. Even in dreams? He was not sure if the thought was his or theirs.

ɛɡwin stɪl wɔɹ ðə stʃɹɪŋ ə blu bidz ɛɹæm hæd ɡɪvən hɝ, ən ə lɪɾəl spɹɪɡ ʌv sʌmθɪŋ wɪð taɪni, bɹaɪt ɹɛd livz ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ənʌðɝ ɡɪft fɹəm ðə jʌŋ tuætɑn. ðəɾ ɛɹæm hæd tʃɹaɪd tə tɔk əɹ ɪndə steɪɪŋ wɪð ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl, pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ. hi wɑz ɡlæd ʃi hæd nɑt ɡɪvən ɪn, bʌɾ i wɪʃt ʃi dɪd nɑt fɪŋɡɝ ðə bidz soʊ fɑnli.

Egwene still wore the string of blue beads Aram had given her, and a little sprig of something with tiny, bright red leaves in her hair, another gift from the young Tuatha'an. That Aram had tried to talk her into staying with the Traveling People, Perrin was sure. He was glad she had not given in, but he wished she did not finger the beads so fondly.

faɪnəli hi sɛd, "wʌt dɪd jə spɛn soʊ mʌtʃ taɪm tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt wɪð ilə? ɪf jə wɝn dænsɪŋ wɪð ðət lɔŋ-lɛɡəd fɛloʊ, jə wɝ tɔkɪŋ tə hɝ laɪk ɪt wɑz səm kaɪndə sikɹət."

Finally he said, "What did you spend so much time talking about with Ila? If you weren't dancing with that long-legged fellow, you were talking to her like it was some kind of secret."

"ilə wɑz ɡɪvɪŋ mi ædvaɪs ɑn biɪŋ ə wʊmən," ɛɡwin ɹɪplaɪɾ æbsənli. hi bɪɡæn læfɪŋ, ən ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə hʊɾɪd, deɪnʒɝəs lʊk ðəɾ i feɪl tə si.

"Ila was giving me advice on being a woman," Egwene replied absently. He began laughing, and she gave him a hooded, dangerous look that he failed to see.

"ædvaɪs! noʊbɑdi tɛlz əs haʊ tə bi mɛn. wi dʒʌst ɑɹ."

"Advice! Nobody tells us how to be men. We just are."

"ðæt," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ɪz pɹɑbli waɪ jə meɪk sətʃ ə bæd dʒɑb ʌv ɪt." ʌp əhɛd, ɛlaɪəs kækəld laʊdli.

"That," Egwene said, "is probably why you make such a bad job of it." Up ahead, Elyas cackled loudly.


tʃæptɝ twɛntieɪt


CHAPTER 28

fʊtpɹɪns ɪn ɛɹ


Footprints in Air

nɪneɪiv stɛɹɾ ɪn wʌndɝ ət wʌt leɪ əhɛd daʊn ðə ɹɪvɝ, ðə waɪt bɹɪdʒ ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn wɪð ə mɪlki ɡloʊ. ənʌðɝ lɛdʒənd, ʃi θɔt, ɡlænsɪŋ ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʒʌst əhɛɾ ə hɝ. ənʌðɝ lɛdʒənd, ən ðeɪ doʊn ivən sim tə noʊɾəs. ʃi ɹizɑlv nɑt tə stɛɹ wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd si. ðəl læf ɪf ðeɪ si mi ɡeɪpɪŋ laɪk ə kʌntʃɹi bʌmpkɪn. ðə θɹi ɹoʊɾ ɑn saɪlənli təwɔɹd ðə feɪbəld waɪt bɹɪdʒ.

Nynaeve stared in wonder at what lay ahead down the river, the White Bridge gleaming in the sun with a milky glow. Another legend, she thought, glancing at the Warder and the Aes Sedai, riding just ahead of her. Another legend, and they don't even seem to notice. She resolved not to stare where they could see. They'll laugh if they see me gaping like a country bumpkin. The three rode on silently toward the fabled White Bridge.

sɪns ðət mɔɹnɪŋ æftɝ ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, wən ʃi hæd faʊn mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn ɑn ðə bæŋk ə ði ɑɹɪnɛl, ðəɹ hæd bɪn lɪɾəl ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ɹil kɑnvɝseɪʃən bɪtwin əɹ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðəɹ hæd bɪn tɔk, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ə sʌbstəns əz nɪneɪiv sɔ ɪt. mɔɪɹeɪnz ətɛmps tə tɔk əɹ ɪndə ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, fəɹ ɪnstəns. tɑɹ vəlɑn. ʃi wəd ɡoʊ ðɛɹ, ɪf nid bi, ən teɪk ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, bʌt nɑt fəɹ ðə ɹizənz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ θɔt. ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn hæd bɹɔt hɑɹm tə ɛɡwin ən ðə bɔɪz. . . .

Since that morning after Shadar Logoth, when she had found Moiraine and Lan on the bank of the Arinelle, there had been little in the way of real conversation between her and the Aes Sedai. There had been talk, of course, but nothing of substance as Nynaeve saw it. Moiraine's attempts to talk her into going to Tar Valon, for instance. Tar Valon. She would go there, if need be, and take their training, but not for the reasons the Aes Sedai thought. If Moiraine had brought harm to Egwene and the boys. . . .

səmtaɪmz, əɡɛnst əɹ wɪl, nɪneɪiv hæd faʊn hɝsɛlf θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv wʌɾ ə wɪzdəm kəd də wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ʌv wʌt ʃi kəd du. wɛnɛvɝ ʃi ɹilaɪzd wʌt wɑz ɪn əɹ hɛd, ðoʊ, ə flæʃ ʌv æŋɡɝ bɝn ɪɾ aʊt. ðə paʊɝ wɑz ə fɪlθi θɪŋ. ʃi wəɾ əv nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪt. ənlɛs ʃi hæd tə.

Sometimes, against her will, Nynaeve had found herself thinking of what a Wisdom could do with the One Power, of what she could do. Whenever she realized what was in her head, though, a flash of anger burned it out. The Power was a filthy thing. She would have nothing to do with it. Unless she had to.

ðə kɝst wʊmən oʊnli wɑntəd tə tɔk əbaʊt teɪkɪŋ əɹ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn fəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. mɔɪɹeɪn wəd nɑt tɛl əɹ ɛniθɪŋ! ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə noʊ soʊ mʌtʃ.

The cursed woman only wanted to talk about taking her to Tar Valon for training. Moiraine would not tell her anything! It was not as if she wanted to know so much.

"haʊ dʒju min tə faɪn ðɛm?" ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd dɪmændɪŋ.

"How do you mean to find them?" she remembered demanding.

"æz aɪ hæv toʊl ju," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd wɪθaʊt bɑðɝɪŋ tə lʊk bæk ət hɝ, "aɪ wɪl noʊ wən aɪm kloʊs tə ðə tu hu hæv lɔs ðɛɹ kɔɪnz." ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm nɪneɪiv hæɾ æskt, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪz vɔɪs wɑz laɪk ə stɪl pɑn ðət ɹəfjuz tə ɹɪpəl noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni stoʊnz nɪneɪiv θɹu; ɪt meɪd ðə wɪzdəmz blʌd bɔɪl ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi wɑz ɪkspoʊz tə ɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn wɛn ɑn əz ɪf ʃi kəd nɑt fil nɪneɪivz aɪz ɑn əɹ bæk; nɪneɪiv nu ʃi mʌs bi eɪbəl tə, ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ soʊ hɑɹd. "ðə lɔŋɡɝ ɪt teɪks, ðə kloʊsɝ aɪ mʌs kʌm, bʌɾ əl noʊ. əz fəɹ ðə wʌn u stɪl əz ɪz toʊkən, soʊ lɔŋ əz hiz ɪɾ ɪn ɪz pəzɛʃən aɪ kən fɑloʊ hɪm əkɹɔs hæf ðə wɝld, ɪf nid bi."

"As I have told you," Moiraine replied without bothering to look back at her, "I will know when I am close to the two who have lost their coins." It was not the first time Nynaeve had asked, but the Aes Sedai's voice was like a still pond that refused to ripple no matter how many stones Nynaeve threw; it made the Wisdom's blood boil every time she was exposed to it. Moiraine went on as if she could not feel Nynaeve's eyes on her back; Nynaeve knew she must be able to, she was staring so hard. "The longer it takes, the closer I must come, but I will know. As for the one who still has his token, so long as he has it in his possession I can follow him across half the world, if need be."

"æn ðɛn? wʌt dʒju plæn wən juv faʊn ðɛm, ɛɛs sədaɪ?" ʃi dɪd nɑt fəɹ ə mɪnət bɪliv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wəd bi soʊ ɪntɛn ɑn faɪndɪŋ əm ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv plænz.

"And then? What do you plan when you've found them, Aes Sedai?" She did not for a minute believe the Aes Sedai would be so intent on finding them if she did not have plans.

"tɑɹ vəlɑn, wɪzdəm."

"Tar Valon, Wisdom."

"tɑɹ vəlɑn, tɑɹ vəlɑn. ðæts ɔl jə ɛvɝ seɪ, ən aɪm bɪkʌmɪŋ - "

"Tar Valon, Tar Valon. That's all you ever say, and I am becoming - "

"pɑɹɾ ə ðə tʃɹeɪnɪŋ jəl ɹəsiv ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, wɪzdəm, wɪl titʃ jə tə kəntʃɹoʊl jəɹ tɛmpɝ. jə kən də nʌθɪŋ wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ wən ɪmoʊʃən ɹulz jəɹ maɪnd." nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn. "læn, aɪ mʌst spik wɪð jə ə moʊmənt."

"Part of the training you will receive in Tar Valon, Wisdom, will teach you to control your temper. You can do nothing with the One Power when emotion rules your mind." Nynaeve opened her mouth, but the Aes Sedai went right on. "Lan, I must speak with you a moment."

ðə tu pʊt ðɛɹ hɛdz təɡɛðɝ, ən nɪneɪiv wɑz lɛft wɪð ə sʌlən ɡlaʊɝ ðət ʃi heɪɾəd ɛvɹi taɪm ʃi ɹilaɪzd ɪt wɑz ɑn əɹ feɪs. ɪt keɪm tu ɔfən əz ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɛfli tɝn əɹ kwɛstʃənz ɔf ɑntu ənʌðɝ sʌbʒɪkt, slɪɾ izəli baɪ hɝ kɑnvɝseɪʃənəl tʃɹæps, əɹ ɪɡnɔɹɾ əɹ ʃaʊts əntɪl ðeɪ ɛndəɾ ɪn saɪləns. ðə skaʊl meɪɾ əɹ fil laɪk ə ɡɝl u hæd bɪn kɑɾ æktɪŋ ðə ful baɪ sʌmwʌn ɪn ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl. ðət wɑz ə filɪŋ nɪneɪiv wɑz nɑt juz tə, ən ðə kɑm smaɪl ɑn mɔɪɹeɪnz feɪs oʊnli meɪɾ ɪt wɝs.

The two put their heads together, and Nynaeve was left with a sullen glower that she hated every time she realized it was on her face. It came too often as the Aes Sedai deftly turned her questions off onto another subject, slid easily by her conversational traps, or ignored her shouts until they ended in silence. The scowl made her feel like a girl who had been caught acting the fool by someone in the Women's Circle. That was a feeling Nynaeve was not used to, and the calm smile on Moiraine's face only made it worse.

ɪf oʊnli ðəɹ wɑz səm weɪ tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðə wʊmən. læn wəd bi bɛɾɝ baɪ hɪmsɛlf - ə wɔɹɾɝ ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə hændəl wʌt wɑz niɾəd, ʃi toʊl hɝsɛlf heɪstəli, filɪŋ ə sʌɾən flʌʃ; noʊ ʌðɝ ɹizən - bʌt wʌn mɛn ði ʌðɝ.

If only there was some way to get rid of the woman. Lan would be better by himself - a Warder should be able to handle what was needed, she told herself hastily, feeling a sudden flush; no other reason - but one meant the other.

ən jɛt, læn meɪɾ əɹ ivən mɔɹ fjʊɹiəs ðən mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn haʊ hi mænədʒ tə ɡɛɾ ʌndɝ əɹ skɪn soʊ izəli. hi ɹɛɹli sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ - səmtaɪmz nɑɾ ə dʌzən wɝdz ɪn ə deɪ - ən i nɛvɝ tʊk pɑɹɾ ɪn ɛni ʌv ðə . . . dɪskʌʃənz wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn. hi wɑz ɔfən əpɑɹt fɹəm ðə tu wɪmən, skaʊɾɪŋ ðə lænd, bʌɾ ivən wən i wɑz ðəɹ i kɛpt ə lɪɾəl tə wʌn saɪd, wɑtʃɪŋ əm əz ɪf wɑtʃɪŋ ə duəl. nɪneɪiv wɪʃt i wəd stɑp. ɪf ɪt wɑz ə duəl, ʃi hæd nɑt mænədʒ tə skɔɹ wʌns, ən mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑɾ ivən sim tə ɹilaɪz ʃi wɑz ɪn ə faɪt. nɪneɪiv cʊɾə dʌn wɪθaʊɾ ɪz kul blu aɪz, wɪθaʊɾ ivən ə saɪlən ɑɾiəns.

And yet, Lan made her even more furious than Moiraine. She could not understand how he managed to get under her skin so easily. He rarely said anything - sometimes not a dozen words in a day - and he never took part in any of the . . . discussions with Moiraine. He was often apart from the two women, scouting the land, but even when he was there he kept a little to one side, watching them as if watching a duel. Nynaeve wished he would stop. If it was a duel, she had not managed to score once, and Moiraine did not even seem to realize she was in a fight. Nynaeve could have done without his cool blue eyes, without even a silent audience.

ðət hæd bɪn ðə weɪ ʌv ðɛɹ dʒɝni, fəɹ ðə moʊs pɑɹt. kwaɪət, ɪksɛpt wən əɹ tɛmpɝ ɡɑt ðə bɛst ə hɝ, ən səmtaɪmz wən ʃi ʃaʊɾəd ðə saʊn ə hɝ vɔɪs sim tə kɹæʃ ɪn ðə saɪləns laɪk bɹeɪkɪŋ ɡlæs. ðə læn ɪtsɛlf wɑz kwaɪət, əz ɪf ðə wɝld wɝ pɔzɪŋ tə kætʃ ɪts bɹɛθ. ðə wɪn moʊn ɪn ðə tʃɹiz, bʌɾ ɔl ɛls wɑz stɪl. ðə wɪn sim dɪstənt, tu, ivən wən ɪt wɑz kʌɾɪŋ θɹu ðə kloʊk ɑn əɹ bæk.

That had been the way of their journey, for the most part. Quiet, except when her temper got the best of her, and sometimes when she shouted the sound of her voice seemed to crash in the silence like breaking glass. The land itself was quiet, as if the world were pausing to catch its breath. The wind moaned in the trees, but all else was still. The wind seemed distant, too, even when it was cutting through the cloak on her back.

ət fɝs ðə stɪlnəs wɑz ɹɛsfəl æftɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət hæd hæpənd. ɪt simd əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt noʊn ə moʊmən ə kwaɪət sɪns bɪfɔɹ wɪntɝnaɪt. baɪ ði ɛn ə ðə fɝs deɪ əloʊn wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ, ðoʊ, ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ən fɪdʒəɾɪŋ ɪn əɹ sæɾəl əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ən ɪtʃ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə hɝ bæk wɛɹ ʃi kəd nɑt ɹitʃ. ðə saɪləns sim laɪk kɹɪstəl dum tə ʃæɾɝ, ən weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə fɝs kɹæk pʊɾ əɹ tiθ ɑn ɛdʒ.

At first the stillness was restful after everything that had happened. It seemed as if she had not known a moment of quiet since before Winternight. By the end of the first day alone with the Aes Sedai and the Warder, though, she was looking over her shoulder and fidgeting in her saddle as if she had an itch in the middle of her back where she could not reach. The silence seemed like crystal doomed to shatter, and waiting for the first crack put her teeth on edge.

ɪt weɪɾ ɑn mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn, tu, əz aʊtwɝdli ənpɝɾɝbəbəl əz ðeɪ wɝ. ʃi sun ɹilaɪz ðæt, bɪniθ ðɛɹ kɑm sɝfəsəz, aʊɝ baɪ aʊɝ ðeɪ waʊn taɪɾɝ ən taɪɾɝ, laɪk klɑkspɹɪŋz biɪŋ fɔɹs tə ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ pɔɪnt. mɔɪɹeɪn sim tə lɪsən tə θɪŋz ðət wɝ nɑt ðɛɹ, ən wʌt ʃi hɝd pʊɾ ə kɹis ɪn əɹ fɔɹhɛd. læn wɑtʃt ðə fɔɹəst ən ðə ɹɪvɝ əz ɪf ðə lifləs tʃɹiz ən waɪd, sloʊ wɔɾɝ kæɹid ðə saɪnz ə tʃɹæps ən æmbʊʃɪz weɪɾɪŋ əhɛd.

It weighed on Moiraine and Lan, too, as outwardly unperturbable as they were. She soon realized that, beneath their calm surfaces, hour by hour they wound tighter and tighter, like clocksprings being forced to the breaking point. Moiraine seemed to listen to things that were not there, and what she heard put a crease in her forehead. Lan watched the forest and the river as if the leafless trees and wide, slow water carried the signs of traps and ambushes waiting ahead.

pɑɹɾ ə hɝ wɑz ɡlæd ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn u æpɹəhɛndəd ðət pɔɪzd-ɑn-ðə-bɹɪŋk fil tə ðə wɝld, bʌɾ ɪf ɪɾ əfɛktəd ðɛm, ɪt wɑz ɹil, ən ənʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə hɝ wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ soʊ mʌtʃ əz fəɹ ɪt tə bi dʒʌst əɹ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ɪt tɪkəl ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɝ maɪnd, əz wən ʃi lɪsən tə ðə wɪnd, bʌt naʊ ʃi nu ðət ðət hæd tə də wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən ʃi kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ hɝsɛlf tə ɛmbɹeɪs ðoʊz ɹɪpəlz ət ði ɛdʒ ə θɔt.

Part of her was glad that she was not the only one who apprehended that poised-on-the-brink feel to the world, but if it affected them, it was real, and another part of her wanted nothing so much as for it to be just her imagination. Something of it tickled the corners of her mind, as when she listened to the wind, but now she knew that that had to do with the One Power, and she could not bring herself to embrace those ripples at the edge of thought.

"ɪɾ ɪz nʌθɪŋ," læn sɛd kwaɪətli wən ʃi æskt. hi dɪd nɑt lʊk əɾ əɹ waɪl i spoʊk; hɪz aɪz nɛvɝ sis ðɛɹ skænɪŋ. ðɛn, kɑntʃɹədɪktɪŋ wʌɾ i hæd dʒʌst sɛd, hi æɾəd, "ju ʃəd ɡoʊ bæk tə jəɹ tu ɹɪvɝz wən wi ɹitʃ waɪtbɹɪdʒ, ən ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd. ɪts tu deɪnʒɝəs hɪɹ. nʌθɪŋ wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp jə ɡoʊɪŋ bæk, ðoʊ." ɪt wɑz ðə lɔŋɡəst spitʃ i meɪɾ ɔl ðət deɪ.

"It is nothing," Lan said quietly when she asked. He did not look at her while he spoke; his eyes never ceased their scanning. Then, contradicting what he had just said, he added, "You should go back to your Two Rivers when we reach Whitebridge, and the Caemlyn Road. It's too dangerous here. Nothing will try to stop you going back, though." It was the longest speech he made all that day.

"ʃi ɪz pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn, læn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd tʃaɪɾɪŋli. hɝ ɡeɪz wɑz ɛlswɛɹ, tu. "ɪɾ ɪz ðə dɑɹk wʌn, nɪneɪiv. ðə stɔɹm əz lɛft əs . . . fəɹ ə taɪm, ət list." ʃi ɹeɪzd wʌn hæn əz ðoʊ filɪŋ ði ɛɹ, ðən skɹʌbd ɪɾ ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs ʌnkɑnʃəsli, əz ɪf ʃi hæd tʌtʃt fɪlθ. "hi ɪz stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ, haʊɛvɝ" - ʃi saɪd - "æn ɪz ɡeɪz ɪz stʃɹɔŋɝ. nɑɾ ɑn ʌs, bʌɾ ɑn ðə wɝld. haʊ mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ bɪfɔɹ hiz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə. . . ."

"She is part of the Pattern, Lan," Moiraine said chidingly. Her gaze was elsewhere, too. "It is the Dark One, Nynaeve. The storm has left us . . . for a time, at least." She raised one hand as though feeling the air, then scrubbed it on her dress unconsciously, as if she had touched filth. "He is still watching, however" - she sighed - "and his gaze is stronger. Not on us, but on the world. How much longer before he is strong enough to. . . ."

nɪneɪiv hʌntʃt əɹ ʃoʊldɝz; sʌɾənli ʃi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil sʌmwʌn stɛɹɪŋ əɾ əɹ bæk. ɪt wɑz wʌn ɛkspləneɪʃən ʃi wəd dʒʌst əz sun ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd nɑt ɡɪvən hɝ.

Nynaeve hunched her shoulders; suddenly she could almost feel someone staring at her back. It was one explanation she would just as soon the Aes Sedai had not given her.

læn skaʊɾəd ðɛɹ pæθ daʊn ðə ɹɪvɝ, bʌt wɛɹ bɪfɔɹ i hæd tʃoʊzən ðə weɪ, naʊ mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd soʊ, əz ʃʊɹli əz ɪf ʃi fɑloʊd səm ənsin tʃɹæk, fʊtpɹɪns ɪn ɛɹ, ðə sɛn ə mɛmɹi. læn oʊnli tʃɛk ðə ɹut ʃi ɪntɛndəd, tə si ðəɾ ɪt wɑz seɪf. nɪneɪiv hæd ðə filɪŋ ðəɾ ivən ɪf i sɛɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt, mɔɪɹeɪn wəɾ ɪnsɪst ɑn ɪɾ ɛniweɪ. ən i wəd ɡoʊ, ʃi wɑz ʃʊɹ. stʃɹeɪt daʊn ðə ɹɪvɝ tə. . . .

Lan scouted their path down the river, but where before he had chosen the way, now Moiraine did so, as surely as if she followed some unseen track, footprints in air, the scent of memory. Lan only checked the route she intended, to see that it was safe. Nynaeve had the feeling that even if he said it was not, Moiraine would insist on it anyway. And he would go, she was sure. Straight down the river to. . . .

wɪð ə stɑɹt, nɪneɪiv pʊld aʊɾ ə hɝ θɔts. ðeɪ wɝ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə waɪt bɹɪdʒ. ðə peɪl ɑɹtʃ ʃoʊn ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt, ə mɪlki spaɪɾɝwɛb tu dɛləkət tə stænd, swipɪŋ əkɹɔs ði ɑɹɪnɛl. ðə weɪɾ ʌv ə mæn wəd bɹɪŋ ɪt kɹæʃɪŋ daʊn, mʌtʃ lɛs ðəɾ ʌv ə hɔɹs. ʃʊɹli ɪt wəd kəlæps ʌndɝ ɪts oʊn weɪɾ ɛni mɪnət.

With a start, Nynaeve pulled out of her thoughts. They were at the foot of the White Bridge. The pale arch shone in the sunlight, a milky spiderweb too delicate to stand, sweeping across the Arinelle. The weight of a man would bring it crashing down, much less that of a horse. Surely it would collapse under its own weight any minute.

læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn ɹoʊɾ ʌnkənsɝnədli əhɛd, ʌp ðə ɡlimɪŋ waɪɾ əpɹoʊtʃ ən ɑntu ðə bɹɪdʒ, hʊvz ɹɪŋɪŋ, nɑt laɪk stil ɑn ɡlæs, bʌt laɪk stil ɑn stil. ðə sɝfəs ə ðə bɹɪdʒ sɝɾənli lʊkt əz slɪk əz ɡlæs, wɛt ɡlæs, bʌɾ ɪt ɡeɪv ðə hɔɹsəz ə fɝm, ʃʊɹ fʊɾɪŋ.

Lan and Moiraine rode unconcernedly ahead, up the gleaming white approach and onto the bridge, hooves ringing, not like steel on glass, but like steel on steel. The surface of the bridge certainly looked as slick as glass, wet glass, but it gave the horses a firm, sure footing.

nɪneɪiv meɪd hɝsɛlf fɑloʊ, bʌt fɹəm ðə fɝst stɛp ʃi hæf weɪɾəd fəɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ stʃɹʌktʃɝ tə ʃæɾɝ ʌndɝ ðɛm. ɪf leɪs wɝ meɪɾ ʌv ɡlæs, ʃi θɔt, ɪt wəd lʊk laɪk ðɪs.

Nynaeve made herself follow, but from the first step she half waited for the entire structure to shatter under them. If lace were made of glass, she thought, it would look like this.

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɔlmoʊst ɔl ðə weɪ əkɹɔs ðət ʃi noʊɾəst ðə tɛɹi smɛl ə tʃɑɹ θɪkənɪŋ ði ɛɹ. ɪn ə moʊmənt ʃi sɔ.

It was not until they were almost all the way across that she noticed the tarry smell of char thickening the air. In a moment she saw.

ɝaʊn ðə skwɛɹ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə waɪt bɹɪdʒ paɪlz ə blækən tɪmbɝz, stɪl likɪŋ smoʊki θɹɛdz, ɹipleɪs hæf ə dʌzən bɪldɪŋz. mɛn ɪn pʊɹli fɪɾɪŋ ɹɛd junəfɔɹmz ən tɑɹnɪʃt ɑɹmɝ pətʃɹoʊl ðə stʃɹits, bʌt ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt kwɪkli, əz ɪf əfɹeɪɾ ə faɪndɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ, ən ðeɪ lʊkt oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz əz ðeɪ wɛnt. taʊnzpipəl - ðə fju hu wɝ aʊt - ɔlmoʊst ɹæn, ʃoʊldɝz hʌntʃt, əz ðoʊ sʌmθɪŋ wɝ tʃeɪsɪŋ ðɛm.

Around the square at the foot of the White Bridge piles of blackened timbers, still leaking smoky threads, replaced half a dozen buildings. Men in poorly fitting red uniforms and tarnished armor patrolled the streets, but they marched quickly, as if afraid of finding anything, and they looked over their shoulders as they went. Townspeople - the few who were out - almost ran, shoulders hunched, as though something were chasing them.

læn lʊkt ɡɹɪm, ivən fəɹ hɪm, ən pipəl wɔkt waɪɾ ə ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm, ivən ðə soʊlʒɝz. ðə wɔɹɾɝ snɪf ði ɛɹ ən ɡɹɪməst, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. ɪt wɑz noʊ wʌndɝ tə nɪneɪiv, wɪð ðə stɪŋk ə bɝn soʊ stʃɹɔŋ.

Lan looked grim, even for him, and people walked wide of the three of them, even the soldiers. The Warder sniffed the air and grimaced, growling under his breath. It was no wonder to Nynaeve, with the stink of burn so strong.

"ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz," mɔɪɹeɪn mʌmbəld. "noʊ aɪ kən si ðə pæɾɝn əntɪl ɪts woʊvən."

"The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills," Moiraine mumbled. "No eye can see the Pattern until it is woven."

ɪn ðə nɛks moʊmənt ʃi wɑz daʊn ɔf ɑldib ən spikɪŋ tə taʊnzfoʊk. ʃi dɪd nɑɾ æsk kwɛstʃənz; ʃi ɡeɪv sɪmpəθi, ən tə nɪneɪivz sɝpɹaɪz ɪɾ əpɪɹd dʒɛnjəwən. pipəl u ʃaɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm læn, ɹɛɾi tə hɝi fɹəm ɛni stʃɹeɪnʒɝ, stɑp tə spik wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn. ðeɪ əpɪɹd stɑɹɾəld ðɛmsɛlvz ət wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ oʊpən ʌp, æftɝ ə fæʃən, ʌndɝ mɔɪɹeɪnz klɪɹ ɡeɪz ən suðɪŋ vɔɪs. ði ɛɛs sədaɪz aɪz sim tə ʃɛɹ ðə pipəlz hɝt, tə ɛmpəθaɪz wɪð ðɛɹ kənfjuʒən, ən tʌŋz lusənd.

In the next moment she was down off Aldieb and speaking to townsfolk. She did not ask questions; she gave sympathy, and to Nynaeve's surprise it appeared genuine. People who shied away from Lan, ready to hurry from any stranger, stopped to speak with Moiraine. They appeared startled themselves at what they were doing, but they opened up, after a fashion, under Moiraine's clear gaze and soothing voice. The Aes Sedai's eyes seemed to share the people's hurt, to empathize with their confusion, and tongues loosened.

ðeɪ stɪl laɪd, ðoʊ. moʊst ə ðɛm. səm dɪnaɪd ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɛni tʃɹʌbəl əɾ ɔl. nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. mɔɪɹeɪn mɛnʃən ðə bɝn bɪldɪŋz ɔl ɝaʊn ðə skwɛɹ. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz faɪn, ðeɪ ɪnsɪstəd, stɛɹɪŋ pæst wʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt wɑnə si.

They still lied, though. Most of them. Some denied there had been any trouble at all. Nothing at all. Moiraine mentioned the burned buildings all around the square. Everything was fine, they insisted, staring past what they did not want to see.

wʌn fæt fɛloʊ spoʊk wɪð ə hɑloʊ hɑɹtinəs, bʌɾ ɪz tʃik twɪtʃt əɾ ɛvɹi nɔɪz bɪhaɪn hɪm. wɪð ə ɡɹɪn ðət kɛp slɪpɪŋ, hi kleɪmd ən oʊvɝtɝn læmp hæd stɑɹɾəd ə faɪɝ ðət spɹɛd wɪð ðə wɪn bɪfɔɹ ɛniθɪŋ kəd bi dʌn. wʌn ɡlæns ʃoʊd nɪneɪiv ðət noʊ bɝn stʃɹʌktʃɝ stʊɾ əlɔŋsaɪɾ ənʌðɝ.

One fat fellow spoke with a hollow heartiness, but his cheek twitched at every noise behind him. With a grin that kept slipping, he claimed an overturned lamp had started a fire that spread with the wind before anything could be done. One glance showed Nynaeve that no burned structure stood alongside another.

ðəɹ wɝ ɔlmoʊst əz mɛni dɪfɹən stɔɹiz əz ðəɹ wɝ pipəl. sɛvɹəl wɪmən loʊɝd ðɛɹ vɔɪsəz kənspɹətɔɹiəli. ðə tʃɹuθ ə ðə mæɾɝ wɑz ðəɹ wɑz ə mæn sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə taʊn mɛɾəlɪŋ wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə hæv ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn; pæs taɪm, wɑz ðə weɪ ðeɪ sɔ ɪt, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt ðə mɛn sɛɾ əbaʊt tɑɹ vəlɑn. lɛt ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ sɛɾəl mæɾɝz.

There were almost as many different stories as there were people. Several women lowered their voices conspiratorially. The truth of the matter was there was a man somewhere in the town meddling with the One Power. It was time to have the Aes Sedai in; past time, was the way they saw it, no matter what the men said about Tar Valon. Let the Red Ajah settle matters.

wʌn mæn kleɪmd ɪt hæd bɪn ən ətæk baɪ bændəts, ən ənʌðɝ sɛɾ ə ɹaɪət baɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. "ðoʊz wʌnz gɑnə si ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, jə noʊ," hi kənfaɪɾəd dɑɹkli. "ðeɪɹ ɔl oʊvɝ ðə pleɪs. dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ɛvɹi wʌn."

One man claimed it had been an attack by bandits, and another said a riot by Darkfriends. "Those ones going to see the false Dragon, you know," he confided darkly. "They're all over the place. Darkfriends, every one."

stɪl ʌðɝz spoʊk ə səm kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl - ðeɪ wɝ veɪɡ əbaʊɾ ɪɡzækli wʌt kaɪnd - ðət hæd kʌm daʊnɹɪvɝ ɑn ə boʊt.

Still others spoke of some kind of trouble - they were vague about exactly what kind - that had come downriver on a boat.

"wi ʃoʊd ðɛm," ə nɛɹoʊ-feɪs mæn mʌɾɝd, skɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hæn təɡɛðɝ nɝvəsli. "lɛɾ əm kip ðət kaɪndə θɪŋ ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, wɛɹ ɪt bɪlɔŋz. wi wɛn daʊn tə ðə dɑks ən - " hi kʌɾ ɔf soʊ əbɹʌpli hɪz tiθ klɪkt. wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝɾ i skɝiɾ ɔf, piɹɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əɾ əm əz ɪf i θɔt ðeɪ maɪt tʃeɪs ɪm daʊn.

"We showed them," a narrow-faced man muttered, scrubbing his hand together nervously. "Let them keep that kind of thing in the Borderlands, where it belongs. We went down to the docks and - " He cut off so abruptly his teeth clicked. Without another word he scurried off, peering back over his shoulder at them as if he thought they might chase him down.

ðə boʊt hæd ɡɑɾən əweɪ - ðət mʌtʃ wɑz klɪɹ, ɪvɛntʃəwəli, fɹəm ʌðɝz - kʌɾɪŋ ɪts muɹɪŋz ən fliɪŋ daʊnɹɪvɝ oʊnli ðə deɪ bɪfɔɹ waɪl ə mɑb pɔɹɾ ɑntu ðə dɑks. nɪneɪiv wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɛɡwin ən ðə bɔɪz hæd bɪn ɑn bɔɹd. wʌn wʊmən sɛd ðəɾ ə ɡlimən hæd bɪn ɑn ðə boʊt. ɪf ðət hæd bɪn tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn. . . .

The boat had gotten away - that much was clear, eventually, from others - cutting its moorings and fleeing downriver only the day before while a mob poured onto the docks. Nynaeve wondered if Egwene and the boys had been on board. One woman said that a gleeman had been on the boat. If that had been Thom Merrilin. . . .

ʃi tʃɹaɪɾ əɹ əpɪnjən ɑn mɔɪɹeɪn, ðət səm ə ði ɛmənz fildɝz maɪɾ əv flɛɾ ɑn ðə boʊt. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lɪsən peɪʃənli, nɑɾɪŋ, əntɪl ʃi wɑz dʌn.

She tried her opinion on Moiraine, that some of the Emond's Fielders might have fled on the boat. The Aes Sedai listened patiently, nodding, until she was done.

"pɝhæps," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ðɛn, bʌt ʃi saʊndəd daʊtfəl.

"Perhaps," Moiraine said then, but she sounded doubtful.

ən ɪn stɪl stʊɾ ɪn ðə skwɛɹ, ðə kɑmən ɹum dɪvaɪɾəd ɪn tu baɪ ə ʃoʊldɝ-haɪ wɔl. mɔɪɹeɪn pɔzd əz ʃi stɛpt ɪndə ði ɪn, filɪŋ ði ɛɹ wɪð əɹ hænd. ʃi smaɪld ət wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz ʃi fɛlt, bʌt ʃi wəd seɪ nʌθɪŋ ʌv ɪt, ðɛn.

An inn still stood in the square, the common room divided in two by a shoulder-high wall. Moiraine paused as she stepped into the inn, feeling the air with her hand. She smiled at Whatever it was she felt, but she would say nothing of it, then.

ðɛɹ mil wɑz kənsumd ɪn saɪləns, saɪləns nɑɾ oʊnli ət ðɛɹ teɪbəl, bʌt θɹuaʊt ðə kɑmən ɹum. ðə hændfʊl ə pipəl iɾɪŋ ðəɹ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn pleɪts ən ðɛɹ oʊn θɔts. ði ɪnkipɝ, dʌstɪŋ teɪbəlz wɪð ə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz eɪpɹən, mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf kəntɪnjuəli, bʌɾ ɔlweɪz tu loʊ tə bi hɝd. nɪneɪiv θɔɾ ɪt wəd nɑt bi plɛzən slipɪŋ ðɛɹ; ivən ði ɛɹ wɑz hɛvi wɪð fɪɹ.

Their meal was consumed in silence, silence not only at their table, but throughout the common room. The handful of people eating there concentrated on their own plates and their own thoughts. The innkeeper, dusting tables with a corner of his apron, muttered to himself continually, but always too low to be heard. Nynaeve thought it would not be pleasant sleeping there; even the air was heavy with fear.

əbaʊt ðə taɪm ðeɪ pʊʃt ðɛɹ pleɪts əweɪ, waɪp klin wɪð ðə læst skɹæps ə bɹɛd, wʌn ə ðə ɹɛd-junəfɔɹm soʊlʒɝz əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ. hi simd ɹisplɛndən tə nɪneɪiv, ɪn ɪz pik hɛlməɾ ən bɝnɪʃt bɹɛstpleɪt, əntɪl i tʊk ə poʊz dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə dɔɹ, wɪð ə hæn ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹɾ ən ə stɝn lʊk ɑn ɪz feɪs, ən juzd ə fɪŋɡɝ tə iz ɪz tu-taɪt kɑlɝ. ɪt meɪɾ əɹ θɪŋk ə sɛn bui tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə æk ðə weɪ ə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəlɝ ʃʊd.

About the time they pushed their plates away, wiped clean with the last scraps of bread, one of the red-uniformed soldiers appeared in the doorway. He seemed resplendent to Nynaeve, in his peaked helmet and burnished breastplate, until he took a pose just inside the door, with a hand resting on the hilt of his sword and a stern look on his face, and used a finger to ease his too-tight collar. It made her think of Cenn Buie trying to act the way a Village Councilor should.

læn spɛɹɾ ɪm wʌn ɡlæns ən snɔɹɾɪd. "məlɪʃə. jusləs."

Lan spared him one glance and snorted. "Militia. Useless."

ðə soʊlʒɝ lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə ɹum, lɛɾɪŋ ɪz aɪz kʌm tə ɹɛst ɑn ðɛm. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ bɪfɔɹ stɑmpɪŋ oʊvɝ tə dɪmænd, ɔl ɪn ə ɹʌʃ, hu ðeɪ wɝ, wʌt ðɛɹ bɪznəs wɑz ɪn waɪtbɹɪdʒ, ən haʊ lɔŋ ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd tə steɪ.

The soldier looked over the room, letting his eyes come to rest on them. He hesitated, then took a deep breath before stomping over to demand, all in a rush, who they were, what their business was in Whitebridge, and how long they intended to stay.

"wi ɑɹ livɪŋ əz sun əz aɪ fɪnɪʃ maɪ eɪl," læn sɛd. hi tʊk ənʌðɝ sloʊ swɑloʊ bɪfɔɹ lʊkɪŋ ʌp ət ðə soʊlʒɝ. "ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɡʊd kwin mɔɹɡeɪs."

"We are leaving as soon as I finish my ale," Lan said. He took another slow swallow before looking up at the soldier. "The Light illumine good Queen Morgase."

ðə ɹɛd-junəfɔɹmd mæn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ðən tʊk ə ɡʊd lʊk ət lænz aɪz ən stɛp bæk. hi kɑt hɪmsɛlf ɪmiɾiətli, wɪð ə ɡlæns ət mɔɪɹeɪn ən hɝ. ʃi θɔt fəɹ ə moʊmən ðəɾ i wɑz gɑnə də sʌmθɪŋ fulɪʃ tə kip fɹəm lʊkɪŋ ðə kaʊɝɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə tu wɪmən. ɪn əɹ ɪkspɪɹiəns, mɛn wɝ ɔfən ɪɾiəts ðət weɪ. bʌt tu mʌtʃ hæd hæpən ɪn waɪtbɹɪdʒ; tu mʌtʃ ənsɝɾənti hæɾ ɪskeɪp fɹəm ðə sɛlɝz ə mɛnz maɪnz. ðə mɪlɪʃəmən lʊk bæk ət læn ən ɹikənsɪɾɝd wʌns mɔɹ. ðə wɔɹɾɝz hɑɹd-pleɪn feɪs wɑz ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz koʊl blu aɪz. soʊ koʊld.

The red-uniformed man opened his mouth, then took a good look at Lan's eyes and stepped back. He caught himself immediately, with a glance at Moiraine and her. She thought for a moment that he was going to do something foolish to keep from looking the coward in front of two women. In her experience, men were often idiots that way. But too much had happened in Whitebridge; too much uncertainty had escaped from the cellars of men's minds. The militiaman looked back at Lan and reconsidered once more. The Warder's hard-planed face was expressionless, but there were those cold blue eyes. So cold.

ðə mɪlɪʃəmən sɛɾəld ɑn ə bɹɪsk nɑd. "si ðət jə du. tu mɛni stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɝaʊn ðiz deɪz fəɹ ðə ɡʊɾ ə ðə kwinz pis." tɝnɪŋ ɑn ɪz hil i stɑmpt aʊɾ əɡɛn, pɹæktəsɪŋ ɪz stɝn lʊk ɑn ðə weɪ. nʌn ə ðə loʊkəlz ɪn ði ɪn sim tə noʊɾəs.

The militiaman settled on a brisk nod. "See that you do. Too many strangers around these days for the good of the Queen's peace." Turning on his heel he stomped out again, practicing his stern look on the way. None of the locals in the inn seemed to notice.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəɾ ə ðə wɔɹɾɝ. ðə muɾ ɪn ðə ɹum wɑz sətʃ ðət ʃi kɛpt əɹ vɔɪs loʊ, bʌt ʃi meɪd ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz fɝm, tu. "æftɝ ðə boʊt?"

"Where are we going?" Nynaeve demanded of the Warder. The mood in the room was such that she kept her voice low, but she made sure it was firm, too. "After the boat?"

læn lʊkt ət mɔɪɹeɪn, hu ʃʊk əɹ hɛd slaɪtli ən sɛd, "fɝst aɪ mʌs faɪn ðə wʌn aɪ kən bi ʃʊɹ ə faɪndɪŋ, ən ət pɹɛzən hiz sʌmwɛɹ tə ðə nɔɹθ ʌv ʌs. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk ði ʌðɝ tu wɛnt wɪð ðə boʊɾ ɪn ɛni keɪs." ə smɔl, sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl tʌtʃt əɹ lɪps. "ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðɪs ɹum, pɝhæps ə deɪ əɡoʊ, noʊ mɔɹ ðən tu. əfɹeɪd, bʌt ðeɪ lɛft əlaɪv. ðə tʃɹeɪs wəd nɑɾ əv læstəd wɪθaʊt ðət stʃɹɔŋ ɪmoʊʃən."

Lan looked at Moiraine, who shook her head slightly and said, "First I must find the one I can be sure of finding, and at present he is somewhere to the north of us. I do not think the other two went with the boat in any case." A small, satisfied smile touched her lips. "They were in this room, perhaps a day ago, no more than two. Afraid, but they left alive. The trace would not have lasted without that strong emotion."

"wɪtʃ tu?" nɪneɪiv lin oʊvɝ ðə teɪbəl ɪntɛnli. "du jə noʊ?" ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, ðə slaɪɾəst ə moʊʃənz, ən nɪneɪiv sɛɾəld bæk. "ɪf ðəɹ oʊnli ə deɪ əɹ tu əhɛd, waɪ doʊnt wi ɡoʊ æftɝ əm fɝst?"

"Which two?" Nynaeve leaned over the table intently. "Do you know?" The Aes Sedai shook her head, the slightest of motions, and Nynaeve settled back. "If they're only a day or two ahead, why don't we go after them first?"

"aɪ noʊ ðeɪ wɝ hɪɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ ɪn ðəɾ ɪnsʌfɝəbli kɑm vɔɪs, "bʌt bɪɑn ðəɾ aɪ kænɑt seɪ ɪf ðeɪ wɛn ist əɹ nɔɹθ əɹ saʊθ. aɪ tʃɹʌs ðeɪ ɑɹ smɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə hæv ɡɔn ist, təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt noʊ, ən lækɪŋ ðɛɹ toʊkənz, əl nɑt noʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ əntɪl aɪm pɝhæps wɪðɪn hæf ə maɪl. ɪn tu deɪz ðeɪ cʊɾə ɡɔn twɛnti maɪlz, əɹ fɔɹɾi, ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən, ɪf fɪɹ ɝdʒ ðɛm, ən ðeɪ wɝ sɝɾənli əfɹeɪd wən ðeɪ lɛf hɪɹ."

"I know they were here," Moiraine said in that insufferably calm voice, "but beyond that I cannot say if they went east or north or south. I trust they are smart enough to have gone east, toward Caemlyn, but I do not know, and lacking their tokens, I will not know where they are until I am perhaps within half a mile. In two days they could have gone twenty miles, or forty, in any direction, if fear urged them, and they were certainly afraid when they left here."

"bʌt - "

"But - "

"wɪzdəm, haʊɛvɝ fɪɹfəl ðeɪ wɝ, ɪn wʌtɛvɝ dɝɛkʃən ðeɪ ɹæn, ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðəl ɹɪmɛmbɝ keɪɛmlɪn, ən ɪts ðəɹ əl faɪn ðɛm. bʌɾ əl hɛlp ðə wʌn aɪ kən faɪnd naʊ, fɝst."

"Wisdom, however fearful they were, in Whatever direction they ran, eventually they will remember Caemlyn, and it is there I will find them. But I will help the one I can find now, first."

nɪneɪiv oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əɡɛn, bʌt læn kʌɾ əɹ ɔf ɪn ə sɑf vɔɪs. "ðeɪ hæd ɹizən tə bi əfɹeɪd." hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd, ðən loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "ðɛɹ wɑz ə hæfmən hɪɹ." hi ɡɹɪməst, ðə weɪ hi hæɾ ɪn ðə skwɛɹ. "aɪ kən stɪl smɛl ɪm ɛvɹiwɛɹ."

Nynaeve opened her mouth again, but Lan cut her off in a soft voice. "They had reason to be afraid." He looked around, then lowered his voice. "There was a Halfman here." He grimaced, the way he had in the square. "I can still smell him everywhere."

mɔɪɹeɪn saɪd. "aɪ wɪl kip hoʊp əntɪl aɪ noʊ ɪts ɡɔn. aɪ ɹəfjuz tə bɪliv ðə dɑɹk wʌn kən wɪn soʊ izəli. əl faɪn ɔl θɹi ʌv əm əlaɪv ən wɛl. aɪ mʌs bɪliv ɪt."

Moiraine sighed. "I will keep hope until I know it is gone. I refuse to believe the Dark One can win so easily. I will find all three of them alive and well. I must believe it."

"aɪ wɑnə faɪn ðə bɔɪz, tu," nɪneɪiv sɛd, "bʌt wʌɾ əbaʊɾ ɛɡwin? jə nɛvɝ ivən mɛnʃən hɝ, ən jə ɪɡnɔɹ mi wən aɪ æsk. aɪ θɔt jə wɝ gɑnə teɪk əɹ ɔf tə" - ʃi ɡlænst ət ði ʌðɝ teɪbəlz, ən loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs - "tə tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"I want to find the boys, too," Nynaeve said, "but what about Egwene? You never even mention her, and you ignore me when I ask. I thought you were going to take her off to" - she glanced at the other tables, and lowered her voice - "to Tar Valon."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stʌɾid ðə teɪbəltɑp fəɹ ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ ɹeɪzɪŋ əɹ aɪz tə nɪneɪivz, ən wən ʃi dɪd, nɪneɪiv stɑɹɾəd bæk fɹəm ə flæʃ ʌv æŋɡɝ ðəɾ ɔlmoʊst sim tə meɪk mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz ɡloʊ. ðən əɹ bæk stɪfənd, hɝ oʊn æŋɡɝ ɹaɪzɪŋ, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd seɪ ə wɝd, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ spoʊk koʊldli.

The Aes Sedai studied the tabletop for a moment before raising her eyes to Nynaeve's, and when she did, Nynaeve started back from a flash of anger that almost seemed to make Moiraine's eyes glow. Then her back stiffened, her own anger rising, but before she could say a word, the Aes Sedai spoke coldly.

"aɪ hoʊp tə faɪn ɛɡwin əlaɪv ən wɛl, tu. aɪ də nɑɾ izəli ɡɪv ʌp jʌŋ wɪmən wɪð ðət mʌtʃ əbɪləɾi wʌns aɪ hæv faʊn ðɛm. bʌɾ ɪɾəl bi əz ðə wil wivz."

"I hope to find Egwene alive and well, too. I do not easily give up young women with that much ability once I have found them. But it will be as the Wheel weaves."

nɪneɪiv fɛlt ə koʊl bɔl ɪn ðə pɪɾ ə hɝ stʌmək. æm aɪ wʌn ə ðoʊz jʌŋ wɪmən jə woʊnt ɡɪv ʌp? wɪl si əbaʊt ðæt, ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə laɪt bɝn ju, wɪl si əbaʊt ðæt!

Nynaeve felt a cold ball in the pit of her stomach. Am I one of those young women you won't give up? We'll see about that, Aes Sedai. The Light burn you, we'll see about that!

ðə mil wɑz fɪnɪʃt ɪn saɪləns, ən ɪt wɑz ə saɪlən θɹi hu ɹoʊd θɹu ðə ɡeɪts ən daʊn ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd. mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz sɝtʃt ðə hɝaɪzən tə ðə nɔɹθist. bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ðə smoʊk-steɪn taʊn ʌv waɪtbɹɪdʒ kaʊɝd.

The meal was finished in silence, and it was a silent three who rode through the gates and down the Caemlyn Road. Moiraine's eyes searched the horizon to the northeast. Behind them, the smoke-stained town of Whitebridge cowered.


tʃæptɝ twɛntinaɪn


CHAPTER 29

aɪz wɪθaʊt pɪɾi


Eyes Without Pity

ɛlaɪəs pʊʃt fəɹ spiɾ əkɹɔs ðə bɹaʊn ɡɹæs flætlæn əz ɪf tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ ðə taɪm spɛnt wɪð ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl, sɛɾɪŋ ə peɪs saʊθwɝd ðət hæɾ ivən bɛlə ɡɹeɪtfəl tə stɑp wən twaɪlaɪt dipənd. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ heɪst, ðoʊ, hi tʊk pɹikɔʃənz i hæd nɑt teɪkən bɪfɔɹ. ət naɪt ðeɪ hæɾ ə faɪɝ oʊnli ɪf ðəɹ wɑz dɛd wʊɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hi wəd nɑt lɛɾ əm bɹeɪk soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə twɪɡ ɔf ʌv ə stændɪŋ tʃɹi. ðə faɪɝz i meɪd wɝ smɔl, ən ɔlweɪz hɪɾən ɪn ə pɪt kɛɹfəli dʌɡ wɛɹ i hæd kʌɾ əweɪ ə plʌɡ ʌv sɑd. əz sun əz ðɛɹ mil wɑz pɹipɛɹd, hi bɛɹid ðə koʊlz ən ɹipleɪs ðə plʌɡ. bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ sɛɾ aʊɾ əɡɛn ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ fɔls dɔn, hi wɛn oʊvɝ ðə kæmpsaɪɾ ɪntʃ baɪ ɪntʃ tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ðəɾ ɛniwʌn hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ðɛɹ. hi ivən ɹaɪɾɪd oʊvɝtɝn ɹɑks ən stʃɹeɪɾənd bɛnt-daʊn widz. hi dɪɾ ɪt kwɪkli, nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ə fju mɪnəts, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt liv əntɪl i wɑz sæɾəsfaɪd.

Elyas pushed for speed across the brown grass flatland as if trying to make up for the time spent with the Traveling People, setting a pace southward that had even Bela grateful to stop when twilight deepened. Despite his desire for haste, though, he took precautions he had not taken before. At night they had a fire only if there was dead wood already on the ground. He would not let them break so much as a twig off of a standing tree. The fires he made were small, and always hidden in a pit carefully dug where he had cut away a plug of sod. As soon as their meal was prepared, he buried the coals and replaced the plug. Before they set out again in the gray false dawn, he went over the campsite inch by inch to make sure there was no sign that anyone had ever been there. He even righted overturned rocks and straightened bent-down weeds. He did it quickly, never taking more than a few minutes, but they did not leave until he was satisfied.

pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə pɹikɔʃənz wɝ mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ əɡɛns dʒɹimz, bʌt wən i bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk ʌv wʌt ðeɪ maɪt bi ɡʊɾ əɡɛnst, hi wɪʃt ɪt wɝ oʊnli ðə dʒɹimz. ðə fɝs taɪm, ɛɡwin æskt æŋkʃəsli ɪf ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ bæk, bʌɾ ɛlaɪəs oʊnli ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ən ɝdʒd əm ɑn. pɛɹɪn sɛd nʌθɪŋ. hi nu ðəɹ wɝ noʊ tʃɹɑləks kloʊz; ðə wʊlvz sɛntɪɾ oʊnli ɡɹæs ən tʃɹiz ən smɔl ænəməlz. ɪt wɑz nɑt fɪɹ ə tʃɹɑləks ðət dʒɹoʊv ɛlaɪəs, bʌt ðət sʌmθɪŋ ɛls ʌv wɪtʃ ivən ɛlaɪəs wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ. ðə wʊlvz nu nʌθɪŋ ʌv wʌɾ ɪt wɑz, bʌt ðeɪ sɛnst ɛlaɪəsəz ɝdʒənt wɛɹinɪs, ən ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə skaʊɾ əz ɪf deɪnʒɝ ɹæn ət ðɛɹ hilz əɹ weɪɾəd ɪn æmbʊʃ oʊvɝ ðə nɛkst ɹaɪz.

Perrin did not think the precautions were much good against dreams, but when he began to think of what they might be good against, he wished it were only the dreams. The first time, Egwene asked anxiously if the Trollocs were back, but Elyas only shook his head and urged them on. Perrin said nothing. He knew there were no Trollocs close; the wolves scented only grass and trees and small animals. It was not fear of Trollocs that drove Elyas, but that something else of which even Elyas was not sure. The wolves knew nothing of what it was, but they sensed Elyas's urgent wariness, and they began to scout as if danger ran at their heels or waited in ambush over the next rise.

ðə læn bɪkeɪm lɔŋ, ɹoʊlɪŋ kɹɛsts, tu loʊ tə bi kɔl hɪlz, ɹaɪzɪŋ əkɹɔs ðɛɹ pæθ. ə kɑɹpəɾ ə tʌf ɡɹæs, stɪl wɪntɝ sɪɹ ən dɑɾəd wɪð ɹæŋk widz, spɹɛd bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, ɹɪpəl baɪ ən ist wɪn ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ tə kʌɾ ɪt fəɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz. ðə ɡɹoʊvz ə tʃɹiz ɡɹu mɔɹ skæɾɝd. ðə sʌn ɹoʊz ɹɪlʌktənli, wɪθaʊt wɔɹmθ.

The land became long, rolling crests, too low to be called hills, rising across their path. A carpet of tough grass, still winter sere and dotted with rank weeds, spread before them, rippled by an east wind that had nothing to cut it for a hundred miles. The groves of trees grew more scattered. The sun rose reluctantly, without warmth.

əmʌŋ ðə skwɑt ɹɪdʒəz ɛlaɪəs fɑloʊd ðə kɑntʊɹz ə ðə læn əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl, ən i əvɔɪɾəd tɑpɪŋ ðə ɹaɪzəz wɛnɛvɝ pɑsəbəl. hi sɛldəm tɔkt, ən wən i dɪd. . . .

Among the squat ridges Elyas followed the contours of the land as much as possible, and he avoided topping the rises whenever possible. He seldom talked, and when he did. . . .

"ju noʊ haʊ lɔŋ ðɪs ɪz teɪkɪŋ, ɡoʊɪŋ ɝaʊn ɛvɹi blʌɾi lɪɾəl hɪl laɪk ðɪs? blʌɾ ən æʃəz! əl bi tɪl sʌmɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ jə ɔf maɪ hænz. noʊ, wi kæn dʒʌst ɡoʊ ɪn ə stʃɹeɪt laɪn! haʊ mɛni taɪmz də aɪ hæv tə tɛl ju? juv ɛni aɪdiə, ivən ðə feɪntəst, haʊ ə mæn stænz aʊɾ ɑn ə ɹɪdʒəlaɪn ɪn kʌntʃɹi laɪk ðɪs? bɝn mi, bʌt wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ əz mʌtʃ əz fɔɹwɝd. wɪɡəlɪŋ laɪk ə sneɪk. aɪ kəd muv fæstɝ wɪð maɪ fit taɪd. wɛl, jə gɑnə stɛɹ ət mi, əɹ jə ɡoʊɪŋ tə wɔk?"

"You know how long this is taking, going around every bloody little hill like this? Blood and ashes! I'll be till summer getting you off my hands. No, we can't just go in a straight line! How many times do I have to tell you? You have any idea, even the faintest, how a man stands out on a ridgeline in country like this? Burn me, but we're going back and forth as much as forward. Wiggling like a snake. I could move faster with my feet tied. Well, you going to stare at me, or you going to walk?"

pɛɹɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ɡlænsɪz wɪð ɛɡwin. ʃi stʌk əɹ tʌŋ aʊɾ əɾ ɛlaɪəsəz bæk. niðɝ ə ðɛm sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ. ðə wʌn taɪm ɛɡwin hæd pɹətɛstəd ðəɾ ɛlaɪəs wɑz ðə wʌn u wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ ɝaʊn ðə hɪlz ən i ʃəd nɑt bleɪm ðɛm, ɪt ɡɑɾ əɹ ə lɛktʃɝ ɑn haʊ saʊn kæɹid, dɪlɪvɝɾ ɪn ə ɡɹaʊl ðət cʊɾə bɪn hɝɾ ə maɪl ɔf. hi ɡeɪv ðə lɛktʃɝ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən i nɛvɝ ivən sloʊd tə ɡɪv ɪt.

Perrin exchanged glances with Egwene. She stuck her tongue out at Elyas's back. Neither of them said anything. The one time Egwene had protested that Elyas was the one who wanted to go around the hills and he should not blame them, it got her a lecture on how sound carried, delivered in a growl that could have been heard a mile off. He gave the lecture over his shoulder, and he never even slowed to give it.

wɛðɝ i wɑz tɔkɪŋ əɹ nɑt, ɛlaɪəsəz aɪz sɝtʃt ɔl ɝaʊn ðɛm, səmtaɪmz stɛɹɪŋ əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ sʌmθɪŋ tə si ɪksɛp ðə seɪm kɔɹs ɡɹæs ðət wɑz ʌndɝ ðɛɹ fit. ɪf i dɪd si ɛniθɪŋ, pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt, ən niðɝ kəd ðə wʊlvz. ɛlaɪəsəz fɔɹhɛd ɡɹu ɛkstʃɹə fɝoʊz, bʌɾ i wəd nɑɾ ɪkspleɪn, nɑt waɪ ðeɪ hæd tə hɝi, nɑt wʌɾ i wɑz əfɹeɪd wɑz hʌntɪŋ ðɛm.

Whether he was talking or not, Elyas's eyes searched all around them, sometimes staring as if there were something to see except the same coarse grass that was under their feet. If he did see anything, Perrin could not, and neither could the wolves. Elyas's forehead grew extra furrows, but he would not explain, not why they had to hurry, not what he was afraid was hunting them.

səmtaɪmz ə lɔŋɡɝ ɹɪdʒ ðən juʒəwəl leɪ əkɹɔs ðɛɹ pæθ, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ maɪlz ən maɪlz tə ist ən wɛst. ivən ɛlaɪəs hæd tə əɡɹi ðət ɡoʊɪŋ ɝaʊn ðoʊz wəd teɪk əm tu fɑɹ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ weɪ. hi dɪd nɑt lɛɾ əm sɪmpli kɹɔs oʊvɝ, ðoʊ. livɪŋ əm ət ðə beɪs ə ðə sloʊp, hi wəd kɹip ʌp tə ðə kɹɛst ɑn ɪz bɛli, piɹɪŋ oʊvɝ əz kɔʃəsli əz ðoʊ ðə wʊlvz hæd nɑt skaʊɾəd ðəɹ tɛn mɪnəts bɪfɔɹ. weɪɾɪŋ ət ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə ɹɪdʒ, mɪnəts pæs laɪk aʊɝz, ən ðə nɑt noʊɪŋ pɹɛst ɑn ðɛm. ɛɡwin tʃuɾ əɹ lɪp ən ʌnkɑnʃəsli klɪk ðə bidz ɛɹæm hæd ɡɪvən əɹ θɹu hɝ fɪŋɡɝz. pɛɹɪn weɪɾəd dɔɡədli. hɪz stʌmək twɪstəɾ ʌp ɪn ə sɪk nɑt, bʌɾ i mænədʒ tə kip ɪz feɪs kɑm, mænədʒ tə kip ðə tɝmɔɪl hɪɾən ɪnsaɪd.

Sometimes a longer ridge than usual lay across their path, stretching miles and miles to east and west. Even Elyas had to agree that going around those would take them too far out of their way. He did not let them simply cross over, though. Leaving them at the base of the slope, he would creep up to the crest on his belly, peering over as cautiously as though the wolves had not scouted there ten minutes before. Waiting at the bottom of the ridge, minutes passed like hours, and the not knowing pressed on them. Egwene chewed her lip and unconsciously clicked the beads Aram had given her through her fingers. Perrin waited doggedly. His stomach twisted up in a sick knot, but he managed to keep his face calm, managed to keep the turmoil hidden inside.

ðə wʊlvz wɪl wɔɹn ɪf ðɛɹz deɪnʒɝ. ɪt wəd bi wʌndɝfəl ɪf ðeɪ wɛn əweɪ, ɪf ðeɪ dʒʌs vænɪʃt, bʌt ɹaɪt naʊ . . . ɹaɪt naʊ, ðəl ɡɪv wɔɹnɪŋ. wʌɾ ɪz i lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ? wʌt?

The wolves will warn if there's danger. It would be wonderful if they went away, if they just vanished, but right now . . . right now, they'll give warning. What is he looking for? What?

æftɝ ə lɔŋ sɝtʃ wɪð oʊnli hɪz aɪz əbʌv ðə ɹaɪz, ɛlaɪəs ɔlweɪz moʊʃən əm tə kʌm əhɛd. ɛvɹi taɪm ðə weɪ əhɛd wɑz klɪɹ - əntɪl ðə nɛks taɪm ðeɪ faʊn ə ɹɪdʒ ðeɪ kəd nɑt ɡoʊ ɝaʊnd. ət ðə θɝd sətʃ ɹɪdʒ, pɛɹɪnz stʌmək lɝtʃt. saʊɝ fjumz ɹoʊz ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt, ən i nu ɪf i hæd tə weɪɾ ivən faɪv mɪnəts i wəd vɑmət. "aɪ. . . ." hi swɑloʊd. "aɪm kʌmɪŋ, tu."

After a long search with only his eyes above the rise, Elyas always motioned them to come ahead. Every time the way ahead was clear - until the next time they found a ridge they could not go around. At the third such ridge, Perrin's stomach lurched. Sour fumes rose in his throat, and he knew if he had to wait even five minutes he would vomit. "I. . . ." He swallowed. "I'm coming, too."

"kip loʊ," wɑz ɔl ɛlaɪəs sɛd.

"Keep low," was all Elyas said.

əz sun əz i spoʊk ɛɡwin dʒʌmp daʊn fɹəm bɛlə.

As soon as he spoke Egwene jumped down from Bela.

ðə fɝ-klæd mæn pʊʃt ɪz ɹaʊn hæt fɔɹwɝɾ ən pɪɹɾ əɾ əɹ fɹəm ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ. "ju ɪkspɛktɪŋ tə meɪk ðət mɛɹ kɹɔl?" hi sɛd dʒɹaɪli.

The fur-clad man pushed his round hat forward and peered at her from under the edge. "You expecting to make that mare crawl?" he said dryly.

hɝ maʊθ wɝkt, bʌt noʊ saʊn keɪm aʊt. faɪnəli ʃi ʃɹʌɡd, ən ɛlaɪəs tɝn əweɪ wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝɾ ən bɪɡæn klaɪmɪŋ ði izi sloʊp. pɛɹɪn hɝiɾ æftɝ hɪm.

Her mouth worked, but no sound came out. Finally she shrugged, and Elyas turned away without another word and began climbing the easy slope. Perrin hurried after him.

wɛl ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə kɹɛst ɛlaɪəs meɪɾ ə daʊnwɝd moʊʃən ən ə moʊmən leɪɾɝ flæɾənd hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɹɪəlɪŋ fɔɹwɝd ðə læs fju jɑɹdz. pɛɹɪn flɑpt ɑn ɪz bɛli.

Well short of the crest Elyas made a downward motion and a moment later flattened himself on the ground, wriggling forward the last few yards. Perrin flopped on his belly.

ət ðə tɑp, ɛlaɪəs tʊk ɔf ɪz hæt bɪfɔɹ ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɛvɝ soʊ sloʊli. piɹɪŋ θɹu ə klʌmp ə θɔɹni widz, pɛɹɪn sɔ oʊnli ðə seɪm ɹoʊlɪŋ pleɪn ðət leɪ bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ðə daʊn-sloʊp wɑz bɛɹ, ðoʊ ə klʌmp ə tʃɹiz ə hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz əkɹɔs ɡɹu ɪn ðə hɑloʊ, pɝhæps hæf ə maɪl saʊθ fɹəm ðə ɹɪdʒ. ðə wʊlvz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn θɹu ɪt, smɛlɪŋ noʊ tʃɹeɪs ə tʃɹɑləks əɹ mɹdʒɹɑl.

At the top, Elyas took off his hat before raising his head ever so slowly. Peering through a clump of thorny weeds, Perrin saw only the same rolling plain that lay behind them. The down-slope was bare, though a clump of trees a hundred paces across grew in the hollow, perhaps half a mile south from the ridge. The wolves had already been through it, smelling no trace of Trollocs or Myrddraal.

ist ən wɛs ðə lænd wɑz ðə seɪm əz fɑɹ əz pɛɹɪn kəd si, ɹoʊlɪŋ ɡɹæslæn ən waɪd-skæɾɝd θɪkəts. nʌθɪŋ muvd. ðə wʊlvz wɝ mɔɹ ðən ə maɪl əhɛd, aʊɾ ə saɪt; ət ðət dɪstəns i kəd bɛɹli fil ðɛm. ðeɪ hæd sin nʌθɪŋ wən ðeɪ kʌvɝd ðɪs ɡɹaʊnd. wʌɾ ɪz i lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ? ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ ðɛɹ.

East and west the land was the same as far as Perrin could see, rolling grassland and wide-scattered thickets. Nothing moved. The wolves were more than a mile ahead, out of sight; at that distance he could barely feel them. They had seen nothing when they covered this ground. What is he looking for? There's nothing there.

"wɝ weɪstɪŋ taɪm," hi sɛd, stɑɹɾɪŋ tə stænd, ən ə flɑk ə ɹeɪvənz bɝst aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz bɪloʊ, fɪfti, ə hʌnʒɹəd blæk bɝdz, spaɪɹəlɪŋ ɪndə ðə skaɪ. hi fɹoʊz ɪn ə kɹaʊtʃ əz ðeɪ mɪld oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹiz. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪz. dɪd ðeɪ si mi? swɛt tʃɹɪkəl daʊn ɪz feɪs.

"We're wasting time," he said, starting to stand, and a flock of ravens burst out of the trees below, fifty, a hundred black birds, spiraling into the sky. He froze in a crouch as they milled over the trees. The Dark One's Eyes. Did they see me? Sweat trickled down his face.

əz ɪf wʌn θɔt hæd sʌɾənli spɑɹkt ɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪni maɪnz, ɛvɹi ɹeɪvən bɹoʊk ʃɑɹpli ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən. saʊθ. ðə flɑk dɪsəpɪɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə nɛkst ɹaɪz, ɔlɹɛɾi dɪsɛndɪŋ. tə ði ist ənʌðɝ θɪkɪt dɪsɡɔɹdʒ mɔɹ ɹeɪvənz. ðə blæk mæs wil twaɪs ən hɛɾəd saʊθ.

As if one thought had suddenly sparked in a hundred tiny minds, every raven broke sharply in the same direction. South. The flock disappeared over the next rise, already descending. To the east another thicket disgorged more ravens. The black mass wheeled twice and headed south.

ʃeɪkɪŋ, hi loʊɝd hɪmsɛlf tə ðə ɡɹaʊn sloʊli. hi tʃɹaɪd tə spik, bʌɾ ɪz maʊθ wɑz tu dʒɹaɪ. æftɝ ə mɪnəɾ i mænədʒ tə wɝk ʌp səm spɪt. "wɑz ðət wʌt jə wɝ əfɹeɪɾ ʌv? waɪ dɪdn jə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ? waɪ dɪdn ðə wʊlvz si ðɛm?"

Shaking, he lowered himself to the ground slowly. He tried to speak, but his mouth was too dry. After a minute he managed to work up some spit. "Was that what you were afraid of? Why didn't you say something? Why didn't the wolves see them?"

"wʊlvz doʊn lʊk ʌp ɪn tʃɹiz mʌtʃ," ɛlaɪəs ɡɹaʊld. "ænd noʊ, aɪ wɑzn lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ðɪs. aɪ toʊl ju, aɪ dɪdnt noʊ wʌt. . . ." fɑɹ tə ðə wɛst ə blæk klaʊd ɹoʊz oʊvɝ jɛɾ ənʌðɝ ɡɹoʊv ən wɪŋ saʊθwɝd. ðeɪ wɝ tu fɑɹ ɔf tə meɪk aʊɾ ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl bɝdz. "ɪɾ ɪzən ə bɪɡ hʌnt, θæŋk ðə laɪt. ðeɪ doʊnt noʊ. ivən æftɝ. . . ." hi tɝn tə stɛɹ bæk ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm.

"Wolves don't look up in trees much," Elyas growled. "And no, I wasn't looking for this. I told you, I didn't know what. . . ." Far to the west a black cloud rose over yet another grove and winged southward. They were too far off to make out individual birds. "It isn't a big hunt, thank the Light. They don't know. Even after. . . ." He turned to stare back the way they had come.

pɛɹɪn swɑloʊd. ivən æftɝ ðə dʒɹim, ɛlaɪəs hæd mɛnt. "nɑt bɪɡ?" hi sɛd. "bæk hoʊm jə woʊn si ðət mɛni ɹeɪvənz ɪn ə hoʊl jɪɹ."

Perrin swallowed. Even after the dream, Elyas had meant. "Not big?" he said. "Back home you won't see that many ravens in a whole year."

ɛlaɪəs ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz aɪv sin swips wɪð ə θaʊzən ɹeɪvənz tə ðə flɑk. nɑt tu ɔfən - ðɛɹz ə baʊnti ɑn ɹeɪvənz ðəɹ - bʌɾ ɪts hæpənd." hi wɑz stɪl lʊkɪŋ nɔɹθ. "hʌʃ, naʊ."

Elyas shook his head. "In the Borderlands I've seen sweeps with a thousand ravens to the flock. Not too often - there's a bounty on ravens there - but it has happened." He was still looking north. "Hush, now."

pɛɹɪn fɛlt ɪt, ðɛn; ði ɛfɝɾ ə ɹitʃɪŋ aʊt tə ðə dɪstənt wʊlvz. ɛlaɪəs wɑntəd dæpəl ən əɹ kəmpænjənz tə kwɪt skaʊɾɪŋ əhɛd, tə hɝi bæk ən tʃɛk ðɛɹ bæktʃɹeɪl. hɪz ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɔn feɪs taɪɾənd ən θɪn ʌndɝ ðə stʃɹeɪn. ðə wʊlvz wɝ soʊ fɑɹ əweɪ pɛɹɪn kəd nɑɾ ivən fil ðɛm. hɝi. wɑtʃ ðə skaɪ. hɝi.

Perrin felt it, then; the effort of reaching out to the distant wolves. Elyas wanted Dapple and her companions to quit scouting ahead, to hurry back and check their backtrail. His already gaunt face tightened and thinned under the strain. The wolves were so far away Perrin could not even feel them. Hurry. Watch the sky. Hurry.

feɪnli pɛɹɪn kɑt ðə ɹɪplaɪ fɹəm fɑɹ tə ðə saʊθ. wi kʌm. ən ɪmədʒ flæʃt ɪn ɪz maɪnd - wʊlvz ɹʌnɪŋ, mʌzəlz pɔɪntɪŋ ɪndə ðə wɪn ə ðɛɹ heɪst, ɹʌnɪŋ əz ɪf waɪldfaɪɝ ɹeɪs bɪhaɪnd, ɹʌnɪŋ - flæʃt ən wɑz ɡɔn ɪn ən ɪnstənt.

Faintly Perrin caught the reply from far to the south. We come. An image flashed in his mind - wolves running, muzzles pointing into the wind of their haste, running as if wildfire raced behind, running - flashed and was gone in an instant.

ɛlaɪəs slʌmpt ən dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ. fɹaʊnɪŋ, hi pɪɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪdʒ, ðən bæk tə ðə nɔɹθ, ən mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ.

Elyas slumped and drew a deep breath. Frowning, he peered over the ridge, then back to the north, and muttered under his breath.

"ju θɪŋk ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ ɹeɪvənz bɪhaɪn ʌs?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"You think there are more ravens behind us?" Perrin asked.

"kʊd bi," ɛlaɪəs sɛd veɪɡli. "ðeɪ də ɪt ðət weɪ, səmtaɪmz. aɪ noʊ ə pleɪs, ɪf wi kən ɹitʃ ɪt baɪ dɑɹk. wɪv tə kip muvɪŋ əntɪl fʊl dɑɹk ɛniweɪ, ivən ɪf wi doʊnt ɡɛt ðɛɹ, bʌt wi kænt ɡoʊ əz fæst əz aɪ wəd laɪk. kæn əfɔɹd tə ɡɛt tu kloʊs tə ðə ɹeɪvənz əhɛɾ ʌv ʌs. bʌɾ ɪf ðəɹ bɪhaɪn ʌs, tu. . . ."

"Could be," Elyas said vaguely. "They do it that way, sometimes. I know a place, if we can reach it by dark. We have to keep moving until full dark anyway, even if we don't get there, but we can't go as fast as I would like. Can't afford to get too close to the ravens ahead of us. But if they're behind us, too. . . ."

"waɪ dɑɹk?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "wʌt pleɪs? sʌmwɛɹ seɪf fɹəm ðə ɹeɪvənz?"

"Why dark?" Perrin said. "What place? Somewhere safe from the ravens?"

"seɪf fɹəm ɹeɪvənz," ɛlaɪəs sɛd, "bʌt tu mɛni pipəl noʊ. . . . ɹeɪvənz ɹus fəɹ ðə naɪt. wi doʊn əv tə wɝi əbaʊɾ əm faɪndɪŋ əs ɪn ðə dɑɹk. ðə laɪt sɛn ɹeɪvənz ɑɹ ɔl wɪv tə wɝi əbaʊt ðɛn." wɪð wʌn mɔɹ lʊk oʊvɝ ðə kɹɛst, hi ɹoʊz ən weɪv tə ɛɡwin tə bɹɪŋ bɛlə ʌp. "bʌt dɑɹk ɪz ə lɔŋ weɪ ɔf. wɪv tə ɡɛt muvɪŋ." hi stɑɹɾəd daʊn ðə fɑɹ sloʊp ɪn ə ʃæmbəlɪŋ ɹʌn, itʃ stʃɹaɪd bɛɹli kætʃɪŋ ɪm ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə fɔlɪŋ. "muv, bɝn ju!"

"Safe from ravens," Elyas said, "but too many people know. . . . Ravens roost for the night. We don't have to worry about them finding us in the dark. The Light send ravens are all we have to worry about then." With one more look over the crest, he rose and waved to Egwene to bring Bela up. "But dark is a long way off. We have to get moving." He started down the far slope in a shambling run, each stride barely catching him on the edge of falling. "Move, burn you!"

pɛɹɪn muvd, hæf ɹʌnɪŋ, hæf slaɪɾɪŋ, æftɝ hɪm.

Perrin moved, half running, half sliding, after him.

ɛɡwin tɑp ðə ɹaɪz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, kɪkɪŋ bɛlə tə ə tʃɹɑt. ə ɡɹɪn ə ɹɪlif blumd ɑn əɹ feɪs wən ʃi sɔ ðɛm. "wʌts ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn?" ʃi kɔld, ɝdʒɪŋ ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ tə kætʃ ʌp. "wɛn jə dɪsəpɪɹd laɪk ðæt, aɪ θɔt. . . . wʌt hæpənd?"

Egwene topped the rise behind them, kicking Bela to a trot. A grin of relief bloomed on her face when she saw them. "What's going on?" she called, urging the shaggy mare to catch up. "When you disappeared like that, I thought. . . . What happened?"

pɛɹɪn seɪvd ɪz bɹɛθ fəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ əntɪl ʃi ɹitʃt ðɛm. hi ɪkspleɪn əbaʊt ðə ɹeɪvənz ən ɛlaɪəsəz seɪf pleɪs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ə dɪsdʒɔɪntɪd stɔɹi. æftɝ ə stʃɹæŋɡəld, "ɹeɪvənz!" ʃi kɛpt ɪntɝʌptɪŋ wɪð kwɛstʃənz fəɹ wɪtʃ, əz ɔfən əz nɑt, hi hæd noʊ ænsɝz. bɪtwin ðɛm, hi dɪd nɑt fɪnɪʃ əntɪl ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə nɛkst ɹɪdʒ.

Perrin saved his breath for running until she reached them. He explained about the ravens and Elyas's safe place, but it was a disjointed story. After a strangled, "Ravens!" she kept interrupting with questions for which, as often as not, he had no answers. Between them, he did not finish until they reached the next ridge.

ɔɹɾənɛɹəli - ɪf ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə dʒɝni kəd bi kɔld ɔɹɾənɛɹi - ðeɪ wʊɾə ɡɔn ɝaʊn ðɪs wʌn ɹæðɝ ðən oʊvɝ, bʌɾ ɛlaɪəs ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn skaʊɾɪŋ ɛniweɪ.

Ordinarily - if anything about the journey could be called ordinary - they would have gone around this one rather than over, but Elyas insisted on scouting anyway.

"ju wɑnə dʒʌst sɔntɝ ɹaɪɾ ɪndə ðə mɪɾəl ə ðɛm, bɔɪ?" wɑz ɪz saʊɝ kɑmɛnt.

"You want to just saunter right into the middle of them, boy?" was his sour comment.

ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ ət ðə kɹɛst ə ðə ɹɪdʒ, lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps, əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ wɪð ɛlaɪəs ðɪs taɪm ən wɑntəd tə steɪ wɛɹ ʃi wɑz, tu. ɛlaɪəs wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn u ʃoʊd noʊ hɛzəteɪʃən.

Egwene stared at the crest of the ridge, licking her lips, as if she wanted to go with Elyas this time and wanted to stay where she was, too. Elyas was the only one who showed no hesitation.

pɛɹɪn wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðə ɹeɪvənz ɛvɝ dʌbəl bæk. ɪt wəd bi ə faɪn θɪŋ tə ɹitʃ ðə kɹɛst ət ðə seɪm taɪm əz ə flɑk ə ɹeɪvənz.

Perrin wondered if the ravens ever doubled back. It would be a fine thing to reach the crest at the same time as a flock of ravens.

ət ðə tɑp i ɪntʃt ɪz hɛɾ ʌp əntɪl i kəd dʒʌst si, ən hivd ə saɪ ʌv ɹɪlif wən ɔl i sɔ wɑz ə kɑps ə tʃɹiz ə lɪɾəl tə ðə wɛst. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɹeɪvənz tə bi sin. əbɹʌpli ə fɑks bɝst aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz, ɹʌnɪŋ hɑɹd. ɹeɪvənz pɔɹd fɹəm ðə bɹæntʃəz æftɝ ɪt. ðə biɾ ə ðɛɹ wɪŋz ɔlmoʊs dʒɹaʊn aʊɾ ə dɛspɹɪt waɪnɪŋ fɹəm ðə fɑks. ə blæk wɝlwɪn dʌv ən swɝld ɝaʊn ɪt. ðə fɑksəz dʒɔz snæpt ət ðɛm, bʌt ðeɪ dɑɹɾɪd ɪn, ən dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ əntʌtʃt, blæk biks ɡlɪsnɪŋ wɛtli. ðə fɑks tɝn bæk təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹiz, sikɪŋ ðə seɪfti ʌv ɪts dɛn. ɪt ɹæn ɔkwɝdli naʊ, hɛd loʊ, fɝ dɑɹk ən blʌɾi, ən ðə ɹeɪvənz flæpt ɝaʊn ɪt, mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ə ðɛm ət wʌns, ðə flʌɾɝɪŋ mæs θɪkənɪŋ əntɪl ɪt hɪd ðə fɑks kəmplitli. əz sʌɾənli əz ðeɪ hæd dɪsɛndəd ðə ɹeɪvənz ɹoʊz, wild, ən vænɪʃt oʊvɝ ðə nɛkst ɹaɪz tə ðə saʊθ. ə mɪsʃeɪpən lʌmp ə tɔɹn fɝ mɑɹkt wʌt hæd bɪn ðə fɑks.

At the top he inched his head up until he could just see, and heaved a sigh of relief when all he saw was a copse of trees a little to the west. There were no ravens to be seen. Abruptly a fox burst out of the trees, running hard. Ravens poured from the branches after it. The beat of their wings almost drowned out a desperate whining from the fox. A black whirlwind dove and swirled around it. The fox's jaws snapped at them, but they darted in, and darted away untouched, black beaks glistening wetly. The fox turned back toward the trees, seeking the safety of its den. It ran awkwardly now, head low, fur dark and bloody, and the ravens flapped around it, more and more of them at once, the fluttering mass thickening until it hid the fox completely. As suddenly as they had descended the ravens rose, wheeled, and vanished over the next rise to the south. A misshapen lump of torn fur marked what had been the fox.

pɛɹɪn swɑloʊd hɑɹd. laɪt! ðeɪ kəd də ðət tə ʌs. ə hʌnʒɹəd ɹeɪvənz. ðeɪ kəd -  "muv," ɛlaɪəs ɡɹaʊld, dʒʌmpɪŋ ʌp. hi weɪv tə ɛɡwin tə kʌm ɑn, ən wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ sɛɾ ɔf əɾ ə tʃɹɑt təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹiz. "muv, bɝn ju!" hi kɔld oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "muv!"

Perrin swallowed hard. Light! They could do that to us. A hundred ravens. They could -  "Move," Elyas growled, jumping up. He waved to Egwene to come on, and without waiting set off at a trot toward the trees. "Move, burn you!" he called over his shoulder. "Move!"

ɛɡwin ɡæləp bɛlə oʊvɝ ðə ɹaɪz ən kɑɾ əm bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə bɑɾəm ə ðə sloʊp. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɛkspləneɪʃənz, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz pɪkt aʊt ðə fɑks ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. hɝ feɪs wɛn əz waɪɾ əz snoʊ.

Egwene galloped Bela over the rise and caught them before they reached the bottom of the slope. There was no time for explanations, but her eyes picked out the fox right away. Her face went as white as snow.

ɛlaɪəs ɹitʃt ðə tʃɹiz ən tɝn ðɛɹ, ət ði ɛdʒ ə ðə kɑps, weɪvɪŋ vɪɡɝəsli fəɹ əm tə hɝi. pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə ɹʌn fæstɝ ən stʌmbəld. ɑɹmz wɪndmɪlɪŋ, hi bɛɹli kɑt hɪmsɛlf ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ flæɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs. blʌɾ ən æʃəz! aɪm ɹʌnɪŋ əz fæst əz aɪ kæn!

Elyas reached the trees and turned there, at the edge of the copse, waving vigorously for them to hurry. Perrin tried to run faster and stumbled. Arms windmilling, he barely caught himself short of going flat on his face. Blood and ashes! I'm running as fast as I can!

ə loʊn ɹeɪvən wɪŋd aʊɾ ə ðə kɑps. ɪt tɪltəd təwɔɹd ðɛm, skɹimd, ən spʌn təwɔɹd ðə saʊθ. noʊɪŋ i wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi tu leɪt, pɛɹɪn fʌmbəld ɪz slɪŋ fɹəm ɝaʊn ɪz weɪst. hi wɑz stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ə stoʊn fɹəm ɪz pɑkət tə ðə slɪŋ wən ðə ɹeɪvən əbɹʌpli foʊldəɾ ʌp ɪn mɪd-ɛɹ ən plʌməɾɪd tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hɪz maʊθ dʒɹɑpt oʊpən, ən ðən i sɔ ðə slɪŋ hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɛɡwinz hænd. ʃi ɡɹɪn əɾ ɪm ənstɛɾəli.

A lone raven winged out of the copse. It tilted toward them, screamed, and spun toward the south. Knowing he was already too late, Perrin fumbled his sling from around his waist. He was still trying to get a stone from his pocket to the sling when the raven abruptly folded up in mid-air and plummeted to the ground. His mouth dropped open, and then he saw the sling hanging from Egwene's hand. She grinned at him unsteadily.

"doʊn stæn ðəɹ kaʊntɪŋ jəɹ toʊz!" ɛlaɪəs kɔld.

"Don't stand there counting your toes!" Elyas called.

wɪð ə stɑɹt pɛɹɪn hɝiɾ ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz, ðən dʒʌmpt aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ tə əvɔɪd biɪŋ tʃɹæmpəl baɪ ɛɡwin ən bɛlə.

With a start Perrin hurried into the trees, then jumped out of the way to avoid being trampled by Egwene and Bela.

fɑɹ tə ðə wɛst, ɔlmoʊst aʊɾ ə saɪt, wʌt sim laɪk ə dɑɹk mɪst ɹoʊz ɪndə ði ɛɹ. pɛɹɪn fɛl ðə wʊlvz pæsɪŋ ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən, hɛɾɪŋ nɔɹθ. hi fɛlt əm noʊɾəs ɹeɪvənz, tə ðə lɛft ən ɹaɪɾ ə ðɛm, wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ. ðə dɑɹk mɪst swɝl nɔɹθwɝɾ əz ɪf pɝsuɪŋ ðə wʊlvz, ðən əbɹʌpli bɹoʊk ɔf ən flæʃt tə ðə saʊθ.

Far to the west, almost out of sight, what seemed like a dark mist rose into the air. Perrin felt the wolves passing in that direction, heading north. He felt them notice ravens, to the left and right of them, without slowing. The dark mist swirled northward as if pursuing the wolves, then abruptly broke off and flashed to the south.

"du jə θɪŋk ðeɪ sɔ ʌs?" ɛɡwin æskt. "wi wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə tʃɹiz, wɝnt wi? ðeɪ kʊdn si əs ət ðət dɪstəns. kəd ðeɪ? nɑt ðət fɑɹ ɔf."

"Do you think they saw us?" Egwene asked. "We were already in the trees, weren't we? They couldn't see us at that distance. Could they? Not that far off."

"wi sɔ ðɛm ət ðət dɪstəns," ɛlaɪəs sɛd dʒɹaɪli. pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli, ən ɛɡwin dʒɹu ə fɹaɪɾənd bɹɛθ. "ɪf ðeɪ hæd sin ʌs," ɛlaɪəs ɡɹaʊld, "ðeɪɾ əv bɪn daʊn ɑn əs laɪk ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ðət fɑks. θɪŋk, ɪf jə wɑnə steɪ əlaɪv. fɪɹ wɪl kɪl jə ɪf jə doʊn kəntʃɹoʊl ɪt." hɪz pɛnətʃɹeɪɾɪŋ stɛɹ hɛld ɑn itʃ ə ðɛm fəɹ ə moʊmənt. faɪnəli hi nɑɾəd. "ðeɪɹ ɡɔn, naʊ, ən wi ʃəd bi, tu. kip ðoʊz slɪŋz hændi. maɪt bi jusfəl əɡɛn."

"We saw them at that distance," Elyas said dryly. Perrin shifted uneasily, and Egwene drew a frightened breath. "If they had seen us," Elyas growled, "they'd have been down on us like they were on that fox. Think, if you want to stay alive. Fear will kill you if you don't control it." His penetrating stare held on each of them for a moment. Finally he nodded. "They're gone, now, and we should be, too. Keep those slings handy. Might be useful again."

əz ðeɪ muvd aʊɾ ə ðə kɑps, ɛlaɪəs æŋɡəld əm wɛstwɝd fɹəm ðə laɪn ə mɑɹtʃ ðeɪ hæd bɪn fɑloʊɪŋ. pɛɹɪnz bɹɛθ snæɡd ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt; ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tʃeɪsɪŋ æftɝ ðə læst ɹeɪvənz ðeɪ hæd sin. ɛlaɪəs kɛpt ɑn taɪɹləsli, ən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ fəɹ əm tə də bʌt fɑloʊ. æftɝ ɔl, ɛlaɪəs nu ə seɪf pleɪs. sʌmwɛɹ. soʊ hi sɛd.

As they moved out of the copse, Elyas angled them westward from the line of march they had been following. Perrin's breath snagged in his throat; it was as if they were chasing after the last ravens they had seen. Elyas kept on tirelessly, and there was nothing for them to do but follow. After all, Elyas knew a safe place. Somewhere. So he said.

ðeɪ ɹæn tə ðə nɛks hɪl, weɪɾəd tɪl ðə ɹeɪvənz muvd ɑn, ðən ɹæn əɡɛn, weɪɾəd, ɹæn. ðə stɛɾi pɹɑɡɹɛs ðeɪ hæd bɪn kipɪŋ hæd bɪn taɪɹɪŋ ɪnʌf, bʌɾ ɔl ɪksɛpt ɛlaɪəs kwɪkli bɪɡæn tə flæɡ ʌndɝ ðɪs dʒɝki peɪs. pɛɹɪnz tʃɛs hivd, ən i ɡʌlpt ɛɹ wən i hæɾ ə fju mɪnəts tə laɪ ɑn ə hɪltɑp, livɪŋ ðə sɝtʃ tə ɛlaɪəs. bɛlə stʊd hɛd daʊn, nɑstʃɹəlz flɛɹɪŋ, əɾ ɛvɹi stɑp. fɪɹ læʃt əm ɑn, ən pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪf ɪt wɑz kəntʃɹoʊld əɹ nɑt. hi oʊnli wɪʃt ðə wʊlvz wəd tɛl əm wʌt wɑz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ɪf ɛniθɪŋ wɑz, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz.

They ran to the next hill, waited till the ravens moved on, then ran again, waited, ran. The steady progress they had been keeping had been tiring enough, but all except Elyas quickly began to flag under this jerky pace. Perrin's chest heaved, and he gulped air when he had a few minutes to lie on a hilltop, leaving the search to Elyas. Bela stood head down, nostrils flaring, at every stop. Fear lashed them on, and Perrin did not know if it was controlled or not. He only wished the wolves would tell them what was behind them, if anything was, Whatever it was.

əhɛd wɝ mɔɹ ɹeɪvənz ðən pɛɹɪn ɛvɝ hoʊp tə si əɡɛn. tə ðə lɛft ən ɹaɪt ðə blæk bɝdz bɪloʊɾ ʌp, ən tə ðə saʊθ. ə dʌzən taɪmz ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs ʌv ə ɡɹoʊv əɹ ðə skænt ʃɛltɝ ʌv ə sloʊp oʊnli moʊməns bɪfɔɹ ɹeɪvənz swɛpt ɪndə ðə skaɪ. wʌns, wɪð ðə sʌn bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə slaɪd fɹəm ɪts mɪddeɪ haɪt, ðeɪ stʊɾ ɪn ði oʊpən, fɹoʊzən əz stɪl əz stætʃuz, hæf ə maɪl fɹəm ðə nɪɹəs kʌvɝ, waɪl ə hʌnʒɹəd ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz fɛðɝd spaɪz flæʃt baɪ ə bɛɹ maɪl tə ði ist. swɛt ɹoʊl daʊn pɛɹɪnz feɪs dɪspaɪt ðə wɪnd, əntɪl ðə læs blæk ʃeɪp dwɪndəl tə ə dɑɾ ən vænɪʃt. hi lɔs kaʊn ə ðə stʃɹæɡlɝz ðeɪ bɹɔt daʊn wɪð ðɛɹ slɪŋz.

Ahead were more ravens than Perrin ever hoped to see again. To the left and right the black birds billowed up, and to the south. A dozen times they reached the hiding place of a grove or the scant shelter of a slope only moments before ravens swept into the sky. Once, with the sun beginning to slide from its midday height, they stood in the open, frozen as still as statues, half a mile from the nearest cover, while a hundred of the Dark One's feathered spies flashed by a bare mile to the east. Sweat rolled down Perrin's face despite the wind, until the last black shape dwindled to a dot and vanished. He lost count of the stragglers they brought down with their slings.

hi sɔ mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf ɛvəɾəns laɪɪŋ ɪn ðə pæθ ðə ɹeɪvənz hæd kʌvɝd tə dʒʌstəfaɪ hɪz fɪɹ. hi hæd stɛɹd wɪð ə kwizi fæsəneɪʃən əɾ ə ɹæbət ðət hæd bɪn tɔɹn tə pisəz. ði aɪləs hɛd stʊɾ əpɹaɪt, wɪð ði ʌðɝ bɪts - lɛɡz, ɛntʃɹəlz - skæɾɝd ɪn ə ɹʌf sɝkəl ɝaʊn ɪt. bɝdz, tu, stæb tə ʃeɪpləs mæsəz ə fɛðɝz. ən tu mɔɹ fɑksəz.

He saw more than enough evidence lying in the path the ravens had covered to justify his fear. He had stared with a queasy fascination at a rabbit that had been torn to pieces. The eyeless head stood upright, with the other bits - legs, entrails - scattered in a rough circle around it. Birds, too, stabbed to shapeless masses of feathers. And two more foxes.

hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd sʌmθɪŋ læn hæd sɛd. ɔl ðə dɑɹk wʌnz kɹitʃɝz dɪlaɪɾ ɪn kɪlɪŋ. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz paʊɝ ɪz dɛθ. ən ɪf ðə ɹeɪvənz faʊn ðɛm? pɪɾiləs aɪz ʃaɪnɪŋ laɪk blæk bidz. stæbɪŋ biks swɝlɪŋ ɝaʊn ðɛm. niɾəl-ʃɑɹp biks dʒɹɔɪŋ blʌd. ə hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm. əɹ kən ðeɪ kɔl mɔɹ ə ðɛɹ kaɪnd? meɪbi ɔl ə ðɛm ɪn ðə hʌnt? ə sɪkənɪŋ ɪmədʒ bɪlt ʌp ɪn ɪz maɪnd. ə paɪl ə ɹeɪvənz əz bɪɡ əz ə hɪl, siθɪŋ laɪk mæɡəts, faɪɾɪŋ oʊvɝ ə fju blʌɾi ʃɹɛdz.

He remembered something Lan had said. All the Dark One's creatures delight in killing. The Dark One's power is death. And if the ravens found them? Pitiless eyes shining like black beads. Stabbing beaks swirling around them. Needle-sharp beaks drawing blood. A hundred of them. Or can they call more of their kind? Maybe all of them in the hunt? A sickening image built up in his mind. A pile of ravens as big as a hill, seething like maggots, fighting over a few bloody shreds.

sʌɾənli ði ɪmədʒ wɑz swɛpt əweɪ baɪ ʌðɝz, itʃ wʌn klɪɹ fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ðən spɪnɪŋ ən feɪɾɪŋ ɪndə ənʌðɝ. ðə wʊlvz hæd faʊn ɹeɪvənz tə ðə nɔɹθ. skɹimɪŋ bɝdz dʌv ən wɝld ən dʌv əɡɛn, biks dʒɹɔɪŋ blʌd wɪð ɛvɹi swup. snɑɹlɪŋ wʊlvz dɑdʒd ən lɛpt, twɪstɪŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, dʒɔz snæpɪŋ. əɡɛn ən əɡɛn pɛɹɪn teɪstəd fɛðɝz ən ðə faʊl teɪst ə flʌɾɝɪŋ ɹeɪvənz kɹʌʃt əlaɪv, fɛl ðə peɪn ʌv uzɪŋ ɡæʃəz ɔl oʊvɝ ɪz bɑɾi, nu wɪð ə dɪspɛɹ ðət nɛvɝ tʌtʃt ɑn ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp ðəɾ ɔl ɪz ɛfɝt wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf. sʌɾənli ðə ɹeɪvənz bɹoʊk əweɪ, wilɪŋ oʊvɝhɛd fəɹ wʌn læst ʃɹik ə ɹeɪdʒ ət ðə wʊlvz. wʊlvz dɪd nɑt daɪ əz izəli əz fɑksəz, ən ðeɪ hæɾ ə mɪʃən. ə flæp ə blæk wɪŋz, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn, ə fju blæk fɛðɝz dʒɹɪftɪŋ daʊn ɑn ðɛɹ dɛd. wɪn lɪkt əɾ ə pʌŋktʃɝ ɑn ɪz lɛft fɔɹɛlɪɡ. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð wʌn ə hɑpɝz aɪz. ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ əɹ oʊn hɝts, dæpəl ɡæðɝɾ əm ən ðeɪ sɛɾəld ɪndə ə peɪnfəl loʊp ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ðə ɹeɪvənz hæd ɡɔn. blʌd mæɾɪd ðɛɹ fɝ. wi kʌm. deɪnʒɝ kʌmz bɪfɔɹ ʌs.

Suddenly the image was swept away by others, each one clear for an instant, then spinning and fading into another. The wolves had found ravens to the north. Screaming birds dove and whirled and dove again, beaks drawing blood with every swoop. Snarling wolves dodged and leaped, twisting in the air, jaws snapping. Again and again Perrin tasted feathers and the foul taste of fluttering ravens crushed alive, felt the pain of oozing gashes all over his body, knew with a despair that never touched on giving up that all his effort was not enough. Suddenly the ravens broke away, wheeling overhead for one last shriek of rage at the wolves. Wolves did not die as easily as foxes, and they had a mission. A flap of black wings, and they were gone, a few black feathers drifting down on their dead. Wind licked at a puncture on his left foreleg. There was something wrong with one of Hopper's eyes. Ignoring her own hurts, Dapple gathered them and they settled into a painful lope in the direction the ravens had gone. Blood matted their fur. We come. Danger comes before us.

muvɪŋ ɪn ə stʌmbəlɪŋ tʃɹɑt, pɛɹɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə ɡlæns wɪð ɛlaɪəs. ðə mænz jɛloʊ aɪz wɝ ɪkspɹɛʃənləs, bʌɾ i nu. hi sɛd nʌθɪŋ, dʒʌst wɑtʃt pɛɹɪn ən weɪɾəd, ɔl ðə waɪl meɪnteɪnɪŋ ðəɾ ɛfɝtləs loʊp.

Moving in a stumbling trot, Perrin exchanged a glance with Elyas. The man's yellow eyes were expressionless, but he knew. He said nothing, just watched Perrin and waited, all the while maintaining that effortless lope.

weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mi. weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ mi tə ədmɪɾ aɪ fil ðə wʊlvz.

Waiting for me. Waiting for me to admit I feel the wolves.

"ɹeɪvənz," pɛɹɪn pæntɪd ɹɪlʌktənli. "bɪhaɪn ʌs."

"Ravens," Perrin panted reluctantly. "Behind us."

"hi wɑz ɹaɪt," ɛɡwin bɹiðd. "ju kən tɔk tə ðɛm."

"He was right," Egwene breathed. "You can talk to them."

pɛɹɪnz fit fɛlt laɪk lʌmps ʌv aɪɝn ɑn ði ɛnz ʌv wʊɾən poʊsts, bʌɾ i tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk əm muv fæstɝ. ɪf i kəɾ aʊtʃɹʌn ðɛɹ aɪz, aʊtʃɹʌn ðə ɹeɪvənz, aʊtʃɹʌn ðə wʊlvz, bʌɾ əbʌv ɔl ɛɡwinz aɪz, ðət nu hɪm naʊ fəɹ wʌɾ i wɑz. wʌɾ ɑɹ ju? teɪntɪd, ðə laɪt blaɪn mi! kɝst!

Perrin's feet felt like lumps of iron on the ends of wooden posts, but he tried to make them move faster. If he could outrun their eyes, outrun the ravens, outrun the wolves, but above all Egwene's eyes, that knew him now for what he was. What are you? Tainted, the Light blind me! Cursed!

hɪz θɹoʊt bɝn əz ɪt nɛvɝ hæd fɹəm bɹiðɪŋ ðə smoʊk ən hiɾ ə mæstɝ luhənz fɔɹdʒ. hi stæɡɝɾ ən hʌŋ ɑn tə ɛɡwinz stɝəp əntɪl ʃi klaɪm daʊn ən ɔl bʌt pʊʃt ɪm ɪndə ðə sæɾəl dɪspaɪɾ ɪz pɹoʊɾɛsts ðəɾ i kəd kip ɡoʊɪŋ. ɪt wɑz nɑt lɔŋ, ðoʊ, bɪfɔɹ ʃi wɑz klʌtʃɪŋ ðə stɝəp əz ʃi ɹæn, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp əɹ skɝts wɪð əɹ ʌðɝ hænd, ən oʊnli ə lɪɾəl waɪl æftɝ ðəɾ əntɪl i dɪsmaʊntɪd, hɪz niz stɪl wɑbəlɪŋ. hi hæd tə pɪk əɹ ʌp tə meɪk əɹ teɪk ɪz pleɪs, bʌt ʃi wɑz tu taɪɝd tə faɪt hɪm.

His throat burned as it never had from breathing the smoke and heat of Master Luhhan's forge. He staggered and hung on to Egwene's stirrup until she climbed down and all but pushed him into the saddle despite his protests that he could keep going. It was not long, though, before she was clutching the stirrup as she ran, holding up her skirts with her other hand, and only a little while after that until he dismounted, his knees still wobbling. He had to pick her up to make her take his place, but she was too tired to fight him.

ɛlaɪəs wəd nɑt sloʊ daʊn. hi ɝdʒ ðɛm, ən tɔntɪd ðɛm, ən kɛpt əm soʊ kloʊs bɪhaɪn ðə sɝtʃɪŋ ɹeɪvənz tə ðə saʊθ ðət pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ɔl ɪt wəd teɪk wəd bi fəɹ wʌn bɝd tə lʊk bæk. "kip muvɪŋ, bɝn ju! θɪŋk jəl də ɛni bɛɾɝ ðən ðət fɑks dɪd, ɪf ðeɪ kætʃ ʌs? ðə wʌn wɪð ɪts ɪnsaɪdz paɪld ɑn ɪts hɛd?" ɛɡwin sweɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sæɾəl ən vɑməɾəd nɔɪzəli. "aɪ nu jud ɹɪmɛmbɝ. dʒʌs kip ɡoʊɪŋ ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ. ðæts ɔl. dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl mɔɹ. bɝn ju, aɪ θɔt fɑɹm jʌŋstɝz hæɾ ɛndɝəns. wɝk ɔl deɪ ən dæns ɔl naɪt. slip ɔl deɪ ən slip ɔl naɪt, lʊks laɪk tə mi. muv jəɹ blʌɾi fit!"

Elyas would not slow down. He urged them, and taunted them, and kept them so close behind the searching ravens to the south that Perrin thought all it would take would be for one bird to look back. "Keep moving, burn you! Think you'll do any better than that fox did, if they catch us? The one with its insides piled on its head?" Egwene swayed out of the saddle and vomited noisily. "I knew you'd remember. Just keep going a little more. That's all. Just a little more. Burn you, I thought farm youngsters had endurance. Work all day and dance all night. Sleep all day and sleep all night, looks like to me. Move your bloody feet!"

ðeɪ bɪɡæn kʌmɪŋ daʊn ɔf ðə hɪlz əz sun əz ðə læst ɹeɪvən vænɪʃt oʊvɝ ðə nɛkst wʌn, ðən waɪl ðə læs tʃɹeɪlɝz stɪl flæpt əbʌv ðə hɪltɑp. wʌn bɝd lʊkɪŋ bæk. tə ist ən wɛs ðə ɹeɪvənz sɝtʃt waɪl ðeɪ hɝiɾ əkɹɔs ði oʊpən speɪsəz bɪtwin. wʌn bɝɾ ɪz ɔl ɪɾəl teɪk.

They began coming down off the hills as soon as the last raven vanished over the next one, then while the last trailers still flapped above the hilltop. One bird looking back. To east and west the ravens searched while they hurried across the open spaces between. One bird is all it will take.

ðə ɹeɪvənz bɪhaɪnd wɝ kʌmɪŋ fæst. dæpəl ən ði ʌðɝ wʊlvz wɝk ðɛɹ weɪ ɝaʊn əm ən wɝ kʌmɪŋ ɑn wɪθaʊt stɑpɪŋ tə lɪk ðɛɹ wunz, bʌt ðeɪ hæd lɝn ɔl ðə lɛsənz ðeɪ niɾəd əbaʊt wɑtʃɪŋ ðə skaɪ. haʊ kloʊs? haʊ lɔŋ? ðə wʊlvz hæd noʊ noʊʃənz ə taɪm ðə weɪ mɛn dɪd, noʊ ɹizənz tə dɪvaɪɾ ə deɪ ɪndə aʊɝz. ðə sizənz wɝ taɪm ɪnʌf fəɹ ðɛm, ən ðə laɪɾ ən ðə dɑɹk. noʊ nid fəɹ mɔɹ. faɪnəli pɛɹɪn wɝkt aʊɾ ən ɪmədʒ ʌv wɛɹ ðə sʌn wəd stæn ɪn ðə skaɪ wən ðə ɹeɪvənz oʊvɝɹæn əm fɹəm bɪhaɪnd. hi ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn, ən lɪkt ɪz lɪps wɪð ə dʒɹaɪ tʌŋ. ɪn ən aʊɝ ðə ɹeɪvənz wəd bi ɑn ðɛm, meɪbi lɛs. ən aʊɝ, ən ɪt wɑz ə ɡʊd tu aʊɝz tə sʌnsɛt, ət lis tu tə fʊl dɑɹk.

The ravens behind were coming fast. Dapple and the other wolves worked their way around them and were coming on without stopping to lick their wounds, but they had learned all the lessons they needed about watching the sky. How close? How long? The wolves had no notions of time the way men did, no reasons to divide a day into hours. The seasons were time enough for them, and the light and the dark. No need for more. Finally Perrin worked out an image of where the sun would stand in the sky when the ravens overran them from behind. He glanced over his shoulder at the setting sun, and licked his lips with a dry tongue. In an hour the ravens would be on them, maybe less. An hour, and it was a good two hours to sunset, at least two to full dark.

wɪl daɪ wɪð ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn, hi θɔt, stæɡɝɪŋ əz i ɹæn. slɔɾɝd laɪk ðə fɑks. hi fɪŋɡɝɾ ɪz æks, ðən muv tə hɪz slɪŋ. ðət wəd bi mɔɹ juz. nɑɾ ɪnʌf, ðoʊ. nɑɾ əɡɛnst ə hʌnʒɹəd ɹeɪvənz, ə hʌnʒɹəd dɑɹɾɪŋ tɑɹɡəts, ə hʌnʒɹəd stæbɪŋ biks.

We'll die with the setting sun, he thought, staggering as he ran. Slaughtered like the fox. He fingered his axe, then moved to his sling. That would be more use. Not enough, though. Not against a hundred ravens, a hundred darting targets, a hundred stabbing beaks.

"ɪts jəɹ tɝn tə ɹaɪd, pɛɹɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd taɪɹədli.

"It's your turn to ride, Perrin," Egwene said tiredly.

"ɪn ə bɪt," hi pæntɪd. "aɪm ɡʊd fəɹ maɪlz, jɛt." ʃi nɑɾəd, ən steɪɾ ɪn ðə sæɾəl. ʃiz taɪɝd. tɛl hɝ? əɹ lɛɾ əɹ θɪŋk wi stɪl əv ə tʃæns tə ɪskeɪp? ən aʊɝ ə hoʊp, ivən ɪf ɪts dɛspɹɪt, əɹ ən aʊɝ ə dɪspɛɹ?

"In a bit," he panted. "I'm good for miles, yet." She nodded, and stayed in the saddle. She is tired. Tell her? Or let her think we still have a chance to escape? An hour of hope, even if it is desperate, or an hour of despair?

ɛlaɪəs wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm əɡɛn, seɪɪŋ nʌθɪŋ. hi mʌs noʊ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt spik. pɛɹɪn lʊkt əɾ ɛɡwin əɡɛn ən blɪŋkt əweɪ hɑt tɪɹz. hi tʌtʃt ɪz æks ən wʌndɝɾ ɪf i hæd ðə kɝədʒ. ɪn ðə læs mɪnəts, wən ðə ɹeɪvənz dɪsɛndəɾ ɑn ðɛm, wən ɔl hoʊp wɑz ɡɔn, wəɾ i hæv ðə kɝədʒ tə spɛɹ əɹ ðə dɛθ ðə fɑks hæd daɪd? laɪt meɪk mi stʃɹɔŋ!

Elyas was watching him again, saying nothing. He must know, but he did not speak. Perrin looked at Egwene again and blinked away hot tears. He touched his axe and wondered if he had the courage. In the last minutes, when the ravens descended on them, when all hope was gone, would he have the courage to spare her the death the fox had died? Light make me strong!

ðə ɹeɪvənz əhɛɾ ə ðɛm sʌɾənli sim tə vænɪʃ. pɛɹɪn kəd stɪl meɪk aʊt dɑɹk, mɪsti klaʊdz, fɑɹ tə ði ist ən wɛst, bʌɾ əhɛd . . . nʌθɪŋ. wɛɹ dɪd ðeɪ ɡoʊ? laɪt, ɪf wiv oʊvɝɹʌn ðɛm. . . .

The ravens ahead of them suddenly seemed to vanish. Perrin could still make out dark, misty clouds, far to the east and west, but ahead . . . nothing. Where did they go? Light, if we've overrun them. . . .

əbɹʌpli ə tʃɪl ɹæn θɹu hɪm, wʌn koʊld, klin tɪŋɡəl əz ɪf i hæd dʒʌmpt ɪndə ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ wɔɾɝ ɪn mɪdwɪntɝ. ɪt ɹɪpəl θɹu hɪm ən sim tə kæɹi əweɪ səm ə hɪz fətiɡ, ə lɪɾəl ə ði eɪk ɪn ɪz lɛɡz ən ðə bɝnɪŋ ə hɪz lʌŋz. ɪt lɛf bɪhaɪnd . . . sʌmθɪŋ. hi kəd nɑt seɪ wʌt, oʊnli hi fɛl dɪfɹənt. hi stʌmbəl tə ə hɔlt ən lʊkt ɝaʊnd, əfɹeɪd.

Abruptly a chill ran through him, one cold, clean tingle as if he had jumped into the Winespring Water in midwinter. It rippled through him and seemed to carry away some of his fatigue, a little of the ache in his legs and the burning of his lungs. It left behind . . . something. He could not say what, only he felt different. He stumbled to a halt and looked around, afraid.

ɛlaɪəs wɑtʃt hɪm, wɑtʃt əm ɔl, wɪð ə ɡlim bɪhaɪn ɪz aɪz. hi nu wʌɾ ɪt wɑz, pɛɹɪn wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt, bʌɾ i oʊnli wɑtʃt ðɛm.

Elyas watched him, watched them all, with a gleam behind his eyes. He knew what it was, Perrin was sure of it, but he only watched them.

ɛɡwin ɹeɪn ɪn bɛlə ən lʊkt ɝaʊn ənsɝteɪnli, hæf wʌndɝɪŋ ən hæf fɪɹfəl. "ɪts . . . stʃɹeɪnʒ," ʃi wɪspɝd. "aɪ fil əz ɪf aɪ lɔst sʌmθɪŋ." ivən ðə mɛɹ hæɾ əɹ hɛɾ ʌp ɪkspɛktənli, nɑstʃɹəlz flɛɹɪŋ əz ɪf ðeɪ dɪtɛktəɾ ə feɪn oʊɾɝ ə nu-moʊn heɪ.

Egwene reined in Bela and looked around uncertainly, half wondering and half fearful. "It's . . . strange," she whispered. "I feel as if I lost something." Even the mare had her head up expectantly, nostrils flaring as if they detected a faint odor of new-mown hay.

"wʌt . . . wʌt wɑz ðæt?" pɛɹɪn æskt.

"What . . . what was that?" Perrin asked.

ɛlaɪəs kækəl sʌɾənli. hi bɛn oʊvɝ, ʃoʊldɝz ʃeɪkɪŋ, tə ɹɛst ɪz hænz ɑn ɪz niz. "seɪfti, ðæts wʌt. wi meɪɾ ɪt, jə blʌɾi fulz. noʊ ɹeɪvən wɪl kɹɔs ðət laɪn . . . nɑt wʌn ðət kæɹiz ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪz, ɛniweɪz. eɪ tʃɹɑlɑk wəɾ əv tə bi dʒɹɪvən əkɹɔs, ən ðɛɹəd nid tə bi sʌmθɪŋ fɪɹs pʊʃɪŋ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl tə meɪk ɪm də ðə dʒɹaɪvɪŋ. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ, iðɝ. ðə wʌn paʊɝ woʊnt wɝk hɪɹ; ðeɪ kæn tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. kæn ivən fil ðə sɔɹs, laɪk ɪt vænɪʃt. meɪks əm ɪtʃ ɪnsaɪd, ðət dʌz. ɡɪvz əm ðə ʃeɪks laɪk ə sɛvən-deɪ dʒɹʌŋk. ɪts seɪfti."

Elyas cackled suddenly. He bent over, shoulders shaking, to rest his hands on his knees. "Safety, that's what. We made it, you bloody fools. No raven will cross that line . . . not one that carries the Dark One's eyes, anyways. A Trolloc would have to be driven across, and there'd need to be something fierce pushing the Myrddraal to make him do the driving. No Aes Sedai, either. The One Power won't work here; they can't touch the True Source. Can't even feel the Source, like it vanished. Makes them itch inside, that does. Gives them the shakes like a seven-day drunk. It's safety."

ət fɝst, tə pɛɹɪnz aɪz, ðə lænd wɑz əntʃeɪnʒd fɹəm ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ hɪlz ən ɹɪdʒəz ðeɪ hæd kɹɔs ðə hoʊl deɪ. ðən i noʊɾəst ɡɹin ʃuts əmʌŋ ðə ɡɹæs; nɑt mɛni, ən ðeɪ wɝ stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ, bʌt mɔɹ ðən i hæd sin ɛniwɛɹ ɛls. ðəɹ wɝ fjuɝ widz ɪn ðə ɡɹæs, tu. hi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən wʌɾ ɪt wɑz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz . . . sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðɪs pleɪs. ən sʌmθɪŋ ɪn wʌɾ ɛlaɪəs sɛd tɪkəld ɪz mɛmɹi.

At first, to Perrin's eyes, the land was unchanged from the rolling hills and ridges they had crossed the whole day. Then he noticed green shoots among the grass; not many, and they were struggling, but more than he had seen anywhere else. There were fewer weeds in the grass, too. He could not imagine what it was, but there was . . . something about this place. And something in what Elyas said tickled his memory.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" ɛɡwin æskt. "aɪ fil. . . . wʌɾ ɪz ðɪs pleɪs? aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ laɪk ɪt."

"What is it?" Egwene asked. "I feel. . . . What is this place? I don't think I like it."

"ə stɛɾɪŋ," ɛlaɪəs ɹɔɹd. "ju nɛvɝ lɪsən tə stɔɹiz? ʌv kɔɹs, ðəɹ hæzən bɪn ən oʊɡiɝ hɪɹ ɪn θɹi θaʊzən ɑd jɪɹz, nɑt sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, bʌɾ ɪts ðə stɛɾɪŋ meɪks ði oʊɡiɝ, nɑt ði oʊɡiɝ meɪk ðə stɛɾɪŋ."

"A stedding," Elyas roared. "You never listen to stories? Of course, there hasn't been an Ogier here in three thousand odd years, not since the Breaking of the World, but it's the stedding makes the Ogier, not the Ogier make the stedding."

"dʒʌst ə lɛdʒənd," pɛɹɪn stæmɝd. ɪn ðə stɔɹiz, ðə stɛɾɪŋ wɝ ɔlweɪz heɪvənz, pleɪsəz tə haɪd, wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz fɹəm ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ fɹəm kɹitʃɝz ə ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz.

"Just a legend," Perrin stammered. In the stories, the stedding were always havens, places to hide, whether it was from Aes Sedai or from creatures of the Father of Lies.

ɛlaɪəs stʃɹeɪɾənd; ɪf nɑɾ ɪɡzækli fɹɛʃ, hi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ðəɾ i hæd spɛn moʊst ʌv ə deɪ ɹʌnɪŋ. "kʌm ɑn. wid bɛɾɝ ɡɛt dipɝ ɪndə ðɪs lɛdʒənd. ðə ɹeɪvənz kæn fɑloʊ, bʌt ðeɪ kən stɪl si əs ðɪs kloʊs tə ði ɛdʒ, ən ðəɹ kəd bi ɪnʌf ə ðɛm tə wɑtʃ ðə hoʊl bɔɹɾɝ ʌv ɪt. lɛɾ əm kip hʌntɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ɑn baɪ ɪt."

Elyas straightened; if not exactly fresh, he gave no sign that he had spent most of a day running. "Come on. We'd better get deeper into this legend. The ravens can't follow, but they can still see us this close to the edge, and there could be enough of them to watch the whole border of it. Let them keep hunting right on by it."

pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə steɪ ɹaɪt ðɛɹ, naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz stɑpt; hɪz lɛɡz tʃɹɛmbəld ən toʊld ɪm tə laɪ daʊn fəɹ ə wik. wʌtɛvɝ ɹəfɹɛʃmən i hæd fɛl hæd bɪn moʊməntɛɹi; ɔl ðə wɪɹinəs ən eɪks wɝ bæk. hi fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə teɪk wʌn stɛp, ðən ənʌðɝ. ɪt dɪd nɑt ɡɛɾ iziɝ, bʌɾ i kɛpt əɾ ɪt. ɛɡwin flæp ðə ɹeɪnz tə ɡɛt bɛlə muvɪŋ əɡɛn. ɛlaɪəs sɛɾəld ɪndə ən ɛfɝtləs loʊp, oʊnli sloʊɪŋ tə ə wɔk wən ɪt bɪkeɪm əpɛɹən ði ʌðɝz kəd nɑt kip ʌp. ə fæst wɔk.

Perrin wanted to stay right there, now that he was stopped; his legs trembled and told him to lie down for a week. Whatever refreshment he had felt had been momentary; all the weariness and aches were back. He forced himself to take one step, then another. It did not get easier, but he kept at it. Egwene flapped the reins to get Bela moving again. Elyas settled into an effortless lope, only slowing to a walk when it became apparent the others could not keep up. A fast walk.

"waɪ doʊnt - wi steɪ hɪɹ?" pɛɹɪn pæntɪd. hi wɑz bɹiðɪŋ θɹu hɪz maʊθ, ən i fɔɹs ðə wɝdz aʊt bɪtwin dip, ɹækɪŋ bɹɛθs. "ɪf ɪts ɹɪli - ə stɛɾɪŋ. wid bi seɪf. noʊ tʃɹɑləks. noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ. waɪ doʊnt wi - dʒʌst steɪ hɪɹ - əntɪl ɪts ɔl oʊvɝ?" meɪbi ðə wʊlvz woʊn kʌm hɪɹ, iðɝ.

"Why don't - we stay here?" Perrin panted. He was breathing through his mouth, and he forced the words out between deep, wracking breaths. "If it's really - a stedding. We'd be safe. No Trollocs. No Aes Sedai. Why don't we - just stay here - until it's all over?" Maybe the wolves won't come here, either.

"haʊ lɔŋ wɪl ðət bi?" ɛlaɪəs lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ wɪð wʌn aɪbɹaʊ ɹeɪzd. "wʌt wəd jə it? ɡɹæs, laɪk ðə hɔɹs? bɪsaɪdz, ðɛɹz ʌðɝz noʊ əbaʊt ðɪs pleɪs, ən nʌθɪŋ kips mɛn aʊt, nɑɾ ivən ðə wɝst ə ðɛm. ən ðəɹ ɪz oʊnli wʌn pleɪs wɛɹ ðɛɹz stɪl wɔɾɝ tə bi faʊnd." fɹaʊnɪŋ ənizəli, hi tɝn ɪn ə kəmplit sɝkəl, skænɪŋ ðə lænd. wən i wɑz dʌn, hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ən mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf. pɛɹɪn fɛlt ɪm kɔlɪŋ tə ðə wʊlvz. hɝi. hɝi. "wi teɪk əɹ tʃænsəz ɑn ə tʃɔɪs ʌv ivəlz, ən ðə ɹeɪvənz ɑɹ ʃʊɹ. kʌm ɑn. ɪts oʊnli ənʌðɝ maɪl əɹ tu."

"How long will that be?" Elyas looked over his shoulder with one eyebrow raised. "What would you eat? Grass, like the horse? Besides, there's others know about this place, and nothing keeps men out, not even the worst of them. And there is only one place where there's still water to be found." Frowning uneasily, he turned in a complete circle, scanning the land. When he was done, he shook his head and muttered to himself. Perrin felt him calling to the wolves. Hurry. Hurry. "We take our chances on a choice of evils, and the ravens are sure. Come on. It's only another mile or two."

pɛɹɪn wʊɾə ɡɹoʊn ɪf i hæd bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə spɛɹ ðə bɹɛθ.

Perrin would have groaned if he had been willing to spare the breath.

hjudʒ boʊldɝz bɪɡæn tə dɑt ðə loʊ hɪlz, ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ lʌmps ʌv ɡɹeɪ, laɪkən-koʊɾəd stoʊn hæf bɛɹiɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, səm əz bɪɡ əz ə haʊs. bɹæmbəlz wɛb ðɛm, ən loʊ bɹʌʃ hæf hɪd moʊst. hɪɹ ən ðəɹ əmɪd ðə dɪsɪkeɪɾɪd bɹaʊn ə bɹæmbəlz ən bɹʌʃ ə loʊn ɡɹin ʃuɾ ənaʊns ðət ðɪs wɑz ə spɛʃəl pleɪs. wʌtɛvɝ wundəd ðə læn bɪɑn ɪts bɔɹɾɝz hɝɾ ɪt, tu, bʌt hɪɹ ðə waʊn dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ kwaɪɾ əz dip.

Huge boulders began to dot the low hills, irregular lumps of gray, lichen-coated stone half buried in the ground, some as big as a house. Brambles webbed them, and low brush half hid most. Here and there amid the desiccated brown of brambles and brush a lone green shoot announced that this was a special place. Whatever wounded the land beyond its borders hurt it, too, but here the wound did not go quite as deep.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðeɪ stʃɹæɡəld oʊvɝ wʌn mɔɹ ɹaɪz, ən ət ðə beɪs ə ðɪs hɪl leɪ ə pul ʌv wɔɾɝ. ɛni ʌv əm cʊɾə weɪɾɪd əkɹɔs ɪɾ ɪn tu stʃɹaɪdz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz klɪɹ ən klin ɪnʌf tə ʃoʊ ðə sændi bɑɾəm laɪk ə ʃiɾ ʌv ɡlæs. ivən ɛlaɪəs hɝiɾ iɡɝli daʊn ðə sloʊp.

Eventually they straggled over one more rise, and at the base of this hill lay a pool of water. Any of them could have waded across it in two strides, but it was clear and clean enough to show the sandy bottom like a sheet of glass. Even Elyas hurried eagerly down the slope.

pɛɹɪn θɹu hɪmsɛlf fʊl lɛŋθ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd wən i ɹitʃt ðə pul ən plʌnʒd ɪz hɛɾ ɪn. ən ɪnstən leɪɾɝ i wɑz spləɾɝɪŋ fɹəm ðə koʊld ʌv wɔɾɝ ðət hæd wɛld ʌp fɹəm ðə dɛpθs ə ði ɝθ. hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, hɪz lɔŋ hɛɹ spɹeɪɪŋ ə ɹeɪn ə dʒɹɑps. ɛɡwin ɡɹɪn ən splæʃt bæk ət hɪm. pɛɹɪnz aɪz ɡɹu soʊbɝ. ʃi fɹaʊn ən oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌɾ i stʌk ɪz feɪs bæk ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ. noʊ kwɛstʃənz. nɑt naʊ. noʊ ɛkspləneɪʃənz. nɑɾ ɛvɝ. bʌɾ ə smɔl vɔɪs tɔntɪd hɪm. bʌt jə wʊɾə dʌn ɪt, wʊdn ju?

Perrin threw himself full length on the ground when he reached the pool and plunged his head in. An instant later he was spluttering from the cold of water that had welled up from the depths of the earth. He shook his head, his long hair spraying a rain of drops. Egwene grinned and splashed back at him. Perrin's eyes grew sober. She frowned and opened her mouth, but he stuck his face back in the water. No questions. Not now. No explanations. Not ever. But a small voice taunted him. But you would have done it, wouldn't you?

ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɛlaɪəs kɔld əm əweɪ fɹəm ðə pul. "ɛnibəɾi wɑns tə it, aɪ wɑn səm hɛlp."

Eventually Elyas called them away from the pool. "Anybody wants to eat, I want some help."

ɛɡwin wɝk tʃɪɹfəli, læfɪŋ ən dʒoʊkɪŋ əz ðeɪ pɹipɛɹd ðɛɹ skænti mil. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ lɛf bʌt tʃiz ən dʒɹaɪd mit; ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ tʃæns tə hʌnt. ət lis ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ti. pɛɹɪn dɪɾ ɪz ʃɛɹ, bʌt saɪlənli. hi fɛlt ɛɡwinz aɪz ɑn hɪm, sɔ ɡɹoʊɪŋ wɝi ɑn əɹ feɪs, bʌɾ i əvɔɪɾəd miɾɪŋ əɹ aɪz əz mʌtʃ əz i kʊd. hɝ læftɝ feɪɾəd, ən ðə dʒoʊks keɪm fɝðɝ əpɑɹt, itʃ wʌn mɔɹ stʃɹeɪn ðən ðə læst. ɛlaɪəs wɑtʃt, seɪɪŋ nʌθɪŋ. ə sɑmbɝ mud dɪsɛndəd, ən ðeɪ bɪɡæn ðɛɹ mil ɪn saɪləns. ðə sʌn ɡɹu ɹɛɾ ɪn ðə wɛst, ən ðɛɹ ʃædoʊz stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt lɔŋ ən θɪn.

Egwene worked cheerfully, laughing and joking as they prepared their scanty meal. There was nothing left but cheese and dried meat; there had been no chance to hunt. At least there was still tea. Perrin did his share, but silently. He felt Egwene's eyes on him, saw growing worry on her face, but he avoided meeting her eyes as much as he could. Her laughter faded, and the jokes came further apart, each one more strained than the last. Elyas watched, saying nothing. A somber mood descended, and they began their meal in silence. The sun grew red in the west, and their shadows stretched out long and thin.

nɑt kwaɪɾ ən aʊɝ tɪl dɑɹk. ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə stɛɾɪŋ, ɔl ə jə wəd bi dɛd naʊ. wəd juv seɪv hɝ? wəd juv kʌɾ əɹ daʊn laɪk soʊ mɛni bʊʃəz? bʊʃəz doʊn blid, də ðeɪ? əɹ skɹim, ən lʊk ɪn jəɹ aɪz ən æsk, waɪ?

Not quite an hour till dark. If not for the stedding, all of you would be dead now. Would you have saved her? Would you have cut her down like so many bushes? Bushes don't bleed, do they? Or scream, and look in your eyes and ask, why?

pɛɹɪn dʒɹu ɪn ɑn hɪmsɛlf mɔɹ. hi kəd fil sʌmθɪŋ læfɪŋ ət hɪm, dip ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪnd. sʌmθɪŋ kɹuəl. nɑt ðə dɑɹk wʌn. hi ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt ɪt wɑz. nɑt ðə dɑɹk wʌn; hɪmsɛlf.

Perrin drew in on himself more. He could feel something laughing at him, deep in the back of his mind. Something cruel. Not the Dark One. He almost wished it was. Not the Dark One; himself.

fəɹ wʌns ɛlaɪəs hæd bɹoʊkən ɪz ɹul əbaʊt faɪɝz. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ tʃɹiz, bʌɾ i hæd snæp dɛd bɹæntʃəz fɹəm ðə bɹʌʃ ən bɪlt ɪz faɪɝ əɡɛnst ə hjudʒ tʃʌŋk ə ɹɑk stɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə hɪlsaɪd. fɹəm ðə leɪɝz ə sʊt steɪnɪŋ ðə stoʊn, pɛɹɪn θɔt ðə saɪt mʌst əv bɪn juz baɪ dʒɛnɝeɪʃən æftɝ dʒɛnɝeɪʃən ə tʃɹævəlɝz.

For once Elyas had broken his rule about fires. There were no trees, but he had snapped dead branches from the brush and built his fire against a huge chunk of rock sticking out of the hillside. From the layers of soot staining the stone, Perrin thought the site must have been used by generation after generation of travelers.

wʌt ʃoʊɾ əbʌv ɡɹaʊn ə ðə bɪɡ ɹɑk wɑz ɹaʊndəd sʌmwʌt, wɪð ə ʃɑɹp bɹeɪk ɑn wʌn saɪd wɛɹ mɔs, oʊld ən bɹaʊn, kʌvɝd ðə ɹæɡəd sɝfəs. ðə ɡɹuvz ən hɑloʊz ɪɹoʊɾəd ɪn ðə ɹaʊndəd pɑɹt lʊkt ɑd tə pɛɹɪn, bʌɾ i wɑz tu əbzɔɹbd ɪn ɡlum tə wʌndɝ əbaʊɾ ɪt. ɛɡwin, ðoʊ, stʌɾid ɪɾ əz ʃi eɪt.

What showed above ground of the big rock was rounded somewhat, with a sharp break on one side where moss, old and brown, covered the ragged surface. The grooves and hollows eroded in the rounded part looked odd to Perrin, but he was too absorbed in gloom to wonder about it. Egwene, though, studied it as she ate.

"ðæt," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli, "lʊks laɪk ən aɪ." pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt; ɪt dɪd lʊk laɪk ən aɪ, ʌndɝ ɔl ðət sʊt.

"That," she said finally, "looks like an eye." Perrin blinked; it did look like an eye, under all that soot.

"ɪɾ ɪz," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. hi sæt wɪð ɪz bæk tə ðə faɪɝ ən ðə ɹɑk, stʌɾiɪŋ ðə læn ɝaʊn əm waɪl i tʃuɾ ə stʃɹɪp ə dʒɹaɪd miɾ ɔlmoʊst əz tʌf əz lɛðɝ. "ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz aɪ. ði aɪ ʌv ðə haɪ kɪŋ hɪmsɛlf. ðɪs ɪz wʌɾ ɪz paʊɝ ən ɡlɔɹi keɪm tə, ɪn ði ɛnd." hi sɛɾ ɪɾ æbsənli. ivən ɪz tʃuɪŋ wɑz æbsəntmaɪndɪd; hɪz aɪz ən ɪz ətɛnʃən wɝ ɑn ðə hɪlz.

"It is," Elyas said. He sat with his back to the fire and the rock, studying the land around them while he chewed a strip of dried meat almost as tough as leather. "Artur Hawkwing's eye. The eye of the High King himself. This is what his power and glory came to, in the end." He said it absently. Even his chewing was absentminded; his eyes and his attention were on the hills.

"ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ!" ɛɡwin ɪkskleɪmd. "jɔɹ dʒoʊkɪŋ wɪð mi. ɪɾ ɪzən ən aɪ əɾ ɔl. waɪ wəd sʌmbɑɾi kɑɹv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz aɪ ɑn ə ɹɑk aʊt hɪɹ?"

"Artur Hawkwing!" Egwene exclaimed. "You're joking with me. It isn't an eye at all. Why would somebody carve Artur Hawkwing's eye on a rock out here?"

ɛlaɪəs ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət hɝ, mʌɾɝɪŋ, "wʌt də ðeɪ titʃ jə vɪlədʒ wɛlps?" hi snɔɹɾɪd ən stʃɹeɪɾənd bæk tə hɪz wɑtʃɪŋ, bʌɾ i wɛn ɑn tɔkɪŋ. "ɑɹɾɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ tænɹəl, ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, ðə haɪ kɪŋ, junaɪɾəd ɔl ðə lænz fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt tə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, fɹəm ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən tə ði il weɪst, ən ivən səm bɪɑn ðə weɪst. hi ivən sɛn ɑɹmiz ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. ðə stɔɹiz seɪ hi ɹul ðə hoʊl wɝld, bʌt wʌɾ i ɹɪli dɪd ɹul wɑz ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛni mæn aʊtsaɪɾ ʌv ə stɔɹi. ən i bɹɔt pis ən dʒʌstəs tə ðə lænd."

Elyas glanced over his shoulder at her, muttering, "What do they teach you village whelps?" He snorted and straightened back to his watching, but he went on talking. "Artur Paendrag Tanreall, Artur Hawkwing, the High King, united all the lands from the Great Blight to the Sea of Storms, from the Aryth Ocean to the Aiel Waste, and even some beyond the Waste. He even sent armies the other side of the Aryth Ocean. The stories say he ruled the whole world, but what he really did rule was enough for any man outside of a story. And he brought peace and justice to the land."

"ɔl stʊɾ ikwəl bɪfɔɹ ðə lɔ," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ænd noʊ mæn ɹeɪzd ɪz hæn əɡɛnst ənʌðɝ."

"All stood equal before the law," Egwene said, "and no man raised his hand against another."

"soʊ juv hɝd ðə stɔɹiz, ət list." ɛlaɪəs tʃʌkəld, ə dʒɹaɪ saʊnd. "ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ bɹɔt pis ən dʒʌstəs, bʌɾ i dɪɾ ɪt wɪð faɪɝ ən sɔɹd. ə tʃaɪl kəd ɹaɪɾ əloʊn wɪð ə bæɡ ʌv ɡoʊl fɹəm ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən tə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld ən nɛvɝ əv ə moʊməns fɪɹ, bʌt ðə haɪ kɪŋz dʒʌstəs wɑz əz hɑɹɾ əz ðət ɹɑk ðəɹ fəɹ ɛniwʌn u tʃælənʒd ɪz paʊɝ, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz dʒʌs baɪ biɪŋ u ðeɪ wɝ, əɹ baɪ pipəl θɪŋkɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ ə tʃælənʒ. ðə kɑmən foʊk hæd pis, ən dʒʌstəs, ən fʊl bɛliz, bʌɾ i leɪɾ ə twɛnti-jɪɹ sidʒ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən pʊɾ ə pɹaɪs ʌv ə θaʊzənd ɡoʊl kɹaʊnz ɑn ðə hɛɾ ʌv ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"So you've heard the stories, at least." Elyas chuckled, a dry sound. "Artur Hawkwing brought peace and justice, but he did it with fire and sword. A child could ride alone with a bag of gold from the Aryth Ocean to the Spine of the World and never have a moment's fear, but the High King's justice was as hard as that rock there for anyone who challenged his power, even if it was just by being who they were, or by people thinking they were a challenge. The common folk had peace, and justice, and full bellies, but he laid a twenty-year siege to Tar Valon and put a price of a thousand gold crowns on the head of every Aes Sedai."

"aɪ θɔt jə dɪdn laɪk ɛɛs sədaɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd.

"I thought you didn't like Aes Sedai," Egwene said.

ɛlaɪəs ɡeɪv ə ɹaɪ smaɪl. "dʌzn mæɾɝ wʌɾ aɪ laɪk, ɡɝl. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wɑz ə pɹaʊd ful. ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hilɝ cʊɾə seɪvd ɪm wən i tʊk sɪk - əɹ wɑz pɔɪzənd, əz səm seɪ - bʌɾ ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ stɪl əlaɪv wɑz pɛn ʌp bɪhaɪn ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ wɔlz, juzɪŋ ɔl ðɛɹ paʊɝ tə hoʊld ɔf ən ɑɹmi ðət lɪɾ ʌp ðə naɪt wɪð ðɛɹ kæmpfaɪɝz. hi wʊdn əv lɛt wʌn nɪɹ hɪm, ɛniweɪ. hi heɪɾəd ɛɛs sədaɪ əz mʌtʃ əz i heɪɾəd ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

Elyas gave a wry smile. "Doesn't matter what I like, girl. Artur Hawkwing was a proud fool. An Aes Sedai healer could have saved him when he took sick - or was poisoned, as some say - but every Aes Sedai still alive was penned up behind the Shining Walls, using all their Power to hold off an army that lit up the night with their campfires. He wouldn't have let one near him, anyway. He hated Aes Sedai as much as he hated the Dark One."

ɛɡwinz maʊθ taɪɾənd, bʌt wən ʃi spoʊk, ɔl ʃi sɛd wɑz, "wʌt dʌz ɔl ðəɾ əv tə də wɪð wɛðɝ ðæts ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz aɪ?"

Egwene's mouth tightened, but when she spoke, all she said was, "What does all that have to do with whether that's Artur Hawkwing's eye?"

"dʒʌs ðɪs, ɡɝl. wɪð pis ɪksɛp fəɹ wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn əkɹɔs ði oʊʃən, wɪð ðə pipəl tʃɪɹɪŋ ɪm wɛɹɛvɝ i wɛnt - ðeɪ ɹɪli lʌv hɪm, jə si; hi wɑz ə hɑɹʃ mæn, bʌt nɛvɝ wɪð ðə kɑmən foʊk - wɛl, wɪð ɔl ə ðæt, hi dɪsaɪɾɪd ɪt wɑz taɪm tə bɪl hɪmsɛlf ə kæpəɾəl. ə nu sɪɾi, nɑt kənɛktəɾ ɪn ɛni mænz maɪnd wɪð ɛni oʊl kɑz əɹ fækʃən əɹ ɹaɪvəlɹi. hɪɹ, hid bɪld ɪt, ət ðə vɛɹi sɛntɝ ə ðə læn bɔɹɾɝd baɪ ðə siz ən ðə weɪst ən ðə blaɪt. hɪɹ, wɛɹ noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ wəɾ ɛvɝ kʌm wɪlɪŋ əɹ kəd juz ðə paʊɝ ɪf ðeɪ dɪd. ə kæpəɾəl fɹəm wɪtʃ, wʌn deɪ, ðə hoʊl wɝld wəd ɹəsiv pis ən dʒʌstəs. wən ðeɪ hɝd ðə pɹɑkləmeɪʃən, ðə kɑmən pipəl səbskɹaɪbd ɪnʌf mʌni tə bɪld ə mɑnjəmən tə hɪm. moʊst ə ðɛm lʊkt ɑn ɪm əz oʊnli ə stɛp bɪloʊ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ. ə ʃɔɹt stɛp. ɪt tʊk faɪv jɪɹz tə kɑɹv ən bɪld. ə stætʃu ʌv hɔkwɪŋ, hɪmsɛlf, ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz bɪɡɝ ðən ðə mæn. ðeɪ ɹeɪzd ɪt ɹaɪt hɪɹ, ən ðə sɪɾi wɑz tə ɹaɪz ɝaʊn ɪt."

"Just this, girl. With peace except for what was going on across the ocean, with the people cheering him wherever he went - they really loved him, you see; he was a harsh man, but never with the common folk - well, with all of that, he decided it was time to build himself a capital. A new city, not connected in any man's mind with any old cause or faction or rivalry. Here, he'd build it, at the very center of the land bordered by the seas and the Waste and the Blight. Here, where no Aes Sedai would ever come willing or could use the Power if they did. A capital from which, one day, the whole world would receive peace and justice. When they heard the proclamation, the common people subscribed enough money to build a monument to him. Most of them looked on him as only a step below the Creator. A short step. It took five years to carve and build. A statue of Hawkwing, himself, a hundred times bigger than the man. They raised it right here, and the city was to rise around it."

"ðɛɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ɛni sɪɾi hɪɹ," ɛɡwin skɔft. "ðɛɹ wəɾ əv tə bi sʌmθɪŋ lɛft ɪf ðəɹ wɑz. sʌmθɪŋ."

"There was never any city here," Egwene scoffed. "There would have to be something left if there was. Something."

ɛlaɪəs nɑɾəd, stɪl kipɪŋ ɪz wɑtʃ. "ɪndid ðəɹ wɑz nɑt. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ daɪd ðə vɛɹi deɪ ðə stætʃu wɑz fɪnɪʃt, ən ɪz sʌnz ən ðə ɹɛst ə hɪz blʌd fɔɾ oʊvɝ u wəd sɪɾ ɑn hɔkwɪŋz θɹoʊn. ðə stætʃu stʊɾ əloʊn ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ðiz hɪlz. ðə sʌnz ən ðə nɛfjuz ən ðə kʌzənz daɪd, ən ðə læst ə ðə hɔkwɪŋz blʌd vænɪʃt fɹəm ði ɝθ - ɪksɛp meɪbi fəɹ səm ə ðoʊz u wɛn oʊvɝ ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən. ðəɹ wɝ ðoʊz u wʊɾə ɪɹeɪst ivən ðə mɛmɹi ʌv hɪm, ɪf ðeɪ kʊd. bʊks wɝ bɝn dʒʌs kəz ðeɪ mɛnʃən ɪz neɪm. ɪn ði ɛn ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ lɛft ə hɪm bʌt ðə stɔɹiz, ən moʊst ə ðɛm ɹɔŋ. ðæts wʌɾ ɪz ɡlɔɹi keɪm tə.

Elyas nodded, still keeping his watch. "Indeed there was not. Artur Hawkwing died the very day the statue was finished, and his sons and the rest of his blood fought over who would sit on Hawkwing's throne. The statue stood alone in the midst of these hills. The sons and the nephews and the cousins died, and the last of the Hawkwing's blood vanished from the earth - except maybe for some of those who went over the Aryth Ocean. There were those who would have erased even the memory of him, if they could. Books were burned just because they mentioned his name. In the end there was nothing left of him but the stories, and most of them wrong. That's what his glory came to.

"ðə faɪɾɪŋ dɪdn stɑp, ʌv kɔɹs, dʒʌs kəz ðə hɔkwɪŋ ən ɪz kɪn wɝ dɛd. ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ə θɹoʊn tə bi wʌn, ən ɛvɹi lɔɹɾ ən leɪɾi hu kəd mʌstɝ faɪɾɪŋ mɛn wɑntəɾ ɪt. ɪt wɑz ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. læstəɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ən twɛnti-θɹi, ɹɪli, ən moʊst ə ðə hɪstɝi ʌv ðət taɪm ɪz lɔst ɪn ðə smoʊk ə bɝnɪŋ taʊnz. mɛni ɡɑɾ ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə lænd, bʌt nʌn ɡɑt ðə hoʊl, ən sʌmtaɪm dʊɹɪŋ ðoʊz jɪɹz ðə stætʃu wɑz pʊl daʊn. meɪbi ðeɪ kʊdn stæn mɛʒɝɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz əɡɛnst ɪɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ."

"The fighting didn't stop, of course, just because the Hawkwing and his kin were dead. There was still a throne to be won, and every lord and lady who could muster fighting men wanted it. It was the beginning of the War of the Hundred Years. Lasted a hundred and twenty-three, really, and most of the history of that time is lost in the smoke of burning towns. Many got a part of the land, but none got the whole, and sometime during those years the statue was pulled down. Maybe they couldn't stand measuring themselves against it any longer."

"fɝs jə saʊn əz ɪf jə dɪspaɪz hɪm," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ænd naʊ jə saʊn əz ɪf jə ædmaɪɹ hɪm." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

"First you sound as if you despise him," Egwene said, "and now you sound as if you admire him." She shook her head.

ɛlaɪəs tɝn tə lʊk ət hɝ, ə flæt, ənblɪŋkɪŋ stɛɹ. "ɡɛt səm mɔɹ ti naʊ, ɪf jə wɑn ɛni. aɪ wɑn ðə faɪɝ aʊt bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk."

Elyas turned to look at her, a flat, unblinking stare. "Get some more tea now, if you want any. I want the fire out before dark."

pɛɹɪn kəd meɪk aʊt ði aɪ klɪɹli naʊ, dɪspaɪt ðə feɪlɪŋ laɪt. ɪt wɑz bɪɡɝ ðən ə mænz hɛd, ən ðə ʃædoʊz fɔlɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪt meɪɾ ɪt sim laɪk ə ɹeɪvənz aɪ, hɑɹɾ ən blæk ən wɪθaʊt pɪɾi. hi wɪʃt ðeɪ wɝ slipɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ ɛls.

Perrin could make out the eye clearly now, despite the failing light. It was bigger than a man's head, and the shadows falling across it made it seem like a raven's eye, hard and black and without pity. He wished they were sleeping somewhere else.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾi


CHAPTER 30

tʃɪlʒɹən ə ʃædoʊ


Children of Shadow

ɛɡwin sæt baɪ ðə faɪɝ, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə fɹæɡmən ə stætʃu, bʌt pɛɹɪn wɛn daʊn baɪ ðə pul tə bi əloʊn. deɪ wɑz feɪɾɪŋ, ən ðə naɪt wɪnd wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɹaɪzɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ist, ɹʌfəlɪŋ ðə sɝfəs ə ðə wɔɾɝ. hi tʊk ði æks fɹəm ðə lup ɑn ɪz bɛlt ən tɝn ɪɾ oʊvɝ ɪn ɪz hænz. ði æʃwʊd hæft wɑz əz lɔŋ əz ɪz ɑɹm, ən smuð ən kul tə ðə tʌtʃ. hi heɪɾəd ɪt. hi wɑz əʃeɪmd ə haʊ pɹaʊɾ i hæd bɪn ə ði æks bæk ɪn ɛmənz fild. bɪfɔɹ i nu wʌɾ i maɪt bi wɪlɪŋ tə də wɪð ɪt.

Egwene sat by the fire, staring up at the fragment of statue, but Perrin went down by the pool to be alone. Day was fading, and the night wind was already rising out of the east, ruffling the surface of the water. He took the axe from the loop on his belt and turned it over in his hands. The ashwood haft was as long as his arm, and smooth and cool to the touch. He hated it. He was ashamed of how proud he had been of the axe back in Emond's Field. Before he knew what he might be willing to do with it.

"ju heɪɾ əɹ ðət mʌtʃ?" ɛlaɪəs sɛd bɪhaɪn hɪm.

"You hate her that much?" Elyas said behind him.

stɑɹɾəld, hi dʒʌmpt ən hæf ɹeɪz ði æks bɪfɔɹ i sɔ hu ɪt wɑz. "kæn . . . ? kən jə ɹɛd maɪ maɪnd, tu? laɪk ðə wʊlvz?"

Startled, he jumped and half raised the axe before he saw who it was. "Can . . . ? Can you read my mind, too? Like the wolves?"

ɛlaɪəs kɑkt ɪz hɛd tə wʌn saɪɾ ən aɪɾ ɪm kwɪtsɪkli. "ə blaɪn mæn kəd ɹid jəɹ feɪs, bɔɪ. wɛl, spik ʌp. dʒju heɪt ðə ɡɝl? dɪspaɪz hɝ? ðæts ɪt. jə wɝ ɹɛɾi tə kɪl əɹ kəz jə dɪspaɪz hɝ, ɔlweɪz dʒɹæɡɪŋ əɹ fit, hoʊldɪŋ jə bæk wɪð əɹ wʊmənɪʃ weɪz."

Elyas cocked his head to one side and eyed him quizzically. "A blind man could read your face, boy. Well, speak up. Do you hate the girl? Despise her? That's it. You were ready to kill her because you despise her, always dragging her feet, holding you back with her womanish ways."

"ɛɡwin nɛvɝ dʒɹæɡd əɹ fiɾ ɪn əɹ laɪf," hi pɹətɛstəd. "ʃi ɔlweɪz dʌz əɹ ʃɛɹ. aɪ doʊn dɪspaɪz hɝ, aɪ lʌv hɝ." hi ɡlɛɹɾ əɾ ɛlaɪəs, dɛɹɪŋ ɪm tə læf. "nɑt laɪk ðæt. aɪ min, ʃi ɪzən laɪk ə sɪstɝ, bʌt ʃi ən ɹænd. . . . blʌɾ ən æʃəz! ɪf ðə ɹeɪvənz kɑɾ ʌs. . . . ɪf. . . . aɪ doʊnt noʊ."

"Egwene never dragged her feet in her life," he protested. "She always does her share. I don't despise her, I love her." He glared at Elyas, daring him to laugh. "Not like that. I mean, she isn't like a sister, but she and Rand. . . . Blood and ashes! If the ravens caught us. . . . If. . . . I don't know."

"jɛs, jə du. ɪf ʃi hæd tə tʃuz əɹ weɪ ʌv daɪɪŋ, wɪtʃ dʒju θɪŋk ʃid pɪk? wʌn klin bloʊ ʌv jəɹ æks, əɹ ðə weɪ ði ænəməlz wi sɔ tədeɪ daɪd? aɪ noʊ wɪtʃ aɪd teɪk."

"Yes, you do. If she had to choose her way of dying, which do you think she'd pick? One clean blow of your axe, or the way the animals we saw today died? I know which I'd take."

"aɪ doʊn əv ɛni ɹaɪt tə tʃuz fəɹ hɝ. jə woʊn tɛl hɝ, wɪl ju? əbaʊt. . . ." hɪz hænz taɪɾənd ɑn ði æks hæft; ðə mʌsəlz ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz kɔɹɾəd, hɛvi mʌsəlz fəɹ ɪz eɪdʒ, bɪl baɪ lɔŋ aʊɝz swɪŋɪŋ ðə hæmɝ ət mæstɝ luhənz fɔɹdʒ. fəɹ ən ɪnstən i θɔt ðə θɪk wʊɾən ʃæft wəd snæp. "aɪ heɪt ðɪs blʌɾi θɪŋ," hi ɡɹaʊld. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ aɪm duɪŋ wɪð ɪt, stʃɹʌɾɪŋ ɝaʊn laɪk səm kaɪndə ful. aɪ kʊdn əv dʌn ɪt, jə noʊ. wən ɪt wɑz ɔl pɹitɛn ən meɪbi, aɪ kəd swæɡɝ, ən pleɪ əz ɪf aɪ. . . ." hi saɪd, hɪz vɔɪs feɪɾɪŋ. "ɪts dɪfɹənt, naʊ. aɪ doʊn ɛvɝ wɑnə juz ɪɾ əɡɛn."

"I don't have any right to choose for her. You won't tell her, will you? About. . . ." His hands tightened on the axe haft; the muscles in his arms corded, heavy muscles for his age, built by long hours swinging the hammer at Master Luhhan's forge. For an instant he thought the thick wooden shaft would snap. "I hate this bloody thing," he growled. "I don't know what I'm doing with it, strutting around like some kind of fool. I couldn't have done it, you know. When it was all pretend and maybe, I could swagger, and play as if I. . . ." He sighed, his voice fading. "It's different, now. I don't ever want to use it again."

"jul juz ɪt."

"You'll use it."

pɛɹɪn ɹeɪz ði æks tə θɹoʊ ɪɾ ɪn ðə pul, bʌɾ ɛlaɪəs kɑɾ ɪz ɹɪst.

Perrin raised the axe to throw it in the pool, but Elyas caught his wrist.

"jul juz ɪt, bɔɪ, ən əz lɔŋ əz jə heɪt juzɪŋ ɪt, jəl juz ɪt mɔɹ waɪzli ðən moʊs mɛn wʊd. weɪt. ɪf ɛvɝ jə doʊn heɪɾ ɪɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, ðən wɪl bi ðə taɪm tə θɹoʊ ɪɾ əz fɑɹ əz jə kən ən ɹʌn ði ʌðɝ weɪ."

"You'll use it, boy, and as long as you hate using it, you will use it more wisely than most men would. Wait. If ever you don't hate it any longer, then will be the time to throw it as far as you can and run the other way."

pɛɹɪn hɛftəd ði æks ɪn ɪz hænz, stɪl tɛmptəd tə liv ɪɾ ɪn ðə pul. izi fəɹ ɪm tə seɪ weɪt. wʌɾ ɪf aɪ weɪɾ ən ðən kæn θɹoʊ ɪɾ əweɪ?

Perrin hefted the axe in his hands, still tempted to leave it in the pool. Easy for him to say wait. What if I wait and then can't throw it away?

hi oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə æsk ɛlaɪəs, bʌt noʊ wɝdz keɪm aʊt. ə sɛndɪŋ fɹəm ðə wʊlvz, soʊ ɝdʒən ðəɾ ɪz aɪz ɡleɪzd oʊvɝ. fəɹ ən ɪnstən i fɝɡɑt wʌɾ i hæd bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ tə seɪ, fɝɡɑɾ i hæd bɪn gɑnə seɪ ɛniθɪŋ, fɝɡɑɾ ivən haʊ tə spik, haʊ tə bɹið. ɛlaɪəsəz feɪs sæɡd, tu, ən ɪz aɪz sim tə pɪɹ ɪnwɝɾ ən fɑɹ əweɪ. ðən ɪt wɑz ɡɔn, əz kwɪkli əz ɪt hæd kʌm. ɪt hæɾ oʊnli læstəɾ ə hɑɹtbit, bʌt ðət wɑz ɪnʌf.

He opened his mouth to ask Elyas, but no words came out. A sending from the wolves, so urgent that his eyes glazed over. For an instant he forgot what he had been going to say, forgot he had been going to say anything, forgot even how to speak, how to breathe. Elyas's face sagged, too, and his eyes seemed to peer inward and far away. Then it was gone, as quickly as it had come. It had only lasted a heartbeat, but that was enough.

pɛɹɪn ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf ən fɪld ɪz lʌŋz dipli. ɛlaɪəs dɪd nɑt pɔz; əz sun əz ðə veɪl lɪftəd fɹəm ɪz aɪz, hi spɛd təwɔɹd ðə faɪɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɛni hɛzəteɪʃən. pɛɹɪn ɹæn wɝdləsli bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Perrin shook himself and filled his lungs deeply. Elyas did not pause; as soon as the veil lifted from his eyes, he sped toward the fire without any hesitation. Perrin ran wordlessly behind him.

"daʊs ðə faɪɝ!" ɛlaɪəs kɔl hɔɹsli tə ɛɡwin. hi dʒɛstʃɝɾ ɝdʒənli, ən i sim tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃaʊɾ ɪn ə wɪspɝ. "ɡɛɾ ɪɾ aʊt!"

"Douse the fire!" Elyas called hoarsely to Egwene. He gestured urgently, and he seemed to be trying to shout in a whisper. "Get it out!"

ʃi ɹoʊz tə hɝ fit, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm ənsɝteɪnli, ðən stɛp kloʊsɝ tə ðə faɪɝ, bʌt sloʊli, klɪɹli nɑɾ ʌndɝstændɪŋ wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ.

She rose to her feet, staring at him uncertainly, then stepped closer to the fire, but slowly, clearly not understanding what was happening.

ɛlaɪəs pʊʃt ɹʌfli pæst əɹ ən snætʃt ʌp ðə ti kɛɾəl, kɝsɪŋ wən ɪt bɝn hɪm. dʒʌɡəlɪŋ ðə hɑt pɑt, hi ʌpɛndəɾ ɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə faɪɝ dʒʌs ðə seɪm. ə stɛp bɪhaɪn hɪm, pɛɹɪn ɝaɪvd ɪn taɪm tə stɑɹt kɪkɪŋ dɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə hɪsɪŋ koʊlz əz ðə læst ə ðə ti splæʃt ɪndə ðə faɪɝ, hɪsɪŋ ən ɹaɪzɪŋ ɪn tɛnʒɹəlz ə stim. hi dɪd nɑt stɑp əntɪl ðə læs vɛstɪdʒ ə ðə faɪɝ wɑz bɛɹid.

Elyas pushed roughly past her and snatched up the tea kettle, cursing when it burned him. Juggling the hot pot, he upended it over the fire just the same. A step behind him, Perrin arrived in time to start kicking dirt over the hissing coals as the last of the tea splashed into the fire, hissing and rising in tendrils of steam. He did not stop until the last vestige of the fire was buried.

ɛlaɪəs tɔs ðə kɛɾəl tə pɛɹɪn, hu ɪmiɾiətli lɛɾ ɪt fɔl wɪð ə tʃoʊkt-ɔf jɛl. pɛɹɪn blu ɑn ɪz hænz, fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ ɛlaɪəs, bʌt ðə fɝ-klæd mæn wɑz tu bɪzi ɡɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ kæmpsaɪɾ ə heɪsti lʊk tə peɪ ɛni ətɛnʃən.

Elyas tossed the kettle to Perrin, who immediately let it fall with a choked-off yell. Perrin blew on his hands, frowning at Elyas, but the fur-clad man was too busy giving their campsite a hasty look to pay any attention.

"noʊ tʃæns tə haɪd ðət sʌmbɑɾiz bɪn hɪɹ," ɛlaɪəs sɛd. "wil dʒʌst əv tə hɝi ən hoʊp. meɪbi ðeɪ woʊn bɑðɝ. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, bʌɾ aɪ wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz ðə ɹeɪvənz."

"No chance to hide that somebody's been here," Elyas said. "We'll just have to hurry and hope. Maybe they won't bother. Blood and ashes, but I was sure it was the ravens."

hɝidli pɛɹɪn tɔs ðə sæɾəl ɑn bɛlə, pɹɑpɪŋ ði æks əɡɛnst ɪz θaɪ waɪl i bɛn tə taɪɾən ðə ɡɝθ.

Hurriedly Perrin tossed the saddle on Bela, propping the axe against his thigh while he bent to tighten the girth.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" ɛɡwin æskt. hɝ vɔɪs ʃʊk. "tʃɹɑləks? eɪ feɪd?"

"What is it?" Egwene asked. Her voice shook. "Trollocs? A Fade?"

"ɡoʊ ist əɹ wɛst," ɛlaɪəs toʊl pɛɹɪn. "faɪn ə pleɪs tə haɪd, ən əl dʒɔɪn jə əz sun əz aɪ kæn. ɪf ðeɪ si ə wʊlf. . . ." hi dɑɹɾɪd əweɪ, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf i ɪntɛndəd tə ɡoʊ tə ɔl fɔɹz, ən vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə lɛŋθənɪŋ ʃædoʊz ʌv ivnɪŋ.

"Go east or west," Elyas told Perrin. "Find a place to hide, and I'll join you as soon as I can. If they see a wolf. . . ." He darted away, crouching almost as if he intended to go to all fours, and vanished into the lengthening shadows of evening.

ɛɡwin heɪstəli ɡæðɝɾ əɹ fju bɪlɔŋɪŋz, bʌt ʃi stɪl dɪmændəɾ ən ɛkspləneɪʃən fɹəm pɛɹɪn. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz ɪnsɪstən ən ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ fɹaɪɾənd baɪ ðə mɪnəɾ əz i kɛp saɪlənt. hi wɑz fɹaɪɾənd, tu, bʌt fɪɹ meɪɾ əm muv fæstɝ. hi weɪɾəd əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ hɛɾəd təwɔɹd ðə sɛɾɪŋ sʌn. tʃɹɑɾɪŋ əhɛɾ ə bɛlə ən hoʊldɪŋ ði æks əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst ɪn boʊθ hænz, hi toʊld wʌɾ i nu oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ɪn snætʃɪz waɪl hʌntɪŋ fəɹ ə pleɪs tə ɡoʊ tə ɡɹaʊn ən weɪt fəɹ ɛlaɪəs.

Egwene hastily gathered her few belongings, but she still demanded an explanation from Perrin. Her voice was insistent and growing more frightened by the minute as he kept silent. He was frightened, too, but fear made them move faster. He waited until they were headed toward the setting sun. Trotting ahead of Bela and holding the axe across his chest in both hands, he told what he knew over his shoulder in snatches while hunting for a place to go to ground and wait for Elyas.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ ə lɑɾ ə mɛn kʌmɪŋ, ɑn hɔɹsəz. ðeɪ keɪm ʌp bɪhaɪn ðə wʊlvz, bʌt ðə mɛn dɪdn si ðɛm. ðəɹ hɛɾɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə pul. pɹɑbli ðeɪ doʊn əv ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð ʌs; ɪts ði oʊnli wɔɾɝ fəɹ maɪlz. bʌt dæpəl sɛz. . . ." hi ɡlænst oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ði ivnɪŋ sʌn peɪntəɾ ɑd ʃædoʊz ɑn əɹ feɪs, ʃædoʊz ðət hɪɾ əɹ ɪkspɹɛʃən. wʌɾ ɪz ʃi θɪŋkɪŋ? ɪz ʃi lʊkɪŋ ət jə əz ɪf ʃi dʌznt noʊ jə ɛnimɔɹ? dʌz ʃi noʊ ju? "dæpəl sɛz ðeɪ smɛl ɹɔŋ. ɪts . . . sɔɹɾ ə ðə weɪ ə ɹæbɪd dɔɡ smɛlz ɹɔŋ." ðə pul wɑz lɔs tə saɪt bɪhaɪn ðɛm. hi kəd stɪl pɪk aʊt boʊldɝz - fɹæɡməns ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz stætʃu - ɪn ðə dipənɪŋ twaɪlaɪt, bʌt nɑt tə tɛl wɪtʃ wɑz ðə stoʊn wɛɹ ðə faɪɝ hæd bɪn. "wil steɪ əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm, faɪn ə pleɪs tə weɪt fəɹ ɛlaɪəs."

"There are a lot of men coming, on horses. They came up behind the wolves, but the men didn't see them. They're heading toward the pool. Probably they don't have anything to do with us; it's the only water for miles. But Dapple says. . . ." He glanced over his shoulder. The evening sun painted odd shadows on her face, shadows that hid her expression. What is she thinking? Is she looking at you as if she doesn't know you anymore? Does she know you? "Dapple says they smell wrong. It's . . . sort of the way a rabid dog smells wrong." The pool was lost to sight behind them. He could still pick out boulders - fragments of Artur Hawkwing's statue - in the deepening twilight, but not to tell which was the stone where the fire had been. "We'll stay away from them, find a place to wait for Elyas."

"waɪ ʃəd ðeɪ bɑðɝ ʌs?" ʃi dɪmændəd. "wɝ səpoʊz tə bi seɪf hɪɹ. ɪts səpoʊz tə bi seɪf. laɪt, ðəɹ əz tə bi sʌmpleɪs seɪf."

"Why should they bother us?" she demanded. "We're supposed to be safe here. It's supposed to be safe. Light, there has to be someplace safe."

pɛɹɪn bɪɡæn lʊkɪŋ hɑɹɾɝ fəɹ sʌmwɛɹ tə haɪd. ðeɪ kəd nɑt bi vɛɹi fɑɹ fɹəm ðə pul, bʌt ðə twaɪlaɪt wɑz θɪkənɪŋ. sun ɪt wəd bi tu dɑɹk tə tʃɹævəl. feɪn laɪt stɪl beɪðd ðə kɹɛsts. fɹəm ðə hɑloʊz bɪtwin, wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz bɛɹli ɪnʌf tə si, ɪt sim bɹaɪt baɪ kɑntʃɹæst. ɔf tə ðə lɛft ə dɑɹk ʃeɪp stʊd ʃɑɹp əɡɛns ðə skaɪ, ə lɑɹdʒ, flæt stoʊn slæntɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə hɪlsaɪd, kloʊkɪŋ ðə sloʊp bɪniθ ɪn dɑɹknəs.

Perrin began looking harder for somewhere to hide. They could not be very far from the pool, but the twilight was thickening. Soon it would be too dark to travel. Faint light still bathed the crests. From the hollows between, where there was barely enough to see, it seemed bright by contrast. Off to the left a dark shape stood sharp against the sky, a large, flat stone slanting out of a hillside, cloaking the slope beneath in darkness.

"ðɪs weɪ," hi sɛd.

"This way," he said.

hi tʃɹɑɾəd təwɔɹd ðə hɪl, ɡlænsɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ fəɹ ɛni saɪn ə ðə mɛn u wɝ kʌmɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ - jɛt. mɔɹ ðən wʌns i hæd tə stɑp ən weɪt waɪl ði ʌðɝz stʌmbəld æftɝ hɪm. ɛɡwin wɑz kɹaʊtʃt oʊvɝ bɛləz nɛk, ən ðə mɛɹ wɑz pɪkɪŋ əɹ weɪ kɛɹfəli oʊvɝ ði ənivən ɡɹaʊnd. pɛɹɪn θɔt ðeɪ boʊθ mʌs bi mɔɹ taɪɝd ðən i hæd bɪlivd. ðɪs hæd bɛɾɝ bi ə ɡʊd haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk wi kən hʌn fəɹ ənʌðɝ.

He trotted toward the hill, glancing over his shoulder for any sign of the men who were coming. There was nothing - yet. More than once he had to stop and wait while the others stumbled after him. Egwene was crouched over Bela's neck, and the mare was picking her way carefully over the uneven ground. Perrin thought they both must be more tired than he had believed. This had better be a good hiding place. I don't think we can hunt for another.

ət ðə beɪs ə ðə hɪl i stʌɾid ðə mæsɪv, flæt ɹɑk aʊtlaɪn əɡɛns ðə skaɪ, dʒʌɾɪŋ aʊt ðə sloʊp ɔlmoʊst ət ðə kɹɛst. ðəɹ wɑz ən ɑd fəmɪljɛɹəɾi tə ðə weɪ ðə tɑp ə ðə hjudʒ slæb sim tə fɔɹm ɪɹɛɡjəlɝ stɛps, θɹi ʌp ən wʌn daʊn. hi klaɪm ðə ʃɔɹt dɪstəns ən fɛlt əkɹɔs ðə stoʊn, wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪt. dɪspaɪt ðə wɛðɝɪŋ ə sɛntʃɝiz i kəd stɪl fil fɔɹ dʒɔɪn kɑləmz. hi ɡlænst ʌp ət ðə stɛp-laɪk tɑp ə ðə stoʊn, taʊɝɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd laɪk ə hjudʒ lin-tə. fɪŋɡɝz. wɪl ʃɛltɝ ɪn ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz hænd. meɪbi səm ə hɪz dʒʌstəs ɪz lɛf hɪɹ.

At the base of the hill he studied the massive, flat rock outlined against the sky, jutting out the slope almost at the crest. There was an odd familiarity to the way the top of the huge slab seemed to form irregular steps, three up and one down. He climbed the short distance and felt across the stone, walking along it. Despite the weathering of centuries he could still feel four joined columns. He glanced up at the step-like top of the stone, towering over his head like a huge lean-to. Fingers. We'll shelter in Artur Hawkwing's hand. Maybe some of his justice is left here.

hi moʊʃən fəɹ ɛɡwin tə dʒɔɪn hɪm. ʃi dɪd nɑt muv, soʊ hi slɪd bæk daʊn tə ðə beɪs ə ðə hɪl ən toʊld əɹ wʌɾ i hæd faʊnd.

He motioned for Egwene to join him. She did not move, so he slid back down to the base of the hill and told her what he had found.

ɛɡwin pɪɹɾ ʌp ðə hɪl wɪð əɹ hɛd pʊʃt fɔɹwɝd. "haʊ kən jə si ɛniθɪŋ?" ʃi æskt.

Egwene peered up the hill with her head pushed forward. "How can you see anything?" she asked.

pɛɹɪn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ðən ʃʌɾ ɪt. hi lɪkt ɪz lɪps əz i lʊkt ɝaʊnd, fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɹɪli əwɛɹ ʌv wʌɾ i wɑz siɪŋ. ðə sʌn wɑz daʊn. ɔl ðə weɪ daʊn, naʊ, ən klaʊdz hɪd ðə fʊl mun, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl sim laɪk ðə dip pɝpəl fɹɪnʒɪz ə twaɪlaɪt tə hɪm. "aɪ fɛl ðə ɹɑk," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "ðæts wʌɾ ɪts tə bi. ðeɪ woʊn bi eɪbəl tə pɪk əs aʊɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ɪɾ ivən ɪf ðeɪ kʌm ðɪs fɑɹ." hi tʊk bɛləz bɹaɪɾəl tə liɾ əɹ tə ðə ʃɛltɝ ə ðə hænd. hi kəd fil ɛɡwinz aɪz ɑn ɪz bæk.

Perrin opened his mouth, then shut it. He licked his lips as he looked around, for the first time really aware of what he was seeing. The sun was down. All the way down, now, and clouds hid the full moon, but it still seemed like the deep purple fringes of twilight to him. "I felt the rock," he said finally. "That's what it has to be. They won't be able to pick us out against the shadow of it even if they come this far." He took Bela's bridle to lead her to the shelter of the hand. He could feel Egwene's eyes on his back.

əz i wɑz hɛlpɪŋ əɹ daʊn fɹəm ðə sæɾəl, ðə naɪt bɹoʊk aʊɾ ɪn ʃaʊts bæk təwɔɹd ðə pul. ʃi leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn pɛɹɪnz ɑɹm, ən i hɝɾ əɹ ənspoʊkən kwɛstʃən.

As he was helping her down from the saddle, the night broke out in shouts back toward the pool. She laid a hand on Perrin's arm, and he heard her unspoken question.

"ðə mɛn sɔ wɪnd," hi sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. ɪt wɑz dɪfəkəl tə pɪk aʊt ðə minɪŋ ə ðə wʊlvz' θɔts. sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt faɪɝ. "ðeɪ hæv tɔɹtʃɪz." hi pɹɛst əɹ daʊn ət ðə beɪs ə ðə fɪŋɡɝz ən kɹaʊtʃt bɪsaɪd hɝ. "ðeɪɹ bɹeɪkɪŋ ʌp ɪndə pɑɹɾiz tə sɝtʃ. soʊ mɛni ʌv ðɛm, ən ðə wʊlvz ɑɹ ɔl hɝt." hi tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs hɑɹɾiɝ. "bʌt dæpəl ən ði ʌðɝz ʃəd bi eɪbəl tə kip aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ weɪ, ivən ɪnʒɝd, ən ðeɪ doʊn ɪkspɛkt ʌs. pipəl doʊn si wʌt ðeɪ doʊn ɪkspɛkt. ðəl ɡɪv ʌp sun ɪnʌf ən meɪk kæmp." ɛlaɪəs wɑz wɪð ðə wʊlvz, ən wəd nɑt liv əm waɪl ðeɪ wɝ hʌntəd. soʊ mɛni ɹaɪɾɝz. soʊ pɝsɪstənt. waɪ soʊ pɝsɪstənt?

"The men saw Wind," he said reluctantly. It was difficult to pick out the meaning of the wolves' thoughts. Something about fire. "They have torches." He pressed her down at the base of the fingers and crouched beside her. "They're breaking up into parties to search. So many of them, and the wolves are all hurt." He tried to make his voice heartier. "But Dapple and the others should be able to keep out of their way, even injured, and they don't expect us. People don't see what they don't expect. They'll give up soon enough and make camp." Elyas was with the wolves, and would not leave them while they were hunted. So many riders. So persistent. Why so persistent?

hi sɔ ɛɡwin nɑd, bʌɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk ʃi dɪd nɑt ɹilaɪz ɪt. "wil bi ɔl ɹaɪt, pɛɹɪn."

He saw Egwene nod, but in the dark she did not realize it. "We'll be all right, Perrin."

laɪt, hi θɔt wʌndɝɪŋli, ʃiz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kʌmfɝt mi.

Light, he thought wonderingly, she's trying to comfort me.

ðə ʃaʊts wɛn ɑn ən ɑn. smɔl nɑts ə tɔɹtʃɪz muvd ɪn ðə dɪstəns, flɪkɝɪŋ pɔɪns ə laɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs.

The shouts went on and on. Small knots of torches moved in the distance, flickering points of light in the darkness.

"pɛɹɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd sɔfli, "wɪl jə dæns wɪð mi ət sʌndeɪ? ɪf wɝ hoʊm baɪ ðɛn?"

"Perrin," Egwene said softly, "will you dance with me at Sunday? If we're home by then?"

hɪz ʃoʊldɝz ʃʊk. hi meɪd noʊ saʊnd, ən i dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪf i wɑz læfɪŋ əɹ kɹaɪɪŋ. "aɪ wɪl. aɪ pɹɑməs." əɡɛnst ɪz wɪl ɪz hænz taɪɾənd ɑn ði æks, ɹimaɪndɪŋ ɪm ðəɾ i stɪl hɛld ɪt. hɪz vɔɪs dʒɹɑp tə ə wɪspɝ. "aɪ pɹɑməs," hi sɛɾ əɡɛn, ən hoʊpt.

His shoulders shook. He made no sound, and he did not know if he was laughing or crying. "I will. I promise." Against his will his hands tightened on the axe, reminding him that he still held it. His voice dropped to a whisper. "I promise," he said again, and hoped.

ɡɹups ə tɔɹtʃ-kæɹiɪŋ mɛn naʊ ɹoʊd θɹu ðə hɪlz, bʌntʃəz ə tɛn əɹ twɛlv. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt tɛl haʊ mɛni ɡɹups ðəɹ wɝ. səmtaɪmz θɹi əɹ fɔɹ wɝ ɪn saɪɾ ət wʌns, kɔɹɾɝɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ. ðeɪ kəntɪnjud tə ʃaʊt tə wʌn ənʌðɝ, ən səmtaɪmz ðəɹ wɝ skɹimz ɪn ðə naɪt, ðə skɹimz ə hɔɹsəz, ðə skɹimz ə mɛn.

Groups of torch-carrying men now rode through the hills, bunches of ten or twelve. Perrin could not tell how many groups there were. Sometimes three or four were in sight at once, quartering back and forth. They continued to shout to one another, and sometimes there were screams in the night, the screams of horses, the screams of men.

hi sɔ ɪɾ ɔl fɹəm mɔɹ ðən wʌn væntədʒ. hi kɹaʊtʃt ɑn ðə hɪlsaɪd wɪð ɛɡwin, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə tɔɹtʃɪz muv θɹu ðə dɑɹknəs laɪk faɪɝəfliz, ən ɪn ɪz maɪn i ɹæn ɪn ðə naɪt wɪð dæpəl, ən wɪnd, ən hɑpɝ. ðə wʊlvz hæd bɪn tu hɝt baɪ ðə ɹeɪvənz tə ɹʌn fɑɹ əɹ fæst, soʊ ðeɪ ɪntɛndəd tə dʒɹaɪv ðə mɛn aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹknəs, dʒɹaɪv əm tə ðə ʃɛltɝ ə ðɛɹ faɪɝz. mɛn ɔlweɪz sɔt ðə seɪfti ʌv faɪɝz ɪn ði ɛnd, wən wʊlvz ɹoʊm ðə naɪt. səm ə ðə maʊntəd mɛn lɛd stʃɹɪŋz ə hɔɹsəz wɪθaʊt ɹaɪɾɝz; ðeɪ wɪniɾ ən ɹɪɹd wɪð waɪd, ɹoʊlɪŋ aɪz wən ðə ɡɹeɪ ʃeɪps dɑɹɾɪd əmʌŋ ðɛm, skɹimɪŋ ən pʊlɪŋ ðɛɹ lɛd ɹoʊps fɹəm ðə hænz ə ðə mɛn u hɛl ðɛm, skæɾɝɪŋ ɪn ɔl dɝɛkʃənz əz fæst əz ðeɪ kəd ɹʌn. hɔɹsəz wɪð mɛn ɑn ðɛɹ bæks skɹimd, tu, wən ɡɹeɪ ʃædoʊz flæʃt aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wɪð hæmstʃɹɪŋɪŋ fæŋz, ən səmtaɪmz ðɛɹ ɹaɪɾɝz skɹimd əz wɛl, dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ dʒɔz tɔɹ aʊt ðɛɹ θɹoʊts. ɛlaɪəs wɑz aʊt ðɛɹ, ɔlsoʊ, mɔɹ dɪmli sɛnst, stɔkɪŋ ðə naɪt wɪð ɪz lɔŋ naɪf, ə tu-lɛɡəd wʊlf wɪð wʌn ʃɑɹp stil tuθ. ðə ʃaʊts bɪkeɪm kɝsɪz mɔɹ ɔfən ðən nɑt, bʌt ðə sɝtʃɝz ɹəfjuz tə ɡɪv ʌp.

He saw it all from more than one vantage. He crouched on the hillside with Egwene, watching the torches move through the darkness like fireflies, and in his mind he ran in the night with Dapple, and Wind, and Hopper. The wolves had been too hurt by the ravens to run far or fast, so they intended to drive the men out of the darkness, drive them to the shelter of their fires. Men always sought the safety of fires in the end, when wolves roamed the night. Some of the mounted men led strings of horses without riders; they whinnied and reared with wide, rolling eyes when the gray shapes darted among them, screaming and pulling their lead ropes from the hands of the men who held them, scattering in all directions as fast as they could run. Horses with men on their backs screamed, too, when gray shadows flashed out of the dark with hamstringing fangs, and sometimes their riders screamed as well, just before jaws tore out their throats. Elyas was out there, also, more dimly sensed, stalking the night with his long knife, a two-legged wolf with one sharp steel tooth. The shouts became curses more often than not, but the searchers refused to give up.

əbɹʌpli pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪz ðət ðə mɛn wɪð tɔɹtʃɪz wɝ fɑloʊɪŋ ə pæɾɝn. itʃ taɪm səm ə ðə pɑɹɾiz keɪm ɪn vju, wʌn ə ðɛm, ət list, wɑz kloʊsɝ tə ðə hɪlsaɪd wɛɹ i ən ɛɡwin wɝ haɪɾɪŋ. ɛlaɪəs hæd sɛd tə haɪd, bʌt. . . . wʌɾ ɪf wi ɹʌn? meɪbi wi kəd haɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk, ɪf wi kip muvɪŋ. meɪbi. ɪts tə bi dɑɹk ɪnʌf fəɹ ðæt.

Abruptly Perrin realized that the men with torches were following a pattern. Each time some of the parties came in view, one of them, at least, was closer to the hillside where he and Egwene were hiding. Elyas had said to hide, but. . . . What if we run? Maybe we could hide in the dark, if we keep moving. Maybe. It has to be dark enough for that.

hi tɝn tə ɛɡwin, bʌɾ əz i dɪd ðə dɪsɪʒən wɑz teɪkən əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. bʌntʃt tɔɹtʃɪz, ə dʌzən ə ðɛm, keɪm ɝaʊn ðə beɪs ə ðə hɪl, weɪvɝɪŋ wɪð ðə tʃɹɑɾ ə ðə hɔɹsəz. lænsəhɛdz ɡlimd ɪn ðə tɔɹtʃlaɪt. hi fɹoʊz, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ, hænz taɪɾənɪŋ ɑn ɪz æks hæft.

He turned to Egwene, but as he did the decision was taken away from him. Bunched torches, a dozen of them, came around the base of the hill, wavering with the trot of the horses. Lanceheads gleamed in the torchlight. He froze, holding his breath, hands tightening on his axe haft.

ðə hɔɹsmən ɹoʊd pæs ðə hɪl, bʌt wʌn ə ðə mɛn ʃaʊɾəd, ən ðə tɔɹtʃɪz swʌŋ bæk. hi θɔt dɛspɝətli, sikɪŋ fəɹ ə weɪ tə ɡoʊ. bʌɾ əz sun əz ðeɪ muv ðeɪ wəd bi sin, ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn, ən wʌns ðeɪ wɝ mɑɹk ðeɪ wəɾ əv noʊ tʃæns, nɑɾ ivən wɪð ðə dɑɹknəs tə hɛlp.

The horsemen rode past the hill, but one of the men shouted, and the torches swung back. He thought desperately, seeking for a way to go. But as soon as they moved they would be seen, if they had not already been, and once they were marked they would have no chance, not even with the darkness to help.

ðə hɔɹsmən dʒɹu ʌp ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə hɪl, itʃ mæn hoʊldɪŋ ə tɔɹtʃ ɪn wʌn hæn ən ə lɔŋ læns ɪn ði ʌðɝ, ɡaɪɾɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs baɪ ðə pɹɛʃɝ ə hɪz niz. baɪ ðə laɪɾ ə ðə tɔɹtʃɪz pɛɹɪn kəd si ðə waɪt kloʊks ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. ðeɪ hɛl ðə tɔɹtʃɪz haɪ ən lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, piɹɪŋ ʌp ət ðə dip ʃædoʊz ʌndɝ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋz fɪŋɡɝz.

The horsemen drew up at the foot of the hill, each man holding a torch in one hand and a long lance in the other, guiding his horse by the pressure of his knees. By the light of the torches Perrin could see the white cloaks of the Children of the Light. They held the torches high and leaned forward in their saddles, peering up at the deep shadows under Artur Hawkwing's fingers.

"ðɛɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ʌp ðɛɹ," wʌn ə ðɛm sɛd. hɪz vɔɪs wɑz tu laʊd, əz ɪf i wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ʌv wʌt leɪ aʊtsaɪd ðə laɪɾ ə hɪz tɔɹtʃ. "aɪ toʊl jə sʌmbɑɾi kəd haɪɾ ɪn ðæt. ɪzən ðəɾ ə hɔɹs?"

"There is something up there," one of them said. His voice was too loud, as if he was afraid of what lay outside the light of his torch. "I told you somebody could hide in that. Isn't that a horse?"

ɛɡwin leɪɾ ə hæn ɑn pɛɹɪnz ɑɹm; hɝ aɪz wɝ bɪɡ ɪn ðə dɑɹk. hɝ saɪlən kwɛstʃən pleɪn dɪspaɪt ðə ʃædoʊ haɪɾɪŋ əɹ fitʃɝz. wʌt tə du? ɛlaɪəs ən ðə wʊlvz stɪl hʌntəd θɹu ðə naɪt. ðə hɔɹsəz bɪloʊ ʃɪftəd ðɛɹ fit nɝvəsli. ɪf wi ɹʌn naʊ, ðəl tʃeɪs əs daʊn.

Egwene laid a hand on Perrin's arm; her eyes were big in the dark. Her silent question plain despite the shadow hiding her features. What to do? Elyas and the wolves still hunted through the night. The horses below shifted their feet nervously. If we run now, they'll chase us down.

wʌn ə ðə waɪtkloʊks stɛpt ɪz hɔɹs fɔɹwɝɾ ən ʃaʊɾəd ʌp ðə hɪl. "ɪf jə kən ʌndɝstæn hjumən spitʃ, kʌm daʊn ən sɝɛndɝ. jəl nɑt bi hɑɹmd ɪf jə wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt. ɪf jə doʊn sɝɛndɝ, jəl ɔl bi kɪld. juv wʌn mɪnut." ðə lænsɪz loʊɝd, lɔŋ stil hɛdz bɹaɪt wɪð tɔɹtʃlaɪt.

One of the Whitecloaks stepped his horse forward and shouted up the hill. "If you can understand human speech, come down and surrender. You'll not be harmed if you walk in the Light. If you don't surrender, you will all be killed. You have one minute." The lances lowered, long steel heads bright with torchlight.

"pɛɹɪn," ɛɡwin wɪspɝd, "wi kæn aʊtʃɹʌn ðɛm. ɪf wi doʊnt ɡɪv ʌp, ðəl kɪl ʌs. pɛɹɪn?"

"Perrin," Egwene whispered, "we can't outrun them. If we don't give up, they'll kill us. Perrin?"

ɛlaɪəs ən ðə wʊlvz wɝ stɪl fɹi. ənʌðɝ dɪstənt, bʌbəlɪŋ skɹim mɑɹkt ə waɪtkloʊk u hæd hʌntəd dæpəl tu kloʊsli. ɪf wi ɹʌn. . . . ɛɡwin wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə tɛl əɹ wʌt tə du. ɪf wi ɹʌn. . . . hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd wɛɹəli ən stʊɾ ʌp laɪk ə mæn ɪn ə tʃɹæns, stʌmbəlɪŋ daʊn ðə hɪl təwɔɹd ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. hi hɝɾ ɛɡwin saɪ ən fɑloʊ hɪm, hɝ fit dʒɹæɡɪŋ ɹɪlʌktənli. waɪ ɑɹ ðə waɪtkloʊks soʊ pɝsɪstənt, əz ɪf ðeɪ heɪt wʊlvz wɪð ə pæʃən? waɪ də ðeɪ smɛl ɹɔŋ? hi ɔlmoʊs θɔɾ i kəd smɛl ðə ɹɔŋɡnəs hɪmsɛlf, wən ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪd fɹəm ðə ɹaɪɾɝz.

Elyas and the wolves were still free. Another distant, bubbling scream marked a Whitecloak who had hunted Dapple too closely. If we run. . . . Egwene was looking at him, waiting for him to tell her what to do. If we run. . . . He shook his head wearily and stood up like a man in a trance, stumbling down the hill toward the Children of the Light. He heard Egwene sigh and follow him, her feet dragging reluctantly. Why are the Whitecloaks so persistent, as if they hate wolves with a passion? Why do they smell wrong? He almost thought he could smell the wrongness himself, when the wind gusted from the riders.

"dʒɹɑp ðəɾ æks," ðə liɾɝ bɑɹkt.

"Drop that axe," the leader barked.

pɛɹɪn stʌmbəl təwɔɹd hɪm, ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ ɪz noʊz tə ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðə smɛl i θɔɾ i smɛlt.

Perrin stumbled toward him, wrinkling his nose to get rid of the smell he thought he smelt.

"dʒɹɑp ɪt, bʌmpkɪn!" ðə liɾɝz læns ʃɪftəd təwɔɹd pɛɹɪnz tʃɛst.

"Drop it, bumpkin!" The leader's lance shifted toward Perrin's chest.

fəɹ ə moʊmən i stɛɹɾ ət ðə lænsəhɛd, ɪnʌf ʃɑɹp stil tə ɡoʊ kəmplitli θɹu hɪm, ən əbɹʌpli hi ʃaʊɾəd, "noʊ!" ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ət ðə hɔɹsmən i ʃaʊɾəd.

For a moment he stared at the lancehead, enough sharp steel to go completely through him, and abruptly he shouted, "No!" It was not at the horseman he shouted.

aʊɾ ə ðə naɪt hɑpɝ keɪm, ən pɛɹɪn wɑz wʌn wɪð ðə wʊlf. hɑpɝ, ðə kʌb u hæd wɑtʃt ði iɡəlz sɔɹ, ən wɑntəd soʊ bædli tə flaɪ θɹu ðə skaɪ əz ði iɡəlz dɪd. ðə kʌb u hɑpt ən dʒʌmpt ən lɛpt əntɪl i kəd lip haɪɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ wʊlf, ən u nɛvɝ lɔs ðə kʌbz jɝnɪŋ tə sɔɹ θɹu ðə skaɪ. aʊɾ ə ðə naɪt hɑpɝ keɪm ən lɛf ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn ə lip, sɔɹɪŋ laɪk ði iɡəlz. ðə waɪtkloʊks hæɾ oʊnli ə moʊmən tə bɪɡɪn kɝsɪŋ bɪfɔɹ hɑpɝz dʒɔz kloʊzd ɑn ðə θɹoʊɾ ə ðə mæn wɪð ɪz læns lɛvəld ət pɛɹɪn. ðə bɪɡ wʊlfs moʊmɛntəm kæɹiɾ əm boʊθ ɔf ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə hɔɹs. pɛɹɪn fɛl ðə θɹoʊt kɹʌʃɪŋ, teɪstəd ðə blʌd.

Out of the night Hopper came, and Perrin was one with the wolf. Hopper, the cub who had watched the eagles soar, and wanted so badly to fly through the sky as the eagles did. The cub who hopped and jumped and leaped until he could leap higher than any other wolf, and who never lost the cub's yearning to soar through the sky. Out of the night Hopper came and left the ground in a leap, soaring like the eagles. The Whitecloaks had only a moment to begin cursing before Hopper's jaws closed on the throat of the man with his lance leveled at Perrin. The big wolf's momentum carried them both off the other side of the horse. Perrin felt the throat crushing, tasted the blood.

hɑpɝ lændəd laɪtli, ɔlɹɛɾi əpɑɹt fɹəm ðə mæn i hæd kɪld. blʌd mæɾɪd ɪz fɝ, hɪz oʊn blʌɾ ən ðəɾ ʌv ʌðɝz. ə ɡæʃ daʊn ɪz feɪs kɹɔs ði ɛmpti sɑkət wɛɹ ɪz lɛft aɪ hæd bɪn. hɪz ɡʊɾ aɪ mɛt pɛɹɪnz tu fəɹ dʒʌst ən ɪnstənt. ɹʌn, bɹʌðɝ! hi wɝl tə lip əɡɛn, tə sɔɹ wʌn læs taɪm, ən ə læns pɪn ɪm tə ði ɝθ. ə sɛkən lɛŋθ ə stil θɹʌs θɹu hɪz ɹɪbz, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊn ʌndɝ hɪm. kɪkɪŋ, hi snæpt ət ðə ʃæfs ðət hɛl hɪm. tə sɔɹ.

Hopper landed lightly, already apart from the man he had killed. Blood matted his fur, his own blood and that of others. A gash down his face crossed the empty socket where his left eye had been. His good eye met Perrin's two for just an instant. Run, brother! He whirled to leap again, to soar one last time, and a lance pinned him to the earth. A second length of steel thrust through his ribs, driving into the ground under him. Kicking, he snapped at the shafts that held him. To soar.

peɪn fɪl pɛɹɪn, ən i skɹimd, ə wɝdləs skɹim ðət hæd sʌmθɪŋ ʌv ə wʊlfs kɹaɪ ɪn ɪt. wɪθaʊt θɪŋkɪŋ i lɛp fɔɹwɝd, stɪl skɹimɪŋ. ɔl θɔt wɑz ɡɔn. ðə hɔɹsmən hæd bʌntʃt tu mʌtʃ tə bi eɪbəl tə juz ðɛɹ lænsɪz, ən ði æks wɑz ə fɛðɝ ɪn ɪz hænz, wʌn hjudʒ wʊlfs tuθ ə stil. sʌmθɪŋ kɹæʃt ɪndə hɪz hɛd, ən əz i fɛl, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪf ɪt wɑz hɑpɝ əɹ hɪmsɛlf u daɪd.

Pain filled Perrin, and he screamed, a wordless scream that had something of a wolf's cry in it. Without thinking he leaped forward, still screaming. All thought was gone. The horsemen had bunched too much to be able to use their lances, and the axe was a feather in his hands, one huge wolf's tooth of steel. Something crashed into his head, and as he fell, he did not know if it was Hopper or himself who died.

". . . sɔɹ laɪk ði iɡəlz."

". . . soar like the eagles."

mʌmbəlɪŋ, pɛɹɪn oʊpən ɪz aɪz wuzəli. hɪz hɛd hɝt, ən i kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ waɪ. blɪŋkɪŋ əɡɛns ðə laɪt, hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd. ɛɡwin wɑz nilɪŋ ən wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm wɛɹ i leɪ. ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ə skwɛɹ tɛn əz bɪɡ əz ə miɾiəm-saɪzd ɹum ɪn ə fɑɹmhaʊs, wɪð ə ɡɹaʊn klɔθ fəɹ ə flɔɹ. ɔɪl læmps ɑn tɔl stænz, wʌn ɪn itʃ kɔɹnɝ, ɡeɪv ə bɹaɪt laɪt.

Mumbling, Perrin opened his eyes woozily. His head hurt, and he could not remember why. Blinking against the light, he looked around. Egwene was kneeling and watching him where he lay. They were in a square tent as big as a medium-sized room in a farmhouse, with a ground cloth for a floor. Oil lamps on tall stands, one in each corner, gave a bright light.

"θæŋk ðə laɪt, pɛɹɪn," ʃi bɹiðd. "aɪ wɑz əfɹeɪd ðeɪ hæd kɪl ju."

"Thank the Light, Perrin," she breathed. "I was afraid they had killed you."

ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ænsɝɪŋ, hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn siɾəd ɪn ðə loʊn tʃɛɹ ɪn ðə tɛnt. ə dɑɹk-aɪd, ɡɹændfɑðɝli feɪs lʊk bæk ət hɪm, ə feɪs əɾ ɑdz ɪn ɪz maɪnd wɪð ðə waɪt-ænd-ɡoʊl tɑbɝd ðə mæn wɔɹ, ən ðə bɝnɪʃt ɑɹmɝ stʃɹæpt oʊvɝ ɪz pjʊɹ-waɪɾ ʌndɝkoʊt. ɪt simd ə kaɪnli feɪs, blʌf ən dɪɡnəfaɪd, ən sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt fɪt ði ɛləɡən ɔstɛɹɪɾi ʌv ðə tɛns fɝnɪʃɪŋz. ə teɪbəl ən ə foʊldɪŋ bɛd, ə wɑʃstænd wɪð ə pleɪn waɪt beɪsən ən pɪtʃɝ, ə sɪŋɡəl wʊɾən tʃɛst ɪnleɪɾ ɪn sɪmpəl dʒiəmɛtʃɹɪk pæɾɝnz. wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz wʊd, ɪt wɑz pɑlɪʃt tə ə sɑft ɡloʊ, ən ðə mɛɾəl ɡlimd, bʌt nɑt tu bɹaɪtli, ən nʌθɪŋ wɑz ʃoʊi. ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ðə tɛn hæd ðə lʊk ə kɹæfsmənʃɪp, bʌɾ oʊnli sʌmwʌn u hæd wɑtʃt ðə wɝk ə kɹæfsmən - laɪk mæstɝ luhən, əɹ mæstɝ eɪdɑɹ, ðə kæbəntmeɪkɝ - wəd si ɪt.

Instead of answering, he stared at the gray-haired man seated in the lone chair in the tent. A dark-eyed, grandfatherly face looked back at him, a face at odds in his mind with the white-and-gold tabard the man wore, and the burnished armor strapped over his pure-white undercoat. It seemed a kindly face, bluff and dignified, and something about it fit the elegant austerity of the tent's furnishings. A table and a folding bed, a washstand with a plain white basin and pitcher, a single wooden chest inlaid in simple geometric patterns. Where there was wood, it was polished to a soft glow, and the metal gleamed, but not too brightly, and nothing was showy. Everything in the tent had the look of craftsmanship, but only someone who had watched the work of craftsmen - like Master Luhhan, or Master Aydaer, the cabinetmaker - would see it.

fɹaʊnɪŋ, ðə mæn stɝd tu smɔl paɪlz ʌv ɑbʒɛkts ɑn ðə teɪbəl wɪð ə blʌn fɪŋɡɝ. pɛɹɪn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə kɑntɛns ə hɪz pɑkəts ɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz paɪlz, ən ɪz bɛl naɪf. ðə sɪlvɝ kɔɪn mɔɪɹeɪn hæd ɡɪvən ɪm tɑpəld aʊt, ən ðə mæn pʊʃt ɪt bæk θɔtfəli. pɝsɪŋ ɪz lɪps, hi lɛf ðə paɪlz ən lɪftəd pɛɹɪnz æks fɹəm ðə teɪbəl, hɛftɪŋ ɪt. hɪz ətɛnʃən keɪm bæk tə ði ɛmənz fildɝz.

Frowning, the man stirred two small piles of objects on the table with a blunt finger. Perrin recognized the contents of his pockets in one of those piles, and his belt knife. The silver coin Moiraine had given him toppled out, and the man pushed it back thoughtfully. Pursing his lips, he left the piles and lifted Perrin's axe from the table, hefting it. His attention came back to the Emond's Fielders.

pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛɾ ʌp. ʃɑɹp peɪn stæbɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz tɝn ðə muvmən ɪndə ə flɑp. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm i ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz taɪd, hæn ən fʊt. hɪz aɪz wɛn tə ɛɡwin. ʃi ʃɹʌɡd ɹufəli, ən twɪstəd soʊ ðəɾ i kəd si hɝ bæk. hæf ə dʌzən læʃɪŋz ɹæpt əɹ ɹɪsts ən æŋkəlz, ðə kɔɹdz meɪkɪŋ ɹɪdʒəz ɪn əɹ flɛʃ. ə lɛŋθ ə ɹoʊp ɹæn bɪtwin ðə bɑnz ɝaʊn æŋkəlz ən ɹɪsts, ʃɔɹɾ ɪnʌf tə stɑp əɹ fɹəm stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ tə mɔɹ ðən ə kɹaʊtʃ ɪf ʃi ɡɑt tə hɝ fit.

Perrin tried to get up. Sharp pain stabbing along his arms and legs turned the movement into a flop. For the first time he realized that he was tied, hand and foot. His eyes went to Egwene. She shrugged ruefully, and twisted so that he could see her back. Half a dozen lashings wrapped her wrists and ankles, the cords making ridges in her flesh. A length of rope ran between the bonds around ankles and wrists, short enough to stop her from straightening to more than a crouch if she got to her feet.

pɛɹɪn stɛɹd. ðət ðeɪ wɝ taɪd wɑz ʃɑk ɪnʌf, bʌt ðeɪ wɔɹ ɪnʌf ɹoʊps tə hoʊl hɔɹsəz. wʌt də ðeɪ θɪŋk wi ɑɹ?

Perrin stared. That they were tied was shock enough, but they wore enough ropes to hold horses. What do they think we are?

ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn wɑtʃt ðɛm, kjʊɹiəs ən θɔtfəl, laɪk mæstɝ ælvɪɹ pʌzəlɪŋ aʊɾ ə pɹɑbləm. hi hɛl ði æks əz ɪf i hæd fɝɡɑɾən ɪt.

The gray-haired man watched them, curious and thoughtful, like Master al'Vere puzzling out a problem. He held the axe as if he had forgotten it.

ðə tɛn flæp ʃɪftəɾ əsaɪd, ən ə tɔl mæn stɛpt ɪndə ðə tɛnt. hɪz feɪs wɑz lɔŋ ən ɡɔnt, wɪð aɪz soʊ dipli sɛt ðeɪ sim tə lʊk aʊt fɹəm keɪvz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɛksɛs flɛʃ ɑn hɪm, noʊ fæɾ əɾ ɔl; hɪz skɪn wɑz pʊl taɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə mʌsəl ən boʊn bɪniθ.

The tent flap shifted aside, and a tall man stepped into the tent. His face was long and gaunt, with eyes so deeply set they seemed to look out from caves. There was no excess flesh on him, no fat at all; his skin was pulled tight over the muscle and bone beneath.

pɛɹɪn hæɾ ə ɡlɪmps ə naɪɾ aʊtsaɪd, ən kæmpfaɪɝz, ən tu waɪt-kloʊkt ɡɑɹdz ət ði ɛntʃɹəns ə ðə tɛnt, ðən ðə flæp fɛl bæk ɪndə pleɪs. əz sun əz ðə nukʌmɝ wɑz ɪndə ðə tɛnt, hi stɑpt, stændɪŋ əz ɹɪdʒəɾ əz ən aɪɝn ɹɑd, stɛɹɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ ə hɪm ət ðə fɑɹ wɔl ə ðə tɛnt. hɪz pleɪt-ænd-meɪl ɑɹmɝ ɡlim laɪk sɪlvɝ əɡɛnst ɪz snoʊi kloʊk ən ʌndɝkoʊt.

Perrin had a glimpse of night outside, and campfires, and two white-cloaked guards at the entrance of the tent, then the flap fell back into place. As soon as the newcomer was into the tent, he stopped, standing as rigid as an iron rod, staring straight ahead of him at the far wall of the tent. His plate-and-mail armor gleamed like silver against his snowy cloak and undercoat.

"maɪ lɔɹd kæptən." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz əz hɑɹɾ əz ɪz pɑstʃɝ, ən ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ, bʌt sʌmhaʊ flæt, wɪθaʊɾ ɪkspɹɛʃən.

"My Lord Captain." His voice was as hard as his posture, and grating, but somehow flat, without expression.

ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn meɪɾ ə kæʒəwəl dʒɛstʃɝ. "bi ət jəɹ iz, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ. juv tæliɾ əɹ kɑsts fəɹ ðɪs . . . ɪnkaʊntɝ?"

The gray-haired man made a casual gesture. "Be at your ease, Child Byar. You have tallied our costs for this . . . encounter?"

ðə tɔl mæn muvd ɪz fiɾ əpɑɹt, bʌɾ ʌðɝ ðən ðət pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt si ɛniθɪŋ iz əbaʊɾ ɪz stæns. "naɪn mɛn dɛd, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən, ən twɛnti-θɹi ɪnʒɝd, sɛvən sɪɹiəsli. ɔl kən ɹaɪd, ðoʊ. θɝɾi hɔɹsəz hæd tə bi pʊt daʊn. ðeɪ wɝ hæmstʃɹəŋ!" hi ɛmfəsaɪz ðəɾ ɪn ɪz ɪmoʊʃənləs vɔɪs, əz ɪf wʌt hæd hæpən tə ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ wɝs ðən ðə dɛθs ən ɪnʒɝiz tə mɛn. "mɛni ʌv ðə ɹimaʊns ɑɹ skæɾɝd. wi meɪ faɪn səm ət deɪbɹeɪk, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən, bʌt wɪð wʊlvz tə sɛn əm ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ, ɪɾəl teɪk deɪz tə ɡæðɝ əm ɔl. ðə mɛn u wɝ səpoʊz tə bi wɑtʃɪŋ əm əv bɪn əsaɪn tə naɪt ɡɑɹɾ əntɪl wi ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn."

The tall man moved his feet apart, but other than that Perrin did not see anything ease about his stance. "Nine men dead, my Lord Captain, and twenty-three injured, seven seriously. All can ride, though. Thirty horses had to be put down. They were hamstrung!" He emphasized that in his emotionless voice, as if what had happened to the horses were worse than the deaths and injuries to men. "Many of the remounts are scattered. We may find some at daybreak, my Lord Captain, but with wolves to send them on their way, it will take days to gather them all. The men who were supposed to be watching them have been assigned to night guard until we reach Caemlyn."

"wi də nɑɾ əv deɪz, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ," ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn sɛd maɪldli. "wi ɹaɪɾ ət dɔn. nʌθɪŋ kən tʃeɪnʒ ðæt. wi mʌs bi ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ɪn taɪm, jɛs?"

"We do not have days, Child Byar," the gray-haired man said mildly. "We ride at dawn. Nothing can change that. We must be in Caemlyn in time, yes?"

"æz jə kəmænd, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən."

"As you command, my Lord Captain."

ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn ɡlænst ət pɛɹɪn ən ɛɡwin, ðən əweɪ əɡɛn. "ænd wʌɾ əv wi tə ʃoʊ fəɹ ɪt, əsaɪd fɹəm ðiz tu jʌŋɡəlɪŋz?"

The gray-haired man glanced at Perrin and Egwene, then away again. "And what have we to show for it, aside from these two younglings?"

baɪɑɝ dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "aɪ hæv hæd ðə wʊlf ðət wɑz wɪð ðɪs lɑt skɪnd, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən. ðə haɪd ʃəd meɪk ə faɪn ɹʌɡ fəɹ maɪ lɔɹd kæptənz tɛnt."

Byar drew a deep breath and hesitated. "I have had the wolf that was with this lot skinned, my Lord Captain. The hide should make a fine rug for my Lord Captain's tent."

hɑpɝ! nɑɾ ivən ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld ən stʃɹʌɡəld əɡɛnst ɪz bɑnz. ðə ɹoʊps dʌɡ ɪndə hɪz skɪn - hɪz ɹɪsts bɪkeɪm slɪpɝi wɪð blʌd - bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɡɪv.

Hopper! Not even realizing what he was doing, Perrin growled and struggled against his bonds. The ropes dug into his skin - his wrists became slippery with blood - but they did not give.

fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm baɪɑɝ lʊkt ət ðə pɹɪznɝz. ɛɡwin stɑɹɾəd bæk fɹəm hɪm. hɪz feɪs wɑz əz ɪkspɹɛʃənləs əz ɪz vɔɪs, bʌɾ ə kɹuəl laɪt bɝn ɪn ɪz sʌŋkən aɪz, əz ʃʊɹli əz fleɪmz bɝn ɪn bælzəmənz. baɪɑɝ heɪɾəd əm əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɛnəmiz ə lɔŋ jɪɹz ɪnstɛɾ ə pipəl nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ tənaɪt.

For the first time Byar looked at the prisoners. Egwene started back from him. His face was as expressionless as his voice, but a cruel light burned in his sunken eyes, as surely as flames burned in Ba'alzamon's. Byar hated them as if they were enemies of long years instead of people never seen before tonight.

pɛɹɪn stɛɹd bæk dɪfaɪənli. hɪz maʊθ kɝld ɪndə ə taɪt smaɪl ət ðə θɔɾ ə hɪz tiθ miɾɪŋ ɪn ðə mænz θɹoʊt.

Perrin stared back defiantly. His mouth curled into a tight smile at the thought of his teeth meeting in the man's throat.

əbɹʌpli hɪz smaɪl feɪɾəd, ən i ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf. maɪ tiθ? ɪm ə mæn, nɑɾ ə wʊlf! laɪt, ðəɹ əz tə bi ən ɛn tə ðɪs! bʌɾ i stɪl mɛt baɪɑɝz ɡlɛɹ, heɪt fəɹ heɪt.

Abruptly his smile faded, and he shook himself. My teeth? I'm a man, not a wolf! Light, there has to be an end to this! But he still met Byar's glare, hate for hate.

"aɪ də nɑt kɛɹ əbaʊt wʊlf-haɪd ɹʌɡz, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ." ðə ɹibjuk ɪn ðə lɔɹd kæptənz vɔɪs wɑz dʒɛntəl, bʌt baɪɑɝz bæk snæpt ɹɪdʒəɾ əɡɛn, hɪz aɪz lɑkɪŋ tə ðə wɔl ə ðə tɛnt. "ju wɝ ɹipɔɹɾɪŋ ɑn wʌt wi ətʃiv ðɪs naɪt, noʊ? ɪf wi ətʃivd ɛniθɪŋ."

"I do not care about wolf-hide rugs, Child Byar." The rebuke in the Lord Captain's voice was gentle, but Byar's back snapped rigid again, his eyes locking to the wall of the tent. "You were reporting on what we achieved this night, no? If we achieved anything."

lɔɹd kæptənz vɔɪs wɑz dʒɛntəl, bʌt baɪɑɝz bæk snæpt ɹɪdʒəɾ əɡɛn, hɪz aɪz lɑkɪŋ tə ðə wɔl ə ðə tɛnt. "ju wɝ ɹipɔɹɾɪŋ ɑn wʌt wi ətʃiv ðɪs naɪt, noʊ? ɪf wi ətʃivd ɛniθɪŋ."

Lord Captain's voice was gentle, but Byar's back snapped rigid again, his eyes locking to the wall of the tent. "You were reporting on what we achieved this night, no? If we achieved anything."

"aɪ wəɾ ɛstəmeɪt ðə pæk ðəɾ ətækt əs ət fɪfti bists əɹ mɔɹ, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən. ʌv ðæt, wi kɪld ət lis twɛnti, pɝhæps θɝɾi. aɪ dɪd nɑt kənsɪɾɝ ɪt wɝθ ðə ɹɪsk ə luzɪŋ mɔɹ hɔɹsəz tə hæv ðə kɑɹkəsɪz bɹɔɾ ɪn tənaɪt. ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ əl əv əm ɡæðɝɾ ən bɝnd, ðoʊz ðəɾ ɑɹən dʒɹæɡd ɔf ɪn ðə dɑɹk. bɪsaɪdz ðiz tu, ðəɹ wɝ ət list ə dʌzən ʌðɝ mɛn. aɪ bɪliv wi dɪspoʊzd ə fɔɹ əɹ faɪv, bʌɾ ɪts ənlaɪkli wɪl faɪn ɛni bɑɾiz, ɡɪvən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz' pɹəpɛnsɪɾi fəɹ kæɹiɪŋ əweɪ ðɛɹ dɛd tə haɪd ðɛɹ lɔsəz. ðɪs simz tə hæv bɪn ə koʊɔɹɾəneɪtɪd æmbʊʃ, bʌt ðət ɹeɪzəz ðə kwɛstʃən ʌv. . . ."

"I would estimate the pack that attacked us at fifty beasts or more, my Lord Captain. Of that, we killed at least twenty, perhaps thirty. I did not consider it worth the risk of losing more horses to have the carcasses brought in tonight. In the morning I will have them gathered and burned, those that aren't dragged off in the dark. Besides these two, there were at least a dozen other men. I believe we disposed of four or five, but it is unlikely we will find any bodies, given the Darkfriends' propensity for carrying away their dead to hide their losses. This seems to have been a coordinated ambush, but that raises the question of. . . ."

pɛɹɪnz θɹoʊt taɪɾənd əz ðə ɡɔn mæn wɛn ɑn. ɛlaɪəs? kɔʃəsli, ɹɪlʌktənli, hi fɛl fəɹ ɛlaɪəs, fəɹ ðə wʊlvz . . . ən faʊnd nʌθɪŋ. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn eɪbəl tə fil ə wʊlfs maɪnd. iðɝ ðəɹ dɛd, əɹ ðeɪv əbændən ju. hi wɑntəd tə læf, ə bɪɾɝ læf. ət læst i hæd wʌɾ i hæd bɪn wɪʃɪŋ fɔɹ, bʌt ðə pɹaɪs wɑz haɪ.

Perrin's throat tightened as the gaunt man went on. Elyas? Cautiously, reluctantly, he felt for Elyas, for the wolves . . . and found nothing. It was as if he had never been able to feel a wolf's mind. Either they're dead, or they've abandoned you. He wanted to laugh, a bitter laugh. At last he had what he had been wishing for, but the price was high.

ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn dɪd læf, dʒʌs ðɛn, ə ɹɪtʃ, ɹaɪ tʃʌkəl ðət meɪɾ ə ɹɛd spɑt blum ɑn itʃ ə baɪɑɝz tʃiks. "soʊ, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ, ɪts jəɹ kənsɪɾɝd ɛstəmeɪt ðət wi wɝ ətækt ɪn ə plæn æmbʊʃ baɪ ʌpwɝdz ə fɪfti wʊlvz ən bɛɾɝ ðən hæf ə skɔɹ ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz? jɛs? pɝhæps wən juv sin ə fju mɔɹ ækʃənz . . . ."

The gray-haired man did laugh, just then, a rich, wry chuckle that made a red spot bloom on each of Byar's cheeks. "So, Child Byar, it is your considered estimate that we were attacked in a planned ambush by upwards of fifty wolves and better than half a score of Darkfriends? Yes? Perhaps when you've seen a few more actions . . . ."

"bʌt, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən bɔɹnhəld . . . ."

"But, my Lord Captain Bornhald . . . ."

"aɪ wəd seɪ sɪks əɹ eɪt wʊlvz, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ, ən pɝhæps noʊ ʌðɝ hjumənz ðən ðiz tu. juv ðə tʃɹu zil, bʌt noʊ ɪkspɪɹiəns aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾiz. ɪts ə dɪfɹən θɪŋ, bɹɪŋɪŋ ðə laɪt, wən stʃɹits ən haʊsəz ɑɹ fɑɹ dɪstənt. wʊlvz əv ə weɪ ʌv simɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ ɑɹ, ɪn ðə naɪt - ən mɛn, ɔlsoʊ. sɪks əɹ eɪɾ ət moʊst, aɪ θɪŋk." baɪɑɝz flʌʃ dipən sloʊli. "aɪ ɔlsoʊ səspɛk ðeɪ wɝ hɪɹ fəɹ ðə seɪm ɹizən wi ɑɹ: ði oʊnli izi wɔɾɝ fəɹ ət list ə deɪ ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən. ə mʌtʃ sɪmpəlɝ ɛkspləneɪʃən ðən spaɪz əɹ tʃɹeɪɾɝz wɪðɪn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, ən ðə sɪmpləst ɛkspləneɪʃən ɪz juʒəwəli ðə tʃɹuɪst. jəl lɝn, wɪð ɪkspɪɹiəns."

"I would say six or eight wolves, Child Byar, and perhaps no other humans than these two. You have the true zeal, but no experience outside the cities. It is a different thing, bringing the Light, when streets and houses are far distant. Wolves have a way of seeming more than they are, in the night - and men, also. Six or eight at most, I think." Byar's flush deepened slowly. "I also suspect they were here for the same reason we are: the only easy water for at least a day in any direction. A much simpler explanation than spies or traitors within the Children, and the simplest explanation is usually the truest. You will learn, with experience."

baɪɑɝz feɪs wɛn dɛθli waɪɾ əz ðə ɡɹændfɑðɝli mæn spoʊk; baɪ kəntʃɹæst, ðə tu spɑts ɪn ɪz hɑloʊ tʃiks dipən fɹəm ɹɛd tə pɝpəl. hi kʌɾ ɪz aɪz təwɔɹd ðə tu pɹɪznɝz fəɹ ən ɪnstənt.

Byar's face went deathly white as the grandfatherly man spoke; by contrast, the two spots in his hollow cheeks deepened from red to purple. He cut his eyes toward the two prisoners for an instant.

hi heɪts əs ivən mɔɹ, naʊ, pɛɹɪn θɔt, fəɹ hɪɹɪŋ ðɪs. bʌt waɪ dɪɾ i heɪɾ əs ɪn ðə fɝs pleɪs?

He hates us even more, now, Perrin thought, for hearing this. But why did he hate us in the first place?

"wʌt dʒju θɪŋk ə ðɪs?" ðə lɔɹd kæptən sɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ʌp pɛɹɪnz æks.

"What do you think of this?" the Lord Captain said, holding up Perrin's axe.

baɪɑɝ lʊkt ə kwɛstʃən əɾ ɪz kəmændɝ ən weɪɾəd fəɹ ən ænsɝɪŋ nɑd bɪfɔɹ i bɹoʊk ɪz ɹɪdʒəd stæns tə teɪk ðə wɛpən. hi hɛftəd ði æks ən ɡeɪv ə sɝpɹaɪzd ɡɹʌnt, ðən wɝld ɪɾ ɪn ə taɪɾ ɑɹk əbʌv ɪz hɛd ðət bɛɹli mɪs ðə tɑp ə ðə tɛnt. hi hændəld ɪɾ əz ʃʊɹli əz ɪf i hæd bɪn bɔɹn wɪð ən æks ɪn ɪz hænz. ə lʊk ʌv ɡɹʌdʒɪŋ ædmɝeɪʃən flɪkɝɾ əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs, bʌt baɪ ðə taɪm i loʊɝd ði æks i wɑz ɪkspɹɛʃənləs wʌns mɔɹ.

Byar looked a question at his commander and waited for an answering nod before he broke his rigid stance to take the weapon. He hefted the axe and gave a surprised grunt, then whirled it in a tight arc above his head that barely missed the top of the tent. He handled it as surely as if he had been born with an axe in his hands. A look of grudging admiration flickered across his face, but by the time he lowered the axe he was expressionless once more.

"ɛksələnli bælənst, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən. pleɪnli meɪd, bʌt baɪ ə vɛɹi ɡʊd wɛpənsmɪθ, pɝhæps ivən ə mæstɝ." hɪz aɪz bɝn dɑɹkli ət ðə pɹɪznɝz. "nɑɾ ə vɪlɪdʒɝz wɛpən, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən. nɔɹ ə fɑɹmɝz."

"Excellently balanced, my Lord Captain. Plainly made, but by a very good weaponsmith, perhaps even a master." His eyes burned darkly at the prisoners. "Not a villager's weapon, my Lord Captain. Nor a farmer's."

"noʊ." ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn tɝn təwɔɹd pɛɹɪn ən ɛɡwin wɪð ə wɪɹi, slaɪtli tʃaɪɾɪŋ smaɪl, ə kaɪnli ɡɹændfɑðɝ u nu hɪz ɡɹæntʃɪlʒɹən hæd bɪn ʌp tə səm mɪstʃəf. "maɪ neɪm ɪz dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəld," hi toʊl ðɛm. "ju ɑɹ pɛɹɪn, aɪ ʌndɝstænd. bʌt ju, jʌŋ wʊmən, wʌɾ ɪz jəɹ neɪm?"

"No." The gray-haired man turned toward Perrin and Egwene with a weary, slightly chiding smile, a kindly grandfather who knew his grandchildren had been up to some mischief. "My name is Geofram Bornhald," he told them. "You are Perrin, I understand. But you, young woman, what is your name?"

pɛɹɪn ɡlaʊɝɾ ət hɪm, bʌɾ ɛɡwin ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "doʊn bi sɪli, pɛɹɪn. aɪm ɛɡwin."

Perrin glowered at him, but Egwene shook her head. "Don't be silly, Perrin. I'm Egwene."

"dʒʌs pɛɹɪn, ən dʒʌst ɛɡwin," bɔɹnhəl mɝmɝd. "bʌɾ aɪ səpoʊz ɪf jə tʃɹuli ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, jə wɪʃ tə haɪd jəɹ aɪdɛntɪɾiz əz mʌtʃ əz pɑsəbəl."

"Just Perrin, and just Egwene," Bornhald murmured. "But I suppose if you truly are Darkfriends, you wish to hide your identities as much as possible."

pɛɹɪn hiv hɪmsɛlf ʌp tə hɪz niz; hi kəd ɹaɪz noʊ fɝðɝ kəz ə ðə weɪ hi wɑz baʊnd. "wi ɑɹən dɑɹkfɹɛnz," hi pɹətɛstəɾ æŋɡɹəli.

Perrin heaved himself up to his knees; he could rise no further because of the way he was bound. "We aren't Darkfriends," he protested angrily.

ðə wɝdz wɝ nɑt kəmplitli aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ bɪfɔɹ baɪɑɝ ɹitʃt hɪm. ðə mæn muv laɪk ə sneɪk. hi sɔ ðə hændəl ə hɪz oʊn æks swɪŋɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ɪm ən tʃɹaɪd tə dʌk, bʌt ðə θɪk hæf kɑɾ ɪm oʊvɝ ði ɪɹ. oʊnli ðə fæk ðəɾ i wɑz muvɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ðə bloʊ kɛpt ɪz skʌl fɹəm biɪŋ splɪt. ivən soʊ, laɪts flæʃt ɪn ɪz aɪz. bɹɛθ lɛft ɪm əz i stʃɹʌk ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hɪz hɛd ɹʌŋ, ən blʌd ɹæn daʊn ɪz tʃik.

The words were not completely out of his mouth before Byar reached him. The man moved like a snake. He saw the handle of his own axe swinging toward him and tried to duck, but the thick haft caught him over the ear. Only the fact that he was moving away from the blow kept his skull from being split. Even so, lights flashed in his eyes. Breath left him as he struck the ground. His head rung, and blood ran down his cheek.

"ju hæv noʊ ɹaɪt," ɛɡwin bɪɡæn, ən skɹimd əz ði æks hændəl wɪp təwɔɹd hɝ. ʃi θɹu hɝsɛlf əsaɪd, ən ðə bloʊ wɪsəl θɹu ɛmpti ɛɹ əz ʃi tʌmbəl tə ðə ɡɹaʊn klɔθ.

"You have no right," Egwene began, and screamed as the axe handle whipped toward her. She threw herself aside, and the blow whistled through empty air as she tumbled to the ground cloth.

"ju wɪl kip ə sɪvəl tʌŋ," baɪɑɝ sɛd, "wɛn spikɪŋ tə ən ənɔɪntəɾ ə ðə laɪt, əɹ jəl əv noʊ tʌŋ." ðə wɝst ʌv ɪt wɑz ɪz vɔɪs stɪl hæd noʊ ɪmoʊʃən əɾ ɔl. kʌɾɪŋ aʊt ðɛɹ tʌŋz wəd ɡɪv ɪm noʊ plɛʒɝ ən noʊ ɹəɡɹɛt; ɪt wɑz dʒʌst sʌmθɪŋ i wəd du.

"You will keep a civil tongue," Byar said, "when speaking to an Anointed of the Light, or you will have no tongue." The worst of it was his voice still had no emotion at all. Cutting out their tongues would give him no pleasure and no regret; it was just something he would do.

"ɡoʊ izi, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ." bɔɹnhəld lʊkt ət ðə kæptɪvz əɡɛn. "aɪ ɪkspɛk jə də nɑt noʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt ði ənɔɪntəd, əɹ əbaʊt lɔɹdz kæptən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, də ju? noʊ, aɪ θɔt nɑt. wɛl, fəɹ tʃaɪl baɪɑɝz seɪk, ət list, tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə ɑɹɡju əɹ ʃaʊt, jɛs? aɪ wɑnt noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðət jə ʃəd wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt, ən lɛɾɪŋ æŋɡɝ ɡɛt ðə bɛɾɝ ə jə woʊn hɛlp ɛni ʌv ʌs."

"Go easy, Child Byar." Bornhald looked at the captives again. "I expect you do not know much about the Anointed, or about Lords Captain of the Children of the Light, do you? No, I thought not. Well, for Child Byar's sake, at least, try not to argue or shout, yes? I want no more than that you should walk in the Light, and letting anger get the better of you won't help any of us."

pɛɹɪn lʊkt ʌp ət ðə ɡɔnt-feɪs mæn stændɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛm. fəɹ tʃaɪl baɪɑɝz seɪk? hi noʊɾəst ðət ðə lɔɹd kæptən dɪd nɑt tɛl baɪɑɝ tə liv əm əloʊn. baɪɑɝ mɛɾ ɪz aɪz ən smaɪld; ðə smaɪl tʌtʃt oʊnli hɪz maʊθ, bʌt ðə skɪn ə hɪz feɪs dʒɹu taɪɾɝ, əntɪl ɪt lʊk laɪk ə skʌl. pɛɹɪn ʃɪvɝd.

Perrin looked up at the gaunt-faced man standing over them. For Child Byar's sake? He noticed that the Lord Captain did not tell Byar to leave them alone. Byar met his eyes and smiled; the smile touched only his mouth, but the skin of his face drew tighter, until it looked like a skull. Perrin shivered.

"aɪ hæv hɝɾ ə ðɪs θɪŋ ə mɛn ɹʌnɪŋ wɪð wʊlvz," bɔɹnhəl sɛd mjuzɪŋli, "ðoʊ aɪ hæv nɑt sin ɪt bɪfɔɹ. mɛn səpoʊzədli tɔkɪŋ wɪð wʊlvz, ən wɪð ʌðɝ kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ə fɪlθi bɪznəs. ɪt meɪks mi fɪɹ ðə læs bæɾəl ɪz ɪndid kʌmɪŋ sun."

"I have heard of this thing of men running with wolves," Bornhald said musingly, "though I have not seen it before. Men supposedly talking with wolves, and with other creatures of the Dark One. A filthy business. It makes me fear the Last Battle is indeed coming soon."

"wʊlvz ɑɹənt - " pɛɹɪn kʌɾ ɔf əz baɪɑɝz but dʒɹu bæk. teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi wɛn ɑn ɪn ə maɪldɝ toʊn. baɪɑɝ loʊɝɾ ɪz fʊt wɪð ə dɪsəpɔɪntɪd ɡɹɪmɑs. "wʊlvz ɑɹən kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðeɪ heɪt ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ət list, ðeɪ heɪt tʃɹɑləks, ən feɪdz." hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si ðə ɡɔnt-feɪs mæn nɑɾ əz ɪf tə hɪmsɛlf.

"Wolves aren't - " Perrin cut off as Byar's boot drew back. Taking a deep breath, he went on in a milder tone. Byar lowered his foot with a disappointed grimace. "Wolves aren't creatures of the Dark One. They hate the Dark One. At least, they hate Trollocs, and Fades." He was surprised to see the gaunt-faced man nod as if to himself.

bɔɹnhəld ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. "hu toʊl jə ðæt?"

Bornhald raised an eyebrow. "Who told you that?"

"eɪ wɔɹɾɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd. ʃi skɹʌntʃt əweɪ fɹəm baɪɑɝz hiɾəd aɪz. "hi sɛd wʊlvz heɪt tʃɹɑləks, ən tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ əfɹeɪɾ ʌv wʊlvz." pɛɹɪn wɑz ɡlæd ʃi hæd nɑt mɛnʃən ɛlaɪəs.

"A Warder," Egwene said. She scrunched away from Byar's heated eyes. "He said wolves hate Trollocs, and Trollocs are afraid of wolves." Perrin was glad she had not mentioned Elyas.

"eɪ wɔɹɾɝ," ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn saɪd. "ə kɹitʃɝ ə ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz. wʌɾ ɛls wəd ðət sɔɹt tɛl ju, wən hiz ə dɑɹkfɹɛn hɪmsɛlf, ən ə sɝvən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz? dʒju nɑt noʊ tʃɹɑləks əv wʊlvz' mʌzəlz ən tiθ, ən wʊlvz' fɝ?"

"A Warder," the gray-haired man sighed. "A creature of the Tar Valon witches. What else would that sort tell you, when he is a Darkfriend himself, and a servant of Darkfriends? Do you not know Trollocs have wolves' muzzles and teeth, and wolves' fur?"

pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə klɪɹ ɪz hɛd. hɪz bɹeɪn stɪl fɛlt laɪk dʒɛlid peɪn, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ hɪɹ. hi kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ ɪz θɔts stʃɹeɪɾ ɪnʌf tə pʌzəl ɪɾ aʊt.

Perrin blinked, trying to clear his head. His brain still felt like jellied pain, but there was something wrong here. He could not get his thoughts straight enough to puzzle it out.

"nɑɾ ɔl ə ðɛm," ɛɡwin mʌɾɝd. pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv baɪɑɝ ə wɛɹi lʊk, bʌt ðə ɡɔn mæn oʊnli wɑtʃt hɝ. "sʌm ə ðɛm əv hɔɹnz, laɪk ɹæmz əɹ ɡoʊts, əɹ hɔks' biks, əɹ . . . əɹ . . . ɔl sɔɹts ə θɪŋz."

"Not all of them," Egwene muttered. Perrin gave Byar a wary look, but the gaunt man only watched her. "Some of them have horns, like rams or goats, or hawks' beaks, or . . . or . . . all sorts of things."

bɔɹnhəld ʃʊk ɪz hɛd sædli. "aɪ ɡɪv jə ɛvɹi tʃæns, ən jə dɪɡ jɝsɛlf dipɝ wɪð ɛvɹi wɝd." hi hɛld ʌp wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. "ju ɹʌn wɪð wʊlvz, kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn." ə sɛkən fɪŋɡɝ. "ju ədmɪt tə biɪŋ əkweɪntəd wɪð ə wɔɹɾɝ, ənʌðɝ kɹitʃɝ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. aɪ daʊɾ i wʊɾə toʊl jə wʌɾ i dɪɾ ɪf ɪt wɑz oʊnli ɪn pæsɪŋ." ə θɝd fɪŋɡɝ. "ju, bɔɪ, kæɹi ə tɑɹ vəlɑn mɑɹk ɪn jəɹ pɑkət. moʊs mɛn aʊtsaɪd tɑɹ vəlɑn ɡɛt ɹɪɾ ə ðoʊz əz fæst əz ðeɪ kæn. ənlɛs ðeɪ sɝv ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃəz." ə fɔɹθ. "ju kæɹi ə faɪɾɪŋ mænz wɛpən waɪl jə dʒɹɛs laɪk ə fɑɹmbɔɪ. ə skʌlkɝ, ðɛn." ðə θʌm ɹoʊz. "ju noʊ tʃɹɑləks, ən mɹdʒɹɑl. ðɪs fɑɹ saʊθ, oʊnli ə fju skɑlɝz ən ðoʊz u hæv tʃɹævəld ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz bɪliv ðeɪ ɑɹ ɛniθɪŋ bʌt stɔɹiz. pɝhæps juv bɪn tə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz? ɪf soʊ, tɛl mi wɛɹ? aɪ hæv tʃɹævəld ə ɡʊd dil ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz; aɪ noʊ ðɛm wɛl. noʊ? ɑ, wɛl, ðɛn." hi lʊkt əɾ ɪz spɹɛd hænd, ðən dʒɹɑpt ɪt hɑɹɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl. ðə ɡɹændfɑðɝli ɪkspɹɛʃən sɛd ðə ɡɹæntʃɪlʒɹən hæd bɪn ʌp tə səm vɛɹi sɪɹiəs mɪstʃəf ɪndid. "waɪ dʒju nɑt tɛl mi ðə tʃɹuθ ə haʊ jə keɪm tə bi ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ðə naɪt wɪð wʊlvz?"

Bornhald shook his head sadly. "I give you every chance, and you dig yourself deeper with every word." He held up one finger. "You run with wolves, creatures of the Dark One." A second finger. "You admit to being acquainted with a Warder, another creature of the Dark One. I doubt he would have told you what he did if it was only in passing." A third finger. "You, boy, carry a Tar Valon mark in your pocket. Most men outside Tar Valon get rid of those as fast as they can. Unless they serve the Tar Valon witches." A fourth. "You carry a fighting man's weapon while you dress like a farmboy. A skulker, then." The thumb rose. "You know Trollocs, and Myrddraal. This far south, only a few scholars and those who have traveled in the Borderlands believe they are anything but stories. Perhaps you have been to the Borderlands? If so, tell me where? I have traveled a good deal in the Borderlands; I know them well. No? Ah, well, then." He looked at his spread hand, then dropped it hard on the table. The grandfatherly expression said the grandchildren had been up to some very serious mischief indeed. "Why do you not tell me the truth of how you came to be running in the night with wolves?"

ɛɡwin oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, bʌt pɛɹɪn sɔ ðə stʌbɝn sɛɾ ə hɝ dʒɔ ən nu ɹaɪɾ əweɪ ʃi wɑz gɑnə tɛl wʌn ə ðə stɔɹiz ðeɪ hæd wɝkt aʊt. ðət wəd nɑt du. nɑt naʊ, nɑt hɪɹ. hɪz hɛɾ ætʃt, ən i wɪʃt i hæd taɪm tə θɪŋk ɪɾ aʊt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm. hu kəd tɛl wɛɹ ðɪs bɔɹnhəl hæd tʃɹævəld, wɪð wʌt lænz ən sɪɾiz i wɑz fəmɪljɝ? ɪf i kɑɾ əm ɪn ə laɪ, ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə ðə tʃɹuθ. bɔɹnhəld wəd bi kənvɪns ðeɪ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðɛn.

Egwene opened her mouth, but Perrin saw the stubborn set of her jaw and knew right away she was going to tell one of the stories they had worked out. That would not do. Not now, not here. His head ached, and he wished he had time to think it out, but there was no time. Who could tell where this Bornhald had traveled, with what lands and cities he was familiar? If he caught them in a lie, there would be no going back to the truth. Bornhald would be convinced they were Darkfriends, then.

"wɝ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," hi sɛd kwɪkli.

"We're from the Two Rivers," he said quickly.

ɛɡwin stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪm oʊpənli bɪfɔɹ ʃi kɑt hɝsɛlf, bʌɾ i pɹɛst ɑn wɪð ðə tʃɹuθ - əɹ ə vɝʒən ʌv ɪt. ðə tu ʌv əm hæd lɛf ðə tu ɹɪvɝz tə si keɪɛmlɪn. ɑn ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd hɝɾ ə ðə ɹuənz ʌv ə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi, bʌt wən ðeɪ faʊnd ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, ðəɹ wɝ tʃɹɑləks ðɛɹ. ðə tu ʌv əm mænədʒ tə ɪskeɪp əkɹɔs ðə ɹɪvɝ ɑɹɪnɛl, bʌt baɪ ðət taɪm ðeɪ wɝ kəmplitli lɔst. ðən ðeɪ fɛl ɪn wɪð ə mæn u ɔfɝd tə ɡaɪɾ əm tə keɪɛmlɪn. hi hæd sɛɾ ɪz neɪm wɑz nʌn ə ðɛɹ bɪznəs, ən i hɑɹdli sim fɹɛnli, bʌt ðeɪ niɾəd ə ɡaɪd. ðə fɝst iðɝ ə ðɛm hæd sin ʌv wʊlvz hæd bɪn æftɝ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ əpɪɹd. ɔl ðeɪ hæd bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə də wɑz haɪd soʊ ðeɪ wəd nɑt ɡɛɾ iɾən baɪ wʊlvz əɹ kɪl baɪ ðə mɛn ɑn hɔɹsəz.

Egwene stared at him openly before she caught herself, but he pressed on with the truth - or a version of it. The two of them had left the Two Rivers to see Caemlyn. On the way they had heard of the ruins of a great city, but when they found Shadar Logoth, there were Trollocs there. The two of them managed to escape across the River Arinelle, but by that time they were completely lost. Then they fell in with a man who offered to guide them to Caemlyn. He had said his name was none of their business, and he hardly seemed friendly, but they needed a guide. The first either of them had seen of wolves had been after the Children of the Light appeared. All they had been trying to do was hide so they would not get eaten by wolves or killed by the men on horses.

". . . ɪf wid noʊn jə wɝ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt," hi fɪnɪʃt, "wiɾ əv ɡɔn tə jə fəɹ hɛlp."

". . . If we'd known you were Children of the Light," he finished, "we'd have gone to you for help."

baɪɑɝ snɔɹɾɪd wɪð dɪsbɪlif. pɛɹɪn dɪd nɑt kɛɹ oʊvɝmək; ɪf ðə lɔɹd kæptən wɑz kənvɪnst, baɪɑɝ kəd nɑt hɑɹm ðɛm. ɪt wɑz pleɪn ðət baɪɑɝ wəd stɑp bɹiðɪŋ ɪf lɔɹd kæptən bɔɹnhəl toʊld ɪm tə.

Byar snorted with disbelief. Perrin did not care overmuch; if the Lord Captain was convinced, Byar could not harm them. It was plain that Byar would stop breathing if Lord Captain Bornhald told him to.

"ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ wɔɹɾɝ ɪn ðæt," ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn sɛɾ æftɝ ə moʊmənt.

"There is no Warder in that," the gray-haired man said after a moment.

pɛɹɪnz ɪnvɛnʃən feɪl hɪm; hi nu hi ʃʊɾə teɪkən taɪm tə θɪŋk ɪɾ aʊt. ɛɡwin lɛpt ɪndə ðə bɹitʃ. "wi mɛɾ ɪm ɪn bɛɹlən. ðə sɪɾi wɑz kɹaʊɾəd wɪð mɛn u hæd kʌm daʊn fɹəm ðə maɪnz æftɝ ðə wɪntɝ, ən wi wɝ pʊɾ ət ðə seɪm teɪbəl ɪn ən ɪn. wi oʊnli tɔk tə hɪm fəɹ ðə lɛŋθ ʌv ə mil."

Perrin's invention failed him; he knew he should have taken time to think it out. Egwene leaped into the breach. "We met him in Baerlon. The city was crowded with men who had come down from the mines after the winter, and we were put at the same table in an inn. We only talked to him for the length of a meal."

pɛɹɪn bɹiðd əɡɛn. θæŋk ju, ɛɡwin.

Perrin breathed again. Thank you, Egwene.

"ɡɪv əm bæk ðɛɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ. nɑt ðə wɛpənz, ʌv kɔɹs." wən baɪɑɝ lʊkt əɾ ɪm ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, bɔɹnhəld æɾəd, "ɔɹ ɑɹ jə wʌn ə ðoʊz u hæv teɪkən tə luɾɪŋ ði ʌnɛnlaɪɾənd, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ? ɪts ə bæd bɪznəs, ðæt, jɛs? noʊ mæn kən bi ə θif ən wɔk ɪn ðə laɪt." baɪɑɝ sim tə stʃɹʌɡəl wɪð dɪsbɪlif ət ðə sədʒɛstʃən.

"Give them back their belongings, Child Byar. Not the weapons, of course." When Byar looked at him in surprise, Bornhald added, "Or are you one of those who have taken to looting the unenlightened, Child Byar? It is a bad business, that, yes? No man can be a thief and walk in the Light." Byar seemed to struggle with disbelief at the suggestion.

"ðɛn jəɹ lɛɾɪŋ əs ɡoʊ?" ɛɡwin saʊndəd sɝpɹaɪzd. pɛɹɪn lɪftəɾ ɪz hɛd tə stɛɹ ət ðə lɔɹd kæptən.

"Then you're letting us go?" Egwene sounded surprised. Perrin lifted his head to stare at the Lord Captain.

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt, tʃaɪld," bɔɹnhəl sɛd sædli. "ju meɪ bi tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ əbaʊt biɪŋ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, sɪns jə noʊ əbaʊt bɛɹlən, ən ðə maɪnz. bʌt ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ . . . ? ðəɾ ɪz ə neɪm vɛɹi, vɛɹi fju noʊ, moʊst ə ðɛm dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən ɛniwʌn u noʊz ɪnʌf tə noʊ ðə neɪm, noʊz ɪnʌf nɑt tə ɡoʊ ðɛɹ. aɪ sədʒɛs jə θɪŋk ʌv ə bɛɾɝ stɔɹi ɑn ðə dʒɝni tə æmədɔɹ. jəl əv taɪm, sɪns wi mʌs pɔz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. pɹɛfɝəbli ðə tʃɹuθ, tʃaɪld. ðəɹ ɪz fɹiɾəm ɪn tʃɹuθ ən ðə laɪt."

"Of course not, child," Bornhald said sadly. "You may be telling the truth about being from the Two Rivers, since you know about Baerlon, and the mines. But Shadar Logoth . . . ? That is a name very, very few know, most of them Darkfriends, and anyone who knows enough to know the name, knows enough not to go there. I suggest you think of a better story on the journey to Amador. You will have time, since we must pause in Caemlyn. Preferably the truth, child. There is freedom in truth and the Light."

baɪɑɝ fɝɡɑt səm ə hɪz dɪfəɾəns təwɔɹd ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn. hi spʌn fɹəm ðə pɹɪznɝz, ən ðəɹ wɑz ən aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ snæp tə hɪz wɝdz. "ju kænt! ɪts nɑɾ əlaʊd!" bɔɹnhəld ɹeɪzd wʌn aɪbɹaʊ kwɪtsɪkli, ən baɪɑɝ pʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp ʃɔɹt, swɑloʊɪŋ. "fɝɡɪv mi, maɪ lɔɹd kæptən. aɪ fɝɡɑt maɪsɛlf, ən aɪ hʌmbli bɛɡ pɑɹɾən ən səbmɪt maɪsɛlf fəɹ pɛnəns, bʌɾ əz maɪ lɔɹd kæptən hɪmsɛlf əz pɔɪntəɾ aʊt, wi mʌst ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn ɪn taɪm, ən wɪð moʊst ʌv əɹ ɹimaʊns ɡɔn, wɪl bi hɑɹd pɹɛst ɪnʌf wɪθaʊt kæɹiɪŋ pɹɪznɝz əlɔŋ."

Byar forgot some of his diffidence toward the gray-haired man. He spun from the prisoners, and there was an outraged snap to his words. "You can't! It is not allowed!" Bornhald raised one eyebrow quizzically, and Byar pulled himself up short, swallowing. "Forgive me, my Lord Captain. I forgot myself, and I humbly beg pardon and submit myself for penance, but as my Lord Captain himself has pointed out, we must reach Caemlyn in time, and with most of our remounts gone, we will be hard pressed enough without carrying prisoners along."

"ænd wʌt wəd jə sədʒɛst?" bɔɹnhəld æskt kɑmli.

"And what would you suggest?" Bornhald asked calmly.

"ðə pɛnəlti fəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪz dɛθ." ðə flæt vɔɪs meɪɾ ɪɾ ɔl ðə mɔɹ dʒɑɹɪŋ. hi maɪɾ əv bɪn sədʒɛstɪŋ stɛpɪŋ ɑn ə bʌɡ. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ tʃɹus wɪð ðə ʃædoʊ. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ mɝsi fəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz."

"The penalty for Darkfriends is death." The flat voice made it all the more jarring. He might have been suggesting stepping on a bug. "There is no truce with the Shadow. There is no mercy for Darkfriends."

"zil ɪz tə bi əplɔɾəd, tʃaɪl baɪɑɝ, bʌt, əz aɪ mʌst ɔfən tɛl maɪ sʌn, deɪn, oʊvɝzɛləsnəs kən bi ə ɡɹivəs fɔlt. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət ðə tɛnəts ɔlsoʊ seɪ, 'noʊ mæn ɪz soʊ lɔs ðəɾ i kænɑt bi bɹɔt tə ðə laɪt.' ðiz tu ɑɹ jʌŋ. ðeɪ kænɑt jɛt bi dip ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ. ðeɪ kən jɛt bi lɛd tə ðə laɪt, ɪf ðəl oʊnli əlaʊ ðə ʃædoʊ tə bi lɪftəd fɹəm ðɛɹ aɪz. wi mʌst ɡɪv əm ðət tʃæns."

"Zeal is to be applauded, Child Byar, but, as I must often tell my son, Dain, overzealousness can be a grievous fault. Remember that the Tenets also say, 'No man is so lost that he cannot be brought to the Light.' These two are young. They cannot yet be deep in the Shadow. They can yet be led to the Light, if they will only allow the Shadow to be lifted from their eyes. We must give them that chance."

fəɹ ə moʊmən pɛɹɪn ɔlmoʊs fɛlt əfɛkʃən fəɹ ðə ɡɹændfɑðɝli mæn u stʊd bɪtwin əm ən baɪɑɝ. ðən bɔɹnhəl tɝn ɪz ɡɹændfɑðɝz smaɪl ɑn ɛɡwin.

For a moment Perrin almost felt affection for the grandfatherly man who stood between them and Byar. Then Bornhald turned his grandfather's smile on Egwene.

"ɪf jə ɹəfjuz tə kʌm tə ðə laɪt baɪ ðə taɪm wi ɹitʃ æmədɔɹ, əl bi fɔɹs tə tɝn jə oʊvɝ tə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz, ən bɪsaɪɾ əm baɪɑɝz zil ɪz bʌɾ ə kændəl bɪsaɪd ðə sʌn." ðə ɡɹeɪ-hɛɹd mæn saʊndəd laɪk ə mæn u ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd wʌɾ i mʌs du, bʌɾ u hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ʌv ɛvɝ duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ bʌɾ ɪz duɾi əz i sɔ ɪt. "ɹɪpɛnt, ɹɪnaʊns ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kʌm tə ðə laɪt, kənfɛs jəɹ sɪnz ən tɛl wʌt jə noʊ ʌv ðɪs vɪlnəs wɪð wʊlvz, ən jəl bi spɛɹd ðæt. jəl wɔk fɹi, ɪn ðə laɪt." hɪz ɡeɪz sɛntɝɾ ɑn pɛɹɪn, ən i saɪd sædli. aɪs fɪl pɛɹɪnz spaɪn. "bʌt ju, dʒʌs pɛɹɪn fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. jə kɪl tu ʌv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən." hi tʌtʃt ði æks ðət baɪɑɝ stɪl hɛld. "fɔɹ ju, aɪ fɪɹ, ə ɡɪbət weɪts ɪn æmədɔɹ."

"If you refuse to come to the Light by the time we reach Amador, I will be forced to turn you over to the Questioners, and beside them Byar's zeal is but a candle beside the sun." The gray-haired man sounded like a man who regretted what he must do, but who had no intention of ever doing anything but his duty as he saw it. "Repent, renounce the Dark One, come to the Light, confess your sins and tell what you know of this vileness with wolves, and you will be spared that. You will walk free, in the Light." His gaze centered on Perrin, and he sighed sadly. Ice filled Perrin's spine. "But you, just Perrin from the Two Rivers. You killed two of the Children." He touched the axe that Byar still held. "For you, I fear, a gibbet waits in Amador."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 31

pleɪ fəɹ jəɹ sʌpɝ


Play for Your Supper

ɹænd nɛɹoʊɾ ɪz aɪz, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə dʌst-teɪl ðət ɹoʊz əhɛd, θɹi əɹ fɔɹ bɛnz ə ðə ɹoʊɾ əweɪ. mæt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi hɛɾəd təwɔɹd ðə waɪl hɛdʒɝoʊ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə ɹoʊdweɪ. ɪts ɛvɝɡɹin livz ən dɛnsli ɪntɝmɪʃt bɹæntʃəz wəd haɪɾ əm əz wɛl əz ə stoʊn wɔl, ɪf ðeɪ kəd faɪn ə weɪ θɹu tə ði ʌðɝ saɪd. ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd wɑz mɑɹk baɪ ðə spɑɹs bɹaʊn skɛləɾənz ə hɛd-haɪ bʊʃəz, ən bɪɑnd wɑz ən oʊpən fil fəɹ hæf ə maɪl tə ðə wʊdz. ɪt maɪɾ əv bɪn pɑɹɾ ʌv ə fɑɹm nɑt tu lɔŋ əbændənd, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɔfɝd noʊ kwɪk haɪɾɪŋ pleɪs. hi tʃɹaɪd tə dʒʌdʒ ðə spiɾ ə ðə dʌst-teɪl, ən ðə wɪnd.

Rand narrowed his eyes, watching the dust-tail that rose ahead, three or four bends of the road away. Mat was already headed toward the wild hedgerow alongside the roadway. Its evergreen leaves and densely intermeshed branches would hide them as well as a stone wall, if they could find a way through to the other side. The other side of the road was marked by the sparse brown skeletons of head-high bushes, and beyond was an open field for half a mile to the woods. It might have been part of a farm not too long abandoned, but it offered no quick hiding place. He tried to judge the speed of the dust-tail, and the wind.

ə sʌɾən ɡʌst swɝld ɹoʊd dʌst ʌp ɝaʊn hɪm, əbskjʊɹɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. hi blɪŋkt ən ədʒʌstəd ðə pleɪn, dɑɹk skɑɹf əkɹɔs ɪz noʊz ən maʊθ. nʌn tu klin naʊ, ɪt meɪɾ ɪz feɪs ɪtʃ, bʌɾ ɪt kɛpt ɪm fɹəm ɪnheɪlɪŋ dʌst wɪð ɛvɹi bɹɛθ. ə fɑɹmɝ hæd ɡɪvən ɪt tə hɪm, ə lɔŋ-feɪs mæn wɪð ɡɹuvz ɪn ɪz tʃiks fɹəm wɝi.

A sudden gust swirled road dust up around him, obscuring everything. He blinked and adjusted the plain, dark scarf across his nose and mouth. None too clean now, it made his face itch, but it kept him from inhaling dust with every breath. A farmer had given it to him, a long-faced man with grooves in his cheeks from worry.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹʌm," hi hæd sɛd wɪð ən æŋkʃəs fɹaʊn, "æn aɪ doʊnt wɑn tə. jə ʌndɝstænd? maɪ fæmli." əbɹʌpli ðə fɑɹmɝ hæd dʌɡ tu lɔŋ skɑɹvz aʊɾ ə hɪz koʊt pɑkəɾ ən pʊʃt ðə tæŋɡəl ʌv wʊl ət ðɛm. "ɪts nɑt mʌtʃ, bʌt hɪɹ. bɪlɔŋ tə maɪ bɔɪz. ðeɪv ʌðɝz. jə doʊnt noʊ mi, ʌndɝstænd? ɪts hɑɹd taɪmz."

"I don't know what you're running from," he had said with an anxious frown, "and I don't want to. You understand? My family." Abruptly the farmer had dug two long scarves out of his coat pocket and pushed the tangle of wool at them. "It's not much, but here. Belong to my boys. They have others. You don't know me, understand? It's hard times."

ɹænd tʃɹɛʒɝd ðə skɑɹf. ðə lɪst ə kaɪndnəsəz i hæd meɪɾ ɪn ɪz maɪn ɪn ðə deɪz sɪns waɪtbɹɪdʒ wɑz ə ʃɔɹt wʌn, ən i dɪd nɑt bɪliv ɪt wəd ɡɛt mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ.

Rand treasured the scarf. The list of kindnesses he had made in his mind in the days since Whitebridge was a short one, and he did not believe it would get much longer.

mæt, ɔl bʌɾ ɪz aɪz hɪɾən baɪ ðə skɑɹf ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd, hʌntəd swɪfli əlɔŋ ðə tɔl hɛdʒɝoʊ, pʊlɪŋ ət ðə lifi bɹæntʃəz. ɹænd tʌtʃt ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk hɪlt əɾ ɪz bɛlt, bʌt lɛɾ ɪz hæn fɔl əweɪ. wʌns ɔlɹɛɾi, kʌɾɪŋ ə hoʊl θɹu ə hɛdʒ hæɾ ɔlmoʊst ɡɪvən əm əweɪ. ðə dʌst-teɪl wɑz muvɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛm, ən steɪɪŋ təɡɛðɝ tu lɔŋ. nɑt ðə wɪnd. ət list ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹeɪnɪŋ. ɹeɪn sɛɾəld ðə dʌst. noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ hɑɹɾ ɪt fɛl, ɪt nɛvɝ tɝn ðə hɑɹd-pækt ɹoʊd tə mʌd, bʌt wən ɪt ɹeɪn ðəɹ wɑz noʊ dʌst. dʌst wɑz ði oʊnli wɔɹnɪŋ ðeɪ hæd bɪfɔɹ huɛvɝ ɪt wɑz keɪm kloʊs ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ. səmtaɪmz ðət wɑz tu leɪt.

Mat, all but his eyes hidden by the scarf wrapped around his head, hunted swiftly along the tall hedgerow, pulling at the leafy branches. Rand touched the heron-marked hilt at his belt, but let his hand fall away. Once already, cutting a hole through a hedge had almost given them away. The dust-tail was moving toward them, and staying together too long. Not the wind. At least it was not raining. Rain settled the dust. No matter how hard it fell, it never turned the hard-packed road to mud, but when it rained there was no dust. Dust was the only warning they had before whoever it was came close enough to hear. Sometimes that was too late.

"hɪɹ," mæt kɔl sɔfli. hi sim tə stɛp ɹaɪt θɹu ðə hɛdʒ. ɹænd hɝid tə ðə spɑt. sʌmwʌn hæd kʌɾ ə hoʊl ðɛɹ, wʌns. ɪt wɑz pɑɹtli ɡɹoʊn oʊvɝ, ən fɹəm θɹi fiɾ əweɪ ɪt lʊkt əz sɑləɾ əz ðə ɹɛst, bʌt kloʊs ʌp ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ə θɪn skɹin ə bɹæntʃəz. əz i pʊʃt θɹu, hi hɝd hɔɹsəz kʌmɪŋ. nɑt ðə wɪnd.

"Here," Mat called softly. He seemed to step right through the hedge. Rand hurried to the spot. Someone had cut a hole there, once. It was partly grown over, and from three feet away it looked as solid as the rest, but close up there was only a thin screen of branches. As he pushed through, he heard horses coming. Not the wind.

hi kɹaʊtʃt bɪhaɪn ðə bɛɹli kʌvɝɾ oʊpənɪŋ, klʌtʃɪŋ ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹɾ əz ðə hɔɹsmən ɹoʊd baɪ. faɪv . . . sɪks . . . sɛvən ə ðɛm. pleɪnli dʒɹɛs mɛn, bʌt sɔɹdz ən spɪɹz sɛd ðeɪ wɝ nɑt vɪlɪdʒɝz. səm wɔɹ lɛðɝ tunɪks wɪð mɛɾəl stʌdz, ən tu hæd ɹaʊn stil kæps. mɝtʃəns' ɡɑɹdz, pɝhæps, bɪtwin haɪɹɪŋz. pɝhæps.

He crouched behind the barely covered opening, clutching the hilt of his sword as the horsemen rode by. Five . . . six . . . seven of them. Plainly dressed men, but swords and spears said they were not villagers. Some wore leather tunics with metal studs, and two had round steel caps. Merchants' guards, perhaps, between hirings. Perhaps.

wʌn ə ðɛm kæʒəwəli swʌŋ ɪz aɪz təwɔɹd ðə hɛdʒ əz i wɛn baɪ ði oʊpənɪŋ, ən ɹænd bɛɹɾ ən ɪntʃ ə hɪz sɔɹd. mæt snɑɹəl saɪlənli laɪk ə kɔɹnɝd bædʒɝ, skwɪntɪŋ əbʌv ɪz skɑɹf. hɪz hænd wɑz ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt; hi ɔlweɪz klʌtʃt ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ wən ðəɹ wɑz deɪnʒɝ. ɹænd wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ʃʊɹ ɪf ɪt wɑz tə pɹətɛk hɪmsɛlf əɹ tə pɹətɛk ðə ɹubi-hɪltɪd dæɡɝ. ʌv leɪt mæt sim tə fɝɡɛɾ i hæɾ ə baʊ, səmtaɪmz.

One of them casually swung his eyes toward the hedge as he went by the opening, and Rand bared an inch of his sword. Mat snarled silently like a cornered badger, squinting above his scarf. His hand was under his coat; he always clutched the dagger from Shadar Logoth when there was danger. Rand was no longer sure if it was to protect himself or to protect the ruby-hilted dagger. Of late Mat seemed to forget he had a bow, sometimes.

ðə ɹaɪɾɝz pæst əɾ ə sloʊ tʃɹɑt, ɡoʊɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ wɪð ə pɝpəs bʌt nɑt tu ɡɹeɪɾ ə heɪst. dʌst sɪftɪd θɹu ðə hɛdʒ.

The riders passed at a slow trot, going somewhere with a purpose but not too great a haste. Dust sifted through the hedge.

ɹænd weɪɾəd əntɪl ðə klɑp ə ðə hʊvz feɪɾəd bɪfɔɹ i stʌk ɪz hɛd kɔʃəsli bæk θɹu ðə hoʊl. ðə dʌst-teɪl wɑz wɛl daʊn ðə ɹoʊd, ɡoʊɪŋ ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm. istwɝd ðə skaɪ wɑz klɪɹ. hi klaɪmd aʊɾ ɑntu ðə ɹoʊdweɪ, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə kɑləm ə dʌs muv wɛst.

Rand waited until the clop of the hooves faded before he stuck his head cautiously back through the hole. The dust-tail was well down the road, going the way they had come. Eastward the sky was clear. He climbed out onto the roadway, watching the column of dust move west.

"nɑɾ æftɝ ʌs," hi sɛd, hæfweɪ bɪtwin ə steɪtmən ən ə kwɛstʃən.

"Not after us," he said, halfway between a statement and a question.

mæt skɹæmbəld aʊɾ æftɝ hɪm, lʊkɪŋ wɛɹəli ɪn boʊθ dɝɛkʃənz. "meɪbi," hi sɛd. "meɪbi."

Mat scrambled out after him, looking warily in both directions. "Maybe," he said. "Maybe."

ɹænd hæd noʊ aɪdiə wɪtʃ weɪ hi mɛn ɪt, bʌɾ i nɑɾəd. meɪbi. ɪt hæd nɑt bɪɡʌn laɪk ðɪs, ðɛɹ dʒɝni daʊn ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd.

Rand had no idea which way he meant it, but he nodded. Maybe. It had not begun like this, their journey down the Caemlyn Road.

fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm æftɝ livɪŋ waɪtbɹɪdʒ, ɹænd wəd sʌɾənli faɪn hɪmsɛlf stɛɹɪŋ bæk daʊn ðə ɹoʊd bɪhaɪn ðɛm. səmtaɪmz i wəd si sʌmwʌn u meɪɾ ɪz bɹɛθ kætʃ, ə tɔl, skɪni mæn hɝiɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹoʊd, əɹ ə læŋki, waɪt-hɛɹd fɛloʊ ʌp bɪsaɪd ðə dʒɹaɪvɝ ɑn ə wæɡən, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz ə pæk-pɛdlɝ, əɹ fɑɹmɝz meɪkɪŋ ðɛɹ weɪ tə mɑɹkət, nɛvɝ tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn. hoʊp feɪɾəd əz ðə deɪz pæst.

For a long time after leaving Whitebridge, Rand would suddenly find himself staring back down the road behind them. Sometimes he would see someone who made his breath catch, a tall, skinny man hurrying up the road, or a lanky, white-haired fellow up beside the driver on a wagon, but it was always a pack-peddler, or farmers making their way to market, never Thom Merrilin. Hope faded as the days passed.

ðəɹ wɑz kənsɪɾɝəbəl tʃɹæfɪk ɑn ðə ɹoʊd, wæɡənz ən kɑɹts, pipəl ɑn hɔɹsəz ən pipəl əfʊt. ðeɪ keɪm sɪŋɡli ən ɪn ɡɹups, ə tʃɹeɪn ə mɝtʃəns' wæɡənz əɹ ə dʌzən hɔɹsmən təɡɛðɝ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt dʒæm ðə ɹoʊd, ən ɔfən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ ɪn saɪɾ ɪksɛp ði ɔl bʌt lifləs tʃɹiz laɪnɪŋ ðə hɑɹd-pækt ɹoʊdbd, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ sɝɾənli mɔɹ pipəl tʃɹævlɪŋ ðən ɹænd hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz.

There was considerable traffic on the road, wagons and carts, people on horses and people afoot. They came singly and in groups, a train of merchants' wagons or a dozen horsemen together. They did not jam the road, and often there was nothing in sight except the all but leafless trees lining the hard-packed roadbed, but there were certainly more people traveling than Rand had ever seen in the Two Rivers.

moʊs tʃɹævəld ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən ðət ðeɪ dɪd, istwɝd təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ ɡɑɾ ə ɹaɪɾ ɪn ə fɑɹmɝz wæɡən fəɹ ə lɪɾəl dɪstəns, ə maɪl, əɹ faɪv, bʌt mɔɹ ɔfən ðeɪ wɔkt. mɛn ɑn hɔɹsbæk ðeɪ əvɔɪɾəd; wən ðeɪ spɑɾəd ivən wʌn ɹaɪɾɝ ɪn ðə dɪstəns ðeɪ skɹæmbəld ɔf ðə ɹoʊɾ ən hɪɾ əntɪl i wɑz pæst. nʌn ɛvɝ wɔɹ ə blæk kloʊk, ən ɹænd dɪd nɑt ɹɪli θɪŋk ə feɪd wəd lɛɾ əm si hɪm kʌmɪŋ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn teɪkɪŋ tʃænsəz. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðə hæfmən ðeɪ fɪɹd.

Most traveled in the same direction that they did, eastward toward Caemlyn. Sometimes they got a ride in a farmer's wagon for a little distance, a mile, or five, but more often they walked. Men on horseback they avoided; when they spotted even one rider in the distance they scrambled off the road and hid until he was past. None ever wore a black cloak, and Rand did not really think a Fade would let them see him coming, but there was no point in taking chances. In the beginning it was just the Halfmen they feared.

ðə fɝs vɪlədʒ æftɝ waɪtbɹɪdʒ lʊk soʊ mʌtʃ laɪk ɛmənz fil ðət ɹændz stɛps dʒɹæɡd wən i sɔ ɪt. θætʃt ɹufs wɪð haɪ piks, ən ɡʊdwaɪvz ɪn ðɛɹ eɪpɹənz ɡɑsəpɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə fɛnsəz bɪtwin ðɛɹ haʊsəz, ən tʃɪlʒɹən pleɪɪŋ ɑn ə vɪlədʒ ɡɹin. ðə wɪmənz hɛɹ hʌŋ ənbɹeɪɾɪd ɝaʊn ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ən ʌðɝ smɔl θɪŋz wɝ dɪfɹənt, tu, bʌt ðə hoʊl təɡɛðɝ wɑz laɪk hoʊm. kaʊz kɹɑpt ɑn ðə ɡɹin, ən ɡis wɑɾəld sɛlf-ɪmpɔɹɾəntli əkɹɔs ðə ɹoʊd. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən tʌmbəld, læfɪŋ, ɪn ðə dʌst wɛɹ ðə ɡɹæs wɑz ɡɔn ɔltəɡɛðɝ. ðeɪ dɪd nɑɾ ivən lʊk ɝaʊnd wən ɹænd ən mæt wɛn baɪ. ðət wɑz ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ðət wɑz dɪfɹənt. stʃɹeɪnʒɝz wɝ noʊ ɑɾəti ðɛɹ; tu mɔɹ dɪd nɑt dʒɹɔ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə sɛkənd ɡlæns. vɪlədʒ dɑɡz oʊnli ɹeɪz ðɛɹ hɛdz tə snɪf əz i ən mæt pæst; nʌn stɝd ðɛmsɛlvz.

The first village after Whitebridge looked so much like Emond's Field that Rand's steps dragged when he saw it. Thatched roofs with high peaks, and goodwives in their aprons gossiping over the fences between their houses, and children playing on a village green. The women's hair hung unbraided around their shoulders, and other small things were different, too, but the whole together was like home. Cows cropped on the green, and geese waddled self-importantly across the road. The children tumbled, laughing, in the dust where the grass was gone altogether. They did not even look around when Rand and Mat went by. That was another thing that was different. Strangers were no oddity there; two more did not draw so much as a second glance. Village dogs only raised their heads to sniff as he and Mat passed; none stirred themselves.

ɪt wɑz kʌmɪŋ ɑn ivnɪŋ əz ðeɪ wɛn θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ, ən i fɛlt ə pæŋ ə hoʊmsɪknəs əz laɪts əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz. noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɪt lʊks laɪk, ə smɔl vɔɪs wɪspɝɾ ɪn ɪz maɪnd, ɪɾ ɪzən ɹɪli hoʊm. ivən ɪf jə ɡoʊ ɪndə wʌn ə ðoʊz haʊsəz tæm woʊn bi ðɛɹ. ɪf i wɑz, kəd jə lʊk ɪm ɪn ðə feɪs? jə noʊ, naʊ, doʊn ju? ɪksɛp fəɹ lɪɾəl θɪŋz laɪk wɛɹ jə kʌm fɹəm ən u jə ɑɹ. noʊ fivɝ-dʒɹimz. hi hʌntʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝz əɡɛns tɔntɪŋ læftɝ ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd. jə maɪɾ əz wɛl stɑp, ðə vɔɪs snɪkɝd. wʌn pleɪs ɪz əz ɡʊɾ əz ənʌðɝ wən jə ɑɹən fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ, ən ðə dɑɹk wʌn əz jə mɑɹkt.

It was coming on evening as they went through the village, and he felt a pang of homesickness as lights appeared in the windows. No matter what it looks like, a small voice whispered in his mind, it isn't really home. Even if you go into one of those houses Tam won't be there. If he was, could you look him in the face? You know, now, don't you? Except for little things like where you come from and who you are. No fever-dreams. He hunched his shoulders against taunting laughter inside his head. You might as well stop, the voice snickered. One place is as good as another when you aren't from anywhere, and the Dark One has you marked.

mæt tʌɡd əɾ ɪz sliv, bʌɾ i pʊld lus ən sɹɾ ət ðə haʊsəz. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə stɑp, bʌɾ i dɪd wɑnə lʊk ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ. soʊ mʌtʃ laɪk hoʊm, bʌt jəl nɛvɝ si ðəɾ əɡɛn, wɪl ju?

Mat tugged at his sleeve, but he pulled loose and sared at the houses. He did not want to stop, but he did want to look and remember. So much like home, but you'll never see that again, will you?

mæt jæŋkt əɾ ɪm əɡɛn. hɪz feɪs wɑz tɔt, ðə skɪn ɝaʊn ɪz maʊθ ən aɪz waɪt. "kʌm ɑn," mæt mʌɾɝd. "kʌm ɑn." hi lʊkt ət ðə vɪlədʒ əz ɪf i səspɛktəd sʌmθɪŋ ə haɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ. "kʌm ɑn. wi kæn stɑp jɛt."

Mat yanked at him again. His face was taut, the skin around his mouth and eyes white. "Come on," Mat muttered. "Come on." He looked at the village as if he suspected something of hiding there. "Come on. We can't stop yet."

ɹænd tɝn ɪn ə kəmplit sɝkəl, teɪkɪŋ ɪn ðə hoʊl vɪlədʒ, ən saɪd. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt vɛɹi fɑɹ fɹəm waɪtbɹɪdʒ. ɪf ðə mɹdʒɹɑl kəd ɡɛt pæst waɪtbɹɪdʒəz wɔl wɪθaʊt biɪŋ sin, ɪt wəɾ əv noʊ tʃɹʌbəl əɾ ɔl sɝtʃɪŋ ðɪs smɔl vɪlədʒ. hi lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi dʒɹɔn ɑn ɪndə ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd bɪɑnd, əntɪl ðə θætʃ-ɹuf haʊsəz wɝ lɛf bɪhaɪnd.

Rand turned in a complete circle, taking in the whole village, and sighed. They were not very far from Whitebridge. If the Myrddraal could get past Whitebridge's wall without being seen, it would have no trouble at all searching this small village. He let himself be drawn on into the countryside beyond, until the thatch-roofed houses were left behind.

naɪt fɛl bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ faʊn ə spɑt baɪ munlaɪt, ʌndɝ səm bʊʃəz stɪl bɛɹɪŋ ðɛɹ dɛd livz. ðeɪ fɪl ðɛɹ bɛliz wɪð koʊld wɔɾɝ fɹəm ə ʃæloʊ ɹɪvjulɛt nɑt fɑɹ əweɪ ən kɝld ʌp ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɹæpt ɪn ðɛɹ kloʊks, wɪθaʊɾ ə faɪɝ. ə faɪɝ kəd bi sin; bɛɾɝ tə bi koʊld.

Night fell before they found a spot by moonlight, under some bushes still bearing their dead leaves. They filled their bellies with cold water from a shallow rivulet not far away and curled up on the ground, wrapped in their cloaks, without a fire. A fire could be seen; better to be cold.

ənizi wɪð ɪz mɛmɹiz, ɹænd woʊk ɔfən, ən ɛvɹi taɪm i kəd hɪɹ mæt mʌɾɝɪŋ ən tɔsɪŋ ɪn ɪz slip. hi dɪd nɑt dʒɹim, ðəɾ i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt slip wɛl. jəl nɛvɝ si hoʊm əɡɛn.

Uneasy with his memories, Rand woke often, and every time he could hear Mat muttering and tossing in his sleep. He did not dream, that he could remember, but he did not sleep well. You'll never see home again.

ðət wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli naɪt ðeɪ spɛnt wɪð dʒʌs ðɛɹ kloʊks tə pɹətɛkt əm fɹəm ðə wɪnd, ən səmtaɪmz ðə ɹeɪn, koʊld ən soʊkɪŋ. ɪt wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli mil ðeɪ meɪd fɹəm nʌθɪŋ bʌt koʊld wɔɾɝ. bɪtwin əm ðeɪ hæɾ ɪnʌf kɔɪnz fəɹ ə fju milz əɾ ən ɪn, bʌɾ ə bɛd fəɹ ðə naɪt wəd teɪk tu mʌtʃ. θɪŋz kɑs mɔɹ aʊtsaɪd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, mɔɹ ðɪs saɪɾ ə ði ɑɹɪnɛl ðən ɪn bɛɹlən. wʌt mʌni ðeɪ hæd lɛf hæd tə bi seɪv fəɹ ən ɪmɝdʒənsi.

That was not the only night they spent with just their cloaks to protect them from the wind, and sometimes the rain, cold and soaking. It was not the only meal they made from nothing but cold water. Between them they had enough coins for a few meals at an inn, but a bed for the night would take too much. Things cost more outside the Two Rivers, more this side of the Arinelle than in Baerlon. What money they had left had to be saved for an emergency.

wʌn æftɝnun ɹænd mɛnʃən ðə dæɡɝ wɪð ðə ɹubi ɪn ɪts hɪlt, waɪl ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹʌdʒɪŋ daʊn ðə ɹoʊd wɪð bɛliz tu ɛmpti tə ɹʌmbəl, ən ðə sʌn loʊ ən wik, ən nʌθɪŋ ɪn vju fəɹ ðə kʌmɪŋ naɪt bʌt mɔɹ bʊʃəz. dɑɹk klaʊdz bɪlt ʌp oʊvɝhɛd fəɹ ɹeɪn dʊɹɪŋ ðə naɪt. hi hoʊp ðeɪ wɝ lʌki; meɪbi noʊ mɔɹ ðən ən aɪsi dʒɹɪzəl.

One afternoon Rand mentioned the dagger with the ruby in its hilt, while they were trudging down the road with bellies too empty to rumble, and the sun low and weak, and nothing in view for the coming night but more bushes. Dark clouds built up overhead for rain during the night. He hoped they were lucky; maybe no more than an icy drizzle.

hi wɛn ɑn ə fju stɛps bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪz ðət mæt hæd stɑpt. hi stɑpt, tu, ɹɪəlɪŋ ɪz toʊz ɪn ɪz buts. ət list ɪz fit fɛlt wɔɹm. hi iz ðə stʃɹæps əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. hɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl ən tɑmz bʌndəl kloʊk wɝ nɑt hɛvi, bʌɾ ivən ə fju paʊnz weɪd hɛvi æftɝ maɪlz ɑn ən ɛmpti stʌmək. "wʌts ðə mæɾɝ, mæt?" hi sɛd.

He went on a few steps before he realized that Mat had stopped. He stopped, too, wriggling his toes in his boots. At least his feet felt warm. He eased the straps across his shoulders. His blanketroll and Thom's bundled cloak were not heavy, but even a few pounds weighed heavy after miles on an empty stomach. "What's the matter, Mat?" he said.

"waɪ ɑɹ jə soʊ æŋkʃəs tə sɛl ɪt?" mæt dɪmændəɾ æŋɡɹəli. "aɪ faʊn ɪt, æftɝ ɔl. jə ɛvɝ θɪŋk aɪ maɪt laɪk tə kip ɪt? fəɹ ə waɪl, ɛniweɪ. ɪf jə wɑnə sɛl sʌmθɪŋ, sɛl ðət blʌɾi sɔɹd!"

"Why are you so anxious to sell it?" Mat demanded angrily. "I found it, after all. You ever think I might like to keep it? For a while, anyway. If you want to sell something, sell that bloody sword!"

ɹænd ɹʌbd ɪz hæn əlɔŋ ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk hɪlt. "maɪ fɑðɝ ɡeɪv ðɪs sɔɹd tə mi. ɪt wɑz hɪz. aɪ wʊdn æsk jə tə sɛl sʌmθɪŋ jəɹ fɑðɝ ɡeɪv ju. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, mæt, dʒju laɪk ɡoʊɪŋ hʌŋɡɹi? ɛniweɪ, ivən ɪf aɪ kəd faɪn sʌmbɑɾi tə baɪ ɪt, haʊ mʌtʃ wəɾ ə sɔɹd bɹɪŋ? wʌt wəɾ ə fɑɹmɝ wɑnt wɪð ə sɔɹd? ðət ɹubi wəd fɛtʃ ɪnʌf tə teɪk əs ɔl ðə weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn ɪn ə kæɹɪdʒ. meɪbi ɔl ðə weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ən wiɾ iɾ ɛvɹi mil ɪn ən ɪn, ən slip ɛvɹi naɪɾ ɪn ə bɛd. meɪbi jə laɪk ði aɪdiə ʌv wɔkɪŋ hæfweɪ əkɹɔs ðə wɝld ən slipɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd?" hi ɡlɛɹɾ ət mæt, ən ɪz fɹɛnd ɡlɛɹd bæk.

Rand rubbed his hand along the heron-marked hilt. "My father gave this sword to me. It was his. I wouldn't ask you to sell something your father gave you. Blood and ashes, Mat, do you like going hungry? Anyway, even if I could find somebody to buy it, how much would a sword bring? What would a farmer want with a sword? That ruby would fetch enough to take us all the way to Caemlyn in a carriage. Maybe all the way to Tar Valon. And we'd eat every meal in an inn, and sleep every night in a bed. Maybe you like the idea of walking halfway across the world and sleeping on the ground?" He glared at Mat, and his friend glared back.

ðeɪ stʊd laɪk ðəɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹoʊɾ əntɪl mæt sʌɾənli ɡeɪv ən ənkʌmftəɹbəl ʃɹʌɡ, ən dʒɹɑpt ɪz aɪz tə ðə ɹoʊd. "hu wəɾ aɪ sɛl ɪt tə, ɹænd? ə fɑɹmɝ wəɾ əv tə peɪ ɪn tʃɪkənz; wi kʊdn baɪ ə kæɹɪdʒ wɪð tʃɪkənz. ən ɪf aɪ ivən ʃoʊɾ ɪɾ ɪn ɛni vɪlədʒ wiv bɪn θɹu, ðeɪd pɹɑbli θɪŋk wi stoʊl ɪt. ðə laɪt noʊz wʌt wəd hæpən ðɛn."

They stood like that in the middle of the road until Mat suddenly gave an uncomfortable shrug, and dropped his eyes to the road. "Who would I sell it to, Rand? A farmer would have to pay in chickens; we couldn't buy a carriage with chickens. And if I even showed it in any village we've been through, they'd probably think we stole it. The Light knows what would happen then."

æftɝ ə mɪnət ɹænd nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli. "jɔɹ ɹaɪt. aɪ noʊ ɪt. aɪm sɑɹi; aɪ dɪdn min tə snæp ət ju. ɪts oʊnli ðəɾ aɪm hʌŋɡɹi ən maɪ fit hɝt."

After a minute Rand nodded reluctantly. "You're right. I know it. I'm sorry; I didn't mean to snap at you. It's only that I'm hungry and my feet hurt."

"maɪn, tu." ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd daʊn ðə ɹoʊɾ əɡɛn, wɔkɪŋ ivən mɔɹ wɛɹəli ðən bɪfɔɹ. ðə wɪnd ɡʌstɪɾ ʌp, bloʊɪŋ dʌst ɪn ðɛɹ feɪsəz. "maɪn, tu." mæt kɔft.

"Mine, too." They started down the road again, walking even more wearily than before. The wind gusted up, blowing dust in their faces. "Mine, too." Mat coughed.

fɑɹmz dɪd pɹəvaɪd səm milz ən ə fju naɪts aʊɾ ə ðə koʊld. ə heɪstæk wɑz nɪɹli əz wɔɹm əz ə ɹum wɪð ə faɪɝ, ət lis kəmpɛɹd tə laɪɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə bʊʃəz, ən ə heɪstæk, ivən wʌn wɪθaʊɾ ə tɑɹp oʊvɝ ɪt, kɛpt ɔl bʌt ðə hɛviəst ɹeɪn ɔf, ɪf jə dʌɡ jɝsɛlf ɪn dipli ɪnʌf. səmtaɪmz mæt tʃɹaɪɾ ɪz hæn ət stilɪŋ ɛɡz, ən wʌns i ətɛmptəd tə mɪlk ə kaʊ lɛft ənətɛndɪd, steɪkt aʊɾ ɑn ə lɔŋ ɹoʊp tə kɹɑp ɪn ə fild. moʊs fɑɹmz hæd dɑɡz, ðoʊ, ən fɑɹm dɑɡz wɝ wɑtʃfəl. ə tu-maɪl ɹʌn wɪð beɪɪŋ haʊnz ət ðɛɹ hilz wɑz tu haɪ ə pɹaɪs fəɹ tu əɹ θɹi ɛɡz əz ɹænd sɔ ɪt, ɪspɛʃli wən ðə dɑɡz səmtaɪmz tʊk aʊɝz tə ɡoʊ əweɪ ən lɛɾ əm daʊn aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹi wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd teɪkən ʃɛltɝ. ði aʊɝz wɝ wʌɾ i ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd.

Farms did provide some meals and a few nights out of the cold. A haystack was nearly as warm as a room with a fire, at least compared to lying under the bushes, and a haystack, even one without a tarp over it, kept all but the heaviest rain off, if you dug yourself in deeply enough. Sometimes Mat tried his hand at stealing eggs, and once he attempted to milk a cow left unattended, staked out on a long rope to crop in a field. Most farms had dogs, though, and farm dogs were watchful. A two-mile run with baying hounds at their heels was too high a price for two or three eggs as Rand saw it, especially when the dogs sometimes took hours to go away and let them down out of the tree where they had taken shelter. The hours were what he regretted.

hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪli laɪk duɪŋ ɪt, bʌt ɹænd pɹəfɝd tə əpɹoʊtʃ ə fɑɹmhaʊs oʊpənli ɪn bɹɔd deɪlaɪt. naʊ ən əɡɛn ðeɪ hæd ðə dɑɡz sɛɾ ɑn əm ɛniweɪ, wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd biɪŋ sɛd, fəɹ ðə ɹumɝz ən ðə taɪmz meɪɾ ɛvɹiwʌn u lɪvd əpɑɹt fɹəm ʌðɝ pipəl nɝvəs əbaʊt stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, bʌɾ ɔfən ən aʊɝ əɹ soʊ tʃɑpɪŋ wʊɾ əɹ hɔlɪŋ wɔɾɝ wəɾ ɝn ə mil ən ə bɛd, ivən ɪf ðə bɛd wɑz ə paɪl ə stʃɹɔ ɪn ðə bɑɹn. bʌɾ ən aʊɝ əɹ tu duɪŋ tʃɔɹz wɑz ən aʊɝ əɹ tu ʌv deɪlaɪt wən ðeɪ wɝ stændɪŋ stɪl, ən aʊɝ əɹ tu fəɹ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl tə kætʃ ʌp. səmtaɪmz i wʌndɝd haʊ mɛni maɪlz ə feɪd kəd kʌvɝ ɪn ən aʊɝ. hi bɪɡɹʌdʒd ɛvɹi mɪnəɾ ʌv ɪt - ðoʊ ædmɪɾɪdli nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ wən i wɑz wʊlfɪŋ daʊn ə ɡʊdwaɪfs hɑt sup. ən wən ðeɪ hæd noʊ fud, noʊɪŋ ðeɪ hæd spɛn ɛvɹi pɑsəbəl mɪnət muvɪŋ təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn dɪd nɑt də mʌtʃ tə suð ən ɛmpti bɛli. ɹænd kəd nɑt meɪk ʌp ɪz maɪn ɪf ɪt wɑz wɝs tə luz taɪm əɹ ɡoʊ hʌŋɡɹi, bʌt mæt wɛn bɪɑnd wɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪz bɛli əɹ pɝsut.

He did not really like doing it, but Rand preferred to approach a farmhouse openly in broad daylight. Now and again they had the dogs set on them anyway, without a word being said, for the rumors and the times made everyone who lived apart from other people nervous about strangers, but often an hour or so chopping wood or hauling water would earn a meal and a bed, even if the bed was a pile of straw in the barn. But an hour or two doing chores was an hour or two of daylight when they were standing still, an hour or two for the Myrddraal to catch up. Sometimes he wondered how many miles a Fade could cover in an hour. He begrudged every minute of it - though admittedly not so much when he was wolfing down a goodwife's hot soup. And when they had no food, knowing they had spent every possible minute moving toward Caemlyn did not do much to soothe an empty belly. Rand could not make up his mind if it was worse to lose time or go hungry, but Mat went beyond worrying about his belly or pursuit.

"wʌt də wi noʊ əbaʊt ðɛm, ɛniweɪ?" mæt dɪmændəd wʌn æftɝnun waɪl ðeɪ wɝ mʌkɪŋ aʊt stɔlz ɑn ə smɔl fɑɹm.

"What do we know about them, anyway?" Mat demanded one afternoon while they were mucking out stalls on a small farm.

"laɪt, mæt, wʌt də ðeɪ noʊ əbaʊɾ ʌs?" ɹænd snizd. ðeɪ wɝ wɝkɪŋ stʃɹɪp tə ðə weɪst, ən swɛɾ ən stʃɹɔ kʌvɝɾ əm boʊθ lɪbɝəli, ən moʊts ə stʃɹɔ-dʌs hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ. "wʌɾ aɪ noʊ ɪz ðəl ɡɪv əs səm ɹoʊs læm ən ə ɹil bɛd tə slip ɪn."

"Light, Mat, what do they know about us?" Rand sneezed. They were working stripped to the waist, and sweat and straw covered them both liberally, and motes of straw-dust hung in the air. "What I know is they'll give us some roast lamb and a real bed to sleep in."

mæt dʌɡ hɪz heɪfɔɹk ɪndə ðə stʃɹɔ ən mənʊɹ ən ɡeɪv ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ fɹaʊn ət ðə fɑɹmɝ, kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə bæk ə ðə bɑɹn wɪð ə bʌkəɾ ɪn wʌn hæn ən ɪz mɪlkɪŋ stul ɪn ði ʌðɝ. ə stupt oʊl mæn wɪð skɪn laɪk lɛðɝ ən θɪn, ɡɹeɪ hɛɹ, ðə fɑɹmɝ sloʊd wən i sɔ mæt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ðən lʊkt əweɪ kwɪkli ən hɝiɾ ɑn aʊɾ ə ðə bɑɹn, slɑpɪŋ mɪlk oʊvɝ ðə ɹɪm ə ðə bʌkəɾ ɪn ɪz heɪst.

Mat dug his hayfork into the straw and manure and gave a sidelong frown at the farmer, coming from the back of the barn with a bucket in one hand and his milking stool in the other. A stooped old man with skin like leather and thin, gray hair, the farmer slowed when he saw Mat looking at him, then looked away quickly and hurried on out of the barn, slopping milk over the rim of the bucket in his haste.

"hiz ʌp tə sʌmθɪŋ, aɪ tɛl ju," mæt sɛd. "si ðə weɪ hi wʊdn mit maɪ aɪ? waɪ ɑɹ ðeɪ soʊ fɹɛnli tə ə kʌpəl ʌv wɑndɝɝz ðeɪ nɛvɝ leɪɾ aɪz ɑn bɪfɔɹ? tɛl mi ðæt."

"He's up to something, I tell you," Mat said. "See the way he wouldn't meet my eye? Why are they so friendly to a couple of wanderers they never laid eyes on before? Tell me that."

"hɪz waɪf sɛz wi ɹimaɪn əɹ ə ðɛɹ ɡɹændsʌnz. wɪl jə stɑp wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛm? wʌt wɪv tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪz bɪhaɪn ʌs. aɪ hoʊp."

"His wife says we remind her of their grandsons. Will you stop worrying about them? What we have to worry about is behind us. I hope."

"hiz ʌp tə sʌmθɪŋ," mæt mʌɾɝd.

"He's up to something," Mat muttered.

wən ðeɪ fɪnɪʃt, ðeɪ wɑʃt ʌp ət ðə tʃɹɔf ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə bɑɹn, ðɛɹ ʃædoʊz stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ lɔŋ wɪð ðə sɪŋkɪŋ sʌn. ɹænd taʊəld ɔf wɪð ɪz ʃɝɾ əz ðeɪ wɔk tə ðə fɑɹmhaʊs. ðə fɑɹmɝ mɛɾ əm ət ðə dɔɹ; hi lin ɑn ə kɔɹɾɝstæf ɪn ə tu-kæʒəwəl mænɝ. bɪhaɪn ɪm ɪz waɪf klʌtʃt əɹ eɪpɹən ən pɪɹd pæst ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, tʃuɪŋ əɹ lɪp. ɹænd saɪd; hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i ən mæt ɹimaɪndəɾ əm ə ðɛɹ ɡɹændsʌnz ɛni lɔŋɡɝ.

When they finished, they washed up at the trough in front of the barn, their shadows stretching long with the sinking sun. Rand toweled off with his shirt as they walked to the farmhouse. The farmer met them at the door; he leaned on a quarterstaff in a too-casual manner. Behind him his wife clutched her apron and peered past his shoulder, chewing her lip. Rand sighed; he did not think he and Mat reminded them of their grandsons any longer.

"aʊɝ sʌnz ɑɹ kʌmɪŋ tə vɪzət tənaɪt," ði oʊl mæn sɛd. "ɔl fɔɹ ə ðɛm. aɪ fɝɡɑt. ðəɹ ɔl fɔɹ kʌmɪŋ. bɪɡ lædz. stʃɹɔŋ. bi hɪɹ ɛni taɪm, naʊ. aɪm əfɹeɪd wi doʊn əv ðə bɛd wi pɹɑməs ju."

"Our sons are coming to visit tonight," the old man said. "All four of them. I forgot. They're all four coming. Big lads. Strong. Be here any time, now. I'm afraid we don't have the bed we promised you."

hɪz waɪf θɹʌst ə smɔl bʌndəl ɹæpt ɪn ə næpkɪn pæs hɪm. "hɪɹ. ɪts bɹɛd, ən tʃiz, ən pɪkəlz, ən læm. ɪnʌf fəɹ tu milz, meɪbi. hɪɹ." hɝ ɹɪŋkəl feɪs æskt əm tə pliz teɪk ɪɾ ən ɡoʊ.

His wife thrust a small bundle wrapped in a napkin past him. "Here. It's bread, and cheese, and pickles, and lamb. Enough for two meals, maybe. Here." Her wrinkled face asked them to please take it and go.

ɹænd tʊk ðə bʌndəl. "θæŋk ju. aɪ ʌndɝstænd. kʌm ɑn, mæt."

Rand took the bundle. "Thank you. I understand. Come on, Mat."

mæt fɑloʊd hɪm, ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ waɪl i pʊld ɪz ʃɝɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. ɹænd θɔɾ ɪt bɛs tə kʌvɝ əz mɛni maɪlz əz ðeɪ kəd bɪfɔɹ stɑpɪŋ tə it. ði oʊl fɑɹmɝ hæɾ ə dɔɡ.

Mat followed him, grumbling while he pulled his shirt over his head. Rand thought it best to cover as many miles as they could before stopping to eat. The old farmer had a dog.

ɪt cʊɾə bɪn wɝs, hi θɔt. θɹi deɪz ɝliɝ, waɪl ðeɪ wɝ stɪl wɝkɪŋ, ðeɪd hæd ðə dɑɡz sɛɾ ɑn ðɛm. ðə dɑɡz, ən ðə fɑɹmɝ, ən ɪz tu sʌnz weɪvɪŋ kʌdʒəlz tʃeɪst əm aʊt tə ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊɾ ən hæf ə maɪl daʊn ɪt bɪfɔɹ ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp. ðeɪ hæd bɛɹli hæd taɪm tə snætʃ ʌp ðɛɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz ən ɹʌn. ðə fɑɹmɝ hæd kæɹiɾ ə baʊ wɪð ə bɹɔd-hɛɾ æɹoʊ nɑkt.

It could have been worse, he thought. Three days earlier, while they were still working, they'd had the dogs set on them. The dogs, and the farmer, and his two sons waving cudgels chased them out to the Caemlyn Road and half a mile down it before giving up. They had barely had time to snatch up their belongings and run. The farmer had carried a bow with a broad-head arrow nocked.

"doʊn kʌm bæk, hɪɹ!" hi hæd ʃaʊɾəd æftɝ ðɛm. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jəɹ ʌp tə, bʌt doʊn lemi si jəɹ ʃɪfti aɪz əɡɛn!"

"Don't come back, hear!" he had shouted after them. "I don't know what you're up to, but don't let me see your shifty eyes again!"

mæt hæd stɑɹɾəd tə tɝn bæk, fʌmbəlɪŋ əɾ ɪz kwɪvɝ, bʌt ɹænd pʊld ɪm ɑn. "ɑɹ jə kɹeɪzi?" mæt ɡeɪv ɪm ə sʌlən lʊk, bʌɾ ət list i kɛpt ɹʌnɪŋ.

Mat had started to turn back, fumbling at his quiver, but Rand pulled him on. "Are you crazy?" Mat gave him a sullen look, but at least he kept running.

ɹænd səmtaɪmz wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɪt wɑz wɝθwaɪl stɑpɪŋ ət fɑɹmz. ðə fɝðɝ ðeɪ wɛnt, ðə mɔɹ səspɪʃəs ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz mæt bɪkeɪm, ən ðə lɛs i wɑz eɪbəl tə haɪɾ ɪt. əɹ bɑðɝd tə. ðə milz ɡɑt skɪmpiɝ fəɹ ðə seɪm wɝk, ən səmtaɪmz nɑɾ ivən ðə bɑɹn wɑz ɔfɝɾ əz ə pleɪs tə slip. bʌt ðən ə səluʃən tə ɔl ðɛɹ pɹɑbləmz keɪm tə ɹænd, əɹ soʊ ɪt simd, ən ɪt keɪm ət ɡɹɪnwɛlz fɑɹm.

Rand sometimes wondered if it was worthwhile stopping at farms. The further they went, the more suspicious of strangers Mat became, and the less he was able to hide it. Or bothered to. The meals got skimpier for the same work, and sometimes not even the barn was offered as a place to sleep. But then a solution to all their problems came to Rand, or so it seemed, and it came at Grinwell's farm.

mæstɝ ɡɹɪnwɛl ən ɪz waɪf hæd naɪn tʃɪlʒɹən, ði ɛldəst ə dɔɾɝ nɑt mɔɹ ðən ə jɪɹ jʌŋɡɝ ðən ɹænd ən mæt. mæstɝ ɡɹɪnwɛl wɑz ə stɝɾi mæn, ən wɪð ɪz tʃɪlʒɹən i pɹɑbli hæd noʊ niɾ ʌv ɛni mɔɹ hɛlp, bʌɾ i lʊkt əm ʌp ən daʊn, teɪkɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ tʃɹævəl-steɪn kloʊðz ən dʌsti buts, ən əlaʊɾ əz haʊ hi kəɾ ɔlweɪz faɪnd wɝk fəɹ mɔɹ hænz. mɪstʃɹəs ɡɹɪnwɛl sɛd ðəɾ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə iɾ əɾ əɹ teɪbəl, ðeɪ wəd nɑt də ɪɾ ɪn ðoʊz fɪlθi θɪŋz. ʃi wɑz əbaʊt tə də lɔnʒɹi, ən səm ə hɝ hʌzbənz oʊl kloʊðz wəd fɪɾ əm wɛl ɪnʌf fəɹ wɝkɪŋ. ʃi smaɪld wən ʃi sɛɾ ɪt, ən fəɹ ə mɪnət ʃi lʊk tə ɹænd dʒʌs laɪk mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ, ðoʊ hɝ hɛɹ wɑz jɛloʊ; hi hæd nɛvɝ sin hɛɹ ðət kʌlɝ bɪfɔɹ. ivən mæt sim tə luz səm ə hɪz tɛnʃən wən əɹ smaɪl tʌtʃt hɪm. ði ɛldəs dɔɾɝ wɑz ənʌðɝ mæɾɝ.

Master Grinwell and his wife had nine children, the eldest a daughter not more than a year younger than Rand and Mat. Master Grinwell was a sturdy man, and with his children he probably had no need of any more help, but he looked them up and down, taking in their travel-stained clothes and dusty boots, and allowed as how he could always find work for more hands. Mistress Grinwell said that if they were going to eat at her table, they would not do it in those filthy things. She was about to do laundry, and some of her husband's old clothes would fit them well enough for working. She smiled when she said it, and for a minute she looked to Rand just like Mistress al'Vere, though her hair was yellow; he had never seen hair that color before. Even Mat seemed to lose some of his tension when her smile touched him. The eldest daughter was another matter.

dɑɹk-hɛɹd, bɪɡ-aɪd, ən pɹɪɾi, ɛls ɡɹɪn ɪmpuɾəntli əɾ əm wɛnɛvɝ əɹ pɛɹəns wɝ nɑt lʊkɪŋ. waɪl ðeɪ wɝkt, muvɪŋ bæɹəlz ən sæks ʌv ɡɹeɪn ɪn ðə bɑɹn, ʃi hʌŋ oʊvɝ ə stɔl dɔɹ, hʌmɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf ən tʃuɪŋ ði ɛn ʌv wʌn lɔŋ pɪɡteɪl, wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛm. ɹænd ʃi wɑtʃt ɪspɛʃli. hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɪɡnɔɹ hɝ, bʌɾ æftɝ ə fju mɪnəts i pʊɾ ɑn ðə ʃɝt mæstɝ ɡɹɪnwɛl hæd loʊn hɪm. ɪt wɑz taɪɾ əkɹɔs ðə ʃoʊldɝz ən tu ʃɔɹt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz bɛɾɝ ðən nʌθɪŋ. ɛls læft aʊt laʊd wən i tʌɡd ɪɾ ɑn. hi bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk ðət ðɪs taɪm ɪt wəd nɑt bi mæts fɔlt wən ðeɪ wɝ tʃeɪst ɔf.

Dark-haired, big-eyed, and pretty, Else grinned impudently at them whenever her parents were not looking. While they worked, moving barrels and sacks of grain in the barn, she hung over a stall door, humming to herself and chewing the end of one long pigtail, watching them. Rand she watched especially. He tried to ignore her, but after a few minutes he put on the shirt Master Grinwell had loaned him. It was tight across the shoulders and too short, but it was better than nothing. Else laughed out loud when he tugged it on. He began to think that this time it would not be Mat's fault when they were chased off.

pɛɹɪn wəd noʊ haʊ tə hændəl ðɪs, hi θɔt. hid meɪk səm ɔfhæn kɑmɛnt, ən pɹɪɾi sun ʃid bi læfɪŋ əɾ ɪz dʒoʊks ɪnstɛɾ ə munɪŋ ɝaʊnd wɛɹ əɹ fɑðɝ kən si. oʊnli hi kəd nɑt θɪŋk ʌv ɛni ɔfhæn kɑmɛnt, əɹ ɛni dʒoʊks, iðɝ. wɛnɛvɝ i lʊkt ɪn əɹ dɝɛkʃən, ʃi smaɪld əɾ ɪm ɪn ə weɪ ðət wəɾ əv əɹ fɑðɝ lusɪŋ ðə dɑɡz ɑn əm ɪf i sɔ. wʌns ʃi toʊld ɪm ʃi laɪk tɔl mɛn. ɔl ðə bɔɪz ɑn ðə fɑɹmz ɝaʊn ðəɹ wɝ ʃɔɹt. mæt ɡeɪv ə næsti snɪkɝ. wɪʃɪŋ i kəd θɪŋk ʌv ə dʒoʊk, ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ɪz heɪfɔɹk.

Perrin would know how to handle this, he thought. He'd make some offhand comment, and pretty soon she'd be laughing at his jokes instead of mooning around where her father can see. Only he could not think of any offhand comment, or any jokes, either. Whenever he looked in her direction, she smiled at him in a way that would have her father loosing the dogs on them if he saw. Once she told him she liked tall men. All the boys on the farms around there were short. Mat gave a nasty snicker. Wishing he could think of a joke, Rand tried to concentrate on his hayfork.

ðə jʌŋɡɝ tʃɪlʒɹən, ət list, wɝ ə blɛsɪŋ ɪn ɹændz aɪz. mæts wɛɹinɪs ɔlweɪz izd ə lɪɾəl wən ðəɹ wɝ tʃɪlʒɹən ɝaʊnd. æftɝ sʌpɝ ðeɪ ɔl sɛɾəld ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, wɪð mæstɝ ɡɹɪnwɛl ɪn ɪz feɪvɹɪt tʃɛɹ θʌmɪŋ ɪz paɪp fʊl ə təbæk ən mɪstʃɹəs ɡɹɪnwɛl fʌsɪŋ wɪð əɹ soʊɪŋ bɑks ən ðə ʃɝts ʃi hæd wɑʃt fəɹ ɪm ən mæt. mæt dʌɡ aʊt tɑmz kʌlɝd bɔlz ən bɪɡæn tə dʒʌɡəl. hi nɛvɝ dɪd ðəɾ ənlɛs ðəɹ wɝ tʃɪlʒɹən. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən læft wən i pɹitɛndəd tə bi dʒɹɑpɪŋ ðə bɔlz, snætʃɪŋ əm ət ðə læs mɪnət, ən ðeɪ klæp fəɹ faʊntənz ən fɪɡjɝ-eɪts ən ə sɪks-bɔl sɝkəl ðəɾ i ɹɪli dɪɾ ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑp. bʌt ðeɪ tʊk ɪɾ ɪn ɡʊd pɑɹt, mæstɝ ɡɹɪnwɛl ən ɪz waɪf əplɔɾɪŋ əz hɑɹɾ əz ðɛɹ tʃɪlʒɹən. wən mæt wɑz dʌn, boʊɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə ɹum wɪð əz mɛni flɝɪʃəz əz tɑm maɪɾ əv meɪd, ɹænd tʊk tɑmz flut fɹəm ɪts keɪs.

The younger children, at least, were a blessing in Rand's eyes. Mat's wariness always eased a little when there were children around. After supper they all settled in front of the fireplace, with Master Grinwell in his favorite chair thumbing his pipe full of tabac and Mistress Grinwell fussing with her sewing box and the shirts she had washed for him and Mat. Mat dug out Thom's colored balls and began to juggle. He never did that unless there were children. The children laughed when he pretended to be dropping the balls, snatching them at the last minute, and they clapped for fountains and figure-eights and a six-ball circle that he really did almost drop. But they took it in good part, Master Grinwell and his wife applauding as hard as their children. When Mat was done, bowing around the room with as many flourishes as Thom might have made, Rand took Thom's flute from its case.

hi kəd nɛvɝ hændəl ði ɪnstʃɹəmənt wɪθaʊɾ ə pæŋ ə sædnəs. tʌtʃɪŋ ɪts ɡoʊld-ænd-sɪlvɝ skɹɑlwɝk wɑz laɪk tʌtʃɪŋ tɑmz mɛmɹi. hi nɛvɝ hændəl ðə hɑɹp ɪksɛp tə si ðəɾ ɪt wɑz seɪf ən dʒɹaɪ - tɑm hæɾ ɔlweɪz sɛd ðə hɑɹp wɑz bɪɑn ə fɑɹmbɔɪz klʌmzi hænz - bʌt wɛnɛvɝ ə fɑɹmɝ əlaʊɾ əm tə steɪ, hi ɔlweɪz pleɪd wʌn tun ɑn ðə fluɾ æftɝ sʌpɝ. ɪt wɑz dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl sʌmθɪŋ ɛkstʃɹə tə peɪ ðə fɑɹmɝ, ən meɪbi ə weɪ ʌv kipɪŋ tɑmz mɛmɹi fɹɛʃ.

He could never handle the instrument without a pang of sadness. Touching its gold-and-silver scrollwork was like touching Thom's memory. He never handled the harp except to see that it was safe and dry - Thom had always said the harp was beyond a farmboy's clumsy hands - but whenever a farmer allowed them to stay, he always played one tune on the flute after supper. It was just a little something extra to pay the farmer, and maybe a way of keeping Thom's memory fresh.

wɪð ə læfɪŋ muɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sɛt baɪ mæts dʒʌɡəlɪŋ, hi pleɪd "θɹi ɡɝlz ɪn ðə mɛdoʊ." mæstɝ ən mɪstʃɹəs ɡɹɪnwɛl klæpt əlɔŋ, ən ðə smɔlɝ tʃɪlʒɹən dænst ɝaʊn ðə flɔɹ, ivən ðə smɔləs bɔɪ, hu kəd bɛɹli wɔk, stɑmpɪŋ ɪz fiɾ ɪn taɪm. hi nu hi wəd wɪn noʊ pɹaɪzəz ət bɛl taɪn, bʌɾ æftɝ tɑmz titʃɪŋ i wəd nɑt bi ɪmbɛɹəs tə ɛntɝ.

With a laughing mood already set by Mat's juggling, he played "Three Girls in the Meadow." Master and Mistress Grinwell clapped along, and the smaller children danced around the floor, even the smallest boy, who could barely walk, stomping his feet in time. He knew he would win no prizes at Bel Tine, but after Thom's teaching he would not be embarrassed to enter.

ɛls wɑz sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝ, ən əz i loʊɝd ðə fluɾ æftɝ ðə læs noʊt, ʃi lin fɔɹwɝd wɪð ə lɔŋ saɪ ən smaɪld ət hɪm. "ju pleɪ soʊ bjuɾəfli. aɪ nɛvɝ hɝɾ ɛniθɪŋ soʊ bjuɾəfəl."

Else was sitting cross-legged in front of the fire, and as he lowered the flute after the last note, she leaned forward with a long sigh and smiled at him. "You play so beautifully. I never heard anything so beautiful."

mɪstʃɹəs ɡɹɪnwɛl sʌɾənli pɔzd ɪn əɹ soʊɪŋ ən ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ əɾ əɹ dɔɾɝ, ðən ɡeɪv ɹænd ə lɔŋ, əpɹeɪzɪŋ lʊk.

Mistress Grinwell suddenly paused in her sewing and raised an eyebrow at her daughter, then gave Rand a long, appraising look.

hi hæd pɪkt ʌp ðə lɛðɝ keɪs tə pʊt ðə fluɾ əweɪ, bʌɾ ʌndɝ əɹ stɛɹ i dʒɹɑp ðə keɪs ən ɔlmoʊs ðə flut, tu. ɪf ʃi əkjuzd ɪm ə tʃɹaɪflɪŋ wɪð əɹ dɔɾɝ. . . . ɪn dɛspɝeɪʃən i pʊt ðə flut bæk tə hɪz lɪps ən pleɪɾ ənʌðɝ sɔŋ, ðən ənʌðɝ, ən ənʌðɝ. mɪstʃɹəs ɡɹɪnwɛl kɛpt wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. hi pleɪd "ðə wɪn ðət ʃeɪks ðə wɪloʊ," ən "kʌmɪŋ hoʊm fɹəm tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp," ən "mɪstʃɹəs eɪnɹəz ɹustɝ," ən "ði oʊl blæk bɛɹ." hi pleɪɾ ɛvɹi sɔŋ i kəd θɪŋk ʌv, bʌt ʃi nɛvɝ tʊk əɹ aɪz ɔf hɪm. ʃi nɛvɝ sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ, iðɝ, bʌt ʃi wɑtʃt, ən weɪd.

He had picked up the leather case to put the flute away, but under her stare he dropped the case and almost the flute, too. If she accused him of trifling with her daughter. . . . In desperation he put the flute back to his lips and played another song, then another, and another. Mistress Grinwell kept watching him. He played "The Wind That Shakes the Willow," and "Coming Home From Tarwin's Gap," and "Mistress Aynora's Rooster," and "The Old Black Bear." He played every song he could think of, but she never took her eyes off him. She never said anything, either, but she watched, and weighed.

ɪt wɑz leɪt wən mæstɝ ɡɹɪnwɛl faɪnəli stʊɾ ʌp, tʃʌklɪŋ ən ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ. "wɛl, ðɪs əz bɪn ɹɛɹ fʌn, bʌɾ ɪts weɪ pæst əɹ bɛdtaɪm. jə tʃɹævlɪŋ lædz meɪk jəɹ oʊn aʊɝz, bʌt mɔɹnɪŋ kʌmz ɝli ɑn ə fɑɹm. əl tɛl jə lædz, aɪ hæv peɪd ɡʊd mʌni əɾ ən ɪn fəɹ noʊ bɛɾɝ ɛntɝteɪnmən ðən aɪv hæd ðɪs naɪt. fəɹ wɝs."

It was late when Master Grinwell finally stood up, chuckling and rubbing his hands together. "Well, this has been rare fun, but it's way past our bedtime. You traveling lads make your own hours, but morning comes early on a farm. I'll tell you lads, I have paid good money at an inn for no better entertainment than I've had this night. For worse."

"aɪ θɪŋk ðeɪ ʃəɾ əv ə ɹɪwɔɹd, fɑðɝ," mɪstʃɹəs ɡɹɪnwɛl sɛɾ əz ʃi pɪkt ʌp əɹ jʌŋɡəs bɔɪ, hu hæd lɔŋ sɪns fɔlən əslip ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝ. "ðə bɑɹn ɪz noʊ fɪt pleɪs tə slip. ðeɪ kən slip ɪn ɛlsəz ɹum tənaɪt, ən ʃɪl slip wɪð mi."

"I think they should have a reward, father," Mistress Grinwell said as she picked up her youngest boy, who had long since fallen asleep in front of the fire. "The barn is no fit place to sleep. They can sleep in Else's room tonight, and she will sleep with me."

ɛls ɡɹɪməst. ʃi wɑz kɛɹfəl tə kip əɹ hɛd daʊn, bʌt ɹænd sɔ ɪt. hi θɔɾ əɹ mʌðɝ dɪd, tu.

Else grimaced. She was careful to keep her head down, but Rand saw it. He thought her mother did, too.

mæstɝ ɡɹɪnwɛl nɑɾəd. "jɛs, jɛs, mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən ðə bɑɹn. ɪf jə doʊn maɪn slipɪŋ tu tə ə bɛd, ðəɾ ɪz." ɹænd flʌʃt; mɪstʃɹəs ɡɹɪnwɛl wɑz stɪl lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. "aɪ də wɪʃ aɪ kəd hɪɹ mɔɹ ə ðət flut. ən jəɹ dʒʌɡəlɪŋ, tu. aɪ laɪk ðæt. jə noʊ, ðɛɹz ə lɪɾəl tæsk jə kəd hɛlp wɪð təmɑɹoʊ, ən - "

Master Grinwell nodded. "Yes, yes, much better than the barn. If you don't mind sleeping two to a bed, that is." Rand flushed; Mistress Grinwell was still looking at him. "I do wish I could hear more of that flute. And your juggling, too. I like that. You know, there's a little task you could help with tomorrow, and - "

"ðeɪl bi wɑntɪŋ ən ɝli stɑɹt, fɑðɝ," mɪstʃɹəs ɡɹɪnwɛl kʌɾ ɪn. "ɛɹin ɪz ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ ðə weɪ ðəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ, ən ɪf ðeɪ ɪntɛn tə tʃɹaɪ ðɛɹ lʌk ət ði ɪn ðɛɹ, ðəl əv tə wɔk ɔl deɪ tə ɡɛt ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk."

"They'll be wanting an early start, father," Mistress Grinwell cut in. "Arien is the next village the way they're going, and if they intend to try their luck at the inn there, they'll have to walk all day to get there before dark."

"jɛs, mɪstʃɹəs," ɹænd sɛd, "wi wɪl. ən θæŋk ju."

"Yes, mistress," Rand said, "we will. And thank you."

ʃi ɡeɪv ɪm ə taɪt-lɪp smaɪl əz ɪf ʃi nu vɛɹi wɛl ðəɾ ɪz θæŋks wɝ fəɹ mɔɹ ðən əɹ ædvaɪs, əɹ ivən sʌpɝ ən ə wɔɹm bɛd.

She gave him a tight-lipped smile as if she knew very well that his thanks were for more than her advice, or even supper and a warm bed.

ðə hoʊl nɛks deɪ mæt twɪɾɪd ɪm əbaʊɾ ɛls əz ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ daʊn ðə ɹoʊd. hi kɛp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə sʌbʒɪkt, ən wʌt ðə ɡɹɪnwɛlz hæd sədʒɛstəɾ əbaʊt pɝfɔɹmɪŋ əɾ ɪnz wɑz ði iziəs θɪŋ tə maɪnd. ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, wɪð ɛls paʊɾɪŋ əz i lɛft, ən mɪstʃɹəs ɡɹɪnwɛl wɑtʃɪŋ wɪð ə ʃɑɹp-aɪd lʊk ʌv ɡʊd-ɹɪɾəns ən sunəst-mɛndɪd, ɪt wɑz dʒʌst sʌmθɪŋ tə kip mæt fɹəm tɔkɪŋ. baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ dɪd ɹitʃ ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ, ɪt wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɛls əɡɛn.

The whole next day Mat twitted him about Else as they made their way down the road. He kept trying to change the subject, and what the Grinwells had suggested about performing at inns was the easiest thing to mind. In the morning, with Else pouting as he left, and Mistress Grinwell watching with a sharp-eyed look of good-riddance and soonest-mended, it was just something to keep Mat from talking. By the time they did reach the next village, it was something else again.

wɪð dʌsk dɪsɛndɪŋ, ðeɪ ɛntɝd ði oʊnli ɪn ɪn ɛɹin, ən ɹænd spoʊk tə ði ɪnkipɝ. hi pleɪd "fɛɹi ɝ ðə ɹɪvɝ" - wɪtʃ ðə plʌmp ɪnkipɝ kɔld "dɑɹlɪŋ sɛɹə" - ən pɑɹɾ ʌv "ðə ɹoʊd tə dʌn ɹɛn," ən mæt dɪɾ ə lɪɾəl dʒʌɡəlɪŋ, ən ði ʌpʃɑt wɑz ðət ðeɪ slɛpt ɪn ə bɛd ðət naɪɾ ən eɪt ɹoʊstəd pəteɪɾoʊz ən hɑt bif. ɪt wɑz ðə smɔləst ɹum ɪn ði ɪn, tə bi ʃʊɹ, ʌp ʌndɝ ði ivz ɪn ðə bæk, ən ðə mil keɪm ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə lɔŋ naɪɾ ə pleɪɪŋ ən dʒʌɡəlɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl ə bɛd bɪniθ ə ɹuf. ivən bɛɾɝ, tə ɹænd, ɛvɹi deɪlaɪɾ aʊɝ hæd bɪn spɛn tʃɹævlɪŋ. ən ði ɪnz peɪtʃɹənz dɪd nɑt sim tə kɛɹ ɪf mæt stɛɹɾ əɾ əm səspɪʃəsli. səm ə ðɛm ivən lʊkt əskæns ət wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðə taɪmz meɪd səspɪʃən ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ə kɑmənpleɪs, ən ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz stʃɹeɪnʒɝz əɾ ən ɪn.

With dusk descending, they entered the only inn in Arien, and Rand spoke to the innkeeper. He played "Ferry O'er the River" - which the plump innkeeper called "Darling Sara" - and part of "The Road to Dun Aren," and Mat did a little juggling, and the upshot was that they slept in a bed that night and ate roasted potatoes and hot beef. It was the smallest room in the inn, to be sure, up under the eaves in the back, and the meal came in the middle of a long night of playing and juggling, but it was still a bed beneath a roof. Even better, to Rand, every daylight hour had been spent traveling. And the inn's patrons did not seem to care if Mat stared at them suspiciously. Some of them even looked askance at one another. The times made suspicion of strangers a commonplace, and there were always strangers at an inn.

ɹænd slɛp bɛɾɝ ðən i hæd sɪns livɪŋ waɪtbɹɪdʒ, dɪspaɪt ʃɛɹɪŋ ə bɛd wɪð mæt ən ɪz nɑktɝnəl mʌɾɝɪŋ. ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ði ɪnkipɝ tʃɹaɪd tə tɔk əm ɪndə steɪɪŋ ənʌðɝ deɪ əɹ tu, bʌt wən i kəd nɑt, hi kɔld oʊvɝ ə blɪɹi-aɪd fɑɹmɝ u hæd dʒɹʌŋk tu mʌtʃ tə dʒɹaɪv ɪz kɑɹt hoʊm ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ. ən aʊɝ leɪɾɝ ðeɪ wɝ faɪv maɪlz fɝðɝ ist, spɹɔlɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ bæks ɑn ðə stʃɹɔ ɪn ðə bæk ʌv izəl fɔɹniz kɑɹt.

Rand slept better than he had since leaving Whitebridge, despite sharing a bed with Mat and his nocturnal muttering. In the morning the innkeeper tried to talk them into staying another day or two, but when he could not, he called over a bleary-eyed farmer who had drunk too much to drive his cart home the night before. An hour later they were five miles further east, sprawling on their backs on the straw in the back of Eazil Forney's cart.

ðət bɪkeɪm ðə weɪ ʌv ðɛɹ tʃɹævlɪŋ. wɪð ə lɪɾəl lʌk, ən meɪbi ə ɹaɪɾ əɹ tu, ðeɪ kəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz ɹitʃ ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ baɪ dɑɹk. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən wʌn ɪn ɪn ə vɪlədʒ, ði ɪnkipɝz wəd bɪd fəɹ əm wʌns ðeɪ hɝd ɹændz fluɾ ən sɔ mæt dʒʌɡəl. təɡɛðɝ ðeɪ stɪl dɪd nɑt kʌm kloʊs tə ə ɡlimən, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ mɔɹ ðən moʊs vɪlədʒəz sɔ ɪn ə jɪɹ. tu əɹ θɹi ɪnz ɪn ə taʊn mɛn ə bɛɾɝ ɹum, wɪð tu bɛdz, ən mɔɹ dʒɛnɝəs pɔɹʃənz ʌv ə bɛɾɝ kʌɾ ə mit, ən səmtaɪmz ivən ə fju kɑpɝz ɪn ðɛɹ pɑkəts wən ðeɪ lɛf bɪsaɪdz. ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋz ðəɹ wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz sʌmwʌn tə ɔfɝ ə ɹaɪd, ənʌðɝ fɑɹmɝ u hæd steɪd tu leɪɾ ən dʒɹʌŋk tu mʌtʃ, əɹ ə mɝtʃən u hæd laɪk ðɛɹ ɛntɝteɪnmən ɪnʌf nɑt tə maɪn ɪf ðeɪ hɑpt ʌp ɑn ðə bæk ʌv wʌn ə hɪz wæɡənz. ɹænd bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk ðɛɹ pɹɑbləmz wɝ oʊvɝ tɪl ðeɪ ɹitʃt keɪɛmlɪn. bʌt ðən ðeɪ keɪm tə fɔɹ kɪŋz.

That became the way of their traveling. With a little luck, and maybe a ride or two, they could almost always reach the next village by dark. If there was more than one inn in a village, the innkeepers would bid for them once they heard Rand's flute and saw Mat juggle. Together they still did not come close to a gleeman, but they were more than most villages saw in a year. Two or three inns in a town meant a better room, with two beds, and more generous portions of a better cut of meat, and sometimes even a few coppers in their pockets when they left besides. In the mornings there was almost always someone to offer a ride, another farmer who had stayed too late and drunk too much, or a merchant who had liked their entertainment enough not to mind if they hopped up on the back of one of his wagons. Rand began to think their problems were over till they reached Caemlyn. But then they came to Four Kings.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾitu


CHAPTER 32

fɔɹ kɪŋz ɪn ʃædoʊ


Four Kings in Shadow

ðə vɪlədʒ wɑz bɪɡɝ ðən moʊst, bʌt stɪl ə skɹʌfi taʊn tə bɛɹ ə neɪm laɪk fɔɹ kɪŋz. əz juʒəwəl, ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd ɹæn stʃɹeɪt θɹu ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə taʊn, bʌɾ ənʌðɝ hɛvəli tʃɹævəl haɪweɪ keɪm ɪn fɹəm ðə saʊθ, tu. moʊs vɪlədʒəz wɝ mɑɹkəts ən ɡæðɝɪŋ pleɪsəz fəɹ ðə fɑɹmɝz ə ði ɛɹiə, bʌt ðəɹ wɝ fju fɑɹmɝz tə bi sin hɪɹ. fɔɹ kɪŋz sɝvaɪvd əz ə stɑpoʊvɝ fəɹ mɝtʃəns' wæɡən tʃɹeɪnz ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn ən tə ðə maɪnɪŋ taʊnz ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪs bɪɑn bɛɹlən, əz wɛl əz ðə vɪlədʒəz bɪtwin. ðə sʌðɝn ɹoʊd kæɹid luɡɹdz tʃɹeɪd wɪð ðə maɪnz ɪn ðə wɛst; luɡɑɝɾɝ mɝtʃəns ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn hæɾ ə mɔɹ dɝɛkt ɹut. ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ kʌntʃɹi hɛl fju fɑɹmz, bɛɹli ɪnʌf tə fid ðɛmsɛlvz ən ðə taʊn, ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ sɛntɝɾ ɑn ðə mɝtʃəns ən ðɛɹ wæɡənz, ðə mɛn u dʒɹoʊv əm ən ðə leɪbɝɝz u loʊɾəd ðə ɡʊdz.

The village was bigger than most, but still a scruffy town to bear a name like Four Kings. As usual, the Caemlyn Road ran straight through the center of the town, but another heavily traveled highway came in from the south, too. Most villages were markets and gathering places for the farmers of the area, but there were few farmers to be seen here. Four Kings survived as a stopover for merchants' wagon trains on their way to Caemlyn and to the mining towns in the Mountains of Mist beyond Baerlon, as well as the villages between. The southern road carried Lugard's trade with the mines in the west; Lugarder merchants going to Caemlyn had a more direct route. The surrounding country held few farms, barely enough to feed themselves and the town, and everything in the village centered on the merchants and their wagons, the men who drove them and the laborers who loaded the goods.

plɑts ə bɛɹ ɝθ, ɡɹaʊn tə dʌst, leɪ skæɾɝd θɹu fɔɹ kɪŋz, fɪld wɪð wæɡənz pɑɹkt wil tə wil ən əbændən ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju bɔɹd ɡɑɹdz. steɪbəlz ən hɔɹs-lɑts laɪn ðə stʃɹits, ɔl ʌv wɪtʃ wɝ waɪɾ ɪnʌf tə əlaʊ wæɡənz tə pæs ən dipli ɹʌɾɪd fɹəm tu mɛni wilz. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ vɪlədʒ ɡɹin, ən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən pleɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹʌts, dɑdʒɪŋ wæɡənz ən ðə kɝsɪz ʌv wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz. vɪlədʒ wɪmən, ðɛɹ hɛdz kʌvɝd wɪð skɑɹvz, kɛp ðɛɹ aɪz daʊn ən wɔkt kwɪkli, səmtaɪmz fɑloʊd baɪ wæɡənɪɹz' kɑmɛns ðət meɪd ɹænd blʌʃ; ivən mæt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ət səm ə ðɛm. noʊ wʊmən stʊd ɡɑsəpɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə fɛns wɪð ə neɪbɝ. dʒɹæb wʊɾən haʊsəz stʊd tʃik baɪ dʒaʊl, wɪð oʊnli nɛɹoʊ æliz bɪtwin ən waɪtwɑʃ - wɛɹ ɛniwʌn hæd bɑðɝd tə waɪtwɑʃ ðə wɛðɝd bɔɹdz - feɪɾəd əz ɪf ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn fɹɛʃən ɪn jɪɹz. hɛvi ʃʌɾɝz ɑn ðə haʊsəz hæd nɑt bɪn oʊpən ɪn soʊ lɔŋ ðət ðə hɪnʒɪz wɝ sɑləd lʌmps ə ɹʌst. nɔɪz hʌŋ oʊvɝ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, klæŋɪŋ fɹəm blæksmɪθs, ʃaʊts fɹəm ðə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz, ɹɔkəs læftɝ fɹəm ðə taʊnz ɪnz.

Plots of bare earth, ground to dust, lay scattered through Four Kings, filled with wagons parked wheel to wheel and abandoned except for a few bored guards. Stables and horse-lots lined the streets, all of which were wide enough to allow wagons to pass and deeply rutted from too many wheels. There was no village green, and the children played in the ruts, dodging wagons and the curses of wagon drivers. Village women, their heads covered with scarves, kept their eyes down and walked quickly, sometimes followed by wagoneers' comments that made Rand blush; even Mat gave a start at some of them. No woman stood gossiping over the fence with a neighbor. Drab wooden houses stood cheek by jowl, with only narrow alleys between and whitewash - where anyone had bothered to whitewash the weathered boards - faded as if it had not been freshened in years. Heavy shutters on the houses had not been open in so long that the hinges were solid lumps of rust. Noise hung over everything, clanging from blacksmiths, shouts from the wagon drivers, raucous laughter from the town's inns.

ɹænd swʌŋ daʊn fɹəm ðə bæk ʌv ə mɝtʃəns kænvəs-tɑpt wæɡən əz ðeɪ keɪm əbɹɛst ʌv ə ɡɛɹɪʃli peɪntəɾ ɪn, ɔl ɡɹinz ən jɛloʊz ðət kɑt ði aɪ fɹəm əfɑɹ əmʌŋ ðə lɛɾən haʊzɪz. ðə laɪn ʌv wæɡənz kɛp muvɪŋ. nʌn ə ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz ivən sim tə noʊɾəs ðəɾ i ən mæt hæd ɡɔn; dʌsk wɑz fɔlɪŋ, ən ðeɪ ɔl hæd ðɛɹ aɪz ɑn ənhɪtʃɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz ən ɹitʃɪŋ ði ɪnz. ɹænd stʌmbəld ɪn ə ɹʌt, ðən lɛp kwɪkli tə əvɔɪɾ ə hɛvi-leɪɾən wæɡən klæɾɝɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ. ðə dʒɹaɪvɝ ʃaʊɾəd ə kɝs əɾ ɪm əz ðə wæɡən ɹoʊl baɪ. ə vɪlədʒ wʊmən stɛpt ɝaʊn ɪm ən hɝiɾ ɑn wɪθaʊɾ ɛvɝ miɾɪŋ ɪz aɪ.

Rand swung down from the back of a merchant's canvas-topped wagon as they came abreast of a garishly painted inn, all greens and yellows that caught the eye from afar among the leaden houses. The line of wagons kept moving. None of the drivers even seemed to notice that he and Mat had gone; dusk was falling, and they all had their eyes on unhitching the horses and reaching the inns. Rand stumbled in a rut, then leaped quickly to avoid a heavy-laden wagon clattering the other way. The driver shouted a curse at him as the wagon rolled by. A village woman stepped around him and hurried on without ever meeting his eye.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt ðɪs pleɪs," hi sɛd. hi θɔɾ i kəd hɪɹ mjuzɪk mɪkst ɪn ðə dɪn, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt tɛl fɹəm wɛɹ ɪt wɑz kʌmɪŋ. fɹəm ði ɪn, meɪbi, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz hɑɹd tə bi ʃʊɹ. "aɪ doʊn laɪk ɪt. meɪbi wid bɛɾɝ ɡoʊ ɑn ðɪs taɪm."

"I don't know about this place," he said. He thought he could hear music mixed in the din, but he could not tell from where it was coming. From the inn, maybe, but it was hard to be sure. "I don't like it. Maybe we'd better go on this time."

mæt ɡeɪv ɪm ə skɔɹnfəl lʊk, ðən ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz ət ðə skaɪ. dɑɹk klaʊdz θɪkən oʊvɝhɛd. "æn slip ʌndɝ ə hɛdʒ tənaɪt? ɪn ðæt? aɪm juz tə ə bɛɾ əɡɛn." hi kɑkt ɪz hɛd tə lɪsən, ðən ɡɹʌntɪd. "meɪbi wʌn ə ðiz pleɪsəz dʌzn əv mjuzɪʃənz. ɛniweɪ, əl bɛt ðeɪ doʊn əv ə dʒʌɡəlɝ." hi slʌŋ ɪz baʊ əkɹɔs ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən stɑɹɾəd fəɹ ðə bɹaɪt jɛloʊ dɔɹ, stʌɾiɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ θɹu nɛɹoʊɾ aɪz. ɹænd fɑloʊd daʊtfəli.

Mat gave him a scornful look, then rolled his eyes at the sky. Dark clouds thickened overhead. "And sleep under a hedge tonight? In that? I'm used to a bed again." He cocked his head to listen, then grunted. "Maybe one of these places doesn't have musicians. Anyway, I'll bet they don't have a juggler." He slung his bow across his shoulders and started for the bright yellow door, studying everything through narrowed eyes. Rand followed doubtfully.

ðəɹ wɝ mjuzɪʃənz ɪnsaɪd, ðɛɹ zɪðɝ ən dʒɹʌm ɔlmoʊs dʒɹaʊn ɪn kɔɹs læftɝ ən dʒɹʌŋkən ʃaʊɾɪŋ. ɹænd dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə faɪn ðə lændlɔɹd. ðə nɛks tu ɪnz hæd mjuzɪʃənz əz wɛl, ən ðə seɪm dɛfənɪŋ kækɑfəni. ɹʌfli dʒɹɛs mɛn fɪl ðə teɪbəlz ən stʌmbəld əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ, weɪvɪŋ mʌɡz ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɑndəl sɝvɪŋ meɪdz u dɑdʒd wɪð fɪkst, lɔŋ-sʌfɝɪŋ smaɪlz. ðə bɪldɪŋz ʃʊk wɪð ðə ɹækɪt, ən ðə smɛl wɑz saʊɝ, ə stɛntʃ ʌv oʊld waɪn ən ənwɑʃt bɑɾiz. ʌv ðə mɝtʃəns, ɪn ðɛɹ sɪlk ən vɛlvəɾ ən leɪs, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn; pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ ɹumz əbʌvstɛɹz pɹətɛktəd ðɛɹ ɪɹz ən noʊzɪz. hi ən mæt oʊnli pʊt ðɛɹ hɛdz ɪn ðə dɔɹz bɪfɔɹ livɪŋ. hi wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə θɪŋk ðeɪ wəɾ əv noʊ tʃɔɪs bʌt tə muv ɑn.

There were musicians inside, their zither and drum almost drowned in coarse laughter and drunken shouting. Rand did not bother to find the landlord. The next two inns had musicians as well, and the same deafening cacophony. Roughly dressed men filled the tables and stumbled across the floor, waving mugs and trying to fondle serving maids who dodged with fixed, long-suffering smiles. The buildings shook with the racket, and the smell was sour, a stench of old wine and unwashed bodies. Of the merchants, in their silk and velvet and lace, there was no sign; private dining rooms abovestairs protected their ears and noses. He and Mat only put their heads in the doors before leaving. He was beginning to think they would have no choice but to move on.

ðə fɔɹθ ɪn, ðə dænsɪŋ kɑɹtmən, stʊd saɪlənt.

The fourth inn, The Dancing Cartman, stood silent.

ɪt wɑz əz ɡɔɾi əz ði ʌðɝ ɪnz, jɛloʊ tʃɹɪmd ɪn bɹaɪt ɹɛɾ ən bɪliəs, aɪ-ɹɛntʃɪŋ ɡɹin, ðoʊ hɪɹ ðə peɪnt wɑz kɹækt ən pilɪŋ. ɹænd ən mæt stɛpt ɪnsaɪd.

It was as gaudy as the other inns, yellow trimmed in bright red and bilious, eye-wrenching green, though here the paint was cracked and peeling. Rand and Mat stepped inside.

oʊnli hæf ə dʌzən mɛn sæɾ ət ðə teɪbəlz ðət fɪl ðə kɑmən ɹum, hʌntʃt oʊvɝ ðɛɹ mʌɡz, itʃ wʌn ɡlʌmli əloʊn wɪð ɪz θɔts. bɪznəs wɑz dɛfənətli nɑt ɡʊd, bʌɾ ɪt hæd bɪn bɛɾɝ wʌns. ɪɡzækli əz mɛni sɝvɪŋ meɪdz əz ðəɹ wɝ peɪtʃɹənz bɪzid ðɛmsɛlvz ɝaʊn ðə ɹum. ðəɹ wɑz plɛnti fəɹ əm tə də - dɝt kɹʌstɪd ðə flɔɹ ən kɑbwɛbz fɪl ðə kɔɹnɝz ə ðə silɪŋ - bʌt moʊst wɝ nɑt duɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ɹɪli jusfəl, oʊnli muvɪŋ soʊ ðeɪ wəd nɑt bi sin stændɪŋ stɪl.

Only half a dozen men sat at the tables that filled the common room, hunched over their mugs, each one glumly alone with his thoughts. Business was definitely not good, but it had been better once. Exactly as many serving maids as there were patrons busied themselves around the room. There was plenty for them to do - dirt crusted the floor and cobwebs filled the corners of the ceiling - but most were not doing anything really useful, only moving so they would not be seen standing still.

ə boʊni mæn wɪð lɔŋ, stʃɹɪŋi hɛɹ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz tɝn tə skaʊl əɾ əm əz ðeɪ keɪm θɹu ðə dɔɹ. ðə fɝst sloʊ pil ə θʌndɝ ɹʌmbəld əkɹɔs fɔɹ kɪŋz. "wʌt dʒju wɑnt?" hi wɑz ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz ɑn ə ɡɹisi eɪpɹən ðət hʌŋ tə hɪz æŋkəlz. ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf mɔɹ ɡɹaɪm wɑz kʌmɪŋ ɔf ɑn ði eɪpɹən əɹ ɑn ðə mænz hænz. hi wɑz ðə fɝst skɪni ɪnkipɝ ɹænd hæd sin. "wɛl? spik ʌp, baɪ ə dʒɹɪŋk, əɹ ɡɛɾ aʊt! də aɪ lʊk laɪk ə ɹɝi ʃoʊ?"

A bony man with long, stringy hair to his shoulders turned to scowl at them as they came through the door. The first slow peal of thunder rumbled across Four Kings. "What do you want?" He was rubbing his hands on a greasy apron that hung to his ankles. Rand wondered if more grime was coming off on the apron or on the man's hands. He was the first skinny innkeeper Rand had seen. "Well? Speak up, buy a drink, or get out! Do I look like a raree show?"

flʌʃɪŋ, ɹænd lɔntʃt ɪndə ðə spil i hæd pɝfɛktəɾ əɾ ɪnz bɪfɔɹ ðɪs. "aɪ pleɪ ðə flut, ən maɪ fɹɛn dʒʌɡəlz, ən jəl nɑt si tu bɛɾɝ ɪn ə jɪɹ. fəɹ ə ɡʊd ɹum ən ə ɡʊd mil, wɪl fɪl ðɪs kɑmən ɹum ə jʊɹz." hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə fɪl kɑmən ɹumz i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi sin ðəɾ ivnɪŋ, ɪspɛʃli ðə mæn u hæd vɑməɾəd ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm ət ðə læst wʌn. hi hæd hæd tə stɛp laɪvli tə kip ɪz buts əntʌtʃt. hi fɔltɝd, bʌt kɑt hɪmsɛlf ən wɛn ɑn. "wil fɪl jəɹ ɪn wɪð mɛn u wɪl ɹipeɪ ðə lɪɾəl wi kɑs twɛnti taɪmz oʊvɝ wɪð ðə fuɾ ən dʒɹɪŋk ðeɪ baɪ. waɪ ʃəd - "

Flushing, Rand launched into the spiel he had perfected at inns before this. "I play the flute, and my friend juggles, and you'll not see two better in a year. For a good room and a good meal, we'll fill this common room of yours." He remembered the filled common rooms he had already seen that evening, especially the man who had vomited right in front of him at the last one. He had had to step lively to keep his boots untouched. He faltered, but caught himself and went on. "We'll fill your inn with men who will repay the little we cost twenty times over with the food and drink they buy. Why should - "

"aɪv ɡɑɾ ə mæn pleɪz ðə dʌlsɪmɝ," ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd saʊɝli.

"I've got a man plays the dulcimer," the innkeeper said sourly.

"ju hæv ə dʒɹʌŋk, sæməl heɪk," wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz sɛd. ʃi wɑz pæsɪŋ ɪm wɪð ə tʃɹeɪ ən tu mʌɡz, ən ʃi pɔz tə ɡɪv ɹænd ən mæt ə plʌmp smaɪl. "moʊs taɪmz, hi kæn si wɛl ɪnʌf tə faɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum," ʃi kənfaɪɾəd ɪn ə laʊd wɪspɝ. "hævən ivən sin ɪm ɪn tu deɪz."

"You have a drunk, Saml Hake," one of the serving maids said. She was passing him with a tray and two mugs, and she paused to give Rand and Mat a plump smile. "Most times, he can't see well enough to find the common room," she confided in a loud whisper. "Haven't even seen him in two days."

wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz ɔf ɹænd ən mæt, heɪk kæʒəwəli bækhændəɾ əɹ əkɹɔs ðə feɪs. ʃi ɡeɪv ə sɝpɹaɪzd ɡɹʌn ən fɛl hɛvəli tə ði ənwɑʃt flɔɹ; wʌn ə ðə mʌɡz bɹoʊk, ən ðə spɪld waɪn wɑʃt ɹɪvələts ɪn ðə dɝt. "jɔɹ dɑk fəɹ ðə waɪn ən bɹeɪkɪdʒ. ɡɛt 'ɛm fɹɛʃ dʒɹɪŋks. ən hɝi. mɛn doʊn peɪ tə weɪt waɪl jə leɪz ɝaʊnd." hɪz toʊn wɑz əz ɔfhæn əz ðə bloʊ. nʌn ə ðə peɪtʃɹənz lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ðɛɹ waɪn, ən ði ʌðɝ sɝvɪŋ meɪdz kɛp ðɛɹ aɪz əvɝɾəd.

Without taking his eyes off Rand and Mat, Hake casually backhanded her across the face. She gave a surprised grunt and fell heavily to the unwashed floor; one of the mugs broke, and the spilled wine washed rivulets in the dirt. "You're docked for the wine and breakage. Get 'em fresh drinks. And hurry. Men don't pay to wait while you laze around." His tone was as offhand as the blow. None of the patrons looked up from their wine, and the other serving maids kept their eyes averted.

ðə plʌmp wʊmən ɹʌbd əɹ tʃik ən stɛɹd pjʊɹ mɝɾɝ ət heɪk, bʌt ʃi ɡæðɝd ði ɛmpti mʌɡ ən ðə bɹoʊkən pisəz ɑn əɹ tʃɹeɪ ən wɛn ɔf wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd.

The plump woman rubbed her cheek and stared pure murder at Hake, but she gathered the empty mug and the broken pieces on her tray and went off without a word.

heɪk sʌkt ɪz tiθ θɔtfəli, aɪɪŋ ɹænd ən mæt. hɪz ɡeɪz klʌŋ tə ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd bɪfɔɹ i pʊld ɪɾ əweɪ. "tɛl jə wʌt," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "ju kən əv ə kʌpəl ə pæləts ɪn ən ɛmpti stɔɹɹum ɪn ðə bæk. ɹumz ɑɹ tu ɪkspɛnsɪv tə ɡɪv əweɪ. jə it wən ɛvɹibɑɾiz ɡɔn. ðəɹ ɔt tə bi sʌmθɪŋ lɛft."

Hake sucked his teeth thoughtfully, eyeing Rand and Mat. His gaze clung to the heron-mark sword before he pulled it away. "Tell you what," he said finally. "You can have a couple of pallets in an empty storeroom in the back. Rooms are too expensive to give away. You eat when everybody's gone. There ought to be something left."

ɹænd wɪʃt ðəɹ wɑz ən ɪn ɪn fɔɹ kɪŋz ðeɪ hæd nɑt jɛt tʃɹaɪd. sɪns livɪŋ waɪtbɹɪdʒ i hæd mɛt kulnəs, ɪndɪfɝəns, ən aʊtʃɹaɪt hɑstɪləɾi, bʌt nʌθɪŋ ðət ɡeɪv ɪm ðə sɛns ʌv əniz ðət ðɪs mæn ən ðɪs vɪlədʒ dɪd. hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ðə dɝɾ ən skwɑlɝ ən nɔɪz, bʌt ðə mɪsɡɪvɪŋz dɪd nɑt ɡoʊ əweɪ. mæt wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ heɪk əz ɪf i səspɛktəd səm tʃɹæp, bʌɾ i ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ʌv wɑntɪŋ tə ɡɪv ʌp ðə dænsɪŋ kɑɹtmən fəɹ ə bɛɾ ʌndɝ ə hɛdʒ. θʌndɝ ɹæɾəld ðə wɪndoʊz. ɹænd saɪd.

Rand wished there was an inn in Four Kings they had not yet tried. Since leaving Whitebridge he had met coolness, indifference, and outright hostility, but nothing that gave him the sense of unease that this man and this village did. He told himself it was just the dirt and squalor and noise, but the misgivings did not go away. Mat was watching Hake as if he suspected some trap, but he gave no sign of wanting to give up The Dancing Cartman for a bed under a hedge. Thunder rattled the windows. Rand sighed.

"ðə pæləts wɪl də ɪf ðəɹ klin, ən ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹ ɪnʌf klin blæŋkəts. bʌt wi it tu aʊɝz æftɝ fʊl dɑɹk, noʊ leɪɾɝ, ən ðə bɛs jə hæv. hɪɹ. wɪl ʃoʊ jə wʌt wi kən du." hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə flut keɪs, bʌt heɪk ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

"The pallets will do if they're clean, and if there are enough clean blankets. But we eat two hours after full dark, no later, and the best you have. Here. We'll show you what we can do." He reached for the flute case, but Hake shook his head.

"doʊn mæɾɝ. ðɪs lɑɾəl bi sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð ɛni kaɪndə skɹitʃɪŋ soʊ lɔŋ əz ɪt saʊnz sʌmθɪŋ laɪk mjuzɪk." hɪz aɪz tʌtʃt ɹændz sɔɹɾ əɡɛn; hɪz θɪn smaɪl tʌtʃt nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ɪz lɪps. "it wən jə wɑnt, bʌɾ ɪf jə doʊn bɹɪŋ ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn, aʊt jə ɡoʊ ɪn ðə stʃɹit." hi nɑɾəd oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət tu hɑɹd-feɪs mɛn sɪɾɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl. ðeɪ wɝ nɑt dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ, ən ðɛɹ ɑɹmz wɝ θɪk ɪnʌf fəɹ lɛɡz. wən heɪk nɑɾəd ət ðɛm, ðɛɹ aɪz ʃɪftəd tə ɹænd ən mæt, flæɾ ən ɪkspɹɛʃənləs.

"Don't matter. This lot'll be satisfied with any kind of screeching so long as it sounds something like music." His eyes touched Rand's sword again; his thin smile touched nothing but his lips. "Eat when you want, but if you don't bring the crowd in, out you go in the street." He nodded over his shoulder at two hard-faced men sitting against the wall. They were not drinking, and their arms were thick enough for legs. When Hake nodded at them, their eyes shifted to Rand and Mat, flat and expressionless.

ɹænd pʊt wʌn hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, hoʊpɪŋ ðə twɪstɪŋ ɪn ɪz stʌmək dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ ɑn ɪz feɪs. "æz lɔŋ əz wi ɡɛt wʌts əɡɹiɾ ɑn," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə lɛvəl toʊn.

Rand put one hand on his sword hilt, hoping the twisting in his stomach did not show on his face. "As long as we get what's agreed on," he said in a level tone.

heɪk blɪŋkt, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən i simd ənizi hɪmsɛlf. əbɹʌpli hi nɑɾəd. "wʌɾ aɪ sɛd, ɪzən ɪt? wɛl, ɡɛt stɑɹɾəd. jə woʊn bɹɪŋ ɛnibəɾi ɪn dʒʌst stændɪŋ ðɛɹ." hi stɔkt ɔf, skaʊlɪŋ ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ ət ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ fɪfti kʌstəmɝz ðeɪ wɝ nɪɡlɛktɪŋ.

Hake blinked, and for a moment he seemed uneasy himself. Abruptly he nodded. "What I said, isn't it? Well, get started. You won't bring anybody in just standing there." He stalked off, scowling and shouting at the serving maids as if there were fifty customers they were neglecting.

ðəɹ wɑz ə smɔl, ɹeɪz plætfɔɹm ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə ɹum, nɪɹ ðə dɔɹ tə ðə bæk. ɹænd lɪftəɾ ə bɛntʃ ʌp ɑn ɪt, ən sɛɾəld ɪz kloʊk, blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl, ən tɑmz bʌndəl kloʊk bɪhaɪn ðə bɛntʃ wɪð ðə sɔɹd laɪɪŋ ətɑp ðɛm.

There was a small, raised platform at the far end of the room, near the door to the back. Rand lifted a bench up on it, and settled his cloak, blanketroll, and Thom's bundled cloak behind the bench with the sword lying atop them.

hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf i hæd bɪn waɪz tə kip wɛɹɪŋ ðə sɔɹɾ oʊpənli. sɔɹdz wɝ kɑmən ɪnʌf, bʌt ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk ətʃɹæktəɾ ətɛnʃən ən spɛkjəleɪʃən. nɑt fɹəm ɛvɹibɑɾi, bʌɾ ɛni noʊɾəs əɾ ɔl meɪɾ ɪm ənkʌmftəɹbəl. hi kəd bi livɪŋ ə klɪɹ tʃɹeɪl fəɹ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl - ɪf feɪdz niɾəd ðət kaɪndə tʃɹeɪl. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə. ɪn ɛni keɪs, hi wɑz ɹɪlʌktən tə stɑp wɛɹɪŋ ɪt. tæm hæd ɡɪvən ɪt tə hɪm. hɪz fɑðɝ. əz lɔŋ əz i wɔɹ ðə sɔɹd, ðəɹ wɑz stɪl səm kənɛkʃən bɪtwin tæm ən hɪm, ə θɹɛd ðət ɡeɪv ɪm ðə ɹaɪt tə stɪl kɔl tæm fɑðɝ. tu leɪt naʊ, hi θɔt. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i mɛnt, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt wɑz tʃɹu. tu leɪt.

He wondered if he had been wise to keep wearing the sword openly. Swords were common enough, but the heron-mark attracted attention and speculation. Not from everybody, but any notice at all made him uncomfortable. He could be leaving a clear trail for the Myrddraal - if Fades needed that kind of trail. They did not seem to. In any case, he was reluctant to stop wearing it. Tam had given it to him. His father. As long as he wore the sword, there was still some connection between Tam and him, a thread that gave him the right to still call Tam father. Too late now, he thought. He was not sure what he meant, but he was sure it was true. Too late.

ət ðə fɝs noʊɾ ʌv "kɑk oʊ' ðə nɔɹθ" ðə hæf-dʌzən peɪtʃɹənz ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum lɪftəd ðɛɹ hɛdz aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ waɪn. ivən ðə tu baʊnsɝz sæt fɔɹwɝɾ ə lɪɾəl. ðeɪ ɔl əplɔɾəd wən i fɪnɪʃt, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə tu tʌfs, ən wʌns mɔɹ wən mæt sɛn ə ʃaʊɝ ə kʌlɝd bɔlz spɪnɪŋ θɹu hɪz hænz. aʊtsaɪd, ðə skaɪ mʌɾɝd əɡɛn. ðə ɹeɪn wɑz hoʊldɪŋ ɔf, bʌt ðə pɹɛʃɝ ʌv ɪt wɑz pælpəbəl; ðə lɔŋɡɝ ɪt weɪɾəd, ðə hɑɹɾɝ ɪt wəd fɔl.

At the first note of "Cock o' the North" the half-dozen patrons in the common room lifted their heads out of their wine. Even the two bouncers sat forward a little. They all applauded when he finished, including the two toughs, and once more when Mat sent a shower of colored balls spinning through his hands. Outside, the sky muttered again. The rain was holding off, but the pressure of it was palpable; the longer it waited, the harder it would fall.

wɝd spɹɛd, ən baɪ ðə taɪm ɪt wɑz dɑɹk aʊtsaɪd ði ɪn wɑz pæk fʊl wɪð mɛn læfɪŋ ən tɔkɪŋ soʊ laʊd ðət ɹænd kəd bɛɹli hɪɹ wʌɾ i wɑz pleɪɪŋ. oʊnli ðə θʌndɝ oʊvɝpaʊɝd ðə nɔɪz ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum. laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz, ən ɪn ðə moʊməntɛɹi lʌlz i kəd feɪnli hɪɹ ɹeɪn dʒɹʌmɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹuf. mɛn u keɪm ɪn naʊ dʒɹɪp tʃɹeɪlz əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ.

Word spread, and by the time it was dark outside the inn was packed full with men laughing and talking so loud that Rand could barely hear what he was playing. Only the thunder overpowered the noise in the common room. Lightning flashed in the windows, and in the momentary lulls he could faintly hear rain drumming on the roof. Men who came in now dripped trails across the floor.

wɛnɛvɝ i pɔzd, vɔɪsəz ʃaʊɾəd ðə neɪmz ə tunz θɹu ðə dɪn. ə ɡʊd mɛni neɪmz i dɪd nɑt ɹɛkəɡnaɪz, ðoʊ wən i ɡɑt sʌmwʌn tə hʌm ə bɪɾ ʌv ɪt, hi ɔfən faʊn i dɪd noʊ ðə sɔŋ. ɪt hæd bɪn ðət weɪ ʌðɝ pleɪsəz, bɪfɔɹ. "dʒɑli dʒeɪm" wɑz "ɹiəz flɪŋ" hɪɹ, ən hæd bɪn "kʌlɝz ə ðə sʌn" əɾ ən ɝliɝ stɑp. səm neɪmz steɪd ðə seɪm; ʌðɝz tʃeɪnʒd wɪð tɛn maɪlz' dɪstəns, ən i hæd lɝnd nu sɔŋz, tu. "ðə dʒɹʌŋkən pɛdlɝ" wɑz ə nu wʌn, ðoʊ səmtaɪmz ɪt wɑz kɔld "tɪŋkɝ ɪn ðə kɪtʃən." "tu kɪŋz keɪm hʌntɪŋ" wɑz "tu hɔɹsəz ɹʌnɪŋ" ən sɛvɹəl ʌðɝ neɪmz bɪsaɪdz. hi pleɪd ðə wʌnz i nu, ən mɛn paʊndɪd ðə teɪbəlz fəɹ mɔɹ.

Whenever he paused, voices shouted the names of tunes through the din. A good many names he did not recognize, though when he got someone to hum a bit of it, he often found he did know the song. It had been that way other places, before. "Jolly Jaim" was "Rhea's Fling" here, and had been "Colors of the Sun" at an earlier stop. Some names stayed the same; others changed with ten miles' distance, and he had learned new songs, too. "The Drunken Peddler" was a new one, though sometimes it was called "Tinker in the Kitchen." "Two Kings Came Hunting" was "Two Horses Running" and several other names besides. He played the ones he knew, and men pounded the tables for more.

ʌðɝz kɔl fəɹ mæt tə dʒʌɡəl əɡɛn. səmtaɪmz faɪts bɹoʊk aʊt bɪtwin ðoʊz wɑntɪŋ mjuzɪk ən ðoʊz u fænsid dʒʌɡəlɪŋ. wʌns ə naɪf flæʃt, ən ə wʊmən skɹimd, ən ə mæn ɹil bæk fɹəm ə teɪbəl wɪð blʌd stʃɹimɪŋ daʊn ɪz feɪs, bʌt dʒæk ən stʃɹɑm, ðə tu baʊnsɝz, kloʊzd ɪn swɪfli ən wɪð kəmpliɾ ɪmpɑɹʃiælɪɾi θɹu ɛvɹiwʌn ɪnvɑlvd ɪndə ðə stʃɹit wɪð lʌmps ɑn ðɛɹ hɛdz. ðət wɑz ðɛɹ tæktɪk wɪð ɛni tʃɹʌbəl. ðə tɔk ən ðə læfɪŋ wɛn ɑn əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ hæɾ əkɝd. noʊbɑdi ivən lʊkt ɝaʊn ɪksɛp ðoʊz ðə baʊnsɝz dʒɑsəld ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə ðə dɔɹ.

Others called for Mat to juggle again. Sometimes fights broke out between those wanting music and those who fancied juggling. Once a knife flashed, and a woman screamed, and a man reeled back from a table with blood streaming down his face, but Jak and Strom, the two bouncers, closed in swiftly and with complete impartiality threw everyone involved into the street with lumps on their heads. That was their tactic with any trouble. The talk and the laughing went on as if nothing had occurred. Nobody even looked around except those the bouncers jostled on their way to the door.

ðə peɪtʃɹənz wɝ fɹi wɪð ðɛɹ hænz, tu, wən wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz lɛt hɝsɛlf ɡɹoʊ ənwɛɹi. mɔɹ ðən wʌns dʒæk əɹ stʃɹɑm hæd tə ɹɛskju wʌn ə ðə wɪmən, ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ nʌn tu kwɪk əbaʊɾ ɪt. ðə weɪ heɪk kæɹiɾ ɑn, skɹimɪŋ ən ʃeɪkɪŋ ðə wʊmən ɪnvɑlvd, hi ɔlweɪz kənsɪɾɝd ɪɾ əɹ fɔlt, ən ðə tɪɹi aɪz ən stæmɝɾ əpɑlədʒiz sɛd ʃi wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə æksɛpt ɪz əpɪnjən. ðə wɪmən dʒʌmpt wɛnɛvɝ heɪk fɹaʊnd, ivən ɪf i wɑz lʊkɪŋ sʌmwɛɹ ɛls. ɹænd wʌndɝd waɪ ɛni ʌv əm pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ɪt.

The patrons were free with their hands, too, when one of the serving maids let herself grow unwary. More than once Jak or Strom had to rescue one of the women, though they were none too quick about it. The way Hake carried on, screaming and shaking the woman involved, he always considered it her fault, and the teary eyes and stammered apologies said she was willing to accept his opinion. The women jumped whenever Hake frowned, even if he was looking somewhere else. Rand wondered why any of them put up with it.

heɪk smaɪld wən i lʊkt ət ɹænd ən mæt. æftɝ ə waɪl ɹænd ɹilaɪz heɪk wɑz nɑt smaɪlɪŋ ət ðɛm; ðə smaɪlz keɪm wən ɪz aɪz slɪd bɪhaɪn ðɛm, tə wɛɹ ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd leɪ. wʌns, wən ɹænd sɛt ðə ɡoʊld-ænd-sɪlvɝ-tʃeɪs flut daʊn bɪsaɪɾ ɪz stul, ðə flut ɡɑɾ ə smaɪl, tu.

Hake smiled when he looked at Rand and Mat. After a while Rand realized Hake was not smiling at them; the smiles came when his eyes slid behind them, to where the heron-mark sword lay. Once, when Rand set the gold-and-silver-chased flute down beside his stool, the flute got a smile, too.

ðə nɛks taɪm i tʃeɪnʒd pleɪsəz wɪð mæt ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə deɪz, hi lin oʊvɝ tə spik ɪn mæts ɪɹ. ivən ðət kloʊs i hæd tə spik laʊdli, bʌt wɪð ɔl ðə nɔɪz i daʊɾɪd ɪf ɛniwʌn ɛls kəd hɪɹ. "heɪks gɑnə tʃɹaɪ tə ɹɑb ʌs."

The next time he changed places with Mat at the front of the dais, he leaned over to speak in Mat's ear. Even that close he had to speak loudly, but with all the noise he doubted if anyone else could hear. "Hake's going to try to rob us."

mæt nɑɾəd əz ɪf ɪt wɑz nʌθɪŋ i hæd nɑɾ ɪkspɛktəd. "wil əv tə bɑɹ əɹ dɔɹ tənaɪt."

Mat nodded as if it was nothing he had not expected. "We'll have to bar our door tonight."

"bɑɹ əɹ dɔɹ? dʒæk ən stʃɹɑm kəd bɹeɪk daʊn ə dɔɹ wɪð ðɛɹ fɪsts. lɛts ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ."

"Bar our door? Jak and Strom could break down a door with their fists. Let's get out of here."

"weɪt tɪl æftɝ wi it, ət list. aɪm hʌŋɡɹi. ðeɪ kæn də ɛniθɪŋ hɪɹ," mæt æɾəd. ðə pækt kɑmən ɹum ʃaʊɾəd ɪmpeɪʃənli fəɹ əm tə ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ɪt. heɪk wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ ət ðɛm. "ɛniweɪ, jə wɑnə slip aʊtsaɪd tənaɪt?" ən ɪspɛʃli stʃɹɔŋ kɹæk ə laɪtnɪŋ dʒɹaʊn aʊɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, ən fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðə laɪt θɹu ðə wɪndoʊz wɑz stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ðə læmps.

"Wait till after we eat, at least. I'm hungry. They can't do anything here," Mat added. The packed common room shouted impatiently for them to get on with it. Hake was glaring at them. "Anyway, you want to sleep outside tonight?" An especially strong crack of lightning drowned out everything else, and for an instant the light through the windows was stronger than the lamps.

"aɪ dʒʌst wɑnə ɡɛɾ aʊt wɪθaʊt maɪ hɛd biɪŋ bɹoʊkən," ɹænd sɛd, bʌt mæt wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi slaʊtʃɪŋ bæk tə teɪk ɪz ɹɛst ɑn ðə stul. ɹænd saɪɾ ən lɔntʃt ɪndə "ðə ɹoʊd tə dʌn ɹɛn." ə lɑɾ ə ðɛm sim tə laɪk ðət wʌn; hi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi pleɪɾ ɪt fɔɹ taɪmz, ən ðeɪ stɪl ʃaʊɾəd fəɹ ɪt.

"I just want to get out without my head being broken," Rand said, but Mat was already slouching back to take his rest on the stool. Rand sighed and launched into "The Road to Dun Aren." A lot of them seemed to like that one; he had already played it four times, and they still shouted for it.

ðə tʃɹʌbəl wɑz ðət mæt wɑz ɹaɪt, əz fɑɹ əz i wɛnt. hi wɑz hʌŋɡɹi, tu. ən i kəd nɑt si haʊ heɪk kəd ɡɪv əm ɛni tʃɹʌbəl waɪl ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz fʊl, ən ɡɛɾɪŋ fʊlɝ. fəɹ ɛvɹi mæn u lɛft əɹ wɑz θɹoʊn aʊt baɪ dʒæk ən stʃɹɑm, tu keɪm ɪn fɹəm ðə stʃɹit. ðeɪ ʃaʊɾəd fəɹ ðə dʒʌɡəlɪŋ əɹ fəɹ ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ tun, bʌt moʊsli ðeɪ wɝ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ən fɑndəlɪŋ ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz. wʌn mæn wɑz dɪfɹənt, ðoʊ.

The trouble was that Mat was right, as far as he went. He was hungry, too. And he could not see how Hake could give them any trouble while the common room was full, and getting fuller. For every man who left or was thrown out by Jak and Strom, two came in from the street. They shouted for the juggling or for a particular tune, but mostly they were interested in drinking and fondling the serving maids. One man was different, though.

hi stʊɾ aʊɾ ɪn ɛvɹi weɪ əmʌŋ ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn ðə dænsɪŋ kɑɹtmən. mɝtʃəns əpɛɹənli hæd noʊ jus fəɹ ðə ɹʌn-daʊn ɪn; ðəɹ wɝ nɑɾ ivən ɛni pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ ɹumz fəɹ ðɛm, əz fɑɹ əz i kəd meɪk aʊt. ðə peɪtʃɹənz wɝ ɔl ɹʌf-dʒɹɛst, wɪð ðə tʌf skɪn ə mɛn u leɪbɝɾ ɪn ðə sʌn ən waɪnd. ðɪs mæn wɑz slikli flɛʃi, wɪð ə sɑf lʊk tə hɪz hænz, ən ə vɛlvət koʊt, ən ə dɑɹk ɡɹin vɛlvət kloʊk laɪnd wɪð blu sɪlk wɑz slʌŋ ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. ɔl ə hɪz kloʊðz hæɾ ən ɪkspɛnsɪv kʌt tə ðɛm. hɪz ʃuz - sɑf vɛlvət slɪpɝz, nɑt buts - wɝ nɑt meɪd fəɹ ðə ɹʌɾɪd stʃɹits ə fɔɹ kɪŋz, əɹ fəɹ ɛni stʃɹits əɾ ɔl, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ.

He stood out in every way among the crowd in The Dancing Cartman. Merchants apparently had no use for the run-down inn; there were not even any private dining rooms for them, as far as he could make out. The patrons were all rough-dressed, with the tough skin of men who labored in the sun and wind. This man was sleekly fleshy, with a soft look to his hands, and a velvet coat, and a dark green velvet cloak lined with blue silk was slung around his shoulders. All of his clothes had an expensive cut to them. His shoes - soft velvet slippers, not boots - were not made for the rutted streets of Four Kings, or for any streets at all, for that matter.

hi keɪm ɪn wɛl æftɝ dɑɹk, ʃeɪkɪŋ ðə ɹeɪn ɔf ɪz kloʊk əz i lʊkt ɝaʊnd, ə twɪst ə dɪsteɪst ɑn ɪz maʊθ. hi skæn ðə ɹum wʌns, ɔlɹɛɾi tɝnɪŋ tə ɡoʊ, ðən sʌɾənli ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ət nʌθɪŋ ɹænd kəd si ən sæt daʊn əɾ ə teɪbəl dʒæk ən stʃɹɑm hæd dʒʌst ɛmptid. ə sɝvɪŋ meɪd stɑpt əɾ ɪz teɪbəl, ðən bɹɔɾ ɪm ə mʌɡ ʌv waɪn wɪtʃ i pʊʃt tə wʌn saɪɾ ən nɛvɝ tʌtʃt əɡɛn. ʃi simd ɪn ə hɝi tə liv ɪz teɪbəl boʊθ taɪmz, ðoʊ hi dɪd nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə tʌtʃ əɹ əɹ ivən lʊk ət hɝ. wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz əbaʊɾ ɪm ðət meɪɾ əɹ ənizi, ʌðɝz u keɪm kloʊs tə hɪm noʊɾəst ɪt, tu. fəɹ ɔl ə hɪz sɑf lʊk, wɛnɛvɝ səm kæləs-hændəd wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝ dɪsaɪɾɪd tə ʃɛɹ ɪz teɪbəl, wʌn ɡlæns wɑz ɔl ɪt tʊk tə sɛn ðə mæn lʊkɪŋ ɛlswɛɹ. hi sæɾ əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wʌn ɛls ɪn ðə ɹum bʌɾ ɪm - ən ɹænd ən mæt. ðɛm i wɑtʃt oʊvɝ stipəl hænz ðət ɡlɪɾɝd wɪð ə ɹɪŋ ɑn itʃ fɪŋɡɝ. hi wɑtʃt əm wɪð ə smaɪl ə sæɾəsfaɪd ɹɛkəɡnɪʃən.

He came in well after dark, shaking the rain off his cloak as he looked around, a twist of distaste on his mouth. He scanned the room once, already turning to go, then suddenly gave a start at nothing Rand could see and sat down at a table Jak and Strom had just emptied. A serving maid stopped at his table, then brought him a mug of wine which he pushed to one side and never touched again. She seemed in a hurry to leave his table both times, though he did not try to touch her or even look at her. Whatever it was about him that made her uneasy, others who came close to him noticed it, too. For all of his soft look, whenever some callus-handed wagon driver decided to share his table, one glance was all it took to send the man looking elsewhere. He sat as if there were no one else in the room but him - and Rand and Mat. Them he watched over steepled hands that glittered with a ring on each finger. He watched them with a smile of satisfied recognition.

ɹænd mɝmɝd tə mæt əz ðeɪ wɝ tʃeɪnʒɪŋ pleɪsəz əɡɛn, ən mæt nɑɾəd. "aɪ sɔ hɪm," hi mʌɾɝd. "hu ɪz hi? aɪ kip θɪŋkɪŋ aɪ noʊ hɪm."

Rand murmured to Mat as they were changing places again, and Mat nodded. "I saw him," he muttered. "Who is he? I keep thinking I know him."

ðə seɪm θɔt hæɾ əkɝd tə ɹænd, tɪklɪŋ ðə bæk ə hɪz mɛmɹi, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt bɹɪŋ ɪt fɔɹwɝd. jɛɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ðət feɪs wɑz wʌn i hæd nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ.

The same thought had occurred to Rand, tickling the back of his memory, but he could not bring it forward. Yet he was sure that face was one he had never seen before.

wən ðeɪ hæd bɪn pɝfɔɹmɪŋ fəɹ tu aʊɝz, əz nɪɹ əz ɹænd kəɾ ɛstəmeɪt, hi slɪp ðə fluɾ ɪndə ɪts keɪs ən i ən mæt ɡæðɝɾ ʌp ðɛɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz. əz ðeɪ wɝ stɛpɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ðə loʊ plætfɔɹm, heɪk keɪm bʌsəlɪŋ ʌp, æŋɡɝ twɪstɪŋ ɪz nɛɹoʊ feɪs.

When they had been performing for two hours, as near as Rand could estimate, he slipped the flute into its case and he and Mat gathered up their belongings. As they were stepping down from the low platform, Hake came bustling up, anger twisting his narrow face.

"ɪts taɪm tə it," ɹænd sɛd tə fɔɹstɔl hɪm, "ænd wi doʊnt wɑn əɹ θɪŋz stoʊlən. jə wɑnə tɛl ðə kʊk?" heɪk hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, stɪl æŋɡɹi, tʃɹaɪɪŋ ʌnsəksɛsfəli tə kip ɪz aɪz ɔf wʌt ɹænd hɛld ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz. kæʒəwəli ɹænd ʃɪftəɾ ɪz bʌndəlz soʊ hi kəd ɹɛst wʌn hæn ɑn ðə sɔɹd. "ɔɹ jə kən tʃɹaɪ θɹoʊɪŋ əs aʊt." hi meɪd ði ɛmfəsəs dɪlɪbɝətli, ðən æɾəd, "ðɛɹz ə lɑɾ ə naɪt lɛft fəɹ əs tə pleɪ, jɛt. wɪv tə kip əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ ʌp ɪf wɝ gɑnə pɝfɔɹm wɛl ɪnʌf tə kip ðɪs kɹaʊd spɛndɪŋ mʌni. haʊ lɔŋ dʒju θɪŋk ðɪs ɹum wɪl steɪ fʊl ɪf wi fɔl oʊvɝ fɹəm hʌŋɡɝ?"

"It's time to eat," Rand said to forestall him, "and we don't want our things stolen. You want to tell the cook?" Hake hesitated, still angry, trying unsuccessfully to keep his eyes off what Rand held in his arms. Casually Rand shifted his bundles so he could rest one hand on the sword. "Or you can try throwing us out." He made the emphasis deliberately, then added, "There's a lot of night left for us to play, yet. We have to keep our strength up if we're going to perform well enough to keep this crowd spending money. How long do you think this room will stay full if we fall over from hunger?"

heɪks aɪz twɪtʃt oʊvɝ ðə ɹum fʊl ə mɛn pʊɾɪŋ mʌni ɪn ɪz pɑkət, ðən i tɝn ən stʌk ɪz hɛd θɹu ðə dɔɹ tə ðə ɹɪɹ ə ði ɪn. "fid 'ɛm!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. ɹaʊndɪŋ ɑn ɹænd ən mæt, hi snɑɹəld, "doʊn bi ɔl naɪɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt. aɪ ɪkspɛk jə ʌp ðəɹ tɪl ðə læs mænz ɡɔn."

Hake's eyes twitched over the room full of men putting money in his pocket, then he turned and stuck his head through the door to the rear of the inn. "Feed 'em!" he shouted. Rounding on Rand and Mat, he snarled, "Don't be all night about it. I expect you up there till the last man's gone."

səm ə ðə peɪtʃɹənz wɝ ʃaʊɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə mjuzɪʃən ən ðə dʒʌɡəlɝ, ən heɪk tɝn tə suð ðɛm. ðə mæn ɪn ðə vɛlvət kloʊk wɑz wʌn ə ði æŋkʃəs wʌnz. ɹænd moʊʃən mæt tə fɑloʊ hɪm.

Some of the patrons were shouting for the musician and the juggler, and Hake turned to soothe them. The man in the velvet cloak was one of the anxious ones. Rand motioned Mat to follow him.

ə staʊt dɔɹ sɛpɝeɪɾəd ðə kɪtʃən fɹəm ðə fɹʌn ə ði ɪn, ænd, ɪksɛpt wən ɪɾ oʊpən tə lɛɾ ə sɝvɪŋ meɪd θɹu, ðə ɹeɪn paʊndɪŋ ðə ɹuf wɑz laʊɾɝ ɪn ðə kɪtʃən ðən ðə ʃaʊts fɹəm ðə kɑmən ɹum. ɪt wɑz ə bɪɡ ɹum, hɑɾ ən stimi fɹəm stoʊvz ən ʌvənz, wɪð ə hjudʒ teɪbəl kʌvɝd wɪð hæf-pɹipɛɹd fuɾ ən dɪʃəz ɹɛɾi tə bi sɝvd. səm ə ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz sæt klʌstɝɾ ɑn ə bɛntʃ nɪɹ ðə ɹɪɹ dɔɹ, ɹʌbɪŋ ðɛɹ fiɾ ən tʃæɾɝɪŋ əweɪ ɔl ət wʌns wɪð ðə fæt kʊk, hu tɔk bæk ət ðə seɪm taɪm ən weɪvd ə bɪɡ spun tə ɛmfəsaɪz əɹ pɔɪns. ðeɪ ɔl ɡlænst ʌp əz ɹænd ən mæt keɪm ɪn, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt sloʊ ðɛɹ kɑnvɝseɪʃən əɹ stɑp ðɛɹ fʊt ɹʌbɪŋ.

A stout door separated the kitchen from the front of the inn, and, except when it opened to let a serving maid through, the rain pounding the roof was louder in the kitchen than the shouts from the common room. It was a big room, hot and steamy from stoves and ovens, with a huge table covered with half-prepared food and dishes ready to be served. Some of the serving maids sat clustered on a bench near the rear door, rubbing their feet and chattering away all at once with the fat cook, who talked back at the same time and waved a big spoon to emphasize her points. They all glanced up as Rand and Mat came in, but it did not slow their conversation or stop their foot rubbing.

"wi ɔt tə ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ waɪl wɪv ðə tʃæns," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli, bʌt mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, hɪz aɪz fɪkst oʊ ðə tu pleɪts ðə kʊk wɑz fɪlɪŋ wɪð bif ən pəteɪɾoʊz ən piz. ʃi hɑɹdli lʊkt ət ðə tu ʌv ðɛm, kipɪŋ ʌp əɹ tɔk wɪð ði ʌðɝ wɪmən waɪl ʃi pʊʃt θɪŋz əsaɪɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl wɪð əɹ ɛlboʊz ən sɛt ðə pleɪts daʊn, æɾɪŋ fɔɹks.

"We ought to get out of here while we have the chance," Rand said softly, but Mat shook his head, his eyes fixed oh the two plates the cook was filling with beef and potatoes and peas. She hardly looked at the two of them, keeping up her talk with the other women while she pushed things aside on the table with her elbows and set the plates down, adding forks.

"æftɝ wi iɾ ɪz taɪm ɪnʌf." mæt slɪɾ ɑntu ə bɛntʃ ən bɪɡæn juzɪŋ ɪz fɔɹk əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə ʃʌvəl.

"After we eat is time enough." Mat slid onto a bench and began using his fork as if it were a shovel.

ɹænd saɪd, bʌɾ i wɑz ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn mæt. hi hæd hæɾ oʊnli ə bʌt-ɛn ə bɹɛd tə it sɪns ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ. hɪz bɛli fɛlt əz ɛmpti əz ə bɛɡɝz pɝs, ən ðə kʊkɪŋ smɛlz ðət fɪl ðə kɪtʃən dɪd nɑt hɛlp. hi kwɪkli hæɾ ɪz maʊθ fʊl, ðoʊ mæt wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪz pleɪt ɹifɪl baɪ ðə kʊk bɪfɔɹ i hæd fɪnɪʃt hæf ə hɪz.

Rand sighed, but he was right behind Mat. He had had only a butt-end of bread to eat since the night before. His belly felt as empty as a beggar's purse, and the cooking smells that filled the kitchen did not help. He quickly had his mouth full, though Mat was getting his plate refilled by the cook before he had finished half of his.

hi dɪd nɑt min tə ivzdʒɹɑp ɑn ðə wɪmənz tɔk, bʌt səm ə ðə wɝdz ɹitʃt aʊɾ ən ɡɹæb hɪm.

He did not mean to eavesdrop on the women's talk, but some of the words reached out and grabbed him.

"saʊnz kɹeɪzi tə mi."

"Sounds crazy to me."

"kɹeɪzi əɹ nɑt, ɪts wʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ. hi wɛn tə hæf ði ɪnz ɪn taʊn bɪfɔɹ i keɪm hɪɹ. dʒʌst wɔkt ɪn, lʊkt ɝaʊnd, ən wɔkt aʊt wɪθaʊt seɪɪŋ wʌn wɝd, ivən ət ðə ɹɔɪəl ɪn. laɪk ɪt wɑzn ɹeɪnɪŋ əɾ ɔl."

"Crazy or not, it's what I hear. He went to half the inns in town before he came here. Just walked in, looked around, and walked out without saying one word, even at the Royal Inn. Like it wasn't raining at all."

"meɪbi hi θɔt hɪɹ wɑz ðə moʊs kʌmftəɹbəl." ðət bɹɔt ɡeɪlz ə læftɝ.

"Maybe he thought here was the most comfortable." That brought gales of laughter.

"wʌɾ aɪ hɪɹ ɪz i dɪdn ivən ɡɛt tə fɔɹ kɪŋz tɪl æftɝ naɪtfɔl, ən ɪz hɔɹsəz bloʊɪŋ laɪk ðeɪd bɪn pʊʃt hɑɹd."

"What I hear is he didn't even get to Four Kings till after nightfall, and his horses blowing like they'd been pushed hard."

"wɛɹəɾ i kʌm fɹʌm, tə ɡɛt kɑɾ aʊɾ æftɝ dɑɹk? noʊbɑdi bʌɾ ə ful əɹ ə mædmæn tʃɹævəlz ɛniwɛɹ ən plænz ɪt ðət bædli."

"Where'd he come from, to get caught out after dark? Nobody but a fool or a madman travels anywhere and plans it that badly."

"wɛl, meɪbi hiz ə ful, bʌt hiz ə ɹɪtʃ wʌn. aɪ hɪɹ i ivən əz ənʌðɝ kæɹɪdʒ fəɹ ɪz sɝvəns ən bæɡədʒ. ðɛɹz mʌni ðɛɹ, mɑɹk maɪ wɝdz. dɪd jə si ðət kloʊk ə hɪz? aɪ wʊdn maɪn hævɪŋ ðət maɪ aʊnsɛlf."

"Well, maybe he's a fool, but he's a rich one. I hear he even has another carriage for his servants and baggage. There's money there, mark my words. Did you see that cloak of his? I wouldn't mind having that my ownself."

"hiz ə lɪɾəl plʌmp fəɹ maɪ teɪst, bʌɾ aɪ ɔlweɪz seɪ ə mæn kæn bi tu fæɾ ɪf ɪnʌf ɡoʊl kʌmz wɪð ɪt." ðeɪ ɔl dʌbəld oʊvɝ ɡɪɡəlɪŋ, ən ðə kʊk θɹu bæk əɹ hɛɾ ən ɹɔɹd wɪð læftɝ.

"He's a little plump for my taste, but I always say a man can't be too fat if enough gold comes with it." They all doubled over giggling, and the cook threw back her head and roared with laughter.

ɹænd dʒɹɑpt ɪz fɔɹk ɑn ɪz pleɪt. ə θɔɾ i dɪd nɑt laɪk bʌbəld ɪn ɪz hɛd. "aɪl bi bæk ɪn ə mɪnət," hi sɛd. mæt bɛɹli nɑɾəd, stʌfɪŋ ə pis ə pəteɪtoʊ ɪndə hɪz maʊθ.

Rand dropped his fork on his plate. A thought he did not like bubbled in his head. "I'll be back in a minute," he said. Mat barely nodded, stuffing a piece of potato into his mouth.

ɹænd pɪkt ʌp ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt əlɔŋ wɪð ɪz kloʊk əz i stʊd, ən bʌkəld ɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz weɪst ɑn ðə weɪ tə ðə bæk dɔɹ. noʊ wʌn peɪɾ ɪm ɛni maɪnd.

Rand picked up his sword belt along with his cloak as he stood, and buckled it around his waist on the way to the back door. No one paid him any mind.

ðə ɹeɪn wɑz bʌkəɾɪŋ daʊn. hi swʌŋ ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən pʊl ðə hʊɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, hoʊldɪŋ ðə kloʊk kloʊzd əz i tʃɹɑɾəd əkɹɔs ðə steɪbliɑɹd. ə kɝɾən ʌv wɔɾɝ hɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪksɛpt wən laɪtnɪŋ flæʃt, bʌɾ i faʊnd wʌɾ i wɑz hʌntɪŋ. ðə hɔɹsəz hæd bɪn teɪkən ɪndə ðə steɪbəl, bʌt ðə tu blæk-lækɝd kæɹɪdʒɪz ɡlɪsənd wɛtli aʊtsaɪd. θʌndɝ ɡɹʌmbəld, ən ə boʊlt ə laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹikt əbʌv ði ɪn. ɪn ðə bɹif bɝst ə laɪɾ i meɪɾ aʊɾ ə neɪm ɪn ɡoʊl skɹɪpt ɑn ðə koʊtʃ dɔɹz. haʊəl ɡoʊd.

The rain was bucketing down. He swung his cloak around his shoulders and pulled the hood over his head, holding the cloak closed as he trotted across the stableyard. A curtain of water hid everything except when lightning flashed, but he found what he was hunting. The horses had been taken into the stable, but the two black-lacquered carriages glistened wetly outside. Thunder grumbled, and a bolt of lightning streaked above the inn. In the brief burst of light he made out a name in gold script on the coach doors. Howal Gode.

ʌnmaɪnfəl ə ðə ɹeɪn biɾɪŋ ət hɪm, hi stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə neɪm i kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ si. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd wɛɹ i hæd læst sin blæk-lækɝd koʊtʃɪz wɪð ðɛɹ oʊnɝz' neɪmz ɑn ðə dɔɹ, ən slik, oʊvɝfɛd mɛn ɪn sɪlk-laɪn vɛlvət kloʊks ən vɛlvət slɪpɝz. waɪtbɹɪdʒ. eɪ waɪtbɹɪdʒ mɝtʃən kəɾ əv ə pɝfəkli lədʒɪɾəmət ɹizən tə bi ɑn ɪz weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn. ə ɹizən ðət sɛnz ɪm tə hæf ði ɪnz ɪn taʊn bɪfɔɹ i tʃuzəz ðə wʌn wɛɹ jə ɑɹ? ə ɹizən ðət meɪks ɪm lʊk ət jə əz ɪf hiz faʊnd wʌt hiz sɝtʃɪŋ fɔɹ?

Unmindful of the rain beating at him, he stood staring at the name he could no longer see. He remembered where he had last seen black-lacquered coaches with their owners' names on the door, and sleek, overfed men in silk-lined velvet cloaks and velvet slippers. Whitebridge. A Whitebridge merchant could have a perfectly legitimate reason to be on his way to Caemlyn. A reason that sends him to half the inns in town before he chooses the one where you are? A reason that makes him look at you as if he's found what he's searching for?

ɹænd ʃɪvɝd, ən sʌɾənli hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə ɹeɪn tʃɹɪklɪŋ daʊn ɪz bæk. hɪz kloʊk wɑz taɪtli woʊvən, bʌɾ ɪt hæd nɛvɝ bɪn mɛn tə stæn ʌp tə ðɪs kaɪndə daʊnpɔɹ. hi hɝid bæk tə ði ɪn, splæʃɪŋ θɹu dipənɪŋ pʌɾəlz. dʒæk blɑk ðə dɔɹ əz i stɑɹɾəd θɹu.

Rand shivered, and suddenly he was aware of rain trickling down his back. His cloak was tightly woven, but it had never been meant to stand up to this kind of downpour. He hurried back to the inn, splashing through deepening puddles. Jak blocked the door as he started through.

"wɛl, wɛl, wɛl. aʊt hɪɹ əloʊn ɪn ðə dɑɹk. dɑɹks deɪnʒɝəs, bɔɪ."

"Well, well, well. Out here alone in the dark. Dark's dangerous, boy."

ɹeɪn slɪkt ɹændz hɛɹ daʊn əkɹɔs ɪz fɔɹhɛd. ðə steɪbliɑɹd wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ðɛm. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf heɪk hæd dɪsaɪɾɪd i wɑntəd ðə sɔɹɾ ən ðə flut bædli ɪnʌf tə fɔɹɡoʊ kipɪŋ ðə kɹaʊɾ ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum.

Rain slicked Rand's hair down across his forehead. The stableyard was empty except for them. He wondered if Hake had decided he wanted the sword and the flute badly enough to forgo keeping the crowd in the common room.

bɹʌʃɪŋ wɔɾɝ aʊɾ ə hɪz aɪz wɪð wʌn hænd, hi pʊt ði ʌðɝ ɑn ɪz sɔɹd. ivən wɛt, ðə nɑbi lɛðɝ meɪɾ ə ʃʊɹ ɡɹɪp fəɹ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. "hæz heɪk dɪsaɪɾɪd ɔl ðoʊz mɛn wɪl steɪ dʒʌs fəɹ ɪz eɪl, ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ wɛɹ ðɛɹz ɛntɝteɪnmənt, tu? ɪf i hæz, wɪl kɔl ðə mil ivən fəɹ wʌt wiv dʌn soʊ fɑɹ ən bi ɑn əɹ weɪ."

Brushing water out of his eyes with one hand, he put the other on his sword. Even wet, the nobby leather made a sure grip for his fingers. "Has Hake decided all those men will stay just for his ale, instead of going where there's entertainment, too? If he has, we'll call the meal even for what we've done so far and be on our way."

dʒɹaɪ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, ðə bɪɡ mæn lʊkt aʊɾ ət ðə ɹeɪn ən snɔɹɾɪd. "ɪn ðɪs?" hɪz aɪz slɪd daʊn tə ɹændz hæn ɑn ðə sɔɹd. "ju noʊ, mi ən stʃɹɑm ɡɑɾ ə bɛt. hi fɪɡjɝz jə stoʊl ðət fɹəm jəɹ oʊld ɡɹændmʌðɝ. mi, aɪ fɪɡjɝ jəɹ ɡɹændmʌðɝd kɪk jə ɹaʊn ðə pɪɡpən ən hæŋ jə aʊt tə dʒɹaɪ." hi ɡɹɪnd. hɪz tiθ wɝ kɹʊkəɾ ən jɛloʊ, ən ðə ɡɹɪn meɪɾ ɪm lʊk ivən minɝ. "naɪts lɔŋ jɛt, bɔɪ."

Dry in the doorway, the big man looked out at the rain and snorted. "In this?" His eyes slid down to Rand's hand on the sword. "You know, me and Strom got a bet. He figures you stole that from your old grandmother. Me, I figure your grandmother'd kick you round the pigpen and hang you out to dry." He grinned. His teeth were crooked and yellow, and the grin made him look even meaner. "Night's long yet, boy."

ɹænd bɹʌʃt pæs hɪm, ən dʒæk lɛɾ ɪm baɪ wɪð ən ʌɡli tʃʌkəl.

Rand brushed past him, and Jak let him by with an ugly chuckle.

ɪnsaɪd, hi tɔst ɔf ɪz kloʊk ən dʒɹɑpt ɑn ðə bɛntʃ ət ðə teɪbəl i hæd lɛft oʊnli mɪnəts bɪfɔɹ. mæt wɑz dʌn wɪð ɪz sɛkən pleɪɾ ən wɝkɪŋ ɑn ə θɝd, iɾɪŋ mɔɹ sloʊli naʊ, bʌɾ ɪntɛnli, əz ɪf i plæn tə fɪnɪʃ ɛvɹi baɪɾ ɪf ɪt kɪl hɪm. dʒæk tʊk ʌp ə pleɪs baɪ ðə dɔɹ tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd, linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl ən wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛm. ivən ðə kʊk sim tə fil noʊ ɝdʒ tə tɔk wɪð ɪm ðɛɹ.

Inside, he tossed off his cloak and dropped on the bench at the table he had left only minutes before. Mat was done with his second plate and working on a third, eating more slowly now, but intently, as if he planned to finish every bite if it killed him. Jak took up a place by the door to the stableyard, leaning against the wall and watching them. Even the cook seemed to feel no urge to talk with him there.

"hiz fɹəm waɪtbɹɪdʒ," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ nid tə seɪ hu "hi" wɑz. mæts hɛd swɪvəl təwɔɹd hɪm, ə pis ə bif ɑn ði ɛn ə ðə fɔɹk səspɛndəd hæfweɪ tə hɪz maʊθ. kɑnʃəs ə dʒæk wɑtʃɪŋ, ɹænd stɝd ðə fuɾ ɑn ɪz pleɪt. hi kəd nɑɾ əv ɡɑɾən ə maʊθfʊl daʊn ɪf i hæd bɪn stɑɹvɪŋ, bʌɾ i tʃɹaɪd tə pɹitɛn ən ɪntʃɹəst ɪn ðə piz əz i toʊl mæt əbaʊt ðə kæɹɪdʒɪz, ən wʌt ðə wɪmən hæd sɛd, ɪn keɪs mæt hæd nɑt bɪn lɪsnɪŋ.

"He's from Whitebridge," Rand said softly. There was no need to say who "he" was. Mat's head swiveled toward him, a piece of beef on the end of the fork suspended halfway to his mouth. Conscious of Jak watching, Rand stirred the food on his plate. He could not have gotten a mouthful down if he had been starving, but he tried to pretend an interest in the peas as he told Mat about the carriages, and what the women had said, in case Mat had not been listening.

ɑbviəsli hi hæd nɑt bɪn. mæt blɪŋkt ɪn sɝpɹaɪz ən wɪsəl bɪtwin ɪz tiθ, ðən fɹaʊn ət ðə miɾ ɑn ɪz fɔɹk ən ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz i tɔs ðə fɔɹk ɑntu hɪz pleɪt. ɹænd wɪʃt i wəd meɪk ət list ən ɛfɝt tə bi sɝkəmspɛkt.

Obviously he had not been. Mat blinked in surprise and whistled between his teeth, then frowned at the meat on his fork and grunted as he tossed the fork onto his plate. Rand wished he would make at least an effort to be circumspect.

"æftɝ ʌs," mæt sɛd wən i fɪnɪʃt. ðə kɹisɪz ɪn mæts fɔɹhɛd dipənd. "eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd?"

"After us," Mat said when he finished. The creases in Mat's forehead deepened. "A Darkfriend?"

"meɪbi. aɪ doʊnt noʊ." ɹænd ɡlænst ət dʒæk ən ðə bɪɡ mæn stʃɹɛtʃt ɪlæbɹətli, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ ʃoʊldɝz əz bɪɡ əz ɛni blæksmɪθs. "du jə θɪŋk wi kən ɡɛt pæs hɪm?"

"Maybe. I don't know." Rand glanced at Jak and the big man stretched elaborately, shrugging shoulders as big as any blacksmith's. "Do you think we can get past him?"

"nɑt wɪθaʊɾ ɪm meɪkɪŋ ɪnʌf nɔɪz tə bɹɪŋ heɪk ən ði ʌðɝ wʌn. aɪ nu wi ʃəd nɛvɝ əv stɑp hɪɹ."

"Not without him making enough noise to bring Hake and the other one. I knew we should never have stopped here."

ɹænd ɡeɪpt, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəd seɪ ɛniθɪŋ heɪk pʊʃt θɹu ðə dɔɹ fɹəm ðə kɑmən ɹum. stʃɹɑm bʌlk lɑɹdʒ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. dʒæk stɛpt ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə bæk dɔɹ. "ju gɑnə iɾ ɔl naɪt?" heɪk bɑɹkt. "aɪ dɪdn fid jə soʊ jə kəd laɪ ɝaʊn aʊt hɪɹ."

Rand gaped, but before he could say anything Hake pushed through the door from the common room. Strom bulked large over his shoulder. Jak stepped in front of the back door. "You going to eat all night?" Hake barked. "I didn't feed you so you could lie around out here."

ɹænd lʊkt əɾ ɪz fɹɛnd. leɪɾɝ, mæt maʊðd, ən ðeɪ ɡæðɝd ðɛɹ θɪŋz ʌndɝ ðə wɑtʃfəl aɪz ə heɪk, stʃɹɑm, ən dʒæk.

Rand looked at his friend. Later, Mat mouthed, and they gathered their things under the watchful eyes of Hake, Strom, and Jak.

ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum, kɹaɪz fəɹ dʒʌɡəlɪŋ ən ðə neɪmz ə tunz bɝs θɹu ðə klæmɝ əz sun əz ɹænd ən mæt əpɪɹd. ðə mæn ɪn ðə vɛlvət kloʊk - haʊəl ɡoʊd - stɪl əpɪɹd tə ɪɡnɔɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɝaʊn hɪm, bʌɾ i wɑz nʌnðəlɛs siɾəd ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz tʃɛɹ. ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðɛm i lin bæk, ðə sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl ɹɪtɝnɪŋ tə hɪz lɪps.

In the common room, cries for juggling and the names of tunes burst through the clamor as soon as Rand and Mat appeared. The man in the velvet cloak - Howal Gode - still appeared to ignore everyone around him, but he was nonetheless seated on the edge of his chair. At the sight of them he leaned back, the satisfied smile returning to his lips.

ɹænd tʊk ðə fɝs tɝn ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə deɪz, pleɪɪŋ "dʒɹɔɪŋ wɔɾɝ fɹəm ðə wɛl" wɪð oʊnli hæf ɪz maɪn ɑn ɪt. noʊ wʌn sim tə noʊɾəs ðə fju ɹɔŋ noʊts. hi tʃɹaɪd tə θɪŋk ə haʊ ðeɪ wɝ gɑnə ɡɛɾ əweɪ, ən tʃɹaɪd tə əvɔɪd lʊkɪŋ ət ɡoʊd, tu. ɪf i wɑz æftɝ ðɛm, ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɔɪn ɪn lɛɾɪŋ ɪm noʊ ðeɪ nu ɪt. əz fəɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ əweɪ. . . .

Rand took the first turn at the front of the dais, playing "Drawing Water From the Well" with only half his mind on it. No one seemed to notice the few wrong notes. He tried to think of how they were going to get away, and tried to avoid looking at Gode, too. If he was after them, there was no point in letting him know they knew it. As for getting away. . . .

hi hæd nɛvɝ ɹilaɪz bɪfɔɹ wʌɾ ə ɡʊd tʃɹæp ən ɪn meɪd. heɪk, dʒæk, ən stʃɹɑm dɪd nɑɾ ivən əv tə kip ə kloʊs aɪ ɑn ðɛm; ðə kɹaʊd wəd lɛɾ əm noʊ ɪf i əɹ mæt lɛf ðə deɪz. əz lɔŋ əz ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz fʊl ə pipəl, heɪk kəd nɑt sɛn dʒæk ən stʃɹɑm æftɝ ðɛm, bʌɾ əz lɔŋ əz ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz fʊl ə pipəl ðeɪ kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ əweɪ wɪθaʊt heɪk noʊɪŋ. ən ɡoʊd wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛɹ ɛvɹi muv, tu. ɪt wɑz soʊ fʌni hi wʊɾə læft ɪf i hæd nɑt bɪn ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə θɹoʊɪŋ ʌp. ðeɪ wəd dʒʌst əv tə bi wɛɹi ən weɪt ðɛɹ tʃæns.

He had never realized before what a good trap an inn made. Hake, Jak, and Strom did not even have to keep a close eye on them; the crowd would let them know if he or Mat left the dais. As long as the common room was full of people, Hake could not send Jak and Strom after them, but as long as the common room was full of people they could not get away without Hake knowing. And Gode was watching their every move, too. It was so funny he would have laughed if he had not been on the point of throwing up. They would just have to be wary and wait their chance.

wən i tʃeɪnʒd pleɪsəz wɪð mæt, ɹænd ɡɹoʊn tə hɪmsɛlf. mæt ɡlɛɹɾ ət heɪk, ət stʃɹɑm, ət dʒæk, wɪθaʊɾ ə kɛɹ tə wɛðɝ ðeɪ noʊɾəst əɹ wʌndɝd waɪ. wən i wɑz nɑɾ æktʃəli  hænlɪŋ ðə bɔlz, hɪz hæn ɹɛstəɾ ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt. ɹænd hɪst ət hɪm, bʌɾ i peɪd noʊ ətɛnʃən. ɪf heɪk sɔ ðət ɹubi, hi maɪt nɑt weɪɾ əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn. ɪf ðə mɛn ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum sɔ ɪt, hæf ə ðɛm maɪt dʒɔɪn ɪn wɪð heɪk.

When he changed places with Mat, Rand groaned to himself. Mat glared at Hake, at Strom, at Jak, without a care to whether they noticed or wondered why. When he was not actually handling the balls, his hand rested under his coat. Rand hissed at him, but he paid no attention. If Hake saw that ruby, he might not wait until they were alone. If the men in the common room saw it, half of them might join in with Hake.

wɝst ʌv ɔl, mæt stɛɹɾ ət ðə waɪtbɹɪdʒ mɝtʃənt - ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnd? - twaɪs əz hɑɹɾ əz əɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls, ən ɡoʊd noʊɾəst. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ hi kəɾ əvɔɪd noʊɾɪsɪŋ. bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt dɪstɝb ɪz əplɑm ɪn ðə list. hɪz smaɪl dipənd, ɪf ɛniθɪŋ, ən i nɑɾəd tə mæt əz ɪf tə ən oʊld əkweɪntəns, ðən lʊkt ət ɹænd ən ɹeɪzd ə kwɛstʃənɪŋ aɪbɹaʊ. ɹænd dɪd nɑt wɑnə noʊ wʌt ðə kwɛstʃən wɑz. hi tʃɹaɪd tə əvɔɪd lʊkɪŋ ət ðə mæn, bʌɾ i nu ɪt wɑz tu leɪt fəɹ ðæt. tu leɪt. tu leɪɾ əɡɛn.

Worst of all, Mat stared at the Whitebridge merchant - the Darkfriend? - twice as hard as at anyone else, and Gode noticed. There was no way he could avoid noticing. But it did not disturb his aplomb in the least. His smile deepened, if anything, and he nodded to Mat as if to an old acquaintance, then looked at Rand and raised a questioning eyebrow. Rand did not want to know what the question was. He tried to avoid looking at the man, but he knew it was too late for that. Too late. Too late again.

oʊnli wʌn θɪŋ sim tə ʃeɪk ðə vɛlvət-kloʊk mænz ikwəlɪbɹiəm. ɹændz sɔɹd. hi hæd lɛft ɪɾ ɑn. tu əɹ θɹi mɛn stæɡɝɾ ʌp tə æsk ɪf i θɔɾ ɪz pleɪɪŋ wɑz soʊ bæd ðəɾ i niɾəd pɹətɛkʃən, bʌt nʌn ə ðɛm hæd noʊɾəst ðə hɛɹən ɑn ðə hɪlt. ɡoʊd noʊɾəst. hɪz peɪl hænz klɛntʃt, ən i fɹaʊn ət ðə sɔɹd fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm bɪfɔɹ ɪz smaɪl keɪm bæk. wən ɪt dɪd, ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ʃʊɹ əz bɪfɔɹ.

Only one thing seemed to shake the velvet-cloaked man's equilibrium. Rand's sword. He had left it on. Two or three men staggered up to ask if he thought his playing was so bad that he needed protection, but none of them had noticed the heron on the hilt. Gode noticed. His pale hands clenched, and he frowned at the sword for a long time before his smile came back. When it did, it was not as sure as before.

wʌn ɡʊd θɪŋ, ət list, ɹænd θɔt. ɪf i bɪlivz aɪ kən lɪv ʌp tə ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk, meɪbi hɪl liv əs əloʊn. ðən ɔl wɪv tə wɝi əbaʊɾ ɪz heɪk ən ɪz bʊliz. ɪt wɑz hɑɹdli ə kʌmfɝɾɪŋ θɔt, ænd, sɔɹɾ əɹ noʊ sɔɹd, ɡoʊd kɛpt wɑtʃɪŋ. ən smaɪlɪŋ.

One good thing, at least, Rand thought. If he believes I can live up to the heron-mark, maybe he'll leave us alone. Then all we have to worry about is Hake and his bullies. It was hardly a comforting thought, and, sword or no sword, Gode kept watching. And smiling.

tə ɹænd ðə naɪt sim tə læst ə jɪɹ. ɔl ðoʊz aɪz lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm: heɪk ən dʒæk ən stʃɹɑm laɪk vʌltʃɝz wɑtʃɪŋ ə ʃip kɑɾ ɪn ə bɑɡ, ɡoʊd weɪɾɪŋ laɪk sʌmθɪŋ ivən wɝs. hi bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk ðəɾ ɛvɹibɑɾi ɪn ðə ɹum wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ wɪð səm hɪɾən moʊɾɪv. saʊɝ waɪn fjumz ən ðə stɛntʃ ə dɝɾi, swɛɾɪŋ bɑɾiz meɪɾ ɪz hɛd swɪm, ən ðə dɪn ə vɔɪsəz biɾ əɾ ɪm tɪl ɪz aɪz blɝɾ ən ivən ðə saʊn ə hɪz oʊn flut skɹætʃt əɾ ɪz ɪɹz. ðə kɹæʃ ə ðə θʌndɝ sim tə bi ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz skʌl. wɪɹinəs hʌŋ ɑn ɪm laɪk ən aɪɝn weɪt.

To Rand the night seemed to last a year. All those eyes looking at him: Hake and Jak and Strom like vultures watching a sheep caught in a bog, Gode waiting like something even worse. He began to think that everybody in the room was watching with some hidden motive. Sour wine fumes and the stench of dirty, sweating bodies made his head swim, and the din of voices beat at him till his eyes blurred and even the sound of his own flute scratched at his ears. The crash of the thunder seemed to be inside his skull. Weariness hung on him like an iron weight.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðə nid tə bi ʌp wɪð ðə dɔn bɪɡæn tə pʊl mɛn ɹɪlʌktənli aʊɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹk. ə fɑɹmɝ hæɾ oʊnli hɪmsɛlf tə ænsɝ tə, bʌt mɝtʃəns wɝ noʊtɔɹiəsli ənfilɪŋ əbaʊt hæŋoʊvɝz wən ðeɪ wɝ peɪɪŋ dʒɹaɪvɝz' weɪdʒəz. ɪn ðə smɔl aʊɝz ðə kɑmən ɹum sloʊli ɛmptiɾ əz ivən ðoʊz u hæd ɹumz əbʌvstɛɹz stæɡɝɾ ɔf tə faɪn ðɛɹ bɛdz.

Eventually the need to be up with the dawn began to pull men reluctantly out into the dark. A farmer had only himself to answer to, but merchants were notoriously unfeeling about hangovers when they were paying drivers' wages. In the small hours the common room slowly emptied as even those who had rooms abovestairs staggered off to find their beds.

ɡoʊd wɑz ðə læs peɪtʃɹən. wən ɹænd ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə lɛðɝ flut keɪs, jɔnɪŋ, ɡoʊd stʊɾ ʌp ən slʌŋ ɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ɑɹm. ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz wɝ klinɪŋ ʌp, mʌɾɝɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz əbaʊt ðə mɛs ə spɪld waɪn ən bɹoʊkən kɹɑkɝi. heɪk wɑz lɑkɪŋ ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ wɪð ə bɪɡ ki. ɡoʊd kɔɹnɝd heɪk fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ən heɪk kɔld wʌn ə ðə wɪmən tə ʃoʊ hɪm tə ə ɹum. ðə vɛlvət-kloʊk mæn ɡeɪv mæt ən ɹænd ə noʊɪŋ smaɪl bɪfɔɹ i dɪsəpɪɹɾ əpstɛɹz.

Gode was the last patron. When Rand reached for the leather flute case, yawning, Gode stood up and slung his cloak over his arm. The serving maids were cleaning up, muttering among themselves about the mess of spilled wine and broken crockery. Hake was locking the front door with a big key. Gode cornered Hake for a moment, and Hake called one of the women to show him to a room. The velvet-cloaked man gave Mat and Rand a knowing smile before he disappeared upstairs.

heɪk wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət ɹænd ən mæt. dʒæk ən stʃɹɑm stʊɾ əɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz.

Hake was looking at Rand and Mat. Jak and Strom stood at his shoulders.

ɹænd heɪstəli fɪnɪʃt hæŋɪŋ ɪz θɪŋz fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, hoʊldɪŋ əm ɔl ɔkwɝdli bɪhaɪn ɪm wɪð ɪz lɛf hæn soʊ hi kəd ɹitʃ ɪz sɔɹd. hi meɪd noʊ muv təwɔɹɾ ɪt, bʌɾ i wɑntəd tə noʊ ɪt wɑz ɹɛɾi. hi səpɹɛst ə jɔn; haʊ taɪɝɾ i wɑz wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ ʃəd nɑt noʊ.

Rand hastily finished hanging his things from his shoulders, holding them all awkwardly behind him with his left hand so he could reach his sword. He made no move toward it, but he wanted to know it was ready. He suppressed a yawn; how tired he was was something they should not know.

mæt ʃoʊldɝɾ ɪz baʊ ən ɪz fju ʌðɝ bɪlɔŋɪŋz ɔkwɝdli, bʌɾ i pʊɾ ɪz hæn ʌndɝ ɪz koʊɾ əz i wɑtʃt heɪk ən ɪz tʌfs əpɹoʊtʃ.

Mat shouldered his bow and his few other belongings awkwardly, but he put his hand under his coat as he watched Hake and his toughs approach.

heɪk wɑz kæɹiɪŋ ən ɔɪl læmp, ən tə ɹændz sɝpɹaɪz i ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl baʊ ən dʒɛstʃɝd tə ə saɪd dɔɹ wɪð ɪt. "jɔɹ pæləts ɑɹ ðɪs weɪ." oʊnli ə slaɪt twɪst ə hɪz lɪps spɔɪld ɪz ækt.

Hake was carrying an oil lamp, and to Rand's surprise he gave a little bow and gestured to a side door with it. "Your pallets are this way." Only a slight twist of his lips spoiled his act.

mæt θɹʌst ɪz tʃɪn aʊɾ ət dʒæk ən stʃɹɑm. "ju nid ðoʊz tu tə ʃoʊ əs əɹ bɛdz?"

Mat thrust his chin out at Jak and Strom. "You need those two to show us our beds?"

"ɪm ə mæn ə pɹɑpɝɾi," heɪk sɛd, smuðɪŋ ðə fɹʌn ə hɪz sɔɪld eɪpɹən, "æn mɛn ə pɹɑpɝɾi kæn bi tu kɛɹfəl." ə kɹæʃ ə θʌndɝ ɹæɾəld ðə wɪndoʊz, ən i ɡlænst sɪɡnɪfɪkənli ət ðə silɪŋ, ðən ɡeɪv əm ə tuθi ɡɹɪn. "ju wɑnə si jəɹ bɛdz əɹ nɑt?"

"I'm a man of property," Hake said, smoothing the front of his soiled apron, "and men of property can't be too careful." A crash of thunder rattled the windows, and he glanced significantly at the ceiling, then gave them a toothy grin. "You want to see your beds or not?"

ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌt wəd hæpən ɪf i sɛd ðeɪ wɑntəd tə liv. ɪf jə ɹɪli dɪd noʊ mɔɹ əbaʊt juzɪŋ ə sɔɹd ðən ðə fju ɛksɝsaɪzəz læn ʃoʊd ju. . . . "lid ðə weɪ," hi sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs hɑɹd. "aɪ doʊn laɪk hævɪŋ ɛnibəɾi bɪhaɪn mi."

Rand wondered what would happen if he said they wanted to leave. If you really did know more about using a sword than the few exercises Lan showed you. . . . "Lead the way," he said, trying to make his voice hard. "I don't like having anybody behind me."

stʃɹɑm snɪkɝd, bʌt heɪk nɑɾəd plɑtʃədli ən tɝn təwɔɹd ðə saɪd dɔɹ, ən ðə tu bɪɡ mɛn swæɡɝɾ æftɝ hɪm. teɪkɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, ɹænd ɡeɪv ə wɪʃfəl ɡlæns ət ðə dɔɹ tə ðə kɪtʃən. ɪf heɪk hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi lɑk ðə bæk dɔɹ, ɹʌnɪŋ naʊ wəɾ oʊnli bɪɡɪn wʌɾ i wɑz hoʊpɪŋ tə əvɔɪd. hi fɑloʊd ði ɪnkipɝ ɡlʌmli.

Strom snickered, but Hake nodded placidly and turned toward the side door, and the two big men swaggered after him. Taking a deep breath, Rand gave a wishful glance at the door to the kitchen. If Hake had already locked the back door, running now would only begin what he was hoping to avoid. He followed the innkeeper glumly.

ət ðə saɪd dɔɹ i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ən mæt kɹaʊɾəd ɪndə hɪz bæk. ðə ɹizən fəɹ heɪks læmp wɑz əpɛɹənt. ðə dɔɹ lɛɾ ɪndə ə hɔl əz blæk əz pɪtʃ. oʊnli ðə læmp heɪk kæɹid, sɪləuɛɾɪŋ dʒæk ən stʃɹɑm, ɡeɪv ɪm ðə kɝədʒ tə kip ɑn. ɪf ðeɪ tɝnd, hi wəd noʊ ɪt. ən də wʌt? ðə flɔɹ kɹikt ʌndɝ ɪz buts.

At the side door he hesitated, and Mat crowded into his back. The reason for Hake's lamp was apparent. The door let into a hall as black as pitch. Only the lamp Hake carried, silhouetting Jak and Strom, gave him the courage to keep on. If they turned, he would know it. And do what? The floor creaked under his boots.

ðə hɔl ɛndəɾ ɪn ə ɹʌf, ənpeɪntɪd dɔɹ. hi hæd nɑt sin ɪf ðəɹ wɝ ɛni ʌðɝ dɔɹz əlɔŋ ðə weɪ. heɪk ən ɪz bʊliz wɛn θɹu, ən i fɑloʊd kwɪkli, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kəɾ əv ə tʃæns tə sɛɾ ə tʃɹæp, bʌt heɪk mɪɹli lɪftəd ðə læmp haɪ ən dʒɛstʃɝɾ ət ðə ɹum.

The hall ended in a rough, unpainted door. He had not seen if there were any other doors along the way. Hake and his bullies went through, and he followed quickly, before they could have a chance to set a trap, but Hake merely lifted the lamp high and gestured at the room.

"hɪɹ ɪɾ ɪz."

"Here it is."

ən oʊl stɔɹɹum, hi hæd kɔld ɪt, ən baɪ ðə lʊk ʌv ɪt nɑt juzd ɪn səm taɪm. wɛðɝd bæɹəlz ən bɹoʊkən kɹeɪts fɪl hæf ðə flɔɹ. stɛɾi dʒɹɪps fɛl fɹəm mɔɹ ðən wʌn pleɪs ɑn ðə silɪŋ, ən ə bɹoʊkən peɪn ɪn ðə fɪlθi wɪndoʊ lɛt ðə ɹeɪn bloʊ ɪn fɹili. ʌnaɪɾentəfaɪəbəl ɑdz ən ɛnz lɪɾɝd ðə ʃɛlvz, ən θɪk dʌs kʌvɝɾ ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ðə pɹɛzəns ə ðə pɹɑməs pæləts wɑz ə sɝpɹaɪz.

An old storeroom, he had called it, and by the look of it not used in some time. Weathered barrels and broken crates filled half the floor. Steady drips fell from more than one place on the ceiling, and a broken pane in the filthy window let the rain blow in freely. Unidentifiable odds and ends littered the shelves, and thick dust covered almost everything. The presence of the promised pallets was a surprise.

ðə sɔɹd meɪks ɪm nɝvəs. hi woʊn tʃɹaɪ ɛniθɪŋ əntɪl wɝ saʊn əslip. ɹænd hæd noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə slipɪŋ ʌndɝ heɪks ɹuf. əz sun əz ði ɪnkipɝ lɛft, hi ɪntɛndəd tə bi aʊt ðə wɪndoʊ. "ɪɾəl du," hi sɛd. hi kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn heɪk, wɛɹi fəɹ ə sɪɡnəl tə ðə tu ɡɹɪnɪŋ mɛn ət ði ɪnkipɝz saɪd. ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə wɛɾ ɪz lɪps. "liv ðə læmp."

The sword makes him nervous. He won't try anything until we're sound asleep. Rand had no intention of sleeping under Hake's roof. As soon as the innkeeper left, he intended to be out the window. "It'll do," he said. He kept his eyes on Hake, wary for a signal to the two grinning men at the innkeeper's side. It was an effort not to wet his lips. "Leave the lamp."

heɪk ɡɹʌntɪd, bʌt pʊʃt ðə læmp ɑntu ə ʃɛlf. hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðɛm, ən ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ i wɑz əbaʊt tə ɡɪv ðə wɝd fəɹ dʒæk ən stʃɹɑm tə dʒʌmp ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪz aɪz wɛn tə ɹændz sɔɹd wɪð ə kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ fɹaʊn, ən i dʒɝkt ɪz hɛɾ ət ðə tu bɪɡ mɛn. sɝpɹaɪz flæʃt əkɹɔs ðɛɹ bɹɔd feɪsəz, bʌt ðeɪ fɑloʊɾ ɪm aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum wɪθaʊɾ ə bækwɝd ɡlæns.

Hake grunted, but pushed the lamp onto a shelf. He hesitated, looking at them, and Rand was sure he was about to give the word for Jak and Strom to jump them, but his eyes went to Rand's sword with a calculating frown, and he jerked his head at the two big men. Surprise flashed across their broad faces, but they followed him out of the room without a backward glance.

ɹænd weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə kɹik-kɹik-kɹik ə ðɛɹ fʊtstɛps tə feɪɾ əweɪ, ðən kaʊntəd tə fɪfti bɪfɔɹ stɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl. ðə blæknəs wɑz bɹoʊkən oʊnli baɪ ə ɹɛktæŋɡəl ə laɪt ðət simd əz dɪstən əz ðə mun: ðə dɔɹ tə ðə kɑmən ɹum. əz i pʊld ɪz hɛɾ ɪn, sʌmθɪŋ bɪɡ muvd ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs nɪɹ ðə fɑɹ dɔɹ. dʒæk əɹ stʃɹɑm, stændɪŋ ɡɑɹd.

Rand waited for the creak-creak-creak of their footsteps to fade away, then counted to fifty before sticking his head into the hall. The blackness was broken only by a rectangle of light that seemed as distant as the moon: the door to the common room. As he pulled his head in, something big moved in the darkness near the far door. Jak or Strom, standing guard.

ə kwɪk ɪɡzæməneɪʃən ə ðə dɔɹ toʊld ɪm ɔl i niɾəd tə noʊ, lɪɾəl ʌv ɪt ɡʊd. ðə bɔɹdz wɝ θɪk ən staʊt, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ lɑk, ən noʊ bɑɹ ɑn ði ɪnsaɪd. ɪt dɪɾ oʊpən ɪndə ðə ɹum, ðoʊ.

A quick examination of the door told him all he needed to know, little of it good. The boards were thick and stout, but there was no lock, and no bar on the inside. It did open into the room, though.

"aɪ θɔt ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ fəɹ ʌs," mæt sɛd. "wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ?" hi hæd ðə dæɡɝ aʊt, ɡɹɪpt ɪn ə waɪt-nʌkəl fɪst. læmplaɪt flɪkɝɾ ɑn ðə bleɪd. hɪz baʊ ən kwɪvɝ leɪ fɝɡɑɾən ɑn ðə flɔɹ.

"I thought they were going for us," Mat said. "What are they waiting for?" He had the dagger out, gripped in a white-knuckled fist. Lamplight flickered on the blade. His bow and quiver lay forgotten on the floor.

"fɔɹ əs tə ɡoʊ tə slip." ɹænd stɑɹɾəd ɹʌmɪdʒɪŋ θɹu ðə bæɹəlz ən kɹeɪts. "hɛlp mi faɪn sʌmθɪŋ tə blɑk ðə dɔɹ."

"For us to go to sleep." Rand started rummaging through the barrels and crates. "Help me find something to block the door."

"waɪ? jə doʊn ɹɪli ɪntɛn tə slip hɪɹ, də ju? lɛts ɡɛɾ aʊt ðə wɪndoʊ ən ɡɔn. aɪd ɹæðɝ bi wɛt ðən dɛd."

"Why? You don't really intend to sleep here, do you? Let's get out the window and gone. I'd rather be wet than dead."

"wʌn ə ðɛm ɪz ət ði ɛn ə ðə hɔl. wi meɪk ɛni nɔɪz, ən ðəl bi daʊn ɑn əs bɪfɔɹ wi kən blɪŋk. aɪ θɪŋk heɪk wəd ɹæðɝ feɪs əs əweɪk ðən ɹɪsk lɛɾɪŋ əs ɡɛɾ əweɪ."

"One of them is at the end of the hall. We make any noise, and they'll be down on us before we can blink. I think Hake would rather face us awake than risk letting us get away."

mʌɾɝɪŋ, mæt dʒɔɪn ɪz sɝtʃ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ jusfəl ɪn ɛni ʌv ðə lɪɾɝ ɑn ðə flɔɹ. ðə bæɹəlz wɝ ɛmpti, ðə kɹeɪts splɪntɝd, ən ðə hoʊl lɑɾ ə ðɛm paɪld ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə dɔɹ wəd nɑt stɑp ɛniwʌn fɹəm oʊpənɪŋ ɪt. ðən sʌmθɪŋ fəmɪljɝ ɑn ə ʃɛlf kɑt ɹændz aɪ. tu splɪɾɪŋ wɛdʒəz, kʌvɝd wɪð ɹʌst ən dʌst. hi tʊk əm daʊn wɪð ə ɡɹɪn.

Muttering, Mat joined his search, but there was nothing useful in any of the litter on the floor. The barrels were empty, the crates splintered, and the whole lot of them piled in front of the door would not stop anyone from opening it. Then something familiar on a shelf caught Rand's eye. Two splitting wedges, covered with rust and dust. He took them down with a grin.

heɪstəli hi ʃʌvd əm ʌndɝ ðə dɔɹ ænd, wən ðə nɛkst ɹoʊl ə θʌndɝ ɹæɾəld ði ɪn, dʒɹoʊv əm ɪn wɪð tu kwɪk kɪks ə hɪz hil. ðə θʌndɝ feɪɾəd, ən i hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ, lɪsnɪŋ. ɔl i hɝd wɑz ðə ɹeɪn paʊndɪŋ ɑn ðə ɹuf. noʊ flɔɹbɔɹdz kɹikɪŋ ʌndɝ ɹʌnɪŋ fit.

Hastily he shoved them under the door and, when the next roll of thunder rattled the inn, drove them in with two quick kicks of his heel. The thunder faded, and he held his breath, listening. All he heard was the rain pounding on the roof. No floorboards creaking under running feet.

"ðə wɪndoʊ," hi sɛd.

"The window," he said.

ɪt hæd nɑt bɪn oʊpən ɪn jɪɹz, fɹəm ðə dɝt kɹʌstɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪt. ðeɪ stʃɹeɪn təɡɛðɝ, pʊʃɪŋ ʌp wɪð ɔl ðɛɹ maɪt. ɹændz niz wɑbəl bɪfɔɹ ðə sæʃ bʌdʒd; ɪt ɡɹoʊnd wɪð itʃ ɹɪlʌktən ɪntʃ. wən ði oʊpənɪŋ wɑz waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə slɪp θɹu, hi kɹaʊtʃt, ðən stɑpt.

It had not been opened in years, from the dirt crusted around it. They strained together, pushing up with all their might. Rand's knees wobbled before the sash budged; it groaned with each reluctant inch. When the opening was wide enough for them to slip through, he crouched, then stopped.

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz!" mæt ɡɹaʊld. "noʊ wʌndɝ heɪk wɑznt wɝiɾ əbaʊɾ əs slɪpɪŋ aʊt."

"Blood and ashes!" Mat growled. "No wonder Hake wasn't worried about us slipping out."

aɪɝn bɑɹz ɪn ən aɪɝn fɹeɪm ɡlɪsənd wɛtli ɪn ðə laɪt fɹəm ðə læmp. ɹænd pʊʃt ət ðɛm; ðeɪ wɝ əz sɑləɾ əz ə boʊldɝ.

Iron bars in an iron frame glistened wetly in the light from the lamp. Rand pushed at them; they were as solid as a boulder.

"aɪ sɔ sʌmθɪŋ," mæt sɛd. hi pɔd hɝidli θɹu ðə lɪɾɝ ɑn ðə ʃɛlvz ən keɪm bæk wɪð ə ɹʌsti kɹoʊbɑɹ. hi ɹæm ði ɛn ʌv ɪɾ ʌndɝ ði aɪɝn fɹeɪm ɑn wʌn saɪd, ən ɹænd wɪnst.

"I saw something," Mat said. He pawed hurriedly through the litter on the shelves and came back with a rusty crowbar. He rammed the end of it under the iron frame on one side, and Rand winced.

"ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə nɔɪz, mæt."

"Remember the noise, Mat."

mæt ɡɹɪməst ən mʌɾɝd ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ, bʌɾ i weɪɾəd. ɹænd pʊɾ ɪz hænz ɑn ðə kɹoʊbɑɹ ən tʃɹaɪd tə faɪnd ɡʊd fʊɾɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɹoʊɪŋ pʌɾəl ʌv wɔɾɝ ʌndɝ ðə wɪndoʊ. θʌndɝ ɹoʊld ən ðeɪ hivd. wɪð ə tɔɹtʃɝd skwil ə neɪlz ðət meɪd ðə hɛɹz lɪft ɑn ɹændz nɛk, ðə fɹeɪm ʃɪftəd - ə kɔɹɾɝ ʌv ən ɪntʃ, ɪf ðæt. taɪmɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz tə pilz ə θʌndɝ ən laɪtnɪŋ kɹæks, ðeɪ hivd ɑn ðə kɹoʊbɑɹ əɡɛn ən əɡɛn. nʌθɪŋ. ə kɔɹɾɝ ʌv ən ɪntʃ. nʌθɪŋ. ə hɛɹzbɹɛdθ. nʌθɪŋ. nʌθɪŋ.

Mat grimaced and muttered under his breath, but he waited. Rand put his hands on the crowbar and tried to find good footing in the growing puddle of water under the window. Thunder rolled and they heaved. With a tortured squeal of nails that made the hairs lift on Rand's neck, the frame shifted - a quarter of an inch, if that. Timing themselves to peals of thunder and lightning cracks, they heaved on the crowbar again and again. Nothing. A quarter of an inch. Nothing. A hairsbreadth. Nothing. Nothing.

sʌɾənli ɹændz fit slɪpt ɪn ðə wɔɾɝ, ən ðeɪ kɹæʃt tə ðə flɔɹ. ðə kɹoʊbɑɹ klæɾɝd əɡɛns ðə bɑɹz laɪk ə ɡɔŋ. hi leɪ ɪn ə pʌɾəl hoʊldɪŋ ɪz bɹɛθ ən lɪsnɪŋ. saɪləns bʌt fəɹ ðə ɹeɪn.

Suddenly Rand's feet slipped in the water, and they crashed to the floor. The crowbar clattered against the bars like a gong. He lay in a puddle holding his breath and listening. Silence but for the rain.

mæt nɝs bɹuz nʌkəlz ən ɡlɛɹɾ ət hɪm. "wil nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ət ðɪs ɹeɪt." ði aɪɝn fɹeɪm wɑz pʊʃt aʊt fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ nɑt kwaɪt fɑɹ ɪnʌf tə ɡɛt tu fɪŋɡɝz ʌndɝ ɪt. dʌzənz ə θɪk neɪlz kɹɔs ðə nɛɹoʊ oʊpənɪŋ.

Mat nursed bruised knuckles and glared at him. "We'll never get out at this rate." The iron frame was pushed out from the window not quite far enough to get two fingers under it. Dozens of thick nails crossed the narrow opening.

"wi dʒʌst əv tə kip tʃɹaɪɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd, ɡɛɾɪŋ ʌp. bʌɾ əz i sɛt ðə kɹoʊbɑɹ ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə fɹeɪm, ðə dɔɹ kɹikt əz sʌmwʌn tʃɹaɪd tə oʊpən ɪt. ðə splɪɾɪŋ wɛdʒəz hɛld ɪt ʃʌt. hi ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə wɝid lʊk wɪð mæt. mæt pʊl ðə dæɡɝ aʊɾ əɡɛn. ðə dɔɹ ɡeɪv ənʌðɝ skɹik.

"We just have to keep trying," Rand said, getting up. But as he set the crowbar under the edge of the frame, the door creaked as someone tried to open it. The splitting wedges held it shut. He exchanged a worried look with Mat. Mat pulled the dagger out again. The door gave another screak.

ɹænd tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən tʃɹaɪd tə meɪk ɪz vɔɪs stɛɾi. "ɡoʊ əweɪ, heɪk. wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə slip."

Rand took a deep breath and tried to make his voice steady. "Go away, Hake. We're trying to sleep."

"aɪ fɪɹ jə mɪsteɪk mi." ðə vɔɪs wɑz soʊ slik ən fʊl ʌv ɪtsɛlf ðəɾ ɪt neɪmd ɪts oʊnɝ. haʊəl ɡoʊd. "mæstɝ heɪk ən ɪz . . . mɪnjənz wɪl nɑt tʃɹʌbəl ʌs. ðeɪ slip saʊnli, ən ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ðəl oʊnli bi eɪbəl tə wʌndɝ wɛɹ jə vænɪʃt tə. lemi ɪn, maɪ jʌŋ fɹɛnz. wi mʌs tɔk."

"I fear you mistake me." The voice was so sleek and full of itself that it named its owner. Howal Gode. "Master Hake and his . . . minions will not trouble us. They sleep soundly, and in the morning they will only be able to wonder where you vanished to. Let me in, my young friends. We must talk."

"wi doʊn əv ɛniθɪŋ tə tɔk tə jə əbaʊt," mæt sɛd. "ɡoʊ əweɪ ən lɛɾ əs slip."

"We don't have anything to talk to you about," Mat said. "Go away and let us sleep."

ɡoʊdz tʃʌkəl wɑz næsti. "ʌv kɔɹs wɪv θɪŋz tə tɔk əbaʊt. jə noʊ ðəɾ əz wɛl əz aɪ. aɪ sɔ ɪɾ ɪn jəɹ aɪz. aɪ noʊ wʌt jə ɑɹ, pɝhæps bɛɾɝ ðən jə du. aɪ kən fil ɪt kʌmɪŋ fɹəm jə ɪn weɪvz. ɔlɹɛɾi jə hæfweɪ bɪlɔŋ tə maɪ mæstɝ. stɑp ɹʌnɪŋ ən æksɛpt ɪt. θɪŋz wɪl bi soʊ mʌtʃ iziɝ fəɹ ju. ɪf ðə tɑɹ vəlɑn hæɡz faɪn ju, jəl wɪʃ jə kəd kʌt jəɹ oʊn θɹoʊt bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ dʌn, bʌt jə woʊn bi eɪbəl tə. oʊnli maɪ mæstɝ kən pɹətɛk jə fɹəm ðɛm."

Gode's chuckle was nasty. "Of course we have things to talk about. You know that as well as I. I saw it in your eyes. I know what you are, perhaps better than you do. I can feel it coming from you in waves. Already you halfway belong to my master. Stop running and accept it. Things will be so much easier for you. If the Tar Valon hags find you, you'll wish you could cut your own throat before they are done, but you won't be able to. Only my master can protect you from them."

ɹænd swɑloʊd hɑɹd. "wi doʊnt noʊ wʌt jəɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt. liv əs əloʊn." ðə flɔɹbɔɹdz ɪn ðə hɔl skwikt. ɡoʊd wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. haʊ mɛni mɛn kəɾ i hæv bɹɔɾ ɪn tu kæɹɪdʒɪz?

Rand swallowed hard. "We don't know what you're talking about. Leave us alone." The floorboards in the hall squeaked. Gode was not alone. How many men could he have brought in two carriages?

"stɑp biɪŋ fulɪʃ, maɪ jʌŋ fɹɛnz. jə noʊ. jə noʊ vɛɹi wɛl. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk əz mɑɹk jə fəɹ ɪz oʊn. ɪts ɹɪɾən ðət wən i əweɪks, ðə nu dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz wɪl bi ðəɹ tə pɹeɪz hɪm. jə mʌs bi tu ʌv ðɛm, ɛls aɪ wəd nɑɾ əv bɪn sɛn tə faɪn ju. θɪŋk ʌv ɪt. laɪf ɛvɝlæstɪŋ, ən paʊɝ bɪɑn dʒɹimz." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz θɪk wɪð hʌŋɡɝ fəɹ ðət paʊɝ hɪmsɛlf.

"Stop being foolish, my young friends. You know. You know very well. The Great Lord of the Dark has marked you for his own. It is written that when he awakes, the new Dreadlords will be there to praise him. You must be two of them, else I would not have been sent to find you. Think of it. Life everlasting, and power beyond dreams." His voice was thick with hunger for that power himself.

ɹænd ɡlæns bæk ət ðə wɪndoʊ dʒʌst əz laɪtnɪŋ splɪt ðə skaɪ, ən i ɔlmoʊst ɡɹoʊnd. ðə bɹif flæʃ ə laɪt ʃoʊd mɛn aʊtsaɪd, mɛn ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə ɹeɪn ðət dʒɹɛntʃt əm əz ðeɪ stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ ðə wɪndoʊ.

Rand glanced back at the window just as lightning split the sky, and he almost groaned. The brief flash of light showed men outside, men ignoring the rain that drenched them as they stood watching the window.

"aɪ taɪɝ ə ðɪs," ɡoʊɾ ənaʊnst. "ju wɪl səbmɪt tə maɪ mæstɝ - tə jəɹ mæstɝ - əɹ jəl bi meɪd tə səbmɪt. ðət wəd nɑt bi plɛzən fəɹ ju. ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk ɹulz dɛθ, ən i kən ɡɪv laɪf ɪn dɛθ əɹ dɛθ ɪn laɪf əz i tʃuzəz. oʊpən ðɪs dɔɹ. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ, jəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz əɾ ən ɛnd. oʊpən ɪt, aɪ seɪ!"

"I tire of this," Gode announced. "You will submit to my master - to your master - or you will be made to submit. That would not be pleasant for you. The Great Lord of the Dark rules death, and he can give life in death or death in life as he chooses. Open this door. One way or another, your running is at an end. Open it, I say!"

hi mʌst əv sɛd sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, tu, fəɹ sʌɾənli ə hɛvi bɑɾi θʌddɪɾ əɡɛns ðə dɔɹ. ɪt ʃɪvɝd, ən ðə wɛdʒəz slɪɾ ə fɹækʃən ʌv ən ɪntʃ wɪð ə ɡɹeɪɾ ə ɹʌst ɹʌbɪŋ ɔf ɑn wʊd. əɡɛn ən əɡɛn ðə dɔɹ tʃɹɛmbəld əz bɑɾiz hɝl ðɛmsɛlvz əɾ ɪt. səmtaɪmz ðə wɛdʒəz hɛld; səmtaɪmz ðeɪ slɪɾ ənʌðɝ taɪni bɪt, ən bɪt baɪ taɪni bɪt ðə dɔɹ kɹɛpt ɪnɛksɝəbli ɪnwɝd.

He must have said something else, too, for suddenly a heavy body thudded against the door. It shivered, and the wedges slid a fraction of an inch with a grate of rust rubbing off on wood. Again and again the door trembled as bodies hurled themselves at it. Sometimes the wedges held; sometimes they slid another tiny bit, and bit by tiny bit the door crept inexorably inward.

"səbmɪt," ɡoʊd dɪmændəd fɹəm ðə hɔl, "ɔɹ spɛn ɪtɝnəɾi wɪʃɪŋ ðət jə hæd!"

"Submit," Gode demanded from the hall, "or spend eternity wishing that you had!"

"ɪf wi doʊn əv ɛni tʃɔɪs - " mæt lɪkt ɪz lɪps ʌndɝ ɹændz stɛɹ. hɪz aɪz dɑɹɾɪd laɪk ði aɪz ʌv ə bædʒɝ ɪn ə tʃɹæp; hɪz feɪs wɑz peɪl, ən i pæntɪɾ əz i spoʊk. "wi kəd seɪ jɛs, ən ðən ɡɛɾ əweɪ leɪɾɝ. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, ɹænd, ðɛɹz noʊ weɪ aʊt!"

"If we don't have any choice - " Mat licked his lips under Rand's stare. His eyes darted like the eyes of a badger in a trap; his face was pale, and he panted as he spoke. "We could say yes, and then get away later. Blood and ashes, Rand, there's no way out!"

ðə wɝdz sim tə dʒɹɪf tə ɹænd θɹu wʊl stʌft ɪn ɪz ɪɹz. noʊ weɪ aʊt. θʌndɝ mʌɾɝd oʊvɝhɛd, ən wɑz dʒɹaʊn ɪn ə slæʃ ə laɪtnɪŋ. hæv tə faɪn ə weɪ aʊt. ɡoʊd kɔl tə ðɛm, dɪmændɪŋ, əpilɪŋ; ðə dɔɹ slɪɾ ənʌðɝ ɪntʃ təwɔɹd biɪŋ oʊpən. ə weɪ aʊt!

The words seemed to drift to Rand through wool stuffed in his ears. No way out. Thunder muttered overhead, and was drowned in a slash of lightning. Have to find a way out. Gode called to them, demanding, appealing; the door slid another inch toward being open. A way out!

laɪt fɪl ðə ɹum, flʌɾɪŋ vɪʒən; ði ɛɹ ɹɔɹɾ ən bɝnd. ɹænd fɛl hɪmsɛlf pɪkt ʌp ən dæʃt əɡɛns ðə wɔl. hi slɪd daʊn ɪn ə hip, ɪɹz ɹɪŋɪŋ ən ɛvɹi hɛɹ ɑn ɪz bɑɾi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stæn ɑn ɛnd. deɪzd, hi stæɡɝd tə hɪz fit. hɪz niz wɑbəld, ən i pʊɾ ə hæn əɡɛns ðə wɔl tə stɛɾi hɪmsɛlf. hi lʊkt ɝaʊn ɪn əmeɪzmənt.

Light filled the room, flooding vision; the air roared and burned. Rand felt himself picked up and dashed against the wall. He slid down in a heap, ears ringing and every hair on his body trying to stand on end. Dazed, he staggered to his feet. His knees wobbled, and he put a hand against the wall to steady himself. He looked around in amazement.

ðə læmp, laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪts saɪɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ʌv wʌn ə ðə fju ʃɛlvz stɪl klɪŋɪŋ tə ðə wɔlz, stɪl bɝn ən ɡeɪv laɪt. ɔl ðə bæɹəlz ən kɹeɪts, səm blækən ən smoʊldɝɪŋ, leɪ tɑpəld wɛɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn hɝld. ðə wɪndoʊ, bɑɹz ən ɔl, ən moʊst ə ðə wɔl, tu, hæd vænɪʃt, livɪŋ ə splɪntɝd hoʊl. ðə ɹuf sæɡd, ən tɛnʒɹəlz ə smoʊk fɔt ðə ɹeɪn ɝaʊn ðə dʒæɡd ɛdʒəz ə ði oʊpənɪŋ. ðə dɔɹ hʌŋ ɔf ɪts hɪnʒɪz, dʒæmd ɪn ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm əɾ ən æŋɡəl slæntɪŋ ɪndə ðə hɔl.

The lamp, lying on its side on the edge of one of the few shelves still clinging to the walls, still burned and gave light. All the barrels and crates, some blackened and smoldering, lay toppled where they had been hurled. The window, bars and all, and most of the wall, too, had vanished, leaving a splintered hole. The roof sagged, and tendrils of smoke fought the rain around the jagged edges of the opening. The door hung off its hinges, jammed in the doorframe at an angle slanting into the hall.

wɪð ə filɪŋ ʌv wuzi ʌnɹiæləɾi hi stʊd ðə læmp ʌp. ɪt sim ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld wɑz meɪkɪŋ ʃʊɹ ɪt dɪd nɑt bɹeɪk.

With a feeling of woozy unreality he stood the lamp up. It seemed the most important thing in the world was making sure it did not break.

ə paɪl ə kɹeɪts sʌɾənli hivd əpɑɹt, ən mæt stʊɾ ʌp ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt. hi wivd ɑn ɪz fit, blɪŋkɪŋ ən fʌmbəlɪŋ ət hɪmsɛlf əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz stɪl ətætʃt. hi pɪɹd təwɔɹd ɹænd. "ɹænd? ɪz ðət ju? jəɹ əlaɪv. aɪ θɔt wi wɝ boʊθ - " hi bɹoʊk ɔf, baɪɾɪŋ ɪz lɪp ən ʃeɪkɪŋ. ɪt tʊk ɹænd ə moʊmən tə ɹilaɪz i wɑz læfɪŋ, ən ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɪstɛɹiə.

A pile of crates suddenly heaved apart, and Mat stood up in the middle of it. He weaved on his feet, blinking and fumbling at himself as if wondering if everything was still attached. He peered toward Rand. "Rand? Is that you? You're alive. I thought we were both - " He broke off, biting his lip and shaking. It took Rand a moment to realize he was laughing, and on the edge of hysteria.

"wʌt hæpənd, mæt? mæt? mæt! wʌt hæpənd?"

"What happened, Mat? Mat? Mat! What happened?"

wʌn læst ʃɪvɝ ɹæk mæt, ən ðən i wɑz stɪl. "laɪtnɪŋ, ɹænd. aɪ wɑz lʊkɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ət ðə wɪndoʊ wən ɪt hɪt ðə bɑɹz. laɪtnɪŋ. aɪ kæn si wɝθ - " hi bɹoʊk ɔf, skwɪntɪŋ ət ði æslɑn dɔɹ, ən ɪz vɔɪs wɛnt ʃɑɹp. "wɛɹz ɡoʊd?"

One last shiver wracked Mat, and then he was still. "Lightning, Rand. I was looking right at the window when it hit the bars. Lightning. I can't see worth - " He broke off, squinting at the aslant door, and his voice went sharp. "Where's Gode?"

nʌθɪŋ muvd ɪn ðə dɑɹk kɔɹəɾɝ bɪɑn ðə dɔɹ. ʌv ɡoʊɾ ən ɪz kəmpænjənz ðəɹ wɑz niðɝ saɪn nɔɹ saʊnd, ðoʊ ɛniθɪŋ cʊɾə leɪn ɪn ðə blæknəs. ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf hoʊpɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ dɛd, bʌɾ i wəd nɑɾ əv pʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪndə ðə hɔl tə faɪn aʊt fəɹ ʃʊɹ ɪf i hæd bɪn ɔfɝɾ ə kɹaʊn. nʌθɪŋ muvd aʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt bɪɑnd wɛɹ ðə wɔl hæd bɪn, iðɝ, bʌɾ ʌðɝz wɝ ʌp ən əbaʊt. kənfjuzd ʃaʊts keɪm fɹəm əbʌvstɛɹz ɪn ði ɪn, ən ðə paʊndɪŋ ə ɹʌnɪŋ fit.

Nothing moved in the dark corridor beyond the door. Of Gode and his companions there was neither sign nor sound, though anything could have lain in the blackness. Rand found himself hoping they were dead, but he would not have put his head into the hall to find out for sure if he had been offered a crown. Nothing moved out in the night beyond where the wall had been, either, but others were up and about. Confused shouts came from abovestairs in the inn, and the pounding of running feet.

"lɛts ɡoʊ waɪl wi kæn," ɹænd sɛd.

"Let's go while we can," Rand said.

heɪstəli hɛlpɪŋ sɛpɝeɪt ðɛɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz fɹəm ðə ɹʌbəl, hi ɡɹæb mæts ɑɹm ən hæf pʊld, hæf ɡaɪɾəd ɪz fɹɛn θɹu ðə ɡeɪpɪŋ hoʊl ɪndə ðə naɪt. mæt klʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm, stʌmbəlɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪm wɪð ɪz hɛd pʊʃt fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ən ɛfɝt tə si.

Hastily helping separate their belongings from the rubble, he grabbed Mat's arm and half pulled, half guided his friend through the gaping hole into the night. Mat clutched his arm, stumbling beside him with his head pushed forward in an effort to see.

əz ðə fɝst ɹeɪn hɪt ɹændz feɪs, laɪtnɪŋ fɔɹkt əbʌv ði ɪn, ən i keɪm tə ə kənvʌlsɪv stɑp. ɡoʊdz mɛn wɝ stɪl ðɛɹ, laɪɪŋ wɪð ðɛɹ fit təwɔɹd ði oʊpənɪŋ. pɛltɪd baɪ ðə ɹeɪn, ðɛɹ oʊpən aɪz stɛɹɾ ət ðə skaɪ.

As the first rain hit Rand's face, lightning forked above the inn, and he came to a convulsive stop. Gode's men were still there, lying with their feet toward the opening. Pelted by the rain, their open eyes stared at the sky.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" mæt æskt. "blʌɾ ən æʃəz! aɪ kən hɑɹdli si maɪ oʊn blʌɾi hænd!"

"What is it?" Mat asked. "Blood and ashes! I can hardly see my own bloody hand!"

"nʌθɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd. lʌk. ðə laɪts oʊn. . . . ɪz ɪt? ʃɪvɝɪŋ, hi kɛɹfəli ɡaɪɾəd mæt ɝaʊn ðə bɑɾiz. "dʒʌs ðə laɪtnɪŋ."

"Nothing," Rand said. Luck. The Light's own. . . . Is it? Shivering, he carefully guided Mat around the bodies. "Just the lightning."

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ laɪt seɪv ðə laɪtnɪŋ, ən i stʌmbəld ɪn ðə ɹʌts əz ðeɪ ɹæn stæɡɝɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ði ɪn. wɪð mæt ɔlmoʊs hæŋɪŋ ɑn hɪm, ɛvɹi stʌmbəl ɔlmoʊs pʊld əm boʊθ daʊn, bʌt tɑɾɝɪŋ, pæntɪŋ, ðeɪ ɹæn.

There was no light save the lightning, and he stumbled in the ruts as they ran staggering away from the inn. With Mat almost hanging on him, every stumble almost pulled them both down, but tottering, panting, they ran.

wʌns i lʊk bæk. wʌns, bɪfɔɹ ðə ɹeɪn θɪkən tə ə dɛfənɪŋ kɝɾən ðət blɑɾɪd ðə dænsɪŋ kɑɹtmən fɹəm saɪt. laɪtnɪŋ sɪləuɛɾɪd ðə fɪɡjɝ ʌv ə mæn ət ðə bæk ə ði ɪn, ə mæn ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz fɪst ət ðɛm, əɹ ət ðə skaɪ. ɡoʊɾ əɹ heɪk, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ, bʌɾ iðɝ wʌn wɑz əz bæɾ əz ði ʌðɝ. ðə ɹeɪn keɪm ɪn ə dɛljudʒ, aɪsəleɪɾɪŋ əm ɪn ə wɔl ʌv wɔɾɝ. hi hɝid θɹu ðə naɪt, lɪsnɪŋ θɹu ðə ɹɔɹ ə ðə stɔɹm fəɹ ðə saʊn ə pɝsut.

Once he looked back. Once, before the rain thickened to a deafening curtain that blotted The Dancing Cartman from sight. Lightning silhouetted the figure of a man at the back of the inn, a man shaking his fist at them, or at the sky. Gode or Hake, he did not know, but either one was as bad as the other. The rain came in a deluge, isolating them in a wall of water. He hurried through the night, listening through the roar of the storm for the sound of pursuit.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾiθɹi


CHAPTER 33

ðə dɑɹk weɪts


The Dark Waits

ʌndɝ ə lɛɾən skaɪ ðə haɪ-wil kɑɹt bʌmpt ist əlɔŋ ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd. ɹænd pʊl hɪmsɛlf aʊɾ ə ðə stʃɹɔ ɪn bæk tə lʊk oʊvɝ ðə saɪd. ɪt wɑz iziɝ ðən ɪt hæd bɪn ən aʊɝ ɝliɝ. hɪz ɑɹmz fɛlt əz ɪf ðeɪ maɪt stʃɹɛtʃ ɪnstɛɾ ə dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪm ʌp, ən fəɹ ə mɪnuɾ ɪz hɛd wɑntəd tə kip ɑn ɡoʊɪŋ ən floʊɾ əweɪ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz iziɝ. hi hʊkt ɪz ɛlboʊz oʊvɝ ðə loʊ slæts ən wɑtʃt ðə læn ɹoʊl pæst. ðə sʌn, stɪl hɪɾən baɪ dʌl klaʊdz, jɛt stʊd haɪ oʊvɝhɛd, bʌt ðə kɑɹt wɑz klæɾɝɪŋ ɪndə ənʌðɝ vɪlədʒ ə vaɪn-kʌvɝd, ɹɛd bɹɪk haʊsəz. taʊnz hæd bɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ kloʊsɝ təɡɛðɝ sɪns fɔɹ kɪŋz.

Under a leaden sky the high-wheeled cart bumped east along the Caemlyn Road. Rand pulled himself out of the straw in back to look over the side. It was easier than it had been an hour earlier. His arms felt as if they might stretch instead of drawing him up, and for a minute his head wanted to keep on going and float away, but it was easier. He hooked his elbows over the low slats and watched the land roll past. The sun, still hidden by dull clouds, yet stood high overhead, but the cart was clattering into another village of vine-covered, red brick houses. Towns had been getting closer together since Four Kings.

səm ə ðə pipəl weɪvd əɹ kɔld ə ɡɹiɾɪŋ tə haɪəm kɪntʃ, ðə fɑɹmɝ huz kɑɹɾ ɪt wɑz. mæstɝ kɪntʃ, lɛðɝi-feɪst ən tæsɪtɝn, ʃaʊɾəd bæk ə fju wɝdz itʃ taɪm, ɝaʊn ðə paɪp ɪn ɪz tiθ. ðə klɛntʃt tiθ meɪd wʌɾ i sɛɾ ɔl bʌɾ ʌnɪntɛlədʒəbəl, bʌɾ ɪt saʊndəd dʒoʊviəl ən sim tə sæɾəsfaɪ; ðeɪ wɛn bæk tə wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ ɡlæns ət ðə kɑɹt. noʊ wʌn əpɪɹd tə peɪ ɛni maɪn tə ðə fɑɹmɝz tu pæsənʒɝz.

Some of the people waved or called a greeting to Hyam Kinch, the farmer whose cart it was. Master Kinch, leathery-faced and taciturn, shouted back a few words each time, around the pipe in his teeth. The clenched teeth made what he said all but unintelligible, but it sounded jovial and seemed to satisfy; they went back to what they were doing without another glance at the cart. No one appeared to pay any mind to the farmer's two passengers.

ðə vɪlədʒ ɪn muv θɹu ɹændz fild ə vɪʒən. ɪt wɑz waɪtwɑʃt, wɪð ə ɡɹeɪ sleɪt ɹuf. pipəl bʌsəld ɪn ən aʊt, nɑɾɪŋ kæʒəwəli ən weɪvɪŋ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ. səm ə ðɛm stɑp tə spik. ðeɪ nu wʌn ənʌðɝ. vɪlɪdʒɝz, moʊsli, baɪ ðɛɹ kloʊðz - buts ən tʃɹaʊzɝz ən koʊts nɑt mʌtʃ dɪfɹən fɹəm wʌɾ i wɔɹ hɪmsɛlf, ðoʊ wɪð ən ɪnɔɹɾənɪt fɑndnəs fəɹ kʌlɝfəl stʃɹaɪps. ðə wɪmən wɔɹ dip bɑnəts ðət hɪd ðɛɹ feɪsəz ən waɪɾ eɪpɹənz wɪð stʃɹaɪps. meɪbi ðeɪ wɝ ɔl taʊnsmɪn ən loʊkəl fɑɹmfoʊk. dʌz ðət meɪk ɛni dɪfɝəns?

The village inn moved through Rand's field of vision. It was whitewashed, with a gray slate roof. People bustled in and out, nodding casually and waving to one another. Some of them stopped to speak. They knew one another. Villagers, mostly, by their clothes - boots and trousers and coats not much different from what he wore himself, though with an inordinate fondness for colorful stripes. The women wore deep bonnets that hid their faces and white aprons with stripes. Maybe they were all townsmen and local farmfolk. Does that make any difference?

hi dʒɹɑp bæk ɑn ðə stʃɹɔ, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə vɪlədʒ dwɪndəl bɪtwin ɪz fit. fɛns filz ən tʃɹɪm hɛdʒɪz laɪn ðə ɹoʊd, ən smɔl fɑɹmhaʊsəz wɪð smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ɹɛd bɹɪk tʃɪmniz. ði oʊnli wʊdz nɪɹ ðə ɹoʊd wɝ kɑpɪsɪz, wɛl tɛndəd fəɹ faɪɝwʊd, teɪm əz ə fɑɹmjɑɹd. bʌt ðə bɹæntʃəz stʊd lifləs əɡɛns ðə skaɪ, əz stɑɹk əz ɪn ðə waɪld wʊdz tə ðə wɛst.

He dropped back on the straw, watching the village dwindle between his feet. Fenced fields and trimmed hedges lined the road, and small farmhouses with smoke rising from red brick chimneys. The only woods near the road were coppices, well tended for firewood, tame as a farmyard. But the branches stood leafless against the sky, as stark as in the wild woods to the west.

ə laɪn ʌv wæɡənz hɛɾɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɹʌmbəl daʊn ðə sɛntɝ ə ðə ɹoʊd, kɹaʊɾɪŋ ðə kɑɹɾ oʊvɝ ɑntu ðə vɝdʒ. mæstɝ kɪntʃ ʃɪftəɾ ɪz paɪp tə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz maʊθ ən spæt bɪtwin ɪz tiθ. wɪð wʌn aɪ ɑn ɪz ɔf-saɪd wil, tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ɪt dɪd nɑt tæŋɡəl ɪn ðə hɛdʒ, hi kɛp ðə kɑɹt muvɪŋ. hɪz maʊθ taɪɾənd əz i ɡlænst ət ðə mɝtʃəns' tʃɹeɪn.

A line of wagons heading the other way rumbled down the center of the road, crowding the cart over onto the verge. Master Kinch shifted his pipe to the corner of his mouth and spat between his teeth. With one eye on his off-side wheel, to make sure it did not tangle in the hedge, he kept the cart moving. His mouth tightened as he glanced at the merchants' train.

nʌn ə ðə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz kɹækɪŋ ðɛɹ lɔŋ wɪps ɪn ði ɛɹ əbʌv eɪt-hɔɹs timz, nʌn ə ðə hɑɹd-feɪst ɡɑɹdz slaʊtʃɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz əlɔŋsaɪd ðə wæɡənz, lʊkt ət ðə kɑɹt. ɹænd wɑtʃt əm ɡoʊ, hɪz tʃɛs taɪt. hɪz hænd wɑz ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk, ɡɹɪpɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, əntɪl ðə læst wæɡən lɝtʃt baɪ.

None of the wagon drivers cracking their long whips in the air above eight-horse teams, none of the hard-faced guards slouching in their saddles alongside the wagons, looked at the cart. Rand watched them go, his chest tight. His hand was under his cloak, gripping his sword hilt, until the last wagon lurched by.

əz ðət faɪnəl wæɡən ɹæɾəld əweɪ təwɔɹd ðə vɪlədʒ ðeɪ hæd dʒʌs lɛft, mæt tɝn ɑn ðə sit bɪsaɪd ðə fɑɹmɝ ən lin bæk əntɪl i faʊn ɹændz aɪz. ðə skɑɹf ðət dɪd duɾi fəɹ dʌst, wən nid bi, ʃeɪɾɪd ɪz oʊn aɪz, foʊldəɾ oʊvɝ θɪkli ən taɪd loʊ ɝaʊn ɪz fɔɹhɛd. ivən soʊ hi skwɪntɪɾ ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪ deɪlaɪt. "ju si ɛniθɪŋ bæk ðɛɹ?" hi æskt kwaɪətli. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə wæɡənz?"

As that final wagon rattled away toward the village they had just left, Mat turned on the seat beside the farmer and leaned back until he found Rand's eyes. The scarf that did duty for dust, when need be, shaded his own eyes, folded over thickly and tied low around his forehead. Even so he squinted in the gray daylight. "You see anything back there?" he asked quietly. "What about the wagons?"

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən mæt nɑɾəd. hi hæd sin nʌθɪŋ iðɝ.

Rand shook his head, and Mat nodded. He had seen nothing either.

mæstɝ kɪntʃ ɡlænst əɾ əm aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, ðən ʃɪftəɾ ɪz paɪp əɡɛn, ən flæp ðə ɹeɪnz. ðət wɑz ɔl, bʌɾ i hæd noʊɾəst. ðə hɔɹs pɪkt ʌp ðə peɪs ə stɛp.

Master Kinch glanced at them out of the corner of his eye, then shifted his pipe again, and flapped the reins. That was all, but he had noticed. The horse picked up the pace a step.

"jɔɹ aɪz stɪl hɝt?" ɹænd æskt.

"Your eyes still hurt?" Rand asked.

mæt tʌtʃt ðə skɑɹf ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd. "noʊ. nɑt mʌtʃ. nɑɾ ənlɛs aɪ lʊk ɔlmoʊst ɹaɪɾ ət ðə sʌn, ɛniweɪ. wʌɾ əbaʊt ju? ɑɹ jə filɪŋ ɛni bɛɾɝ?"

Mat touched the scarf around his head. "No. Not much. Not unless I look almost right at the sun, anyway. What about you? Are you feeling any better?"

"sʌm." hi ɹɪli wɑz filɪŋ bɛɾɝ, hi ɹilaɪzd. ɪt wɑz ə wʌndɝ tə ɡɛɾ oʊvɝ biɪŋ sɪk soʊ fæst. mɔɹ ðən ðæt, ɪt wɑz ə ɡɪft ə ðə laɪt. ɪts tə bi ðə laɪt. ɪts tə bi.

"Some." He really was feeling better, he realized. It was a wonder to get over being sick so fast. More than that, it was a gift of the Light. It has to be the Light. It has to be.

sʌɾənli ə bɑɾi ʌv hɔɹsmən wɑz pæsɪŋ ðə kɑɹt, hɛɾɪŋ wɛs laɪk ðə mɝtʃəns' wæɡənz. lɔŋ waɪt kɑlɝz hʌŋ daʊn oʊvɝ ðɛɹ meɪl ən pleɪt, ən ðɛɹ kloʊks ən ʌndɝkoʊts wɝ ɹɛd, laɪk ðə ɡəttɛndɝz' junəfɔɹmz ɪn waɪtbɹɪdʒ, bʌt bɛɾɝ meɪɾ ən bɛɾɝ fɪɾɪŋ. itʃ mænz kɑnɪkəl hɛlmət ʃoʊn laɪk sɪlvɝ. ðeɪ sæt ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz wɪð stʃɹeɪt bæks. θɪn ɹɛd stʃɹimɝz flʌɾɝd bɪniθ ðə hɛdz ə ðɛɹ lænsɪz, ɛvɹi læns hɛld ət ðə seɪm æŋɡəl.

Suddenly a body of horsemen was passing the cart, heading west like the merchants' wagons. Long white collars hung down over their mail and plate, and their cloaks and undercoats were red, like the gatetenders' uniforms in Whitebridge, but better made and better fitting. Each man's conical helmet shone like silver. They sat their horses with straight backs. Thin red streamers fluttered beneath the heads of their lances, every lance held at the same angle.

səm ə ðɛm ɡlænst ɪndə ðə kɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ pæst ɪn tu kɑləmz. ə keɪdʒ ə stil bɑɹz mæskt itʃ feɪs. ɹænd wɑz ɡlæɾ ɪz kloʊk kʌvɝɾ ɪz sɔɹd. ə fju nɑɾəd tə mæstɝ kɪntʃ, nɑɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ nu hɪm, bʌɾ ɪn ə nutʃɹəl ɡɹiɾɪŋ. mæstɝ kɪntʃ nɑɾəd bæk ɪn mʌtʃ ðə seɪm weɪ, bʌt dɪspaɪɾ ɪz əntʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪkspɹɛʃən ðəɹ wɑz ə hɪn ʌv əpɹuvəl ɪn ɪz nɑd.

Some of them glanced into the cart as they passed in two columns. A cage of steel bars masked each face. Rand was glad his cloak covered his sword. A few nodded to Master Kinch, not as if they knew him, but in a neutral greeting. Master Kinch nodded back in much the same way, but despite his unchanging expression there was a hint of approval in his nod.

ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz wɝ əɾ ə wɔk, bʌt wɪð ðə spiɾ ə ðə kɑɹɾ æɾəd, ðeɪ wɛn baɪ kwɪkli. wɪð ə pɑɹɾ ə hɪz maɪn ɹænd kaʊntəd ðɛm. tɛn . . . twɛnti . . . θɝɾi . . . θɝɾi-tu. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd tə wɑtʃ ðə kɑləmz muv ɑn daʊn ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd.

Their horses were at a walk, but with the speed of the cart added, they went by quickly. With a part of his mind Rand counted them. Ten . . . twenty . . . thirty . . . thirty-two. He raised his head to watch the columns move on down the Caemlyn Road.

"hu wɝ ðeɪ?" mæt æskt, hæf wʌndɝɪŋ, hæf səspɪʃəs.

"Who were they?" Mat asked, half wondering, half suspicious.

"kwinz ɡɑɹdz," mæstɝ kɪntʃ sɛɾ ɝaʊn ɪz paɪp. hi kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn ðə ɹoʊɾ əhɛd. "woʊnt ɡoʊ mʌtʃ fɝðɝ ðən bɹinz spɹɪŋ, 'lɛs ðəɹ kɔl fɔɹ. nɑt laɪk ði oʊl deɪz." hi sʌkt ɑn ɪz paɪp, ðən æɾəd, "aɪ səpoʊz, ðiz deɪz, ðɛɹz pɑɹts ə ðə ɹɛlm doʊn si ðə ɡɑɹdz ɪn ə jɪɹ əɹ mɔɹ. nɑt laɪk ði oʊl deɪz."

"Queen's Guards," Master Kinch said around his pipe. He kept his eyes on the road ahead. "Won't go much further than Breen's Spring, 'less they're called for. Not like the old days." He sucked on his pipe, then added, "I suppose, these days, there's parts of the Realm don't see the Guards in a year or more. Not like the old days."

"wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ duɪŋ?" ɹænd æskt.

"What are they doing?" Rand asked.

ðə fɑɹmɝ ɡeɪv ɪm ə lʊk. "kipɪŋ ðə kwinz pis ən əphoʊldɪŋ ðə kwinz lɔ." hi nɑɾəd tə hɪmsɛlf əz ɪf i laɪk ðə saʊn ə ðæt, ən æɾəd, "sɝtʃɪŋ aʊt mæləfæktɝz ən siɪŋ əm bɪfɔɹ ə mædʒəstʃɹeɪt. mf!" hi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ stʃɹimɝ ə smoʊk. "ju tu mʌs bi fɹəm pɹɪɾi fɑɹ ɔf nɑt tə ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd. wɛɹ jə fɹʌm?"

The farmer gave him a look. "Keeping the Queen's peace and upholding the Queen's law." He nodded to himself as if he liked the sound of that, and added, "Searching out malefactors and seeing them before a magistrate. Mmmph!" He let out a long streamer of smoke. "You two must be from pretty far off not to recognize the Queen's Guard. Where you from?"

"fɑɹ ɔf," mæt sɛɾ ət ðə seɪm ɪnstən ðət ɹænd sɛd, "ðə tu ɹɪvɝz." hi wɪʃt i kəd teɪk ɪt bæk əz sun əz i sɛɾ ɪt. hi stɪl wɑz nɑt θɪŋkɪŋ klɪɹli. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə haɪd, ən mɛnʃənɪŋ ə neɪm ə feɪd wəd hɪɹ laɪk ə bɛl.

"Far off," Mat said at the same instant that Rand said, "The Two Rivers." He wished he could take it back as soon as he said it. He still was not thinking clearly. Trying to hide, and mentioning a name a Fade would hear like a bell.

mæstɝ kɪntʃ ɡlænst ət mæt aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ, ən pʌft ɪz paɪp ɪn saɪləns fəɹ ə waɪl. "ðæts fɑɹ ɔf, ɔl ɹaɪt," hi sɛd faɪnəli. "ɔlmoʊs tə ðə bɔɹɾɝ ə ðə ɹɛlm. bʌt θɪŋz mʌs bi wɝs ðən aɪ θɔɾ ɪf ðɛɹz pleɪsəz ɪn ðə ɹɛlm wɛɹ pipəl doʊn ivən ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz. nɑt laɪk ði oʊl deɪz əɾ ɔl."

Master Kinch glanced at Mat out of the corner of his eye, and puffed his pipe in silence for a while. "That's far off, all right," he said finally. "Almost to the border of the Realm. But things must be worse than I thought if there's places in the Realm where people don't even recognize the Queen's Guards. Not like the old days at all."

ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌt mæstɝ ælvɪɹ wəd seɪ ɪf sʌmwʌn toʊld ɪm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz pɑɹɾ ə səm kwinz ɹɛlm. ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ, hi səpoʊzd. pɝhæps ðə meɪɝ dɪd noʊ - hi nu ə lɑɾ ə θɪŋz ðət sɝpɹaɪzd ɹænd - ən meɪbi ʌðɝz dɪd, tu, bʌɾ i hæd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ɛniwʌn mɛnʃən ɪt. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. itʃ vɪlədʒ hændəld ɪts oʊn pɹɑbləmz, ən ɪf səm dɪfəkəlti ɪnvɑlv mɔɹ ðən wʌn vɪlədʒ ðə meɪɝz, ən meɪbi ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəlz, sɑlvd ɪt bɪtwin ðɛm.

Rand wondered what Master al'Vere would say if someone told him the Two Rivers was part of some Queen's Realm. The Queen of Andor, he supposed. Perhaps the Mayor did know - he knew a lot of things that surprised Rand - and maybe others did, too, but he had never heard anyone mention it. The Two Rivers was the Two Rivers. Each village handled its own problems, and if some difficulty involved more than one village the Mayors, and maybe the Village Councils, solved it between them.

mæstɝ kɪntʃ pʊld ɑn ðə ɹeɪnz, dʒɹɔɪŋ ðə kɑɹt tə ə hɔlt. "fɑɹ əz aɪ ɡoʊ." ə nɛɹoʊ kɑɹt pæθ lɛɾ ɔf tə ðə nɔɹθ; sɛvɹəl fɑɹmhaʊsəz wɝ vɪzəbəl ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən əkɹɔs oʊpən filz, plaʊd bʌt stɪl bɛɹ ə kɹɑps. "tu deɪz wɪl si jə ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. list, ɪt wəɾ ɪf jəɹ fɹɛn hæɾ ɪz lɛɡz ʌndɝ hɪm."

Master Kinch pulled on the reins, drawing the cart to a halt. "Far as I go." A narrow cart path led off to the north; several farmhouses were visible in that direction across open fields, plowed but still bare of crops. "Two days will see you in Caemlyn. Least, it would if your friend had his legs under him."

mæt hɑp daʊn ən ɹitʃɹivd ɪz baʊ ən ʌðɝ θɪŋz, ðən hɛlpt ɹænd klaɪm ɔf ðə teɪl ə ðə kɑɹt. ɹændz bʌndəlz weɪɾ ɑn hɪm, ən ɪz lɛɡz wɑbəld, bʌɾ i ʃɹʌɡd ɔf ɪz fɹɛnz hæn ən tʃɹaɪɾ ə fju stɛps ɑn ɪz oʊn. hi stɪl fɛlt ənstɛɾi, bʌɾ ɪz lɛɡz hɛld ɪm ʌp. ðeɪ ivən sim tə ɡɹoʊ stʃɹɔŋɝ əz i juz ðɛm.

Mat hopped down and retrieved his bow and other things, then helped Rand climb off the tail of the cart. Rand's bundles weighed on him, and his legs wobbled, but he shrugged off his friend's hand and tried a few steps on his own. He still felt unsteady, but his legs held him up. They even seemed to grow stronger as he used them.

ðə fɑɹmɝ dɪd nɑt stɑɹɾ ɪz hɔɹs ʌp əɡɛn ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. hi stʌɾid əm fəɹ ə mɪnət, sʌkɪŋ ɑn ɪz paɪp. "ju kən ɹɛst ʌp ə deɪ əɹ tu ət maɪ pleɪs, ɪf jə wɑnt. woʊn mɪs ɛniθɪŋ ɪn ðət taɪm, aɪ səpoʊz. wʌtɛvɝ sɪknəs jəɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ oʊvɝ, jʌŋ fɛloʊ . . . wɛl, ði oʊld wʊmən ən mi, wi ɔlɹɛɾi hæɾ əbaʊɾ ɛvɹi sɪknəs jə kən θɪŋk ə bɪfɔɹ jə wɝ bɔɹn, ən nɝst əɹ jʌŋɡəlɪŋz θɹu 'ɛm, tu. aɪ ɪkspɛk jəɹ pæs ðə kætʃɪŋ steɪdʒ, ɛniweɪ."

The farmer did not start his horse up again right away. He studied them for a minute, sucking on his pipe. "You can rest up a day or two at my place, if you want. Won't miss anything in that time, I suppose. Whatever sickness you're getting over, young fellow . . . well, the old woman and me, we already had about every sickness you can think of before you were born, and nursed our younglings through 'em, too. I expect you're past the catching stage, anyway."

mæts aɪz nɛɹoʊd, ən ɹænd kɑt hɪmsɛlf fɹaʊnɪŋ. nɑɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪz pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. ɪt kæn bi ɛvɹibɑɾi.

Mat's eyes narrowed, and Rand caught himself frowning. Not everyone is part of it. It can't be everybody.

"θæŋk ju," hi sɛd, "bʌɾ ɪm ɔl ɹaɪt. ɹɪli. haʊ fɑɹ tə ðə nɛks vɪlədʒ?"

"Thank you," he said, "but I'm all right. Really. How far to the next village?"

"kɛɹisfɝd? jə kən ɹitʃ ɪt bɪfɔɹ dɑɹk, wɔkɪŋ." mæstɝ kɪntʃ tʊk ɪz paɪp fɹəm bɪtwin ɪz tiθ ən pɝst ɪz lɪps θɔtfəli bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn. "fɝst ɔf, aɪ ɹɛkən jə fəɹ ɹʌnəweɪ 'pɹɛntəsəz, bʌt naʊ aɪ ɪkspɛkt ɪts sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ sɪɹiəs jəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹʌm. doʊnt noʊ wʌt. doʊn kɛɹ. ɪm ə ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf dʒʌdʒ tə seɪ jəɹ nɑt dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən nɑt laɪkli tə ɹɑb əɹ hɝɾ ɛnibəɾi. nɑt laɪk səm ɑn ðə ɹoʊd ðiz deɪz. aɪ ɡɑɾ ɪn tʃɹʌbəl ə taɪm əɹ tu maɪsɛlf wən aɪ wɑz jəɹ eɪdʒ. jə niɾ ə pleɪs tə kip aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ə fju deɪz, maɪ fɑɹm ɪz faɪv maɪlz ðət weɪ" - hi dʒɝkt ɪz hɛd təwɔɹd ðə kɑɹt tʃɹæk - "æn doʊnt noʊbɑdi ɛvɝ kʌm aʊt ðɛɹ. wʌtɛvɝz tʃeɪsɪŋ ju, woʊn laɪkli faɪn jə ðɛɹ." hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ əz ɪf ɪmbɛɹəs baɪ spikɪŋ soʊ mɛni wɝdz təɡɛðɝ.

"Carysford? You can reach it before dark, walking." Master Kinch took his pipe from between his teeth and pursed his lips thoughtfully before going on. "First off, I reckoned you for runaway 'prentices, but now I expect it's something more serious you're running from. Don't know what. Don't care. I'm a good enough judge to say you're not Darkfriends, and not likely to rob or hurt anybody. Not like some on the road these days. I got in trouble a time or two myself when I was your age. You need a place to keep out of sight a few days, my farm is five miles that way" - he jerked his head toward the cart track - "and don't nobody ever come out there. Whatever's chasing you, won't likely find you there." He cleared his throat as if embarrassed by speaking so many words together.

"haʊ wəd jə noʊ wʌt dɑɹkfɹɛnz lʊk laɪk?" mæt dɪmændəd. hi bækt əweɪ fɹəm ðə kɑɹt, ən ɪz hænd wɛn ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt. "wʌt dʒju noʊ əbaʊt dɑɹkfɹɛnz?"

"How would you know what Darkfriends look like?" Mat demanded. He backed away from the cart, and his hand went under his coat. "What do you know about Darkfriends?"

mæstɝ kɪntʃəz feɪs taɪɾənd. "sut jʊɹsɛlvz," hi sɛd, ən klʌk tə hɪz hɔɹs. ðə kɑɹt ɹoʊld ɔf daʊn ðə nɛɹoʊ pæθ, ən i nɛvɝ lʊk bæk.

Master Kinch's face tightened. "Suit yourselves," he said, and clucked to his horse. The cart rolled off down the narrow path, and he never looked back.

mæt lʊkt ət ɹænd, ən ɪz skaʊl feɪɾəd. "sɑɹi, ɹænd. jə niɾ ə pleɪs tə ɹɛst. meɪbi ɪf wi ɡoʊ æftɝ hɪm. . . ." hi ʃɹʌɡd. "aɪ dʒʌs kænt ɡɛɾ oʊvɝ ðə filɪŋ ðəɾ ɛvɹibɑɾiz æftɝ ʌs. laɪt, aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu waɪ ðeɪ wɝ. aɪ wɪʃ ɪt wɑz oʊvɝ. aɪ wɪʃ. . . ." hi tʃɹeɪld ɔf mɪzɝəbli.

Mat looked at Rand, and his scowl faded. "Sorry, Rand. You need a place to rest. Maybe if we go after him. . . ." He shrugged. "I just can't get over the feeling that everybody's after us. Light, I wish I knew why they were. I wish it was over. I wish. . . ." He trailed off miserably.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ stɪl səm ɡʊd pipəl," ɹænd sɛd. mæt stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ðə kɑɹt pæθ, dʒɔ klɛntʃt əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ðə læs θɪŋ i wɑntəd tə du, bʌt ɹænd stɑp hɪm. "wi kæn əfɔɹd tə stɑp dʒʌs tə ɹɛst, mæt. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðəɹ ɪz ɛniwɛɹ tə haɪd."

"There are still some good people," Rand said. Mat started toward the cart path, jaw clenched as if it were the last thing he wanted to do, but Rand stopped him. "We can't afford to stop just to rest, Mat. Besides, I don't think there is anywhere to hide."

mæt nɑɾəd, hɪz ɹɪlif ɛvəɾənt. hi tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk səm ə ɹændz bɝɾənz, ðə sæɾəlbæɡz ən tɑmz kloʊk ɹæpt ɝaʊn ðə keɪs hɑɹp, bʌt ɹænd hɛld ɑntu ðɛm. hɪz lɛɡz ɹɪli dɪd fil stʃɹɔŋɝ. wʌɾ ɛvɝz tʃeɪsɪŋ ʌs? hi θɔɾ əz ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd ɔf daʊn ðə ɹoʊd. nɑt tʃeɪsɪŋ. weɪɾɪŋ.

Mat nodded, his relief evident. He tried to take some of Rand's burdens, the saddlebags and Thom's cloak wrapped around the cased harp, but Rand held onto them. His legs really did feel stronger. What ever's chasing us? he thought as they started off down the road. Not chasing. Waiting.

ðə ɹeɪn hæd kəntɪnjud θɹu ðə naɪt ðeɪ stæɡɝɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə dænsɪŋ kɑɹtmən, hæmɝɪŋ əɾ əm əz hɑɹɾ əz ðə θʌndɝ aʊɾ ʌv ə blæk skaɪ splɪt baɪ laɪtnɪŋ. ðɛɹ kloʊðz bɪkeɪm sɑɾən ɪn mɪnəts; ɪn ən aʊɝ ɹændz skɪn fɛl sɑɾən, tu, bʌt ðeɪ hæd lɛft fɔɹ kɪŋz bɪhaɪn ðɛm. mæt wɑz ɔl bʌt blaɪn ɪn ðə dɑɹk, skwɪntɪŋ peɪnfəli ət ðə ʃɑɹp flæʃɪz ðət meɪd tʃɹiz stæn aʊt stɑɹkli fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. ɹænd lɛɾ ɪm baɪ ðə hænd, bʌt mæt stɪl fɛlt aʊɾ itʃ stɛp ənsɝteɪnli. wɝi kɹist ɹændz fɔɹhɛd. ɪf mæt dɪd nɑt ɹɪɡeɪn ɪz saɪt, ðeɪ wəd bi sloʊd tə ə kɹɔl. ðeɪ wəd nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ əweɪ.

The rain had continued through the night they staggered away from The Dancing Cartman, hammering at them as hard as the thunder out of a black sky split by lightning. Their clothes became sodden in minutes; in an hour Rand's skin felt sodden, too, but they had left Four Kings behind them. Mat was all but blind in the dark, squinting painfully at the sharp flashes that made trees stand out starkly for an instant. Rand led him by the hand, but Mat still felt out each step uncertainly. Worry creased Rand's forehead. If Mat did not regain his sight, they would be slowed to a crawl. They would never get away.

mæt sim tə sɛns ɪz θɔt. dɪspaɪt ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk, ðə ɹeɪn hæd plæstɝd mæts hɛɹ əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs. "ɹænd," hi sɛd, "ju woʊn liv mi, wɪl ju? ɪf aɪ kæn kip ʌp?" hɪz vɔɪs kweɪvɝd.

Mat seemed to sense his thought. Despite the hood of his cloak, the rain had plastered Mat's hair across his face. "Rand," he said, "you won't leave me, will you? If I can't keep up?" His voice quavered.

"aɪ woʊn liv ju." ɹænd taɪɾənd ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ɪz fɹɛnz hænd. "aɪ woʊn liv jə noʊ mæɾɝ wʌt." laɪt hɛlp ʌs! θʌndɝ kɹæʃt oʊvɝhɛd, ən mæt stʌmbəld, ɔlmoʊs fɔlɪŋ, ɔlmoʊs pʊlɪŋ ɪm daʊn, tu. "wi hæv tə stɑp, mæt. ɪf wi kip ɡoʊɪŋ, jəl bɹeɪk ə lɛɡ."

"I won't leave you." Rand tightened his grip on his friend's hand. "I won't leave you no matter what." Light help us! Thunder crashed overhead, and Mat stumbled, almost falling, almost pulling him down, too. "We have to stop, Mat. If we keep going, you'll break a leg."

"ɡoʊd." laɪtnɪŋ splɪt ðə dɑɹk ɹaɪɾ əbʌv əm əz mæt spoʊk, ən ðə θʌndɝ kɹæk paʊndɪɾ ɛvɹi ʌðɝ saʊn ɪndə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, bʌɾ ɪn ðə flæʃ ɹænd kəd meɪk aʊt ðə neɪm ɑn mæts lɪps.

"Gode." Lightning split the dark right above them as Mat spoke, and the thunder crack pounded every other sound into the ground, but in the flash Rand could make out the name on Mat's lips.

"hiz dɛd." hiz tə bi. laɪt, lɛɾ ɪm bi dɛd.

"He's dead." He has to be. Light, let him be dead.

hi lɛd mæt tə səm bʊʃəz ðə laɪtnɪŋ flæʃ hæd ʃoʊd hɪm. ðeɪ hæd livz ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ə lɪɾəl ʃɛltɝ fɹəm ðə dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ɹeɪn. nɑɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ə ɡʊd tʃɹi maɪt, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹɪsk ənʌðɝ laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹaɪk. ðeɪ maɪt nɑt bi soʊ lʌki, nɛks taɪm.

He led Mat to some bushes the lightning flash had showed him. They had leaves enough to give a little shelter from the driving rain. Not as much as a good tree might, but he did not want to risk another lightning strike. They might not be so lucky, next time.

hʌɾəld təɡɛðɝ bɪniθ ðə bʊʃəz, ðeɪ tʃɹaɪd tə ɝeɪnʒ ðɛɹ kloʊks tə meɪk ə lɪɾəl tɛn oʊvɝ ðə bɹæntʃəz. ɪt wɑz fɑɹ tu leɪt tə θɪŋk ə steɪɪŋ dʒɹaɪ, bʌt dʒʌst stɑpɪŋ ði ɪnsɛsən pɛltɪŋ ə ðə ɹeɪndʒɹɑps wəd bi sʌmθɪŋ. ðeɪ kɹaʊtʃt əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ tə ʃɛɹ wʌt lɪɾəl bɑɾi wɔɹmθ wɑz lɛf tə ðɛm. dʒɹɪpɪŋ wɛɾ əz ðeɪ wɝ, ən mɔɹ dʒɹɪps kʌmɪŋ θɹu ðə kloʊks, ðeɪ ʃɪvɝd ðɛmsɛlvz ɪndə slip.

Huddled together beneath the bushes, they tried to arrange their cloaks to make a little tent over the branches. It was far too late to think of staying dry, but just stopping the incessant pelting of the raindrops would be something. They crouched against each other to share what little body warmth was left to them. Dripping wet as they were, and more drips coming through the cloaks, they shivered themselves into sleep.

ɹænd nu ɹaɪɾ əweɪ ɪt wɑz ə dʒɹim. hi wɑz bæk ɪn fɔɹ kɪŋz, bʌt ðə taʊn wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ hɪm. ðə wæɡənz wɝ ðɛɹ, bʌt noʊ pipəl, noʊ hɔɹsəz, noʊ dɑɡz. nʌθɪŋ əlaɪv. hi nu sʌmwʌn wɑz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ hɪm, ðoʊ.

Rand knew right away it was a dream. He was back in Four Kings, but the town was empty except for him. The wagons were there, but no people, no horses, no dogs. Nothing alive. He knew someone was waiting for him, though.

əz i wɔk daʊn ðə ɹʌɾɪd stʃɹit, ðə bɪldɪŋz sim tə blɝ əz ðeɪ slɪd bɪhaɪn hɪm. wən i tɝn ɪz hɛd, ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ðɛɹ, sɑləd, bʌt ði ɪndɪstɪŋknəs ɹɪmeɪn ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɪz vɪʒən. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf oʊnli wʌɾ i sɔ ɹɪli ɪɡzɪstəd, ən ðən dʒʌst waɪl i wɑz siɪŋ. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪf i tɝn kwɪkli ɪnʌf i wəd si. . . . hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌt, bʌɾ ɪt meɪɾ ɪm ənizi, θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt.

As he walked down the rutted street, the buildings seemed to blur as they slid behind him. When he turned his head, they were all there, solid, but the indistinctness remained at the corners of his vision. It was as if only what he saw really existed, and then just while he was seeing. He was sure if he turned quickly enough he would see. . . . He was not sure what, but it made him uneasy, thinking about it.

ðə dænsɪŋ kɑɹtmən əpɪɹɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm. sʌmhaʊ ɪts ɡɛɹɪʃ peɪn simd ɡɹeɪ ən laɪfləs. hi wɛn ɪn. ɡoʊd wɑz ðɛɹ, əɾ ə teɪbəl.

The Dancing Cartman appeared in front of him. Somehow its garish paint seemed gray and lifeless. He went in. Gode was there, at a table.

hi oʊnli ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə mæn fɹəm ɪz kloʊðz, hɪz sɪlk ən dɑɹk vɛlvəts. ɡoʊdz skɪn wɑz ɹɛd, bɝn ən kɹækt ən uzɪŋ. hɪz feɪs wɑz ɔlmoʊst ə skʌl, hɪz lɪps ʃɹɪvəl tə bɛɹ tiθ ən ɡʌmz. əz ɡoʊd tɝn ɪz hɛd, səm ə hɪz hɛɹ kɹækt ɔf, paʊɾɝɪŋ tə sʊt wən ɪt hɪɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hɪz lɪdləs aɪz stɛɹɾ ət ɹænd.

He only recognized the man from his clothes, his silk and dark velvets. Gode's skin was red, burned and cracked and oozing. His face was almost a skull, his lips shriveled to bare teeth and gums. As Gode turned his head, some of his hair cracked off, powdering to soot when it hit his shoulder. His lidless eyes stared at Rand.

"soʊ jə ɑɹ dɛd," ɹænd sɛd. hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz noʊɪŋ ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə dʒɹim ðɪs taɪm.

"So you are dead," Rand said. He was surprised that he was not afraid. Perhaps it was knowing that it was a dream this time.

"jɛs," sɛd bælzəmənz vɔɪs, "bʌɾ i dɪd faɪn jə fəɹ mi. ðət dɪzɝvz səm ɹɪwɔɹd, doʊn jə θɪŋk?"

"Yes," said Ba'alzamon's voice, "but he did find you for me. That deserves some reward, don't you think?"

ɹænd tɝnd, ən dɪskʌvɝɾ i kəd bi əfɹeɪd, ivən noʊɪŋ ɪt wɑz ə dʒɹim. bælzəmənz kloʊðz wɝ ðə kʌlɝ ə dʒɹaɪd blʌd, ən ɹeɪdʒ ən heɪɾ ən tʃɹaɪəmf bæɾəld ɑn ɪz feɪs.

Rand turned, and discovered he could be afraid, even knowing it was a dream. Ba'alzamon's clothes were the color of dried blood, and rage and hate and triumph battled on his face.

"ju si, jʌŋɡəlɪŋ, jə kænɑt haɪd fɹəm mi fɝɛvɝ. wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ aɪ faɪn ju. wʌt pɹətɛks jə ɔlsoʊ meɪks jə vʌlnɝəbəl. wʌn taɪm jə haɪd, ðə nɛks jə laɪɾ ə sɪɡnəl faɪɝ. kʌm tə mi, jʌŋɡəlɪŋ." hi hɛld aʊɾ ɪz hæn tə ɹænd. "ɪf maɪ haʊnz mʌs pʊl jə daʊn, ðeɪ meɪ nɑt bi dʒɛntəl. ðeɪ ɑɹ dʒɛləs ʌv wʌt jəl bi, wʌns juv nɛlt ət maɪ fit. ɪts jəɹ dɛstəni. jə bɪlɔŋ tə mi." ɡoʊdz bɝn tʌŋ meɪɾ ən æŋɡɹi, iɡɝ ɡɑɹbəl ə saʊnd.

"You see, youngling, you cannot hide from me forever. One way or another I find you. What protects you also makes you vulnerable. One time you hide, the next you light a signal fire. Come to me, youngling." He held out his hand to Rand. "If my hounds must pull you down, they may not be gentle. They are jealous of what you will be, once you have knelt at my feet. It is your destiny. You belong to me." Gode's burned tongue made an angry, eager garble of sound.

ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə wɛɾ ɪz lɪps, bʌɾ i hæd noʊ spɪɾ ɪn ɪz maʊð. "noʊ," hi mænədʒd, ən ðən ðə wɝdz keɪm mɔɹ izəli. "aɪ bɪlɔŋ tə maɪsɛlf. nɑt ju. nɑɾ ɛvɝ. maɪsɛlf. ɪf jəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz kɪl mi, jəl nɛvɝ əv mi."

Rand tried to wet his lips, but he had no spit in his mouth. "No," he managed, and then the words came more easily. "I belong to myself. Not you. Not ever. Myself. If your Darkfriends kill me, you'll never have me."

ðə faɪɝz ɪn bælzəmənz feɪs hiɾəd ðə ɹum tɪl ði ɛɹ swæm. "əlaɪv əɹ dɛd, jʌŋɡəlɪŋ, jə ɑɹ maɪn. ðə ɡɹeɪv bɪlɔŋz tə mi. iziɝ dɛd, bʌt bɛɾɝ əlaɪv. bɛɾɝ fəɹ ju, jʌŋɡəlɪŋ. ðə lɪvɪŋ əv mɔɹ paʊɝ ɪn moʊs θɪŋz." ɡoʊd meɪɾ ə ɡæbəlɪŋ saʊn əɡɛn. "jɛs, maɪ ɡʊd haʊnd. hɪɹ ɪz jəɹ ɹɪwɔɹd."

The fires in Ba'alzamon's face heated the room till the air swam. "Alive or dead, youngling, you are mine. The grave belongs to me. Easier dead, but better alive. Better for you, youngling. The living have more power in most things." Gode made a gabbling sound again. "Yes, my good hound. Here is your reward."

ɹænd lʊkt ət ɡoʊd dʒʌst ɪn taɪm tə si ðə mænz bɑɾi kɹʌmbəl tə dʌst. fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðə bɝn feɪs hɛld ə lʊk ə səblaɪm dʒɔɪ ðət tɝn tə hɔɹɝ ɪn ðə faɪnəl moʊmənt, əz ɪf i hæd sin sʌmθɪŋ weɪɾɪŋ i dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt. ɡoʊdz ɛmpti vɛlvət ɡɑɹməns sɛɾəld ɑn ðə tʃɛɹ ən ðə flɔɹ əmʌŋ ði æʃ.

Rand looked at Gode just in time to see the man's body crumble to dust. For an instant the burned face held a look of sublime joy that turned to horror in the final moment, as if he had seen something waiting he did not expect. Gode's empty velvet garments settled on the chair and the floor among the ash.

wən i tɝn bæk, bælzəmənz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt hæn hæd bɪkʌm ə fɪst. "ju ɑɹ maɪn, jʌŋɡəlɪŋ, əlaɪv əɹ dɛd. ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld wɪl nɛvɝ sɝv ju. aɪ mɑɹk jə əz maɪn." hɪz fɪst oʊpənd, ən ə bɔl ə fleɪm ʃɑɾ aʊt. ɪt stʃɹʌk ɹænd ɪn ðə feɪs, ɪksploʊɾɪŋ, sɪɹɪŋ.

When he turned back, Ba'alzamon's outstretched hand had become a fist. "You are mine, youngling, alive or dead. The Eye of the World will never serve you. I mark you as mine." His fist opened, and a ball of flame shot out. It struck Rand in the face, exploding, searing.

ɹænd lɝtʃt əweɪk ɪn ðə dɑɹk, wɔɾɝ dʒɹɪpɪŋ θɹu ðə kloʊks ɑntu hɪz feɪs. hɪz hæn tʃɹɛmbəld əz i tʌtʃt ɪz tʃiks. ðə skɪn fɛl tɛndɝ, əz ɪf sʌnbɝnd.

Rand lurched awake in the dark, water dripping through the cloaks onto his face. His hand trembled as he touched his cheeks. The skin felt tender, as if sunburned.

sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪz mæt wɑz twɪstɪŋ ən moʊnɪŋ ɪn ɪz slip. hi ʃʊk hɪm, ən mæt keɪm əweɪk wɪð ə wɪmpɝ.

Suddenly he realized Mat was twisting and moaning in his sleep. He shook him, and Mat came awake with a whimper.

"maɪ aɪz! oʊ, laɪt, maɪ aɪz! hi tʊk maɪ aɪz!"

"My eyes! Oh, Light, my eyes! He took my eyes!"

ɹænd hɛld ɪm kloʊs, kɹeɪɾəlɪŋ ɪm əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst əz ɪf i wɝ ə beɪbi. "jɔɹ ɔl ɹaɪt, mæt. jəɹ ɔl ɹaɪt. hi kæn hɝɾ ʌs. wi woʊn lɛt hɪm." hi kəd fil mæt ʃeɪkɪŋ, sɑbɪŋ ɪndə hɪz koʊt. "hi kæn hɝɾ ʌs," hi wɪspɝd, ən wɪʃt i bɪlivd ɪt. wʌt pɹətɛks jə meɪks jə vʌlnɝəbəl. aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ mæd.

Rand held him close, cradling him against his chest as if he were a baby. "You're all right, Mat. You're all right. He can't hurt us. We won't let him." He could feel Mat shaking, sobbing into his coat. "He can't hurt us," he whispered, and wished he believed it. What protects you makes you vulnerable. I am going mad.

dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ fɝs laɪt ðə daʊnpɔɹ dwɪndəld, ðə læs dʒɹɪzəl feɪɾɪŋ əz dɔn keɪm. ðə klaʊdz ɹɪmeɪnd, θɹɛɾənɪŋ əntɪl wɛl ɪndə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. ðə wɪn keɪm ʌp, ðɛn, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðə klaʊdz ɔf tə ðə saʊθ, bɛɹɪŋ ə wɔɹmθləs sʌn ən slaɪsɪŋ θɹu ðɛɹ dʒɹɪpɪŋ wɛt kloʊðz. ðeɪ hæd nɑt slɛpt əɡɛn, bʌt ɡɹɑdʒəli ðeɪ dɑn ðɛɹ kloʊks ən sɛɾ ɔf istwɝd, ɹænd liɾɪŋ mæt baɪ ðə hænd. æftɝ ə waɪl mæt ivən fɛlt wɛl ɪnʌf tə kəmpleɪn əbaʊt wʌt ðə ɹeɪn hæd dʌn tə hɪz bɑstʃɹɪŋ. ɹænd wəd nɑt lɛɾ ɪm stɑp tə ɪkstʃeɪnʒ ɪt fəɹ ə dʒɹaɪ stʃɹɪŋ fɹəm ɪz pɑkət, ðoʊ; nɑt jɛt.

Just before first light the downpour dwindled, the last drizzle fading as dawn came. The clouds remained, threatening until well into the morning. The wind came up, then, driving the clouds off to the south, baring a warmthless sun and slicing through their dripping wet clothes. They had not slept again, but groggily they donned their cloaks and set off eastward, Rand leading Mat by the hand. After a while Mat even felt well enough to complain about what the rain had done to his bowstring. Rand would not let him stop to exchange it for a dry string from his pocket, though; not yet.

ðeɪ keɪm ɑn ənʌðɝ vɪlədʒ ʃɔɹtli æftɝ mɪddeɪ. ɹænd ʃɪvɝd hɑɹɾɝ ət ðə saɪɾ ə snʌɡ bɹɪk haʊsəz ən smoʊk ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm tʃɪmniz, bʌɾ i kɛp klɪɹ, liɾɪŋ mæt θɹu ðə wʊdz ən filz tə ðə saʊθ. ə loʊn fɑɹmɝ wɝkɪŋ wɪð ə speɪɾɪŋ fɔɹk ɪn ə mʌɾi fild wɑz ði oʊnli pɝsən i sɔ, ən i tʊk kɛɹ ðət ðə mæn dɪd nɑt si ðɛm, kɹaʊtʃɪŋ θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. ðə fɑɹmɝz ətɛnʃən wɑz ɔl ɑn ɪz wɝk, bʌt ɹænd kɛpt wʌn aɪ ɑn ɪm tɪl i wɑz lɔs tə saɪt. ɪf ɛni ʌv ɡoʊdz mɛn wɝ əlaɪv, pɝhæps ðeɪ wəd bɪliv i ən mæt hæd teɪkən ðə sʌðɝn ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə fɔɹ kɪŋz wən ðeɪ kəd nɑt faɪn ɛniwʌn u hæd sin əm ɪn ðɪs vɪlədʒ. ðeɪ keɪm bæk tə ðə ɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ə ðə taʊn, ən wɔk ðɛɹ kloʊðz, ɪf nɑt dʒɹaɪ, ət lis tə dʒʌs dæmp.

They came on another village shortly after midday. Rand shivered harder at the sight of snug brick houses and smoke rising from chimneys, but he kept clear, leading Mat through the woods and fields to the south. A lone farmer working with a spading fork in a muddy field was the only person he saw, and he took care that the man did not see them, crouching through the trees. The farmer's attention was all on his work, but Rand kept one eye on him till he was lost to sight. If any of Gode's men were alive, perhaps they would believe he and Mat had taken the southern road out of Four Kings when they could not find anyone who had seen them in this village. They came back to the road out of sight of the town, and walked their clothes, if not dry, at least to just damp.

ən aʊɝ bɪɑn ðə taʊn ə fɑɹmɝ ɡeɪv əm ə ɹaɪɾ ɪn ɪz hæf-ɛmpti heɪweɪn. ɹænd hæd bɪn teɪkən baɪ sɝpɹaɪz waɪl lɔst ɪn wɝi əbaʊt mæt. mæt ʃildɪɾ ɪz aɪz fɹəm ðə sʌn wɪð ɪz hænd, wik əz ði æftɝnun laɪt wɑz, skwɪntɪŋ θɹu slɪɾɪd lɪdz ivən soʊ, ən i mʌɾɝd kəntɪnjuəli əbaʊt haʊ bɹaɪt ðə sʌn wɑz. wən ɹænd hɝd ðə ɹʌmbəl ə ðə heɪweɪn, ɪt wɑz tu leɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi. ðə sɑɾən ɹoʊd dɛɾənd saʊnd, ən ðə wæɡən wɪð ɪts tu-hɔɹs hɪtʃ wɑz oʊnli fɪfti jɑɹdz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ðə dʒɹaɪvɝ ɔlɹɛɾi piɹɪŋ ət ðɛm.

An hour beyond the town a farmer gave them a ride in his half-empty haywain. Rand had been taken by surprise while lost in worry about Mat. Mat shielded his eyes from the sun with his hand, weak as the afternoon light was, squinting through slitted lids even so, and he muttered continually about how bright the sun was. When Rand heard the rumble of the haywain, it was too late already. The sodden road deadened sound, and the wagon with its two-horse hitch was only fifty yards behind them, the driver already peering at them.

tə ɹændz sɝpɹaɪz i dʒɹu ʌp ən ɔfɝɾ əm ə lɪft. ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz tu leɪt tə əvɔɪd biɪŋ sin, ən ɹəfjuzɪŋ ə ɹaɪd maɪt fɪks əm ɪn ðə mænz maɪnd. hi hɛlp mæt ʌp tə ðə sit bɪsaɪd ðə fɑɹmɝ, ðən klaɪmd ʌp bɪhaɪn hɪm.

To Rand's surprise he drew up and offered them a lift. Rand hesitated, but it was too late to avoid being seen, and refusing a ride might fix them in the man's mind. He helped Mat up to the seat beside the farmer, then climbed up behind him.

ælpɝt mʌl wɑz ə stɑləd mæn, wɪð ə skwɛɹ feɪs ən skwɛɹ hænz, boʊθ wɔɹn ən ɡɹuv fɹəm hɑɹd wɝk ən wɝi, ən i wɑntəd sʌmwʌn tə tɔk tə. hɪz kaʊz hæd ɡɔn dʒɹaɪ, hɪz tʃɪkənz hæd stɑp leɪɪŋ, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pæstʃɝ wɝθ ðə neɪm. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɪn mɛmɹi hi hæd hæd tə baɪ heɪ, ən hæf ə wæɡən wɑz ɔl "oʊl beɪn" wəd lɛɾ ɪm hæv. hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðəɹ wɑz ɛni tʃæns ʌv ɡɛɾɪŋ heɪ ɑn ɪz oʊn læn ðɪs jɪɹ, əɹ ɛni kaɪndə kɹɑp.

Alpert Mull was a stolid man, with a square face and square hands, both worn and grooved from hard work and worry, and he wanted someone to talk to. His cows had gone dry, his chickens had stopped laying, and there was no pasture worth the name. For the first time in memory he had had to buy hay, and half a wagon was all "old Bain" would let him have. He wondered whether there was any chance of getting hay on his own land this year, or any kind of crop.

"ðə kwin ʃəd də sʌmθɪŋ, ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin hɝ," hi mʌɾɝd, nʌklɪŋ ɪz fɔɹhɛd ɹɪspɛkfəli bʌɾ æbsəntmaɪndɪdli.

"The Queen should do something, the Light illumine her," he muttered, knuckling his forehead respectfully but absentmindedly.

hi hɑɹdli lʊkt ət ɹænd əɹ mæt, bʌt wən i lɛɾ əm daʊn baɪ ðə nɛɹoʊ, ɹeɪl-laɪn tʃɹæk ðət lɛɾ ɔf tə hɪz fɑɹm, hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən sɛd, ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf tə hɪmsɛlf, "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹʌm, ən aɪ doʊnt wɑn tə. aɪ hæv ə waɪf ən tʃɪlʒɹən. jə ʌndɝstænd? maɪ fæmli. ɪts hɑɹd taɪmz fəɹ hɛlpɪŋ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz."

He hardly looked at Rand or Mat, but when he let them down by the narrow, rail-lined track that led off to his farm, he hesitated, then said, almost as if to himself, "I don't know what you're running from, and I don't want to. I have a wife and children. You understand? My family. It's hard times for helping strangers."

mæt tʃɹaɪd tə stɪk ɪz hæn ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt, bʌt ɹænd hæɾ ɪz ɹɪst ən i hɛld ɑn. hi stʊɾ ɪn ðə ɹoʊd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə mæn wɪθaʊt spikɪŋ.

Mat tried to stick his hand under his coat, but Rand had his wrist and he held on. He stood in the road, looking at the man without speaking.

"ɪf aɪ wɑz ə ɡʊd mæn," mʌl sɛd, "aɪɾ ɔfɝ ə kʌpəl ə lædz soʊk tə ðə skɪn ə pleɪs tə dʒɹaɪ aʊɾ ən ɡɛt wɔɹm ɪn fɹʌn ə maɪ faɪɝ. bʌɾ ɪts hɑɹd taɪmz, ən stʃɹeɪnʒɝz . . . . aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jəɹ ɹʌnɪŋ fɹʌm, ən aɪ doʊnt wɑn tə. jə ʌndɝstænd? maɪ fæmli." sʌɾənli hi pʊl tu lɔŋ, wʊlən skɑɹvz, dɑɹk ən θɪk, aʊɾ ə hɪz koʊt pɑkət. "ɪts nɑt mʌtʃ, bʌt hɪɹ. bɪlɔŋ tə maɪ bɔɪz. ðeɪv ʌðɝz. jə doʊnt noʊ mi, ʌndɝstænd? ɪts hɑɹd taɪmz."

"If I was a good man," Mull said, "I'd offer a couple of lads soaked to the skin a place to dry out and get warm in front of my fire. But it's hard times, and strangers . . . . I don't know what you're running from, and I don't want to. You understand? My family." Suddenly he pulled two long, woolen scarves, dark and thick, out of his coat pocket. "It's not much, but here. Belong to my boys. They have others. You don't know me, understand? It's hard times."

"wi nɛvɝ ivən sɔ ju," ɹænd əɡɹiɾ əz i tʊk ðə skɑɹvz. "ju ɑɹ ə ɡʊd mæn. ðə bɛst wiv mɛɾ ɪn deɪz."

"We never even saw you," Rand agreed as he took the scarves. "You are a good man. The best we've met in days."

ðə fɑɹmɝ lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd, ðən ɡɹeɪtfəl. ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪz ɹeɪnz, hi tɝn ɪz hɔɹsəz daʊn ðə nɛɹoʊ leɪn. bɪfɔɹ i kəmpliɾəd ðə tɝn ɹænd wɑz liɾɪŋ mæt ɑn daʊn ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd.

The farmer looked surprised, then grateful. Gathering his reins, he turned his horses down the narrow lane. Before he completed the turn Rand was leading Mat on down the Caemlyn Road.

ðə wɪn stɪfən əz dʌsk kloʊzd ɪn. mæt bɪɡæn tə æsk kwɛɹələsli wən ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə stɑp, bʌt ɹænd kɛp muvɪŋ, pʊlɪŋ mæt bɪhaɪn hɪm, sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ mɔɹ ʃɛltɝ ðən ə spɑɾ ʌndɝ ə hɛdʒ. wɪð ðɛɹ kloʊðz stɪl klæmi ən ðə wɪnd ɡɛɾɪŋ koʊldɝ baɪ ðə mɪnət, hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðeɪ kəd sɝvaɪv ənʌðɝ naɪɾ ɪn ði oʊpən. naɪt fɛl wɪθaʊɾ ɪm spɑɾɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ jusfəl. ðə wɪnd ɡɹu aɪsi, biɾɪŋ ɪz kloʊk. ðɛn, θɹu ðə dɑɹknəs əhɛd, hi sɔ laɪts. ə vɪlədʒ.

The wind stiffened as dusk closed in. Mat began to ask querulously when they were going to stop, but Rand kept moving, pulling Mat behind him, searching for more shelter than a spot under a hedge. With their clothes still clammy and the wind getting colder by the minute, he was not sure they could survive another night in the open. Night fell without him spotting anything useful. The wind grew icy, beating his cloak. Then, through the darkness ahead, he saw lights. A village.

hɪz hæn slɪɾ ɪndə hɪz pɑkət, filɪŋ ðə kɔɪnz ðɛɹ. mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf fəɹ ə mil ən ə ɹum fəɹ ðə tu ʌv ðɛm. ə ɹum aʊɾ ə ðə koʊl naɪt. ɪf ðeɪ steɪɾ ɪn ði oʊpən, ɪn ðə wɪn ən koʊld ɪn dæmp kloʊðz, ɛniwʌn u faʊn əm wəd laɪkli əz nɑt faɪn oʊnli tu kɔɹpsəz. ðeɪ dʒʌs hæd tə kip fɹəm ətʃɹæktɪŋ ɛni mɔɹ noʊɾəs ðən ðeɪ kəd hɛlp. noʊ pleɪɪŋ ðə flut, ən wɪð ɪz aɪz, mæt sɝɾənli kəd nɑt dʒʌɡəl. hi ɡɹæsp mæts hæn əɡɛn ən sɛɾ aʊt təwɔɹd ðə bɛkənɪŋ laɪts.

His hand slid into his pocket, feeling the coins there. More than enough for a meal and a room for the two of them. A room out of the cold night. If they stayed in the open, in the wind and cold in damp clothes, anyone who found them would likely as not find only two corpses. They just had to keep from attracting any more notice than they could help. No playing the flute, and with his eyes, Mat certainly could not juggle. He grasped Mat's hand again and set out toward the beckoning lights.

"wɛn ɑɹ wi ɡoʊɪŋ tə stɑp?" mæt æskt əɡɛn. ðə weɪ hi pɪɹɾ əhɛd, wɪð ɪz hɛd stʌk fɔɹwɝd, ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf mæt kəd si hɪm, mʌtʃ lɛs ðə vɪlədʒ laɪts.

"When are we going to stop?" Mat asked again. The way he peered ahead, with his head stuck forward, Rand was not sure if Mat could see him, much less the village lights.

"wɛn wɝ sʌmwɛɹ wɔɹm," hi ɹɪplaɪd.

"When we're somewhere warm," he replied.

pulz ə laɪt fɹəm haʊs wɪndoʊz lɪt ðə stʃɹits ə ðə taʊn, ən pipəl wɔkt əm ʌnkənsɝnd wɪð wʌt maɪt bi aʊɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk. ði oʊnli ɪn wɑz ə spɹɔlɪŋ bɪldɪŋ, ɔl ɑn wʌn flɔɹ, wɪð ðə lʊk ə hævɪŋ hæd ɹumz æɾəd ɪn bʌntʃəz oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz wɪθaʊɾ ɛni pɝtɪkjəlɝ plæn. ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ oʊpən tə lɛt sʌmwʌn aʊt, ən ə weɪv ə læftɝ ɹoʊld aʊɾ æftɝ hɪm.

Pools of light from house windows lit the streets of the town, and people walked them unconcerned with what might be out in the dark. The only inn was a sprawling building, all on one floor, with the look of having had rooms added in bunches over the years without any particular plan. The front door opened to let someone out, and a wave of laughter rolled out after him.

ɹænd fɹoʊz ɪn ðə stʃɹit, ðə dʒɹʌŋkən læftɝ ət ðə dænsɪŋ kɑɹtmən ɛkoʊɪŋ ɪn ɪz hɛd. hi wɑtʃt ðə mæn ɡoʊ daʊn ðə stʃɹit wɪð ə nʌn-tu-stɛɾi stʃɹaɪd, ðən tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən pʊʃt ðə dɔɹ oʊpən. hi tʊk kɛɹ ðəɾ ɪz kloʊk kʌvɝɾ ɪz sɔɹd. læftɝ swɛpt oʊvɝ hɪm.

Rand froze in the street, the drunken laughter at The Dancing Cartman echoing in his head. He watched the man go down the street with a none-too-steady stride, then took a deep breath and pushed the door open. He took care that his cloak covered his sword. Laughter swept over him.

læmps hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə haɪ silɪŋ meɪd ðə ɹum bɹaɪt, ən ɹaɪɾ əweɪ hi kəd si ən fil ðə dɪfɝəns fɹəm sæməl heɪks ɪn. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ dʒɹʌŋkənnəs hɪɹ, fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ. ðə ɹum wɑz fɪld wɪð pipəl u lʊk tə bi fɑɹmɝz ən taʊnsmɪn, ɪf nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli soʊbɝ, nɑt tu fɑɹ fɹəm ɪt. ðə læftɝ wɑz ɹil, ɪf ə bɪt fɔɹst ɝaʊn ði ɛdʒəz. pipəl læfɪŋ tə fɝɡɛt ðɛɹ tʃɹʌbəlz, bʌt wɪð tʃɹu mɝθ ɪn ɪt, tu. ðə kɑmən ɹum ɪtsɛlf wɑz niɾ ən klin, ən wɔɹm fɹəm ə faɪɝ ɹɔɹɪŋ ɪn ə bɪɡ faɪɝpleɪs ət ðə fɑɹ ɛnd. ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz' smaɪlz wɝ əz wɔɹm əz ðə faɪɝ, ən wən ðeɪ læft ɹænd kəd tɛl ɪt wɑz kəz ðeɪ wɑntəd tə.

Lamps hanging from the high ceiling made the room bright, and right away he could see and feel the difference from Saml Hake's inn. There was no drunkenness here, for one thing. The room was filled with people who looked to be farmers and townsmen, if not entirely sober, not too far from it. The laughter was real, if a bit forced around the edges. People laughing to forget their troubles, but with true mirth in it, too. The common room itself was neat and clean, and warm from a fire roaring in a big fireplace at the far end. The serving maids' smiles were as warm as the fire, and when they laughed Rand could tell it was because they wanted to.

ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz əz klin əz ɪz ɪn, wɪð ə ɡlimɪŋ waɪɾ eɪpɹən ɝaʊn ɪz bʌlk. ɹænd wɑz ɡlæd tə si hi wɑz ə staʊt mæn; hi daʊɾɪd ɪf i wəɾ ɛvɝ əɡɛn tʃɹʌst ə skɪni ɪnkipɝ. hɪz neɪm wɑz ɹulən ɔlwaɪn - ə ɡʊɾ oʊmən, ɹænd θɔt, wɪð soʊ mʌtʃ ə ðə saʊn ʌv ɛmənz fil tə ɪt - ən i aɪɾ əm ʌp ən daʊn, ðən pəlaɪtli mɛnʃən peɪɪŋ ɪn ədvæns.

The innkeeper was as clean as his inn, with a gleaming white apron around his bulk. Rand was glad to see he was a stout man; he doubted if he would ever again trust a skinny innkeeper. His name was Rulan Allwine - a good omen, Rand thought, with so much of the sound of Emond's Field to it - and he eyed them up and down, then politely mentioned paying in advance.

"nɑt sədʒɛstɪŋ jəɹ ðə sɔɹt, ʌndɝstænd, bʌt ðɛɹz səm ɑn ðə ɹoʊd ðiz deɪz ɑɹən tu pɝtɪkjəlɝ əbaʊt peɪɪŋ ʌp kʌm mɔɹnɪŋ. simz tə bi ə lɑɾ ə jʌŋ foʊks hɛɾəd fəɹ keɪɛmlɪn."

"Not suggesting you're the sort, understand, but there's some on the road these days aren't too particular about paying up come morning. Seems to be a lot of young folks headed for Caemlyn."

ɹænd wɑz nɑɾ əfɛndəd, nɑɾ əz dæmp ən bɪdʒɹæɡəld əz i wɑz. wən mæstɝ ɔlwaɪn mɛnʃən ðə pɹaɪs, ðoʊ, hɪz aɪz waɪɾənd, ən mæt meɪɾ ə saʊn əz ɪf i hæd tʃoʊkt ɑn sʌmθɪŋ.

Rand was not offended, not as damp and bedraggled as he was. When Master Allwine mentioned the price, though, his eyes widened, and Mat made a sound as if he had choked on something.

ði ɪnkipɝz dʒaʊlz swʌŋ əz i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli, bʌɾ i sim tə bi juz tə ɪt. "taɪmz ɑɹ hɑɹd," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə ɹɪzaɪn vɔɪs. "ðɛɹ ɪzən mʌtʃ, ən wʌt ðəɹ ɪz kɑsts faɪv taɪmz wʌɾ ɪt juz tə. ɪɾəl bi mɔɹ nɛks mʌnθ, əl leɪ oʊθ ɑn ɪt."

The innkeeper's jowls swung as he shook his head regretfully, but he seemed to be used to it. "Times are hard," he said in a resigned voice. "There isn't much, and what there is costs five times what it used to. It'll be more next month, I'll lay oath on it."

ɹænd dʌɡ hɪz mʌni aʊɾ ən lʊkt ət mæt. mæts maʊθ taɪɾənd stʌbɝnli. "ju wɑnə slip ʌndɝ ə hɛdʒ?" ɹænd æskt. mæt saɪɾ ən ɹɪlʌktənli ɛmptiɾ ɪz pɑkət. wən ðə ɹɛkənɪŋ wɑz peɪd, ɹænd ɡɹɪməst ət ðə lɪɾəl ðət ɹɪmeɪn tə dɪvaɪd wɪð mæt.

Rand dug his money out and looked at Mat. Mat's mouth tightened stubbornly. "You want to sleep under a hedge?" Rand asked. Mat sighed and reluctantly emptied his pocket. When the reckoning was paid, Rand grimaced at the little that remained to divide with Mat.

bʌt tɛn mɪnəts leɪɾɝ ðeɪ wɝ iɾɪŋ stu əɾ ə teɪbəl ɪn ə kɔɹnɝ nɪɹ ðə faɪɝpleɪs, pʊʃɪŋ ɪɾ ɑntu ðɛɹ spunz wɪð tʃʌŋks ə bɹɛd. ðə pɔɹʃənz wɝ nɑɾ əz lɑɹdʒ əz ɹænd kəɾ əv wɪʃt, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ hɑt, ən fɪlɪŋ. wɔɹmθ fɹəm ðə hɑɹθ sipt ɪndə hɪm sloʊli. hi pɹitɛndəd tə kip ɪz aɪz ɑn ɪz pleɪt, bʌɾ i wɑtʃt ðə dɔɹ ɪntɛnli. ðoʊz u keɪm ɪn əɹ wɛn aʊɾ ɔl lʊk laɪk fɑɹmɝz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə kwaɪəɾ ɪz fɪɹ.

But ten minutes later they were eating stew at a table in a corner near the fireplace, pushing it onto their spoons with chunks of bread. The portions were not as large as Rand could have wished, but they were hot, and filling. Warmth from the hearth seeped into him slowly. He pretended to keep his eyes on his plate, but he watched the door intently. Those who came in or went out all looked like farmers, but it was not enough to quiet his fear.

mæt eɪt sloʊli, seɪvɝɪŋ itʃ baɪt, ðoʊ hi mʌɾɝd əbaʊt ðə laɪt fɹəm ðə læmps. æftɝ ə taɪm i dʌɡ aʊt ðə skɑɹf ælpɝt mʌl hæd ɡɪvən ɪm ən waʊn ɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz fɔɹhɛd, pʊlɪŋ ɪt daʊn əntɪl ɪz aɪz wɝ ɔlmoʊs hɪɾən. ðət ɡɑɾ əm səm lʊks ɹænd wɪʃt ðeɪ kəɾ əv əvɔɪɾəd. hi klin ɪz pleɪt hɝidli, ɝdʒɪŋ mæt tə də ðə seɪm, ðən æsk mæstɝ ɔlwaɪn fəɹ ðɛɹ ɹum.

Mat ate slowly, savoring each bite, though he muttered about the light from the lamps. After a time he dug out the scarf Alpert Mull had given him and wound it around his forehead, pulling it down until his eyes were almost hidden. That got them some looks Rand wished they could have avoided. He cleaned his plate hurriedly, urging Mat to do the same, then asked Master Allwine for their room.

ði ɪnkipɝ sim sɝpɹaɪz ðət ðeɪ wɝ ɹɪtaɪɹɪŋ soʊ ɝli, bʌɾ i meɪd noʊ kɑmɛnt. hi ɡɑɾ ə kændəl ən ʃoʊɾ əm θɹu ə dʒʌmbəl ə kɔɹɪɾɝz tə ə smɔl ɹum, wɪð tu nɛɹoʊ bɛdz, bæk ɪn ə fɑɹ kɔɹnɝ ə ði ɪn. wən i lɛft, ɹænd dʒɹɑpt ɪz bʌndəlz bɪsaɪɾ ɪz bɛd, tɔst ɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ ə tʃɛɹ, ən fɛl ɑn ðə kʌvɝlət fʊli dʒɹɛst. ɔl ə hɪz kloʊðz wɝ stɪl dæmp ən ənkʌmftəɹbəl, bʌɾ ɪf ðeɪ hæd tə ɹʌn, hi wɑntəd tə bi ɹɛɾi. hi lɛf ðə sɔɹd bɛlt ɑn, tu, ən slɛpt wɪð ɪz hæn ɑn ðə hɪlt.

The innkeeper seemed surprised that they were retiring so early, but he made no comment. He got a candle and showed them through a jumble of corridors to a small room, with two narrow beds, back in a far corner of the inn. When he left, Rand dropped his bundles beside his bed, tossed his cloak over a chair, and fell on the coverlet fully dressed. All of his clothes were still damp and uncomfortable, but if they had to run, he wanted to be ready. He left the sword belt on, too, and slept with his hand on the hilt.

ə ɹustɝ kɹoʊɪŋ dʒɝkt ɪm əweɪk ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ. hi leɪ ðɛɹ, wɑtʃɪŋ dɔn laɪɾən ðə wɪndoʊ, ən wʌndɝɾ ɪf i dɛɹd slip ə lɪɾəl lɔŋɡɝ. slip dʊɹɪŋ deɪlaɪt, wən ðeɪ kəd bi muvɪŋ. ə jɔn meɪɾ ɪz dʒɔz kɹæk.

A rooster crowing jerked him awake in the morning. He lay there, watching dawn lighten the window, and wondered if he dared sleep a little longer. Sleep during daylight, when they could be moving. A yawn made his jaws crack.

"heɪ," mæt ɪkskleɪmd, "aɪ kən si!" hi sæɾ ʌp ɑn ɪz bɛd, skwɪntɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə ɹum. "sʌm, ɛniweɪ. jəɹ feɪs ɪz stɪl ə lɪɾəl blɝi, bʌɾ aɪ kən tɛl u jə ɑɹ. aɪ nu aɪd bi ɔl ɹaɪt. baɪ tənaɪɾ əl si bɛɾɝ ðən jə du. əɡɛn."

"Hey," Mat exclaimed, "I can see!" He sat up on his bed, squinting around the room. "Some, anyway. Your face is still a little blurry, but I can tell who you are. I knew I'd be all right. By tonight I'll see better than you do. Again."

ɹænd spɹæŋ aʊɾ ə bɛd, skɹætʃɪŋ əz i skupt ʌp ɪz kloʊk. hɪz kloʊðz wɝ ɹɪŋkəl fɹəm dʒɹaɪɪŋ ɑn ɪm waɪl i slɛpt, ən ðeɪ ɪtʃt. "wɝ weɪstɪŋ deɪlaɪt," hi sɛd. mæt skɹæmbəld ʌp əz fæst əz i hæd; hi wɑz skɹætʃɪŋ, tu.

Rand sprang out of bed, scratching as he scooped up his cloak. His clothes were wrinkled from drying on him while he slept, and they itched. "We're wasting daylight," he said. Mat scrambled up as fast as he had; he was scratching, too.

ɹænd dɪd fil ɡʊd. ðeɪ wɝ ə deɪ əweɪ fɹəm fɔɹ kɪŋz, ən nʌn ʌv ɡoʊdz mɛn hæd ʃoʊɾ ʌp. ə deɪ kloʊsɝ tə keɪɛmlɪn, wɛɹ mɔɪɹeɪn wəd bi weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðɛm. ʃi wʊd. noʊ mɔɹ wɝiɪŋ əbaʊt dɑɹkfɹɛnz wʌns ðeɪ wɝ bæk wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ. ɪt wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ tə bi lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd soʊ mʌtʃ tə biɪŋ wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. laɪt, wən aɪ si mɔɪɹeɪn əɡɛn, əl kɪs hɝ! hi læft ət ðə θɔt. hi fɛlt ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf tə ɪnvɛst səm ə ðɛɹ dwɪndəlɪŋ stɑk ə kɔɪnz ɪn bɹɛkfəst - ə bɪɡ loʊf ə bɹɛɾ ən ə pɪtʃɝ ə mɪlk, koʊl fɹəm ðə spɹɪŋ haʊs.

Rand did feel good. They were a day away from Four Kings, and none of Gode's men had showed up. A day closer to Caemlyn, where Moiraine would be waiting for them. She would. No more worrying about Darkfriends once they were back with the Aes Sedai and the Warder. It was strange to be looking forward so much to being with an Aes Sedai. Light, when I see Moiraine again, I'll kiss her! He laughed at the thought. He felt good enough to invest some of their dwindling stock of coins in breakfast - a big loaf of bread and a pitcher of milk, cold from the spring house.

ðeɪ wɝ iɾɪŋ ɪn ðə bæk ə ðə kɑmən ɹum wən ə jʌŋ mæn keɪm ɪn, ə vɪlədʒ juθ baɪ ðə lʊk ə hɪm, wɪð ə kɑki spɹɪŋ tə hɪz wɔk ən twɝlɪŋ ə klɔθ kæp, wɪð ə fɛðɝ ɪn ɪt, ɑn wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. ði oʊnli ʌðɝ pɝsən ɪn ðə ɹum wɑz ən oʊl mæn swipɪŋ aʊt; hi nɛvɝ lʊkt ʌp fɹəm ɪz bɹum. ðə jʌŋ mænz aɪz swɛp dʒɔntəli ɝaʊn ðə ɹum, bʌt wən ðeɪ lɪɾ ɑn ɹænd ən mæt, ðə kæp fɛl ɔf ɪz fɪŋɡɝ. hi stɛɹɾ əɾ əm fəɹ ə fʊl mɪnət bɪfɔɹ snætʃɪŋ ðə kæp fɹəm ðə flɔɹ, ðən stɛɹd səm mɔɹ, ɹʌnɪŋ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɪz θɪk hɛɾ ə dɑɹk kɝlz. faɪnəli hi keɪm oʊvɝ tə ðɛɹ teɪbəl, hɪz fit dʒɹæɡɪŋ.

They were eating in the back of the common room when a young man came in, a village youth by the look of him, with a cocky spring to his walk and twirling a cloth cap, with a feather in it, on one finger. The only other person in the room was an old man sweeping out; he never looked up from his broom. The young man's eyes swept jauntily around the room, but when they lit on Rand and Mat, the cap fell off his finger. He stared at them for a full minute before snatching the cap from the floor, then stared some more, running his fingers through his thick head of dark curls. Finally he came over to their table, his feet dragging.

hi wɑz oʊldɝ ðən ɹænd, bʌɾ i stʊd lʊkɪŋ daʊn əɾ əm dɪfəɾəntli. "maɪn ɪf aɪ sɪt daʊn?" hi æskt, ən ɪmiɾiətli swɑloʊd hɑɹɾ əz ɪf i maɪɾ əv sɛd ðə ɹɔŋ θɪŋ.

He was older than Rand, but he stood looking down at them diffidently. "Mind if I sit down?" he asked, and immediately swallowed hard as if he might have said the wrong thing.

ɹænd θɔɾ i maɪt bi hoʊpɪŋ tə ʃɛɹ ðɛɹ bɹɛkfəst, ðoʊ hi lʊkt eɪbəl tə baɪ hɪz oʊn. hɪz blu-stʃɹaɪpt ʃɝt wɑz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɝaʊn ðə kɑlɝ, ən ɪz dɑɹk blu kloʊk ɔl ɝaʊn ðə hɛm. hɪz lɛðɝ buts hæd nɛvɝ bɪn nɪɹ ɛni wɝk ðət skʌf ðɛm, ðət ɹænd kəd si. hi nɑɾəd tə ə tʃɛɹ.

Rand thought he might be hoping to share their breakfast, though he looked able to buy his own. His blue-striped shirt was embroidered around the collar, and his dark blue cloak all around the hem. His leather boots had never been near any work that scuffed them, that Rand could see. He nodded to a chair.

mæt stɛɹɾ ət ðə fɛloʊ əz i dʒɹu ðə tʃɛɹ tə ðə teɪbəl. ɹænd kəd nɑt tɛl ɪf i wɑz ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɹ dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si klɪɹli. ɪn ɛni keɪs, mæts fɹaʊn hæɾ ən ɪfɛkt. ðə jʌŋ mæn fɹoʊz hæfweɪ tə sɪɾɪŋ, ən dɪd nɑt loʊɝ hɪmsɛlf ɔl ðə weɪ əntɪl ɹænd nɑɾəd əɡɛn.

Mat stared at the fellow as he drew the chair to the table. Rand could not tell if he was glaring or just trying to see clearly. In any case, Mat's frown had an effect. The young man froze halfway to sitting, and did not lower himself all the way until Rand nodded again.

"wʌts jəɹ neɪm?" ɹænd æskt.

"What's your name?" Rand asked.

"maɪ neɪm? maɪ neɪm. ɑ . . . kɔl mi peɪtʃɹ." hɪz aɪz ʃɪftəd nɝvəsli. "ɑ . . . ðɪs ɪz nɑt maɪ aɪdiə, jə ʌndɝstænd. aɪ hæv tə də ɪt. aɪ dɪdnt wɑn tə, bʌt ðeɪ meɪd mi. juv tə ʌndɝstæn ðæt. aɪ doʊnt - "

"My name? My name. Ah . . . call me Paitr." His eyes shifted nervously. "Ah . . . this is not my idea, you understand. I have to do it. I didn't want to, but they made me. You have to understand that. I don't - "

ɹænd wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə tɛns wən mæt ɡɹaʊld, "dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

Rand was beginning to tense when Mat growled, "Darkfriend."

peɪtʃɹ ɡeɪv ə dʒɝk ən hæf lɪftəɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz tʃɛɹ, stɛɹɪŋ waɪldli ɝaʊn ðə ɹum əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ fɪfti pipəl tə oʊvɝhɪɹ. ði oʊl mænz hɛd wɑz stɪl bɛn oʊvɝ ðə bɹum, hɪz ətɛnʃən ɑn ðə flɔɹ. peɪtʃɹ sæt bæk daʊn ən lʊk fɹəm ɹænd tə mæt ən bæk ənsɝteɪnli. swɛt biɾɪd ɑn ɪz ʌpɝ lɪp. ɪt wɑz ækjəzeɪʃən ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɛniwʌn swɛt, bʌɾ i sɛd nɑɾ ə wɝɾ əɡɛnst ɪt.

Paitr gave a jerk and half lifted out of his chair, staring wildly around the room as if there were fifty people to overhear. The old man's head was still bent over the broom, his attention on the floor. Paitr sat back down and looked from Rand to Mat and back uncertainly. Sweat beaded on his upper lip. It was accusation enough to make anyone sweat, but he said not a word against it.

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd sloʊli. æftɝ ɡoʊd, hi nu ðət dɑɹkfɹɛnz dɪd nɑt nɛsəsɛɹəli hæv ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ ɑn ðɛɹ fɔɹhɛdz, bʌɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ɪz kloʊðz ðɪs peɪtʃɹ cʊɾə fɪt ɹaɪɾ ɪn ɛmənz fild. nʌθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm hɪntəɾ ət mɝɾɝ ən wɝs. noʊbɑdi wʊɾə ɹɪmɑɹkt ɪm twaɪs. ət list ɡoʊd hæd bɪn . . . dɪfɹənt.

Rand shook his head slowly. After Gode, he knew that Darkfriends did not necessarily have the Dragon's Fang on their foreheads, but except for his clothes this Paitr could have fit right in Emond's Field. Nothing about him hinted at murder and worse. Nobody would have remarked him twice. At least Gode had been . . . different.

"liv əs əloʊn," ɹænd sɛd. "æn tɛl jəɹ fɹɛnz tə liv əs əloʊn. wi wɑnt nʌθɪŋ fɹəm ðɛm, ən ðəl ɡɛt nʌθɪŋ fɹəm ʌs."

"Leave us alone," Rand said. "And tell your friends to leave us alone. We want nothing from them, and they'll get nothing from us."

"ɪf jə doʊnt," mæt æɾəd fɪɹsli, "aɪl neɪm jə fəɹ wʌt jə ɑɹ. si wʌt jəɹ vɪlədʒ fɹɛnz θɪŋk ə ðæt."

"If you don't," Mat added fiercely, "I'll name you for what you are. See what your village friends think of that."

ɹænd hoʊpt i dɪd nɑt ɹɪli min ɪt. ðət kəd kɑz əz mʌtʃ tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ ðə tu ʌv əm əz ɪt dɪd fəɹ peɪtʃɹ.

Rand hoped he did not really mean it. That could cause as much trouble for the two of them as it did for Paitr.

peɪtʃɹ sim tə teɪk ðə θɹɛt sɪɹiəsli. hɪz feɪs ɡɹu peɪl. "aɪ . . . aɪ hɝd wʌt hæpən ət fɔɹ kɪŋz. səm ʌv ɪt, ɛniweɪ. wɝd tʃɹævəlz. wɪv weɪz ə hɪɹɪŋ θɪŋz. bʌt ðɛɹz noʊbɑdi hɪɹ tə tʃɹæp ju. aɪm əloʊn, ən . . . ən aɪ dʒʌst wɑnə tɔk."

Paitr seemed to take the threat seriously. His face grew pale. "I . . . I heard what happened at Four Kings. Some of it, anyway. Word travels. We have ways of hearing things. But there's nobody here to trap you. I'm alone, and . . . and I just want to talk."

"əbaʊt wʌt?" mæt æskt ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət ɹænd sɛd, "wɝ nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəstəd." ðeɪ lʊkt əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ, ən mæt ʃɹʌɡd. "wɝ nɑɾ ɪntʃɹəstəd," hi sɛd.

"About what?" Mat asked at the same time that Rand said, "We're not interested." They looked at each other, and Mat shrugged. "We're not interested," he said.

ɹænd ɡʌlp ðə læst ə ðə mɪlk ən stʌf ðə hil ə hɪz hæf ə ðə bɹɛɾ ɪndə hɪz pɑkət. wɪð ðɛɹ mʌni ɔlmoʊst ɡɔn, ɪt maɪt bi ðɛɹ nɛks mil.

Rand gulped the last of the milk and stuffed the heel of his half of the bread into his pocket. With their money almost gone, it might be their next meal.

haʊ tə liv ði ɪn? ɪf peɪtʃɹ dɪskʌvɝd ðət mæt wɑz ɔlmoʊs blaɪnd, hi wəd tɛl ʌðɝz . . . ʌðɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. wʌns ɹænd hæd sin ə wʊlf sɛpɝeɪɾ ə kɹɪpəld ʃip fɹəm ðə flɑk; ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ wʊlvz ɝaʊnd, ən i kəd niðɝ liv ðə flɑk nɔɹ ɡɛɾ ə klɪɹ ʃɑt wɪð ɪz baʊ. əz sun əz ðə ʃip wɑz əloʊn, bliɾɪŋ wɪð tɛɹɝ, hɑbəlɪŋ fɹæntəkəli ɑn θɹi lɛɡz, ðə wʌn wʊlf tʃeɪsɪŋ ɪt bɪkeɪm tɛn əz ɪf baɪ mædʒɪk. ðə mɛmɹi ʌv ɪt tɝn ɪz stʌmək. ðeɪ kəd nɑt steɪ ðɛɹ, iðɝ. ivən ɪf peɪtʃɹ wɑz tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ əbaʊt biɪŋ əloʊn, haʊ lɔŋ wəɾ i steɪ ðət weɪ?

How to leave the inn? If Paitr discovered that Mat was almost blind, he would tell others . . . other Darkfriends. Once Rand had seen a wolf separate a crippled sheep from the flock; there were other wolves around, and he could neither leave the flock nor get a clear shot with his bow. As soon as the sheep was alone, bleating with terror, hobbling frantically on three legs, the one wolf chasing it became ten as if by magic. The memory of it turned his stomach. They could not stay there, either. Even if Paitr was telling the truth about being alone, how long would he stay that way?

"taɪm tə ɡoʊ, mæt," hi sɛd, ən hɛld ɪz bɹɛθ. əz mæt stɑɹɾəd tə stænd, hi pʊl peɪtʃɹz aɪz tə hɪmsɛlf baɪ linɪŋ fɔɹwɝɾ ən seɪɪŋ, "liv əs əloʊn, dɑɹkfɹɛnd. aɪ woʊn tɛl jə əɡɛn. liv - əs - əloʊn."

"Time to go, Mat," he said, and held his breath. As Mat started to stand, he pulled Paitr's eyes to himself by leaning forward and saying, "Leave us alone, Darkfriend. I won't tell you again. Leave - us - alone."

peɪtʃɹ swɑloʊd hɑɹɾ ən pɹɛs bæk ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ blʌd lɛft ɪn ɪz feɪs əɾ ɔl. ɪt meɪd ɹænd θɪŋk ʌv ə mɹdʒɹɑl.

Paitr swallowed hard and pressed back in his chair; there was no blood left in his face at all. It made Rand think of a Myrddraal.

baɪ ðə taɪm i lʊk bæk ət mæt, mæt wɑz ɑn ɪz fit, hɪz ɔkwɝdnəs ənsin. ɹænd heɪstəli hʌŋ ɪz oʊn sæɾəlbæɡz ən ʌðɝ bʌndəlz ɝaʊn hɪm, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ ðə sɔɹɾ əz i dɪd. meɪbi peɪtʃɹ ɔlɹɛɾi nu əbaʊɾ ɪt; meɪbi ɡoʊd hæd toʊl bælzəmən, ən bælzəmən hæd toʊl peɪtʃɹ; bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk soʊ. hi θɔt peɪtʃɹ hæɾ oʊnli ðə veɪɡɪst aɪdiə ʌv wʌt hæd hæpən ɪn fɔɹ kɪŋz. ðət wɑz waɪ hi wɑz soʊ fɹaɪɾənd.

By the time he looked back at Mat, Mat was on his feet, his awkwardness unseen. Rand hastily hung his own saddlebags and other bundles around him, trying to keep his cloak over the sword as he did. Maybe Paitr already knew about it; maybe Gode had told Ba'alzamon, and Ba'alzamon had told Paitr; but he did not think so. He thought Paitr had only the vaguest idea of what had happened in Four Kings. That was why he was so frightened.

ðə kəmpɛɹəɾɪvli bɹaɪɾ aʊtlaɪn ə ðə dɔɹ hɛlp mæt meɪk ə bilaɪn fəɹ ɪt, ɪf nɑt kwɪkli, ðən nɑt sloʊ ɪnʌf tə sim ənnætʃɹəl, iðɝ. ɹænd fɑloʊd kloʊsli, pɹeɪɪŋ fəɹ ɪm nɑt tə stʌmbəl. hi wɑz θæŋkfəl mæt hæɾ ə klɪɹ, stʃɹeɪt pæθ, wɪð noʊ teɪbəlz əɹ tʃɛɹz ɪn ðə weɪ.

The comparatively bright outline of the door helped Mat make a beeline for it, if not quickly, then not slow enough to seem unnatural, either. Rand followed closely, praying for him not to stumble. He was thankful Mat had a clear, straight path, with no tables or chairs in the way.

bɪhaɪn ɪm peɪtʃɹ sʌɾənli lɛp tə hɪz fit. "weɪt," hi sɛd dɛspɝətli. "ju hæv tə weɪt."

Behind him Paitr suddenly leaped to his feet. "Wait," he said desperately. "You have to wait."

"liv əs əloʊn," ɹænd sɛd wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ bæk. ðeɪ wɝ ɔlmoʊs tə ðə dɔɹ, ən mæt hæd nɑt pʊɾ ə fʊt ɹɔŋ jɛt.

"Leave us alone," Rand said without looking back. They were almost to the door, and Mat had not put a foot wrong yet.

"dʒʌs lɪsən tə mi," peɪtʃɹ sɛd, ən pʊɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ɹændz ʃoʊldɝ tə stɑp hɪm.

"Just listen to me," Paitr said, and put his hand on Rand's shoulder to stop him.

ɪmədʒəz spʌn ɪn ɪz hɛd. ðə tʃɹɑlɑk, nɑɹɡ, lipɪŋ əɾ ɪm ɪn ɪz oʊn hoʊm. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl θɹɛɾənɪŋ ət ðə stæɡ ən laɪən ɪn bɛɹlən. hæfmən ɛvɹiwɛɹ, feɪdz tʃeɪsɪŋ əm tə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, kʌmɪŋ fəɹ əm ɪn waɪtbɹɪdʒ. dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɛvɹiwɛɹ. hi wɝld, hɪz hæn bɔlɪŋ ʌp. "aɪ sɛd, liv əs əloʊn!" hɪz fɪs tʊk peɪtʃɹ flʌʃ ɑn ðə noʊz.

Images spun in his head. The Trolloc, Narg, leaping at him in his own home. The Myrddraal threatening at the Stag and Lion in Baerlon. Halfmen everywhere, Fades chasing them to Shadar Logoth, coming for them in Whitebridge. Darkfriends everywhere. He whirled, his hand balling up. "I said, leave us alone!" His fist took Paitr flush on the nose.

ðə dɑɹkfɹɛn fɛl ɑn ɪz bɑɾəm ən sæt ðəɹ ɑn ðə flɔɹ stɛɹɪŋ ət ɹænd. blʌd tʃɹɪkəl fɹəm ɪz noʊz. "ju woʊnt ɡɛɾ əweɪ," hi spæɾ æŋɡɹəli. "noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ stʃɹɔŋ jə ɑɹ, ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk ɪz stʃɹɔŋɝ. ðə ʃædoʊ wɪl swɑloʊ ju!"

The Darkfriend fell on his bottom and sat there on the floor staring at Rand. Blood trickled from his nose. "You won't get away," he spat angrily. "No matter how strong you are, the Great Lord of the Dark is stronger. The Shadow will swallow you!"

ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡæsp fɹəm fɝðɝ ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum, ən ðə klæɾɝ ʌv ə bɹum hændəl hɪɾɪŋ ðə flɔɹ. ði oʊl mæn wɪð ðə bɹum hæd faɪnəli hɝd. hi stʊd stɛɹɪŋ waɪd-aɪɾ ət peɪtʃɹ. ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪn fɹəm ɪz ɹɪŋkəl feɪs ən ɪz maʊθ wɝkt, bʌt noʊ saʊn keɪm aʊt. peɪtʃɹ stɛɹd bæk fəɹ ən ɪnstənt, ðən ɡeɪv ə waɪl kɝs ən spɹæŋ tə hɪz fit, dɑɹɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɪn ən daʊn ðə stʃɹiɾ əz ɪf stɑɹvɪŋ wʊlvz wɝ əɾ ɪz hilz. ði oʊl mæn ʃɪftəɾ ɪz ətɛnʃən tə ɹænd ən mæt, lʊkɪŋ nɑɾ ə wɪt lɛs fɹaɪɾənd.

There was a gasp from further into the common room, and the clatter of a broom handle hitting the floor. The old man with the broom had finally heard. He stood staring wide-eyed at Paitr. The blood drained from his wrinkled face and his mouth worked, but no sound came out. Paitr stared back for an instant, then gave a wild curse and sprang to his feet, darting out of the inn and down the street as if starving wolves were at his heels. The old man shifted his attention to Rand and Mat, looking not a whit less frightened.

ɹænd hʌsəl mæt aʊɾ ə ði ɪn ən aʊɾ ə ðə vɪlədʒ əz fæst əz i kʊd, lɪsnɪŋ ɔl ðə waɪl fəɹ ə hju ən kɹaɪ ðət nɛvɝ keɪm bʌt wɑz noʊ lɛs laʊɾ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz fəɹ ðæt.

Rand hustled Mat out of the inn and out of the village as fast as he could, listening all the while for a hue and cry that never came but was no less loud in his ears for that.

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz," mæt ɡɹaʊld, "ðeɪɹ ɔlweɪz ðɛɹ, ɔlweɪz ɹaɪɾ ɑn əɹ hilz. wɪl nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ əweɪ."

"Blood and ashes," Mat growled, "they're always there, always right on our heels. We'll never get away."

"noʊ ðəɹ nɑt," ɹænd sɛd. "ɪf bælzəmən nu wi wɝ hɪɹ, dʒju θɪŋk hiɾ əv lɛft ɪt tə ðət fɛloʊ? ðɛɹəɾ əv bɪn ənʌðɝ ɡoʊd, ən twɛnti əɹ θɝɾi bʊlɪbɔɪz. ðəɹ stɪl hʌntɪŋ, bʌt ðeɪ woʊnt noʊ əntɪl peɪtʃɹ tɛlz ðɛm, ən meɪbi hi ɹɪli ɪz əloʊn. hi maɪɾ əv tə ɡoʊ ɔl ðə weɪ tə fɔɹ kɪŋz, fəɹ ɔl wi noʊ."

"No they're not," Rand said. "If Ba'alzamon knew we were here, do you think he'd have left it to that fellow? There'd have been another Gode, and twenty or thirty bullyboys. They're still hunting, but they won't know until Paitr tells them, and maybe he really is alone. He might have to go all the way to Four Kings, for all we know."

"bʌɾ i sɛd - "

"But he said - "

"aɪ doʊn kɛɹ." hi wɑz ənʃʊɹ wɪtʃ "hi" mæt mɛnt, bʌɾ ɪt tʃeɪnʒd nʌθɪŋ. "wɝ nɑt gɑnə laɪ daʊn ən lɛɾ əm teɪk ʌs."

"I don't care." He was unsure which "he" Mat meant, but it changed nothing. "We're not going to lie down and let them take us."

ðeɪ ɡɑt sɪks ɹaɪdz, ʃɔɹt wʌnz, dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪ. ə fɑɹmɝ toʊld əm ðəɾ ə kɹeɪzi oʊl mæn ət ði ɪn ɪn mɑɹkət ʃɛɹən wɑz kleɪmɪŋ ðəɹ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn ðə vɪlədʒ. ðə fɑɹmɝ kəd hɑɹdli tɔk fəɹ læfɪŋ; hi kɛpt waɪpɪŋ tɪɹz ɔf ɪz tʃiks. dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn mɑɹkət ʃɛɹən! ɪt wɑz ðə bɛst stɔɹi hi hæd hɝd sɪns ækli fɛɹən ɡɑt dʒɹʌŋk ən spɛn ðə naɪɾ ɑn ði ɪn ɹuf.

They got six rides, short ones, during the day. A farmer told them that a crazy old man at the inn in Market Sheran was claiming there were Darkfriends in the village. The farmer could hardly talk for laughing; he kept wiping tears off his cheeks. Darkfriends in Market Sheran! It was the best story he had heard since Ackley Farren got drunk and spent the night on the inn roof.

ənʌðɝ mæn, ə ɹaʊnd-feɪst wæɡoʊnɹaɪt wɪð tulz hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə saɪdz ə hɪz kɑɹɾ ən tu wæɡən wilz ɪn ðə bæk, toʊld ə dɪfɹən stɔɹi. twɛnti dɑɹkfɹɛnz hæd hɛld ə ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪn mɑɹkət ʃɛɹən. mɛn wɪð twɪstəd bɑɾiz, ən ðə wɪmən wɝs, ɔl dɝɾi ən ɪn ɹæɡz. ðeɪ kəd meɪk jəɹ niz ɡɹoʊ wik ən jəɹ stʌmək hiv dʒʌs baɪ lʊkɪŋ ət ju, ən wən ðeɪ læft, ðə fɪlθi kækəlz ɹæŋ ɪn jəɹ ɪɹz fəɹ aʊɝz ən jəɹ hɛd fɛlt əz ɪf ɪt wɝ splɪɾɪŋ oʊpən. hi hæd sin əm hɪmsɛlf, dʒʌst əɾ ə dɪstəns, fɑɹ ɪnʌf ɔf tə bi seɪf. ɪf ðə kwin wəd nɑt də sʌmθɪŋ, ðən sʌmbɑɾi ɔt tə æsk ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt fəɹ hɛlp. sʌmbɑɾi ʃəd də sʌmθɪŋ.

Another man, a round-faced wagonwright with tools hanging from the sides of his cart and two wagon wheels in the back, told a different story. Twenty Darkfriends had held a gathering in Market Sheran. Men with twisted bodies, and the women worse, all dirty and in rags. They could make your knees grow weak and your stomach heave just by looking at you, and when they laughed, the filthy cackles rang in your ears for hours and your head felt as if it were splitting open. He had seen them himself, just at a distance, far enough off to be safe. If the Queen would not do something, then somebody ought to ask the Children of the Light for help. Somebody should do something.

ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlif wən ðə wæɡoʊnɹaɪt lɛɾ əm daʊn.

It was a relief when the wagonwright let them down.

wɪð ðə sʌn loʊ bɪhaɪn əm ðeɪ wɔkt ɪndə ə smɔl vɪlədʒ, mʌtʃ laɪk mɑɹkət ʃɛɹən. ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd splɪt ðə taʊn nitli ɪn tu, bʌɾ ɑn boʊθ saɪdz ə ðə waɪd ɹoʊd stʊd ɹoʊz ə smɔl bɹɪk haʊsəz wɪð θætʃt ɹufs. wɛbz ə vaɪn kʌvɝd ðə bɹɪks, ðoʊ oʊnli ə fju livz hʌŋ ɑn ðɛm. ðə vɪlədʒ hæd wʌn ɪn, ə smɔl pleɪs noʊ bɪɡɝ ðən ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn, wɪð ə saɪn ɑn ə bɹækɪɾ aʊt fɹʌnt, kɹikɪŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ ɪn ðə wɪnd. ðə kwinz mæn.

With the sun low behind them they walked into a small village, much like Market Sheran. The Caemlyn Road split the town neatly in two, but on both sides of the wide road stood rows of small brick houses with thatched roofs. Webs of vine covered the bricks, though only a few leaves hung on them. The village had one inn, a small place no bigger than the Winespring Inn, with a sign on a bracket out front, creaking back and forth in the wind. The Queen's Man.

stʃɹeɪnʒ, tə θɪŋk ə ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn əz smɔl. ɹænd kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ wən i θɔɾ ɪt wɑz əbaʊɾ əz bɪɡ əz ə bɪldɪŋ kəd bi. ɛniθɪŋ bɪɡɝ wəd bi ə pæləs. bʌɾ i hæd sin ə fju θɪŋz, naʊ, ən sʌɾənli hi ɹilaɪz ðət nʌθɪŋ wəd lʊk ðə seɪm tə hɪm wən i ɡɑt bæk hoʊm. ɪf jə ɛvɝ du.

Strange, to think of the Winespring Inn as small. Rand could remember when he thought it was about as big as a building could be. Anything bigger would be a palace. But he had seen a few things, now, and suddenly he realized that nothing would look the same to him when he got back home. If you ever do.

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn, bʌɾ ivən ɪf pɹaɪsəz ət ðə kwinz mæn wɝ nɑɾ əz haɪ əz ɪn mɑɹkət ʃɛɹən, ðeɪ kəd nɑɾ əfɔɹɾ ə mil əɹ ə ɹum, iðɝ wʌn.

He hesitated in front of the inn, but even if prices at The Queen's Man were not as high as in Market Sheran, they could not afford a meal or a room, either one.

mæt sɔ wɛɹ i wɑz lʊkɪŋ ən pæɾəd ðə pɑkət wɛɹ i kɛp tɑmz kʌlɝd bɔlz. "aɪ kən si wɛl ɪnʌf, əz lɔŋ əz aɪ doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə ɡɛt tu fænsi." hɪz aɪz hæd bɪn ɡɛɾɪŋ bɛɾɝ, ðoʊ hi stɪl wɔɹ ðə skɑɹf ɝaʊn ɪz fɔɹhɛd, ən hæd skwɪntɪd wɛnɛvɝ i lʊkt ət ðə skaɪ dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪ. wən ɹænd sɛd nʌθɪŋ, mæt wɛn ɑn. "ðɛɹ kæn bi dɑɹkfɹɛnz əɾ ɛvɹi ɪn bɪtwin hɪɹ ən keɪɛmlɪn. bɪsaɪdz, aɪ doʊnt wɑnə slip ʌndɝ ə bʊʃ ɪf aɪ kən slip ɪn ə bɛd." hi meɪd noʊ muv təwɔɹd ði ɪn, ðoʊ, dʒʌst stʊd weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɹænd.

Mat saw where he was looking and patted the pocket where he kept Thom's colored balls. "I can see well enough, as long as I don't try to get too fancy." His eyes had been getting better, though he still wore the scarf around his forehead, and had squinted whenever he looked at the sky during the day. When Rand said nothing, Mat went on. "There can't be Darkfriends at every inn between here and Caemlyn. Besides, I don't want to sleep under a bush if I can sleep in a bed." He made no move toward the inn, though, just stood waiting for Rand.

æftɝ ə moʊmən ɹænd nɑɾəd. hi fɛlt əz taɪɝɾ əz i hæɾ əɾ ɛni taɪm sɪns livɪŋ hoʊm. dʒʌs θɪŋkɪŋ ʌv ə naɪɾ ɪn ði oʊpən meɪɾ ɪz boʊnz eɪk. ɪts ɔl kætʃɪŋ ʌp. ɔl ðə ɹʌnɪŋ, ɔl ðə lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ jəɹ ʃoʊldɝ.

After a moment Rand nodded. He felt as tired as he had at any time since leaving home. Just thinking of a night in the open made his bones ache. It's all catching up. All the running, all the looking over your shoulder.

"ðeɪ kæn bi ɛvɹiwɛɹ," hi əɡɹid.

"They can't be everywhere," he agreed.

wɪð ðə fɝst stɛp i tʊk ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum, hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf i hæd meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk. ɪt wɑz ə klin pleɪs, bʌt kɹaʊɾəd. ɛvɹi teɪbəl wɑz fɪld, ən səm mɛn lin əɡɛns ðə wɔlz kəz ðəɹ wɑz noʊwɛɹ fəɹ əm tə sɪt. fɹəm ðə weɪ ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz skɝid bɪtwin ðə teɪbəlz wɪð hɛɹid lʊks - ən ðə lændlɔɹd, tu - ɪt wɑz ə lɑɹdʒɝ kɹaʊd ðən ðeɪ wɝ juz tə. tu mɛni fəɹ ðɪs smɔl vɪlədʒ. ɪt wɑz izi tə pɪk aʊt ðə pipəl u dɪd nɑt bɪlɔŋ ðɛɹ. ðeɪ wɝ dʒɹɛs noʊ dɪfɹənli fɹəm ðə ɹɛst, bʌt ðeɪ kɛp ðɛɹ aɪz ɑn ðɛɹ fuɾ ən dʒɹɪŋk. ðə loʊkəlz wɑtʃt ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz əz mʌtʃ əz ɛniθɪŋ ɛls.

With the first step he took into the common room, he wondered if he had made a mistake. It was a clean place, but crowded. Every table was filled, and some men leaned against the walls because there was nowhere for them to sit. From the way the serving maids scurried between the tables with harried looks - and the landlord, too - it was a larger crowd than they were used to. Too many for this small village. It was easy to pick out the people who did not belong there. They were dressed no differently from the rest, but they kept their eyes on their food and drink. The locals watched the strangers as much as anything else.

ə dʒɹoʊn ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, ɪnʌf ðət ði ɪnkipɝ tʊk əm ɪndə ðə kɪtʃən wən ɹænd meɪɾ ɪm ʌndɝstæn ðət ðeɪ niɾəd tə tɔk tə hɪm. ðə nɔɪz wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz bæd ðɛɹ, wɪð ðə kʊk ən ɪz hɛlpɝz bæŋɪŋ pɑts ən dɑɹɾɪŋ əbaʊt.

A drone of conversation hung in the air, enough that the innkeeper took them into the kitchen when Rand made him understand that they needed to talk to him. The noise was almost as bad there, with the cook and his helpers banging pots and darting about.

ði ɪnkipɝ mɑpt ɪz feɪs wɪð ə lɑɹdʒ hæŋkɝtʃɪf. "aɪ səpoʊz jəɹ ɑn jəɹ weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn tə si ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən laɪk ɛvɹi ʌðɝ ful ɪn ðə ɹɛlm. wɛl, ɪts sɪks tə ə ɹum ən tu əɹ θɹi tə ə bɛd, ən ɪf ðət dʌzn sut, aɪv nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ju."

The innkeeper mopped his face with a large handkerchief. "I suppose you're on your way to Caemlyn to see the false Dragon like every other fool in the Realm. Well, it's six to a room and two or three to a bed, and if that doesn't suit, I've nothing for you."

ɹænd ɡeɪv ɪz spil wɪð ə filɪŋ ə kwizinəs. wɪð soʊ mɛni pipəl ɑn ðə ɹoʊd, ɛvɹi ʌðɝ wʌn kəd bi ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə pɪk əm aʊt fɹəm ðə ɹɛst. mæt dɛmənstʃɹeɪɾəd ɪz dʒʌɡəlɪŋ - hi kɛpt ɪt tə θɹi bɔlz, ən wɑz kɛɹfəl ivən ðən - ən ɹænd tʊk aʊt tɑmz flut. æftɝ oʊnli ə dʌzən noʊts ʌv "ði oʊl blæk bɛɹ," ði ɪnkipɝ nɑɾəd ɪmpeɪʃənli.

Rand gave his spiel with a feeling of queasiness. With so many people on the road, every other one could be a Darkfriend, and there was no way to pick them out from the rest. Mat demonstrated his juggling - he kept it to three balls, and was careful even then - and Rand took out Thom's flute. After only a dozen notes of "The Old Black Bear," the innkeeper nodded impatiently.

"jul du. aɪ nid sʌmθɪŋ tə teɪk ðoʊz ɪɾiəts' maɪnz ɔf ðɪs lɑɡən. ðɛɹz bɪn θɹi faɪts ɔlɹɛɾi oʊvɝ wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt hiz ɹɪli ðə dʒɹæɡən. stoʊ jəɹ θɪŋz ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ, ən əl ɡoʊ klɪɹ ə speɪs fəɹ ju. ɪf ðɛɹz ɛni ɹum tə. fulz. ðə wɝlz fʊl ə fulz u doʊnt noʊ ɪnʌf tə steɪ wɛɹ ðeɪ bɪlɔŋ. ðæts wʌts kɑzɪŋ ɔl ðə tʃɹʌbəl. pipəl u woʊn steɪ wɛɹ ðeɪ bɪlɔŋ." mɑpɪŋ ɪz feɪs əɡɛn, hi hɝiɾ aʊɾ ə ðə kɪtʃən, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ.

"You'll do. I need something to take those idiots' minds off this Logain. There's been three fights already over whether or not he's really the Dragon. Stow your things in the corner, and I'll go clear a space for you. If there's any room to. Fools. The world's full of fools who don't know enough to stay where they belong. That's what's causing all the trouble. People who won't stay where they belong." Mopping his face again, he hurried out of the kitchen, muttering under his breath.

ðə kʊk ən ɪz hɛlpɝz ɪɡnɔɹd ɹænd ən mæt. mæt kɛpt ədʒʌstɪŋ ðə skɑɹf ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd, pʊʃɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp, ðən blɪŋkɪŋ ət ðə laɪɾ ən tʌɡɪŋ ɪt bæk daʊn əɡɛn. ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf i kəd si wɛl ɪnʌf tə də ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ kɑmpləkeɪɾəd ðən dʒʌɡəl θɹi bɔlz. əz fəɹ hɪmsɛlf. . . .

The cook and his helpers ignored Rand and Mat. Mat kept adjusting the scarf around his head, pushing it up, then blinking at the light and tugging it back down again. Rand wondered if he could see well enough to do anything more complicated than juggle three balls. As for himself. . . .

ðə kwizinəs ɪn ɪz stʌmək ɡɹu θɪkɝ. hi dʒɹɑpt ɑn ə loʊ stul, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ɪz hænz. ðə kɪtʃən fɛl koʊld. hi ʃɪvɝd. stim fɪl ði ɛɹ; stoʊvz ən ʌvənz kɹækəld wɪð hit. hɪz ʃɪvɝz bɪkeɪm stʃɹɔŋɝ, hɪz tiθ tʃæɾɝɪŋ. hi ɹæpt ɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɪmsɛlf, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd noʊ ɡʊd. hɪz boʊnz fɛlt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ fɹizɪŋ.

The queasiness in his stomach grew thicker. He dropped on a low stool, holding his head in his hands. The kitchen felt cold. He shivered. Steam filled the air; stoves and ovens crackled with heat. His shivers became stronger, his teeth chattering. He wrapped his arms around himself, but it did no good. His bones felt as if they were freezing.

dɪmli hi wɑz əwɛɹ ə mæt æskɪŋ ɪm sʌmθɪŋ, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ən ə sʌmwʌn kɝsɪŋ ən ɹʌnɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum. ðən ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz ðɛɹ, wɪð ðə kʊk fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ ɪz saɪd, ən mæt wɑz ɑɹɡjuɪŋ laʊdli wɪð əm boʊθ. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ ɛni ʌv wʌt ðeɪ sɛd; ðə wɝdz wɝ ə bʌz ɪn ɪz ɪɹz, ən i kəd nɑt sim tə θɪŋk əɾ ɔl.

Dimly he was aware of Mat asking him something, shaking his shoulder, and of someone cursing and running out of the room. Then the innkeeper was there, with the cook frowning at his side, and Mat was arguing loudly with them both. He could not make out any of what they said; the words were a buzz in his ears, and he could not seem to think at all.

sʌɾənli mæt tʊk ɪz ɑɹm, pʊlɪŋ ɪm tə hɪz fit. ɔl ə ðɛɹ θɪŋz - sæɾəlbæɡz, blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊlz, tɑmz bʌndəl kloʊk ən ɪnstʃɹəmən keɪsəz - hʌŋ fɹəm mæts ʃoʊldɝz wɪð ɪz baʊ. ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛm, waɪpɪŋ ɪz feɪs æŋkʃəsli. wivɪŋ, mɔɹ ðən hæf səpɔɹɾəd baɪ mæt, ɹænd lɛɾ ɪz fɹɛn stɪɹ ɪm təwɔɹd ðə bæk dɔɹ.

Suddenly Mat took his arm, pulling him to his feet. All of their things - saddlebags, blanketrolls, Thom's bundled cloak and instrument cases - hung from Mat's shoulders with his bow. The innkeeper was watching them, wiping his face anxiously. Weaving, more than half supported by Mat, Rand let his friend steer him toward the back door.

"ɛs-ɛs-sɑɹi, ɛm-ɛm-mæt," hi mænədʒd. hi kəd nɑt stɑp ɪz tiθ fɹəm tʃæɾɝɪŋ. "ɛm-ɛm-mʌst əv . . . bi-bɪn ti-ðə . . . ɹeɪn. oʊ-wʌn ɛm-mɔɹ . . . naɪɾ aʊt . . . dʌbəlju-woʊn eɪtʃ-hɝt . . . aɪ ɡɛs." twaɪlaɪt dɑɹkən ðə skaɪ, spɑɾəd baɪ ə hændfʊl ə stɑɹz.

"S-s-sorry, M-m-mat," he managed. He could not stop his teeth from chattering. "M-m-must have . . . b-been t-the . . . rain. O-one m-more . . . night out . . . w-won't h-hurt . . . I guess." Twilight darkened the sky, spotted by a handful of stars.

"nɑɾ ə bɪɾ ʌv ɪt," mæt sɛd. hi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə saʊn tʃɪɹfəl, bʌt ɹænd kəd hɪɹ ðə hɪɾən wɝi. "hi wɑz skɛɹd ði ʌðɝ foʊk wəd faɪn aʊt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmbɑɾi sɪk ɪn ɪz ɪn. aɪ toʊld ɪm ɪf i kɪkt əs aʊt, aɪd teɪk jə ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum. ðæɾəd ɛmpti hæf ɪz ɹumz ɪn tɛn mɪnəts. fəɹ ɔl ɪz tɔk əbaʊt fulz, hi dʌznt wɑn ðæt."

"Not a bit of it," Mat said. He was trying to sound cheerful, but Rand could hear the hidden worry. "He was scared the other folk would find out there was somebody sick in his inn. I told him if he kicked us out, I'd take you into the common room. That'd empty half his rooms in ten minutes. For all his talk about fools, he doesn't want that."

"ðɛn dʌbəlju-wɛɹ?"

"Then w-where?"

"hɪɹ," mæt sɛd, pʊlɪŋ oʊpən ðə steɪbəl dɔɹ wɪð ə laʊd kɹik ə hɪnʒɪz.

"Here," Mat said, pulling open the stable door with a loud creak of hinges.

ɪt wɑz dɑɹkɝ ɪnsaɪd ðən aʊt, ən ði ɛɹ smɛld ə heɪ ən ɡɹeɪn ən hɔɹsəz, wɪð ə stʃɹɔŋ ʌndɝzməl ə mənʊɹ. wən mæt loʊɝɾ ɪm tə ðə stʃɹɔ-kʌvɝd flɔɹ, hi foʊldəɾ oʊvɝ wɪð ɪz tʃɛst ɑn ɪz niz, stɪl hʌɡɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ən ʃeɪkɪŋ fɹəm hɛd tə toʊ. ɔl ə hɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ sim tə ɡoʊ fəɹ ðə ʃeɪkɪŋ. hi hɝd mæt stʌmbəl ən kɝs ən stʌmbəl əɡɛn, ðən ə klæɾɝ ə mɛɾəl. sʌɾənli laɪt blɑsəmd. mæt hɛld ʌp ə bæɾɝd oʊld læntɝn.

It was darker inside than out, and the air smelled of hay and grain and horses, with a strong undersmell of manure. When Mat lowered him to the straw-covered floor, he folded over with his chest on his knees, still hugging himself and shaking from head to toe. All of his strength seemed to go for the shaking. He heard Mat stumble and curse and stumble again, then a clatter of metal. Suddenly light blossomed. Mat held up a battered old lantern.

ɪf ði ɪn wɑz fʊl, soʊ wɑz ɪts steɪbəl. ɛvɹi stɔl hæɾ ə hɔɹs, səm ɹeɪzɪŋ ðɛɹ hɛdz ən blɪŋkɪŋ ət ðə laɪt. mæt aɪd ðə læɾɝ tə ðə heɪlɔft, ðən lʊkt ət ɹænd, kɹaʊtʃt ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

If the inn was full, so was its stable. Every stall had a horse, some raising their heads and blinking at the light. Mat eyed the ladder to the hayloft, then looked at Rand, crouched on the floor, and shook his head.

"nɛvɝ ɡɛt jə ʌp ðɛɹ," mæt mʌɾɝd. hæŋɪŋ ðə læntɝn ɑn ə neɪl, hi skɹæmbəld ʌp ðə læɾɝ ən bɪɡæn tɔsɪŋ daʊn ɑɹmloʊdz ə heɪ. hɝidli klaɪmɪŋ bæk daʊn, hi meɪɾ ə bɛɾ ət ðə bæk ə ðə steɪbəl ən ɡɑt ɹænd ɑntu ɪt. mæt kʌvɝɾ ɪm wɪð boʊθ ðɛɹ kloʊks, bʌt ɹænd pʊʃt əm ɔf ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli.

"Never get you up there," Mat muttered. Hanging the lantern on a nail, he scrambled up the ladder and began tossing down armloads of hay. Hurriedly climbing back down, he made a bed at the back of the stable and got Rand onto it. Mat covered him with both their cloaks, but Rand pushed them off almost immediately.

"hɑt," hi mɝmɝd. veɪɡli hi nu ðəɾ i hæd bɪn koʊld oʊnli ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ, bʌt naʊ hi fɛlt əz ɪf i wɝ ɪn ən ʌvən. hi tʌɡd əɾ ɪz kɑlɝ, tɔsɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "hɑt." hi fɛl mæts hæn ɑn ɪz fɔɹhɛd.

"Hot," he murmured. Vaguely he knew that he had been cold only a moment before, but now he felt as if he were in an oven. He tugged at his collar, tossing his head. "Hot." He felt Mat's hand on his forehead.

"aɪl bi ɹaɪt bæk," mæt sɛd, ən dɪsəpɪɹd.

"I'll be right back," Mat said, and disappeared.

hi twɪstəd fɪtfəli ɑn ðə heɪ, haʊ lɔŋ i wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ, əntɪl mæt ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ə hipt pleɪɾ ɪn wʌn hænd, ə pɪtʃɝ ɪn ði ʌðɝ, ən tu waɪt kʌps dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɹəm fɪŋɡɝz baɪ ðɛɹ hændəlz.

He twisted fitfully on the hay, how long he was not sure, until Mat returned with a heaped plate in one hand, a pitcher in the other, and two white cups dangling from fingers by their handles.

"ðɛɹz noʊ wɪzdəm hɪɹ," hi sɛd, dʒɹɑpɪŋ tə hɪz niz bɪsaɪd ɹænd. hi fɪld wʌn ə ðə kʌps ən hɛld ɪt tə ɹændz maʊθ. ɹænd ɡʌlp ðə wɔɾɝ daʊn əz ɪf i hæd hæd nʌθɪŋ tə dʒɹɪŋk ɪn deɪz; ðət wɑz haʊ hi fɛlt. "ðeɪ doʊn ivən noʊ wʌɾ ə wɪzdəm ɪz. wʌt ðeɪ də hæv ɪz sʌmbɑɾi kɔl mʌðɝ bɹun, bʌt ʃiz ɔf sʌmwɛɹ bɝθɪŋ ə beɪbi, ən noʊbɑdi noʊz wən ʃɪl bi bæk. aɪ dɪd ɡɛt səm bɹɛd, ən tʃiz, ən sɔsədʒ. ɡʊd mæstɝ ɪnloʊ wɪl ɡɪv əs ɛniθɪŋ əz lɔŋ əz wi steɪ aʊɾ ə saɪɾ ə hɪz ɡɛsts. hɪɹ, tʃɹaɪ sʌm."

"There's no Wisdom here," he said, dropping to his knees beside Rand. He filled one of the cups and held it to Rand's mouth. Rand gulped the water down as if he had had nothing to drink in days; that was how he felt. "They don't even know what a Wisdom is. What they do have is somebody called Mother Brune, but she's off somewhere birthing a baby, and nobody knows when she'll be back. I did get some bread, and cheese, and sausage. Good Master Inlow will give us anything as long as we stay out of sight of his guests. Here, try some."

ɹænd tɝn ɪz hɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðə fud. ðə saɪɾ ʌv ɪt, ðə θɔɾ ʌv ɪt, meɪɾ ɪz stʌmək hiv. æftɝ ə mɪnət mæt saɪɾ ən sɛɾəld daʊn tə it hɪmsɛlf. ɹænd kɛpt ɪz aɪz əvɝɾəd, ən tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lɪsən.

Rand turned his head away from the food. The sight of it, the thought of it, made his stomach heave. After a minute Mat sighed and settled down to eat himself. Rand kept his eyes averted, and tried not to listen.

ðə tʃɪlz keɪm wʌns mɔɹ, ən ðən ðə fivɝ, tə bi ɹipleɪs baɪ ðə tʃɪlz, ən ðə fivɝ əɡɛn. mæt kʌvɝɾ ɪm wən i ʃʊk, ən fɛɾ ɪm wɔɾɝ wən i kəmpleɪn ə θɝst. ðə naɪt dipənd, ən ðə steɪbəl ʃɪftəɾ ɪn ðə flɪkɝɪŋ læntɝn laɪt. ʃædoʊz tʊk ʃeɪp ən muvd ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn. ðən i sɔ bælzəmən stʃɹaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ðə steɪbəl, aɪz bɝnɪŋ, ə mɹdʒɹɑl əɾ iðɝ saɪd wɪð feɪsəz hɪɾən ɪn ðə dɛpθs ə ðɛɹ blæk kaʊlz.

The chills came once more, and then the fever, to be replaced by the chills, and the fever again. Mat covered him when he shook, and fed him water when he complained of thirst. The night deepened, and the stable shifted in the flickering lantern light. Shadows took shape and moved on their own. Then he saw Ba'alzamon striding down the stable, eyes burning, a Myrddraal at either side with faces hidden in the depths of their black cowls.

fɪŋɡɝz skɹæbəlɪŋ fəɹ ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɛt tə hɪz fit, jɛlɪŋ, "mæt! mæt, ðəɹ hɪɹ! laɪt, ðəɹ hɪɹ!"

Fingers scrabbling for his sword hilt, he tried to get to his feet, yelling, "Mat! Mat, they're here! Light, they're here!"

mæt dʒɝkt əweɪk wɛɹ i sæt kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ əɡɛns ðə wɔl. "wʌt? dɑɹkfɹɛnz? wɛɹ?"

Mat jerked awake where he sat cross-legged against the wall. "What? Darkfriends? Where?"

weɪvɝɪŋ ɑn ɪz niz, ɹænd pɔɪntəd fɹæntəkəli daʊn ðə steɪbəl . . . ən ɡeɪpt. ʃædoʊz stɝd, ən ə hɔɹs stæmpt ɪn ɪts slip. nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ. hi fɛl bæk ɑn ðə stʃɹɔ.

Wavering on his knees, Rand pointed frantically down the stable . . . and gaped. Shadows stirred, and a horse stamped in its sleep. Nothing more. He fell back on the straw.

"ðɛɹz noʊbɑdi bʌɾ ʌs," mæt sɛd. "hɪɹ, lemi teɪk ðæt." hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ɹændz sɔɹd bɛlt, bʌt ɹænd taɪɾənd ɪz ɡɹɪp ɑn ðə hɪlt.

"There's nobody but us," Mat said. "Here, let me take that." He reached for Rand's sword belt, but Rand tightened his grip on the hilt.

"noʊ. noʊ. aɪ hæv tə kip ɪt. hiz maɪ fɑðɝ. jə ʌndɝstænd? hiz ɛm-maɪ ɛf-fɑðɝ!" ðə ʃɪvɝɪŋ swɛpt oʊvɝ ɪm wʌns mɔɹ, bʌɾ i klʌŋ tə ðə sɔɹɾ əz ɪf tə ə laɪflaɪn. "ɛm-maɪ ɛf-fɑðɝ!" mæt ɡeɪv ʌp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk ɪɾ ən pʊl ðə kloʊks bæk oʊvɝ hɪm.

"No. No. I have to keep it. He's my father. You understand? He's m-my f-father!" The shivering swept over him once more, but he clung to the sword as if to a lifeline. "M-my f-father!" Mat gave up trying to take it and pulled the cloaks back over him.

ðəɹ wɝ ʌðɝ vɪzəteɪʃənz ɪn ðə naɪt, waɪl mæt doʊzd. ɹænd wɑz nɛvɝ ʃʊɹ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɹɪli ðəɹ əɹ nɑt. səmtaɪmz i lʊkt ət mæt, wɪð ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf i wəd si ðɛm, tu, ɪf i woʊk.

There were other visitations in the night, while Mat dozed. Rand was never sure if they were really there or not. Sometimes he looked at Mat, with his head on his chest, wondering if he would see them, too, if he woke.

ɛɡwin stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz, hɝ hɛɹ ɪn ə lɔŋ, dɑɹk bɹeɪɾ əz ɪt hæd bɪn ɪn ɛmənz fild, hɝ feɪs peɪn ən mɔɹnfəl. "waɪ dɪd jə liv ʌs?" ʃi æskt. "wɝ dɛd kəz jə lɛft ʌs."

Egwene stepped out of the shadows, her hair in a long, dark braid as it had been in Emond's Field, her face pained and mournful. "Why did you leave us?" she asked. "We're dead because you left us."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd wikli ɑn ðə heɪ. "noʊ, ɛɡwin. aɪ dɪdnt wɑnə liv ju. pliz."

Rand shook his head weakly on the hay. "No, Egwene. I didn't want to leave you. Please."

"wɝ ɔl dɛd," ʃi sɛd sædli, "æn dɛθ ɪz ðə kɪŋdəm ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ðə dɑɹk wʌn əz ʌs, kəz jə əbændən ʌs."

"We're all dead," she said sadly, "and death is the kingdom of the Dark One. The Dark One has us, because you abandoned us."

"noʊ. aɪ hæd noʊ tʃɔɪs, ɛɡwin. pliz. ɛɡwin, doʊnt ɡoʊ. kʌm bæk, ɛɡwin!"

"No. I had no choice, Egwene. Please. Egwene, don't go. Come back, Egwene!"

bʌt ʃi tɝn ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊz, ən wɑz ʃædoʊ.

But she turned into the shadows, and was shadow.

mɔɪɹeɪnz ɪkspɹɛʃən wɑz sɝin, bʌɾ əɹ feɪs wɑz blʌdləs ən peɪl. hɝ kloʊk maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ə ʃɹaʊd, ən əɹ vɔɪs wɑz ə læʃ. "ðæɾ ɪz ɹaɪt, ɹænd ælθɹ. juv noʊ tʃɔɪs. jə mʌst ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɪl teɪk jə fəɹ ɪz oʊn. ɪtɝnəɾi tʃeɪn ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ. oʊnli ɛɛs sədaɪ kən seɪv ju, naʊ. oʊnli ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Moiraine's expression was serene, but her face was bloodless and pale. Her cloak might as well have been a shroud, and her voice was a lash. "That is right, Rand al'Thor. You have no choice. You must go to Tar Valon, or the Dark One will take you for his own. Eternity chained in the Shadow. Only Aes Sedai can save you, now. Only Aes Sedai."

tɑm ɡɹɪn əɾ ɪm sɑɹdɑnɪkəli. ðə ɡlimənz kloʊðz hʌŋ ɪn tʃɑɹd ɹæɡz ðət meɪɾ ɪm si ðə flæʃɪz ə laɪɾ əz tɑm ɹɛsəld wɪð ðə feɪd tə ɡɪv əm taɪm tə ɹʌn. ðə flɛʃ ʌndɝ ðə ɹæɡz wɑz blækən ən bɝnd. "tʃɹʌst ɛɛs sədaɪ, bɔɪ, ən jəl wɪʃ jə wɝ dɛd. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ðə pɹaɪs ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛlp ɪz ɔlweɪz smɔlɝ ðən jə kən bɪliv, ɔlweɪz ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən jə kən ɪmædʒən. ən wʌɾ ədʒɑ wɪl faɪn jə fɝst, ɛ? ɹɛd? meɪbi blæk. bɛs tə ɹʌn, bɔɪ. ɹʌn."

Thom grinned at him sardonically. The gleeman's clothes hung in charred rags that made him see the flashes of light as Thom wrestled with the Fade to give them time to run. The flesh under the rags was blackened and burned. "Trust Aes Sedai, boy, and you'll wish you were dead. Remember, the price of Aes Sedai help is always smaller than you can believe, always greater than you can imagine. And what Ajah will find you first, eh? Red? Maybe Black. Best to run, boy. Run."

lænz stɛɹ wɑz əz hɑɹɾ əz ɡɹænət, ən blʌd kʌvɝɾ ɪz feɪs. "stʃɹeɪnʒ tə si ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪɾ ɪn ðə hænz ʌv ə ʃifɝɾɝ. ɑɹ jə wɝði ʌv ɪt? jə hæd bɛɾɝ bi. jəɹ əloʊn, naʊ. nʌθɪŋ tə hoʊl tə bɪhaɪn ju, ən nʌθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ, ən ɛniwʌn kən bi ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd." hi smaɪld ə wʊlfs smaɪl, ən blʌd pɔɹd bʌɾ ə hɪz maʊθ. "ɛniwʌn."

Lan's stare was as hard as granite, and blood covered his face. "Strange to see a heron-mark blade in the hands of a sheepherder. Are you worthy of it? You had better be. You're alone, now. Nothing to hold to behind you, and nothing before, and anyone can be a Darkfriend." He smiled a wolf's smile, and blood poured but of his mouth. "Anyone."

pɛɹɪn keɪm, əkjuzɪŋ, pliɾɪŋ fəɹ hɛlp. mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹ, wipɪŋ fəɹ əɹ dɔɾɝ, ən beɪl doʊmən, kɝsɪŋ ɪm fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ feɪdz daʊn ɑn ɪz vɛsəl, ən mæstɝ fɪtʃ, ɹɪŋɪŋ ɪz hænz oʊvɝ ði æʃəz ə hɪz ɪn, ən mɪn, skɹimɪŋ ɪn ə tʃɹɑlɑks klʌtʃəz, pipəl i nu, pipəl i hæɾ oʊnli mɛt. bʌt ðə wɝst wɑz tæm. tæm stʊɾ oʊvɝ hɪm, fɹaʊnɪŋ ən ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, ən sɛd nɑɾ ə wɝd.

Perrin came, accusing, pleading for help. Mistress al'Vere, weeping for her daughter, and Bayle Domon, cursing him for bringing Fades down on his vessel, and Master Fitch, wringing his hands over the ashes of his inn, and Min, screaming in a Trolloc's clutches, people he knew, people he had only met. But the worst was Tam. Tam stood over him, frowning and shaking his head, and said not a word.

"ju hæv tə tɛl mi," ɹænd bɛɡd hɪm. "hu æm aɪ? tɛl mi, pliz. hu æm aɪ? hu æm aɪ?" hi ʃaʊɾəd.

"You have to tell me," Rand begged him. "Who am I? Tell me, please. Who am I? Who am I?" he shouted.

"izi, ɹænd."

"Easy, Rand."

fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔɾ ɪt wɑz tæm ænsɝɪŋ, bʌt ðən i sɔ ðət tæm wɑz ɡɔn. mæt bɛn oʊvɝ hɪm, hoʊldɪŋ ə kʌp ʌv wɔɾɝ tə hɪz lɪps.

For a moment he thought it was Tam answering, but then he saw that Tam was gone. Mat bent over him, holding a cup of water to his lips.

"dʒʌst ɹɛst izi. jəɹ ɹænd ælθɹ, ðæts u jə ɑɹ, wɪð ði ʌɡliəs feɪs ən ðə θɪkəs hɛɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. heɪ, jəɹ swɛɾɪŋ! ðə fivɝz bɹoʊkən."

"Just rest easy. You're Rand al'Thor, that's who you are, with the ugliest face and the thickest head in the Two Rivers. Hey, you're sweating! The fever's broken."

"ɹæn ælθɹ?" ɹænd wɪspɝd. mæt nɑɾəd, ən ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ soʊ kʌmfɝɾɪŋ ɪn ɪt ðət ɹænd dʒɹɪftəɾ ɔf tə slip wɪθaʊɾ ivən tʌtʃɪŋ ðə wɔɾɝ.

"Rand al'Thor?" Rand whispered. Mat nodded, and there was something so comforting in it that Rand drifted off to sleep without even touching the water.

ɪt wɑz ə slip əntʃɹʌbəl baɪ dʒɹimz - ət lis baɪ ɛni hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd - bʌt laɪɾ ɪnʌf ðəɾ ɪz aɪz dʒɹɪftəɾ oʊpən wɛnɛvɝ mæt tʃɛkt ɑn hɪm. wʌns i wʌndɝɾ ɪf mæt wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ ɛni slip əɾ ɔl, bʌɾ i fɛl bæk əslip hɪmsɛlf bɪfɔɹ ðə θɔt ɡɑt vɛɹi fɑɹ.

It was a sleep untroubled by dreams - at least by any he remembered - but light enough that his eyes drifted open whenever Mat checked on him. Once he wondered if Mat was getting any sleep at all, but he fell back asleep himself before the thought got very far.

ðə skwil ə ðə dɔɹ hɪnʒɪz ɹaʊzd ɪm fʊli, bʌt fəɹ ə moʊmən i oʊnli leɪ ðəɹ ɪn ðə heɪ wɪʃɪŋ i wɑz stɪl əslip. əslip i wəd nɑt bi əwɛɹ ə hɪz bɑɾi. hɪz mʌsəlz ætʃt laɪk ɹʌŋ-aʊt ɹæɡz, ən hæɾ əbaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ stʃɹɛŋkθ. wikli hi tʃɹaɪd tə ɹeɪz ɪz hɛd; hi meɪɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə sɛkən tʃɹaɪ.

The squeal of the door hinges roused him fully, but for a moment he only lay there in the hay wishing he was still asleep. Asleep he would not be aware of his body. His muscles ached like wrung-out rags, and had about as much strength. Weakly he tried to raise his head; he made it on the second try.

mæt sæɾ ɪn ɪz əkʌstəm pleɪs əɡɛns ðə wɔl, wɪðɪn ɑɹmz ɹitʃ ə ɹænd. hɪz tʃɪn ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, wɪtʃ ɹoʊz ən fɛl ɪn ði izi ɹɪðəm ə dip slip. ðə skɑɹf hæd slɪp daʊn oʊvɝ ɪz aɪz.

Mat sat in his accustomed place against the wall, within arm's reach of Rand. His chin rested on his chest, which rose and fell in the easy rhythm of deep sleep. The scarf had slipped down over his eyes.

ɹænd lʊk təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ.

Rand looked toward the door.

ə wʊmən stʊd ðəɹ hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ oʊpən wɪð wʌn hænd. fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi wɑz oʊnli ə dɑɹk ʃeɪp ɪn ə dʒɹɛs, aʊtlaɪn baɪ ðə feɪn laɪɾ ə ɝli mɔɹnɪŋ, ðən ʃi stɛpt ɪnsaɪd, lɛɾɪŋ ðə dɔɹ swɪŋ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɝ. ɪn ðə læntɝn laɪɾ i kəd si hɝ mɔɹ klɪɹli. ʃi wɑz əbaʊt ðə seɪm eɪdʒ əz nɪneɪiv, hi θɔt, bʌt ʃi wɑz noʊ vɪlədʒ wʊmən. ðə peɪl ɡɹin sɪlk ə hɝ dʒɹɛs ʃɪmɝɾ əz ʃi muvd. hɝ kloʊk wɑz ə ɹɪtʃ, sɑft ɡɹeɪ, ən ə fɹɔθi nɛɾ ə leɪs kɑɾ ʌp əɹ hɛɹ. ʃi fɪŋɡɝɾ ə hɛvi ɡoʊl nɛkləs əz ʃi lʊk θɔtfəli ət mæt ən hɪm.

A woman stood there holding it open with one hand. For a moment she was only a dark shape in a dress, outlined by the faint light of early morning, then she stepped inside, letting the door swing shut behind her. In the lantern light he could see her more clearly. She was about the same age as Nynaeve, he thought, but she was no village woman. The pale green silk of her dress shimmered as she moved. Her cloak was a rich, soft gray, and a frothy net of lace caught up her hair. She fingered a heavy gold necklace as she looked thoughtfully at Mat and him.

"mæt," ɹænd sɛd, ðən laʊɾɝ, "mæt!"

"Mat," Rand said, then louder, "Mat!"

mæt snɔɹɾɪd ən ɔlmoʊs fɛl oʊvɝ əz i keɪm əweɪk. skɹʌbɪŋ slip fɹəm ɪz aɪz, hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə wʊmən.

Mat snorted and almost fell over as he came awake. Scrubbing sleep from his eyes, he stared at the woman.

"aɪ keɪm tə lʊk ət maɪ hɔɹs," ʃi sɛd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ veɪɡli ət ðə stɔlz. ʃi nɛvɝ tʊk əɹ aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ðə tu ʌv ðɛm, ðoʊ. "ɑɹ jə ɪl?"

"I came to look at my horse," she said, gesturing vaguely at the stalls. She never took her eyes away from the two of them, though. "Are you ill?"

"hiz ɔl ɹaɪt," mæt sɛd stɪfli. "hi dʒʌs kɑɾ ə tʃɪl ɪn ðə ɹeɪn, ðæts ɔl."

"He's all right," Mat said stiffly. "He just caught a chill in the rain, that's all."

"pɝhæps aɪ ʃəd lʊk ət hɪm," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ hæv səm nɑlədʒ. . . ."

"Perhaps I should look at him," she said. "I have some knowledge. . . ."

ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf ʃi wɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ivən mɔɹ ðən əɹ kloʊðz, hɝ sɛlf-əʃʊɹd mænɝ, ðə weɪ ʃi hɛld əɹ hɛɾ əz ɪf ɑn ðə pɔɪn ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ ə kəmænd, dɪd nɑt bɪlɔŋ hɪɹ. ən ɪf ʃiz ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌv wʌɾ ədʒɑ?

Rand wondered if she were Aes Sedai. Even more than her clothes, her self-assured manner, the way she held her head as if on the point of giving a command, did not belong here. And if she is Aes Sedai, of what Ajah?

"aɪm faɪn, naʊ," hi toʊl hɝ. "ɹɪli, ðɛɹz noʊ nid."

"I'm fine, now," he told her. "Really, there's no need."

bʌt ʃi keɪm daʊn ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə steɪbəl, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ skɝɾ ʌp ən pleɪsɪŋ əɹ ɡɹeɪ slɪpɝz dʒɪnʒɝli. wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs fəɹ ðə stʃɹɔ, ʃi nɛl bɪsaɪɾ ɪm ən fɛlt ɪz fɔɹhɛd.

But she came down the length of the stable, holding her skirt up and placing her gray slippers gingerly. With a grimace for the straw, she knelt beside him and felt his forehead.

"noʊ fivɝ," ʃi sɛd, stʌɾiɪŋ ɪm wɪð ə fɹaʊn. ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, ɪn ə ʃɑɹp-fitʃɝd fæʃən, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɔɹmθ ɪn əɹ feɪs. ɪt wɑz nɑt koʊld, iðɝ; ɪt dʒʌst sim tə læk ɛni filɪŋ wʌtsoʊɛvɝ. "ju wɝ sɪk, ðoʊ. jɛs. jɛs. ən stɪl wik əz ə deɪ-oʊl kɪɾən. aɪ θɪŋk. . . ." ʃi ɹitʃt ʌndɝ əɹ kloʊk, ən sʌɾənli θɪŋz wɝ hæpənɪŋ tu fæs fəɹ ɹænd tə də mɔɹ ðən ɡɪv ə stʃɹæŋɡəld ʃaʊt.

"No fever," she said, studying him with a frown. She was pretty, in a sharp-featured fashion, but there was no warmth in her face. It was not cold, either; it just seemed to lack any feeling whatsoever. "You were sick, though. Yes. Yes. And still weak as a day-old kitten. I think. . . ." She reached under her cloak, and suddenly things were happening too fast for Rand to do more than give a strangled shout.

hɝ hæn flæʃt fɹəm ʌndɝ əɹ kloʊk; sʌmθɪŋ ɡlɪɾɝd əz ʃi lʌnʒd əkɹɔs ɹænd təwɔɹd mæt. mæt tɑpəl saɪdweɪz ɪn ə flɝi ʌv moʊʃən, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə sɑləd tʃʌŋk ə mɛɾəl dʒɹɪvən ɪndə wʊd. ɪɾ ɔl tʊk dʒʌst ən ɪnstənt, ən ðən ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz stɪl.

Her hand flashed from under her cloak; something glittered as she lunged across Rand toward Mat. Mat toppled sideways in a flurry of motion, and there was a solid tchunk of metal driven into wood. It all took just an instant, and then everything was still.

mæt leɪ hæf ɑn ɪz bæk, wʌn hænd ɡɹɪpɪŋ əɹ ɹɪs dʒʌst əbʌv ðə dæɡɝ ʃi hæd dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ðə wɔl wɛɹ ɪz tʃɛs hæd bɪn, hɪz ʌðɝ hæn hoʊldɪŋ ðə bleɪd fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ tə hɝ θɹoʊt.

Mat lay half on his back, one hand gripping her wrist just above the dagger she had driven into the wall where his chest had been, his other hand holding the blade from Shadar Logoth to her throat.

muvɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ əɹ aɪz, ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk daʊn ət ðə dæɡɝ mæt hɛld. aɪz waɪɾənɪŋ, ʃi dʒɹu ə ɹæɡəd bɹɛθ ən tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl bæk fɹəm ɪt, bʌɾ i kɛp ði ɛdʒ əɡɛnst əɹ skɪn. æftɝ ðæt, ʃi wɑz əz stɪl əz ə stoʊn.

Moving nothing but her eyes, she tried to look down at the dagger Mat held. Eyes widening, she drew a ragged breath and tried to pull back from it, but he kept the edge against her skin. After that, she was as still as a stone.

lɪkɪŋ ɪz lɪps, ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət ðə təbloʊ əbʌv hɪm. ivən ɪf i hæd nɑt bɪn soʊ wik, hi dɪd nɑt bɪliv i kəɾ əv muvd. ðən ɪz aɪz fɛl ɑn əɹ dæɡɝ, ən ɪz maʊθ wɛn dʒɹaɪ. ðə wʊɾ ɝaʊn ðə bleɪd wɑz blækənɪŋ; θɪn tɛnʒɹəlz ə smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə tʃɑɹ.

Licking his lips, Rand stared at the tableau above him. Even if he had not been so weak, he did not believe he could have moved. Then his eyes fell on her dagger, and his mouth went dry. The wood around the blade was blackening; thin tendrils of smoke rose from the char.

"mæt! mæt, hɝ dæɡɝ!"

"Mat! Mat, her dagger!"

mæt flɪkt ə ɡlæns ət ðə dæɡɝ, ðən bæk tə ðə wʊmən, bʌt ʃi hæd nɑt muvd. ʃi wɑz lɪkɪŋ əɹ lɪps nɝvəsli. ɹʌfli mæt pɹaɪɾ əɹ hæn ɔf ðə hɪlt ən ɡeɪv əɹ ə pʊʃ; ʃi tɑpəl bæk, spɹɔlɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm əm ən kætʃɪŋ hɝsɛlf wɪð əɹ hænz bɪhaɪn hɝ, stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ ðə bleɪɾ ɪn ɪz hænd. "doʊn muv," hi sɛd. "aɪl juz ðɪs ɪf jə muv. bɪliv mi, aɪ wɪl." ʃi nɑɾəd sloʊli; hɝ aɪz nɛvɝ lɛf mæts dæɡɝ. "wɑtʃ hɝ, ɹænd."

Mat flicked a glance at the dagger, then back to the woman, but she had not moved. She was licking her lips nervously. Roughly Mat pried her hand off the hilt and gave her a push; she toppled back, sprawling away from them and catching herself with her hands behind her, still watching the blade in his hand. "Don't move," he said. "I'll use this if you move. Believe me, I will." She nodded slowly; her eyes never left Mat's dagger. "Watch her, Rand."

ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i wɑz səpoʊz tə də ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ - ʃaʊt, meɪbi; hi sɝɾənli kəd nɑt ɹʌn æftɝ əɹ ɪf ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə fli - bʌt ʃi sæt ðəɹ wɪθaʊt twɪtʃɪŋ waɪl mæt jæŋkt əɹ dæɡɝ fɹi ʌv ðə wɔl. ðə blæk spɑt stɑpt ɡɹoʊɪŋ, ðoʊ ə feɪnt wɪsp ə smoʊk stɪl tʃɹeɪld ʌp fɹəm ɪt.

Rand was not sure what he was supposed to do if she tried anything - shout, maybe; he certainly could not run after her if she tried to flee - but she sat there without twitching while Mat yanked her dagger free of the wall. The black spot stopped growing, though a faint wisp of smoke still trailed up from it.

mæt lʊkt ɝaʊn fəɹ sʌmwɛɹ tə pʊt ðə dæɡɝ, ðən θɹʌst ɪt təwɔɹd ɹænd. hi tʊk ɪt dʒɪnʒɝli, əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ə laɪv æɾɝ. ɪt lʊkt ɔɹɾənɛɹi, ɪf ɔɹneɪt, wɪð ə peɪl aɪvɝi hɪlt ən ə nɛɹoʊ, ɡlimɪŋ bleɪd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ðən ðə pɑm ə hɪz hænd. dʒʌst ə dæɡɝ. oʊnli hi hæd sin wʌɾ ɪt kəd du. ðə hɪlt wɑz nɑɾ ivən wɔɹm, bʌɾ ɪz hæn bɪɡæn tə swɛt. hi hoʊpt i dɪd nɑt dʒɹɑp ɪɾ ɪn ðə heɪ.

Mat looked around for somewhere to put the dagger, then thrust it toward Rand. He took it gingerly, as if it were a live adder. It looked ordinary, if ornate, with a pale ivory hilt and a narrow, gleaming blade no longer than the palm of his hand. Just a dagger. Only he had seen what it could do. The hilt was not even warm, but his hand began to sweat. He hoped he did not drop it in the hay.

ðə wʊmən dɪd nɑt muv fɹəm əɹ spɹɔl əz ʃi wɑtʃt mæt sloʊli tɝn təwɔɹd hɝ. ʃi wɑtʃt ɪm əz ɪf wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ i wəd də nɛkst, bʌt ɹænd sɔ ðə sʌɾən taɪɾənɪŋ ə mæts aɪz, ðə taɪɾənɪŋ ə hɪz hæn ɑn ðə dæɡɝ. "mæt, noʊ!"

The woman did not move from her sprawl as she watched Mat slowly turn toward her. She watched him as if wondering what he would do next, but Rand saw the sudden tightening of Mat's eyes, the tightening of his hand on the dagger. "Mat, no!"

"ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mi, ɹænd. ʃiɾ əv kɪl ju, tu. ʃiz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd." mæt spæt ðə wɝd.

"She tried to kill me, Rand. She'd have killed you, too. She's a Darkfriend." Mat spat the word.

"bʌt wɝ nɑt," ɹænd sɛd. ðə wʊmən ɡæspt əz ɪf ʃi hæd dʒʌst ɹilaɪzd wʌt mæt hæɾ ɪntɛndəd. "wi ɑɹ nɑt, mæt."

"But we're not," Rand said. The woman gasped as if she had just realized what Mat had intended. "We are not, Mat."

fəɹ ə moʊmən mæt ɹɪmeɪn fɹoʊzən, ðə bleɪɾ ɪn ɪz fɪs kætʃɪŋ ðə læntɝn laɪt. ðən i nɑɾəd. "muv oʊvɝ ðɛɹ," hi toʊl ðə wʊmən, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ wɪð ðə dæɡɝ təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ tə ðə tæk ɹum.

For a moment Mat remained frozen, the blade in his fist catching the lantern light. Then he nodded. "Move over there," he told the woman, gesturing with the dagger toward the door to the tack room.

ʃi ɡɑt tə hɝ fit sloʊli, pɔzɪŋ tə bɹʌʃ ðə stʃɹɔ fɹəm əɹ dʒɹɛs. ivən wən ʃi stɑɹɾəd ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən mæt ɪndəkeɪɾəd, ʃi muvd əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɹizən tə hɝi. bʌt ɹænd noʊɾəst ðət ʃi kɛpt ə wɛɹi aɪ ɑn ðə ɹubi-hɪltɪd dæɡɝ ɪn mæts hænd. "ju ɹɪli ʃəd stɑp stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ," ʃi sɛd. "ɪt wəd bi fəɹ ðə bɛst, ɪn ði ɛnd. jəl si."

She got to her feet slowly, pausing to brush the straw from her dress. Even when she started in the direction Mat indicated, she moved as if there were no reason to hurry. But Rand noticed that she kept a wary eye on the ruby-hilted dagger in Mat's hand. "You really should stop struggling," she said. "It would be for the best, in the end. You will see."

"ðə bɛst?" mæt sɛd ɹaɪli, ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz tʃɛst wɛɹ əɹ bleɪd wʊɾə ɡɔn ɪf i hæd nɑt muvd. "ɡɛɾ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ."

"The best?" Mat said wryly, rubbing his chest where her blade would have gone if he had not moved. "Get over there."

ʃi ɡeɪv ə kæʒəwəl ʃɹʌɡ əz ʃi oʊbeɪd. "ə mɪsteɪk. ðəɹ əz bɪn kənsɪɾɝəbəl . . . kənfjuʒən sɪns wʌt hæpənd wɪð ðəɾ ɛɡətɪstɪkəl ful ɡoʊd. nɑt tə mɛnʃən huɛvɝ ði ɪɾiət wɑz u stɑɹɾəd ðə pænɪk ɪn mɑɹkət ʃɛɹən. noʊ wʌn ɪz ʃʊɹ wʌt hæpən ðɛɹ, əɹ haʊ. ðət meɪks ɪt mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs fəɹ ju, doʊn jə si? jəl əv ɑnɝd pleɪsəz ɪf jə kʌm tə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə jəɹ oʊn fɹi wɪl, bʌɾ əz lɔŋ əz jə ɹʌn, ðəɹ wɪl bi pɝsut, ən u kən tɛl wʌt wɪl hæpən ðɛn?"

She gave a casual shrug as she obeyed. "A mistake. There has been considerable . . . confusion since what happened with that egotistical fool Gode. Not to mention whoever the idiot was who started the panic in Market Sheran. No one is sure what happened there, or how. That makes it more dangerous for you, don't you see? You will have honored places if you come to the Great Lord of your own free will, but as long as you run, there will be pursuit, and who can tell what will happen then?"

ɹænd fɛlt ə tʃɪl. maɪ haʊnz ɑɹ dʒɛləs, ən meɪ nɑt bi dʒɛntəl.

Rand felt a chill. My hounds are jealous, and may not be gentle.

"soʊ jəɹ hævɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ə kʌpəl ə fɑɹmbɔɪz." mæts læf wɑz ɡɹɪm. "meɪbi jə dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɑɹən əz deɪnʒɝəs əz aɪv ɔlweɪz hɝd."

"So you're having trouble with a couple of farmboys." Mat's laugh was grim. "Maybe you Darkfriends aren't as dangerous as I've always heard."

hi flʌŋ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ə ðə tæk ɹum ən stɛp bæk.

He flung open the door of the tack room and stepped back.

ʃi pɔz dʒʌs θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ, lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. hɝ ɡeɪz wɑz aɪs, ən əɹ vɔɪs koʊldɝ stɪl. "ju wɪl faɪn aʊt haʊ deɪnʒɝəs wi ɑɹ. wən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ɡɛts hɪɹ - "

She paused just through the doorway, looking at him over her shoulder. Her gaze was ice, and her voice colder still. "You will find out how dangerous we are. When the Myrddraal gets here - "

wʌtɛvɝ ɛls ʃi hæd tə seɪ wɑz kʌɾ ɔf əz mæt slæm ðə dɔɹ ən pʊl ðə bɑɹ daʊn ɪndə ɪts bɹækəts. wən i tɝnd, hɪz aɪz wɝ wɝid. "feɪd," hi sɛɾ ɪn ə taɪt vɔɪs, tʌkɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ bæk ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt. "kʌmɪŋ hɪɹ, ʃi sɛz. haʊ ɑɹ jəɹ lɛɡz?"

Whatever else she had to say was cut off as Mat slammed the door and pulled the bar down into its brackets. When he turned, his eyes were worried. "Fade," he said in a tight voice, tucking the dagger back under his coat. "Coming here, she says. How are your legs?"

"aɪ kæn dæns," ɹænd mʌɾɝd, "bʌɾ ɪf jəl hɛlp mi ɡɛɾ ɑn maɪ fit, aɪ kən wɔk." hi lʊkt ət ðə bleɪɾ ɪn ɪz hæn ən ʃʌɾɝəd. "blʌɾ ən æʃəz, əl ɹʌn."

"I can't dance," Rand muttered, "but if you'll help me get on my feet, I can walk." He looked at the blade in his hand and shuddered. "Blood and ashes, I'll run."

hɝidli hæŋɪŋ hɪmsɛlf əbaʊt wɪð ðɛɹ pəzɛʃənz, mæt pʊld ɹænd tə hɪz fit. ɹændz lɛɡz wɑbəld, ən i hæd tə lin ɑn ɪz fɹɛn tə steɪ əpɹaɪt, bʌɾ i tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə sloʊ mæt daʊn. hi hɛl ðə wʊmənz dæɡɝ wɛl əweɪ fɹəm hɪmsɛlf. aʊtsaɪd ðə dɔɹ wɑz ə bʌkəɾ ʌv wɔɾɝ. hi tɔs ðə dæɡɝ ɪndə ɪɾ əz ðeɪ pæst. ðə bleɪɾ ɛntɝd ðə wɔɾɝ wɪð ə hɪs; stim ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə sɝfəs. ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ, hi tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk fæstɝ stɛps.

Hurriedly hanging himself about with their possessions, Mat pulled Rand to his feet. Rand's legs wobbled, and he had to lean on his friend to stay upright, but he tried not to slow Mat down. He held the woman's dagger well away from himself. Outside the door was a bucket of water. He tossed the dagger into it as they passed. The blade entered the water with a hiss; steam rose from the surface. Grimacing, he tried to take faster steps.

wɪð laɪt kʌm, ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹits, ivən soʊ ɝli. ðeɪ wɝ əbaʊt ðɛɹ oʊn bɪznəs, ðoʊ, ən noʊ wʌn hæɾ ɛni ətɛnʃən tə spɛɹ fəɹ tu jʌŋ mɛn wɔkɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə vɪlədʒ, nɑt wɪð soʊ mɛni stʃɹeɪnʒɝz əbaʊt. dʒʌs ðə seɪm, ɹænd stɪfən ɛvɹi mʌsəl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stæn stʃɹeɪt. wɪð itʃ stɛp i wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɛni ʌv ðə foʊk hɝiɪŋ baɪ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ɑɹ ɛni ʌv əm weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə wʊmən wɪð ðə dæɡɝ? fəɹ ðə feɪd?

With light come, there were plenty of people in the streets, even so early. They were about their own business, though, and no one had any attention to spare for two young men walking out of the village, not with so many strangers about. Just the same, Rand stiffened every muscle, trying to stand straight. With each step he wondered if any of the folk hurrying by were Darkfriends. Are any of them waiting for the woman with the dagger? For the Fade?

ə maɪl aʊtsaɪd ðə vɪlədʒ ɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ ɡeɪv aʊt. wʌn mɪnəɾ i wɑz pæntɪŋ əlɔŋ, hæŋɪŋ ɑn mæt; ðə nɛks ðeɪ wɝ boʊθ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd. mæt tʌɡd ɪm oʊvɝ tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd.

A mile outside the village his strength gave out. One minute he was panting along, hanging on Mat; the next they were both on the ground. Mat tugged him over to the side of the road.

"wi hæv tə kip ɡoʊɪŋ," mæt sɛd. hi skɹʌbd ɪz hæn θɹu hɪz hɛɹ, ðən tʌɡd ðə skɑɹf daʊn əbʌv ɪz aɪz. "sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, sʌmbɑɾi wɪl lɛɾ əɹ aʊt, ən ðəl bi æftɝ əs əɡɛn."

"We have to keep going," Mat said. He scrubbed his hand through his hair, then tugged the scarf down above his eyes. "Sooner or later, somebody will let her out, and they'll be after us again."

"aɪ noʊ," ɹænd pæntɪd. "aɪ noʊ. ɡɪmi ə hænd."

"I know," Rand panted. "I know. Give me a hand."

mæt pʊld ɪm ʌp əɡɛn, bʌɾ i weɪvɝd ðɛɹ, noʊɪŋ ɪt wɑz noʊ ɡʊd. ðə fɝs taɪm i tʃɹaɪd tə teɪk ə stɛp, hi wəd bi flæɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs əɡɛn.

Mat pulled him up again, but he wavered there, knowing it was no good. The first time he tried to take a step, he would be flat on his face again.

hoʊldɪŋ ɪm əpɹaɪt, mæt weɪɾəd ɪmpeɪʃənli fəɹ ə hɔɹs-kɑɹt, əpɹoʊtʃɪŋ fɹəm ðə vɪlədʒ, tə pæs ðɛm. mæt ɡeɪv ə ɡɹʌn ə sɝpɹaɪz wən ðə kɑɹt sloʊd tə ə stɑp bɪfɔɹ ðɛm. ə lɛðɝi-feɪs mæn lʊk daʊn fɹəm ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz sit.

Holding him upright, Mat waited impatiently for a horse-cart, approaching from the village, to pass them. Mat gave a grunt of surprise when the cart slowed to a stop before them. A leathery-faced man looked down from the driver's seat.

"sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð hɪm?" ðə mæn æskt ɝaʊn ɪz paɪp. "hiz dʒʌs taɪɝd," mæt sɛd.

"Something wrong with him?" the man asked around his pipe. "He's just tired," Mat said.

ɹænd kəd si ðət wɑz nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə du, nɑt linɪŋ ɑn mæt ðə weɪ hi wɑz. hi lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv mæt ən tʊk ə stɛp əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. hɪz lɛɡz kwɪvɝd, bʌɾ i wɪl hɪmsɛlf tə steɪ ɪɹɛkt. "aɪ hævən slɛpt ɪn tu deɪz," hi sɛd. "eɪt sʌmθɪŋ ðət meɪd mi sɪk. aɪm bɛɾɝ, naʊ, bʌɾ aɪ hævən slɛpt."

Rand could see that was not going to do, not leaning on Mat the way he was. He let go of Mat and took a step away from him. His legs quivered, but he willed himself to stay erect. "I haven't slept in two days," he said. "Ate something that made me sick. I'm better, now, but I haven't slept."

ðə mæn blu ə stʃɹimɝ ə smoʊk fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz maʊθ. "ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn, ɑɹ ju? wɑz jəɹ eɪdʒ, aɪ ɪkspɛkt aɪ maɪt bi ɔf tə si ðɪs fɔls dʒɹæɡən maɪsɛlf."

The man blew a streamer of smoke from the corner of his mouth. "Going to Caemlyn, are you? Was your age, I expect I might be off to see this false Dragon myself."

"jɛs." mæt nɑɾəd. "ðæts ɹaɪt. wɝ gɑnə si ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən."

"Yes." Mat nodded. "That's right. We're going to see the false Dragon."

"wɛl, klaɪm ɑn ʌp, ðɛn. jəɹ fɹɛn ɪn ðə bæk. ɪf hiz sɪk əɡɛn, bɛst ɪts ɑn ðə stʃɹɔ, nɑɾ ʌp hɪɹ. neɪmz haɪəm kɪntʃ."

"Well, climb on up, then. Your friend in the back. If he's sick again, best it's on the straw, not up here. Name's Hyam Kinch."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifɔɹ


CHAPTER 34

ðə læs vɪlədʒ


The Last Village

ɪt wɑz æftɝ dɑɹk wən ðeɪ ɹitʃt kɛɹisfɝd, lɔŋɡɝ ðən ɹænd hæd θɔɾ ɪt wəd teɪk fɹəm wʌt mæstɝ kɪntʃ sɛd wən i lɛɾ əm daʊn. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɪz hoʊl sɛns ə taɪm wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ skjud. oʊnli θɹi naɪts sɪns haʊəl ɡoʊɾ ən fɔɹ kɪŋz, tu sɪns peɪtʃɹ hæd sɝpɹaɪzd əm ɪn mɑɹkət ʃɛɹən. dʒʌst ə bɛɹ deɪ sɪns ðə neɪmləs dɑɹkfɹɛnd wʊmən tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl əm ɪn ðə steɪbəl ə ðə kwinz mæn, bʌɾ ivən ðət simd ə jɪɹ əɡoʊ, əɹ ə laɪftaɪm.

It was after dark when they reached Carysford, longer than Rand had thought it would take from what Master Kinch said when he let them down. He wondered if his whole sense of time was getting skewed. Only three nights since Howal Gode and Four Kings, two since Paitr had surprised them in Market Sheran. Just a bare day since the nameless Darkfriend woman tried to kill them in the stable of The Queen's Man, but even that seemed a year ago, or a lifetime.

wʌtɛvɝ wɑz hæpənɪŋ tə taɪm, kɛɹisfɝɾ əpɪɹd nɔɹməl ɪnʌf, ɑn ðə sɝfəs, ət list. nit, vaɪn-kʌvɝd bɹɪk haʊsəz ən nɛɹoʊ leɪnz, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊɾ ɪtsɛlf, kwaɪəɾ ən aʊtwɝdli pisfəl. bʌt wʌts ʌndɝniθ? hi wʌndɝd. mɑɹkət ʃɛɹən hæd bɪn pisfəl tə lʊk æt, ən soʊ hæd ðə vɪlədʒ wɛɹ ðə wʊmən. . . . hi hæd nɛvɝ lɝn ðə neɪm ə ðət wʌn, ən i dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊɾ ɪt.

Whatever was happening to time, Carysford appeared normal enough, on the surface, at least. Neat, vine-covered brick houses and narrow lanes, except for the Caemlyn Road itself, quiet and outwardly peaceful. But what's underneath? he wondered. Market Sheran had been peaceful to look at, and so had the village where the woman. . . . He had never learned the name of that one, and he did not want to think about it.

laɪt spɪl fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊz ə ðə haʊsəz ɪndə stʃɹits ɔl bʌɾ ɛmpti ʌv pipəl. ðət suɾəd ɹænd. slɪŋkɪŋ fɹəm kɔɹnɝ tə kɔɹnɝ, hi əvɔɪɾəd ðə fju pipəl əbɹɔd. mæt stʌk tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝ, fɹizɪŋ wən ðə kɹʌntʃ ʌv ɡɹævəl ənaʊns ði əpɹoʊtʃ ʌv ə vɪlɪdʒɝ, dɑdʒɪŋ fɹəm ʃædoʊ tə ʃædoʊ wən ðə dɪm ʃeɪp hæd ɡɔn pæst.

Light spilled from the windows of the houses into streets all but empty of people. That suited Rand. Slinking from corner to corner, he avoided the few people abroad. Mat stuck to his shoulder, freezing when the crunch of gravel announced the approach of a villager, dodging from shadow to shadow when the dim shape had gone past.

ðə ɹɪvɝ kɛɹi wɑz ə bɛɹ θɝɾi peɪsɪz waɪd ðɛɹ, ən ðə blæk wɔɾɝ muv slʌɡɪʃli, bʌt ðə fɔɹd hæd lɔŋ sɪns bɪn bɹɪdʒd oʊvɝ. sɛntʃɝiz ə ɹeɪn ən wɪn hæd wɔɹn ðə stoʊn əbʌtməns əntɪl ðeɪ simd ɔlmoʊs laɪk nætʃɹəl fɔɹmeɪʃənz. jɪɹz ə fɹeɪt wæɡənz ən mɝtʃən tʃɹeɪnz hæd ɡɹaʊn ət ðə θɪk wʊɾən plæŋks, tu. lus bɔɹdz ɹæɾəld ʌndɝ ðɛɹ buts, saʊndɪŋ əz laʊɾ əz dʒɹʌmz. əntɪl lɔŋ æftɝ ðeɪ wɝ θɹu ðə vɪlədʒ ən ɪndə ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd bɪɑnd, ɹænd weɪɾəd fəɹ ə vɔɪs tə dɪmæn tə noʊ hu ðeɪ wɝ. əɹ wɝs, noʊɪŋ u ðeɪ wɝ.

The River Cary was a bare thirty paces wide there, and the black water moved sluggishly, but the ford had long since been bridged over. Centuries of rain and wind had worn the stone abutments until they seemed almost like natural formations. Years of freight wagons and merchant trains had ground at the thick wooden planks, too. Loose boards rattled under their boots, sounding as loud as drums. Until long after they were through the village and into the countryside beyond, Rand waited for a voice to demand to know who they were. Or worse, knowing who they were.

ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd hæd bɪn fɪlɪŋ ʌp ðə fɝðɝ ðeɪ wɛnt, bɪkʌmɪŋ mɔɹ ən mɔɹ sɛɾəld. ðəɹ wɝ ɔlweɪz ðə laɪts ə fɑɹmhaʊsəz ɪn saɪt. hɛdʒɪz ən ɹeɪl fɛnsəz laɪn ðə ɹoʊɾ ən ðə filz bɪɑnd. ɔlweɪz ðə filz wɝ ðɛɹ, ən nɛvɝ ə stʃɹɛtʃ ʌv wʊdz kloʊs tə ðə ɹoʊd. ɪt simd əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɔlweɪz ɑn ði aʊtskɝts ʌv ə vɪlədʒ, ivən wən ðeɪ wɝ aʊɝz fɹəm ðə nɪɹəs taʊn. niɾ ən pisfəl. ən wɪð nɛvɝ ən ɪndəkeɪʃən ðət dɑɹkfɹɛnz əɹ wɝs maɪt bi lɝkɪŋ.

The countryside had been filling up the further they went, becoming more and more settled. There were always the lights of farmhouses in sight. Hedges and rail fences lined the road and the fields beyond. Always the fields were there, and never a stretch of woods close to the road. It seemed as if they were always on the outskirts of a village, even when they were hours from the nearest town. Neat and peaceful. And with never an indication that Darkfriends or worse might be lurking.

əbɹʌpli mæt sæt daʊn ɪn ðə ɹoʊd. hi hæd pʊʃt ðə skɑɹf ʌp ɑn tɑp ə hɪz hɛd, naʊ ðət ði oʊnli laɪt keɪm fɹəm ðə mun. "tu peɪsɪz tə ðə spæn," hi mʌɾɝd. "ə θaʊzən spænz tə ðə maɪl, fɔɹ maɪlz tə ðə liɡ. . . . aɪm nɑt wɔkɪŋ ənʌðɝ tɛn peɪsɪz ənlɛs ðɛɹz ə pleɪs tə slip ət ði ɛn ʌv ɪt. sʌmθɪŋ tə it wʊdn bi əmɪs, iðɝ. jə hævən bɪn haɪɾɪŋ ɛniθɪŋ ɪn jəɹ pɑkəts, hæv ju? ən æpəl, meɪbi? aɪ woʊn hoʊld ɪɾ əɡɛns jə ɪf jə hæv. jə kəɾ ət lis lʊk."

Abruptly Mat sat down in the road. He had pushed the scarf up on top of his head, now that the only light came from the moon. "Two paces to the span," he muttered. "A thousand spans to the mile, four miles to the league. . . . I'm not walking another ten paces unless there's a place to sleep at the end of it. Something to eat wouldn't be amiss, either. You haven't been hiding anything in your pockets, have you? An apple, maybe? I won't hold it against you if you have. You could at least look."

ɹænd pɪɹd daʊn ðə ɹoʊd boʊθ weɪz. ðeɪ wɝ ði oʊnli θɪŋz muvɪŋ ɪn ðə naɪt. hi ɡlænst ət mæt, hu hæd pʊld ɔf wʌn buɾ ən wɑz ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz fʊt. əɹ ðeɪ hæd bɪn. hɪz oʊn fit hɝt, tu. ə tʃɹɛmɝ ɹæn ʌp ɪz lɛɡz əz ɪf tə tɛl ɪm i hæd nɑt jɛt ɹiɡeɪn əz mʌtʃ stʃɹɛŋkθ əz i θɔt.

Rand peered down the road both ways. They were the only things moving in the night. He glanced at Mat, who had pulled off one boot and was rubbing his foot. Or they had been. His own feet hurt, too. A tremor ran up his legs as if to tell him he had not yet regained as much strength as he thought.

dɑɹk maʊnz stʊɾ ɪn ə fil dʒʌst əhɛɾ ə ðɛm. heɪstɑks, dɪmɪnɪʃt baɪ wɪntɝ fiɾɪŋ, bʌt stɪl heɪstɑks.

Dark mounds stood in a field just ahead of them. Haystacks, diminished by winter feeding, but still haystacks.

hi nʌdʒ mæt wɪð ɪz toʊ. "wil slip ðɛɹ."

He nudged Mat with his toe. "We'll sleep there."

"heɪstɑks əɡɛn." mæt saɪd, bʌɾ i tʌɡd ɑn ɪz buɾ ən ɡɑɾ ʌp.

"Haystacks again." Mat sighed, but he tugged on his boot and got up.

ðə wɪnd wɑz ɹaɪzɪŋ, ðə naɪt tʃɪl ɡɹoʊɪŋ dipɝ. ðeɪ klaɪmd oʊvɝ ðə smuð poʊlz ə ðə fɛns ən kwɪkli wɝ bɝoʊɪŋ ɪndə ðə heɪ. ðə tɑɹp ðət kɛp ðə ɹeɪn ɔf ðə heɪ kʌt ðə wɪnd, tu.

The wind was rising, the night chill growing deeper. They climbed over the smooth poles of the fence and quickly were burrowing into the hay. The tarp that kept the rain off the hay cut the wind, too.

ɹænd twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn ɪn ðə hɑloʊ hi hæd meɪɾ əntɪl i faʊn ə kʌmftəɹbəl pəzɪʃən. heɪ stɪl mænədʒ tə poʊk əɾ ɪm θɹu hɪz kloʊðz, bʌɾ i hæd lɝn tə pʊɾ ʌp wɪð ðæt. hi tʃɹaɪd kaʊntɪŋ ðə heɪstɑks i hæd slɛpt ɪn sɪns waɪtbɹɪdʒ. hɪɹoʊz ɪn ðə stɔɹiz nɛvɝ hæd tə slip ɪn heɪstɑks, əɹ ʌndɝ hɛdʒɪz. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ izi tə pɹitɛnd, ɛnimɔɹ, ðəɾ i wɑz ə hɪɹoʊ ɪn ə stɔɹi, ivən fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl. wɪð ə saɪ, hi pʊld ɪz kɑlɝ ʌp ɪn ðə hoʊps ə kipɪŋ heɪ fɹəm ɡɛɾɪŋ daʊn ɪz bæk.

Rand twisted around in the hollow he had made until he found a comfortable position. Hay still managed to poke at him through his clothes, but he had learned to put up with that. He tried counting the haystacks he had slept in since Whitebridge. Heroes in the stories never had to sleep in haystacks, or under hedges. But it was not easy to pretend, anymore, that he was a hero in a story, even for a little while. With a sigh, he pulled his collar up in the hopes of keeping hay from getting down his back.

"ɹænd?" mæt sɛd sɔfli. "ɹænd, dʒju θɪŋk wɪl meɪk ɪt?"

"Rand?" Mat said softly. "Rand, do you think we'll make it?"

"tɑɹ vəlɑn? ɪts ə lɔŋ weɪ jɛt, bʌt - "

"Tar Valon? It's a long way yet, but - "

"keɪɛmlɪn. dʒju θɪŋk wɪl meɪk ɪt tə keɪɛmlɪn?"

"Caemlyn. Do you think we'll make it to Caemlyn?"

ɹænd ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz dɑɹk ɪn ðɛɹ bɝoʊ; ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət toʊld ɪm wɛɹ mæt wɑz wɑz ɪz vɔɪs. "mæstɝ kɪntʃ sɛd tu deɪz. deɪ æftɝ təmɑɹoʊ, ðə nɛks deɪ, wɪl ɡɛt ðɛɹ."

Rand raised his head, but it was dark in their burrow; the only thing that told him where Mat was was his voice. "Master Kinch said two days. Day after tomorrow, the next day, we'll get there."

"ɪf ðəɹ ɑɹən ə hʌnʒɹəd dɑɹkfɹɛnz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əs daʊn ðə ɹoʊd, əɹ ə feɪɾ əɹ tu." ðəɹ wɑz saɪləns fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən mæt sɛd, "aɪ θɪŋk wɝ ðə læst wʌnz lɛft, ɹænd." hi saʊndəd fɹaɪɾənd. "wʌtɛvɝ ɪts ɔl əbaʊt, ɪts dʒʌst əs tu, naʊ. dʒʌst ʌs."

"If there aren't a hundred Darkfriends waiting for us down the road, or a Fade or two." There was silence for a moment, then Mat said, "I think we're the last ones left, Rand." He sounded frightened. "Whatever it's all about, it's just us two, now. Just us."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi nu mæt kəd nɑt si ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɹ fəɹ hɪmsɛlf ðən mæt, ɛniweɪ. "ɡoʊ tə slip, mæt," hi sɛd taɪɹədli. bʌɾ i leɪ əweɪk ə lɔŋ taɪm hɪmsɛlf, bɪfɔɹ slip keɪm. dʒʌst ʌs.

Rand shook his head. He knew Mat could not see in the darkness, but it was more for himself than Mat, anyway. "Go to sleep, Mat," he said tiredly. But he lay awake a long time himself, before sleep came. Just us.

ə kɑks kɹoʊ woʊk hɪm, ən i skɹæmbəld aʊɾ ɪndə ðə fɔls dɔn, bɹʌʃɪŋ heɪ ɔf ɪz kloʊðz. dɪspaɪɾ ɪz pɹikɔʃənz səm hæd wɝkt ɪts weɪ daʊn ɪz bæk; ðə stʃɹɔz klʌŋ bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz, ɪtʃɪŋ. hi tʊk ɔf ɪz koʊɾ ən pʊld ɪz ʃɝɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz bɹitʃɪz tə ɡɛt tə ɪt. ɪt wɑz waɪl i hæd wʌn hæn daʊn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk ən ði ʌðɝ twɪstəɾ ʌp bɪhaɪn ɪm ðəɾ i bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ðə pipəl.

A cock's crow woke him, and he scrambled out into the false dawn, brushing hay off his clothes. Despite his precautions some had worked its way down his back; the straws clung between his shoulder blades, itching. He took off his coat and pulled his shirt out of his breeches to get to it. It was while he had one hand down the back of his neck and the other twisted up behind him that he became aware of the people.

ðə sʌn wɑz nɑt jɛt tʃɹuli ʌp, bʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ə stɛɾi tʃɹɪkəl muv daʊn ðə ɹoʊɾ ɪn wʌnz ən tuz, tʃɹʌdʒɪŋ təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn, səm wɪð pæks əɹ bʌndəlz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, ʌðɝz wɪð nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ ə wɔkɪŋ stæf, ɪf ðæt. moʊst wɝ jʌŋ mɛn, bʌt hɪɹ ən ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡɝl, əɹ sʌmwʌn oʊldɝ. wʌn ən ɔl ðeɪ hæd ðə tʃɹævəl-steɪn lʊk ə hævɪŋ wɔkt ə lɔŋ weɪ. səm hæd ðɛɹ aɪz ɑn ðɛɹ fiɾ ən ə wɪɹi slʌmp tə ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ɝli əz ɪt wɑz; ʌðɝz hæd ðɛɹ ɡeɪz fɪkst ɑn sʌmθɪŋ aʊɾ ə saɪɾ əhɛd, sʌmθɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə dɔn.

The sun was not yet truly up, but already a steady trickle moved down the road in ones and twos, trudging toward Caemlyn, some with packs or bundles on their backs, others with nothing but a walking staff, if that. Most were young men, but here and there was a girl, or someone older. One and all they had the travel-stained look of having walked a long way. Some had their eyes on their feet and a weary slump to their shoulders, early as it was; others had their gaze fixed on something out of sight ahead, something toward the dawn.

mæt ɹoʊld aʊɾ ə ðə heɪstæk, skɹætʃɪŋ vɪɡɝəsli. hi oʊnli pɔz lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹæp ðə skɑɹf ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd; ɪt ʃeɪɾɪd ɪz aɪz ə lɪɾəl lɛs ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. "ju θɪŋk wi maɪt ɡɛt sʌmθɪŋ tə it tədeɪ?"

Mat rolled out of the haystack, scratching vigorously. He only paused long enough to wrap the scarf around his head; it shaded his eyes a little less this morning. "You think we might get something to eat today?"

ɹændz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld ɪn sɪmpəθi. "wi kən θɪŋk əbaʊt ðət wən wɝ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd," hi sɛd. heɪstəli ɝeɪnʒɪŋ ɪz kloʊðz, hi dʌɡ hɪz ʃɛɹ ə ðɛɹ bʌndəlz aʊɾ ə ðə heɪstæk.

Rand's stomach rumbled in sympathy. "We can think about that when we're on the road," he said. Hastily arranging his clothes, he dug his share of their bundles out of the haystack.

baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə fɛns, mæt hæd noʊɾəst ðə pipəl, tu. hi fɹaʊnd, stɑpɪŋ ɪn ðə fild waɪl ɹænd klaɪmd oʊvɝ. ə jʌŋ mæn, nɑt mʌtʃ oʊldɝ ðən ðeɪ, ɡlænst əɾ əm əz i pæst. hɪz kloʊðz wɝ dʌsti, ən soʊ wɑz ðə blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl stʃɹæpt əkɹɔs ɪz bæk.

By the time they reached the fence, Mat had noticed the people, too. He frowned, stopping in the field while Rand climbed over. A young man, not much older than they, glanced at them as he passed. His clothes were dusty, and so was the blanketroll strapped across his back.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ jə baʊnd?" mæt kɔld. "waɪ, keɪɛmlɪn, fəɹ tə si ðə dʒɹæɡən," ðə fɛloʊ ʃaʊɾəd bæk wɪθaʊt stɑpɪŋ. hi ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət ðə blæŋkəts ən sæɾəlbæɡz hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ən æɾəd, "dʒʌs laɪk ju." wɪð ə læf i wɛn ɑn, hɪz aɪz ɔlɹɛɾi sikɪŋ iɡɝli əhɛd.

"Where are you bound?" Mat called. "Why, Caemlyn, for to see the Dragon," the fellow shouted back without stopping. He raised an eyebrow at the blankets and saddlebags hanging from their shoulders, and added, "Just like you." With a laugh he went on, his eyes already seeking eagerly ahead.

mæt æsk ðə seɪm kwɛstʃən sɛvɹəl taɪmz dʊɹɪŋ ðə deɪ, ən ði oʊnli pipəl u dɪd nɑt ɡɪv mʌtʃ ðə seɪm ænsɝ wɝ loʊkəl foʊk. ɪf ðoʊz ænsɝɾ əɾ ɔl, ɪt wɑz baɪ spɪɾɪŋ ən tɝnɪŋ əweɪ ɪn dɪsɡʌst. ðeɪ tɝn əweɪ, bʌt ðeɪ kɛpt ə wɑtʃfəl aɪ, tu. ðeɪ lʊkt əɾ ɔl ðə tʃɹævəlɝz ðə seɪm weɪ, aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝz ə ðɛɹ aɪz. ðɛɹ feɪsəz sɛd stʃɹeɪnʒɝz maɪt ɡɛɾ ʌp tə ɛniθɪŋ ɪf nɑt wɑtʃt.

Mat asked the same question several times during the day, and the only people who did not give much the same answer were local folk. If those answered at all, it was by spitting and turning away in disgust. They turned away, but they kept a watchful eye, too. They looked at all the travelers the same way, out of the corners of their eyes. Their faces said strangers might get up to anything if not watched.

pipəl u lɪvd ɪn ði ɛɹiə wɝ nɑɾ oʊnli wɛɹi ʌv ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, ðeɪ simd mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl pʊɾ aʊt. dʒʌst ɪnʌf pipəl wɝ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd, skæɾɝd aʊt dʒʌst ɪnʌf, ðət wən fɑɹmɝz' kɑɹts ən wæɡənz əpɪɹd wɪð ðə sʌn pikɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hɝaɪzən, ivən ðɛɹ juʒəwəli sloʊ peɪs wɑz hævd. nʌn ə ðɛm wɑz ɪn ɛni mud tə ɡɪv ə ɹaɪd. ə saʊɝ ɡɹɪmɑs, ən meɪbi ə kɝs fəɹ ðə wɝk ðeɪ wɝ mɪsɪŋ, wɝ mɔɹ laɪkli.

People who lived in the area were not only wary of the strangers, they seemed more than a little put out. Just enough people were on the road, scattered out just enough, that when farmers' carts and wagons appeared with the sun peeking over the horizon, even their usually slow pace was halved. None of them was in any mood to give a ride. A sour grimace, and maybe a curse for the work they were missing, were more likely.

ðə mɝtʃəns' wæɡənz ɹoʊl baɪ wɪð lɪɾəl hɪnʒɹəns bɪɑnd ʃeɪkən fɪsts, wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ təwɔɹd keɪɛmlɪn əɹ əweɪ fɹəm ɪt. wən ðə fɝs mɝtʃəns' tʃɹeɪn əpɪɹd, ɝli ɑn ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, kʌmɪŋ əɾ ə stɪf tʃɹɑt wɪð ðə sʌn bɛɹli əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən bɪhaɪn ðə wæɡənz, ɹænd stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə ɹoʊd. ðeɪ ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ə sloʊɪŋ fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ, ən i sɔ ʌðɝ foʊk skɹæmbəlɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ. hi muvd ɔl ðə weɪ oʊvɝ ɑntu ðə vɝdʒ, bʌt kɛpt wɔkɪŋ.

The merchants' wagons rolled by with little hindrance beyond shaken fists, whether they were going toward Caemlyn or away from it. When the first merchants' train appeared, early on in the morning, coming at a stiff trot with the sun barely above the horizon behind the wagons, Rand stepped out of the road. They gave no sign of slowing for anything, and he saw other folk scrambling out of the way. He moved all the way over onto the verge, but kept walking.

ə flɪkɝ ə moʊʃən əz ðə fɝst wæɡən ɹʌmbəl kloʊs wɑz ɔl ðə wɔɹnɪŋ i hæd. hi wɛn spɹɔlɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn əz ðə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz wɪp kɹækt ɪn ði ɛɹ wɛɹ ɪz hɛd hæd bɪn. fɹəm wɛɹ i leɪ hi mɛt ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz aɪz əz ðə wæɡən ɹoʊl baɪ. hɑɹɾ aɪz əbʌv ə maʊθ ɪn ə taɪt ɡɹɪmɑs. nɑɾ ə kɛɹ ðəɾ i maɪɾ əv dʒɹɔn blʌd, əɹ teɪkən ən aɪ.

A flicker of motion as the first wagon rumbled close was all the warning he had. He went sprawling on the ground as the wagon driver's whip cracked in the air where his head had been. From where he lay he met the driver's eyes as the wagon rolled by. Hard eyes above a mouth in a tight grimace. Not a care that he might have drawn blood, or taken an eye.

"laɪt blaɪn ju!" mæt ʃaʊɾəd æftɝ ðə wæɡən. "ju kænt - " ə maʊntəd ɡɑɹd kɑɾ ɪm ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ wɪð ðə bʌɾ ə hɪz spɪɹ, nɑkɪŋ ɪm daʊn ətɑp ɹænd.

"Light blind you!" Mat shouted after the wagon. "You can't - " A mounted guard caught him on the shoulder with the butt of his spear, knocking him down atop Rand.

"aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ, jə dɝɾi dɑɹkfɹɛnd!" ðə ɡɑɹd ɡɹaʊld wɪθaʊt sloʊɪŋ.

"Out of the way, you dirty Darkfriend!" the guard growled without slowing.

æftɝ ðæt, ðeɪ kɛp ðɛɹ dɪstəns fɹəm ðə wæɡənz. ðəɹ wɝ sɝɾənli ɪnʌf ə ðɛm. ðə ɹæɾəl ən klæɾɝ ʌv wʌn hɑɹdli feɪɾəd bɪfɔɹ ənʌðɝ kəd bi hɝd kʌmɪŋ. ɡɑɹdz ən dʒɹaɪvɝz, ðeɪ ɔl stɛɹɾ ət ðə tʃɹævəlɝz hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ keɪɛmlɪn əz ɪf siɪŋ dɝt wɔk.

After that, they kept their distance from the wagons. There were certainly enough of them. The rattle and clatter of one hardly faded before another could be heard coming. Guards and drivers, they all stared at the travelers heading for Caemlyn as if seeing dirt walk.

wʌns ɹænd mɪsdʒʌdʒd ə dʒɹaɪvɝz wɪp, dʒʌs baɪ ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə tɪp. klæpɪŋ ɪz hæn tə ðə ʃæloʊ ɡæʃ oʊvɝ ɪz aɪbɹaʊ, hi swɑloʊd hɑɹd tə kip fɹəm vɑməɾɪŋ ət haʊ kloʊs ɪt hæd kʌm tə hɪz aɪ. ðə dʒɹaɪvɝ smɝkt ət hɪm. wɪð ɪz ʌðɝ hæn i ɡɹæb mæt, tə stɑp ɪm nɑkɪŋ ən æɹoʊ.

Once Rand misjudged a driver's whip, just by the length of the tip. Clapping his hand to the shallow gash over his eyebrow, he swallowed hard to keep from vomiting at how close it had come to his eye. The driver smirked at him. With his other hand he grabbed Mat, to stop him nocking an arrow.

"lɛɾ ɪt ɡoʊ," hi sɛd. hi dʒɝkt ɪz hɛɾ ət ðə ɡɑɹdz ɹaɪɾɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd ðə wæɡənz. səm ə ðɛm wɝ læfɪŋ; ʌðɝz ɡeɪv mæts baʊ ə hɑɹɾ aɪ. "ɪf wɝ lʌki, ðeɪd dʒʌs biɾ əs wɪð ðɛɹ spɪɹz. ɪf wɝ lʌki."

"Let it go," he said. He jerked his head at the guards riding alongside the wagons. Some of them were laughing; others gave Mat's bow a hard eye. "If we're lucky, they'd just beat us with their spears. If we're lucky."

mæt ɡɹʌntɪd saʊɝli, bʌɾ i lɛt ɹænd pʊl ɪm ɑn daʊn ðə ɹoʊd.

Mat grunted sourly, but he let Rand pull him on down the road.

twaɪs skwɑdʒɹənz ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz keɪm tʃɹɑɾɪŋ daʊn ðə ɹoʊd, stʃɹimɝz ɑn ðɛɹ lænsɪz flʌɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd. səm ə ðə fɑɹmɝz heɪl ðɛm, wɑntɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ dʌn əbaʊt ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, ən ðə ɡɑɹdz ɔlweɪz pɔz peɪʃənli tə lɪsən. nɪɹ mɪddeɪ ɹænd stɑp tə lɪsən tə wʌn sətʃ kɑnvɝseɪʃən.

Twice squadrons of the Queen's Guards came trotting down the road, streamers on their lances fluttering in the wind. Some of the farmers hailed them, wanting something done about the strangers, and the Guards always paused patiently to listen. Near midday Rand stopped to listen to one such conversation.

bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɹz ə hɪz hɛlmət, ðə ɡɑɹd kæptənz maʊθ wɑz ə taɪt laɪn. "ɪf wʌn ə ðɛm stilz sʌmθɪŋ, əɹ tʃɹɛspæsəz ɑn jəɹ lænd," hi ɡɹaʊld ət ðə læŋki fɑɹmɝ fɹaʊnɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪz stɝəp, "aɪl hɔl ɪm bɪfɔɹ ə mædʒəstʃɹeɪt, bʌt ðeɪ bɹeɪk noʊ kwinz lɔ baɪ wɔkɪŋ ɑn ðə kwinz haɪweɪ."

Behind the bars of his helmet, the Guard captain's mouth was a tight line. "If one of them steals something, or trespasses on your land," he growled at the lanky farmer frowning beside his stirrup, "I'll haul him before a magistrate, but they break no Queen's Law by walking on the Queen's Highway."

"bʌt ðəɹ ɔl oʊvɝ ðə pleɪs," ðə fɑɹmɝ pɹətɛstəd. "hu noʊz u ðeɪ ɑɹ, əɹ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ. ɔl ðɪs tɔk əbaʊt ðə dʒɹæɡən. . . ."

"But they're all over the place," the farmer protested. "Who knows who they are, or what they are. All this talk about the Dragon. . . ."

"laɪt, mæn! jə oʊnli hæv ə hændfʊl hɪɹ. keɪɛmlɪnz wɔlz ɑɹ bʌlʒɪŋ wɪð ðɛm, ən mɔɹ kʌmɪŋ ɛvɹi deɪ." ðə kæptənz skaʊl dipən əz i kɑt saɪɾ ə ɹænd ən mæt, stændɪŋ ɪn ðə ɹoʊd nɪɹbaɪ. hi dʒɛstʃɝd daʊn ðə ɹoʊd wɪð ə stil-bækt ɡɔnlət. "ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ju, əɹ əl əv jə ɪn fəɹ blɑkɪŋ tʃɹæfɪk."

"Light, man! You only have a handful here. Caemlyn's walls are bulging with them, and more coming every day." The captain's scowl deepened as he caught sight of Rand and Mat, standing in the road nearby. He gestured down the road with a steel-backed gauntlet. "Get on with you, or I'll have you in for blocking traffic."

hɪz vɔɪs wɑz noʊ ɹʌfɝ wɪð əm ðən wɪð ðə fɑɹmɝ, bʌt ðeɪ muvd ɑn. ðə kæptənz aɪz fɑloʊɾ əm fəɹ ə taɪm; ɹænd kəd fil əm ɑn ɪz bæk. hi səspɛktəd ðə ɡɑɹdz hæd lɪɾəl peɪʃəns lɛft wɪð ðə wɑndɝɝz, ən noʊ sɪmpəθi fəɹ ə hʌŋɡɹi θif. hi dɪsaɪɾɪd tə stɑp mæt ɪf i sədʒɛstəd stilɪŋ ɛɡz əɡɛn.

His voice was no rougher with them than with the farmer, but they moved on. The captain's eyes followed them for a time; Rand could feel them on his back. He suspected the Guards had little patience left with the wanderers, and no sympathy for a hungry thief. He decided to stop Mat if he suggested stealing eggs again.

stɪl, ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡʊd saɪd tə ɔl ðə wæɡənz ən pipəl ɑn ðə ɹoʊd, ɪspɛʃli ɔl ðə jʌŋ mɛn hɛɾɪŋ fəɹ keɪɛmlɪn. fəɹ ɛni dɑɹkfɹɛnz hʌntɪŋ ðɛm, ɪt wəd bi laɪk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɪk aʊt tu pɝtɪkjəlɝ pɪdʒənz ɪn ə flɑk. ɪf ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ɑn wɪntɝnaɪt hæd nɑt noʊn ɪɡzækli hu ɪt wɑz æftɝ, meɪbi ɪts fɛloʊ wəd də noʊ bɛɾɝ hɪɹ.

Still, there was a good side to all the wagons and people on the road, especially all the young men heading for Caemlyn. For any Darkfriends hunting them, it would be like trying to pick out two particular pigeons in a flock. If the Myrddraal on Winternight had not known exactly who it was after, maybe its fellow would do no better here.

hɪz stʌmək ɹʌmbəl fɹikwənli, ɹimaɪndɪŋ ɪm ðət ðeɪ hæd nɛks tə noʊ mʌni lɛft, sɝɾənli nɑɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ə mil ət ðə pɹaɪsəz tʃɑɹdʒ ðɪs kloʊs tə keɪɛmlɪn. hi ɹilaɪzd wʌns i hæɾ ə hæn ɑn ðə flut keɪs, ən fɝmli pʊʃt ɪɾ ɝaʊn tə hɪz bæk. ɡoʊd hæd noʊn ɔl əbaʊt ðə flut, ən ðə dʒʌɡəlɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tɛlɪŋ haʊ mʌtʃ bælzəmən hæd lɝn fɹəm ɪm bɪfɔɹ ði ɛnd - ɪf wʌt ɹænd hæd sin hæd bɪn ði ɛnd - əɹ haʊ mʌtʃ hæd bɪn pæs tə ʌðɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

His stomach rumbled frequently, reminding him that they had next to no money left, certainly not enough for a meal at the prices charged this close to Caemlyn. He realized once he had a hand on the flute case, and firmly pushed it around to his back. Gode had known all about the flute, and the juggling. There was no telling how much Ba'alzamon had learned from him before the end - if what Rand had seen had been the end - or how much had been passed to other Darkfriends.

hi lʊkt ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli əɾ ə fɑɹm ðeɪ wɝ pæsɪŋ. ə mæn pətʃɹoʊl ðə fɛnsəz wɪð ə pɛɹ ə dɑɡz, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ ən tʌɡɪŋ ət ðɛɹ liʃɪz. ðə mæn lʊkt əz ɪf i wɑntəd nʌθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən ən ɪkskjus tə lɛɾ əm lus. nɑɾ ɛvɹi fɑɹm hæd ðə dɑɡz aʊt, bʌt noʊ wʌn wɑz ɔfɝɪŋ dʒɑbz tə tʃɹævəlɝz.

He looked regretfully at a farm they were passing. A man patrolled the fences with a pair of dogs, growling and tugging at their leashes. The man looked as if he wanted nothing more than an excuse to let them loose. Not every farm had the dogs out, but no one was offering jobs to travelers.

bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn wɛn daʊn, hi ən mæt wɔk θɹu tu mɔɹ vɪlədʒəz. ðə vɪlədʒ foʊk stʊɾ ɪn nɑts, tɔkɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz ən wɑtʃɪŋ ðə stɛɾi stʃɹim pæs baɪ. ðɛɹ feɪsəz wɝ noʊ fɹɛnliɝ ðən ðə feɪsəz ə ðə fɑɹmɝz, əɹ ðə wæɡən dʒɹaɪvɝz, əɹ ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz. ɔl ðiz stʃɹeɪnʒɝz gɑnə si ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. fulz u dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪnʌf tə steɪ wɛɹ ðeɪ bɪlɔŋd. meɪbi fɑloʊɝz ə ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. meɪbi ivən dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛni dɪfɝəns bɪtwin ðə tu.

Before the sun went down, he and Mat walked through two more villages. The village folk stood in knots, talking among themselves and watching the steady stream pass by. Their faces were no friendlier than the faces of the farmers, or the wagon drivers, or the Queen's Guards. All these strangers going to see the false Dragon. Fools who did not know enough to stay where they belonged. Maybe followers of the false Dragon. Maybe even Darkfriends. If there was any difference between the two.

wɪð ivnɪŋ kʌmɪŋ, ðə stʃɹim bɪɡæn tə θɪn ət ðə sɛkən taʊn. ðə fju hu hæd mʌni dɪsəpɪɹɾ ɪndə ði ɪn, ðoʊ ðəɹ sim tə bi səm ɑɹɡjəmən əbaʊt lɛɾɪŋ əm ɪnsaɪd; ʌðɝz bɪɡæn hʌntɪŋ fəɹ hændi hɛdʒɪz əɹ filz wɪð noʊ dɑɡz. baɪ dʌsk i ən mæt hæd ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd tə ðɛmsɛlvz. mæt bɪɡæn tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt faɪndɪŋ ənʌðɝ heɪstæk, bʌt ɹænd ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn kipɪŋ ɑn.

With evening coming, the stream began to thin at the second town. The few who had money disappeared into the inn, though there seemed to be some argument about letting them inside; others began hunting for handy hedges or fields with no dogs. By dusk he and Mat had the Caemlyn Road to themselves. Mat began talking about finding another haystack, but Rand insisted on keeping on.

"æz lɔŋ əz wi kən si ðə ɹoʊd," hi sɛd. "ðə fɝðɝ wi ɡoʊ bɪfɔɹ stɑpɪŋ, ðə fɝðɝ əhɛd wi ɑɹ." ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃeɪsɪŋ ju. waɪ ʃəd ðeɪ tʃeɪs naʊ, wən ðeɪv bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ jə tə kʌm tə ðɛm soʊ fɑɹ?

"As long as we can see the road," he said. "The further we go before stopping, the further ahead we are." If they are chasing you. Why should they chase now, when they've been waiting for you to come to them so far?

ɪt wɑz ɑɹɡjəmən ɪnʌf fəɹ mæt. wɪð fɹikwənt ɡlænsɪz oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, hi kwɪkən ɪz stɛp. ɹænd hæd tə hɝi tə kip ʌp.

It was argument enough for Mat. With frequent glances over his shoulder, he quickened his step. Rand had to hurry to keep up.

ðə naɪt θɪkənd, ɹɪlivd oʊnli ə bɪt baɪ skæn munlaɪt. mæts bɝst ʌv ɛnɝdʒi feɪɾəd, ən ɪz kəmpleɪns stɑɹɾəd ʌp əɡɛn. eɪkɪŋ nɑts fɔɹmd ɪn ɹændz kævz. hi toʊl hɪmsɛlf i hæd wɔk fɝðɝ ɪn ə hɑɹd deɪ wɝkɪŋ ɑn ðə fɑɹm wɪð tæm, bʌt ɹɪpiɾ ɪɾ əz ɔfən əz i wʊd, hi kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf bɪliv ɪt. ɡɹɪɾɪŋ ɪz tiθ, hi ɪɡnɔɹd ði eɪks ən peɪnz ən wəd nɑt stɑp.

The night thickened, relieved only a bit by scant moonlight. Mat's burst of energy faded, and his complaints started up again. Aching knots formed in Rand's calves. He told himself he had walked further in a hard day working on the farm with Tam, but repeat it as often as he would, he could not make himself believe it. Gritting his teeth, he ignored the aches and pains and would not stop.

wɪð mæt kəmpleɪnɪŋ ən ɪm kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə nɛkst stɛp, ðeɪ wɝ ɔlmoʊst ɑn ðə vɪlədʒ bɪfɔɹ i sɔ ðə laɪts. hi tɑɾɝd tə ə stɑp, sʌɾənli əwɛɹ ʌv ə bɝnɪŋ ðət ɹæn fɹəm ɪz fit ɹaɪɾ ʌp ɪz lɛɡz. hi θɔɾ i hæɾ ə blɪstɝ ɑn ɪz ɹaɪt fʊt.

With Mat complaining and him concentrating on the next step, they were almost on the village before he saw the lights. He tottered to a stop, suddenly aware of a burning that ran from his feet right up his legs. He thought he had a blister on his right foot.

ət ðə saɪɾ ə ðə vɪlədʒ laɪts, mæt sæɡd tə hɪz niz wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn. "kæn wi stɑp naʊ?" hi pæntɪd. "ɔɹ dʒju wɑnə faɪn ən ɪn ən hæŋ aʊɾ ə saɪn fəɹ ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz? əɹ ə feɪd."

At the sight of the village lights, Mat sagged to his knees with a groan. "Can we stop now?" he panted. "Or do you want to find an inn and hang out a sign for the Darkfriends? Or a Fade."

"ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə taʊn," ɹænd ænsɝd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə laɪts. fɹəm ðɪs dɪstəns, ɪn ðə dɑɹk, ɪt cʊɾə bɪn ɛmənz fild. wʌts weɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ? "ənʌðɝ maɪl, ðæts ɔl."

"The other side of the town," Rand answered, staring at the lights. From this distance, in the dark, it could have been Emond's Field. What's waiting there? "Another mile, that's all."

"ɔl! aɪm nɑt wɔkɪŋ ənʌðɝ spæn!"

"All! I'm not walking another span!"

ɹændz lɛɡz fɛlt laɪk faɪɝ, bʌɾ i meɪd hɪmsɛlf teɪk ə stɛp, ən ðən ənʌðɝ. ɪt dɪd nɑt ɡɛɾ ɛni iziɝ, bʌɾ i kɛpt ɑn, wʌn stɛp əɾ ə taɪm. bɪfɔɹ i hæd ɡɔn tɛn peɪsɪz i hɝd mæt stæɡɝɪŋ æftɝ hɪm, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. hi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz dʒʌst əz wɛl i kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt wʌt mæt wɑz seɪɪŋ.

Rand's legs felt like fire, but he made himself take a step, and then another. It did not get any easier, but he kept on, one step at a time. Before he had gone ten paces he heard Mat staggering after him, muttering under his breath. He thought it was just as well he could not make out what Mat was saying.

ɪt wɑz leɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə stʃɹits ə ðə vɪlədʒ tə bi ɛmpti, ðoʊ moʊs haʊsəz hæɾ ə laɪɾ ɪn ət list wʌn wɪndoʊ. ði ɪn ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə taʊn wɑz bɹaɪtli lɪt, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ə ɡoʊldən pul ðət pʊʃt bæk ðə dɑɹknəs. mjuzɪk ən læftɝ, dɪm baɪ θɪk wɔlz, dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm ðə bɪldɪŋ. ðə saɪn oʊvɝ ðə dɔɹ kɹikt ɪn ðə wɪnd. ət ðə nɪɹ ɛn ə ði ɪn, ə kɑɹɾ ən hɔɹs stʊɾ ɪn ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd wɪð ə mæn tʃɛkɪŋ ðə hɑɹnəs. tu mɛn stʊɾ ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə bɪldɪŋ, ɑn ðə vɛɹi ɛdʒ ə ðə laɪt.

It was late enough for the streets of the village to be empty, though most houses had a light in at least one window. The inn in the middle of town was brightly lit, surrounded by a golden pool that pushed back the darkness. Music and laughter, dimmed by thick walls, drifted from the building. The sign over the door creaked in the wind. At the near end of the inn, a cart and horse stood in the Caemlyn Road with a man checking the harness. Two men stood at the far end of the building, on the very edge of the light.

ɹænd stɑpt ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz bɪsaɪɾ ə haʊs ðət stʊd dɑɹk. hi wɑz tu taɪɝd tə hʌn θɹu ðə leɪnz fəɹ ə weɪ ɝaʊnd. ə mɪnət ɹɛstɪŋ kəd nɑt hɝt. dʒʌst ə mɪnət. dʒʌst əntɪl ðə mɛn wɛn əweɪ. mæt slʌmpt əɡɛns ðə wɔl wɪð ə ɡɹeɪtfəl saɪ, linɪŋ bæk əz ɪf i mɛn tə ɡoʊ tə slip ɹaɪt ðɛɹ.

Rand stopped in the shadows beside a house that stood dark. He was too tired to hunt through the lanes for a way around. A minute resting could not hurt. Just a minute. Just until the men went away. Mat slumped against the wall with a grateful sigh, leaning back as if he meant to go to sleep right there.

sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə tu mɛn ət ðə ɹɪm ə ðə ʃædoʊz meɪd ɹænd ənizi. hi kəd nɑt pʊɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ ɑn ɛniθɪŋ, ət fɝst, bʌɾ i ɹilaɪz ðə mæn ət ðə kɑɹt fɛl ðə seɪm weɪ əbaʊt ðɛm. hi ɹitʃt ði ɛn ə ðə stʃɹæp i wɑz tʃɛkɪŋ, ədʒʌstəd ðə bɪɾ ɪn ðə hɔɹsəz maʊθ, ðən wɛn bæk ən stɑɹɾəd oʊvɝ fɹəm ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ əɡɛn. hi kɛpt ɪz hɛd daʊn ðə hoʊl waɪl, hɪz aɪz ɑn wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ ən əweɪ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ mɛn. ɪt cʊɾə bɪn ðəɾ i sɪmpli wɑz nɑɾ əwɛɹ ə ðɛm, ðoʊ ðeɪ wɝ lɛs ðən fɪfti fiɾ ɔf, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə stɪf weɪ hi muvd ən ðə weɪ hi səmtaɪmz tɝn ɔkwɝdli ɪn wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ soʊ hi wəd nɑt bi lʊkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðɛm.

Something about the two men at the rim of the shadows made Rand uneasy. He could not put a finger on anything, at first, but he realized the man at the cart felt the same way about them. He reached the end of the strap he was checking, adjusted the bit in the horse's mouth, then went back and started over from the beginning again. He kept his head down the whole while, his eyes on what he was doing and away from the other men. It could have been that he simply was not aware of them, though they were less than fifty feet off, except for the stiff way he moved and the way he sometimes turned awkwardly in what he was doing so he would not be looking toward them.

wʌn ə ðə mɛn ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz wɑz oʊnli ə blæk ʃeɪp, bʌt ði ʌðɝ stʊd mɔɹ ɪndə ðə laɪt, wɪð ɪz bæk tə ɹænd. ivən soʊ ɪt wɑz pleɪn i wɑz nɑɾ oʊvɝdʒɔɪɾ ət ðə kɑnvɝseɪʃən i wɑz hævɪŋ. hi ɹʌŋ ɪz hænz ən kɛpt ɪz aɪz ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, dʒɝkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ə nɑd naʊ ən ðən ət sʌmθɪŋ ði ʌðɝ hæd sɛd. ɹænd kəd nɑt hɪɹ ɛniθɪŋ, bʌɾ i ɡɑt ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ðət ðə mæn ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz wɑz duɪŋ ɔl ðə tɔkɪŋ; ðə nɝvəs mæn dʒʌs lɪsənd, ən nɑɾəd, ən ɹʌŋ ɪz hænz æŋkʃəsli.

One of the men in the shadows was only a black shape, but the other stood more into the light, with his back to Rand. Even so it was plain he was not overjoyed at the conversation he was having. He wrung his hands and kept his eyes on the ground, jerking his head in a nod now and then at something the other had said. Rand could not hear anything, but he got the impression that the man in the shadows was doing all the talking; the nervous man just listened, and nodded, and wrung his hands anxiously.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðə wʌn u wɑz ɹæpt ɪn dɑɹknəs tɝn əweɪ, ən ðə nɝvəs fɛloʊ stɑɹɾəd bæk ɪndə ðə laɪt. dɪspaɪt ðə tʃɪl i wɑz mɑpɪŋ ɪz feɪs wɪð ðə lɔŋ eɪpɹən i wɔɹ, əz ɪf i wɝ dʒɹɛntʃt ɪn swɛt.

Eventually the one who was wrapped in darkness turned away, and the nervous fellow started back into the light. Despite the chill he was mopping his face with the long apron he wore, as if he were drenched in sweat.

skɪn pɹɪklɪŋ, ɹænd wɑtʃt ðə ʃeɪp muvɪŋ ɔf ɪn ðə naɪt. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ waɪ, bʌɾ ɪz ʌnizinəs sim tə fɑloʊ ðət wʌn, ə veɪɡ tɪŋɡəlɪŋ ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk ən ðə hɛɹ stɝɪŋ ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz əz ɪf i hæd sʌɾənli ɹilaɪz sʌmθɪŋ wɑz snikɪŋ ʌp ɑn hɪm. wɪð ə kwɪk ʃeɪk ə hɪz hɛd, hi ɹʌbd ɪz ɑɹmz bɹɪskli. ɡɛɾɪŋ əz fulɪʃ əz mæt, ɑɹən ju?

Skin prickling, Rand watched the shape moving off in the night. He did not know why, but his uneasiness seemed to follow that one, a vague tingling in the back of his neck and the hair stirring on his arms as if he had suddenly realized something was sneaking up on him. With a quick shake of his head, he rubbed his arms briskly. Getting as foolish as Mat, aren't you?

ət ðət moʊmən ðə fɔɹm slɪp baɪ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə laɪt fɹəm ə wɪndoʊ - dʒʌst ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ʌv ɪt - ən ɹændz skɪn kɹɔld. ði ɪnz saɪn wɛn skɹi-skɹi-skɹi ɪn ðə wɪnd, bʌt ðə dɑɹk kloʊk nɛvɝ stɝd.

At that moment the form slipped by the edge of the light from a window - just on the brink of it - and Rand's skin crawled. The inn's sign went scree-scree-scree in the wind, but the dark cloak never stirred.

"feɪd," hi wɪspɝd, ən mæt dʒɝk tə hɪz fiɾ əz ɪf i hæd ʃaʊɾəd.

"Fade," he whispered, and Mat jerked to his feet as if he had shouted.

"wʌt - ?"

"What - ?"

hi klæmpt ə hæn oʊvɝ mæts maʊθ. "sɔfli." ðə dɑɹk ʃeɪp wɑz lɔst ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs. wɛɹ? "ɪts ɡɔn, naʊ. aɪ θɪŋk. aɪ hoʊp." hi tʊk ɪz hæn əweɪ; ði oʊnli saʊn mæt meɪd wɑz ə lɔŋ, ɪndʒɹɔn bɹɛθ.

He clamped a hand over Mat's mouth. "Softly." The dark shape was lost in the darkness. Where? "It's gone, now. I think. I hope." He took his hand away; the only sound Mat made was a long, indrawn breath.

ðə nɝvəs mæn wɑz ɔlmoʊs tə ði ɪn dɔɹ. hi stɑpt ən smuð daʊn ɪz eɪpɹən, vɪzəbli kəmpoʊzɪŋ hɪmsɛlf bɪfɔɹ i wɛn ɪnsaɪd.

The nervous man was almost to the inn door. He stopped and smoothed down his apron, visibly composing himself before he went inside.

"stʃɹeɪnʒ fɹɛnz juv ɡɑt, ɹeɪmən hoʊldwɪn," ðə mæn baɪ ðə kɑɹt sɛd sʌɾənli. ɪt wɑz ən oʊl mænz vɔɪs, bʌt stʃɹɔŋ. ðə spikɝ stʃɹeɪɾənd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "stʃɹeɪnʒ fɹɛnz ɪn ðə dɑɹk fəɹ ən ɪnkipɝ."

"Strange friends you've got, Raimun Holdwin," the man by the cart said suddenly. It was an old man's voice, but strong. The speaker straightened, shaking his head. "Strange friends in the dark for an innkeeper."

ðə nɝvəs mæn dʒʌmpt wən ði ʌðɝ spoʊk, lʊkɪŋ ɝaʊn əz ɪf i hæd nɑt sin ðə kɑɹɾ ən ði ʌðɝ mæn əntɪl ɹaɪt ðɛn. hi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ ən ɡæðɝd hɪmsɛlf, ðən æskt ʃɑɹpli, "ænd wʌt dʒju min baɪ ðæt, ɑlmɛn bʌnt?"

The nervous man jumped when the other spoke, looking around as if he had not seen the cart and the other man until right then. He drew a deep breath and gathered himself, then asked sharply, "And what do you mean by that, Almen Bunt?"

"dʒʌst wʌɾ aɪ sɛd, hoʊldwɪn. stʃɹeɪnʒ fɹɛnz. hiz nɑt fɹəm ɝaʊn hɪɹ, ɪz hi? lɑɾ ʌv ɑd foʊk kʌmɪŋ θɹu ðə læs fju wiks. ɑfəl lɑɾ ʌv ɑd foʊk."

"Just what I said, Holdwin. Strange friends. He's not from around here, is he? Lot of odd folk coming through the last few weeks. Awful lot of odd folk."

"jɔɹ ə faɪn wʌn tə tɔk." hoʊldwɪn kɑkt ən aɪ ət ðə mæn baɪ ðə kɑɹt. "aɪ noʊ ə lɑɾ ə mɛn, ivən mɛn fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn. nɑt laɪk ju, kupt ʌp əloʊn aʊɾ ɑn ðət fɑɹm ə jʊɹz." hi pɔzd, ðən wɛn ɑn əz ɪf i θɔɾ i hæd tə ɪkspleɪn fɝðɝ. "hiz fɹəm fɔɹ kɪŋz. lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ə kʌpəl ə θivz. jʌŋ mɛn. ðeɪ stoʊl ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd fɹəm hɪm."

"You're a fine one to talk." Holdwin cocked an eye at the man by the cart. "I know a lot of men, even men from Caemlyn. Not like you, cooped up alone out on that farm of yours." He paused, then went on as if he thought he had to explain further. "He's from Four Kings. Looking for a couple of thieves. Young men. They stole a heron-mark sword from him."

ɹændz bɹɛθ hæd kɑɾ ət ðə mɛnʃən ə fɔɹ kɪŋz; ət ðə mɛnʃən ə ðə sɔɹɾ i ɡlænst ət mæt. hɪz fɹɛn hæɾ ɪz bæk pɹɛs hɑɹɾ əɡɛns ðə wɔl ən wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs wɪð aɪz soʊ waɪd ðeɪ sim tə bi ɔl waɪts. ɹænd wɑntəd tə stɛɹ ɪndə ðə naɪt, tu - ðə hæfmən kəd bi ɛniwɛɹ - bʌɾ ɪz aɪz wɛn bæk tə ðə tu mɛn ɪn fɹʌn ə ði ɪn.

Rand's breath had caught at the mention of Four Kings; at the mention of the sword he glanced at Mat. His friend had his back pressed hard against the wall and was staring into the darkness with eyes so wide they seemed to be all whites. Rand wanted to stare into the night, too - the Halfman could be anywhere - but his eyes went back to the two men in front of the inn.

"ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd!" bʌn ɪkskleɪmd. "noʊ wʌndɝ i wɑns ɪt bæk."

"A heron-mark sword!" Bunt exclaimed. "No wonder he wants it back."

hoʊldwɪn nɑɾəd. "jɛs, ən ðɛm, tu. maɪ fɹɛnz ə ɹɪtʃ mæn, ə . . . ə mɝtʃənt, ən ðeɪv bɪn stɝɪŋ ʌp tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ðə mɛn u wɝk fəɹ hɪm. tɛlɪŋ waɪl stɔɹiz ən ɡɛɾɪŋ pipəl ʌpsɛt. ðəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən fɑloʊɝz ə lɑɡən, tu."

Holdwin nodded. "Yes, and them, too. My friend's a rich man, a . . . a merchant, and they've been stirring up trouble with the men who work for him. Telling wild stories and getting people upset. They're Darkfriends, and followers of Logain, too."

"dɑɹkfɹɛnz ən fɑloʊɝz ə ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən? ən tɛlɪŋ waɪl stɔɹiz, tu? ɡɛɾɪŋ ʌp tə ə lɑt fəɹ jʌŋ fɛloʊz. jə dɪd seɪ ðeɪ wɝ jʌŋ?" ðəɹ wɑz ə sʌɾən noʊɾ ʌv əmjuzmən ɪn bʌns vɔɪs, bʌt ði ɪnkipɝ dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs.

"Darkfriends and followers of the false Dragon? And telling wild stories, too? Getting up to a lot for young fellows. You did say they were young?" There was a sudden note of amusement in Bunt's voice, but the innkeeper did not seem to notice.

"jɛs. nɑt jɛt twɛnti. ðɛɹz ə ɹɪwɔɹd - ə hʌnʒɹəd kɹaʊnz ɪn ɡoʊld - fəɹ ðə tu ʌv ðɛm." hoʊldwɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən æɾəd, "ðeɪv slaɪ tʌŋz, ðiz tu. ðə laɪt noʊz wʌt kaɪndə teɪlz ðəl tɛl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɝn pipəl əɡɛnst wʌn ənʌðɝ. ən deɪnʒɝəs, tu, ivən ɪf ðeɪ doʊn lʊk ɪt. vɪʃəs. bɛs jə steɪ klɪɹ ɪf jə θɪŋk jə si ðɛm. tu jʌŋ mɛn, wʌn wɪð ə sɔɹd, ən boʊθ lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ɪf ðəɹ ðə ɹaɪt wʌnz, maɪ . . . maɪ fɹɛnd wɪl pɪk əm ʌp wʌns ðəɹ loʊkeɪɾəd."

"Yes. Not yet twenty. There's a reward - a hundred crowns in gold - for the two of them." Holdwin hesitated, then added, "They've sly tongues, these two. The Light knows what kind of tales they'll tell, trying to turn people against one another. And dangerous, too, even if they don't look it. Vicious. Best you stay clear if you think you see them. Two young men, one with a sword, and both looking over their shoulders. If they're the right ones, my . . . my friend will pick them up once they're located."

"ju saʊn ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf jə noʊ ðɛm tə lʊk æt."

"You sound almost as if you know them to look at."

"aɪl noʊ ðɛm wən aɪ si ðɛm," hoʊldwɪn sɛd kɑnfəɾəntli. "dʒʌs doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə teɪk əm jɝsɛlf. noʊ nid fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə ɡɛt hɝt. kʌm tɛl mi ɪf jə si ðɛm. maɪ . . . fɹɛnd wɪl dil wɪð ðɛm. ə hʌnʒɹəd kɹaʊnz fəɹ ðə tu, bʌɾ i wɑns ðə pɛɹ."

"I'll know them when I see them," Holdwin said confidently. "Just don't try to take them yourself. No need for anyone to get hurt. Come tell me if you see them. My . . . friend will deal with them. A hundred crowns for the two, but he wants the pair."

"ə hʌnʒɹəd kɹaʊnz fəɹ ðə tu," bʌn mjuzd. "haʊ mʌtʃ fəɹ ðɪs sɔɹɾ i wɑns soʊ bæd?"

"A hundred crowns for the two," Bunt mused. "How much for this sword he wants so bad?"

əbɹʌpli hoʊldwɪn əpɪɹd tə ɹilaɪz ði ʌðɝ mæn wɑz meɪkɪŋ fʌn ə hɪm. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ aɪm tɛlɪŋ ju," hi snæpt. "jɔɹ stɪl fɪkst ɑn ðət ful plæn ə jʊɹz, aɪ si."

Abruptly Holdwin appeared to realize the other man was making fun of him. "I don't know why I'm telling you," he snapped. "You're still fixed on that fool plan of yours, I see."

"nɑt sətʃ ə ful plæn," bʌn ɹɪplaɪd plɑtʃədli. "ðɛɹ maɪt nɑt bi ənʌðɝ fɔls dʒɹæɡən tə si bɪfɔɹ aɪ daɪ - laɪt sɛn ɪt soʊ! - ən aɪm tu oʊl tə it səm mɝtʃəns dʌst ɔl ðə weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn. əl əv ðə ɹoʊd tə maɪsɛlf, ən əl bi ɪn keɪɛmlɪn bɹaɪɾ ən ɝli təmɑɹoʊ."

"Not such a fool plan," Bunt replied placidly. "There might not be another false Dragon to see before I die - Light send it so! - and I'm too old to eat some merchant's dust all the way to Caemlyn. I'll have the road to myself, and I'll be in Caemlyn bright and early tomorrow."

"tə jɝsɛlf?" ði ɪnkipɝz vɔɪs hæɾ ə næsti kwɪvɝ. "ju kən nɛvɝ tɛl wʌt maɪt bi aʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt, ɑlmɛn bʌnt. ɔl əloʊn ɑn ðə ɹoʊd, ɪn ðə dɑɹk. ivən ɪf sʌmbɑɾi hɪɹz jə skɹim, ðɛɹz noʊ wʌn wɪl ənbɑɹ ə dɔɹ tə hɛlp. nɑt ðiz deɪz, bʌnt. nɑt jəɹ nɪɹəs neɪbɝ."

"To yourself?" The innkeeper's voice had a nasty quiver. "You can never tell what might be out in the night, Almen Bunt. All alone on the road, in the dark. Even if somebody hears you scream, there's no one will unbar a door to help. Not these days, Bunt. Not your nearest neighbor."

nʌn ə ðət sim tə ɹʌfəl ði oʊl fɑɹmɝ əɾ ɔl; hi ænsɝɾ əz kɑmli əz bɪfɔɹ. "ɪf ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz kæn kip ðə ɹoʊd seɪf ðɪs kloʊs tə keɪɛmlɪn, ðən wɝ nʌn ʌv əs seɪf ivən ɪn əɹ oʊn bɛdz. ɪf jə æsk mi, wʌn θɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹdz kəd də tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðə ɹoʊdz ɑɹ seɪf wəd bi klæp ðət fɹɛn ə jʊɹz ɪn aɪɝnz. snikɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪn ðə dɑɹk, əfɹeɪd tə lɛɾ ɛnibəɾi ɡɛɾ ə lʊk ət hɪm. kæn tɛl mi hiz nɑɾ ʌp tə noʊ ɡʊd."

None of that seemed to ruffle the old farmer at all; he answered as calmly as before. "If the Queen's Guards can't keep the road safe this close to Caemlyn, then we're none of us safe even in our own beds. If you ask me, one thing the Guards could do to make sure the roads are safe would be clap that friend of yours in irons. Sneaking around in the dark, afraid to let anybody get a look at him. Can't tell me he's not up to no good."

"əfɹeɪd!" hoʊldwɪn ɪkskleɪmd. "ju oʊl ful, ɪf jə nu - " hɪz tiθ klɪkt ʃʌɾ əbɹʌpli, ən i ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ aɪm weɪstɪŋ taɪm ɑn ju. ɡɛɾ ɔf wɪð ju! stɑp klʌɾɝɪŋ ʌp ðə fɹʌn ə maɪ pleɪs ə bɪznəs." ðə dɔɹ ə ði ɪn bumd ʃʌt bɪhaɪn hɪm.

"Afraid!" Holdwin exclaimed. "You old fool, if you knew - " His teeth clicked shut abruptly, and he gave himself a shake. "I don't know why I'm wasting time on you. Get off with you! Stop cluttering up the front of my place of business." The door of the inn boomed shut behind him.

mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, bʌn tʊk hoʊld ə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə kɑɹt siɾ ən sɛɾ ɪz fʊɾ ɑn ðə wilhəb.

Muttering to himself, Bunt took hold of the edge of the cart seat and set his foot on the wheelhub.

ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmənt. mæt kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹm əz i stɑɹɾəd fɔɹwɝd.

Rand hesitated only a moment. Mat caught his arm as he started forward.

"ɑɹ jə kɹeɪzi, ɹænd? hɪl ɹɛkəɡnaɪz əs fəɹ ʃʊɹ!"

"Are you crazy, Rand? He'll recognize us for sure!"

"jud ɹæðɝ steɪ hɪɹ? wɪð ə feɪɾ ɝaʊnd? haʊ fɑɹ dʒju θɪŋk wɪl ɡɛɾ ɑn fʊt bɪfɔɹ ɪt faɪnz ʌs?" hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə θɪŋk ə haʊ fɑɹ ðeɪ wəd ɡɛɾ ɪn ə kɑɹɾ ɪf ɪt faʊn ðɛm. hi ʃʊk fɹi ʌv mæt ən tʃɹɑɾəd ʌp ðə ɹoʊd. hi kɛɹfəli hɛld ɪz kloʊk ʃʌt soʊ ðə sɔɹd wɑz hɪɾən; ðə wɪn ən ðə koʊld wɝ ɪkskjus ɪnʌf fəɹ ðæt.

"You'd rather stay here? With a Fade around? How far do you think we'll get on foot before it finds us?" He tried not to think of how far they would get in a cart if it found them. He shook free of Mat and trotted up the road. He carefully held his cloak shut so the sword was hidden; the wind and the cold were excuse enough for that.

"aɪ kʊdn hɛlp oʊvɝhɪɹɪŋ jəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn," hi sɛd.

"I couldn't help overhearing you're going to Caemlyn," he said.

bʌnt ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, dʒɝkɪŋ ə kɔɹɾɝstæf aʊɾ ə ðə kɑɹt. hɪz lɛðɝi feɪs wɑz ə mæs ə ɹɪŋkəlz ən hæf ɪz tiθ wɝ ɡɔn, bʌɾ ɪz nɑɹl hænz hɛl ðə stæf stɛɾi. æftɝ ə mɪnəɾ i loʊɝd wʌn ɛn ə ðə stæf tə ðə ɡɹaʊn ən lin ɑn ɪt. "soʊ jə tu ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn. tə si ðə dʒɹæɡən, ɛ?"

Bunt gave a start, jerking a quarterstaff out of the cart. His leathery face was a mass of wrinkles and half his teeth were gone, but his gnarled hands held the staff steady. After a minute he lowered one end of the staff to the ground and leaned on it. "So you two are going to Caemlyn. To see the Dragon, eh?"

ɹænd hæd nɑt ɹilaɪz ðət mæt hæd fɑloʊd hɪm. mæt wɑz kipɪŋ wɛl bæk, ðoʊ, aʊɾ ə ðə laɪt, wɑtʃɪŋ ði ɪn ən ði oʊl fɑɹmɝ wɪð əz mʌtʃ səspɪʃən əz i wɑz ðə naɪt.

Rand had not realized that Mat had followed him. Mat was keeping well back, though, out of the light, watching the inn and the old farmer with as much suspicion as he was the night.

"ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən," ɹænd sɛd wɪð ɛmfəsəs.

"The false Dragon," Rand said with emphasis.

bʌnt nɑɾəd. "ʌv kɔɹs. ʌv kɔɹs." hi θɹu ə saɪdweɪz lʊk ət ði ɪn, ðən əbɹʌpli ʃʌvd ɪz stæf bæk ʌndɝ ðə kɑɹt sit. "wɛl, ɪf jə wɑn ə ɹaɪd, ɡɛɾ ɪn. aɪv weɪstəɾ ɪnʌf taɪm." hi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi klaɪmɪŋ tə ðə sit.

Bunt nodded. "Of course. Of course." He threw a sideways look at the inn, then abruptly shoved his staff back under the cart seat. "Well, if you want a ride, get in. I've wasted enough time." He was already climbing to the seat.

ɹænd klæmbɝɾ oʊvɝ ðə bæk əz ðə fɑɹmɝ flɪk ðə ɹeɪnz. mæt ɹæn tə kætʃ ʌp əz ðə kɑɹt stɑɹɾəd ɔf. ɹænd kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ən pʊld ɪm əbɔɹd.

Rand clambered over the back as the farmer flicked the reins. Mat ran to catch up as the cart started off. Rand caught his arms and pulled him aboard.

ðə vɪlədʒ feɪɾəd kwɪkli ɪndə ðə naɪɾ ət ðə peɪs bʌn sɛt. ɹænd leɪ bæk ɑn ðə bɛɹ bɔɹdz, faɪɾɪŋ ðə lʌlɪŋ kɹik ə ðə wilz. mæt staɪfəld ɪz jɔnz wɪð ə fɪst, wɛɹəli stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. dɑɹknəs weɪd hɛvəli ɑn ðə filz ən fɑɹmz, dɑɾəd wɪð ðə laɪts ə fɑɹmhaʊsəz. ðə laɪts sim dɪstənt, sim tə stʃɹʌɡəl veɪnli əɡɛns ðə naɪt. ən aʊl kɔld, ə mɔɹnɝz kɹaɪ, ən ðə wɪn moʊn laɪk lɔst soʊlz ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ.

The village faded quickly into the night at the pace Bunt set. Rand lay back on the bare boards, fighting the lulling creak of the wheels. Mat stifled his yawns with a fist, warily staring into the countryside. Darkness weighed heavily on the fields and farms, dotted with the lights of farmhouses. The lights seemed distant, seemed to struggle vainly against the night. An owl called, a mourner's cry, and the wind moaned like lost souls in the Shadow.

ɪt kəd bi aʊt ðəɹ ɛniwɛɹ, ɹænd θɔt.

It could be out there anywhere, Rand thought.

bʌn sim tə fil ði əpɹɛʃən ə ðə naɪt, tu, fəɹ i sʌɾənli spoʊk ʌp. "ju tu ɛvɝ bɪn tə keɪɛmlɪn bɪfɔɹ?" hi ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl tʃʌkəl. "doʊn səpoʊz jə hæv. wɛl, weɪt tɪl jə si ɪt. ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst sɪɾi ɪn ðə wɝld. oʊ, aɪv hɝɾ ɔl əbaʊɾ ɪljən ən ɛbu dɑɹ ən tiɹ ən ɔl - ðɛɹz ɔlweɪz səm ful θɪŋks ə θɪŋ ɪz bɪɡɝ ən bɛɾɝ dʒʌs kəz ɪts ɔf sʌmwɪɹz oʊvɝ ðə hɝaɪzən - bʌt fəɹ maɪ mʌni, keɪɛmlɪn ɪz ðə ɡɹændəs ðəɹ ɪz. kʊdn bi ɡɹændɝ. noʊ, ɪt kʊdnt. ənlɛs meɪbi kwin mɔɹɡeɪs, ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin hɝ, ɡɑt ɹɪɾ ə ðət wɪtʃ fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn."

Bunt seemed to feel the oppression of the night, too, for he suddenly spoke up. "You two ever been to Caemlyn before?" He gave a little chuckle. "Don't suppose you have. Well, wait till you see it. The greatest city in the world. Oh, I've heard all about Illian and Ebou Dar and Tear and all - there's always some fool thinks a thing is bigger and better just because it's off somewheres over the horizon - but for my money, Caemlyn is the grandest there is. Couldn't be grander. No, it couldn't. Unless maybe Queen Morgase, the Light illumine her, got rid of that witch from Tar Valon."

ɹænd wɑz laɪɪŋ bæk wɪð ɪz hɛd pɪloʊɾ ɑn ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl ətɑp ðə bʌndəl ə tɑmz kloʊk, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə naɪt dʒɹɪf baɪ, lɛɾɪŋ ðə fɑɹmɝz wɝdz wɑʃ baɪ hɪm. ə hjumən vɔɪs kɛp ðə dɑɹknəs ət beɪ ən mjuɾɪd ðə mɔɹnfəl wɪnd. hi twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn tə lʊk ʌp ət ðə dɑɹk mæs ə bʌns bæk. "ju min ən ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

Rand was lying back with his head pillowed on his blanketroll atop the bundle of Thom's cloak, watching the night drift by, letting the farmer's words wash by him. A human voice kept the darkness at bay and muted the mournful wind. He twisted around to look up at the dark mass of Bunt's back. "You mean an Aes Sedai?"

"wʌɾ ɛls wəɾ aɪ min? sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ ɪn ðə pæləs laɪk ə spaɪɾɝ. ɪm ə ɡʊd kwinz mæn - nɛvɝ seɪ aɪm nɑt - bʌɾ ɪt dʒʌst ɪzən ɹaɪt. aɪm nɑt wʌn ə ðoʊz seɪɪŋ ɪleɪɾəz ɡɑt tu mʌtʃ ɪnfluəns oʊvɝ ðə kwin. nɑt mi. ən əz fəɹ ðə fulz u kleɪm ɪleɪɾəz ɹɪli ðə kwin ɪn ɔl bʌt neɪm. . . ." hi spæɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt. "ðæt fəɹ ðɛm. mɔɹɡeɪs ɪz noʊ pʌpət tə dæns fəɹ ɛni tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃ."

"What else would I mean? Sitting there in the Palace like a spider. I'm a good Queen's man - never say I'm not - but it just isn't right. I'm not one of those saying Elaida's got too much influence over the Queen. Not me. And as for the fools who claim Elaida's really the queen in all but name. . . ." He spat into the night. "That for them. Morgase is no puppet to dance for any Tar Valon witch."

ənʌðɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪf . . . wən mɔɪɹeɪn ɡɑt tə keɪɛmlɪn, ʃi maɪt wɛl ɡoʊ tə ə sɪstɝ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪf ðə wɝs hæpənd, ðɪs ɪleɪɾə maɪt hɛlp əm ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn. hi lʊkt ət mæt, ən dʒʌst əz ɪf i hæd spoʊkən əlaʊd mæt ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi kəd nɑt si mæts feɪs, bʌɾ i nu ɪt wɑz fɪkst ɪn dɪnaɪəl.

Another Aes Sedai. If . . . when Moiraine got to Caemlyn, she might well go to a sister Aes Sedai. If the worst happened, this Elaida might help them reach Tar Valon. He looked at Mat, and just as if he had spoken aloud Mat shook his head. He could not see Mat's face, but he knew it was fixed in denial.

bʌnt wɛn ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɔkɪŋ, flɪkɪŋ ðə ɹeɪnz wɛnɛvɝ ɪz hɔɹs sloʊd bʌɾ ʌðɝwaɪz lɛɾɪŋ ɪz hænz ɹɛst ɑn ɪz niz. "ɪm ə ɡʊd kwinz mæn, laɪk aɪ sɛd, bʌɾ ivən fulz seɪ sʌmθɪŋ wɝθwaɪl naʊ ən əɡɛn. ivən ə blaɪn pɪɡ faɪnz ən eɪkɔɹn səmtaɪmz. ðɛɹz ɡɑt tə bi səm tʃeɪnʒəz. ðɪs wɛðɝ, ðə kɹɑps feɪlɪŋ, kaʊz dʒɹaɪɪŋ ʌp, kævz ən læmz bɔɹn dɛd, əɹ wɪð tu hɛdz. blʌɾi ɹeɪvənz doʊn ivən weɪt fəɹ θɪŋz tə daɪ. pipəl ɑɹ skɛɹd. ðeɪ wɑn sʌmbɑɾi tə bleɪm. dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ tɝnɪŋ ʌp ɑn pipəlz dɔɹz. θɪŋz kɹipɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt. bɑɹnz ɡɛɾɪŋ bɝnd. fɛloʊz ɝaʊn laɪk ðət fɹɛn ə hoʊldwɪn, skɛɹɪŋ pipəl. ðə kwinz ɡɑt tə də sʌmθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪts tu leɪt. jə si ðæt, doʊn ju?" ɹænd meɪɾ ə nɑnkəmɪɾəl saʊnd. ɪt saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn ivən lʌkiɝ ðən i hæd θɔt tə faɪn ðɪs oʊl mæn ən ɪz kɑɹt. ðeɪ maɪt nɑɾ əv ɡɑɾən fɝðɝ ðən ðət læs vɪlədʒ ɪf ðeɪ hæd weɪɾəd fəɹ deɪlaɪt. θɪŋz kɹipɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪn ðə naɪt. hi lɪftəɾ ʌp tə lʊk oʊvɝ ðə saɪɾ ə ðə kɑɹɾ ət ðə dɑɹknəs. ʃædoʊz ən ʃeɪps sim tə ɹɪð ɪn ðə blæk. hi dʒɹɑp bæk bɪfɔɹ ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən kənvɪnst ɪm ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ðɛɹ.

Bunt went right on talking, flicking the reins whenever his horse slowed but otherwise letting his hands rest on his knees. "I'm a good Queen's man, like I said, but even fools say something worthwhile now and again. Even a blind pig finds an acorn sometimes. There's got to be some changes. This weather, the crops failing, cows drying up, calves and lambs born dead, or with two heads. Bloody ravens don't even wait for things to die. People are scared. They want somebody to blame. Dragon's Fang turning up on people's doors. Things creeping about in the night. Barns getting burned. Fellows around like that friend of Holdwin, scaring people. The Queen's got to do something before it's too late. You see that, don't you?" Rand made a noncommittal sound. It sounded as if they had been even luckier than he had thought to find this old man and his cart. They might not have gotten further than that last village if they had waited for daylight. Things creeping about in the night. He lifted up to look over the side of the cart at the darkness. Shadows and shapes seemed to writhe in the black. He dropped back before his imagination convinced him there was something there.

bʌn tʊk ɪt fəɹ əɡɹimənt. "ɹaɪt. ɪm ə ɡʊd kwinz mæn, ən əl stæn əɡɛnst ɛni hu tʃɹaɪ tə hɑɹm hɝ, bʌɾ aɪm ɹaɪt. jə teɪk ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn ən ðə lɔɹd ɡɔɪn, naʊ. ðɛɹz ə tʃeɪnʒ wʊdn hɑɹm ɛniθɪŋ, ən maɪt də səm ɡʊd. ʃʊɹ, aɪ noʊ wiv ɔlweɪz dʌn ɪt ðət weɪ ɪn ændɝ. sɛn ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ɔf tə tɑɹ vəlɑn tə stʌɾi wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ði ɛldəst sʌn ɔf tə stʌɾi wɪð ðə wɔɹɾɝz. aɪ bɪliv ɪn tʃɹədɪʃən, aɪ du, bʌt lʊk wʌɾ ɪt ɡɑɾ əs læs taɪm. luk dɛɾ ɪn ðə blaɪt bɪfɔɹ i wɑz ɛvɝ ənɔɪntəd fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd, ən tɪɡɹeɪn vænɪʃt - ɹʌn ɔf əɹ dɛd - wən ɪt keɪm taɪm fəɹ əɹ tə teɪk ðə θɹoʊn. stɪl tʃɹʌbəlɪŋ ʌs, ðæt.

Bunt took it for agreement. "Right. I'm a good Queen's man, and I'll stand against any who try to harm her, but I'm right. You take the Lady Elayne and the Lord Gawyn, now. There's a change wouldn't harm anything, and might do some good. Sure, I know we've always done it that way in Andor. Send the Daughter-Heir off to Tar Valon to study with the Aes Sedai, and the eldest son off to study with the Warders. I believe in tradition, I do, but look what it got us last time. Luc dead in the Blight before he was ever anointed First Prince of the Sword, and Tigraine vanished - run off or dead - when it came time for her to take the throne. Still troubling us, that.

"ðɛɹz səm seɪɪŋ ʃiz stɪl əlaɪv, jə noʊ, ðət mɔɹɡeɪs ɪzən ðə ɹaɪtfəl kwin. blʌɾi fulz. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt hæpənd. ɹɪmɛmbɝ laɪk ɪt wɑz jɛstɝdeɪ. noʊ dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tə teɪk ðə θɹoʊn wən ði oʊl kwin daɪd, ən ɛvɹi haʊs ɪn ændɝ skimɪŋ ən faɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə ɹaɪt. ən tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl dəmədʒɹd. jə wʊdn əv θɔt hid lɔst ɪz waɪf, hɪm hɑt tə fɪɡjɝ wɪtʃ haʊs wəd wɪn soʊ hi kəd mɛɹi əɡɛn ən bɪkʌm pɹɪns kɑnsɔɹɾ æftɝ ɔl. wɛl, hi mænədʒd ɪt, ðoʊ waɪ mɔɹɡeɪs tʃoʊz . . . ɑ, noʊ mæn noʊz ðə maɪn ʌv ə wʊmən, ən ə kwin ɪz twaɪs ə wʊmən, wɛd tə ə mæn, wɛd tə ðə lænd. hi ɡɑt wʌɾ i wɑntəd, ɛniweɪ, ɪf nɑt ðə weɪ hi wɑntəɾ ɪt.

"There's some saying she's still alive, you know, that Morgase isn't the rightful Queen. Bloody fools. I remember what happened. Remember like it was yesterday. No Daughter-Heir to take the throne when the old Queen died, and every House in Andor scheming and fighting for the right. And Taringail Damodred. You wouldn't have thought he'd lost his wife, him hot to figure which House would win so he could marry again and become Prince Consort after all. Well, he managed it, though why Morgase chose . . . ah, no man knows the mind of a woman, and a queen is twice a woman, wed to a man, wed to the land. He got what he wanted, anyway, if not the way he wanted it.

"bɹɔt kɛɹhin ɪndə ðə plɑɾɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i wɑz dʌn, ən jə noʊ haʊ ðəɾ ɛndəd. ðə tʃɹi tʃɑp daʊn, ən blæk-veɪld il kʌmɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl. wɛl, hi ɡɑt hɪmsɛlf disənli kɪld æftɝ hid fɑðɝɾ ɪleɪn ən ɡɔɪn, soʊ ðɛɹz ən ɛn tə ɪt, aɪ səpoʊz. bʌt waɪ sɛn əm tə tɑɹ vəlɑn? ɪts taɪm mɛn dɪdn θɪŋk ə ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə seɪm θɔɾ ɛnimɔɹ. ɪf ðeɪv ɡɑt tə ɡoʊ səm pleɪs ɛls tə lɝn wʌt ðeɪ nid, wɛl, ɪljənz ɡɑt laɪbɹɛɹiz əz ɡʊɾ əz tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ðəl titʃ ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn əz mʌtʃ əbaʊt ɹulɪŋ ən skimɪŋ əz ɛvɝ ðə wɪtʃəz kʊd. noʊbɑdi noʊz mɔɹ əbaʊt skimɪŋ ðən ən ɪliɑnɝ. ən ɪf ðə ɡɑɹdz kæn titʃ ðə lɔɹd ɡɔɪn ɪnʌf əbaʊt soʊlʒɝɪŋ, wɛl, ðeɪv soʊlʒɝz ɪn ɪljən, tu. ən ɪn ʃaɪnɝ, ən tiɹ, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. ɪm ə ɡʊd kwinz mæn, bʌɾ aɪ seɪ lɛts stɑp ɔl ðɪs tʃɹʌk wɪð tɑɹ vəlɑn. θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz ɪz lɔŋ ɪnʌf. tu lɔŋ. kwin mɔɹɡeɪs kən liɾ əs ən pʊt θɪŋz ɹaɪt wɪθaʊt hɛlp fɹəm ðə waɪt taʊɝ. aɪ tɛl ju, ðɛɹz ə wʊmən meɪks ə mæn pɹaʊd tə nil fəɹ əɹ blɛsɪŋ. waɪ, wʌns. . . ."

"Brought Cairhien into the plotting before he was done, and you know how that ended. The Tree chopped down, and black-veiled Aiel coming over the Dragonwall. Well, he got himself decently killed after he'd fathered Elayne and Gawyn, so there's an end to it, I suppose. But why send them to Tar Valon? It's time men didn't think of the throne of Andor and Aes Sedai in the same thought anymore. If they've got to go some place else to learn what they need, well, Illian's got libraries as good as Tar Valon, and they'll teach the Lady Elayne as much about ruling and scheming as ever the witches could. Nobody knows more about scheming than an Illianer. And if the Guards can't teach the Lord Gawyn enough about soldiering, well, they've soldiers in Illian, too. And in Shienar, and Tear, for that matter. I'm a good Queen's man, but I say let's stop all this truck with Tar Valon. Three thousand years is long enough. Too long. Queen Morgase can lead us and put things right without help from the White Tower. I tell you, there's a woman makes a man proud to kneel for her blessing. Why, once. . . ."

ɹænd fɔt ðə slip ɪz bɑɾi kɹaɪɾ aʊt fɔɹ, bʌt ðə ɹɪðmɪk kɹik ən sweɪ ʌv ðə kɑɹt lʌld ɪm ən i floʊɾəd ɔf ɑn ðə dʒɹoʊn ə bʌns vɔɪs. hi dʒɹimd ə tæm. ət fɝs ðeɪ wɝ ət ðə bɪɡ oʊk teɪbəl ɪn ðə fɑɹmhaʊs, dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ ti waɪl tæm toʊld ɪm əbaʊt pɹɪns kɑnsɔɹts, ən dɔɾɝ-ɛɹz, ən ðə dʒɹæɡoʊnwɔl, ən blæk-veɪld ilmɛn. ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd leɪ ɑn ðə teɪbəl bɪtwin ðɛm, bʌt niðɝ ə ðɛm lʊkt əɾ ɪt. sʌɾənli hi wɑz ɪn ðə wɛstwʊd, pʊlɪŋ ðə meɪkʃɪf lɪɾɝ θɹu ðə mun-bɹaɪt naɪt. wən i lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ɪt wɑz tɑm ɑn ðə lɪɾɝ, nɑɾ ɪz fɑðɝ, sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəɾ ən dʒʌɡəlɪŋ ɪn ðə munlaɪt.

Rand fought the sleep his body cried out for, but the rhythmic creak and sway of the cart lulled him and he floated off on the drone of Bunt's voice. He dreamed of Tam. At first they were at the big oak table in the farmhouse, drinking tea while Tam told him about Prince Consorts, and Daughter-Heirs, and the Dragonwall, and black-veiled Aielmen. The heron-mark sword lay on the table between them, but neither of them looked at it. Suddenly he was in the Westwood, pulling the makeshift litter through the moon-bright night. When he looked over his shoulder, it was Thom on the litter, not his father, sitting cross-legged and juggling in the moonlight.

"ðə kwin ɪz wɛd tə ðə lænd," tɑm sɛɾ əz bɹaɪtli kʌlɝd bɔlz dænst ɪn ə sɝkəl, "bʌt ðə dʒɹæɡən . . . ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz wʌn wɪð ðə lænd, ən ðə læn ɪz wʌn wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən."

"The Queen is wed to the land," Thom said as brightly colored balls danced in a circle, "but the Dragon . . . the Dragon is one with the land, and the land is one with the Dragon."

fɝðɝ bæk ɹænd sɔ ə feɪd kʌmɪŋ, blæk kloʊk ʌndɪstɝbd baɪ ðə wɪnd, hɔɹs ɡoʊstɪŋ saɪlənli θɹu ðə tʃɹiz. tu sɛvɝd hɛdz hʌŋ ət ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz sæɾəlboʊ, dʒɹɪpɪŋ blʌd ðət ɹæn ɪn dɑɹkɝ stʃɹimz daʊn ɪts maʊns koʊl-blæk ʃoʊldɝ. læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn, feɪsəz dɪstɔɹɾəd ɪn ɡɹɪməsɪz ə peɪn. ðə feɪd pʊld ɑn ə fɪsfəl ə tɛðɝz əz ɪt ɹoʊd. itʃ tɛðɝ ɹæn bæk tə ðə baʊn ɹɪsts ʌv wʌn ə ðoʊz u ɹæn bɪhaɪn ðə saʊnləs hʊvz, ðɛɹ feɪsəz blæŋk wɪð dɪspɛɹ. mæt ən pɛɹɪn. ən ɛɡwin.

Further back Rand saw a Fade coming, black cloak undisturbed by the wind, horse ghosting silently through the trees. Two severed heads hung at the Myrddraal's saddlebow, dripping blood that ran in darker streams down its mount's coal-black shoulder. Lan and Moiraine, faces distorted in grimaces of pain. The Fade pulled on a fistful of tethers as it rode. Each tether ran back to the bound wrists of one of those who ran behind the soundless hooves, their faces blank with despair. Mat and Perrin. And Egwene.

"nɑt hɝ!" ɹænd ʃaʊɾəd. "ðə laɪt blæs ju, ɪts mi jə wɑnt, nɑt hɝ!"

"Not her!" Rand shouted. "The Light blast you, it's me you want, not her!"

ðə hæfmən dʒɛstʃɝd, ən fleɪmz kənsumd ɛɡwin, flɛʃ kɹɪspɪŋ tə æʃ, boʊn blækɪŋ ən kɹʌmbəlɪŋ.

The Halfman gestured, and flames consumed Egwene, flesh crisping to ash, bone blacking and crumbling.

"ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz wʌn wɪð ðə lænd," tɑm sɛd, stɪl dʒʌɡəlɪŋ ʌnkənsɝnədli, "æn ðə læn ɪz wʌn wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡən."

"The Dragon is one with the land," Thom said, still juggling unconcernedly, "and the land is one with the Dragon."

ɹænd skɹimd . . . ən oʊpən ɪz aɪz.

Rand screamed . . . and opened his eyes.

ðə kɑɹt kɹikt əlɔŋ ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd, fɪld wɪð naɪɾ ən ðə switnəs ə lɔŋ-vænɪʃt heɪ ən ðə feɪn smɛl ə hɔɹs. ə ʃeɪp blækɝ ðən ðə naɪt ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, ən aɪz blækɝ ðən dɛθ lʊkt ɪndə hɪz.

The cart creaked along the Caemlyn Road, filled with night and the sweetness of long-vanished hay and the faint smell of horse. A shape blacker than the night rested on his chest, and eyes blacker than death looked into his.

"ju ɑɹ maɪn," ðə ɹeɪvən sɛd, ən ðə ʃɑɹp bik stæbd ɪndə hɪz aɪ. hi skɹimd əz ɪt plʌkt ɪz aɪbɔl aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd.

"You are mine," the raven said, and the sharp beak stabbed into his eye. He screamed as it plucked his eyeball out of his head.

wɪð ə θɹoʊt-ɹɪpɪŋ ʃɹik, hi sæɾ ʌp, klæpɪŋ boʊθ hænz tə hɪz feɪs.

With a throat-ripping shriek, he sat up, clapping both hands to his face.

ɝli mɔɹnɪŋ deɪlaɪt beɪðd ðə kɑɹt. deɪzd, hi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪz hænz. noʊ blʌd. noʊ peɪn. ðə ɹɛst ə ðə dʒɹim wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi feɪɾɪŋ, bʌt ðæt. . . . dʒɪnʒɝli hi fɛlt ɪz feɪs ən ʃʌɾɝəd.

Early morning daylight bathed the cart. Dazed, he stared at his hands. No blood. No pain. The rest of the dream was already fading, but that. . . . Gingerly he felt his face and shuddered.

"æt list. . . ." mæt jɔnd, kɹækɪŋ ɪz dʒɔz. "æt lis jə ɡɑt səm slip." ðəɹ wɑz lɪɾəl sɪmpəθi ɪn ɪz blɪɹi aɪz. hi wɑz hʌɾəld ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk, wɪð ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl dʌbəld ʌp bɪniθ ɪz hɛd. "hi tɔkt ɔl blʌɾi naɪt."

"At least. . . ." Mat yawned, cracking his jaws. "At least you got some sleep." There was little sympathy in his bleary eyes. He was huddled under his cloak, with his blanketroll doubled up beneath his head. "He talked all bloody night."

"ju ɔl ðə weɪ əweɪk?" bʌn sɛd fɹəm ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz sit. "ɡeɪv mi ə stɑɹt, jə dɪd, jɛlɪŋ laɪk ðæt. wɛl, wɝ ðɛɹ." hi swɛpt ə hæn aʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðɛm ɪn ə ɡɹæn dʒɛstʃɝ. "keɪɛmlɪn, ðə ɡɹændəst sɪɾi ɪn ðə wɝld."

"You all the way awake?" Bunt said from the driver's seat. "Gave me a start, you did, yelling like that. Well, we're there." He swept a hand out in front of them in a grand gesture. "Caemlyn, the grandest city in the world."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾifaɪv


CHAPTER 35

keɪɛmlɪn


Caemlyn

ɹænd twɪstəɾ ʌp tə nil bɪhaɪn ðə dʒɹaɪvɝz sit. hi kəd nɑt hɛlp læfɪŋ wɪð ɹɪlif. "wi meɪɾ ɪt, mæt! aɪ toʊl jə wid. . . ." wɝdz daɪɾ ɪn ɪz maʊθ əz ɪz aɪz fɛl ɑn keɪɛmlɪn. æftɝ bɛɹlən, ivən mɔɹ æftɝ ðə ɹuənz ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, hi hæd θɔɾ i nu wʌɾ ə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi wəd lʊk laɪk, bʌt ðɪs . . . ðɪs wɑz mɔɹ ðən i wəɾ əv bɪlivd.

Rand twisted up to kneel behind the driver's seat. He could not help laughing with relief. "We made it, Mat! I told you we'd. . . ." Words died in his mouth as his eyes fell on Caemlyn. After Baerlon, even more after the ruins of Shadar Logoth, he had thought he knew what a great city would look like, but this . . . this was more than he would have believed.

aʊtsaɪd ðə ɡɹeɪt wɔl, bɪldɪŋz klʌstɝɾ əz ɪf ɛvɹi taʊn i hæd pæs θɹu hæd bɪn ɡæðɝɾ ən sɛt daʊn ðɛɹ, saɪd-baɪ-saɪɾ ən ɔl pʊʃt təɡɛðɝ. ɪnz θɹʌs ðɛɹ ʌpɝ stɔɹiz əbʌv ðə taɪl ɹufs ə haʊsəz, ən skwɑt wɛɹhaʊzɪz, bɹɔɾ ən wɪndoʊləs, ʃoʊldɝɾ əɡɛnst əm ɔl. ɹɛd bɹɪk ən ɡɹeɪ stoʊn ən plæstɝd waɪt, dʒʌmbəld ən mɪks təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ spɹɛɾ əz fɑɹ əz ði aɪ kəd si. bɛɹlən cʊɾə vænɪʃt ɪndə ɪt wɪθaʊt biɪŋ noʊɾəst, ən waɪtbɹɪdʒ swɑloʊɾ ʌp twɛnti taɪmz oʊvɝ wɪð hɑɹdli ə ɹɪpəl.

Outside the great wall, buildings clustered as if every town he had passed through had been gathered and set down there, side-by-side and all pushed together. Inns thrust their upper stories above the tile roofs of houses, and squat warehouses, broad and windowless, shouldered against them all. Red brick and gray stone and plastered white, jumbled and mixed together, they spread as far as the eye could see. Baerlon could have vanished into it without being noticed, and Whitebridge swallowed up twenty times over with hardly a ripple.

ən ðə wɔl ɪtsɛlf. ðə ʃɪɹ, fɪfti-fʊt haɪɾ ə peɪl ɡɹeɪ stoʊn, stʃɹikt wɪð sɪlvɝ ən waɪt, swɛpt aʊɾ ɪn ə ɡɹeɪt sɝkəl, kɝvɪŋ tə nɔɹθ ən saʊθ tɪl i wʌndɝd haʊ fɑɹ ɪt mʌst ɹʌn. ɔl əlɔŋ ɪts lɛŋθ taʊɝz ɹoʊz, ɹaʊn ən stændɪŋ haɪ əbʌv ðə wɔlz oʊn haɪt, ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt bænɝz wɪpɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪn ətɑp itʃ wʌn. fɹəm ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔl ʌðɝ taʊɝz pikt aʊt, slɛndɝ taʊɝz ivən tɔlɝ ðən ðoʊz ət ðə wɔlz, ən doʊmz ɡlimɪŋ waɪɾ ən ɡoʊld ɪn ðə sʌn. ə θaʊzən stɔɹiz hæd peɪntəd sɪɾiz ɪn ɪz maɪnd, ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾiz ə kɪŋz ən kwinz, ʌv θɹoʊnz ən paʊɝz ən lɛdʒənz, ən keɪɛmlɪn fɪɾ ɪndə ðoʊz maɪnd-dip pɪktʃɝz əz wɔɾɝ fɪts ɪndə ə dʒʌɡ.

And the wall itself. The sheer, fifty-foot height of pale gray stone, streaked with silver and white, swept out in a great circle, curving to north and south till he wondered how far it must run. All along its length towers rose, round and standing high above the wall's own height, red-and-white banners whipping in the wind atop each one. From inside the wall other towers peeked out, slender towers even taller than those at the walls, and domes gleaming white and gold in the sun. A thousand stories had painted cities in his mind, the great cities of kings and queens, of thrones and powers and legends, and Caemlyn fit into those mind-deep pictures as water fits into a jug.

ðə kɑɹt kɹik daʊn ðə waɪd ɹoʊd təwɔɹd ðə sɪɾi, təwɔɹd taʊɝ-flæŋkt ɡeɪts. ðə wæɡənz ʌv ə mɝtʃəns' tʃɹeɪn ɹoʊld aʊɾ ə ðoʊz ɡeɪts, ʌndɝ ə vɔltɪŋ ɑɹtʃweɪ ɪn ðə stoʊn ðət cʊɾə lɛɾ ə dʒaɪən θɹu, əɹ tɛn dʒaɪəns əbɹɛst. ənwɔl mɑɹkəts laɪn ðə ɹoʊɾ ɑn boʊθ saɪdz, ɹuf taɪlz ɡlɪsnɪŋ ɹɛɾ ən pɝpəl, wɪð stɔlz ən pɛnz ɪn ðə speɪsəz bɪtwin. kævz bɔld, kæɾəl loʊd, ɡis hɔŋkt, tʃɪkənz klʌkt, ɡoʊts bliɾɪd, ʃip beɪd, ən pipəl bɑɹɡən ət ðə tɑp ə ðɛɹ lʌŋz. ə wɔl ə nɔɪz fʌnəld əm təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪts ə keɪɛmlɪn.

The cart creaked down the wide road toward the city, toward tower-flanked gates. The wagons of a merchants' train rolled out of those gates, under a vaulting archway in the stone that could have let a giant through, or ten giants abreast. Unwalled markets lined the road on both sides, roof tiles glistening red and purple, with stalls and pens in the spaces between. Calves bawled, cattle lowed, geese honked, chickens clucked, goats bleated, sheep baaed, and people bargained at the top of their lungs. A wall of noise funneled them toward the gates of Caemlyn.

"wʌt dɪɾ aɪ tɛl ju?" bʌn hæd tə ɹeɪz ɪz vɔɪs tə nɪɹ ə ʃaʊɾ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə bi hɝd. "ðə ɡɹændəst sɪɾi ɪn ðə wɝld. bɪl baɪ oʊɡiɝ, jə noʊ. list, ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi ən ðə pæləs wɝ. ɪts ðəɾ oʊld, keɪɛmlɪn ɪz. keɪɛmlɪn, wɛɹ ɡʊd kwin mɔɹɡeɪs, ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin hɝ, meɪks ðə lɔ ən hoʊlz ðə pis fəɹ ændɝ. ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst sɪɾi ɑn ɝθ."

"What did I tell you?" Bunt had to raise his voice to near a shout in order to be heard. "The grandest city in the world. Built by Ogier, you know. Least, the Inner City and the Palace were. It's that old, Caemlyn is. Caemlyn, where good Queen Morgase, the Light illumine her, makes the law and holds the peace for Andor. The greatest city on earth."

ɹænd wɑz ɹɛɾi tə əɡɹi. hɪz maʊθ hʌŋ oʊpən, ən i wɑntəd tə pʊɾ ɪz hænz oʊvɝ ɪz ɪɹz tə ʃʌɾ aʊt ðə dɪn. pipəl kɹaʊɾəd ðə ɹoʊd, əz θɪk əz foʊk ɪn ɛmənz fil kɹaʊɾəd ðə ɡɹin ət bɛl taɪn. hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd θɪŋkɪŋ ðəɹ wɝ tu mɛni pipəl ɪn bɛɹlən tə bi bɪlivd, ən ɔlmoʊs læft. hi lʊkt ət mæt ən ɡɹɪnd. mæt dɪɾ əv ɪz hænz oʊvɝ ɪz ɪɹz, ən ɪz ʃoʊldɝz wɝ hʌntʃt ʌp əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə kʌvɝ əm wɪð ðoʊz, tu.

Rand was ready to agree. His mouth hung open, and he wanted to put his hands over his ears to shut out the din. People crowded the road, as thick as folk in Emond's Field crowded the Green at Bel Tine. He remembered thinking there were too many people in Baerlon to be believed, and almost laughed. He looked at Mat and grinned. Mat did have his hands over his ears, and his shoulders were hunched up as if he wanted to cover them with those, too.

"haʊ ɑɹ wi gɑnə haɪɾ ɪn ðɪs?" hi dɪmændəd laʊdli wən i sɔ ɹænd lʊkɪŋ. "haʊ kən wi tɛl u tə tʃɹʌst wɪð soʊ mɛni? soʊ blʌɾi mɛni. laɪt, ðə nɔɪz!"

"How are we going to hide in this?" he demanded loudly when he saw Rand looking. "How can we tell who to trust with so many? So bloody many. Light, the noise!"

ɹænd lʊkt ət bʌn bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ. ðə fɑɹmɝ wɑz kɑɾ ʌp ɪn stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə sɪɾi; wɪð ðə nɔɪz, hi maɪt nɑɾ əv hɝɾ ɛniweɪ. stɪl, ɹænd pʊɾ ɪz maʊθ kloʊs tə mæts ɪɹ. "haʊ kən ðeɪ faɪn əs əmʌŋ soʊ mɛni? kæn jə si ɪt, jə wʊl-hɛɾəd ɪɾiət? wɝ seɪf, ɪf jə ɛvɝ lɝn tə wɑtʃ jəɹ blʌɾi tʌŋ!" hi flʌŋ aʊɾ ə hæn tə teɪk ɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ðə mɑɹkəts, ðə sɪɾi wɔlz stɪl əhɛd. "lʊk əɾ ɪt, mæt! ɛniθɪŋ kəd hæpən hɪɹ. ɛniθɪŋ! wi maɪɾ ivən faɪn mɔɪɹeɪn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ʌs, ən ɛɡwin, ən ɔl ðə ɹɛst."

Rand looked at Bunt before answering. The farmer was caught up in staring at the city; with the noise, he might not have heard anyway. Still, Rand put his mouth close to Mat's ear. "How can they find us among so many? Can't you see it, you wool-headed idiot? We're safe, if you ever learn to watch your bloody tongue!" He flung out a hand to take in everything, the markets, the city walls still ahead. "Look at it, Mat! Anything could happen here. Anything! We might even find Moiraine waiting for us, and Egwene, and all the rest."

"ɪf ðəɹ əlaɪv. ɪf jə æsk mi, ðəɹ əz dɛɾ əz ðə ɡlimən."

"If they're alive. If you ask me, they're as dead as the gleeman."

ðə ɡɹɪn feɪɾəd fɹəm ɹændz feɪs, ən i tɝn tə wɑtʃ ðə ɡeɪts kʌm nɪɹɝ. ɛniθɪŋ kəd hæpən ɪn ə sɪɾi laɪk keɪɛmlɪn. hi hɛl ðət θɔt stʌbɝnli.

The grin faded from Rand's face, and he turned to watch the gates come nearer. Anything could happen in a city like Caemlyn. He held that thought stubbornly.

ðə hɔɹs kəd nɑt muv ɛni fæstɝ, flæp ðə ɹeɪnz əz bʌnt wʊd; ðə kloʊsɝ tə ðə ɡeɪts ðeɪ keɪm, ðə θɪkɝ ðə kɹaʊd ɡɹu, dʒɑsəlɪŋ təɡɛðɝ ʃoʊldɝ tə ʃoʊldɝ, pɹɛsɪŋ əɡɛns ðə kɑɹts ən wæɡənz hɛɾɪŋ ɪn. ɹænd wɑz ɡlæd tə si ə ɡʊd mɛni wɝ dʌsti jʌŋ mɛn əfʊt wɪð lɪɾəl ɪn ðə weɪ ʌv bɪlɔŋɪŋz. wʌtɛvɝ ðɛɹ eɪdʒəz, ə lɑɾ ə ðə kɹaʊd pʊʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪts hæɾ ə tʃɹævəl-wɔɹn lʊk, ɹɪkəɾi kɑɹts ən taɪɝd hɔɹsəz, kloʊðz ɹɪŋkəl fɹəm mɛni naɪts ə slipɪŋ ɹʌf, dʒɹæɡɪŋ stɛps ən wɪɹi aɪz. bʌt wɪɹi əɹ nɑt, ðoʊz aɪz wɝ fɪkst ɑn ðə ɡeɪts əz ɪf ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz wəd stʃɹɪp əweɪ ɔl ðɛɹ fətiɡ.

The horse could not move any faster, flap the reins as Bunt would; the closer to the gates they came, the thicker the crowd grew, jostling together shoulder to shoulder, pressing against the carts and wagons heading in. Rand was glad to see a good many were dusty young men afoot with little in the way of belongings. Whatever their ages, a lot of the crowd pushing toward the gates had a travel-worn look, rickety carts and tired horses, clothes wrinkled from many nights of sleeping rough, dragging steps and weary eyes. But weary or not, those eyes were fixed on the gates as if getting inside the walls would strip away all their fatigue.

hæf ə dʌzən ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz stʊɾ ət ðə ɡeɪts, ðɛɹ klin ɹɛd-ænd-waɪt tɑbɝdz ən bɝnɪʃt pleɪt-ænd-meɪl ə ʃɑɹp kɑntʃɹæs tə moʊst ə ðə pipəl stʃɹimɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə stoʊn ɑɹtʃ. bæks ɹɪdʒəɾ ən hɛdz stʃɹeɪt, ðeɪ aɪd ði ɪnkoʊmɝz wɪð dɪsdeɪnfəl wɛɹinɪs. ɪt wɑz pleɪn ðeɪ wəd dʒʌst əz sun əv tɝn əweɪ moʊst ə ðoʊz kʌmɪŋ ɪn. əsaɪd fɹəm kipɪŋ ə weɪ klɪɹ fəɹ tʃɹæfɪk livɪŋ ðə sɪɾi, ðoʊ, ən hævɪŋ ə hɑɹd wɝd wɪð ðoʊz u tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ tu fæst, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt hɪndɝ ɛniwʌn.

Half a dozen of the Queen's Guards stood at the gates, their clean red-and-white tabards and burnished plate-and-mail a sharp contrast to most of the people streaming under the stone arch. Backs rigid and heads straight, they eyed the incomers with disdainful wariness. It was plain they would just as soon have turned away most of those coming in. Aside from keeping a way clear for traffic leaving the city, though, and having a hard word with those who tried to push too fast, they did not hinder anyone.

"kip jəɹ pleɪsəz. doʊn pʊʃ. doʊn pʊʃ, ðə laɪt blaɪn ju! ðɛɹz ɹum fəɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi, ðə laɪt hɛlp ʌs. kip jəɹ pleɪsəz."

"Keep your places. Don't push. Don't push, the Light blind you! There's room for everybody, the Light help us. Keep your places."

bʌns kɑɹt ɹoʊl pæs ðə ɡeɪts wɪð ðə sloʊ taɪɾ ə ðə θɹɔŋ, ɪndə keɪɛmlɪn.

Bunt's cart rolled past the gates with the slow tide of the throng, into Caemlyn.

ðə sɪɾi ɹoʊz ɑn loʊ hɪlz, laɪk stɛps klaɪmɪŋ tə ə sɛntɝ. ənʌðɝ wɔl ɪnsɝkəl ðət sɛntɝ, ʃaɪnɪŋ pjʊɹ waɪɾ ən ɹʌnɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə hɪlz. ɪnsaɪd ðət wɝ ivən mɔɹ taʊɝz ən doʊmz, waɪɾ ən ɡoʊld ən pɝpəl, ðɛɹ ɛləveɪʃən ətɑp ðə hɪlz meɪkɪŋ əm sim tə lʊk daʊn ɑn ðə ɹɛst ə keɪɛmlɪn. ɹænd θɔt ðət mʌs bi ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi ʌv wɪtʃ bʌn hæd spoʊkən.

The city rose on low hills, like steps climbing to a center. Another wall encircled that center, shining pure white and running over the hills. Inside that were even more towers and domes, white and gold and purple, their elevation atop the hills making them seem to look down on the rest of Caemlyn. Rand thought that must be the Inner City of which Bunt had spoken.

ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊɾ ɪtsɛlf tʃeɪnʒd əz sun əz ɪt wɑz ɪnsaɪd ðə sɪɾi, bɪkʌmɪŋ ə waɪd bʊləvɑɹd, splɪt daʊn ðə mɪɾəl baɪ bɹɔd stʃɹɪps ʌv ɡɹæs ən tʃɹiz. ðə ɡɹæs wɑz bɹaʊn ən ðə tʃɹi bɹæntʃəz bɛɹ, bʌt pipəl hɝid baɪ əz ɪf ðeɪ sɔ nʌθɪŋ ənjuʒəwəl, læfɪŋ, tɔkɪŋ, ɑɹɡjuɪŋ, duɪŋ ɔl ðə θɪŋz ðət pipəl du. dʒʌst əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd noʊ aɪdiə ðət ðəɹ hæd bɪn noʊ spɹɪŋ jɛt ðɪs jɪɹ ən maɪt bi nʌn. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt si, ɹænd ɹilaɪzd, kəd nɑɾ əɹ wəd nɑt. ðɛɹ aɪz slɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm lifləs bɹæntʃəz, ən ðeɪ wɔkt əkɹɔs ðə dɛɾ ən daɪɪŋ ɡɹæs wɪθaʊt wʌns lʊkɪŋ daʊn. wʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt si, ðeɪ kəɾ ɪɡnɔɹ; wʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt si wɑz nɑt ɹɪli ðɛɹ.

The Caemlyn Road itself changed as soon as it was inside the city, becoming a wide boulevard, split down the middle by broad strips of grass and trees. The grass was brown and the tree branches bare, but people hurried by as if they saw nothing unusual, laughing, talking, arguing, doing all the things that people do. Just as if they had no idea that there had been no spring yet this year and might be none. They did not see, Rand realized, could not or would not. Their eyes slid away from leafless branches, and they walked across the dead and dying grass without once looking down. What they did not see, they could ignore; what they did not see was not really there.

ɡeɪpɪŋ ət ðə sɪɾi ən ðə pipəl, ɹænd wɑz teɪkən baɪ sɝpɹaɪz wən ðə kɑɹt tɝn daʊn ə saɪd stʃɹit, nɛɹoʊɝ ðən ðə bʊləvɑɹd, bʌt stɪl twaɪs əz waɪɾ əz ɛni stʃɹiɾ ɪn ɛmənz fild. bʌn dʒɹu ðə hɔɹs tə ə hɔlt ən tɝn tə lʊk bæk əɾ əm hɛzɪɾəntli. ðə tʃɹæfɪk wɑz ə bɪt laɪɾɝ hɪɹ; ðə kɹaʊd splɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə kɑɹt wɪθaʊt bɹeɪkɪŋ stʃɹaɪd.

Gaping at the city and the people, Rand was taken by surprise when the cart turned down a side street, narrower than the boulevard, but still twice as wide as any street in Emond's Field. Bunt drew the horse to a halt and turned to look back at them hesitantly. The traffic was a bit lighter here; the crowd split around the cart without breaking stride.

"wʌt jəɹ haɪɾɪŋ ʌndɝ jəɹ kloʊk, ɪz ɪt ɹɪli wʌt hoʊldwɪn sɛz?"

"What you're hiding under your cloak, is it really what Holdwin says?"

ɹænd wɑz ɪn ði ækt ə tɔsɪŋ ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hi dɪd nɑɾ ivən twɪtʃ. "wʌt dʒju min?" hɪz vɔɪs wɑz stɛɾi, tu. hɪz stʌmək wɑz ə saʊɝ nɑt, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs wɑz stɛɾi.

Rand was in the act of tossing his saddlebags over his shoulder. He did not even twitch. "What do you mean?" His voice was steady, too. His stomach was a sour knot, but his voice was steady.

mæt staɪfəld ə jɔn wɪð wʌn hænd, bʌɾ i ʃʌv ði ʌðɝ ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt - klʌtʃɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ, ɹænd nu - ən ɪz aɪz hæɾ ə hɑɹd, hʌntəd lʊk ʌndɝ ðə skɑɹf ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd. bʌn əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət mæt, əz ɪf i nu ðəɹ wɑz ə wɛpən ɪn ðət hɪɾən hænd.

Mat stifled a yawn with one hand, but he shoved the other under his coat - clutching the dagger from Shadar Logoth, Rand knew - and his eyes had a hard, hunted look under the scarf around his head. Bunt avoided looking at Mat, as if he knew there was a weapon in that hidden hand.

"doʊn min nʌθɪŋ, aɪ səpoʊz. lʊk, naʊ, ɪf jə hɝɾ aɪ wɑz kʌmɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn, jə wɝ ðəɹ lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə hɪɹ ðə ɹɛst. wɑz aɪ æftɝ ə ɹɪwɔɹd, aɪɾ əv meɪd səm ɪkskjus tə ɡoʊ ɪn ðə ɡus ən kɹaʊn, spik tə hoʊldwɪn. oʊnli aɪ doʊn mʌtʃ laɪk hoʊldwɪn, ən aɪ doʊn laɪk ðət fɹɛn ə hɪz, nɑɾ əɾ ɔl. simz laɪk i wɑns jə tu mɔɹ ðən i wɑns . . . ɛniθɪŋ ɛls."

"Don't mean nothing, I suppose. Look, now, if you heard I was coming to Caemlyn, you were there long enough to hear the rest. Was I after a reward, I'd have made some excuse to go in the Goose and Crown, speak to Holdwin. Only I don't much like Holdwin, and I don't like that friend of his, not at all. Seems like he wants you two more than he wants . . . anything else."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌɾ i wɑns," ɹænd sɛd. "wiv nɛvɝ sin ɪm bɪfɔɹ." ɪt maɪɾ ivən bi ðə tʃɹuθ; hi kəd nɑt tɛl wʌn feɪd fɹəm ənʌðɝ.

"I don't know what he wants," Rand said. "We've never seen him before." It might even be the truth; he could not tell one Fade from another.

"ʌ-hʌ. wɛl, laɪk aɪ seɪ, aɪ doʊnt noʊ nʌθɪŋ, ən aɪ ɡɛs aɪ doʊnt wɑn tə. ðɛɹz ɪnʌf tʃɹʌbəl ɝaʊn fəɹ ɛvɹibɑɾi wɪθaʊɾ aɪ ɡoʊ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mɔɹ."

"Uh-huh. Well, like I say, I don't know nothing, and I guess I don't want to. There's enough trouble around for everybody without I go looking for more."

mæt wɑz sloʊ ɪn ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪz θɪŋz, ən ɹænd wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə stʃɹit bɪfɔɹ i stɑɹɾəd klaɪmɪŋ daʊn. ɹænd weɪɾəd ɪmpeɪʃənli. mæt tɝn stɪfli fɹəm ðə kɑɹt, hʌɡɪŋ baʊ ən kwɪvɝ ən blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl tə hɪz tʃɛst, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. hɛvi ʃædoʊz dɑɹkən ði ʌndɝsaɪdz ə hɪz aɪz.

Mat was slow in gathering his things, and Rand was already in the street before he started climbing down. Rand waited impatiently. Mat turned stiffly from the cart, hugging bow and quiver and blanketroll to his chest, muttering under his breath. Heavy shadows darkened the undersides of his eyes.

ɹændz stʌmək ɹʌmbəld, ən i ɡɹɪməst. hʌŋɡɝ kəmbaɪnd wɪð ə saʊɝ twɪstɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɡʌt meɪɾ ɪm əfɹeɪɾ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə vɑmət. mæt wɑz stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm naʊ, ɪkspɛktənli. wɪtʃ weɪ tə ɡoʊ? wʌt tə də naʊ?

Rand's stomach rumbled, and he grimaced. Hunger combined with a sour twisting in his gut made him afraid he was going to vomit. Mat was staring at him now, expectantly. Which way to go? What to do now?

bʌn lin oʊvɝ ən bɛkən ɪm kloʊsɝ. hi wɛnt, hoʊpɪŋ fəɹ ædvaɪs əbaʊt keɪɛmlɪn.

Bunt leaned over and beckoned him closer. He went, hoping for advice about Caemlyn.

"aɪd haɪd ðæt. . . ." ði oʊl fɑɹmɝ pɔzd ən lʊkt ɝaʊnd wɛɹəli. pipəl pʊʃt baɪ ɑn boʊθ saɪdz ə ðə kɑɹt, bʌɾ ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju pæsɪŋ kɝsɪz əbaʊt blɑkɪŋ ðə weɪ, noʊ wʌn peɪɾ əm ɛni ətɛnʃən. "stɑp wɛɹɪŋ ɪt," hi sɛd, "haɪɾ ɪt, sɛl ɪt. ɡɪv ɪɾ əweɪ. ðæts maɪ ædvaɪs. θɪŋ laɪk ðæts gɑnə dʒɹɔ ətɛnʃən, ən aɪ ɡɛs jə doʊnt wɑn ɛni ʌv ðæt."

"I'd hide that. . . ." The old farmer paused and looked around warily. People pushed by on both sides of the cart, but except for a few passing curses about blocking the way, no one paid them any attention. "Stop wearing it," he said, "hide it, sell it. Give it away. That's my advice. Thing like that's going to draw attention, and I guess you don't want any of that."

əbɹʌpli hi stʃɹeɪɾənd, klʌkɪŋ tə hɪz hɔɹs, ən dʒɹoʊv sloʊli ɑn daʊn ðə kɹaʊɾəd stʃɹit wɪθaʊɾ ənʌðɝ wɝɾ əɹ ə bækwɝd ɡlæns. ə wæɡən loʊɾəd wɪð bæɹəlz ɹʌmbəl təwɔɹd ðɛm. ɹænd dʒʌmpt aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ, stæɡɝd, ən wən i lʊkt əɡɛn bʌn ən ɪz kɑɹt wɝ lɔs tə saɪt.

Abruptly he straightened, clucking to his horse, and drove slowly on down the crowded street without another word or a backward glance. A wagon loaded with barrels rumbled toward them. Rand jumped out of the way, staggered, and when he looked again Bunt and his cart were lost to sight.

"wʌt də wi də naʊ?" mæt dɪmændəd. hi lɪkt ɪz lɪps, stɛɹɪŋ waɪd-aɪɾ əɾ ɔl ðə pipəl pʊʃɪŋ baɪ ən ðə bɪldɪŋz taʊɝɪŋ əz mʌtʃ əz sɪks stɔɹiz əbʌv ðə stʃɹit. "wɝ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt wʌt də wi du?" hi hæɾ ənkʌvɝɾ ɪz ɪɹz, bʌɾ ɪz hænz twɪtʃt əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə pʊɾ əm bæk. ə hʌm leɪ ɑn ðə sɪɾi, ðə loʊ, stɛɾi dʒɹoʊn ə hʌnʒɹədz ə ʃɑps wɝkɪŋ, θaʊzənz ə pipəl tɔkɪŋ. tə ɹænd ɪt wɑz laɪk biɪŋ ɪnsaɪɾ ə dʒaɪən bihaɪv, kɑnstənli bʌzɪŋ. "ivən ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ hɪɹ, ɹænd, haʊ kəd wi faɪn əm ɪn ɔl ə ðɪs?"

"What do we do now?" Mat demanded. He licked his lips, staring wide-eyed at all the people pushing by and the buildings towering as much as six stories above the street. "We're in Caemlyn, but what do we do?" He had uncovered his ears, but his hands twitched as if he wanted to put them back. A hum lay on the city, the low, steady drone of hundreds of shops working, thousands of people talking. To Rand it was like being inside a giant beehive, constantly buzzing. "Even if they are here, Rand, how could we find them in all of this?"

"mɔɪɹeɪn wɪl faɪn ʌs," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. ði ɪmɛnsəɾi ʌv ðə sɪɾi wɑz ə weɪɾ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz; hi wɑntəd tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ, tə haɪd fɹəm ɔl ðə pipəl ən nɔɪz. ðə vɔɪɾ ɪluɾɪd ɪm dɪspaɪt tæmz titʃɪŋz; hɪz aɪz dʒɹu ðə sɪɾi ɪndə ɪt. hi kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɪnstɛɾ ɑn wʌt wɑz ɹaɪɾ ɝaʊn hɪm, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət leɪ bɪɑnd. dʒʌs lʊkɪŋ ət ðət wʌn stʃɹit, ɪɾ ɔlmoʊst sim laɪk bɛɹlən. bɛɹlən, ðə læs pleɪs ðeɪ hæɾ ɔl θɔt ðeɪ wɝ seɪf. noʊbɑdiz seɪf ɛnimɔɹ. meɪbi ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔl dɛd. wʌt dʒju də ðɛn?

"Moiraine will find us," Rand said slowly. The immensity of the city was a weight on his shoulders; he wanted to get away, to hide from all the people and noise. The void eluded him despite Tam's teachings; his eyes drew the city into it. He concentrated instead on what was right around him, ignoring everything that lay beyond. Just looking at that one street, it almost seemed like Baerlon. Baerlon, the last place they had all thought they were safe. Nobody's safe anymore. Maybe they are all dead. What do you do then?

"ðeɪɹ əlaɪv! ɛɡwinz əlaɪv!" hi sɛd fɪɹsli. sɛvɹəl pæsɝzbi lʊkt əɾ ɪm ɑdli.

"They're alive! Egwene's alive!" he said fiercely. Several passersby looked at him oddly.

"meɪbi," mæt sɛd. "meɪbi. wʌɾ ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn dʌzn faɪn ʌs? wʌɾ ɪf noʊbɑdi dʌz bʌt ðə . . . ðə. . . ." hi ʃʌɾɝəd, əneɪbəl tə seɪ ɪt.

"Maybe," Mat said. "Maybe. What if Moiraine doesn't find us? What if nobody does but the . . . the. . . ." He shuddered, unable to say it.

"wil θɪŋk əbaʊt ðət wən ɪt hæpənz," hi toʊl mæt fɝmli. "ɪf ɪt hæpənz." ðə wɝs mɛn sikɪŋ aʊɾ ɪleɪɾə, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ðə pæləs. hi wəd ɡoʊ ɑn tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, fɝst. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪf mæt ɹɪmɛmbɝd wʌt tɑm hæd sɛɾ əbaʊt ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ - ən ðə blæk - bʌɾ i ʃʊɹli dɪd. hɪz stʌmək twɪstəɾ əɡɛn. "tɑm sɛd tə faɪn ən ɪn kɔl ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ. wɪl ɡoʊ ðəɹ fɝst."

"We'll think about that when it happens," he told Mat firmly. "If it happens." The worst meant seeking out Elaida, the Aes Sedai in the Palace. He would go on to Tar Valon, first. He did not know if Mat remembered what Thom had said about the Red Ajah - and the Black - but he surely did. His stomach twisted again. "Thom said to find an inn called The Queen's Blessing. We'll go there first."

"haʊ? wi kæn əfɔɹd wʌn mil bɪtwin ðə tu ʌv ʌs."

"How? We can't afford one meal between the two of us."

"æt list ɪts ə pleɪs tə stɑɹt. tɑm θɔt wi kəd faɪn hɛlp ðɛɹ."

"At least it's a place to start. Thom thought we could find help there."

"aɪ kænt. . . . ɹænd, ðəɹ ɛvɹiwɛɹ." mæt dʒɹɑpt ɪz aɪz tə ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz ən sim tə ʃɹɪŋk ɪn ɑn hɪmsɛlf, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pʊl əweɪ fɹəm ðə pipəl ðət wɝ ɔl ɝaʊn ðɛm. "wɛɹɛvɝ wi ɡoʊ, ðəɹ ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn ʌs, əɹ ðəɹ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ʌs. ðəl bi ət ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ, tu. aɪ kænt. . . . aɪ. . . . nʌθɪŋz gɑnə stɑp ə feɪd."

"I can't. . . . Rand, they're everywhere." Mat dropped his eyes to the paving stones and seemed to shrink in on himself, trying to pull away from the people that were all around them. "Wherever we go, they're right behind us, or they're waiting for us. They'll be at The Queen's Blessing, too. I can't. . . . I. . . . Nothing's going to stop a Fade."

ɹænd ɡɹæb mæts kɑlɝ ɪn ə fɪs ðəɾ i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ hɑɹd tə kip fɹəm tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. hi niɾəd mæt. meɪbi ði ʌðɝz wɝ əlaɪv - laɪt, pliz! - bʌt ɹaɪt ðən ən ðɛɹ, ɪt wɑz dʒʌs mæt ən hɪm. ðə θɔɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn əloʊn. . . . hi swɑloʊd hɑɹd, teɪstɪŋ baɪl.

Rand grabbed Mat's collar in a fist that he was trying hard to keep from trembling. He needed Mat. Maybe the others were alive - Light, please! - but right then and there, it was just Mat and him. The thought of going on alone. . . . He swallowed hard, tasting bile.

hi lʊkt ɝaʊn kwɪkli. noʊ wʌn sim tə hæv hɝd mæt mɛnʃən ðə feɪd; ðə kɹaʊd pɹɛs pæs lɔst ɪn ɪts oʊn wɝiz. hi pʊɾ ɪz feɪs kloʊs tə mæts. "wiv meɪɾ ɪt ðɪs fɑɹ, hævənt wi?" hi æskt ɪn ə hɔɹs wɪspɝ. "ðeɪ hævən kɑɾ əs jɛt. wi kən meɪk ɪɾ ɔl ðə weɪ, ɪf wi dʒʌs doʊn kwɪt. aɪ woʊn dʒʌs kwɪɾ ən weɪt fəɹ əm laɪk ə ʃip fəɹ slɔɾɝ. aɪ woʊnt! wɛl? ɑɹ jə gɑnə stæn hɪɹ tɪl jə stɑɹv tə dɛθ? əɹ əntɪl ðeɪ kʌm pɪk jə ʌp ɪn ə sæk?"

He looked around quickly. No one seemed to have heard Mat mention the Fade; the crowd pressed past lost in its own worries. He put his face close to Mat's. "We've made it this far, haven't we?" he asked in a hoarse whisper. "They haven't caught us yet. We can make it all the way, if we just don't quit. I won't just quit and wait for them like a sheep for slaughter. I won't! Well? Are you going to stand here till you starve to death? Or until they come pick you up in a sack?"

hi lɛt ɡoʊ ʌv mæt ən tɝn əweɪ. hɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz dʌɡ ɪndə hɪz pɑmz, bʌɾ ɪz hænz stɪl tʃɹɛmbəld. sʌɾənli mæt wɑz wɔkɪŋ əlɔŋsaɪd hɪm, hɪz aɪz stɪl daʊn, ən ɹænd lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ.

He let go of Mat and turned away. His fingernails dug into his palms, but his hands still trembled. Suddenly Mat was walking alongside him, his eyes still down, and Rand let out a long breath.

"aɪm sɑɹi, ɹænd," mæt mʌmbəld.

"I'm sorry, Rand," Mat mumbled.

"fɝɡɛɾ ɪt," ɹænd sɛd.

"Forget it," Rand said.

mæt bɛɹli lʊkt ʌp ɪnʌf tə kip fɹəm wɔkɪŋ ɪndə pipəl waɪl ðə wɝdz pɔɹɾ aʊɾ ɪn ə laɪfləs vɔɪs. "aɪ kæn stɑp θɪŋkɪŋ əl nɛvɝ si hoʊm əɡɛn. aɪ wɑnə ɡoʊ hoʊm. læf ɪf jə wɑnt; aɪ doʊn kɛɹ. wʌɾ aɪ wʊdnt ɡɪv tə hæv maɪ mʌðɝ blɛsɪŋ mi aʊt fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɹaɪt naʊ. ɪts laɪk weɪts ɑn maɪ bɹeɪn; hɑt weɪts. stʃɹeɪnʒɝz ɔl ɝaʊnd, ən noʊ weɪ tə tɛl u tə tʃɹʌst, ɪf aɪ kən tʃɹʌst ɛnibəɾi. laɪt, ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz soʊ fɑɹ əweɪ ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl bi ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə wɝld. wɝ əloʊn, ən wɪl nɛvɝ ɡɛt hoʊm. wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ tə daɪ, ɹænd."

Mat barely looked up enough to keep from walking into people while the words poured out in a lifeless voice. "I can't stop thinking I'll never see home again. I want to go home. Laugh if you want; I don't care. What I wouldn't give to have my mother blessing me out for something right now. It's like weights on my brain; hot weights. Strangers all around, and no way to tell who to trust, if I can trust anybody. Light, the Two Rivers is so far away it might as well be on the other side of the world. We're alone, and we'll never get home. We're going to die, Rand."

"nɑt jɛt, wi woʊnt," ɹænd ɹitɔɹɾɪd. "ɛvɹibɑɾi daɪz. ðə wil tɝnz. aɪm nɑt gɑnə kɝl ʌp ən weɪt fəɹ ɪt tə hæpən, ðoʊ."

"Not yet, we won't," Rand retorted. "Everybody dies. The Wheel turns. I'm not going to curl up and wait for it to happen, though."

"ju saʊn laɪk mæstɝ ælvɪɹ," mæt ɡɹʌmbəld, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs hæɾ ə lɪɾəl spɪɹəɾ ɪn ɪt.

"You sound like Master al'Vere," Mat grumbled, but his voice had a little spirit in it.

"ɡʊd," ɹænd sɛd. "ɡʊd." laɪt, lɛt ði ʌðɝz bi ɔl ɹaɪt. pliz doʊn lɛɾ əs bi əloʊn.

"Good," Rand said. "Good." Light, let the others be all right. Please don't let us be alone.

hi bɪɡæn æskɪŋ dɝɛkʃənz tə ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ. ðə ɹɪspɑnsɪz vɛɹid waɪdli, ə kɝs fəɹ ɔl ðoʊz u dɪd nɑt steɪ wɛɹ ðeɪ bɪlɔŋd əɹ ə ʃɹʌɡ ən ə blæŋk lʊk biɪŋ ðə moʊs kɑmən. səm stɔkt ɑn baɪ wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə ɡlæns, ɪf ðæt.

He began asking directions to The Queen's Blessing. The responses varied widely, a curse for all those who did not stay where they belonged or a shrug and a blank look being the most common. Some stalked on by with no more than a glance, if that.

ə bɹɔd-feɪs mæn, nɪɹli əz bɪɡ əz pɛɹɪn, kɑkt ɪz hɛɾ ən sɛd, "ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ, ɛ? jə kʌntʃɹi bɔɪz kwinz mɛn?" hi wɔɹ ə waɪt kɑkeɪɾ ɑn ɪz waɪd-bɹɪm hæt, ən ə waɪɾ ɑɹmbæn ɑn ɪz lɔŋ koʊt. "wɛl, juv kʌm tu leɪt."

A broad-faced man, nearly as big as Perrin, cocked his head and said, "The Queen's Blessing, eh? You country boys Queen's men?" He wore a white cockade on his wide-brimmed hat, and a white armband on his long coat. "Well, you've come too late."

hi wɛn ɔf ɹɔɹɪŋ wɪð læftɝ, livɪŋ ɹænd ən mæt tə stɛɹ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ ɪn pʌzəlmənt. ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd; ðəɹ wɝ plɛnti ʌv ɑd foʊk ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, pipəl laɪk i hæd nɛvɝ sin bɪfɔɹ.

He went off roaring with laughter, leaving Rand and Mat to stare at one another in puzzlement. Rand shrugged; there were plenty of odd folk in Caemlyn, people like he had never seen before.

səm ə ðɛm stʊɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðə kɹaʊd, skɪnz tu dɑɹk əɹ tu peɪl, koʊts ə stʃɹeɪnʒ kʌɾ əɹ bɹaɪt kʌlɝz, hæts wɪð pɔɪntəd piks əɹ lɔŋ fɛðɝz. ðəɹ wɝ wɪmən wɪð veɪlz əkɹɔs ðɛɹ feɪsəz, wɪmən ɪn stɪf dʒɹɛsəz əz waɪɾ əz ðə wɛɹɝ wɑz tɔl, wɪmən ɪn dʒɹɛsəz ðət lɛf mɔɹ skɪn bɛɹ ðən ɛni tɑvɝmeɪɾ i hæd sin. əkeɪʒənəli ə kæɹɪdʒ, ɔl vɪvəd peɪn ən ɡɪlt, skwiz θɹu ðə θɹɔŋ stʃɹits bɪhaɪn ə fɔɹ-ɔɹ sɪks-hɔɹs tim wɪð plumz ɑn ðɛɹ hɑɹnəs. sɪdæn tʃɛɹz wɝ ɛvɹiwɛɹ, ðə pəlmən pʊʃɪŋ əlɔŋ wɪð nɛvɝ ə kɛɹ fəɹ u ðeɪ ʃʌvd əsaɪd.

Some of them stood out in the crowd, skins too dark or too pale, coats of strange cut or bright colors, hats with pointed peaks or long feathers. There were women with veils across their faces, women in stiff dresses as wide as the wearer was tall, women in dresses that left more skin bare than any tavernmaid he had seen. Occasionally a carriage, all vivid paint and gilt, squeezed through the thronged streets behind a four-or six-horse team with plumes on their harness. Sedan chairs were everywhere, the polemen pushing along with never a care for who they shoved aside.

ɹænd sɔ wʌn faɪt stɑɹt ðət weɪ, ə bɹɔlɪŋ hip ə mɛn swɪŋɪŋ ðɛɹ fɪsts waɪl ə peɪl-skɪn mæn ɪn ə ɹɛd-stʃɹaɪp koʊt klaɪmd aʊɾ ə ðə sɪdæn tʃɛɹ laɪɪŋ ɑn ɪts saɪd. tu ɹʌfli dʒɹɛs mɛn, hu sim tə hæv bɪn dʒʌs pæsɪŋ baɪ ʌp tɪl ðɛn, dʒʌmpt ɑn ɪm bɪfɔɹ i wɑz klɪɹ. ðə kɹaʊd ðət hæd stɑp tə wɑtʃ bɪɡæn tə tɝn ʌɡli, mʌɾɝɪŋ ən ʃeɪkɪŋ fɪsts. ɹænd pʊld ət mæts sliv ən hɝiɾ ɑn. mæt niɾəd noʊ sɛkən ɝdʒɪŋ. ðə ɹɔɹ ʌv ə smɔl ɹaɪət fɑloʊɾ əm daʊn ðə stʃɹit.

Rand saw one fight start that way, a brawling heap of men swinging their fists while a pale-skinned man in a red-striped coat climbed out of the sedan chair lying on its side. Two roughly dressed men, who seemed to have been just passing by up till then, jumped on him before he was clear. The crowd that had stopped to watch began to turn ugly, muttering and shaking fists. Rand pulled at Mat's sleeve and hurried on. Mat needed no second urging. The roar of a small riot followed them down the street.

sɛvɹəl taɪmz mɛn əpɹoʊtʃt ðə tu ʌv əm ɪnstɛɾ ə ði ʌðɝ weɪ ɝaʊnd. ðɛɹ dʌsti kloʊðz mɑɹkt əm əz nukʌmɝz, ən sim tə æk laɪk ə mæɡnəɾ ɑn səm taɪps. fɝɾɪv fɛloʊz u ɔfɝd ɹɛlɪks ə lɑɡən fəɹ seɪl wɪð dɑɹɾɪŋ aɪz ən fit sɛt tə ɹʌn. ɹænd kælkjəleɪɾəd i wɑz ɔfɝɾ ɪnʌf skɹæps ə ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡənz kloʊk ən fɹæɡməns ə hɪz sɔɹd tə meɪk tu sɔɹdz ən hæf ə dʌzən kloʊks. mæts feɪs bɹaɪɾənd wɪð ɪntʃɹəst, ðə fɝs taɪm ət list, bʌt ɹænd ɡeɪv əm ɔl ə kɝt noʊ, ən ðeɪ tʊk ɪt wɪð ə bɑb ə ðə hɛɾ ən ə kwɪk, "laɪɾ ɪlumin ðə kwin, ɡʊd mæstɝ," ən vænɪʃt. moʊst ə ðə ʃɑps hæd pleɪts ən kʌps peɪntəd wɪð fænsɪfəl sinz pɝpɔɹɾɪŋ tə ʃoʊ ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən biɪŋ dɪspleɪd bɪfɔɹ ðə kwin ɪn tʃeɪnz. ən ðəɹ wɝ waɪtkloʊks ɪn ðə stʃɹits. itʃ wɔkt ɪn ən oʊpən speɪs ðət muvd wɪð hɪm, dʒʌst əz ɪn bɛɹlən.

Several times men approached the two of them instead of the other way around. Their dusty clothes marked them as newcomers, and seemed to act like a magnet on some types. Furtive fellows who offered relics of Logain for sale with darting eyes and feet set to run. Rand calculated he was offered enough scraps of the false Dragon's cloak and fragments of his sword to make two swords and half a dozen cloaks. Mat's face brightened with interest, the first time at least, but Rand gave them all a curt no, and they took it with a bob of the head and a quick, "Light illumine the Queen, good master," and vanished. Most of the shops had plates and cups painted with fanciful scenes purporting to show the false Dragon being displayed before the Queen in chains. And there were Whitecloaks in the streets. Each walked in an open space that moved with him, just as in Baerlon.

steɪɪŋ ənnoʊɾɪst wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɹænd θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ə ɡɹeɪt dil. hi kɛpt ɪz kloʊk oʊvɝ ɪz sɔɹd, bʌt ðət wəd nɑt bi ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ vɛɹi lɔŋ. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ sʌmwʌn wəd wʌndɝ wʌɾ i wɑz haɪɾɪŋ. hi wəd nɑt - kəd nɑt - teɪk bʌns ædvaɪs tə stɑp wɛɹɪŋ ɪt, nɑɾ ɪz lɪŋk tə tæm. tə hɪz fɑðɝ.

Staying unnoticed was something Rand thought about a great deal. He kept his cloak over his sword, but that would not be good enough for very long. Sooner or later someone would wonder what he was hiding. He would not - could not - take Bunt's advice to stop wearing it, not his link to Tam. To his father.

mɛni ʌðɝz əmʌŋ ðə θɹɔŋ wɔɹ sɔɹdz, bʌt nʌn wɪð ðə hɛɹənmɑɹk tə pʊl ði aɪ. ɔl ðə keɪɛmlɪn mɛn, ðoʊ, ən səm ə ðə stʃɹeɪnʒɝz, hæd ðɛɹ sɔɹdz waʊn ɪn stʃɹɪps ə klɔθ, ʃiθ ən hɪlt, ɹɛd baʊnd wɪð waɪt kɔɹd, əɹ waɪt baʊnd wɪð ɹɛd. ə hʌnʒɹəd hɛɹən-mɑɹks kəd bi hɪɾən ʌndɝ ðoʊz ɹæpɪŋz ən noʊ wʌn wəd si. bɪsaɪdz, fɑloʊɪŋ loʊkəl fæʃən wəd meɪk əm sim tə fɪɾ ɪn mɔɹ.

Many others among the throng wore swords, but none with the heronmark to pull the eye. All the Caemlyn men, though, and some of the strangers, had their swords wound in strips of cloth, sheath and hilt, red bound with white cord, or white bound with red. A hundred heron-marks could be hidden under those wrappings and no one would see. Besides, following local fashion would make them seem to fit in more.

ə ɡʊd mɛni ʃɑps wɝ fɹʌntɪd wɪð teɪbəlz dɪspleɪɪŋ ðə klɔθ ən kɔɹd, ən ɹænd stɑpt ət wʌn. ðə ɹɛd klɔθ wɑz tʃipɝ ðən ðə waɪt, ðoʊ hi kəd si noʊ dɪfɝəns əpɑɹt fɹəm ðə kʌlɝ, soʊ hi bɑt ðəɾ ən ðə waɪt kɔɹd tə ɡoʊ wɪð ɪt, dɪspaɪt mæts kəmpleɪns əbaʊt haʊ lɪɾəl mʌni ðeɪ hæd lɛft. ðə taɪt-lɪpt ʃɑpkipɝ aɪɾ əm ʌp ən daʊn wɪð ə twɪs tə hɪz maʊθ waɪl i tʊk ɹændz kɑpɝz, ən kɝst əm wən ɹænd æsk fəɹ ə pleɪs ɪnsaɪd tə ɹæp ɪz sɔɹd.

A good many shops were fronted with tables displaying the cloth and cord, and Rand stopped at one. The red cloth was cheaper than the white, though he could see no difference apart from the color, so he bought that and the white cord to go with it, despite Mat's complaints about how little money they had left. The tight-lipped shopkeeper eyed them up and down with a twist to his mouth while he took Rand's coppers, and cursed them when Rand asked for a place inside to wrap his sword.

"wi dɪdn kʌm tə si lɑɡən," ɹænd sɛd peɪʃənli. "wi dʒʌs keɪm tə si keɪɛmlɪn." hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd bʌnt, ən æɾəd, "ðə ɡɹændəst sɪɾi ɪn ðə wɝld." ðə ʃɑpkipɝz ɡɹɪmɑs ɹɪmeɪn ɪn pleɪs. "ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ɡʊd kwin mɔɹɡeɪs," ɹænd sɛd hoʊpfəli.

"We didn't come to see Logain," Rand said patiently. "We just came to see Caemlyn." He remembered Bunt, and added, "The grandest city in the world." The shopkeeper's grimace remained in place. "The Light illumine good Queen Morgase," Rand said hopefully.

"ju meɪk ɛni tʃɹʌbəl," ðə mæn sɛd saʊɝli, "æn ðɛɹz ə hʌnʒɹəd mɛn ɪn saʊn ə maɪ vɔɪs wɪl teɪk kɛɹ ə jə ivən ɪf ðə ɡɑɹdz woʊnt." hi pɔz tə spɪt, dʒʌs mɪsɪŋ ɹændz fʊt. "ɡɛɾ ɑn əbaʊt jəɹ fɪlθi bɪznəs."

"You make any trouble," the man said sourly, "and there's a hundred men in sound of my voice will take care of you even if the Guards won't." He paused to spit, just missing Rand's foot. "Get on about your filthy business."

ɹænd nɑɾəd əz ɪf ðə mæn hæd bɪɾ ɪm ə tʃɪɹfəl fɛɹwɛl, ən pʊl mæt əweɪ. mæt kɛp lʊkɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ təwɔɹd ðə ʃɑp, ɡɹoʊlɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf, əntɪl ɹænd tʌɡd ɪm ɪndə ən ɛmpti æliweɪ. wɪð ðɛɹ bæks tə ðə stʃɹit noʊ pæsɝbaɪ kəd si wʌt ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ. ɹænd pʊld ɔf ðə sɔɹd bɛlt ən sɛt tə ɹæpɪŋ ðə ʃiθ ən hɪlt.

Rand nodded as if the man had bid him a cheerful farewell, and pulled Mat away. Mat kept looking back over his shoulder toward the shop, growling to himself, until Rand tugged him into an empty alleyway. With their backs to the street no passerby could see what they were doing. Rand pulled off the sword belt and set to wrapping the sheath and hilt.

"aɪl bɛɾ i tʃɑɹdʒ jə dʌbəl fəɹ ðət blʌɾi klɔθ," mæt sɛd. "tʃɹɪpəl."

"I'll bet he charged you double for that bloody cloth," Mat said. "Triple."

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz izi əz ɪt lʊkt, fæsənɪŋ ðə stʃɹɪps ə klɔθ ən ðə kɔɹd soʊ ðə hoʊl θɪŋ wəd nɑt fɔl ɔf.

It was not as easy as it looked, fastening the strips of cloth and the cord so the whole thing would not fall off.

"ðeɪl ɔl bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tʃiɾ ʌs, ɹænd. ðeɪ θɪŋk wiv kʌm tə si ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, laɪk ɛvɹibɑɾi ɛls. wɪl bi lʌki ɪf sʌmbɑɾi dʌzn hɪɾ əs ɑn ðə hɛd waɪl wi slip. ðɪs ɪz noʊ pleɪs tə bi. ðəɹ ɑɹ tu mɛni pipəl. lɛts liv fəɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn naʊ. əɹ saʊθ, tə ɪljən. aɪ wʊdn maɪn siɪŋ əm ɡæðɝ fəɹ ðə hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn. ɪf wi kænt ɡoʊ hoʊm, lɛts dʒʌst ɡoʊ."

"They'll all be trying to cheat us, Rand. They think we've come to see the false Dragon, like everybody else. We'll be lucky if somebody doesn't hit us on the head while we sleep. This is no place to be. There are too many people. Let's leave for Tar Valon now. Or south, to Illian. I wouldn't mind seeing them gather for the Hunt of the Horn. If we can't go home, let's just go."

"aɪm steɪɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd. "ɪf ðəɹ nɑt hɪɹ ɔlɹɛɾi, ðəl kʌm hɪɹ sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ʌs."

"I'm staying," Rand said. "If they're not here already, they'll come here sooner or later, looking for us."

hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf i hæd ðə ɹæpɪŋz dʌn ðə weɪ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls dɪd, bʌt ðə hɛɹənz ɑn skæbɝɾ ən hɪlt wɝ hɪɾən ən i θɔɾ ɪt wɑz sɪkjʊɹ. əz i wɛn bæk aʊɾ ɑn ðə stʃɹit, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɾ i hæd wʌn lɛs θɪŋ tə wɝi əbaʊt kɑzɪŋ tʃɹʌbəl. mæt tʃɹeɪld əlɔŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪm əz ɹɪlʌktənli əz ɪf i wɝ biɪŋ pʊld ɑn ə liʃ.

He was not sure if he had the wrappings done the way everyone else did, but the herons on scabbard and hilt were hidden and he thought it was secure. As he went back out on the street, he was sure that he had one less thing to worry about causing trouble. Mat trailed along beside him as reluctantly as if he were being pulled on a leash.

bɪt baɪ bɪt ɹænd dɪd ɡɛt ðə dɝɛkʃənz i wɑntəd. ət fɝs ðeɪ wɝ veɪɡ, ɑn ði ɔɹɾɝ ʌv "sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən" ən "oʊvɝ ðət weɪ." ðə nɪɹɝ ðeɪ keɪm, ðoʊ, ðə klɪɹɝ ði ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz, əntɪl ət læs ðeɪ stʊd bɪfɔɹ ə bɹɔd stoʊn bɪldɪŋ wɪð ə saɪn oʊvɝ ðə dɔɹ kɹikɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd. ə mæn nilɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ə wʊmən wɪð ɹɛd-ɡoʊl hɛɹ ən ə kɹaʊn, wʌn ə hɝ hænz ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ɪz baʊd hɛd. ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ.

Bit by bit Rand did get the directions he wanted. At first they were vague, on the order of "somewhere in that direction" and "over that way." The nearer they came, though, the clearer the instructions, until at last they stood before a broad stone building with a sign over the door creaking in the wind. A man kneeling before a woman with red-gold hair and a crown, one of her hands resting on his bowed head. The Queen's Blessing.

"ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ əbaʊt ðɪs?" mæt æskt.

"Are you sure about this?" Mat asked.

"ʌv kɔɹs," ɹænd sɛd. hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən pʊʃt oʊpən ðə dɔɹ.

"Of course," Rand said. He took a deep breath and pushed open the door.

ðə kɑmən ɹum wɑz lɑɹdʒ ən pænəld wɪð dɑɹk wʊd, ən faɪɝz ɑn tu hɑɹθs wɔɹmd ɪt. ə sɝvɪŋ meɪd wɑz swipɪŋ ðə flɔɹ, ðoʊ ɪt wɑz klin, ən ənʌðɝ wɑz pɑlɪʃɪŋ kændəlstɪks ɪn ðə kɔɹnɝ. itʃ smaɪld ət ðə tu nukʌmɝz bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə hɝ wɝk.

The common room was large and paneled with dark wood, and fires on two hearths warmed it. A serving maid was sweeping the floor, though it was clean, and another was polishing candlesticks in the corner. Each smiled at the two newcomers before going back to her work.

oʊnli ə fju teɪbəlz hæd pipəl ət ðɛm, bʌɾ ə dʌzən mɛn wɑz ə kɹaʊd fəɹ soʊ ɝli ɪn ðə deɪ, ən ɪf nʌn lʊkt ɪɡzækli hæpi tə si hɪm ən mæt, ət lis ðeɪ lʊkt klin ən soʊbɝ. ðə smɛlz ə ɹoʊstɪŋ bif ən beɪkɪŋ bɹɛd dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm ðə kɪtʃən, meɪkɪŋ ɹændz maʊθ wɔɾɝ.

Only a few tables had people at them, but a dozen men was a crowd for so early in the day, and if none looked exactly happy to see him and Mat, at least they looked clean and sober. The smells of roasting beef and baking bread drifted from the kitchen, making Rand's mouth water.

ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz fæt, hi wɑz pliz tə si, ə pɪŋk-feɪs mæn ɪn ə stɑɹtʃt waɪɾ eɪpɹən, wɪð ɡɹeɪɪŋ hɛɹ koʊm bæk oʊvɝ ə bɔl spɑt ðəɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt kwaɪt kʌvɝ. hɪz ʃɑɹp aɪ tʊk əm ɪn fɹəm hɛd tə toʊ, dʌsti kloʊðz ən bʌndəlz ən wɔɹn buts, bʌɾ i hæɾ ə ɹɛɾi, plɛzən smaɪl, tu. bɑzəl ɡɪl wɑz ɪz neɪm.

The innkeeper was fat, he was pleased to see, a pink-faced man in a starched white apron, with graying hair combed back over a bald spot that it did not quite cover. His sharp eye took them in from head to toe, dusty clothes and bundles and worn boots, but he had a ready, pleasant smile, too. Basel Gill was his name.

"mæstɝ ɡɪl," ɹænd sɛd, "ə fɹɛn ʌv aʊɝz toʊld əs tə kʌm hɪɹ. tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn. hi - " ði ɪnkipɝz smaɪl slɪpt. ɹænd lʊkt ət mæt, bʌɾ i wɑz tu bɪzi snɪfɪŋ ði ɝoʊməz kʌmɪŋ fɹəm ðə kɪtʃən tə noʊɾəs ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. "ɪz sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ? jə də noʊ hɪm?"

"Master Gill," Rand said, "a friend of ours told us to come here. Thom Merrilin. He - " The innkeeper's smile slipped. Rand looked at Mat, but he was too busy sniffing the aromas coming from the kitchen to notice anything else. "Is something wrong? You do know him?"

"aɪ noʊ hɪm," ɡɪl sɛd kɝtli. hi simd mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ðə flut keɪs ət ɹændz saɪd naʊ, ðən ɪn ɛniθɪŋ ɛls. "kʌm wɪð mi." hi dʒɝkt ɪz hɛd təwɔɹd ðə bæk. ɹænd ɡeɪv mæt ə dʒɝk tə ɡɛɾ ɪm stɑɹɾəd, ðən fɑloʊd, wʌndɝɪŋ wʌt wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn.

"I know him," Gill said curtly. He seemed more interested in the flute case at Rand's side now, than in anything else. "Come with me." He jerked his head toward the back. Rand gave Mat a jerk to get him started, then followed, wondering what was going on.

ɪn ðə kɪtʃən, mæstɝ ɡɪl pɔz tə spik tə ðə kʊk, ə ɹaʊnd wʊmən wɪð əɹ hɛɹ ɪn ə bʌn ət ðə bæk ə hɝ hɛɾ u ɔlmoʊs mætʃt ði ɪnkipɝ paʊn fəɹ paʊnd. ʃi kɛp stɝɪŋ əɹ pɑts waɪl mæstɝ ɡɪl tɔkt. ðə smɛlz wɝ soʊ ɡʊd - tu deɪz' hʌŋɡɝ meɪɾ ə faɪn sɔs fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt ðɪs smɛld əz ɡʊɾ əz mɪstʃɹəs ælvɪɹz kɪtʃən - ðət ɹændz stʌmək ɡɹaʊld. mæt wɑz linɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə pɑts, noʊz fɝst. ɹænd nʌdʒ hɪm; mæt heɪstəli waɪpt ɪz tʃɪn wɛɹ i hæd bɪɡʌn dʒɹulɪŋ.

In the kitchen, Master Gill paused to speak to the cook, a round woman with her hair in a bun at the back of her head who almost matched the innkeeper pound for pound. She kept stirring her pots while Master Gill talked. The smells were so good - two days' hunger made a fine sauce for anything, but this smelled as good as Mistress al'Vere's kitchen - that Rand's stomach growled. Mat was leaning toward the pots, nose first. Rand nudged him; Mat hastily wiped his chin where he had begun drooling.

ðən ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz hɝiɪŋ əm aʊt ðə bæk dɔɹ. ɪn ðə steɪbliɑɹɾ i lʊkt ɝaʊn tə meɪk ʃʊɹ noʊ wʌn wɑz kloʊs, ðən ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ðɛm. ɑn ɹænd. "wʌts ɪn ðə keɪs, læd?"

Then the innkeeper was hurrying them out the back door. In the stableyard he looked around to make sure no one was close, then rounded on them. On Rand. "What's in the case, lad?"

"tɑmz flut," ɹænd sɛd sloʊli. hi oʊpən ðə keɪs, əz ɪf ʃoʊɪŋ ðə ɡoʊld-ænd-sɪlvɝ-tʃeɪs flut wəd hɛlp. mæts hæn kɹɛpt ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt.

"Thom's flute," Rand said slowly. He opened the case, as if showing the gold-and-silver-chased flute would help. Mat's hand crept under his coat.

mæstɝ ɡɪl dɪd nɑt teɪk ɪz aɪz ɔf ɹænd. "aɪ, aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɪt. aɪ sɔ hɪm pleɪ ɪɾ ɔfən ɪnʌf, ən ðɛɹz nɑt laɪkli tu laɪk ðəɾ aʊtsaɪɾ ə ɹɔɪəl kɔɹt." ðə plɛzən smaɪlz wɝ ɡɔn, ən ɪz ʃɑɹp aɪz wɝ sʌɾənli əz ʃɑɹp əz ə naɪf. "haʊ dɪd jə kʌm baɪ ɪt? tɑm wəd pɑɹt wɪð ɪz ɑɹm əz sun əz ðət flut."

Master Gill did not take his eyes off Rand. "Aye, I recognize it. I saw him play it often enough, and there's not likely two like that outside a royal court." The pleasant smiles were gone, and his sharp eyes were suddenly as sharp as a knife. "How did you come by it? Thom would part with his arm as soon as that flute."

"hi ɡeɪv ɪt tə mi." ɹænd tʊk tɑmz bʌndəl kloʊk fɹəm ɪz bæk ən sɛɾ ɪɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ənfoʊldɪŋ ɪnʌf tə ʃoʊ ðə kʌlɝd pætʃəz, əz wɛl əz ði ɛn ə ðə hɑɹp keɪs. "tɑmz dɛd, mæstɝ ɡɪl. ɪf i wɑz jəɹ fɹɛnd, aɪm sɑɹi. hi wɑz maɪn, tu."

"He gave it to me." Rand took Thom's bundled cloak from his back and set it on the ground, unfolding enough to show the colored patches, as well as the end of the harp case. "Thom's dead, Master Gill. If he was your friend, I'm sorry. He was mine, too."

"dɛd, jə seɪ. haʊ?"

"Dead, you say. How?"

"ə . . . ə mæn tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl ʌs. tɑm pʊʃt ðɪs ət mi ən toʊld əs tə ɹʌn." ðə pætʃəz flʌɾɝd ɪn ðə wɪn laɪk bʌɾɝflaɪz. ɹændz θɹoʊt kɑt; hi foʊldəd ðə kloʊk kɛɹfəli bæk ʌp əɡɛn. "wiɾ əv bɪn kɪld ɪf ɪt hædn bɪn fəɹ hɪm. wi wɝ ɑn əɹ weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn təɡɛðɝ. hi toʊld əs tə kʌm hɪɹ, tə jəɹ ɪn."

"A . . . a man tried to kill us. Thom pushed this at me and told us to run." The patches fluttered in the wind like butterflies. Rand's throat caught; he folded the cloak carefully back up again. "We'd have been killed if it hadn't been for him. We were on our way to Caemlyn together. He told us to come here, to your inn."

"aɪl bɪliv hiz dɛd," ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd sloʊli, "wɛn aɪ si hɪz kɔɹps." hi nʌdʒ ðə bʌndəl kloʊk wɪð ɪz toʊ ən klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt ɹʌfli. "neɪ, neɪ, aɪ bɪliv jə sɔ wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz jə sɔ; aɪ dʒʌs doʊn bɪliv hiz dɛd. hiz ə hɑɹɾɝ mæn tə kɪl ðən jə maɪt bɪliv, ɪz oʊl tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn."

"I'll believe he's dead," the innkeeper said slowly, "when I see his corpse." He nudged the bundled cloak with his toe and cleared his throat roughly. "Nay, nay, I believe you saw Whatever it was you saw; I just don't believe he's dead. He's a harder man to kill than you might believe, is old Thom Merrilin."

ɹænd pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn mæts ʃoʊldɝ. "ɪts ɔl ɹaɪt, mæt. hiz ə fɹɛnd."

Rand put a hand on Mat's shoulder. "It's all right, Mat. He's a friend."

mæstɝ ɡɪl ɡlænst ət mæt, ən saɪd. "aɪ səpoʊz aɪm ət ðæt."

Master Gill glanced at Mat, and sighed. "I suppose I am at that."

mæt stʃɹeɪɾənd ʌp sloʊli, foʊldɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz oʊvɝ ɪz tʃɛst. hi wɑz stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ ði ɪnkipɝ wɛɹəli, ðoʊ, ən ə mʌsəl ɪn ɪz tʃik twɪtʃt.

Mat straightened up slowly, folding his arms over his chest. He was still watching the innkeeper warily, though, and a muscle in his cheek twitched.

"kʌmɪŋ tə keɪɛmlɪn, jə seɪ?" ði ɪnkipɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ðɪs ɪz ðə læs pleɪs ɑn ɝθ aɪɾ ɪkspɛk tɑm tə kʌm, ɛksɛptɪŋ meɪbi ɪt wɑz tɑɹ vəlɑn." hi weɪɾəd fəɹ ə steɪbəlmən tə pæs, liɾɪŋ ə hɔɹs, ən ivən ðən i loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "juv tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, aɪ teɪk ɪt."

"Coming to Caemlyn, you say?" The innkeeper shook his head. "This is the last place on earth I'd expect Thom to come, excepting maybe it was Tar Valon." He waited for a stableman to pass, leading a horse, and even then he lowered his voice. "You've trouble with the Aes Sedai, I take it."

"jɛs," mæt ɡɹʌmbəld ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət ɹænd sɛd, "wʌt meɪks jə θɪŋk ðæt?"

"Yes," Mat grumbled at the same time that Rand said, "What makes you think that?"

mæstɝ ɡɪl tʃʌkəl dʒɹaɪli. "aɪ noʊ ðə mæn, ðæts wʌt. hid dʒʌmp ɪndə ðət kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl, ɪspɛʃli tə hɛlp ə kʌpəl ə lædz əbaʊt ði eɪdʒ ə ju. . . ." ðə ɹɛmənɪsəns ɪn ɪz aɪz flɪkɝɾ aʊt, ən i stʊɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt wɪð ə tʃɑɹi lʊk. "naʊ . . . ɑ . . . aɪm nɑt meɪkɪŋ ɛni ækjəzeɪʃənz, maɪnd, bʌt . . . ɑ . . . aɪ teɪk ɪt niðɝ ə jə kən . . . ɑ . . . wʌɾ aɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ əɾ ɪz . . . ɑ . . . wʌɾ ɪɡzækli ɪz ðə neɪtʃɝ ə jəɹ tʃɹʌbəl wɪð tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɪf jə doʊn maɪn maɪ æskɪŋ?"

Master Gill chuckled dryly. "I know the man, that's what. He'd jump into that kind of trouble, especially to help a couple of lads about the age of you. . . ." The reminiscence in his eyes flickered out, and he stood up straight with a chary look. "Now . . . ah . . . I'm not making any accusations, mind, but . . . ah . . . I take it neither of you can . . . ah . . . what I'm getting at is . . . ah . . . what exactly is the nature of your trouble with Tar Valon, if you don't mind my asking?"

ɹændz skɪn pɹɪkəld əz i ɹilaɪzd wʌt ðə mæn wɑz sədʒɛstɪŋ. ðə wʌn paʊɝ. "noʊ, noʊ, nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðæt. aɪ swɛɹ. ðəɹ wɑz ivən ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛlpɪŋ ʌs. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz. . . ." hi bɪɾ ɪz tʌŋ, bʌt ði ɪnkipɝz ɪkspɹɛʃən nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd.

Rand's skin prickled as he realized what the man was suggesting. The One Power. "No, no, nothing like that. I swear. There was even an Aes Sedai helping us. Moiraine was. . . ." He bit his tongue, but the innkeeper's expression never changed.

"ɡlæd tə hɪɹ ɪt. nɑt ðəɾ aɪv ɔl ðət mʌtʃ lʌv fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt bɛɾɝ əm ðən . . . ðəɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋ." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd sloʊli. "tu mʌtʃ tɔk ə ðət kaɪndə θɪŋ, wɪð lɑɡən biɪŋ bɹɔt hɪɹ. noʊ əfɛns mɛnt, jə ʌndɝstænd, bʌt . . . wɛl, aɪ hæd tə noʊ, dɪdn aɪ?"

"Glad to hear it. Not that I've all that much love for Aes Sedai, but better them than . . . that other thing." He shook his head slowly. "Too much talk of that kind of thing, with Logain being brought here. No offense meant, you understand, but . . . well, I had to know, didn't I?"

"noʊ əfɛns," ɹænd sɛd. mæts mɝmɝ cʊɾə bɪn ɛniθɪŋ, bʌt ði ɪnkipɝ əpɪɹd tə teɪk ɪt fəɹ ðə seɪm əz ɹænd hæd sɛd.

"No offense," Rand said. Mat's murmur could have been anything, but the innkeeper appeared to take it for the same as Rand had said.

"ju tu lʊk ðə ɹaɪt sɔɹt, ən aɪ də bɪliv jə wɝ - ɑɹ - fɹɛnz ə tɑm, bʌɾ ɪts hɑɹd taɪmz ən stoʊni deɪz. aɪ doʊn səpoʊz jə kən peɪ? noʊ, aɪ dɪdn θɪŋk soʊ. ðɛɹz nɑɾ ɪnʌf ʌv ɛniθɪŋ, ən wʌt ðəɹ ɪz kɑsts ði ɝθ, soʊ əl ɡɪv jə bɛdz - nɑt ðə bɛst, bʌt wɔɹm ən dʒɹaɪ - ən sʌmθɪŋ tə it, ən aɪ kænɑt pɹɑməs mɔɹ, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ aɪd laɪk."

"You two look the right sort, and I do believe you were - are - friends of Thom, but it's hard times and stony days. I don't suppose you can pay? No, I didn't think so. There's not enough of anything, and what there is costs the earth, so I'll give you beds - not the best, but warm and dry - and something to eat, and I cannot promise more, however much I'd like."

"θæŋk ju," ɹænd sɛd wɪð ə kwɪtsɪkəl ɡlæns ət mæt. "ɪts mɔɹ ðən aɪ ɪkspɛktəd." wʌt wɑz ðə ɹaɪt sɔɹt, ən waɪ ʃəɾ i pɹɑməs mɔɹ?

"Thank you," Rand said with a quizzical glance at Mat. "It's more than I expected." What was the right sort, and why should he promise more?

"wɛl, tɑmz ə ɡʊd fɹɛnd. ən oʊl fɹɛnd. hɑthɛɾəd ən laɪəbəl tə seɪ ðə wɝs pɑsəbəl θɪŋ tə ðə wʌn pɝsən i ʃʊdnt, bʌɾ ə ɡʊd fɹɛn ɔl ðə seɪm. ɪf i dʌznt ʃoʊ ʌp . . . wɛl, wɪl fɪɡjɝ sʌmθɪŋ aʊt ðɛn. bɛs jə doʊn tɔk ɛni mɔɹ tɔk əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛlpɪŋ ju. ɪm ə ɡʊd kwinz mæn, bʌt ðəɹ ɑɹ tu mɛni ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ɹaɪt naʊ hud teɪk ɪt ɹɔŋ, ən aɪ doʊn min dʒʌs ðə waɪtkloʊks."

"Well, Thom's a good friend. An old friend. Hotheaded and liable to say the worst possible thing to the one person he shouldn't, but a good friend all the same. If he doesn't show up . . . well, we'll figure something out then. Best you don't talk any more talk about Aes Sedai helping you. I'm a good Queen's man, but there are too many in Caemlyn right now who'd take it wrong, and I don't mean just the Whitecloaks."

mæt snɔɹɾɪd. "fɔɹ ɔl aɪ kɛɹ, ðə ɹeɪvənz kən teɪk ɛvɹi ɛɛs sədaɪ stʃɹeɪt tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl!"

Mat snorted. "For all I care, the ravens can take every Aes Sedai straight to Shayol Ghul!"

"wɑtʃ jəɹ tʌŋ," mæstɝ ɡɪl snæpt. "aɪ sɛɾ aɪ doʊn lʌv ðɛm; aɪ dɪdn seɪ ɪm ə ful θɪŋks ðəɹ bɪhaɪn ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðæts ɹɔŋ. ðə kwin səpɔɹts ɪleɪɾə, ən ðə ɡɑɹdz stæn fəɹ ðə kwin. ðə laɪt sɛn θɪŋz doʊnt ɡoʊ soʊ bæd ðət tʃeɪnʒəz. ɛniweɪ, leɪtli səm ɡɑɹdz əv fɝɡɑɾən ðɛmsɛlvz ɪnʌf tə bi ə lɪɾəl ɹʌf wɪð foʊks ðeɪ oʊvɝhɪɹ spikɪŋ əɡɛnst ɛɛs sədaɪ. nɑɾ ɑn duɾi, θæŋk ðə laɪt, bʌɾ ɪts hæpənd, dʒʌs ðə seɪm. aɪ doʊnt niɾ ɔf-duɾi ɡɑɹdz bɹeɪkɪŋ ʌp maɪ kɑmən ɹum tə titʃ jə ə lɛsən, ən aɪ doʊnt nid waɪtkloʊks ɛɡɪŋ sʌmbɑɾi ɑn tə peɪn ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ ɑn maɪ dɔɹ, soʊ ɪf jə wɑn ɛni hɛlp aʊɾ ə mi, jə dʒʌs kip θɔts əbaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ tə jɝsɛlf, ɡʊɾ əɹ bæd." hi pɔz θɔtfəli, ðən æɾəd, "meɪbi ɪts bɛs jə doʊn mɛnʃən tɑmz neɪm, iðɝ, wɛɹ ɛniwʌn bʌt mi kən hɪɹ. səm ə ðə ɡɑɹdz əv lɔŋ mɛmɹiz, ən soʊ dʌz ðə kwin. noʊ nid teɪkɪŋ tʃænsəz."

"Watch your tongue," Master Gill snapped. "I said I don't love them; I didn't say I'm a fool thinks they're behind everything that's wrong. The Queen supports Elaida, and the Guards stand for the Queen. The Light send things don't go so bad that changes. Anyway, lately some Guards have forgotten themselves enough to be a little rough with folks they overhear speaking against Aes Sedai. Not on duty, thank the Light, but it's happened, just the same. I don't need off-duty Guards breaking up my common room to teach you a lesson, and I don't need Whitecloaks egging somebody on to paint the Dragon's Fang on my door, so if you want any help out of me, you just keep thoughts about Aes Sedai to yourself, good or bad." He paused thoughtfully, then added, "Maybe it's best you don't mention Thom's name, either, where anyone but me can hear. Some of the Guards have long memories, and so does the Queen. No need taking chances."

"tɑm hæd tʃɹʌbəl wɪð ðə kwin?" ɹænd sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, ən ði ɪnkipɝ læft.

"Thom had trouble with the Queen?" Rand said incredulously, and the innkeeper laughed.

"soʊ hi dɪdn tɛl jə ɛvɹiθɪŋ. doʊnt noʊ waɪ hi ʃʊd. ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ jə ʃʊdnt noʊ, iðɝ. nɑt laɪk ɪts ə sikɹət, ɪɡzækli. dʒju θɪŋk ɛvɹi ɡlimən θɪŋks əz mʌtʃ ə hɪmsɛlf əz tɑm dʌz? wɛl, kʌm tə θɪŋk ʌv ɪt, aɪ ɡɛs ðeɪ du, bʌɾ ɪɾ ɔlweɪz sim tə mi tɑm hæɾ ən ɛkstʃɹə hɛlpɪŋ ə θɪŋkɪŋ ə lɑɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. hi wɑzn ɔlweɪz ə ɡlimən, jə noʊ, wɑndɝɪŋ fɹəm vɪlədʒ tə vɪlədʒ ən slipɪŋ ʌndɝ ə hɛdʒ əz ɔfən əz nɑt. ðəɹ wɑz ə taɪm tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn wɑz kɔɹtbɑɝd ɹaɪt hɪɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ən noʊn ɪn ɛvɹi ɹɔɪəl kɔɹt fɹəm tiɹ tə mɛɹədɑn."

"So he didn't tell you everything. Don't know why he should. On the other hand, I don't know why you shouldn't know, either. Not like it's a secret, exactly. Do you think every gleeman thinks as much of himself as Thom does? Well, come to think of it, I guess they do, but it always seemed to me Thom had an extra helping of thinking a lot of himself. He wasn't always a gleeman, you know, wandering from village to village and sleeping under a hedge as often as not. There was a time Thom Merrilin was Courtbard right here in Caemlyn, and known in every royal court from Tear to Maradon."

"tɑm?" mæt sɛd.

"Thom?" Mat said.

ɹænd nɑɾəd sloʊli. hi kəd pɪktʃɝ tɑm əɾ ə kwinz kɔɹt, wɪð ɪz steɪtli mænɝ ən ɡɹæn dʒɛstʃɝz.

Rand nodded slowly. He could picture Thom at a Queen's court, with his stately manner and grand gestures.

"ðæɾ i wɑz," mæstɝ ɡɪl sɛd. "ɪt wɑz nɑt lɔŋ æftɝ tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl dəmədʒɹd daɪd ðət ðə . . . tʃɹʌbəl əbaʊɾ ɪz nɛfju kɹɑpt ʌp. ðəɹ wɝ səm sɛd tɑm wɑz, ʃæl wi seɪ, kloʊsɝ tə ðə kwin ðən wɑz pɹɑpɝ. bʌt mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz ə jʌŋ wɪɾoʊ, ən tɑm wɑz ɪn ɪz pɹaɪm, ðɛn, ən ðə kwin kən də əz ʃi wɪʃɪz ɪz ðə weɪ aɪ lʊk əɾ ɪt. oʊnli ʃiz ɔlweɪz hæɾ ə tɛmpɝ, hæz əɹ ɡʊd mɔɹɡeɪs, ən i tʊk ɔf wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd wən i lɝnd wʌt kaɪndə tʃɹʌbəl ɪz nɛfju wɑz ɪn. ðə kwin dɪdn mʌtʃ laɪk ðæt. dɪdn laɪk ɪm mɛɾəlɪŋ ɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ mæɾɝz, iðɝ. kæn seɪ aɪ θɪŋk ɪt wɑz ɹaɪt, iðɝ, nɛfju əɹ noʊ. ɛniweɪ, wən i keɪm bæk, hi sɛd səm wɝdz, ɔl ɹaɪt. wɝdz jə doʊn seɪ tə ə kwin. wɝdz jə doʊn seɪ tə ɛni wʊmən wɪð mɔɹɡeɪsəz spɪɹət. ɪleɪɾə wɑz sɛɾ əɡɛnst ɪm kəz ə hɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə mɪks ɪn ðə bɪznəs wɪð ɪz nɛfju, ən bɪtwin ðə kwinz tɛmpɝ ən ɪleɪɾəz ænəmɑsəɾi, tɑm lɛf keɪɛmlɪn hæf ə stɛp əhɛɾ ʌv ə tʃɹɪp tə pɹɪzən, ɪf nɑt ðə hɛdzmənz æks. əz fɑɹ əz aɪ noʊ, ðə ɹɪt stɪl stænz."

"That he was," Master Gill said. "It was not long after Taringail Damodred died that the . . . trouble about his nephew cropped up. There were some said Thom was, shall we say, closer to the Queen than was proper. But Morgase was a young widow, and Thom was in his prime, then, and the Queen can do as she wishes is the way I look at it. Only she's always had a temper, has our good Morgase, and he took off without a word when he learned what kind of trouble his nephew was in. The Queen didn't much like that. Didn't like him meddling in Aes Sedai matters, either. Can't say I think it was right, either, nephew or no. Anyway, when he came back, he said some words, all right. Words you don't say to a Queen. Words you don't say to any woman with Morgase's spirit. Elaida was set against him because of his trying to mix in the business with his nephew, and between the Queen's temper and Elaida's animosity, Thom left Caemlyn half a step ahead of a trip to prison, if not the headsman's axe. As far as I know, the writ still stands."

"ɪf ɪt wɑz ə lɔŋ taɪm əɡoʊ," ɹænd sɛd, "meɪbi noʊbɑdi ɹɪmɛmbɝz."

"If it was a long time ago," Rand said, "maybe nobody remembers."

mæstɝ ɡɪl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn ɪz kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz. hi pɝsənəli kəmændəd ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn mɔɹɡeɪs sɛn tə bɹɪŋ tɑm bæk ɪn tʃeɪnz, ən aɪ mɪsdaʊt hɪl ɛvɝ fɝɡɛt ɹɪtɝnɪŋ ɛmpti-hændəd tə faɪn tɑm hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn bæk tə ðə pæləs ən lɛft əɡɛn. ən ðə kwin nɛvɝ fɝɡɛts ɛniθɪŋ. jə ɛvɝ noʊ ə wʊmən u dɪd? maɪ, bʌt mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz ɪn ə teɪkɪŋ. əl swɛɹ ðə hoʊl sɪɾi wɔk sɑft ən wɪspɝd fəɹ ə mʌnθ. plɛnti ʌv ʌðɝ ɡɑɹdzmɪn oʊld ɪnʌf tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ, tu. noʊ, bɛs jə kip tɑm əz kloʊz ə sikɹəɾ əz jə kip ðəɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌv jʊɹz. kʌm, əl ɡɛt jə sʌmθɪŋ tə it. jə lʊk əz ɪf jəɹ bɛliz ɑɹ nɔɪŋ ət jəɹ bækboʊnz."

Master Gill shook his head. "Gareth Bryne is Captain-General of the Queen's Guards. He personally commanded the Guardsmen Morgase sent to bring Thom back in chains, and I misdoubt he'll ever forget returning empty-handed to find Thom had already been back to the Palace and left again. And the Queen never forgets anything. You ever know a woman who did? My, but Morgase was in a taking. I'll swear the whole city walked soft and whispered for a month. Plenty of other Guardsmen old enough to remember, too. No, best you keep Thom as close a secret as you keep that Aes Sedai of yours. Come, I'll get you something to eat. You look as if your bellies are gnawing at your backbones."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾisɪks


CHAPTER 36

wɛb ə ðə pæɾɝn


Web of the Pattern

mæstɝ ɡɪl tʊk əm tə ə kɔɹnɝ teɪbəl ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum ən hæd wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz bɹɪŋ əm fud. ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd wən i sɔ ðə pleɪts, wɪð ə fju θɪn slaɪsəz ʌv ɡɹeɪvi-kʌvɝd bif, ə spunfʊl ə mʌstɝd ɡɹinz, ən tu pəteɪɾoʊz ɑn itʃ. ɪt wɑz ə ɹufəl, ɹɪzaɪn hɛdʃeɪk, ðoʊ, nɑɾ æŋɡɹi. nɑɾ ɪnʌf ʌv ɛniθɪŋ, ði ɪnkipɝ hæd sɛd. pɪkɪŋ ʌp ɪz naɪf ən fɔɹk, ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌt wəd hæpən wən ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ lɛft. ɪt meɪɾ ɪz hæf-kʌvɝd pleɪt sim laɪk ə fist. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm ʃɪvɝ.

Master Gill took them to a corner table in the common room and had one of the serving maids bring them food. Rand shook his head when he saw the plates, with a few thin slices of gravy-covered beef, a spoonful of mustard greens, and two potatoes on each. It was a rueful, resigned headshake, though, not angry. Not enough of anything, the innkeeper had said. Picking up his knife and fork, Rand wondered what would happen when there was nothing left. It made his half-covered plate seem like a feast. It made him shiver.

mæstɝ ɡɪl hæd tʃoʊzən ə teɪbəl wɛl əweɪ fɹəm ɛniwʌn ɛls, ən i sæt wɪð ɪz bæk tə ðə kɔɹnɝ, wɛɹ i kəd wɑtʃ ðə ɹum. noʊbɑdi kəd ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə oʊvɝhɪɹ wʌt ðeɪ sɛd wɪθaʊɾ ɪm siɪŋ. wən ðə meɪd lɛft, hi sɛd sɔfli, "naʊ, waɪ doʊn jə tɛl mi əbaʊt ðɪs tʃɹʌbəl ə jʊɹz? ɪf aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə hɛlp, aɪd bɛs noʊ wʌɾ aɪm ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪntu."

Master Gill had chosen a table well away from anyone else, and he sat with his back to the corner, where he could watch the room. Nobody could get close enough to overhear what they said without him seeing. When the maid left, he said softly, "Now, why don't you tell me about this trouble of yours? If I'm going to help, I'd best know what I'm getting into."

ɹænd lʊkt ət mæt, bʌt mæt wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ əɾ ɪz pleɪɾ əz ɪf i wɝ mæɾ ət ðə pəteɪtoʊ hi wɑz kʌɾɪŋ. ɹænd tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "aɪ doʊn ɹɪli ʌndɝstæn ɪt maɪsɛlf," hi bɪɡæn.

Rand looked at Mat, but Mat was frowning at his plate as if he were mad at the potato he was cutting. Rand took a deep breath. "I don't really understand it myself," he began.

hi kɛp ðə stɔɹi sɪmpəl, ən i kɛp tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. wən sʌmbɑɾi ɔfɝd hɛlp, ɪt wəd nɑt də tə tɛl əm ɪt wɑz ɔl əbaʊt feɪbəlz. bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt wɑz fɛɹ tə ʌndɝsteɪt ðə deɪnʒɝ, iðɝ, nɑt fɛɹ tə pʊl sʌmwʌn ɪn wən ðeɪ hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌt ðeɪ wɝ ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪntu. səm mɛn wɝ æftɝ ɪm ən mæt, ən ə kʌpəl ə fɹɛnz ə ðɛɹz, tu. ðeɪ əpɪɹd wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ list ɪkspɛktəd, ðiz mɛn, ən ðeɪ wɝ dɛdli deɪnʒɝəs ən sɛɾ ɑn kɪlɪŋ ɪm ən ɪz fɹɛnz, əɹ wɝs. mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd səm ə ðɛm wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. tɑm dɪd nɑt tʃɹʌs mɔɪɹeɪn kəmplitli, bʌɾ i steɪɾ ɑn wɪð ðɛm, hi sɛd, kəz ə hɪz nɛfju. ðeɪ hæd bɪn sɛpɝeɪɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ən ətæk waɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹitʃ waɪtbɹɪdʒ, ən ðɛn, ɪn waɪtbɹɪdʒ, tɑm daɪd seɪvɪŋ əm fɹəm ənʌðɝ ətæk. ən ðəɹ hæd bɪn ʌðɝ tʃɹaɪz. hi nu ðəɹ wɝ hoʊlz ɪn ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə bɛst i kəd də ɑn ʃɔɹt noʊɾəs wɪθaʊt tɛlɪŋ mɔɹ ðən wɑz seɪf.

He kept the story simple, and he kept Trollocs and Fades out of it. When somebody offered help, it would not do to tell them it was all about fables. But he did not think it was fair to understate the danger, either, not fair to pull someone in when they had no idea what they were getting into. Some men were after him and Mat, and a couple of friends of theirs, too. They appeared where they were least expected, these men, and they were deadly dangerous and set on killing him and his friends, or worse. Moiraine said some of them were Darkfriends. Thom did not trust Moiraine completely, but he stayed on with them, he said, because of his nephew. They had been separated during an attack while trying to reach Whitebridge, and then, in Whitebridge, Thom died saving them from another attack. And there had been other tries. He knew there were holes in it, but it was the best he could do on short notice without telling more than was safe.

"wi dʒʌs kɛpt ɑn tɪl wi ɹitʃt keɪɛmlɪn," hi ɪkspleɪnd. "ðæt wɑz ðə plæn, ɝɪdʒənəli. keɪɛmlɪn, ən ðən tɑɹ vəlɑn." hi ʃɪftəɾ ənkʌmftəbli ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz tʃɛɹ. æftɝ kipɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ sikɹət fəɹ soʊ lɔŋ, ɪt fɛlt ɑd tə bi tɛlɪŋ sʌmbɑɾi ivən əz mʌtʃ əz i wɑz. "ɪf wi steɪ ɑn ðət ɹut, ði ʌðɝz wɪl bi eɪbəl tə faɪn ʌs, sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ."

"We just kept on till we reached Caemlyn," he explained. "That was the plan, originally. Caemlyn, and then Tar Valon." He shifted uncomfortably on the edge of his chair. After keeping everything secret for so long, it felt odd to be telling somebody even as much as he was. "If we stay on that route, the others will be able to find us, sooner or later."

"ɪf ðəɹ əlaɪv," mæt mʌɾɝd əɾ ɪz pleɪt.

"If they're alive," Mat muttered at his plate.

ɹænd dɪd nɑɾ ivən ɡlæns ət mæt. sʌmθɪŋ kəmpɛld ɪm tə æd, "ɪt kəd bɹɪŋ jə tʃɹʌbəl, hɛlpɪŋ ʌs."

Rand did not even glance at Mat. Something compelled him to add, "It could bring you trouble, helping us."

mæstɝ ɡɪl weɪvd ɪɾ ɔf wɪð ə plʌmp hænd. "kæn seɪ əz aɪ wɑn tʃɹʌbəl, bʌɾ ɪt wʊdn bi ðə fɝst aɪv sin. noʊ blʌɾi dɑɹkfɹɛnd wɪl meɪk mi tɝn maɪ bæk ɑn tɑmz fɹɛnz. ðɪs fɹɛn ə jʊɹz fɹəm ʌp nɔɹθ, naʊ - ɪf ʃi kʌmz tə keɪɛmlɪn, əl hɪɹ. ðəɹ ɑɹ pipəl kip ðɛɹ aɪz ɑn kʌmɪŋz ən ɡoʊɪŋz laɪk ðəɾ ɝaʊn hɪɹ, ən wɝd spɹɛdz."

Master Gill waved it off with a plump hand. "Can't say as I want trouble, but it wouldn't be the first I've seen. No bloody Darkfriend will make me turn my back on Thom's friends. This friend of yours from up north, now - if she comes to Caemlyn, I'll hear. There are people keep their eyes on comings and goings like that around here, and word spreads."

ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən æskt, "wʌɾ əbaʊɾ ɪleɪɾə?"

Rand hesitated, then asked, "What about Elaida?"

ði ɪnkipɝ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, tu, ən faɪnəli ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk soʊ. meɪbi ɪf jə dɪdn əv ə kənɛkʃən tə tɑm. ʃid wɪŋkəl ɪɾ aʊt, ən ðən wɛɹ wəd jə bi? noʊ tɛlɪŋ. meɪbi ɪn ə sɛl. meɪbi wɝs. ðeɪ seɪ ʃiz ə weɪ ʌv filɪŋ θɪŋz, wʌts hæpənd, wʌts ɡoʊɪŋ tə hæpən. ðeɪ seɪ ʃi kən kʌt ɹaɪt θɹu tə wʌɾ ə mæn wɑns tə haɪd. aɪ doʊnt noʊ, bʌɾ aɪ wʊdn ɹɪsk ɪt. ɪf ɪt wɑzn fəɹ tɑm, jə kəd ɡoʊ tə ðə ɡɑɹdz. ðeɪd teɪk kɛɹ ʌv ɛni dɑɹkfɹɛnz kwɪk ɪnʌf. bʌɾ ivən ɪf jə kəd kip tɑm kwaɪət fɹəm ðə ɡɑɹdz, wɝd wəd ɹitʃ ɪleɪɾə əz sun əz jə mɛnʃən dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ən ðən jəɹ bæk wɛɹ wi stɑɹɾəd."

The innkeeper hesitated, too, and finally shook his head. "I don't think so. Maybe if you didn't have a connection to Thom. She'd winkle it out, and then where would you be? No telling. Maybe in a cell. Maybe worse. They say she has a way of feeling things, what's happened, what's going to happen. They say she can cut right through to what a man wants to hide. I don't know, but I wouldn't risk it. If it wasn't for Thom, you could go to the Guards. They'd take care of any Darkfriends quick enough. But even if you could keep Thom quiet from the Guards, word would reach Elaida as soon as you mentioned Darkfriends, and then you're back where we started."

"noʊ ɡɑɹdz," ɹænd əɡɹid. mæt nɑɾəd vɪɡɝəsli waɪl stʌfɪŋ ə fɔɹk ɪndə hɪz maʊθ ən ɡɑt ɡɹeɪvi ɑn ɪz tʃɪn.

"No Guards," Rand agreed. Mat nodded vigorously while stuffing a fork into his mouth and got gravy on his chin.

"tʃɹʌbəl ɪz, jəɹ kɑɾ ʌp ɪn ðə fɹɪnʒɪz ə pɑlətɪks, læd, ivən ɪf ɪts nʌn ə jəɹ duɪŋ, ən pɑlətɪks ɪz ə fɑɡi maɪɹ fʊl ə sneɪks."

"Trouble is, you're caught up in the fringes of politics, lad, even if it's none of your doing, and politics is a foggy mire full of snakes."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt - " ɹænd bɪɡæn, bʌt ði ɪnkipɝ ɡɹɪməst sʌɾənli, hɪz tʃɛɹ kɹikɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz bʌlk əz i sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt.

"What about - " Rand began, but the innkeeper grimaced suddenly, his chair creaking under his bulk as he sat up straight.

ðə kʊk wɑz stændɪŋ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ tə ðə kɪtʃən, waɪpɪŋ əɹ hænz wɪð əɹ eɪpɹən. wən ʃi sɔ ði ɪnkipɝ lʊkɪŋ ʃi moʊʃən fəɹ ɪm tə kʌm, ðən vænɪʃt bæk ɪndə ðə kɪtʃən.

The cook was standing in the doorway to the kitchen, wiping her hands with her apron. When she saw the innkeeper looking she motioned for him to come, then vanished back into the kitchen.

"maɪɾ əz wɛl bi mɛɹid tə hɝ." mæstɝ ɡɪl saɪd. "faɪnz θɪŋz ðət nid fɪksɪŋ bɪfɔɹ aɪ noʊ ðɛɹz ɛniθɪŋ ɹɔŋ. ɪf ɪts nɑt ðə dʒɹeɪnz stɑpt ʌp, əɹ ðə daʊnspaʊts klɔɡd, ɪts ɹæts. aɪ kip ə klin pleɪs, jə ʌndɝstænd, bʌt wɪð soʊ mɛni pipəl ɪn ðə sɪɾi, ɹæts ɑɹ ɛvɹiwɛɹ. kɹaʊd pipəl təɡɛðɝ ən jə ɡɛt ɹæts, ən keɪɛmlɪn əz ə pleɪɡ ʌv əm ɔl ʌv ə sʌɾən. jə wʊdn bɪliv wʌɾ ə ɡʊd kæt, ə pɹaɪm ɹæɾɝ, fɛtʃɪz ðiz deɪz. jəɹ ɹum ɪz ɪn ði æɾɪk. əl tɛl ðə ɡɝlz wɪtʃ; ɛni ʌv əm kən ʃoʊ jə tə ɪt. ən doʊnt wɝi əbaʊt dɑɹkfɹɛnz. aɪ kæn seɪ mʌtʃ ɡʊɾ əbaʊt ðə waɪtkloʊks, bʌt bɪtwin əm ən ðə ɡɑɹdz, ðət sɔɹt woʊn dɛɹ ʃoʊ ðɛɹ fɪlθi feɪsəz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn." hɪz tʃɛɹ skwikt əɡɛn əz i pʊʃt ɪt bæk ən stʊd. "aɪ hoʊp ɪɾ ɪzən ðə dʒɹeɪnz əɡɛn."

"Might as well be married to her." Master Gill sighed. "Finds things that need fixing before I know there's anything wrong. If it's not the drains stopped up, or the downspouts clogged, it's rats. I keep a clean place, you understand, but with so many people in the city, rats are everywhere. Crowd people together and you get rats, and Caemlyn has a plague of them all of a sudden. You wouldn't believe what a good cat, a prime ratter, fetches these days. Your room is in the attic. I'll tell the girls which; any of them can show you to it. And don't worry about Darkfriends. I can't say much good about the Whitecloaks, but between them and the Guards, that sort won't dare show their filthy faces in Caemlyn." His chair squeaked again as he pushed it back and stood. "I hope it isn't the drains again."

ɹænd wɛn bæk tə hɪz fud, bʌɾ i sɔ ðət mæt hæd stɑpt iɾɪŋ. "aɪ θɔt jə wɝ hʌŋɡɹi," hi sɛd. mæt kɛp stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪz pleɪt, pʊʃɪŋ wʌn pis ə pəteɪtoʊ ɪn ə sɝkəl wɪð ɪz fɔɹk. "ju hæv tə it, mæt. wi nid tə kip ʌp əɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪf wɝ gɑnə ɹitʃ tɑɹ vəlɑn."

Rand went back to his food, but he saw that Mat had stopped eating. "I thought you were hungry," he said. Mat kept staring at his plate, pushing one piece of potato in a circle with his fork. "You have to eat, Mat. We need to keep up our strength if we're going to reach Tar Valon."

mæt lɛɾ aʊɾ ə loʊ, bɪɾɝ læf. "tɑɹ vəlɑn! ɔl ðɪs taɪm ɪts bɪn keɪɛmlɪn. mɔɪɹeɪn wəd bi weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əs ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. wid faɪn pɛɹɪn ən ɛɡwin ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wəd bi ɔl ɹaɪɾ ɪf wi oʊnli ɡɑt tə keɪɛmlɪn. wɛl, hɪɹ wi ɑɹ, ən nʌθɪŋz ɹaɪt. noʊ mɔɪɹeɪn, noʊ pɛɹɪn, noʊ ɛnibəɾi. naʊ ɪts ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɪl bi ɔl ɹaɪɾ ɪf wi oʊnli ɡɛt tə tɑɹ vəlɑn."

Mat let out a low, bitter laugh. "Tar Valon! All this time it's been Caemlyn. Moiraine would be waiting for us in Caemlyn. We'd find Perrin and Egwene in Caemlyn. Everything would be all right if we only got to Caemlyn. Well, here we are, and nothing's right. No Moiraine, no Perrin, no anybody. Now it's everything will be all right if we only get to Tar Valon."

"wɝ əlaɪv," ɹænd sɛd, mɔɹ ʃɑɹpli ðən i hæɾ ɪntɛndəd. hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ ən tʃɹaɪd tə mɑɾɝeɪt ɪz toʊn. "wi ɑɹ əlaɪv. ðət mʌtʃ ɪz ɔl ɹaɪt. ən aɪ ɪntɛn tə steɪ əlaɪv. aɪ ɪntɛn tə faɪn aʊt waɪ wɝ soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. aɪ woʊnt ɡɪv ʌp."

"We're alive," Rand said, more sharply than he had intended. He took a deep breath and tried to moderate his tone. "We are alive. That much is all right. And I intend to stay alive. I intend to find out why we're so important. I won't give up."

"ɔl ðiz pipəl, ən ɛni ʌv əm kəd bi dɑɹkfɹɛnz. mæstɝ ɡɪl pɹɑməs tə hɛlp əs ɑfli kwɪk. wʌt kaɪndə mæn dʒʌst ʃɹʌɡz ɔf ɛɛs sədaɪ ən dɑɹkfɹɛnz? ɪɾ ɪzənt nætʃɹəl. ɛni disən pɝsən wəd tɛl əs tə ɡɛɾ aʊt, əɹ . . . əɹ . . . əɹ sʌmθɪŋ."

"All these people, and any of them could be Darkfriends. Master Gill promised to help us awfully quick. What kind of man just shrugs off Aes Sedai and Darkfriends? It isn't natural. Any decent person would tell us to get out, or . . . or . . . or something."

"it," ɹænd sɛd dʒɛnli, ən wɑtʃt əntɪl mæt bɪɡæn tʃuɪŋ ə pis ə bif.

"Eat," Rand said gently, and watched until Mat began chewing a piece of beef.

hi lɛft ɪz oʊn hænz ɹɛstɪŋ bɪsaɪɾ ɪz pleɪt fəɹ ə mɪnət, pɹɛsɪŋ əm əɡɛns ðə teɪbəl tə kip əm fɹəm ʃeɪkɪŋ. hi wɑz skɛɹd. nɑɾ əbaʊt mæstɝ ɡɪl, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ɪnʌf wɪθaʊt ðæt. ðoʊz tɔl sɪɾi wɔlz wəd nɑt stɑp ə feɪd. meɪbi hi ʃəd tɛl ði ɪnkipɝ əbaʊt ðæt. bʌɾ ivən ɪf ɡɪl bɪlivd, wəɾ i bi əz wɪlɪŋ tə hɛlp ɪf i θɔɾ ə feɪd maɪt ʃoʊ ʌp ət ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ? ən ðə ɹæts. meɪbi ɹæts dɪd θɹaɪv wɛɹ ðəɹ wɝ ə lɑɾ ə pipəl, bʌɾ i ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə dʒɹim ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə dʒɹim ɪn bɛɹlən, ən ə smɔl spaɪn snæpɪŋ. səmtaɪmz ðə dɑɹk wʌn juzɪz kɛɹiən iɾɝz əz ɪz aɪz, læn hæd sɛd. ɹeɪvənz, kɹoʊz, ɹæts. . . .

He left his own hands resting beside his plate for a minute, pressing them against the table to keep them from shaking. He was scared. Not about Master Gill, of course, but there was enough without that. Those tall city walls would not stop a Fade. Maybe he should tell the innkeeper about that. But even if Gill believed, would he be as willing to help if he thought a Fade might show up at The Queen's Blessing? And the rats. Maybe rats did thrive where there were a lot of people, but he remembered the dream that was not a dream in Baerlon, and a small spine snapping. Sometimes the Dark One uses carrion eaters as his eyes, Lan had said. Ravens, crows, rats. . . .

hi eɪt, bʌt wən i wɑz dʌn i kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ teɪstɪŋ ə sɪŋɡəl baɪt.

He ate, but when he was done he could not remember tasting a single bite.

ə sɝvɪŋ meɪd, ðə wʌn u hæd bɪn pɑlɪʃɪŋ kændəlstɪks wən ðeɪ keɪm ɪn, ʃoʊɾ əm ʌp tə ði æɾɪk ɹum. ə dɔɹmɝ wɪndoʊ pɪɹs ðə slæntɪŋ aʊɾɝ wɔl, wɪð ə bɛɾ ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ɪɾ ən pɛɡz bɪsaɪd ðə dɔɹ fəɹ hæŋɪŋ ðɛɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz. ðə dɑɹk-aɪd ɡɝl hæɾ ə tɛndənsi tə twɪst əɹ skɝɾ ən ɡɪɡəl wɛnɛvɝ ʃi lʊkt ət ɹænd. ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, bʌɾ i nu ɪf i sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə hɝ i wəd dʒʌs meɪk ə ful ə hɪmsɛlf. ʃi meɪɾ ɪm wɪʃ i hæd pɛɹɪnz weɪ wɪð ɡɝlz; hi wɑz ɡlæd wən ʃi lɛft.

A serving maid, the one who had been polishing candlesticks when they came in, showed them up to the attic room. A dormer window pierced the slanting outer wall, with a bed on either side of it and pegs beside the door for hanging their belongings. The dark-eyed girl had a tendency to twist her skirt and giggle whenever she looked at Rand. She was pretty, but he knew if he said anything to her he would just make a fool of himself. She made him wish he had Perrin's way with girls; he was glad when she left.

hi ɪkspɛktəd səm kɑmɛn fɹəm mæt, bʌɾ əz sun əz ʃi wɑz ɡɔn, mæt θɹu hɪmsɛlf ɑn wʌn ə ðə bɛdz, stɪl ɪn ɪz kloʊk ən buts, ən tɝn ɪz feɪs tə ðə wɔl.

He expected some comment from Mat, but as soon as she was gone, Mat threw himself on one of the beds, still in his cloak and boots, and turned his face to the wall.

ɹænd hʌŋ ɪz θɪŋz ʌp, wɑtʃɪŋ mæts bæk. hi θɔt mæt hæɾ ɪz hæn ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt, klʌtʃɪŋ ðət dæɡɝ əɡɛn.

Rand hung his things up, watching Mat's back. He thought Mat had his hand under his coat, clutching that dagger again.

"ju dʒʌs gɑnə laɪ ʌp hɪɹ haɪɾɪŋ?" hi sɛd faɪnəli.

"You just going to lie up here hiding?" he said finally.

"aɪm taɪɝd," mæt mʌmbəld.

"I'm tired," Mat mumbled.

"wi hæv kwɛstʃənz tə æsk mæstɝ ɡɪl, jɛt. hi maɪɾ ivən bi eɪbəl tə tɛl əs haʊ tə faɪn ɛɡwin, ən pɛɹɪn. ðeɪ kəd bi ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ɔlɹɛɾi ɪf ðeɪ mænədʒ tə hæŋ ɑntu ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz."

"We have questions to ask Master Gill, yet. He might even be able to tell us how to find Egwene, and Perrin. They could be in Caemlyn already if they managed to hang onto their horses."

"ðeɪɹ dɛd," mæt sɛd tə ðə wɔl.

"They're dead," Mat said to the wall.

ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən ɡeɪv ʌp. hi kloʊz ðə dɔɹ sɔfli bɪhaɪn hɪm, hoʊpɪŋ mæt ɹɪli wəd slip.

Rand hesitated, then gave up. He closed the door softly behind him, hoping Mat really would sleep.

daʊnstɛɹz, haʊɛvɝ, mæstɝ ɡɪl wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə bi faʊnd, ðoʊ ðə ʃɑɹp lʊk ɪn ðə kʊks aɪ sɛd ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ hɪm, tu. fəɹ ə waɪl ɹænd sæɾ ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum, bʌɾ i faʊn hɪmsɛlf aɪɪŋ ɛvɹi peɪtʃɹən u keɪm ɪn, ɛvɹi stʃɹeɪnʒɝ u kəd bi ɛniwʌn - əɹ ɛniθɪŋ - ɪspɛʃli ɪn ðə moʊmənt wən i wɑz fɝst sɪləuɛɾɪd əz ə kloʊk blæk ʃeɪp ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ. eɪ feɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹum wəd bi laɪk ə fɑks ɪn ə tʃɪkən kup.

Downstairs, however, Master Gill was nowhere to be found, though the sharp look in the cook's eye said she was looking for him, too. For a while Rand sat in the common room, but he found himself eyeing every patron who came in, every stranger who could be anyone - or anything - especially in the moment when he was first silhouetted as a cloaked black shape in the doorway. A Fade in the room would be like a fox in a chicken coop.

eɪ ɡɑɹdzmæn ɛntɝd fɹəm ðə stʃɹit. ðə ɹɛd-junəfɔɹmd mæn stɑp dʒʌst ɪnsaɪd ðə dɔɹ, ɹʌnɪŋ ə kul aɪ oʊvɝ ðoʊz ɪn ðə ɹum u wɝ ɑbviəsli fɹəm aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi. ɹænd stʌɾid ðə teɪbəltɑp wən ðə ɡɑɹdzmænz aɪz fɛl ɑn hɪm; wən i lʊkt ʌp əɡɛn, ðə mæn wɑz ɡɔn.

A Guardsman entered from the street. The red-uniformed man stopped just inside the door, running a cool eye over those in the room who were obviously from outside the city. Rand studied the tabletop when the Guardsman's eyes fell on him; when he looked up again, the man was gone.

ðə dɑɹk-aɪd meɪd wɑz pæsɪŋ wɪð əɹ ɑɹmz fʊl ə taʊəlz. "ðeɪ də ðət səmtaɪmz," ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə kənfaɪɾɪŋ toʊn əz ʃi wɛn baɪ. "dʒʌs tə si ðɛɹz noʊ tʃɹʌbəl. ðeɪ lʊk æftɝ ɡʊd kwinz foʊk, ðeɪ du. nʌθɪŋ fəɹ jə tə wɝi əbaʊt." ʃi ɡɪɡəld.

The dark-eyed maid was passing with her arms full of towels. "They do that sometimes," she said in a confiding tone as she went by. "Just to see there's no trouble. They look after good Queen's folk, they do. Nothing for you to worry about." She giggled.

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ɪm tə wɝi əbaʊt. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪf ðə ɡɑɹdzmæn wʊɾə kʌm oʊvɝ ən dɪmændəd tə noʊ ɪf i nu tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn. hi wɑz ɡɛɾɪŋ əz bæɾ əz mæt. hi skɹeɪp bæk ɪz tʃɛɹ.

Rand shook his head. Nothing for him to worry about. It was not as if the Guardsman would have come over and demanded to know if he knew Thom Merrilin. He was getting as bad as Mat. He scraped back his chair.

ənʌðɝ meɪd wɑz tʃɛkɪŋ ði ɔɪl ɪn ðə læmps əlɔŋ ðə wɔl.

Another maid was checking the oil in the lamps along the wall.

"ɪz ðəɹ ənʌðɝ ɹum wɛɹ aɪ kəd sɪt?" hi æsk hɝ. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɡoʊ bæk əpstɛɹz ən ʃʌt hɪmsɛlf ʌp wɪð mæts sʌlən wɪðdʒɹɔəl. "meɪbi ə pɹaɪvət daɪnɪŋ ɹum ðæts nɑt biɪŋ juzd?"

"Is there another room where I could sit?" he asked her. He did not want to go back upstairs and shut himself up with Mat's sullen withdrawal. "Maybe a private dining room that's not being used?"

"ðɛɹz ðə laɪbɹɛɹi." ʃi pɔɪntəd tə ə dɔɹ. "θɹu ðɛɹ, tə jəɹ ɹaɪt, ət ði ɛn ə ðə hɔl. maɪt bi ɛmpti, ðɪs aʊɝ."

"There's the library." She pointed to a door. "Through there, to your right, at the end of the hall. Might be empty, this hour."

"θæŋk ju. ɪf jə si mæstɝ ɡɪl, wəd jə tɛl ɪm ɹænd ælθɹ nidz tə tɔk tə hɪm ɪf i kən spɛɹ ə mɪnət?"

"Thank you. If you see Master Gill, would you tell him Rand al'Thor needs to talk to him if he can spare a minute?"

"aɪl tɛl hɪm," ʃi sɛd, ðən ɡɹɪnd. "kʊk wɑns tə tɔk tə hɪm, tu."

"I'll tell him," she said, then grinned. "Cook wants to talk to him, too."

ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz pɹɑbli haɪɾɪŋ, hi θɔɾ əz i tɝn əweɪ fɹəm hɝ.

The innkeeper was probably hiding, he thought as he turned away from her.

wən i stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum tə wɪtʃ ʃi hæd dɝɛktəd hɪm, hi stɑpt ən stɛɹd. ðə ʃɛlvz mʌst əv hɛl θɹi əɹ fɔɹ hʌnʒɹəd bʊks, mɔɹ ðən i hæɾ ɛvɝ sin ɪn wʌn pleɪs bɪfɔɹ. klɑθbaʊnd, lɛðɝbaʊnd wɪð ɡɪldɪd spaɪnz. oʊnli ə fju hæd wʊɾən kʌvɝz. hɪz aɪz ɡɑbəld ʌp ðə taɪɾəlz, pɪkɪŋ aʊɾ oʊl feɪvɹɪts. ðə tʃɹævəlz ə dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ. ði ɛseɪz ʌv wɪlɪm ə meɪnɪtʃɪz. hɪz bɹɛθ kɑɾ ət ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə lɛðɝbaʊn kɑpi ʌv vɔɪədʒəz əmʌŋ ðə si foʊk. tæm hæɾ ɔlweɪz wɑntəd tə ɹid ðæt.

When he stepped into the room to which she had directed him, he stopped and stared. The shelves must have held three or four hundred books, more than he had ever seen in one place before. Clothbound, leatherbound with gilded spines. Only a few had wooden covers. His eyes gobbled up the titles, picking out old favorites. The Travels of Jain Farstrider. The Essays of Willim of Maneches. His breath caught at the sight of a leatherbound copy of Voyages Among the Sea Folk. Tam had always wanted to read that.

pɪktʃɝɪŋ tæm, tɝnɪŋ ðə bʊk oʊvɝ ɪn ɪz hænz wɪð ə smaɪl, ɡɛɾɪŋ ðə fil ʌv ɪt bɪfɔɹ sɛɾəlɪŋ daʊn bɪfɔɹ ðə faɪɝpleɪs wɪð ɪz paɪp tə ɹid, hɪz oʊn hæn taɪɾənd ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt wɪð ə sɛns ə lɔs ən ɛmptinəs ðət dæmpən ɔl ɪz plɛʒɝ ɪn ðə bʊks.

Picturing Tam, turning the book over in his hands with a smile, getting the feel of it before settling down before the fireplace with his pipe to read, his own hand tightened on his sword hilt with a sense of loss and emptiness that dampened all his pleasure in the books.

ə θɹoʊt klɪɹd bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən i sʌɾənli ɹilaɪzd i wɑz nɑɾ əloʊn. ɹɛɾi tə əpɑlədʒaɪz fəɹ ɪz ɹudnəs, hi tɝnd. hi wɑz juz tə biɪŋ tɔlɝ ðən ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn i mɛt, bʌt ðɪs taɪm ɪz aɪz tʃɹævəld ʌp ən ʌp ən ʌp, ən ɪz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən. ðən i keɪm tə ðə hɛɾ ɔlmoʊst ɹitʃɪŋ ðə tɛn-fʊt silɪŋ. ə noʊz əz bɹɔɾ əz ðə feɪs, soʊ waɪɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ə snaʊt ðən ə noʊz. aɪbɹaʊz ðət hʌŋ daʊn laɪk teɪlz, fɹeɪmɪŋ peɪl aɪz əz bɪɡ əz tikəps. ɪɹz ðət poʊkt ʌp tə tʌftəd pɔɪns θɹu ə ʃæɡi, blæk meɪn. tʃɹɑlɑk! hi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə jɛl ən tʃɹaɪd tə bæk ʌp ən dʒɹɔ hɪz sɔɹd. hɪz fit ɡɑt tæŋɡəld, ən i sæt daʊn hɑɹd, ɪnstɛd.

A throat cleared behind him, and he suddenly realized he was not alone. Ready to apologize for his rudeness, he turned. He was used to being taller than almost everyone he met, but this time his eyes traveled up and up and up, and his mouth fell open. Then he came to the head almost reaching the ten-foot ceiling. A nose as broad as the face, so wide it was more a snout than a nose. Eyebrows that hung down like tails, framing pale eyes as big as teacups. Ears that poked up to tufted points through a shaggy, black mane. Trolloc! He let out a yell and tried to back up and draw his sword. His feet got tangled, and he sat down hard, instead.

"aɪ wɪʃ jə hjumənz wʊdn də ðæt," ɹʌmbəld ə vɔɪs əz dip əz ə dʒɹʌm. ðə tʌftəɾ ɪɹz twɪtʃt vaɪələnli, ən ðə vɔɪs bɪkeɪm sæd. "soʊ fju ʌv jə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ʌs. ɪts əɹ oʊn fɔlt, aɪ səpoʊz. nɑt mɛni ʌv əs əv ɡɔn aʊɾ əmʌŋ mɛn sɪns ðə ʃædoʊ fɛl ɑn ðə weɪz. ðæts . . . oʊ, sɪks dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz, naʊ. ɹaɪɾ æftɝ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ɪt wɑz." ðə ʃæɡi hɛd ʃʊk ən lɛɾ aʊɾ ə saɪ ðət wʊɾə dʌn kɹɛɾət tə ə bʊl. "tu lɔŋ, tu lɔŋ, ən soʊ fju tə tʃɹævəl ən si, ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn nʌn."

"I wish you humans wouldn't do that," rumbled a voice as deep as a drum. The tufted ears twitched violently, and the voice became sad. "So few of you remember us. It's our own fault, I suppose. Not many of us have gone out among men since the Shadow fell on the Ways. That's . . . oh, six generations, now. Right after the War of the Hundred Years, it was." The shaggy head shook and let out a sigh that would have done credit to a bull. "Too long, too long, and so few to travel and see, it might as well have been none."

ɹænd sæt ðəɹ fəɹ ə mɪnət wɪð ɪz maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət ði æpɝɪʃən ɪn waɪd-toʊd, ni-haɪ buts ən ə dɑɹk blu koʊt ðət bʌɾənd fɹəm ðə nɛk tə ðə weɪst, ðən flɛɹɾ aʊt tə hɪz but tɑps laɪk ə kɪlt oʊvɝ bæɡi tʃɹaʊzɝz. ɪn wʌn hænd wɑz ə bʊk, simɪŋ taɪni baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən, wɪð ə fɪŋɡɝ bɹɔɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ θɹi mɑɹkɪŋ ðə pleɪs.

Rand sat there for a minute with his mouth hanging open, staring up at the apparition in wide-toed, knee-high boots and a dark blue coat that buttoned from the neck to the waist, then flared out to his boot tops like a kilt over baggy trousers. In one hand was a book, seeming tiny by comparison, with a finger broad enough for three marking the place.

"aɪ θɔt jə wɝ - " hi bɪɡæn, ðən kɑt hɪmsɛlf. "wʌɾ ɑɹ - ?" ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɛni bɛɾɝ. ɡɛɾɪŋ tə hɪz fit, hi dʒɪnʒɝli ɔfɝɾ ɪz hænd. "maɪ neɪm ɪz ɹænd ælθɹ."

"I thought you were - " he began, then caught himself. "What are - ?" That was not any better. Getting to his feet, he gingerly offered his hand. "My name is Rand al'Thor."

ə hæn əz bɪɡ əz ə hæm ɪnɡʌlf hɪz; ɪt wɑz əkʌmpənid baɪ ə fɔɹməl baʊ. "lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən. jəɹ neɪm sɪŋz ɪn maɪ ɪɹz, ɹænd ælθɹ."

A hand as big as a ham engulfed his; it was accompanied by a formal bow. "Loial, son of Arent son of Halan. Your name sings in my ears, Rand al'Thor."

ðət saʊndəd laɪk ə ɹɪtʃuəl ɡɹiɾɪŋ tə ɹænd. hi ɹɪtɝn ðə baʊ. "jɔɹ neɪm sɪŋz ɪn maɪ ɪɹz, lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹənt . . . ɑ . . . sʌn ə hɑlən."

That sounded like a ritual greeting to Rand. He returned the bow. "Your name sings in my ears, Loial, son of Arent . . . ah . . . son of Halan."

ɪt wɑz ɔl ə lɪɾəl ənɹil. hi stɪl dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt lɔɪəl wɑz. ðə ɡɹɪp ə lɔɪəlz hjudʒ fɪŋɡɝz wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli dʒɛntəl, bʌɾ i wɑz stɪl ɹɪliv tə ɡɛɾ ɪz hæn bæk ɪn wʌn pis.

It was all a little unreal. He still did not know what Loial was. The grip of Loial's huge fingers was surprisingly gentle, but he was still relieved to get his hand back in one piece.

"ju hjumənz ɑɹ vɛɹi ɪksaɪɾəbəl," lɔɪəl sɛɾ ɪn ðət bæs ɹʌmbəl. "aɪ hæd hɝɾ ɔl ðə stɔɹiz, ən ɹɛd ðə bʊks, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ aɪ dɪdn ɹilaɪz. maɪ fɝs deɪ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, aɪ kəd nɑt bɪliv ði ʌpɹɔɹ. tʃɪlʒɹən kɹaɪd, ən wɪmən skɹimd, ən ə mɑb tʃeɪs mi ɔl ðə weɪ əkɹɔs ðə sɪɾi, weɪvɪŋ klʌbz ən naɪvz ən tɔɹtʃɪz, ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ, 'tʃɹɑlɑk!' aɪm əfɹeɪɾ aɪ wɑz ɔlmoʊs bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ ə lɪɾəl ʌpsɛt. ðɛɹz noʊ tɛlɪŋ wʌt wʊɾə hæpən ɪf ə pɑɹɾi ʌv ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz hædn kʌm əlɔŋ."

"You humans are very excitable," Loial said in that bass rumble. "I had heard all the stories, and read the books, of course, but I didn't realize. My first day in Caemlyn, I could not believe the uproar. Children cried, and women screamed, and a mob chased me all the way across the city, waving clubs and knives and torches, and shouting, 'Trolloc!' I'm afraid I was almost beginning to get a little upset. There's no telling what would have happened if a party of the Queen's Guards hadn't come along."

"ə lʌki θɪŋ," ɹænd sɛd feɪnli.

"A lucky thing," Rand said faintly.

"jɛs, bʌɾ ivən ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn simd ɔlmoʊst əz əfɹeɪɾ ə mi əz ði ʌðɝz. fɔɹ deɪz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn naʊ, ən aɪ hævən bɪn eɪbəl tə pʊt maɪ noʊz aʊtsaɪd ðɪs ɪn. ɡʊd mæstɝ ɡɪl ivən æsk mi nɑt tə juz ðə kɑmən ɹum." hɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃt. "nɑt ðəɾ i hæzən bɪn vɛɹi hɑspɪɾəbəl, jə ʌndɝstænd. bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə bɪɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl ðət fɝs naɪt. ɔl ðə hjumənz sim tə wɑnə liv ət wʌns. sətʃ skɹimɪŋ ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ, ɛvɹiwʌn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt θɹu ðə dɔɹ ət ðə seɪm taɪm. səm ə ðɛm cʊɾə bɪn hɝt."

"Yes, but even the Guardsmen seemed almost as afraid of me as the others. Four days in Caemlyn now, and I haven't been able to put my nose outside this inn. Good Master Gill even asked me not to use the common room." His ears twitched. "Not that he hasn't been very hospitable, you understand. But there was a bit of trouble that first night. All the humans seemed to want to leave at once. Such screaming and shouting, everyone trying to get through the door at the same time. Some of them could have been hurt."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ɪn fæsəneɪʃən ət ðoʊz twɪtʃɪŋ ɪɹz.

Rand stared in fascination at those twitching ears.

"aɪl tɛl ju, ɪt wɑz nɑt fəɹ ðɪs aɪ lɛf ðə stɛɾɪŋ."

"I'll tell you, it was not for this I left the stedding."

"jɔɹ ən oʊɡiɝ!" ɹænd ɪkskleɪmd. "weɪt! sɪks dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz? jə sɛd ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz! haʊ oʊld ɑɹ ju?" hi nu ɪt wɑz ɹuɾ əz sun əz i sɛɾ ɪt, bʌt lɔɪəl bɪkeɪm dɪfɛnsɪv ɹæðɝ ðən əfɛndəd.

"You're an Ogier!" Rand exclaimed. "Wait! Six generations? You said the War of the Hundred Years! How old are you?" He knew it was rude as soon as he said it, but Loial became defensive rather than offended.

"naɪnti jɪɹz," ði oʊɡiɝ sɛd stɪfli. "ɪn oʊnli tɛn mɔɹ əl bi eɪbəl tə ædʒɹɛs ðə stʌmp. aɪ θɪŋk ði ɛldɝz ʃʊɾə lemi spik, sɪns ðeɪ wɝ dəsaɪɾɪŋ wɛðɝ aɪ kəd liv əɹ nɑt. bʌt ðən ðeɪ ɔlweɪz wɝi əbaʊɾ ɛniwʌn ʌv ɛni eɪdʒ ɡoʊɪŋ aʊtsaɪd. jə hjumənz ɑɹ soʊ heɪsti, soʊ ɪɹæɾɪk." hi blɪŋkt ən ɡeɪv ə ʃɔɹt baʊ. "pliz fɝɡɪv mi. aɪ ʃʊdn əv sɛd ðæt. bʌt jə də faɪɾ ɔl ðə taɪm, ivən wən ðɛɹz noʊ nid tə."

"Ninety years," the Ogier said stiffly. "In only ten more I'll be able to address the Stump. I think the Elders should have let me speak, since they were deciding whether I could leave or not. But then they always worry about anyone of any age going Outside. You humans are so hasty, so erratic." He blinked and gave a short bow. "Please forgive me. I shouldn't have said that. But you do fight all the time, even when there's no need to."

"ðæts ɔl ɹaɪt," ɹænd sɛd. hi wɑz stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə teɪk ɪn lɔɪəlz eɪdʒ. oʊldɝ ðən oʊl sɛn bui, ən stɪl nɑɾ oʊld ɪnʌf tə. . . . hi sæt daʊn ɪn wʌn ə ðə haɪ-bæk tʃɛɹz. lɔɪəl tʊk ənʌðɝ, meɪd tə hoʊl tu; hi fɪld ɪt. sɪɾɪŋ, hi wɑz əz tɔl əz moʊs mɛn stændɪŋ. "æt lis ðeɪ dɪd lɛt jə ɡoʊ."

"That's all right," Rand said. He was still trying to take in Loial's age. Older than old Cenn Buie, and still not old enough to. . . . He sat down in one of the high-backed chairs. Loial took another, made to hold two; he filled it. Sitting, he was as tall as most men standing. "At least they did let you go."

lɔɪəl lʊkt ət ðə flɔɹ, ɹɪŋkəlɪŋ ɪz noʊz ən ɹʌbɪŋ əɾ ɪt wɪð wʌn θɪk fɪŋɡɝ. "wɛl, əz tə ðæt, naʊ. jə si, ðə stʌmp hæd nɑt bɪn miɾɪŋ vɛɹi lɔŋ, nɑɾ ivən ə jɪɹ, bʌɾ aɪ kəd tɛl fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ hɝd ðət baɪ ðə taɪm ðeɪ ɹitʃt ə dɪsɪʒən aɪ wəd bi oʊld ɪnʌf tə ɡoʊ wɪθaʊt ðɛɹ pɝmɪʃən. aɪm əfɹeɪd ðəl seɪ aɪ pʊɾ ə lɔŋ hændəl ɑn maɪ æks, bʌɾ aɪ dʒʌst . . . lɛft. ði ɛldɝz ɔlweɪz sɛɾ aɪ wɑz tu hɑthɛɾəd, ən aɪ fɪɹ aɪv pɹuvən əm ɹaɪt. aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf ðeɪv ɹilaɪzd aɪm ɡɔn, jɛt? bʌɾ aɪ hæd tə ɡoʊ."

Loial looked at the floor, wrinkling his nose and rubbing at it with one thick finger. "Well, as to that, now. You see, the Stump had not been meeting very long, not even a year, but I could tell from what I heard that by the time they reached a decision I would be old enough to go without their permission. I am afraid they'll say I put a long handle on my axe, but I just . . . left. The Elders always said I was too hotheaded, and I fear I've proven them right. I wonder if they have realized I'm gone, yet? But I had to go."

ɹænd bɪɾ ɪz lɪp tə kip fɹəm læfɪŋ. ɪf lɔɪəl wɑz ə hɑthɛɾəd oʊɡiɝ, hi kəɾ ɪmædʒən wʌt moʊst oʊɡiɝ wɝ laɪk. hæd nɑt bɪn miɾɪŋ vɛɹi lɔŋ, nɑɾ ivən ə jɪɹ? mæstɝ ælvɪɹ wəd dʒʌst ʃeɪk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn wʌndɝ; ə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl miɾɪŋ ðət læstəd hæf ə deɪ wəɾ əv ɛvɹibɑɾi dʒʌmpɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn, ivən hɹəl luhən. ə weɪv ə hoʊmsɪknəs swɛpt oʊvɝ hɪm, meɪkɪŋ ɪt hɑɹd tə bɹið fəɹ mɛmɹiz ə tæm, ən ɛɡwin, ən ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn, ən bɛl taɪn ɑn ðə ɡɹin ɪn hæpiɝ deɪz. hi fɔɹst əm əweɪ.

Rand bit his lip to keep from laughing. If Loial was a hotheaded Ogier, he could imagine what most Ogier were like. Had not been meeting very long, not even a year? Master al'Vere would just shake his head in wonder; a Village Council meeting that lasted half a day would have everybody jumping up and down, even Haral Luhhan. A wave of homesickness swept over him, making it hard to breathe for memories of Tam, and Egwene, and the Winespring Inn, and Bel Tine on the Green in happier days. He forced them away.

"ɪf jə doʊn maɪn maɪ æskɪŋ," hi sɛd, klɪɹɪŋ ɪz θɹoʊt, "waɪ dɪd jə wɑnə ɡoʊ . . . ɑ, aʊtsaɪd, soʊ mʌtʃ? aɪ wɪʃ aɪd nɛvɝ lɛf maɪ hoʊm, maɪsɛlf."

"If you don't mind my asking," he said, clearing his throat, "why did you want to go . . . ah, Outside, so much? I wish I'd never left my home, myself."

"waɪ, tə si," lɔɪəl sɛɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ðə moʊst ɑbviəs θɪŋ ɪn ðə wɝld. "aɪ ɹɛd ðə bʊks, ɔl ðə tʃɹævəlɝz' əkaʊns, ən ɪt bɪɡæn tə bɝn ɪn mi ðəɾ aɪ hæd tə si, nɑt dʒʌst ɹɛd." hɪz peɪl aɪz bɹaɪɾənd, ən ɪz ɪɹz stɪfənd. "aɪ stʌɾid ɛvɹi skɹæp aɪ kəd faɪn əbaʊt tʃɹævlɪŋ, əbaʊt ðə weɪz, ən kʌstəmz ɪn hjumən lænz, ən ðə sɪɾiz wi bɪl fəɹ jə hjumənz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ən ðə mɔɹ aɪ ɹɛd, ðə mɔɹ aɪ nu ðəɾ aɪ hæd tə ɡoʊ aʊtsaɪd, ɡoʊ tə ðoʊz pleɪsəz wi hæd bɪn, ən si ðə ɡɹoʊvz fəɹ maɪsɛlf."

"Why, to see," Loial said as if it were the most obvious thing in the world. "I read the books, all the travelers' accounts, and it began to burn in me that I had to see, not just read." His pale eyes brightened, and his ears stiffened. "I studied every scrap I could find about traveling, about the Ways, and customs in human lands, and the cities we built for you humans after the Breaking of the World. And the more I read, the more I knew that I had to go Outside, go to those places we had been, and see the groves for myself."

ɹænd blɪŋkt. "ɡɹoʊvz?"

Rand blinked. "Groves?"

"jɛs, ðə ɡɹoʊvz. ðə tʃɹiz. oʊnli ə fju ʌv ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz, ʌv kɔɹs, taʊɝɪŋ tə ðə skaɪ tə kip mɛmɹiz ə ðə stɛɾɪŋ fɹɛʃ." hɪz tʃɛɹ ɡɹoʊn əz i ʃɪftəd fɔɹwɝd, dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ wɪð ɪz hænz, wʌn ʌv wɪtʃ stɪl hɛl ðə bʊk. hɪz aɪz wɝ bɹaɪɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ, ən ɪz ɪɹz ɔlmoʊs kwɪvɝd. "moʊsli ðeɪ juz ðə tʃɹiz ə ðə læn ən ðə pleɪs. jə kænɑt meɪk ðə lænd ɡoʊ əɡɛnst ɪtsɛlf. nɑt fəɹ lɔŋ; ðə lænd wɪl ɹəbɛl. jə mʌst ʃeɪp ðə vɪʒən tə ðə lænd, nɑt ðə læn tə ðə vɪʒən. ɪn ɛvɹi ɡɹoʊv wɑz plæntəɾ ɛvɹi tʃɹi ðət wəd ɡɹoʊ ən θɹaɪv ɪn ðət pleɪs, itʃ bælənst əɡɛns ðə nɛkst, itʃ pleɪs tə kɑmpləmən ði ʌðɝz, fəɹ ðə bɛst ɡɹoʊɪŋ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɔlsoʊ soʊ ðət ðə bæləns wəd sɪŋ ɪn ði aɪ ən ðə hɑɹt. ɑ, ðə bʊks spoʊk ʌv ɡɹoʊvz tə meɪk ɛldɝz wip ən læf ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ɡɹoʊvz tə ɹɪmeɪn ɡɹin ɪn mɛmɹi fɝɛvɝ."

"Yes, the groves. The trees. Only a few of the Great Trees, of course, towering to the sky to keep memories of the stedding fresh." His chair groaned as he shifted forward, gesturing with his hands, one of which still held the book. His eyes were brighter than ever, and his ears almost quivered. "Mostly they used the trees of the land and the place. You cannot make the land go against itself. Not for long; the land will rebel. You must shape the vision to the land, not the land to the vision. In every grove was planted every tree that would grow and thrive in that place, each balanced against the next, each placed to complement the others, for the best growing, of course, but also so that the balance would sing in the eye and the heart. Ah, the books spoke of groves to make Elders weep and laugh at the same time, groves to remain green in memory forever."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ðə sɪɾiz?" ɹænd æskt. lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ɪm ə pʌzəld lʊk. "ðə sɪɾiz. ðə sɪɾiz ði oʊɡiɝ bɪlt. hɪɹ, fəɹ ɪnstəns. keɪɛmlɪn. oʊɡiɝ bɪl keɪɛmlɪn, dɪdn ju? ðə stɔɹiz seɪ soʊ."

"What about the cities?" Rand asked. Loial gave him a puzzled look. "The cities. The cities the Ogier built. Here, for instance. Caemlyn. Ogier built Caemlyn, didn't you? The stories say so."

"wɝkɪŋ wɪð stoʊn. . . ." hɪz ʃoʊldɝz ɡeɪv ə mæsɪv ʃɹʌɡ. "ðæt wɑz dʒʌst sʌmθɪŋ lɝn ɪn ðə jɪɹz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ, dʊɹɪŋ ði ɛɡzaɪl, wən wi wɝ stɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ əɡɛn. ɪts ə faɪn θɪŋ, aɪ səpoʊz, bʌt nɑt ðə tʃɹu θɪŋ. tʃɹaɪ əz jəl - ən aɪ hæv ɹɛd ðət ði oʊɡiɝ u bɪl ðoʊz sɪɾiz tʃɹuli dɪd tʃɹaɪ - jə kænɑt meɪk stoʊn lɪv. ə fju stɪl də wɝk wɪð stoʊn, bʌɾ oʊnli kəz jə hjumənz dæmədʒ ðə bɪldɪŋz soʊ ɔfən wɪð jəɹ wɔɹz. ðəɹ wɝ ə hændfʊl ʌv oʊɡiɝ ɪn . . . ɑ . . . kɛɹhin, ɪts kɔl naʊ . . . wən aɪ pæs θɹu. ðeɪ wɝ fɹəm ənʌðɝ stɛɾɪŋ, lʌkəli, soʊ ðeɪ dɪdnt noʊ əbaʊt mi, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ stɪl səspɪʃəs ðəɾ aɪ wɑz aʊtsaɪɾ əloʊn soʊ jʌŋ. aɪ səpoʊz ɪts dʒʌst əz wɛl ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɹizən fəɹ mi tə lɪŋɡɝ ðɛɹ. ɪn ɛni keɪs, jə si, wɝkɪŋ wɪð stoʊn ɪz dʒʌst sʌmθɪŋ ðət wɑz θɹʌst ɑn əs baɪ ðə wivɪŋ ə ðə pæɾɝn; ðə ɡɹoʊvz keɪm fɹəm ðə hɑɹt."

"Working with stone. . . ." His shoulders gave a massive shrug. "That was just something learned in the years after the Breaking, during the Exile, when we were still trying to find the stedding again. It is a fine thing, I suppose, but not the true thing. Try as you will - and I have read that the Ogier who built those cities truly did try - you cannot make stone live. A few still do work with stone, but only because you humans damage the buildings so often with your wars. There were a handful of Ogier in . . . ah . . . Cairhien, it's called now . . . when I passed through. They were from another stedding, luckily, so they didn't know about me, but they were still suspicious that I was Outside alone so young. I suppose it's just as well there was no reason for me to linger there. In any case, you see, working with stone is just something that was thrust on us by the weaving of the Pattern; the groves came from the heart."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hæf ðə stɔɹiz i hæd ɡɹoʊn ʌp wɪð hæd dʒʌs bɪn stʊɾ ɑn ðɛɹ hɛdz. "aɪ dɪdnt noʊ oʊɡiɝ bɪlivd ɪn ðə pæɾɝn, lɔɪəl."

Rand shook his head. Half the stories he had grown up with had just been stood on their heads. "I didn't know Ogier believed in the Pattern, Loial."

"ʌv kɔɹs, wi bɪliv. ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ðə pæɾɝn ə ði eɪdʒəz, ən laɪvz ɑɹ ðə θɹɛdz ɪt wivz. noʊ wʌn kən tɛl haʊ ðə θɹɛɾ ə hɪz oʊn laɪf wɪl bi woʊvən ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn, əɹ haʊ ðə θɹɛɾ ʌv ə pipəl wɪl bi woʊvən. ɪt ɡeɪv əs ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən ði ɛɡzaɪl, ən stoʊn, ən ðə lɔŋɪŋ, ən ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɪt ɡeɪv əs bæk ðə stɛɾɪŋ bɪfɔɹ wi ɔl daɪd. səmtaɪmz aɪ θɪŋk ðə ɹizən jə hjumənz ɑɹ ðə weɪ jə ɑɹ ɪz kəz jəɹ θɹɛdz ɑɹ soʊ ʃɔɹt. ðeɪ mʌs dʒʌmp ɝaʊn ɪn ðə wivɪŋ. oʊ, ðɛɹ, aɪv dʌn ɪɾ əɡɛn. ði ɛldɝz seɪ jə hjumənz doʊn laɪk tə bi ɹimaɪndəɾ ə haʊ ʃɔɹɾ ə taɪm jə laɪv. aɪ hoʊp aɪ dɪdn hɝt jəɹ filɪŋz."

"Of course, we believe. The Wheel of Time weaves the Pattern of the Ages, and lives are the threads it weaves. No one can tell how the thread of his own life will be woven into the Pattern, or how the thread of a people will be woven. It gave us the Breaking of the World, and the Exile, and Stone, and the Longing, and eventually it gave us back the stedding before we all died. Sometimes I think the reason you humans are the way you are is because your threads are so short. They must jump around in the weaving. Oh, there, I've done it again. The Elders say you humans don't like to be reminded of how short a time you live. I hope I didn't hurt your feelings."

ɹænd læft ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "nɑɾ əɾ ɔl. aɪ səpoʊz ɪɾəd bi fʌn tə lɪv əz lɔŋ əz jə du, bʌɾ aɪ nɛvɝ ɹɪli θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt. aɪ ɡɛs ɪf aɪ lɪv əz lɔŋ əz oʊl sɛn bui, ðæɾəl bi lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛnibəɾi."

Rand laughed and shook his head. "Not at all. I suppose it'd be fun to live as long as you do, but I never really thought about it. I guess if I live as long as old Cenn Buie, that'll be long enough for anybody."

"hi ɪz ə vɛɹi oʊl mæn?"

"He is a very old man?"

ɹænd dʒʌs nɑɾəd. hi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə ɪkspleɪn ðəɾ oʊl sɛn bui wɑz nɑt kwaɪɾ əz oʊld əz lɔɪəl.

Rand just nodded. He was not about to explain that old Cenn Buie was not quite as old as Loial.

"wɛl," lɔɪəl sɛd, "pɝhæps jə hjumənz də hæv ʃɔɹt laɪvz, bʌt jə də soʊ mʌtʃ wɪð ðɛm, ɔlweɪz dʒʌmpɪŋ ɝaʊnd, ɔlweɪz soʊ heɪsti. ən juv ðə hoʊl wɝl tə də ɪɾ ɪn. wi oʊɡiɝ ɑɹ baʊn tə əɹ stɛɾɪŋ."

"Well," Loial said, "perhaps you humans do have short lives, but you do so much with them, always jumping around, always so hasty. And you have the whole world to do it in. We Ogier are bound to our stedding."

"jɔɹ aʊtsaɪd."

"You're Outside."

"fɔɹ ə taɪm, ɹænd. bʌɾ aɪ mʌst ɡoʊ bæk, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. ðɪs wɝld ɪz jʊɹz, jʊɹz ən jəɹ kaɪnz. ðə stɛɾɪŋ ɑɹ maɪn. ðɛɹz tu mʌtʃ hɝli-bɝli aʊtsaɪd. ən soʊ mʌtʃ ɪz tʃeɪnʒd fɹəm wʌɾ aɪ ɹɛɾ əbaʊt."

"For a time, Rand. But I must go back, eventually. This world is yours, yours and your kind's. The stedding are mine. There's too much hurly-burly Outside. And so much is changed from what I read about."

"wɛl, θɪŋz də tʃeɪnʒ oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz. sʌm, ɛniweɪ."

"Well, things do change over the years. Some, anyway."

"sʌm? hæf ðə sɪɾiz aɪ ɹɛɾ əbaʊɾ ɑɹən ivən ðəɹ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ, ən moʊst ə ðə ɹɛst ɑɹ noʊn baɪ dɪfɹənt neɪmz. jə teɪk kɛɹhin. ðə sɪɾiz pɹɑpɝ neɪm ɪz ɑlkɛɹəhinælən, hɪl ə ðə ɡoʊldən dɔn. ðeɪ doʊn ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝ, fəɹ ɔl ə ðə sʌnɹaɪz ɑn ðɛɹ bænɝz. ən ðə ɡɹoʊv ðɛɹ. aɪ daʊɾ ɪf ɪts bɪn tɛndəd sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. ɪts dʒʌst ənʌðɝ fɔɹəst, naʊ, wɛɹ ðeɪ kʌt faɪɝwʊd. ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz ɑɹ ɔl ɡɔn, ən noʊ wʌn ɹɪmɛmbɝz ðɛm. ən hɪɹ? keɪɛmlɪn ɪz stɪl keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt ðeɪ lɛt ðə sɪɾi ɡɹoʊ ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹoʊv. wɝ nɑɾ ə kɔɹɾɝ ʌv ə maɪl fɹəm ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ɪt ɹaɪt wɛɹ wi sɪt - fɹəm wɛɹ ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ɪt ʃəd bi. nɑɾ ə tʃɹi ʌv ɪt lɛft. aɪv bɪn tə tɛɹ ən ɪljən, tu. dɪfɹənt neɪmz, ən noʊ mɛmɹiz. ðɛɹz oʊnli pæstʃɝ fəɹ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz wɛɹ ðə ɡɹoʊv wɑz ət tiɹ, ən əɾ ɪljən ðə ɡɹoʊv ɪz ðə kɪŋz pɑɹk, wɛɹ i hʌns ɪz dɪɹ, ən nʌn əlaʊɾ ɪnsaɪd wɪθaʊɾ ɪz pɝmɪʃən. ɪts ɔl tʃeɪnʒd, ɹænd. aɪ fɪɹ vɛɹi mʌtʃ ðəɾ əl faɪn ðə seɪm ɛvɹiwɛɹ aɪ ɡoʊ. ɔl ðə ɡɹoʊvz ɡɔn, ɔl ðə mɛmɹiz ɡɔn, ɔl ðə dʒɹimz dɛd."

"Some? Half the cities I read about aren't even there any longer, and most of the rest are known by different names. You take Cairhien. The city's proper name is Al'cair'rahienallen, Hill of the Golden Dawn. They don't even remember, for all of the sunrise on their banners. And the grove there. I doubt if it has been tended since the Trolloc Wars. It's just another forest, now, where they cut firewood. The Great Trees are all gone, and no one remembers them. And here? Caemlyn is still Caemlyn, but they let the city grow right over the grove. We're not a quarter of a mile from the center of it right where we sit - from where the center of it should be. Not a tree of it left. I've been to Tear and Illian, too. Different names, and no memories. There's only pasture for their horses where the grove was at Tear, and at Illian the grove is the King's park, where he hunts his deer, and none allowed inside without his permission. It has all changed, Rand. I fear very much that I will find the same everywhere I go. All the groves gone, all the memories gone, all the dreams dead."

"ju kænt ɡɪv ʌp, lɔɪəl. jə kæn ɛvɝ ɡɪv ʌp. ɪf jə ɡɪv ʌp, jə maɪɾ əz wɛl bi dɛd." ɹænd sæŋk bæk ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ əz fɑɹ əz i kəd ɡoʊ, hɪz feɪs tɝnɪŋ ɹɛd. hi ɪkspɛktəd ði oʊɡiɝ tə læf ət hɪm, bʌt lɔɪəl nɑɾəd ɡɹeɪvli ɪnstɛd.

"You can't give up, Loial. You can't ever give up. If you give up, you might as well be dead." Rand sank back in his chair as far as he could go, his face turning red. He expected the Ogier to laugh at him, but Loial nodded gravely instead.

"jɛs, ðæts ðə weɪ ʌv jəɹ kaɪnd, ɪzən ɪt?" ði oʊɡiɝz vɔɪs tʃeɪnʒd, əz ɪf i wɝ kwoʊɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ. "tɪl ʃeɪɾ ɪz ɡɔn, tɪl wɔɾɝ ɪz ɡɔn, ɪndə ðə ʃædoʊ wɪð tiθ bɛɹd, skɹimɪŋ dɪfaɪəns wɪð ðə læs bɹɛθ, tə spɪɾ ɪn saɪtblɪndɝz aɪ ɑn ðə læs deɪ." lɔɪəl kɑkt ɪz ʃæɡi hɛɾ ɪkspɛktənli, bʌt ɹænd hæd noʊ aɪdiə wʌɾ ɪt wɑz i ɪkspɛktəd.

"Yes, that's the way of your kind, isn't it?" The Ogier's voice changed, as if he were quoting something. "Till shade is gone, till water is gone, into the Shadow with teeth bared, screaming defiance with the last breath, to spit in Sightblinder's eye on the Last Day." Loial cocked his shaggy head expectantly, but Rand had no idea what it was he expected.

ə mɪnət wɛn baɪ wɪð lɔɪəl weɪɾɪŋ, ðən ənʌðɝ, ən ɪz lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz bɪɡæn tə dʒɹɔ daʊn ɪn pʌzəlmənt. bʌɾ i stɪl weɪɾəd, ðə saɪləns ɡɹoʊɪŋ ənkʌmftəɹbəl fəɹ ɹænd.

A minute went by with Loial waiting, then another, and his long eyebrows began to draw down in puzzlement. But he still waited, the silence growing uncomfortable for Rand.

"ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz," ɹænd sɛd faɪnəli, dʒʌs fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə bɹeɪk ðət saɪləns. "ɑɹ ðeɪ laɪk ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə?"

"The Great Trees," Rand said finally, just for something to break that silence. "Are they like Avendesora?"

lɔɪəl sæɾ ʌp ʃɑɹpli; hɪz tʃɛɹ skwild ən kɹæk soʊ laʊdli ɹænd θɔɾ ɪt wɑz gɑnə kʌm əpɑɹt. "ju noʊ bɛɾɝ ðən ðæt. ju, ʌv ɔl pipəl."

Loial sat up sharply; his chair squealed and cracked so loudly Rand thought it was going to come apart. "You know better than that. You, of all people."

"mi? haʊ wəɾ aɪ noʊ?"

"Me? How would I know?"

"ɑɹ jə pleɪɪŋ ə dʒoʊk ɑn mi? səmtaɪmz jə ilmɛn θɪŋk ði ɑɾəst θɪŋz ɑɹ fʌni."

"Are you playing a joke on me? Sometimes you Aielmen think the oddest things are funny."

"wʌt? aɪm nɑɾ ən ilmən! aɪm fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. aɪ nɛvɝ ivən sɔ ən ilmən!"

"What? I'm not an Aielman! I'm from the Two Rivers. I never even saw an Aielman!"

lɔɪəl ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ən ðə tʌfs ɑn ɪz ɪɹz dʒɹupt aʊtwɝd. "ju si? ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz tʃeɪnʒd, ən hæf ʌv wʌɾ aɪ noʊ ɪz jusləs. aɪ hoʊp aɪ dɪd nɑɾ əfɛn ju. aɪm ʃʊɹ jəɹ tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz ə vɛɹi faɪn pleɪs, wɛɹɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz."

Loial shook his head, and the tufts on his ears drooped outward. "You see? Everything is changed, and half of what I know is useless. I hope I did not offend you. I'm sure your Two Rivers is a very fine place, wherever it is."

"sʌmbɑɾi toʊl mi," ɹænd sɛd, "ðæɾ ɪt wɑz wʌns kɔl meɪnɛðɝən. aɪd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ɪt, bʌt meɪbi ju. . . ."

"Somebody told me," Rand said, "that it was once called Manetheren. I'd never heard it, but maybe you. . . ."

ði oʊɡiɝz ɪɹz hæd pɝkt ʌp hæpəli. "ɑ! jɛs. meɪnɛðɝən." ðə tʌfs wɛn daʊn əɡɛn. "ðɛɹ wɑz ə vɛɹi faɪn ɡɹoʊv ðɛɹ. jəɹ peɪn sɪŋz ɪn maɪ hɑɹt, ɹænd ælθɹ. wi kəd nɑt kʌm ɪn taɪm."

The Ogier's ears had perked up happily. "Ah! Yes. Manetheren." The tufts went down again. "There was a very fine grove there. Your pain sings in my heart, Rand al'Thor. We could not come in time."

lɔɪəl baʊd wɛɹ i sæt, ən ɹænd baʊd bæk. hi səspɛktəd lɔɪəl wəd bi hɝɾ ɪf i dɪd nɑt, wəd θɪŋk i wɑz ɹuɾ ət ðə list. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf lɔɪəl θɔɾ i hæd ðə seɪm sɔɹɾ ə mɛmɹiz ði oʊɡiɝ sim tə. ðə kɔɹnɝz ə lɔɪəlz maʊθ ən aɪz wɝ sɝɾənli tɝn daʊn əz ɪf i wɝ ʃɛɹɪŋ ðə peɪn ə ɹændz lɔs, dʒʌst əz ɪf ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ə meɪnɛðɝən wɝ nɑt sʌmθɪŋ ðət hæpən tu θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ, nɪɹ ɪnʌf, sʌmθɪŋ ðət ɹænd oʊnli nu əbaʊt kəz ə mɔɪɹeɪnz stɔɹi.

Loial bowed where he sat, and Rand bowed back. He suspected Loial would be hurt if he did not, would think he was rude at the least. He wondered if Loial thought he had the same sort of memories the Ogier seemed to. The corners of Loial's mouth and eyes were certainly turned down as if he were sharing the pain of Rand's loss, just as if the destruction of Manetheren were not something that happened two thousand years ago, near enough, something that Rand only knew about because of Moiraine's story.

æftɝ ə taɪm lɔɪəl saɪd. "ðə wil tɝnz," hi sɛd, "ænd noʊ wʌn noʊz ɪts tɝnɪŋ. bʌt juv kʌm ɔlmoʊst əz fɑɹ fɹəm jəɹ hoʊm əz aɪ hæv. ə vɛɹi kənsɪɾɝəbəl dɪstəns, əz θɪŋz ɑɹ naʊ. wən ðə weɪz wɝ fɹili oʊpən, ʌv kɔɹs - bʌt ðəɾ ɪz lɔŋ pæst. tɛl mi, wʌt bɹɪŋz jə soʊ fɑɹ? ɪz ðəɹ sʌmθɪŋ jə wɑnə si, tu?"

After a time Loial sighed. "The Wheel turns," he said, "and no one knows its turning. But you have come almost as far from your home as I have. A very considerable distance, as things are now. When the Ways were freely open, of course - but that is long past. Tell me, what brings you so far? Is there something you want to see, too?"

ɹænd oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə seɪ ðət ðeɪ hæd kʌm tə si ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən - ən i kəd nɑt seɪ ɪt. pɝhæps ɪt wɑz kəz lɔɪəl æktəɾ əz ɪf i wɝ noʊ oʊldɝ ðən ɹænd, naɪnti jɪɹz oʊld əɹ noʊ naɪnti jɪɹz oʊld. meɪbi fəɹ ən oʊɡiɝ naɪnti jɪɹz wɑz nɑɾ ɛni oʊldɝ ðən i wɑz. ɪt hæd bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm sɪns i hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə ɹɪli tɔk tə ɛniwʌn əbaʊt wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ. ɔlweɪz ðə fɪɹ ðət ðeɪ maɪt bi dɑɹkfɹɛnz, əɹ θɪŋk i wɑz. mæt wɑz soʊ dʒɹɔn ɪn ɑn hɪmsɛlf, fiɾɪŋ ɪz fɪɹz ɑn ɪz oʊn səspɪʃənz, ðəɾ i wɑz noʊ ɡʊd fəɹ tɔkɪŋ. ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf tɛlɪŋ lɔɪəl əbaʊt wɪntɝnaɪt. nɑɾ ə veɪɡ stɔɹi əbaʊt dɑɹkfɹɛnz; ðə tʃɹuθ əbaʊt tʃɹɑləks bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪn ðə dɔɹ, ən ə feɪɾ ɑn ðə kwɔɹi ɹoʊd.

Rand opened his mouth to say that they had come to see the false Dragon - and he could not say it. Perhaps it was because Loial acted as if he were no older than Rand, ninety years old or no ninety years old. Maybe for an Ogier ninety years was not any older than he was. It had been a long time since he had been able to really talk to anyone about what was happening. Always the fear that they might be Darkfriends, or think he was. Mat was so drawn in on himself, feeding his fears on his own suspicions, that he was no good for talking. Rand found himself telling Loial about Winternight. Not a vague story about Darkfriends; the truth about Trollocs breaking in the door, and a Fade on the Quarry Road.

pɑɹɾ ə hɪm wɑz hɔɹəfaɪɾ ət wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf i wɝ tu pipəl, wʌn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊld ɪz tʌŋ waɪl ði ʌðɝ oʊnli fɛl ðə ɹɪlif ət biɪŋ eɪbəl tə tɛl ɪɾ ɔl faɪnəli. ðə ɹɪzʌlt wɑz ðəɾ i stʌmbəld ən stʌɾɝd ən dʒʌmpt ɝaʊn ɪn ðə stɔɹi. ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ən luzɪŋ ɪz fɹɛnz ɪn ðə naɪt, nɑt noʊɪŋ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əlaɪv əɹ dɛd. ðə feɪɾ ɪn waɪtbɹɪdʒ, ən tɑm daɪɪŋ soʊ ðeɪ kəɾ ɪskeɪp. ðə feɪɾ ɪn bɛɹlən. dɑɹkfɹɛnz leɪɾɝ, haʊəl ɡoʊd, ən ðə bɔɪ hu wɑz əfɹeɪɾ ə ðɛm, ən ðə wʊmən u tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mæt. ðə hæfmən aʊtsaɪd ðə ɡus ən kɹaʊn.

Part of him was horrified at what he was doing, but it was almost as if he were two people, one trying to hold his tongue while the other only felt the relief at being able to tell it all finally. The result was that he stumbled and stuttered and jumped around in the story. Shadar Logoth and losing his friends in the night, not knowing if they were alive or dead. The Fade in Whitebridge, and Thom dying so they could escape. The Fade in Baerlon. Darkfriends later, Howal Gode, and the boy who was afraid of them, and the woman who tried to kill Mat. The Halfman outside the Goose and Crown.

wən i stɑɹɾəd bæbəlɪŋ əbaʊt dʒɹimz, ivən ðə pɑɹɾ ə hɪm ðət wɑntəd tə tɔk fɛl ðə hækəlz ɹaɪzɪŋ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk. hi bɪɾ ɪz tʌŋ klæmpɪŋ ɪz tiθ ʃʌt. bɹiðɪŋ hɛvəli θɹu hɪz noʊz, hi wɑtʃt ði oʊɡiɝ wɛɹəli, hoʊpɪŋ i θɔɾ i hæd mɛnt naɪtmɛɹz. ðə laɪt nu ɪɾ ɔl saʊndəd laɪk ə naɪtmɛɹ, əɹ ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ɛniwʌn naɪtmɛɹz. meɪbi lɔɪəl wəd dʒʌs θɪŋk i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ mæd. meɪbi. . . .

When he started babbling about dreams, even the part of him that wanted to talk felt the hackles rising on the back of his neck. He bit his tongue clamping his teeth shut. Breathing heavily through his nose, he watched the Ogier warily, hoping he thought he had meant nightmares. The Light knew it all sounded like a nightmare, or enough to give anyone nightmares. Maybe Loial would just think he was going mad. Maybe. . . .

"tɑvɝən," lɔɪəl sɛd.

"Ta'veren," Loial said.

ɹænd blɪŋkt. "wʌt?"

Rand blinked. "What?"

"tɑvɝən." lɔɪəl ɹʌbd bɪhaɪn ə pɔɪntəɾ ɪɹ wɪð wʌn blʌn fɪŋɡɝ ən ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl ʃɹʌɡ. "ɛldɝ heɪmən ɔlweɪz sɛɾ aɪ nɛvɝ lɪsənd, bʌt səmtaɪmz aɪ dɪd. səmtaɪmz, aɪ lɪsənd. jə noʊ haʊ ðə pæɾɝn ɪz woʊvən, ʌv kɔɹs?"

"Ta'veren." Loial rubbed behind a pointed ear with one blunt finger and gave a little shrug. "Elder Haman always said I never listened, but sometimes I did. Sometimes, I listened. You know how the Pattern is woven, of course?"

"aɪ nɛvɝ ɹɪli θɔɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt," hi sɛd sloʊli. "ɪt dʒʌst ɪz."

"I never really thought about it," he said slowly. "It just is."

"ʌm, jɛs, wɛl. nɑɾ ɪɡzækli. jə si, ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ðə pæɾɝn ə ði eɪdʒəz, ən ðə θɹɛdz ɪt jusəz ɑɹ lɪvz. ɪts nɑt fɪkst, ðə pæɾɝn, nɑɾ ɔlweɪz. ɪf ə mæn tʃɹaɪz tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə dɝɛkʃən ə hɪz laɪf ən ðə pæɾɝn əz ɹum fəɹ ɪt, ðə wil dʒʌst wivz ɑn ən teɪks ɪɾ ɪn. ðəɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz ɹum fəɹ smɔl tʃeɪnʒəz, bʌt səmtaɪmz ðə pæɾɝn sɪmpli woʊn æksɛpt ə bɪɡ tʃeɪnʒ, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ hɑɹd jə tʃɹaɪ. jə ʌndɝstænd?"

"Um, yes, well. Not exactly. You see, the Wheel of Time weaves the Pattern of the Ages, and the threads it uses are lives. It is not fixed, the Pattern, not always. If a man tries to change the direction of his life and the Pattern has room for it, the Wheel just weaves on and takes it in. There is always room for small changes, but sometimes the Pattern simply won't accept a big change, no matter how hard you try. You understand?"

ɹænd nɑɾəd. "aɪ kəd lɪv ɑn ðə fɑɹm əɹ ɪn ɛmənz fild, ən ðət wəd bi ə smɔl tʃeɪnʒ. ɪf aɪ wɑntəd tə bi ə kɪŋ, ðoʊ. . . ." hi læft, ən lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ə ɡɹɪn ðəɾ ɔlmoʊst splɪɾ ɪz feɪs ɪn tu. hɪz tiθ wɝ waɪt, ən əz bɹɔɾ əz tʃɪzəlz.

Rand nodded. "I could live on the farm or in Emond's Field, and that would be a small change. If I wanted to be a king, though. . . ." He laughed, and Loial gave a grin that almost split his face in two. His teeth were white, and as broad as chisels.

"jɛs, ðæts ɪt. bʌt səmtaɪmz ðə tʃeɪnʒ tʃuzəz ju, əɹ ðə wil tʃuzəz ɪt fəɹ ju. ən səmtaɪmz ðə wil bɛnz ə laɪf-θɹɛd, əɹ sɛvɹəl θɹɛdz, ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ ðəɾ ɔl ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ θɹɛdz ɑɹ fɔɹs tə swɝl ɝaʊn ɪt, ən ðoʊz fɔɹs ʌðɝ θɹɛdz, ən ðoʊz stɪl ʌðɝz, ən ɑn ən ɑn. ðət fɝs bɛndɪŋ tə meɪk ðə wɛb, ðəɾ ɪz tɑvɝən, ən ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ jə kən də tə tʃeɪnʒ ɪt, nɑɾ əntɪl ðə pæɾɝn ɪtsɛlf tʃeɪnʒəz. ðə wɛb - tæmɹəleɪlən, ɪts kɔld - kən læs fəɹ wiks, əɹ fəɹ jɪɹz. ɪt kən teɪk ɪn ə taʊn, əɹ ivən ðə hoʊl pæɾɝn. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wɑz tɑvɝən. soʊ wɑz luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ, aɪ səpoʊz." hi lɛɾ aʊɾ ə bumɪŋ tʃʌkəl. "ɛldɝ heɪmən wəd bi pɹaʊɾ ə mi. hi ɔlweɪz dʒɹoʊn ɑn, ən ðə bʊks əbaʊt tʃɹævlɪŋ wɝ mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd lɪsən səmtaɪmz."

"Yes, that's it. But sometimes the change chooses you, or the Wheel chooses it for you. And sometimes the Wheel bends a life-thread, or several threads, in such a way that all the surrounding threads are forced to swirl around it, and those force other threads, and those still others, and on and on. That first bending to make the Web, that is ta'veren, and there is nothing you can do to change it, not until the Pattern itself changes. The Web - ta'maral'ailen, it's called - can last for weeks, or for years. It can take in a town, or even the whole Pattern. Artur Hawkwing was ta'veren. So was Lews Therin Kinslayer, for that matter, I suppose." He let out a booming chuckle. "Elder Haman would be proud of me. He always droned on, and the books about traveling were much more interesting, but I did listen sometimes."

"ðæts ɔl vɛɹi wɛl," ɹænd sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ doʊn si wʌɾ ɪts tə də wɪð mi. ɪm ə ʃɛpɝd, nɑɾ ənʌðɝ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ. ən niðɝ ɪz mæt, əɹ pɛɹɪn. ɪts dʒʌst . . . ɹɪdɪkjələs."

"That's all very well," Rand said, "but I don't see what it has to do with me. I'm a shepherd, not another Artur Hawkwing. And neither is Mat, or Perrin. It's just . . . ridiculous."

"aɪ dɪdn seɪ jə wɝ, bʌɾ aɪ kəɾ ɔlmoʊs fil ðə pæɾɝn swɝl dʒʌs lɪsnɪŋ tə jə tɛl jəɹ teɪl, ən aɪ hæv noʊ tælən ðɛɹ. jə ɑɹ tɑvɝən, ɔl ɹaɪt. ju, ən meɪbi jəɹ fɹɛnz, tu." ði oʊɡiɝ pɔzd, ɹʌbɪŋ ðə bɹɪdʒ ə hɪz bɹɔd noʊz θɔtfəli. faɪnəli hi nɑɾəd tə hɪmsɛlf əz ɪf i hæd ɹitʃt ə dɪsɪʒən. "aɪ wɪʃ tə tʃɹævəl wɪð ju, ɹænd."

"I didn't say you were, but I could almost feel the Pattern swirl just listening to you tell your tale, and I have no Talent there. You are ta'veren, all right. You, and maybe your friends, too." The Ogier paused, rubbing the bridge of his broad nose thoughtfully. Finally he nodded to himself as if he had reached a decision. "I wish to travel with you, Rand."

fəɹ ə mɪnət ɹænd stɛɹd, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf i hæd hɝd kɝɛkli. "wɪð mi?" hi ɪkskleɪmd wən i kəd spik. "dɪdn jə hɪɹ wʌɾ aɪ sɛɾ əbaʊt . . . ?" hi aɪd ðə dɔɹ sʌɾənli. ɪt wɑz ʃʌt taɪt, ən θɪk ɪnʌf ðəɾ ɛniwʌn tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lɪsən ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd wəd hɪɹ oʊnli ə mɝmɝ, ivən wɪð ɪz ɪɹ pɹɛst əɡɛns ðə wʊɾən pænəlz. dʒʌs ðə seɪm i wɛn ɑn ɪn ə loʊɝ vɔɪs. "əbaʊt huz tʃeɪsɪŋ mi? ɛniweɪ, aɪ θɔt jə wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ si jəɹ tʃɹiz."

For a minute Rand stared, wondering if he had heard correctly. "With me?" he exclaimed when he could speak. "Didn't you hear what I said about . . . ?" He eyed the door suddenly. It was shut tight, and thick enough that anyone trying to listen on the other side would hear only a murmur, even with his ear pressed against the wooden panels. Just the same he went on in a lower voice. "About who's chasing me? Anyway, I thought you wanted to go see your trees."

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə vɛɹi faɪn ɡɹoʊv ət tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən aɪ hæv bɪn toʊl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kip ɪt wɛl tɛndəd. bɪsaɪdz, ɪts nɑt dʒʌs ðə ɡɹoʊvz aɪ wɑnə si. pɝhæps jə ɑɹ nɑɾ ənʌðɝ ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ, bʌt fəɹ ə taɪm, ət list, pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɝld wɪl ʃeɪp ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn ju, pɝhæps ɪz ivən naʊ ʃeɪpɪŋ ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn ju. ivən ɛldɝ heɪmən wəd wɑnə si ðæt."

"There is a very fine grove at Tar Valon, and I have been told the Aes Sedai keep it well tended. Besides, it is not just the groves I want to see. Perhaps you are not another Artur Hawkwing, but for a time, at least, part of the world will shape itself around you, perhaps is even now shaping itself around you. Even Elder Haman would want to see that."

ɹænd hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ɪt wəd bi ɡʊd tə hæv sʌmwʌn ɛls əlɔŋ. ðə weɪ mæt wɑz bɪheɪvɪŋ, biɪŋ wɪð ɪm wɑz ɔlmoʊs laɪk biɪŋ əloʊn. ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz ə kʌmfɝɾɪŋ pɹɛzəns. meɪbi hi wɑz jʌŋ əz oʊɡiɝ ɹɛkən eɪdʒ, bʌɾ i simd əz ənflæpəbəl əz ə ɹɑk, dʒʌs laɪk tæm. ən lɔɪəl hæd bɪn ɔl ə ðoʊz pleɪsəz, ən nu əbaʊɾ ʌðɝz. hi lʊkt ət ði oʊɡiɝ, sɪɾɪŋ ðəɹ wɪð ɪz bɹɔd feɪs ə pɪktʃɝ ə peɪʃəns. sɪɾɪŋ ðɛɹ, ən tɔlɝ sɪɾɪŋ ðən moʊs mɛn stændɪŋ. haʊ dʒju haɪd sʌmbɑɾi ɔlmoʊs tɛn fit tɔl? hi saɪɾ ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd.

Rand hesitated. It would be good to have someone else along. The way Mat was behaving, being with him was almost like being alone. The Ogier was a comforting presence. Maybe he was young as Ogier reckoned age, but he seemed as unflappable as a rock, just like Tam. And Loial had been all of those places, and knew about others. He looked at the Ogier, sitting there with his broad face a picture of patience. Sitting there, and taller sitting than most men standing. How do you hide somebody almost ten feet tall? He sighed and shook his head.

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðəɾ ɪz ə ɡʊɾ aɪdiə, lɔɪəl. ivən ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn faɪnz əs hɪɹ, wɪl bi ɪn deɪnʒɝ ɔl ðə weɪ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. ɪf ʃi dʌz nɑt. . . ." ɪf ʃi dʌznt, ðən ʃiz dɛɾ ən soʊ ɪz ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. oʊ, ɛɡwin. hi ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk. ɛɡwin wɑz nɑt dɛd, ən mɔɪɹeɪn wəd faɪn ðɛm.

"I don't think that is a good idea, Loial. Even if Moiraine finds us here, we'll be in danger all the way to Tar Valon. If she does not. . . ." If she doesn't, then she's dead and so is everyone else. Oh, Egwene. He gave himself a shake. Egwene was not dead, and Moiraine would find them.

lɔɪəl lʊkt əɾ ɪm sɪmpəθɛɾɪkəli ən tʌtʃt ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "aɪ æm ʃʊɹ jəɹ fɹɛnz ɑɹ wɛl, ɹænd."

Loial looked at him sympathetically and touched his shoulder. "I am sure your friends are well, Rand."

ɹænd nɑɾəd ɪz θæŋks. hɪz θɹoʊt wɑz tu taɪt tə spik.

Rand nodded his thanks. His throat was too tight to speak.

"wɪl jə ət lis tɔk wɪð mi səmtaɪmz?" lɔɪəl saɪd, ə bæs ɹʌmbəl. "æn pɝhæps pleɪ ə ɡeɪm ə stoʊnz? aɪ hæv nɑt hæɾ ɛniwʌn tə tɔk tə ɪn deɪz, ɪksɛpt ɡʊd mæstɝ ɡɪl, ən hiz bɪzi moʊst ə ðə taɪm. ðə kʊk simz tə ɹʌn ɪm ənmɝsɪfəli. pɝhæps ʃi ɹɪli oʊnz ði ɪn?"

"Will you at least talk with me sometimes?" Loial sighed, a bass rumble. "And perhaps play a game of stones? I have not had anyone to talk to in days, except good Master Gill, and he is busy most of the time. The cook seems to run him unmercifully. Perhaps she really owns the inn?"

"ʌv kɔɹs, aɪ wɪl." hɪz vɔɪs wɑz hɔɹs. hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən tʃɹaɪd tə ɡɹɪn. "æn ɪf wi miɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, jə kən ʃoʊ mi ðə ɡɹoʊv ðɛɹ." ðeɪv tə bi ɔl ɹaɪt. laɪt sɛn ðəɹ ɔl ɹaɪt.

"Of course, I will." His voice was hoarse. He cleared his throat and tried to grin. "And if we meet in Tar Valon, you can show me the grove there." They have to be all right. Light send they're all right.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾisɛvən


CHAPTER 37

ðə lɔŋ tʃeɪs


The Long Chase

nɪneɪiv ɡɹɪp ðə ɹeɪnz ə ðə θɹi hɔɹsəz ən pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə naɪɾ əz ɪf ʃi kəd sʌmhaʊ pɪɹs ðə dɑɹknəs ən faɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ. skɛləɾəl tʃɹiz sɝaʊndəd hɝ, stɑɹk ən blæk ɪn ðə dɪm munlaɪt. ðə tʃɹiz ən ðə naɪt meɪɾ ən ɪfɛktɪv skɹin fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn wɝ duɪŋ, nɑt ðəɾ iðɝ ə ðɛm hæd pɔz tə lɛɾ əɹ noʊ wʌt ðət wɑz. ə loʊ "kip ðə hɔɹsəz kwaɪət," fɹəm læn, ən ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn, livɪŋ əɹ stændɪŋ laɪk ə steɪbəlbɔɪ. ʃi ɡlænst ət ðə hɔɹsəz ən saɪd wɪð ɛksæspɝeɪʃən.

Nynaeve gripped the reins of the three horses and peered into the night as if she could somehow pierce the darkness and find the Aes Sedai and the Warder. Skeletal trees surrounded her, stark and black in the dim moonlight. The trees and the night made an effective screen for Whatever Moiraine and Lan were doing, not that either of them had paused to let her know what that was. A low "Keep the horses quiet," from Lan, and they were gone, leaving her standing like a stableboy. She glanced at the horses and sighed with exasperation.

mændɑɹb blɛndəɾ ɪndə ðə naɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əz wɛl əz ɪz mæstɝz kloʊk. ði oʊnli ɹizən ðə bæɾəl-tʃɹeɪnd stæljən wɑz lɛɾɪŋ əɹ ɡɛt ðɪs kloʊs wɑz kəz læn hæd hændəɾ əɹ ðə ɹeɪnz hɪmsɛlf. hi sim kɑm ɪnʌf naʊ, bʌt ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɔl tu wɛl ðə lɪps dʒɹɔɪŋ bæk saɪlənli wən ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ ɪz bɹaɪɾəl wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ lænz əpɹuvəl. ðə saɪləns hæd meɪd ðə bɛɹd tiθ sim ðət mʌtʃ mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs. wɪð ə læst wɛɹi lʊk ət ðə stæljən, ʃi tɝn tə pɪɹ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ði ʌðɝ tu hæd ɡɔn, aɪdli stʃɹoʊkɪŋ əɹ oʊn hɔɹs. ʃi ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾəld dʒʌmp wən ɑldib pʊʃt ə peɪl mʌzəl ʌndɝ əɹ hænd, bʌɾ æftɝ ə mɪnət ʃi ɡeɪv ðə waɪt mɛɹ ə pæt, tu.

Mandarb blended into the night almost as well as his master's cloak. The only reason the battle-trained stallion was letting her get this close was because Lan had handed her the reins himself. He seemed calm enough now, but she remembered all too well the lips drawing back silently when she reached for his bridle without waiting for Lan's approval. The silence had made the bared teeth seem that much more dangerous. With a last wary look at the stallion, she turned to peer in the direction the other two had gone, idly stroking her own horse. She gave a startled jump when Aldieb pushed a pale muzzle under her hand, but after a minute she gave the white mare a pat, too.

"noʊ nid tə teɪk ɪɾ aʊɾ ɑn ju, aɪ səpoʊz," ʃi wɪspɝd, "dʒʌs kəz jəɹ mɪstʃɹəs ɪz ə koʊld-feɪst - " ʃi stʃɹeɪn ət ðə dɑɹknəs əɡɛn. wʌt wɝ ðeɪ duɪŋ?

"No need to take it out on you, I suppose," she whispered, "just because your mistress is a cold-faced - " She strained at the darkness again. What were they doing?

æftɝ livɪŋ waɪtbɹɪdʒ ðeɪ hæd ɹɪɾən θɹu vɪlədʒəz ðət simd ənɹil ɪn ðɛɹ nɔɹmæləɾi, ɔɹɾənɛɹi mɑɹkət vɪlədʒəz ðət sim tə nɪneɪiv ʌnkənɛktɪd tə ə wɝl ðət hæd feɪdz ən tʃɹɑləks ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðeɪ hæd fɑloʊd ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd, əntɪl ət læs mɔɪɹeɪn sæt fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ɑldibz sæɾəl, piɹɪŋ istwɝɾ əz ɪf ʃi kəd si ðə hoʊl lɛŋθ ə ðə ɡɹeɪt haɪweɪ, ɔl ðə mɛni maɪlz tə keɪɛmlɪn, ən si, tu, wʌt weɪɾəd ðɛɹ.

After leaving Whitebridge they had ridden through villages that seemed unreal in their normality, ordinary market villages that seemed to Nynaeve unconnected to a world that had Fades and Trollocs and Aes Sedai. They had followed the Caemlyn Road, until at last Moiraine sat forward in Aldieb's saddle, peering eastward as if she could see the whole length of the great highway, all the many miles to Caemlyn, and see, too, what waited there.

ɪvɛntʃəwəli ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ ən sɛɾəld bæk. "ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz," ʃi mɝmɝd, "bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt bɪliv ɪt wivz ən ɛn tə hoʊp. aɪ mʌs fɝs teɪk kɛɹ ə ðəɾ ʌv wɪtʃ aɪ kən bi sɝɾən. ɪɾəl bi əz ðə wil wivz." ən ʃi tɝn əɹ mɛɹ nɔɹθ, ɔf ðə ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst. wʌn ə ðə bɔɪz wɑz ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən wɪð ðə kɔɪn mɔɪɹeɪn hæd ɡɪvən hɪm. læn fɑloʊd.

Eventually the Aes Sedai let out a long breath and settled back. "The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills," she murmured, "but I cannot believe it weaves an end to hope. I must first take care of that of which I can be certain. It will be as the Wheel weaves." And she turned her mare north, off the road into the forest. One of the boys was in that direction with the coin Moiraine had given him. Lan followed.

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ə lɔŋ læs lʊk ət ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd. fju pipəl ʃɛɹd ðə ɹoʊdweɪ wɪð əm ðɛɹ, ə kʌpəl ə haɪ-wil kɑɹts ən wʌn ɛmpti wæɡən ɪn ðə dɪstəns, ə hændfʊl ə foʊk əfʊt wɪð ðɛɹ bɪlɔŋɪŋz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks əɹ paɪld ɑn pʊʃkɑɹts. səm ə ðoʊz wɝ wɪlɪŋ tə ədmɪt ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn tə si ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, bʌt moʊs dɪnaɪɾ ɪt viəmənli, ɪspɛʃli ðoʊz u hæd kʌm θɹu waɪtbɹɪdʒ. ət waɪtbɹɪdʒ ʃi hæd bɪɡʌn tə bɪliv mɔɪɹeɪn. sʌmwʌt. mɔɹ, əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt. ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ kʌmfɝɾ ɪn ðæt.

Nynaeve gave a long last look at the Caemlyn Road. Few people shared the roadway with them there, a couple of high-wheeled carts and one empty wagon in the distance, a handful of folk afoot with their belongings on their backs or piled on pushcarts. Some of those were willing to admit they were on their way to Caemlyn to see the false Dragon, but most denied it vehemently, especially those who had come through Whitebridge. At Whitebridge she had begun to believe Moiraine. Somewhat. More, at any rate. And there was no comfort in that.

ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ ɔlmoʊst aʊɾ ə saɪt θɹu ðə tʃɹiz bɪfɔɹ ʃi stɑɹɾəd æftɝ ðɛm. ʃi hɝid tə kætʃ ʌp. læn lʊk bæk əɾ əɹ fɹikwənli, ən weɪv fəɹ əɹ tə kʌm ɑn, bʌɾ i kɛpt ət mɔɪɹeɪnz ʃoʊldɝ, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæɾ əɹ aɪz fɪkst əhɛd.

The Warder and the Aes Sedai were almost out of sight through the trees before she started after them. She hurried to catch up. Lan looked back at her frequently, and waved for her to come on, but he kept at Moiraine's shoulder, and the Aes Sedai had her eyes fixed ahead.

wʌn ivnɪŋ æftɝ ðeɪ lɛf ðə ɹoʊd, ði ɪnvɪzəbəl tʃɹeɪl feɪld. mɔɪɹeɪn, ði ənflæpəbəl mɔɪɹeɪn, sʌɾənli stʊɾ ʌp bɪsaɪd ðə smɔl faɪɝ wɛɹ ðə ti kɛɾəl wɑz bɔɪlɪŋ, hɝ aɪz waɪɾənɪŋ. "ɪɾ ɪz ɡɔn," ʃi wɪspɝɾ ət ðə naɪt.

One evening after they left the road, the invisible trail failed. Moiraine, the unflappable Moiraine, suddenly stood up beside the small fire where the tea kettle was boiling, her eyes widening. "It is gone," she whispered at the night.

"hi ɪz . . . ?" nɪneɪiv kəd nɑt fɪnɪʃ ðə kwɛstʃən. laɪt, aɪ doʊn ivən noʊ wɪtʃ wʌn ɪɾ ɪz!

"He is . . . ?" Nynaeve could not finish the question. Light, I don't even know which one it is!

"hi dɪd nɑt daɪ," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd sloʊli, "bʌɾ i noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əz ðə toʊkən." ʃi sæt daʊn, hɝ vɔɪs lɛvəl ən əɹ hænz stɛɾi əz ʃi tʊk ðə kɛɾəl ɔf ðə fleɪmz ən tɔst ɪn ə hændfʊl ə ti. "ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wɪl kip ɑn əz wiv bɪn ɡoʊɪŋ. wən aɪ ɡɛt kloʊs ɪnʌf, aɪ kən faɪn ɪm wɪθaʊt ðə kɔɪn."

"He did not die," the Aes Sedai said slowly, "but he no longer has the token." She sat down, her voice level and her hands steady as she took the kettle off the flames and tossed in a handful of tea. "In the morning we will keep on as we've been going. When I get close enough, I can find him without the coin."

əz ðə faɪɝ bɝn daʊn tə koʊlz, læn ɹoʊl hɪmsɛlf ɪn ɪz kloʊk ən wɛn tə slip. nɪneɪiv kəd nɑt slip. ʃi wɑtʃt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. mɔɪɹeɪn hæɾ əɹ aɪz kloʊzd, bʌt ʃi sæɾ əpɹaɪt, ən nɪneɪiv nu ʃi wɑz əweɪk.

As the fire burned down to coals, Lan rolled himself in his cloak and went to sleep. Nynaeve could not sleep. She watched the Aes Sedai. Moiraine had her eyes closed, but she sat upright, and Nynaeve knew she was awake.

lɔŋ æftɝ ðə læst ɡloʊ hæd feɪɾəd fɹəm ðə koʊlz, mɔɪɹeɪn oʊpən əɹ aɪz ən lʊkt ət hɝ. ʃi kəd fil ði ɛɛs sədaɪz smaɪl ivən ɪn ðə dɑɹk. "hi hæz ɹiɡeɪn ðə kɔɪn, wɪzdəm. ɔl wɪl bi wɛl." ʃi leɪ daʊn ɑn əɹ blæŋkəts wɪð ə saɪ ən ɔlmoʊst ət wʌns wɑz bɹiðɪŋ dip ɪn slʌmbɝ.

Long after the last glow had faded from the coals, Moiraine opened her eyes and looked at her. She could feel the Aes Sedai's smile even in the dark. "He has regained the coin, Wisdom. All will be well." She lay down on her blankets with a sigh and almost at once was breathing deep in slumber.

nɪneɪiv hæɾ ə hɑɹd taɪm dʒɔɪnɪŋ hɝ, taɪɝɾ əz ʃi wɑz. hɝ maɪn kɑnʒɝd ʌp ðə wɝs noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ ʃi tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp ɪt. ɔl wɪl bi wɛl. æftɝ waɪtbɹɪdʒ, ʃi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ meɪk hɝsɛlf bɪliv ðət soʊ izəli.

Nynaeve had a hard time joining her, tired as she was. Her mind conjured up the worst no matter how she tried to stop it. All will be well. After Whitebridge, she could no longer make herself believe that so easily.

əbɹʌpli nɪneɪiv wɑz dʒɝk fɹəm mɛmɹi bæk tə ðə naɪt; ðəɹ ɹɪli wɑz ə hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm. staɪflɪŋ ðə kɹaɪ ðət ɹoʊz ɪn əɹ θɹoʊt, ʃi fʌmbəl fəɹ ðə naɪf əɾ əɹ bɛlt, hɝ hæn kloʊzɪŋ ɑn ðə hɪl bɪfɔɹ ʃi ɹilaɪz ðət ðə hænd wɑz lænz.

Abruptly Nynaeve was jerked from memory back to the night; there really was a hand on her arm. Stifling the cry that rose in her throat, she fumbled for the knife at her belt, her hand closing on the hilt before she realized that the hand was Lan's.

ðə wɔɹɾɝz hʊd wɑz θɹoʊn bæk, bʌɾ ɪz tʃəmɛliən-laɪk kloʊk blɛndəd soʊ wɛl wɪð ðə naɪt ðət ðə dɪm blɝ ə hɪz feɪs sim tə hæŋ səspɛndəɾ ɪn ðə naɪt. ðə hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm əpɪɹd tə kʌm aʊɾ ə θɪn ɛɹ.

The Warder's hood was thrown back, but his chameleon-like cloak blended so well with the night that the dim blur of his face seemed to hang suspended in the night. The hand on her arm appeared to come out of thin air.

ʃi dʒɹu ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ. ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm tə kɑmɛn ɑn haʊ izəli hi hæd kʌm ɑn əɹ ʌnəwɛɹ, bʌɾ ɪnstɛɾ i tɝn tə dɪɡ ɪndə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz. "ju ɑɹ niɾəd," hi sɛd, ən nɛl tə fæsən hɑbəlz ɑn ðə hɔɹsəz.

She drew a shuddering breath. She expected him to comment on how easily he had come on her unaware, but instead he turned to dig into his saddlebags. "You are needed," he said, and knelt to fasten hobbles on the horses.

əz sun əz ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ sɪkjʊɹd, hi stʃɹeɪɾənd, ɡɹæspt əɹ hænd, ən hɛɾəd ɔf ɪndə ðə naɪɾ əɡɛn. hɪz dɑɹk hɛɹ fɪɾ ɪndə ðə naɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əz wɛl əz ɪz kloʊk, ən i meɪɾ ivən lɛs nɔɪz ðən ʃi dɪd. ɡɹʌdʒɪŋli ʃi hæd tə ədmɪt ðət ʃi kəd nɛvɝ əv fɑloʊɾ ɪm θɹu ðə dɑɹknəs wɪθaʊɾ ɪz ɡɹɪp əz ə ɡaɪd. ʃi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən ʃi kəd pʊl lus ɪf i dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹilis hɝ, ɛniweɪ; hi hæd vɛɹi stʃɹɔŋ hænz.

As soon as the horses were secured, he straightened, grasped her hand, and headed off into the night again. His dark hair fit into the night almost as well as his cloak, and he made even less noise than she did. Grudgingly she had to admit that she could never have followed him through the darkness without his grip as a guide. She was not certain she could pull loose if he did not want to release her, anyway; he had very strong hands.

əz ðeɪ keɪm ʌp ɑn ə smɔl ɹaɪz, bɛɹli ɪnʌf tə bi kɔld ə hɪl, hi sæŋk tə wʌn ni, pʊlɪŋ əɹ daʊn bɪsaɪd hɪm. ɪt tʊk əɹ ə moʊmən tə si ðət mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ðɛɹ, tu. ənmoʊvɪŋ, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ cʊɾə pæs fəɹ ə ʃædoʊ ɪn əɹ dɑɹk kloʊk. læn dʒɛstʃɝd daʊn ðə hɪlsaɪd tə ə lɑɹdʒ klɪɹɪŋ ɪn ðə tʃɹiz.

As they came up on a small rise, barely enough to be called a hill, he sank to one knee, pulling her down beside him. It took her a moment to see that Moiraine was there, too. Unmoving, the Aes Sedai could have passed for a shadow in her dark cloak. Lan gestured down the hillside to a large clearing in the trees.

nɪneɪiv fɹaʊn ɪn ðə dɪm munlaɪt, ðən sʌɾənli smaɪld ɪn ʌndɝstændɪŋ. ðoʊz peɪl blɝz wɝ tɛns ɪn ɹɛɡjəlɝ ɹoʊz, ə dɑɹkən ɛnkæmpmənt.

Nynaeve frowned in the dim moonlight, then suddenly smiled in understanding. Those pale blurs were tents in regular rows, a darkened encampment.

"waɪtkloʊks," læn wɪspɝd, "tu hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm, meɪbi mɔɹ. ðɛɹz ɡʊd wɔɾɝ daʊn ðɛɹ. ən ðə læd wɝ æftɝ."

"Whitecloaks," Lan whispered, "two hundred of them, maybe more. There's good water down there. And the lad we're after."

"ɪn ðə kæmp?" ʃi fɛlt, mɔɹ ðən sɔ, læn nɑd.

"In the camp?" She felt, more than saw, Lan nod.

"ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn kən pɔɪn ɹaɪt tə hɪm. aɪ wɛn kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si hiz ʌndɝ ɡɑɹd."

"In the middle of it. Moiraine can point right to him. I went close enough to see he's under guard."

"ə pɹɪznɝ?" nɪneɪiv sɛd. "waɪ?"

"A prisoner?" Nynaeve said. "Why?"

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ʃəd nɑt bi ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn ə vɪlədʒ bɔɪ, nɑɾ ənlɛs ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tə meɪk əm səspɪʃəs. ðə laɪt noʊz ɪt dʌzn teɪk mʌtʃ tə meɪk waɪtkloʊks səspɪʃəs, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl wɝiz mi."

"I don't know. The Children should not be interested in a village boy, not unless there was something to make them suspicious. The Light knows it doesn't take much to make Whitecloaks suspicious, but it still worries me."

"haʊ ɑɹ jə gɑnə fɹi hɪm?" ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əntɪl i ɡlænst əɾ əɹ ðət ʃi ɹilaɪz haʊ mʌtʃ əʃʊɹəns ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɪn əɹ ðəɾ i kəd mɑɹtʃ ɪndə ðə mɪɾəl ə tu hʌnʒɹəd mɛn ən kʌm bæk wɪð ðə bɔɪ. wɛl, hiz ə wɔɹɾɝ. səm ə ðə stɔɹiz mʌs bi tʃɹu.

"How are you going to free him?" It was not until he glanced at her that she realized how much assurance there had been in her that he could march into the middle of two hundred men and come back with the boy. Well, he is a Warder. Some of the stories must be true.

ʃi wʌndɝɾ ɪf i wɑz læfɪŋ ət hɝ, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs wɑz flæɾ ən bɪznɪslaɪk. "aɪ kən bɹɪŋ ɪm aʊt, bʌt hɪl laɪkli bi ɪn noʊ ʃeɪp fəɹ stɛlθ. ɪf wɝ sin, wi meɪ faɪn tu hʌnʒɹəd waɪtkloʊks ɑn əɹ hilz, ən əs ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʌbəl. ənlɛs ðeɪ ɑɹ tu bɪzi tə tʃeɪs ʌs. ɑɹ jə wɪlɪŋ tə teɪk ə tʃæns?"

She wondered if he was laughing at her, but his voice was flat and businesslike. "I can bring him out, but he'll likely be in no shape for stealth. If we're seen, we may find two hundred Whitecloaks on our heels, and us riding double. Unless they are too busy to chase us. Are you willing to take a chance?"

"tə hɛlp ən ɛmənz fildɝ? ʌv kɔɹs! wʌt kaɪndə tʃæns?"

"To help an Emond's Fielder? Of course! What kind of chance?"

hi pɔɪntəɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs əɡɛn, bɪɑn ðə tɛns. ðɪs taɪm ʃi kəd meɪk aʊt nʌθɪŋ bʌt ʃædoʊz. "ðɛɹ hɔɹs-laɪnz. ɪf ðə pɪkət-ɹoʊps ɑɹ kʌt, nɑɾ ɔl ðə weɪ θɹu, bʌɾ ɪnʌf soʊ ðəl bɹeɪk wən mɔɪɹeɪn kɹieɪts ə daɪvɝʒən, ðə waɪtkloʊks wɪl bi tu bɪzi tʃeɪsɪŋ ðɛɹ oʊn hɔɹsəz tə kʌm æftɝ ʌs. ðəɹ ɑɹ tu ɡɑɹdz ɑn ðət saɪɾ ə ðə kæmp, bɪɑn ðə pɪkət-laɪnz, bʌɾ ɪf jə ɑɹ hæf əz ɡʊɾ əz aɪ θɪŋk jə ɑɹ, ðəl nɛvɝ si ju."

He pointed into the darkness again, beyond the tents. This time she could make out nothing but shadows. "Their horse-lines. If the picket-ropes are cut, not all the way through, but enough so they'll break when Moiraine creates a diversion, the Whitecloaks will be too busy chasing their own horses to come after us. There are two guards on that side of the camp, beyond the picket-lines, but if you are half as good as I think you are, they'll never see you."

ʃi swɑloʊd hɑɹd. stɔkɪŋ ɹæbəts wɑz wʌn θɪŋ; ɡɑɹdz, ðoʊ, wɪð spɪɹz ən sɔɹdz. . . . soʊ hi θɪŋks aɪm ɡʊd, dʌz hi? "aɪl də ɪt."

She swallowed hard. Stalking rabbits was one thing; guards, though, with spears and swords. . . . So he thinks I'm good, does he? "I'll do it."

læn nɑɾəd əɡɛn, əz ɪf i hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd noʊ lɛs. "wʌn ʌðɝ θɪŋ. ðəɹ ɑɹ wʊlvz əbaʊt, tənaɪt. aɪ sɔ tu, ən ɪf aɪ sɔ ðət mɛni, ðəɹ ɑɹ pɹɑbli mɔɹ." hi pɔzd, ən ðoʊ hɪz vɔɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ʃi hæd ðə filɪŋ i wɑz pʌzəld. "ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf ðeɪ wɑntəd mi tə si ðɛm. ɛniweɪ, ðeɪ ʃʊdn bɑðɝ ju. wʊlvz juʒəwəli steɪ əweɪ fɹəm pipəl."

Lan nodded again, as if he had expected no less. "One other thing. There are wolves about, tonight. I saw two, and if I saw that many, there are probably more." He paused, and though his voice did not change she had the feeling he was puzzled. "It was almost as if they wanted me to see them. Anyway, they shouldn't bother you. Wolves usually stay away from people."

"aɪ wʊdn əv noʊn ðæt," ʃi sɛd switli. "aɪ oʊnli ɡɹu ʌp ɝaʊnd ʃɛpɝdz." hi ɡɹʌntɪd, ən ʃi smaɪld ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs.

"I wouldn't have known that," she said sweetly. "I only grew up around shepherds." He grunted, and she smiled into the darkness.

"wil də ɪt naʊ, ðɛn," hi sɛd.

"We'll do it now, then," he said.

hɝ smaɪl feɪɾəd əz ʃi pɪɹd daʊn ət ðə kæmp fʊl ʌv ɑɹmd mɛn. tu hʌnʒɹəd mɛn wɪð spɪɹz ən sɔɹdz ænd. . . . bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd ɹikənsɪɾɝ, ʃi izd əɹ naɪf ɪn ɪts ʃiθ ən stɑɹɾəd tə slɪp əweɪ. mɔɪɹeɪn kɑɾ əɹ ɑɹm ɪn ə ɡɹɪp ɔlmoʊst əz stʃɹɔŋ əz lænz.

Her smile faded as she peered down at the camp full of armed men. Two hundred men with spears and swords and. . . . Before she could reconsider, she eased her knife in its sheath and started to slip away. Moiraine caught her arm in a grip almost as strong as Lan's.

"teɪk kɛɹ," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd sɔfli. "wʌns jə kʌt ðə ɹoʊps, ɹɪtɝn əz kwɪkli əz jə kæn. jə ɑɹ ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn, tu, ən aɪ wəd nɑt ɹɪsk ju, ɛni mɔɹ ðən ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz, ɪf ðə hoʊl wɝld wɑz nɑɾ ət ɹɪsk ɪn ðiz deɪz."

"Take care," the Aes Sedai said softly. "Once you cut the ropes, return as quickly as you can. You are a part of the Pattern, too, and I would not risk you, any more than any of the others, if the whole world was not at risk in these days."

nɪneɪiv ɹʌbd əɹ ɑɹm sɝəptɪʃəsli wən mɔɪɹeɪn ɹilist ɪt. ʃi wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə lɛt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊ ðə ɡɹɪp hæd hɝt. bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn tɝn bæk tə wɑtʃɪŋ ðə kæmp bɪloʊ əz sun əz ʃi lɛt ɡoʊ. ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz ɡɔn, nɪneɪiv ɹilaɪzd wɪð ə stɑɹt. ʃi hæd nɑt hɝɾ ɪm liv. laɪt blaɪn ðə blʌɾi mæn! kwɪkli ʃi taɪɾ əɹ skɝts ʌp tə ɡɪv əɹ lɛɡz fɹiɾəm, ən hɝiɾ ɪndə ðə naɪt.

Nynaeve rubbed her arm surreptitiously when Moiraine released it. She was not about to let the Aes Sedai know the grip had hurt. But Moiraine turned back to watching the camp below as soon as she let go. And the Warder was gone, Nynaeve realized with a start. She had not heard him leave. Light blind the bloody man! Quickly she tied her skirts up to give her legs freedom, and hurried into the night.

æftɝ ðət fɝst ɹʌʃ, wɪð fɔlən bɹæntʃəz kɹækɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ fit, ʃi sloʊd daʊn, ɡlæd ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wʌn ðəɹ tə si hɝ blʌʃ. ði aɪdiə wɑz tə bi kwaɪət, ən ʃi wɑz nɑɾ ɪn ɛni kaɪndə kɑmpətɪʃən wɪð ðə wɔɹɾɝ. oʊ, noʊ?

After that first rush, with fallen branches cracking under her feet, she slowed down, glad there was no one there to see her blush. The idea was to be quiet, and she was not in any kind of competition with the Warder. Oh, no?

ʃi ʃʊk ɔf ðə θɔɾ ən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn meɪkɪŋ əɹ weɪ θɹu ðə dɑɹk wʊdz. ɪt wɑz nɑt hɑɹɾ ɪn ən ʌv ɪtsɛlf; ðə feɪn laɪɾ ə ðə weɪnɪŋ mun wɑz mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛniwʌn u hæd bɪn tɔt baɪ hɝ fɑðɝ, ən ðə ɡɹaʊn hæɾ ə sloʊ, izi ɹoʊl. bʌt ðə tʃɹiz, bɛɹ ən stɑɹk əɡɛns ðə naɪt skaɪ, kɑnstənli ɹimaɪndəɾ əɹ ðət ðɪs wɑz noʊ tʃaɪldhʊd ɡeɪm, ən ðə kinɪŋ wɪn saʊndəɾ ɔl tu mʌtʃ laɪk tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹnz. naʊ ðət ʃi wɑz əloʊn ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, ʃi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət ðə wʊlvz ðət juʒəwəli ɹæn əweɪ fɹəm pipəl hæd bɪn bɪheɪvɪŋ dɪfɹənli ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ðɪs wɪntɝ.

She shook off the thought and concentrated on making her way through the dark woods. It was not hard in and of itself; the faint light of the waning moon was more than enough for anyone who had been taught by her father, and the ground had a slow, easy roll. But the trees, bare and stark against the night sky, constantly reminded her that this was no childhood game, and the keening wind sounded all too much like Trolloc horns. Now that she was alone in the darkness, she remembered that the wolves that usually ran away from people had been behaving differently in the Two Rivers this winter.

ɹɪlif flʌɾəd θɹu hɝ laɪk wɔɹmθ wən ʃi faɪnəli kɑt ðə smɛl ə hɔɹsəz. ɔlmoʊs hoʊldɪŋ əɹ bɹɛθ, ʃi ɡɑt daʊn ɑn əɹ stʌmək ən kɹɔld ʌpwɪnd, təwɔɹd ðə smɛl.

Relief flooded through her like warmth when she finally caught the smell of horses. Almost holding her breath, she got down on her stomach and crawled upwind, toward the smell.

ʃi wɑz nɪɹli ɑn ðə ɡɑɹdz bɪfɔɹ ʃi sɔ ðɛm, mɑɹtʃɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə naɪt, waɪt kloʊks flæpɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪn ən ɔlmoʊst ʃaɪnɪŋ ɪn ðə munlaɪt. ðeɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl əv kæɹid tɔɹtʃɪz; tɔɹtʃlaɪt kəd nɑɾ əv meɪɾ əm mʌtʃ mɔɹ vɪzəbəl. ʃi fɹoʊz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk hɝsɛlf ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. nɪɹli ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, nɑt tɛn peɪsɪz əweɪ, ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt tə ə hɔlt wɪð ə stɑmp ə fit, feɪsɪŋ itʃ ʌðɝ, spɪɹz ʃoʊldɝd. dʒʌs bɪɑn əm ʃi kəd meɪk aʊt ʃædoʊz ðət hæd tə bi ðə hɔɹsəz. ðə steɪbəl smɛl, hɔɹs ən mənʊɹ, wɑz stʃɹɔŋ.

She was nearly on the guards before she saw them, marching toward her out of the night, white cloaks flapping in the wind and almost shining in the moonlight. They might as well have carried torches; torchlight could not have made them much more visible. She froze, trying to make herself a part of the ground. Nearly in front of her, not ten paces away, they marched to a halt with a stomp of feet, facing each other, spears shouldered. Just beyond them she could make out shadows that had to be the horses. The stable smell, horse and manure, was strong.

"ɔl ɪz wɛl wɪð ðə naɪt," wʌn waɪt-kloʊkt ʃeɪp ənaʊnst. "ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ʌs, ən pɹətɛkt əs fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ."

"All is well with the night," one white-cloaked shape announced. "The Light illumine us, and protect us from the Shadow."

"ɔl ɪz wɛl wɪð ðə naɪt," ði ʌðɝ ɹɪplaɪd. "ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ʌs, ən pɹətɛkt əs fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ."

"All is well with the night," the other replied. "The Light illumine us, and protect us from the Shadow."

wɪð ðət ðeɪ tɝn ən mɑɹtʃt ɔf ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs əɡɛn.

With that they turned and marched off into the darkness again.

nɪneɪiv weɪɾəd, kaʊntɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf waɪl ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ sɝkət twaɪs. itʃ taɪm ðeɪ tʊk ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm kaʊnt, ən itʃ taɪm ðeɪ ɹɪdʒɪdli ɹɪpiɾɪd ðə seɪm fɔɹmjələ, nɑɾ ə wɝd mɔɹ əɹ lɛs. niðɝ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ɡlæns tə wʌn saɪd; ðeɪ stɛɹd stʃɹeɪɾ əhɛɾ əz ðeɪ mɑɹtʃt ʌp, ðən mɑɹtʃt əweɪ. ʃi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðeɪ wʊɾə noʊɾəst əɹ ivən ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn stændɪŋ ʌp.

Nynaeve waited, counting to herself while they made their circuit twice. Each time they took exactly the same count, and each time they rigidly repeated the same formula, not a word more or less. Neither so much as glanced to one side; they stared straight ahead as they marched up, then marched away. She wondered if they would have noticed her even if she had been standing up.

bɪfɔɹ ðə naɪt swɑloʊd ðə peɪl swɝlz ə ðɛɹ kloʊks ə θɝd taɪm, ʃi wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn əɹ fit, ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ə kɹaʊtʃ təwɔɹd ðə hɔɹsəz. əz ʃi keɪm kloʊs, ʃi sloʊd soʊ əz nɑt tə stɑɹɾəl ði ænəməlz. ðə waɪtkloʊk ɡɑɹdz maɪt nɑt si wʌt wɑz nɑt ʃʌvd ʌndɝ ðɛɹ noʊzɪz, bʌt ðeɪ wəd sɝɾənli ɪnvɛstəɡeɪɾ ɪf ðə hɔɹsəz sʌɾənli bɪɡæn wɪkɝɪŋ.

Before the night swallowed the pale swirls of their cloaks a third time, she was already on her feet, running in a crouch toward the horses. As she came close, she slowed so as not to startle the animals. The Whitecloak guards might not see what was not shoved under their noses, but they would certainly investigate if the horses suddenly began whickering.

ðə hɔɹsəz əlɔŋ ðə pɪkət-laɪnz - ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən wʌn ɹoʊ - wɝ bɛɹli ɹilaɪz mæsəz ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs, hɛdz daʊn. əkeɪʒənəli wʌn snɔɹɾɪd əɹ stæmpt ə fʊɾ ɪn ɪts slip. ɪn ðə dɪm munlaɪt ʃi wɑz nɪɹli ɑn ði ɛndpoʊst ə ðə pɪkət-laɪn bɪfɔɹ ʃi sɔ ɪt. ʃi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə pɪkət-laɪn, ən fɹoʊz wən ðə nɪɹəs hɔɹs ɹeɪzd ɪts hɛɾ ən lʊkt ət hɝ. ɪts sɪŋɡəl lɛd-ɹeɪn wɑz taɪɾ ɪn ə bɪɡ lup ɝaʊn ðə θʌm-θɪk laɪn ðəɾ ɛndəɾ ət ðə poʊst. wʌn wɪni. hɝ hɑɹt tʃɹaɪd tə paʊn ɪts weɪ aʊɾ ə hɝ tʃɛst, saʊndɪŋ laʊɾ ɪnʌf tə bɹɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹdz.

The horses along the picket-lines - there was more than one row - were barely realized masses in the darkness, heads down. Occasionally one snorted or stamped a foot in its sleep. In the dim moonlight she was nearly on the endpost of the picket-line before she saw it. She reached for the picket-line, and froze when the nearest horse raised its head and looked at her. Its single lead-rein was tied in a big loop around the thumb-thick line that ended at the post. One whinny. Her heart tried to pound its way out of her chest, sounding loud enough to bring the guards.

nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz ɔf ðə hɔɹs, ʃi slaɪst ət ðə pɪkət-ɹoʊp, filɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ bleɪd tə si haʊ fɑɹ ʃi hæd kʌt. ðə hɔɹs tɔst ɪts hɛd, ən əɹ bɹɛθ wɛn koʊld. dʒʌst wʌn wɪni.

Never taking her eyes off the horse, she sliced at the picket-rope, feeling in front of her blade to see how far she had cut. The horse tossed its head, and her breath went cold. Just one whinny.

oʊnli ə fju θɪn stʃɹænz ə hɛmp ɹɪmeɪn hoʊl ʌndɝ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. sloʊli ʃi hɛɾəd təwɔɹd ðə nɛks laɪn, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə hɔɹs əntɪl ʃi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ si ɪf ɪt wɑz lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ əɹ nɑt, ðən dʒɹu ə ɹæɡəd bɹɛθ. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɔl laɪk ðæt, ʃi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wəd læst.

Only a few thin strands of hemp remained whole under her fingers. Slowly she headed toward the next line, watching the horse until she could no longer see if it was looking at her or not, then drew a ragged breath. If they were all like that, she did not think she would last.

ət ðə nɛks pɪkət-ɹoʊp, ðoʊ, ən ðə nɛkst, ən ðə nɛkst, ðə hɔɹsəz ɹɪmeɪn əslip, ivən wən ʃi kʌɾ əɹ θʌm ən bɪɾ ɔf ə jɛlp. sʌkɪŋ ðə kʌt, ʃi lʊkt wɛɹəli bæk ðə weɪ ʃi hæd kʌm. ʌpwɪn əz ʃi wɑz, ʃi kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hɪɹ ðə ɡɑɹdz meɪk ðɛɹ ɪkstʃeɪnʒ, bʌt ðeɪ maɪɾ əv hɝɾ əɹ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðə ɹaɪt pleɪs. ɪf ðeɪ wɝ kʌmɪŋ tə si wʌt ðə nɔɪz hæd bɪn, ðə wɪnd wəd kip əɹ fɹəm hɪɹɪŋ əm əntɪl ðeɪ wɝ ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə hɝ. taɪm tə ɡoʊ. wɪð fɔɹ hɔɹsəz aʊɾ ə faɪv ɹʌnɪŋ lus, ðeɪ woʊn bi tʃeɪsɪŋ ɛniwʌn.

At the next picket-rope, though, and the next, and the next, the horses remained asleep, even when she cut her thumb and bit off a yelp. Sucking the cut, she looked warily back the way she had come. Upwind as she was, she could no longer hear the guards make their exchange, but they might have heard her if they were in the right place. If they were coming to see what the noise had been, the wind would keep her from hearing them until they were right on top of her. Time to go. With four horses out of five running loose, they won't be chasing anyone.

bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt muv. ʃi kəɾ ɪmædʒən lænz aɪz wən i hɝd wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn. ðəɹ wəd bi noʊ ækjəzeɪʃən ɪn ðɛm; hɝ ɹizənɪŋ wɑz saʊnd, ən i wəd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt ɛni mɔɹ ə hɝ. ʃi wɑz ə wɪzdəm, nɑɾ ə blʌɾi ɡɹeɪɾ ɪnvɪnsəbəl wɔɹɾɝ u kəd meɪk hɪmsɛlf ɔl bʌɾ ɪnvɪzəbəl. dʒɔ sɛt, ʃi muv tə ðə læs pɪkət-laɪn. ðə fɝs hɔɹs ɑn ɪt wɑz bɛlə.

But she did not move. She could imagine Lan's eyes when he heard what she had done. There would be no accusation in them; her reasoning was sound, and he would not expect any more of her. She was a Wisdom, not a bloody great invincible Warder who could make himself all but invisible. Jaw set, she moved to the last picket-line. The first horse on it was Bela.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɪsteɪkɪŋ ðət skwɑt, ʃæɡi ʃeɪp; fəɹ ðəɹ tə bi ənʌðɝ hɔɹs laɪk ðæt, hɪɹ ən naʊ, wɑz tu bɪɡ ə koʊɪnsɪɾəns. sʌɾənli ʃi wɑz soʊ ɡlæd ðət ʃi hæd nɑt lɛft ɔf ðɪs læs laɪn ðət ʃi wɑz ʃeɪkɪŋ. hɝ ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz tʃɹɛmbəl soʊ ðət ʃi wɑz əfɹeɪd tə tʌtʃ ðə pɪkət-ɹoʊp, bʌɾ əɹ maɪnd wɑz əz klɪɹ əz ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ wɔɾɝ. wɪtʃɛvɝ ə ðə bɔɪz wɑz ɪn ðə kæmp, ɛɡwin wɑz ðɛɹ, tu. ən ɪf ðeɪ lɛft ɹaɪɾɪŋ dʌbəl, səm ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən wəd kætʃ əm noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ wɛl ðə hɔɹsəz wɝ skæɾɝd, ən səm ə ðɛm wəd daɪ. ʃi wɑz əz sɝɾən əz ɪf ʃi wɝ lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə wɪnd. ðət stʌk ə spaɪk ə fɪɹ ɪndə hɝ bɛli, fɪɹ ə haʊ ʃi wɑz sɝɾən. ðɪs hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð wɛðɝ əɹ kɹɑps əɹ sɪknəs. waɪ dɪd mɔɪɹeɪn tɛl mi aɪ kən juz ðə paʊɝ? waɪ kʊdnt ʃi liv mi əloʊn?

There was no mistaking that squat, shaggy shape; for there to be another horse like that, here and now, was too big a coincidence. Suddenly she was so glad that she had not left off this last line that she was shaking. Her arms and legs trembled so that she was afraid to touch the picket-rope, but her mind was as clear as the Winespring Water. Whichever of the boys was in the camp, Egwene was there, too. And if they left riding double, some of the Children would catch them no matter how well the horses were scattered, and some of them would die. She was as certain as if she were listening to the wind. That stuck a spike of fear into her belly, fear of how she was certain. This had nothing to do with weather or crops or sickness. Why did Moiraine tell me I can use the Power? Why couldn't she leave me alone?

stʃɹeɪnʒli, ðə fɪɹ stɪld əɹ tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ. wɪð hænz əz stɛɾi əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ɝbz ɪn əɹ oʊn haʊs ʃi slɪt ðə pɪkət-ɹoʊp əz ʃi hæd ði ʌðɝz. θɹʌstɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ bæk ɪndə ɪts ʃiθ, ʃi əntaɪd bɛləz lɛd-ɹeɪn. ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ woʊk wɪð ə stɑɹt, tɔsɪŋ əɹ hɛd, bʌt nɪneɪiv stʃɹoʊkt əɹ noʊz ən spoʊk kʌmfɝɾɪŋ wɝdz sɔfli ɪn əɹ ɪɹ. bɛlə ɡeɪv ə loʊ snɔɹɾ ən sim kɑntɛnt.

Strangely, the fear stilled her trembling. With hands as steady as if she were grinding herbs in her own house she slit the picket-rope as she had the others. Thrusting the dagger back into its sheath, she untied Bela's lead-rein. The shaggy mare woke with a start, tossing her head, but Nynaeve stroked her nose and spoke comforting words softly in her ear. Bela gave a low snort and seemed content.

ʌðɝ hɔɹsəz əlɔŋ ðət laɪn wɝ əweɪk, tu, ən lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ mændɑɹb, ʃi ɹitʃt hɛzɪɾəntli tə ðə nɛks lɛd-ɹeɪn, bʌt ðət hɔɹs ɡeɪv noʊ əbdʒɛkʃən tə ə stʃɹeɪnʒ hænd. ɪndid, ɪt sim tə wɑn səm ə ðə mʌzəl-stʃɹoʊkɪŋ ðət bɛlə hæd ɹəsivd. ʃi ɡɹɪp bɛləz ɹeɪn taɪtli ən ɹæp ði ʌðɝ ɝaʊn əɹ ʌðɝ ɹɪst, ɔl ðə waɪl wɑtʃɪŋ ðə kæmp nɝvəsli. ðə peɪl tɛns wɝ oʊnli θɝɾi jɑɹdz ɔf, ən ʃi kəd si mɛn muvɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛm. ɪf ðeɪ noʊɾəst ðə hɔɹsəz stɝɪŋ ən keɪm tə si wʌt kɑzd ɪt. . . .

Other horses along that line were awake, too, and looking at her. Remembering Mandarb, she reached hesitantly to the next lead-rein, but that horse gave no objection to a strange hand. Indeed, it seemed to want some of the muzzle-stroking that Bela had received. She gripped Bela's rein tightly and wrapped the other around her other wrist, all the while watching the camp nervously. The pale tents were only thirty yards off, and she could see men moving among them. If they noticed the horses stirring and came to see what caused it. . . .

dɛspɝətli ʃi wɪʃt fəɹ mɔɪɹeɪn nɑt tə weɪɾ ɑn əɹ ɹɪtɝn. wʌtɛvɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə du, lɛɾ əɹ də ɪt naʊ. laɪt, meɪk əɹ də ɪt naʊ, bɪfɔɹ. . . .

Desperately she wished for Moiraine not to wait on her return. Whatever the Aes Sedai was going to do, let her do it now. Light, make her do it now, before. . . .

əbɹʌpli laɪtnɪŋ ʃæɾɝd ðə naɪɾ oʊvɝhɛd, fəɹ ə moʊmən əbliɾɝeɪtɪŋ dɑɹknəs. θʌndɝ smoʊɾ əɹ ɪɹz, soʊ hɑɹd ʃi θɔɾ əɹ niz wəd bʌkəl, əz ə dʒæɡd tʃɹaɪɾənt stæb ðə ɡɹaʊn dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə hɔɹsəz, splæʃɪŋ dɝɾ ən ɹɑks laɪk ə faʊntən. ðə kɹæʃ ə ɹɪvən ɝθ fɔt ðə θʌndɝstʃɹoʊk. ðə hɔɹsəz wɛn mæd, skɹimɪŋ ən ɹɪɹɪŋ; ðə pɪkət-ɹoʊps snæp laɪk θɹɛd wɛɹ ʃi hæd kʌt ðɛm. ənʌðɝ laɪtnɪŋ boʊl slaɪs daʊn bɪfɔɹ ði ɪmədʒ ə ðə fɝs feɪɾəd.

Abruptly lightning shattered the night overhead, for a moment obliterating darkness. Thunder smote her ears, so hard she thought her knees would buckle, as a jagged trident stabbed the ground just beyond the horses, splashing dirt and rocks like a fountain. The crash of riven earth fought the thunderstroke. The horses went mad, screaming and rearing; the picket-ropes snapped like thread where she had cut them. Another lightning bolt sliced down before the image of the first faded.

nɪneɪiv wɑz tu bɪzi tə ɪɡzʌlt. ət ðə fɝs klæʃ bɛlə dʒɝkt wʌn weɪ waɪl ði ʌðɝ hɔɹs ɹɪɹɾ əweɪ ɪn ði ɑpəzət dɝɛkʃən. ʃi θɔɾ əɹ ɑɹmz wɝ biɪŋ pʊld aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ sɑkəts. fəɹ ən ɛnləs mɪnət ʃi hʌŋ səspɛndəd bɪtwin ðə hɔɹsəz, hɝ fiɾ ɔf ðə ɡɹaʊnd, hɝ skɹim flæɾənd baɪ ðə sɛkən kɹæʃ. əɡɛn ðə laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹʌk, ən əɡɛn, ən əɡɛn, ɪn wʌn kəntɪnjuəs, ɹeɪdʒɪŋ ɹɔɹ fɹəm ðə hɛvənz. bɔkt ɪn ðə weɪ ðeɪ wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ, ðə hɔɹsəz sɝdʒ bæk, lɛɾɪŋ əɹ dʒɹɑp. ʃi wɑntəd tə kɹaʊtʃ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ən suð əɹ tɔɹtʃɝd ʃoʊldɝz, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm. bɛlə ən ði ʌðɝ hɔɹs bəfeɪd hɝ, aɪz ɹoʊlɪŋ waɪldli tɪl oʊnli waɪts ʃoʊd, θɹɛɾənɪŋ tə nɑk əɹ daʊn ən tʃɹæmpəl hɝ. sʌmhaʊ ʃi meɪɾ əɹ ɑɹmz lɪft, klʌtʃt əɹ hænz ɪn bɛləz meɪn, pʊl hɝsɛlf ɑntu ðə hivɪŋ mɛɹz bæk. ði ʌðɝ ɹeɪn wɑz stɪl ɝaʊn əɹ ɹɪst, pʊl taɪɾ ɪndə ðə flɛʃ.

Nynaeve was too busy to exult. At the first clash Bela jerked one way while the other horse reared away in the opposite direction. She thought her arms were being pulled out of their sockets. For an endless minute she hung suspended between the horses, her feet off the ground, her scream flattened by the second crash. Again the lightning struck, and again, and again, in one continuous, raging roar from the heavens. Balked in the way they wanted to go, the horses surged back, letting her drop. She wanted to crouch on the ground and soothe her tortured shoulders, but there was no time. Bela and the other horse buffeted her, eyes rolling wildly till only whites showed, threatening to knock her down and trample her. Somehow she made her arms lift, clutched her hands in Bela's mane, pulled herself onto the heaving mare's back. The other rein was still around her wrist, pulled tight into the flesh.

hɝ dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt əz ə lɔŋ, ɡɹeɪ ʃædoʊ snɑɹəl pæst, simɪŋ tə ɪɡnɔɹ əɹ ən ðə hɔɹsəz wɪð hɝ, bʌt tiθ snæpɪŋ ət ðə kɹeɪzd ænəməlz naʊ dɑɹɾɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. ə sɛkənd ʃædoʊ ʌv dɛθ fɑloʊd kloʊs bɪhaɪnd. nɪneɪiv wɑntəd tə skɹim əɡɛn, bʌt nʌθɪŋ keɪm aʊt. wʊlvz! laɪt hɛlp ʌs! wʌɾ ɪz mɔɪɹeɪn duɪŋ?

Her jaw dropped as a long, gray shadow snarled past, seeming to ignore her and the horses with her, but teeth snapping at the crazed animals now darting in every direction. A second shadow of death followed close behind. Nynaeve wanted to scream again, but nothing came out. Wolves! Light help us! What is Moiraine doing?

ðə hilz ʃi dʌɡ ɪndə bɛləz saɪdz wɝ nɑt niɾəd. ðə mɛɹ ɹæn, ən ði ʌðɝ wɑz mɔɹ ðən hæpi tə fɑloʊ. ɛniwɛɹ, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ kəd ɹʌn, soʊ lɔŋ əz ðeɪ kəɾ ɪskeɪp ðə faɪɝ fɹəm ðə skaɪ ðət kɪl ðə naɪt.

The heels she dug into Bela's sides were not needed. The mare ran, and the other was more than happy to follow. Anywhere, so long as they could run, so long as they could escape the fire from the sky that killed the night.


tʃæptɝ θɝɾieɪt


CHAPTER 38

ɹɛskju


Rescue

pɛɹɪn ʃɪftəɾ əz bɛst i kəd wɪð ɪz ɹɪsts baʊn bɪhaɪn ɪm ən faɪnəli ɡeɪv ʌp wɪð ə saɪ. ɛvɹi ɹɑk i əvɔɪɾəd bɹɔɾ ɪm tu mɔɹ. ɔkwɝdli hi tʃɹaɪd tə wɝk ɪz kloʊk bæk oʊvɝ hɪm. ðə naɪt wɑz koʊld, ən ðə ɡɹaʊn sim tə dʒɹɔ ɔl ðə hiɾ aʊɾ ə hɪm, əz ɪt hæɾ ɛvɹi naɪt sɪns ðə waɪtkloʊks tʊk ðɛm. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən dɪd nɑt θɪŋk pɹɪznɝz niɾəd blæŋkəts, əɹ ʃɛltɝ. ɪspɛʃli nɑt deɪnʒɝəs dɑɹkfɹɛnz.

Perrin shifted as best he could with his wrists bound behind him and finally gave up with a sigh. Every rock he avoided brought him two more. Awkwardly he tried to work his cloak back over him. The night was cold, and the ground seemed to draw all the heat out of him, as it had every night since the Whitecloaks took them. The Children did not think prisoners needed blankets, or shelter. Especially not dangerous Darkfriends.

ɛɡwin leɪ hʌɾəld əɡɛnst ɪz bæk fəɹ wɔɹmθ, slipɪŋ ðə dip slip ʌv ɪɡzɔstʃən. ʃi nɛvɝ ivən mɝmɝɾ əɾ ɪz ʃɪftɪŋ. ðə sʌn wɑz lɔŋ aʊɝz bɪloʊ ðə hɝaɪzən, ən i ætʃt fɹəm hɛd tə fʊɾ æftɝ ə deɪ wɔkɪŋ bɪhaɪn ə hɔɹs wɪð ə hɔltɝ ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk, bʌt slip wəd nɑt kʌm fəɹ hɪm.

Egwene lay huddled against his back for warmth, sleeping the deep sleep of exhaustion. She never even murmured at his shifting. The sun was long hours below the horizon, and he ached from head to foot after a day walking behind a horse with a halter around his neck, but sleep would not come for him.

ðə kɑləm dɪd nɑt muv ðət fæst. wɪð moʊst ə ðɛɹ ɹimaʊns lɔs tə ðə wʊlvz ɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ, ðə waɪtkloʊks kəd nɑt pʊʃ ɑn əz hɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ wɑntəd; ðə dɪleɪ wɑz ənʌðɝ θɪŋ ðeɪ hɛld əɡɛns ði ɛmənz fildɝz. ðə sɪnwəs dʌbəl laɪn dɪd muv stɛɾəli, ðoʊ - lɔɹd bɔɹnhəl mɛn tə ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn ɪn taɪm fəɹ wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz - ən ɔlweɪz ɪn ðə bæk ə pɛɹɪnz maɪnd wɑz ðə fɪɹ ðəɾ ɪf i fɛl ðə waɪtkloʊk hoʊldɪŋ ɪz liʃ wəd nɑt stɑp, noʊ mæɾɝ lɔɹd kæptən bɔɹnhəlz ɔɹɾɝz tə kip əm əlaɪv fəɹ ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɪn æmədɔɹ. hi nu hi kəd nɑt seɪv hɪmsɛlf ɪf ðət hæpənd; ði oʊnli taɪmz ðeɪ fɹiɾ ɪz hænz wɝ wən i wɑz fɛɾ ən fəɹ vɪzəts tə ðə lætʃɹin pɪt. ðə hɔltɝ meɪɾ ɛvɹi stɛp moʊmɛntəs, ɛvɹi ɹɑk ʌndɝfʊt pətɛnʃəli feɪɾəl. hi wɔkt wɪð mʌsəlz tɛns, skænɪŋ ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɪð æŋkʃəs aɪz. wɛnɛvɝ i ɡlænst əɾ ɛɡwin, ʃi wɑz duɪŋ ðə seɪm. wən ʃi mɛɾ ɪz aɪz, hɝ feɪs wɑz taɪɾ ən fɹaɪɾənd. niðɝ ə ðɛm dɛɹd teɪk ðɛɹ aɪz ɔf ðə ɡɹaʊn lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ə ɡlæns.

The column did not move that fast. With most of their remounts lost to the wolves in the stedding, the Whitecloaks could not push on as hard as they wanted; the delay was another thing they held against the Emond's Fielders. The sinuous double line did move steadily, though - Lord Bornhald meant to reach Caemlyn in time for Whatever it was - and always in the back of Perrin's mind was the fear that if he fell the Whitecloak holding his leash would not stop, no matter Lord Captain Bornhald's orders to keep them alive for the Questioners in Amador. He knew he could not save himself if that happened; the only times they freed his hands were when he was fed and for visits to the latrine pit. The halter made every step momentous, every rock underfoot potentially fatal. He walked with muscles tense, scanning the ground with anxious eyes. Whenever he glanced at Egwene, she was doing the same. When she met his eyes, her face was tight and frightened. Neither of them dared take their eyes off the ground long enough for more than a glance.

juʒəwəli hi kəlæps laɪk ə ɹʌŋ-aʊt ɹæɡ əz sun əz ðə waɪtkloʊks lɛɾ ɪm stɑp, bʌt tənaɪɾ ɪz maɪnd wɑz ɹeɪsɪŋ. hɪz skɪn kɹɔld wɪð dʒɹɛd ðət hæd bɪn bɪldɪŋ fəɹ deɪz. ɪf i kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, hi wəd si oʊnli ðə θɪŋz baɪɑɝ pɹɑməs fəɹ əm wʌns ðeɪ ɹitʃt æmədɔɹ.

Usually he collapsed like a wrung-out rag as soon as the Whitecloaks let him stop, but tonight his mind was racing. His skin crawled with dread that had been building for days. If he closed his eyes, he would see only the things Byar promised for them once they reached Amador.

hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɛɡwin stɪl dɪd nɑt bɪliv wʌt baɪɑɝ toʊld əm ɪn ðət flæt vɔɪs. ɪf ʃi dɪd, ʃi wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə slip noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ taɪɝd ʃi wɑz. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ i hæd nɑt bɪliv baɪɑɝ iðɝ. hi stɪl dɪd nɑt wɑn tə; pipəl dʒʌs dɪd nɑt də θɪŋz laɪk ðət tə ʌðɝ pipəl. bʌt baɪɑɝ dɪd nɑt ɹɪli θɹɛɾən; əz ɪf i wɝ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt ɡɛɾɪŋ ə dʒɹɪŋk ʌv wɔɾɝ i tɔkt əbaʊt hɑɾ aɪɝnz ən pɪnsɝz, əbaʊt naɪvz slaɪsɪŋ əweɪ skɪn ən niɾəlz pɪɹsɪŋ. hi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə bi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fɹaɪɾən ðɛm. ðəɹ wɑz nɛvɝ ivən ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɡloʊɾɪŋ ɪn ɪz aɪz. hi dʒʌs dɪd nɑt kɛɹ ɪf ðeɪ wɝ fɹaɪɾənd əɹ nɑt, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ tɔɹtʃɝɾ əɹ nɑt, ɪf ðeɪ wɝ əlaɪv əɹ nɑt. ðət wɑz wʌt bɹɔt koʊl swɛt tə pɛɹɪnz feɪs wʌns ɪt ɡɑt θɹu tə hɪm. ðət wɑz wʌt faɪnəli kənvɪnst ɪm baɪɑɝ wɑz tɛlɪŋ ðə sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ.

He was sure Egwene still did not believe what Byar told them in that flat voice. If she did, she would not be able to sleep no matter how tired she was. In the beginning he had not believed Byar either. He still did not want to; people just did not do things like that to other people. But Byar did not really threaten; as if he were talking about getting a drink of water he talked about hot irons and pincers, about knives slicing away skin and needles piercing. He did not appear to be trying to frighten them. There was never even a touch of gloating in his eyes. He just did not care if they were frightened or not, if they were tortured or not, if they were alive or not. That was what brought cold sweat to Perrin's face once it got through to him. That was what finally convinced him Byar was telling the simple truth.

ðə tu ɡɑɹdz' kloʊks ɡlimd ɡɹeɪli ɪn ðə feɪn munlaɪt. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt ðɛɹ feɪsəz, bʌɾ i nu ðeɪ wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ. əz ɪf ðeɪ kəd tʃɹaɪ sʌmθɪŋ, taɪd hæn ən fʊt ðə weɪ ðeɪ wɝ. fɹəm wən ðəɹ hæd stɪl bɪn laɪɾ ɪnʌf tə si, hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðə dɪsɡʌst ɪn ðɛɹ aɪz ən ðə pɪntʃt lʊks ɑn ðɛɹ feɪsəz, əz ðoʊ ðeɪ hæd bɪn sɛt tə ɡɑɹd fɪlθ-soʊk mɑnstɝz, stɪŋkɪŋ ən ɹɪpɛlən tə lʊk æt. ɔl ðə waɪtkloʊks lʊkt əɾ əm ðət weɪ. ɪt nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd. laɪt, haʊ də aɪ meɪk əm bɪliv wi ɑɹən dɑɹkfɹɛnz wən ðəɹ ɔlɹɛɾi kənvɪnst wi ɑɹ? hɪz stʌmək twɪstəd sɪkənɪŋli. ɪn ði ɛnd, hi wəd pɹɑbli kənfɛs tə ɛniθɪŋ dʒʌs tə meɪk ðə kwɛstʃənɝz stɑp.

The two guards' cloaks gleamed grayly in the faint moonlight. He could not make out their faces, but he knew they were watching. As if they could try something, tied hand and foot the way they were. From when there had still been light enough to see, he remembered the disgust in their eyes and the pinched looks on their faces, as though they had been set to guard filth-soaked monsters, stinking and repellent to look at. All the Whitecloaks looked at them that way. It never changed. Light, how do I make them believe we aren't Darkfriends when they're already convinced we are? His stomach twisted sickeningly. In the end, he would probably confess to anything just to make the Questioners stop.

sʌmwʌn wɑz kʌmɪŋ, ə waɪtkloʊk kæɹiɪŋ ə læntɝn. ðə mæn stɑp tə spik wɪð ðə ɡɑɹdz, hu ænsɝd ɹɪspɛkfəli. pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt hɪɹ wʌt wɑz sɛd, bʌɾ i ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ðə tɔl, ɡɔnt ʃeɪp.

Someone was coming, a Whitecloak carrying a lantern. The man stopped to speak with the guards, who answered respectfully. Perrin could not hear what was said, but he recognized the tall, gaunt shape.

hi skwɪntɪɾ əz ðə læntɝn wɑz hɛl kloʊz tə hɪz feɪs. baɪɑɝ hæd pɛɹɪnz æks ɪn ɪz ʌðɝ hænd; hi hæɾ əpɹoʊpɹieɪɾɪd ðə wɛpən əz ɪz oʊn. ət list, pɛɹɪn nɛvɝ sɔ hɪm wɪθaʊɾ ɪt.

He squinted as the lantern was held close to his face. Byar had Perrin's axe in his other hand; he had appropriated the weapon as his own. At least, Perrin never saw him without it.

"weɪk ʌp," baɪɑɝ sɛɾ ɪmoʊʃənləsli, əz ɪf i θɔt pɛɹɪn slɛpt wɪð ɪz hɛd ɹeɪzd. hi əkʌmpənid ðə wɝdz wɪð ə hɛvi kɪk ɪn ðə ɹɪbz.

"Wake up," Byar said emotionlessly, as if he thought Perrin slept with his head raised. He accompanied the words with a heavy kick in the ribs.

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ə ɡɹʌn θɹu ɡɹɪɾɪd tiθ. hɪz saɪdz wɝ ə mæs ə bɹuzəz ɔlɹɛɾi fɹəm baɪɑɝz buts.

Perrin gave a grunt through gritted teeth. His sides were a mass of bruises already from Byar's boots.

"aɪ sɛd, weɪk ʌp." ðə fʊt wɛn bæk əɡɛn, ən pɛɹɪn spoʊk kwɪkli.

"I said, wake up." The foot went back again, and Perrin spoke quickly.

"aɪm əweɪk." jə hæd tə æknɑlɪdʒ wʌt baɪɑɝ sɛd, əɹ i faʊnd weɪz tə ɡɛt jəɹ ətɛnʃən.

"I'm awake." You had to acknowledge what Byar said, or he found ways to get your attention.

baɪɑɝ sɛt ðə læntɝn ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ən bɛn tə tʃɛk ɪz bɑnz. ðə mæn dʒɝkt ɹʌfli əɾ ɪz ɹɪst, twɪstɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz ɪn ðɛɹ sɑkəts. faɪndɪŋ ðoʊz nɑts stɪl əz taɪɾ əz i hæd lɛf ðɛm, baɪɑɝ pʊld əɾ ɪz æŋkəl ɹoʊp, skɹeɪpɪŋ ɪm əkɹɔs ðə ɹɑki ɡɹaʊnd. ðə mæn lʊk tu skɛləɾəl tə hæv ɛni stʃɹɛŋkθ, bʌt pɛɹɪn maɪɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ə tʃaɪld. ɪt wɑz ə naɪtli ɹutin.

Byar set the lantern on the ground and bent to check his bonds. The man jerked roughly at his wrist, twisting his arms in their sockets. Finding those knots still as tight as he had left them, Byar pulled at his ankle rope, scraping him across the rocky ground. The man looked too skeletal to have any strength, but Perrin might as well have been a child. It was a nightly routine.

əz baɪɑɝ stʃɹeɪɾənd, pɛɹɪn sɔ ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz stɪl əslip. "weɪk ʌp!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "ɛɡwin! weɪk ʌp!"

As Byar straightened, Perrin saw that Egwene was still asleep. "Wake up!" he shouted. "Egwene! Wake up!"

"wɑ . . . ? wʌt?" ɛɡwinz vɔɪs wɑz fɹaɪɾənd ən stɪl θɪk wɪð slip. ʃi lɪftəɾ əɹ hɛd, blɪŋkɪŋ ɪn ðə læntɝn laɪt.

"Wha . . . ? What?" Egwene's voice was frightened and still thick with sleep. She lifted her head, blinking in the lantern light.

baɪɑɝ ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ə dɪsəpɔɪnmənt ət nɑt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə kɪk əɹ əweɪk; hi nɛvɝ dɪd. hi dʒʌs dʒɝkt əɾ əɹ ɹoʊps ðə seɪm weɪ hi hæd pɛɹɪnz, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ əɹ ɡɹoʊnz. kɑzɪŋ peɪn wɑz ənʌðɝ ə ðoʊz θɪŋz ðət sim nɑt tə əfɛkt ɪm wʌn weɪ əɹ ənʌðɝ; pɛɹɪn wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn i ɹɪli wɛn aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ tə hɝt. ivən ɪf pɛɹɪn kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt, baɪɑɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðəɾ i hæd kɪl tu ʌv ðə tʃɪlʒɹən.

Byar gave no sign of disappointment at not being able to kick her awake; he never did. He just jerked at her ropes the same way he had Perrin's, ignoring her groans. Causing pain was another of those things that seemed not to affect him one way or another; Perrin was the only one he really went out of his way to hurt. Even if Perrin could not remember it, Byar remembered that he had killed two of the Children.

"waɪ ʃəd dɑɹkfɹɛnz slip," baɪɑɝ sɛd dɪspæʃənətli, "wɛn disən mɛn mʌst steɪ əweɪk tə ɡɑɹd ðɛm?"

"Why should Darkfriends sleep," Byar said dispassionately, "when decent men must stay awake to guard them?"

"fɔɹ ðə hʌnʒɹədθ taɪm," ɛɡwin sɛd wɛɹəli, "wi ɑɹən dɑɹkfɹɛnz."

"For the hundredth time," Egwene said wearily, "we aren't Darkfriends."

pɛɹɪn tɛnst. səmtaɪmz sətʃ ə dɪnaɪəl bɹɔɾ ə lɛktʃɝ dɪlɪvɝɾ ɪn ə ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ nɪɹ mɑnətoʊn, ɑn kənfɛʃən ən ɹɪpɛntəns, liɾɪŋ ɪndə ə dɪskɹɪpʃən ə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz' mɛθədz ʌv əbteɪnɪŋ ðɛm. səmtaɪmz ɪt bɹɔt ðə lɛktʃɝ ən ə kɪk. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ðɪs taɪm baɪɑɝ ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt.

Perrin tensed. Sometimes such a denial brought a lecture delivered in a grating near monotone, on confession and repentance, leading into a description of the Questioners' methods of obtaining them. Sometimes it brought the lecture and a kick. To his surprise, this time Byar ignored it.

ɪnstɛd ðə mæn skwɑɾɪd ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ɔl æŋɡəlz ən sʌŋkən hɑloʊz, wɪð ði æks əkɹɔs ɪz niz. ðə ɡoʊldən sʌn ɑn ɪz kloʊks lɛf bɹɛst, ən ðə tu ɡoʊldən stɑɹz bɪniθ ɪt, ɡlɪɾɝd ɪn ðə læntɝn laɪt. teɪkɪŋ ɔf ɪz hɛlmət, hi sɛɾ ɪt bɪsaɪd ðə læntɝn. fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ bɪsaɪdz dɪsdeɪn əɹ heɪtʃɹəɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs, sʌmθɪŋ ɪntɛn ən ənɹiɾəbəl. hi ɹɛstəɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ɑn ði æksəhændəl ən stʌɾid pɛɹɪn saɪlənli. pɛɹɪn tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə ʃɪft ʌndɝ ðət hɑloʊ-aɪd stɛɹ.

Instead the man squatted in front of him, all angles and sunken hollows, with the axe across his knees. The golden sun on his cloak's left breast, and the two golden stars beneath it, glittered in the lantern light. Taking off his helmet, he set it beside the lantern. For a change there was something besides disdain or hatred on his face, something intent and unreadable. He rested his arms on the axehandle and studied Perrin silently. Perrin tried not to shift under that hollow-eyed stare.

"ju ɑɹ sloʊɪŋ əs daʊn, dɑɹkfɹɛnd, jə ən jəɹ wʊlvz. ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəɾ əz hɝd ɹɪpɔɹts ə sətʃ θɪŋz, ən ðeɪ wɑnə noʊ mɔɹ, soʊ jə mʌs bi teɪkən tə æmədɔɹ ən ɡɪvən tə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz, bʌt jə ɑɹ sloʊɪŋ əs daʊn. aɪ hæd hoʊpt wi kəd muv fæst ɪnʌf, ivən wɪθaʊt ðə ɹimaʊns, bʌɾ aɪ wɑz ɹɔŋ." hi fɛl saɪlənt, fɹaʊnɪŋ ət ðɛm.

"You are slowing us down, Darkfriend, you and your wolves. The Council of the Anointed has heard reports of such things, and they want to know more, so you must be taken to Amador and given to the Questioners, but you are slowing us down. I had hoped we could move fast enough, even without the remounts, but I was wrong." He fell silent, frowning at them.

pɛɹɪn weɪɾəd; baɪɑɝ wəd tɛl ɪm wən i wɑz ɹɛɾi.

Perrin waited; Byar would tell him when he was ready.

"ðə lɔɹd kæptən ɪz kɑɾ ɪn ðə klft ʌv ə dɪlɛmə," baɪɑɝ sɛd faɪnəli. "bɪkɔz ə ðə wʊlvz i mʌs teɪk jə tə ðə kaʊnsəl, bʌɾ i mʌst ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn, tu. wɪv noʊ spɛɹ hɔɹsəz tə kæɹi ju, bʌɾ ɪf wi kəntɪnju tə lɛt jə wɔk, wɪl nɑt ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn baɪ ði əpɔɪntəd taɪm. ðə lɔɹd kæptən siz ɪz duɾiz wɪð ə sɪŋɡəl-maɪndəd vɪʒən, ən i ɪntɛnz tə si jə bɪfɔɹ ðə kaʊnsəl."

"The Lord Captain is caught in the cleft of a dilemma," Byar said finally. "Because of the wolves he must take you to the Council, but he must reach Caemlyn, too. We have no spare horses to carry you, but if we continue to let you walk, we will not reach Caemlyn by the appointed time. The Lord Captain sees his duties with a single-minded vision, and he intends to see you before the Council."

ɛɡwin meɪɾ ə saʊnd. baɪɑɝ wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət pɛɹɪn, ən i stɛɹd bæk, ɔlmoʊst əfɹeɪd tə blɪŋk. "aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd," hi sɛd sloʊli.

Egwene made a sound. Byar was staring at Perrin, and he stared back, almost afraid to blink. "I don't understand," he said slowly.

"ðɛɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ tə ʌndɝstænd," baɪɑɝ ɹɪplaɪd. "nʌθɪŋ bʌɾ aɪɾəl spɛkjəleɪʃən. ɪf jə ɪskeɪpt, wi wəd nɑɾ əv taɪm tə tʃɹæk jə daʊn. wi doʊn əv ən aʊɝ tə spɛɹ ɪf wəɹ tə ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn ɪn taɪm. ɪf jə fɹeɪd jəɹ ɹoʊps ɑn ə ʃɑɹp ɹɑk, seɪ, ən vænɪʃt ɪndə ðə naɪt, ðə lɔɹd kæptənz pɹɑbləm wəd bi sɑlvd." nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ ɪz ɡeɪz fɹəm pɛɹɪn, hi ɹitʃt ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk ən tɔst sʌmθɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

"There is nothing to understand," Byar replied. "Nothing but idle speculation. If you escaped, we would not have time to track you down. We don't have an hour to spare if we are to reach Caemlyn in time. If you frayed your ropes on a sharp rock, say, and vanished into the night, the Lord Captain's problem would be solved." Never taking his gaze from Perrin, he reached under his cloak and tossed something on the ground.

ɔɾəmætɪkli pɛɹɪnz aɪz fɑloʊɾ ɪt. wən i ɹilaɪzd wʌɾ ɪt wɑz, hi ɡæspt. ə ɹɑk. ə splɪt ɹɑk wɪð ə ʃɑɹp ɛdʒ.

Automatically Perrin's eyes followed it. When he realized what it was, he gasped. A rock. A split rock with a sharp edge.

"dʒʌst aɪɾəl spɛkjəleɪʃən," baɪɑɝ sɛd. "jɔɹ ɡɑɹdz tənaɪɾ ɔlsoʊ spɛkjəleɪt."

"Just idle speculation," Byar said. "Your guards tonight also speculate."

pɛɹɪnz maʊθ wɑz sʌɾənli dʒɹaɪ. θɪŋk ɪt θɹu! laɪt hɛlp mi, θɪŋk ɪt θɹu ən doʊn meɪk ɛni mɪsteɪks!

Perrin's mouth was suddenly dry. Think it through! Light help me, think it through and don't make any mistakes!

kəɾ ɪt bi tʃɹu? kəd ðə waɪtkloʊks' nid tə ɡɛt tə keɪɛmlɪn kwɪkli bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪnʌf fəɹ ðɪs? lɛɾɪŋ səspɛktəd dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪskeɪp? ðəɹ wɑz noʊ jus tʃɹaɪɪŋ ðət weɪ; hi dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪnʌf. baɪɑɝ wɑz ði oʊnli waɪtkloʊk u wəd tɔk tə ðɛm, əsaɪd fɹəm lɔɹd kæptən bɔɹnhəld, ən niðɝ wɑz ɪɡzækli fɹi wɪð ɪnfɝmeɪʃən. ənʌðɝ weɪ. ɪf baɪɑɝ wɑntəɾ əm tə ɪskeɪp, waɪ nɑt sɪmpli kʌt ðɛɹ bɑnz? ɪf baɪɑɝ wɑntəɾ əm tə ɪskeɪp? baɪɑɝ, hu wɑz kənvɪns tə hɪz mɛɹoʊ ðət ðeɪ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. baɪɑɝ, hu heɪɾəd dɑɹkfɹɛnz wɝs ðən i dɪd ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf. baɪɑɝ, hu lʊk fəɹ ɛni ɪkskjus tə kɑz ɪm peɪn kəz i hæd kɪl tu waɪtkloʊks. baɪɑɝ wɑntəɾ əm tə ɪskeɪp?

Could it be true? Could the Whitecloaks' need to get to Caemlyn quickly be important enough for this? Letting suspected Darkfriends escape? There was no use trying that way; he did not know enough. Byar was the only Whitecloak who would talk to them, aside from Lord Captain Bornhald, and neither was exactly free with information. Another way. If Byar wanted them to escape, why not simply cut their bonds? If Byar wanted them to escape? Byar, who was convinced to his marrow that they were Darkfriends. Byar, who hated Darkfriends worse than he did the Dark One himself. Byar, who looked for any excuse to cause him pain because he had killed two Whitecloaks. Byar wanted them to escape?

ɪf i hæd θɔɾ ɪz maɪnd wɑz ɹeɪsɪŋ bɪfɔɹ, naʊ ɪt spɛd laɪk ən ævəlæntʃ. dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld, swɛt ɹæn daʊn ɪz feɪs ɪn ɹɪvələts. hi ɡlænst ət ðə ɡɑɹdz. ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli ʃædoʊz ə peɪl ɡɹeɪ, bʌɾ ɪt sim tə hɪm ðət ðeɪ wɝ pɔɪzd, weɪɾɪŋ. ɪf i ən ɛɡwin wɝ kɪl tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪskeɪp, ən ðɛɹ ɹoʊps hæd bɪn kʌɾ ɑn ə ɹɑk ðət cʊɾə bɪn laɪɪŋ ðəɹ baɪ tʃæns. . . . ðə lɔɹd kæptənz dɪlɛmə wəd bi sɑlvd, ɔl ɹaɪt. ən baɪɑɝ wəɾ əv əm dɛd, ðə weɪ hi wɑntəd ðɛm.

If he had thought his mind was racing before, now it sped like an avalanche. Despite the cold, sweat ran down his face in rivulets. He glanced at the guards. They were only shadows of pale gray, but it seemed to him that they were poised, waiting. If he and Egwene were killed trying to escape, and their ropes had been cut on a rock that could have been lying there by chance. . . . The Lord Captain's dilemma would be solved, all right. And Byar would have them dead, the way he wanted them.

ðə ɡɔn mæn pɪkt ʌp ɪz hɛlmət fɹəm bɪsaɪd ðə læntɝn ən stɑɹɾəd tə stænd.

The gaunt man picked up his helmet from beside the lantern and started to stand.

"weɪt," pɛɹɪn sɛd hɔɹsli. hɪz θɔts tʌmbəld oʊvɝ ən oʊvɝ əz i sɝtʃt ɪn veɪn fəɹ səm weɪ aʊt. "weɪt, aɪ wɑnə tɔk. aɪ - "

"Wait," Perrin said hoarsely. His thoughts tumbled over and over as he searched in vain for some way out. "Wait, I want to talk. I - "

hɛlp kʌmz!

Help comes!

ðə θɔt blɑsəmd ɪn ɪz maɪnd, ə klɪɹ bɝst ə laɪɾ ɪn ðə mɪdst ə keɪɑs, soʊ stɑɹtlɪŋ ðət fəɹ ə moʊmən i fɝɡɑɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, ivən wɛɹ i wɑz. dæpəl wɑz əlaɪv. ɛlaɪəs, hi θɔɾ ət ðə wʊlf, dɪmændɪŋ wɪθaʊt wɝdz tə noʊ ɪf ðə mæn wɑz əlaɪv. ən ɪmədʒ keɪm bæk. ɛlaɪəs, laɪɪŋ ɑn ə bɛɾ ʌv ɛvɝɡɹin bɹæntʃəz bɪsaɪɾ ə smɔl faɪɝ ɪn ə keɪv, tɛndɪŋ ə waʊn ɪn ɪz saɪd. ɪɾ ɔl tʊk oʊnli ən ɪnstənt. hi ɡeɪpt ət baɪɑɝ, ən ɪz feɪs bɹoʊk ɪndə ə fulɪʃ ɡɹɪn. ɛlaɪəs wɑz əlaɪv. dæpəl wɑz əlaɪv. hɛlp wɑz kʌmɪŋ.

The thought blossomed in his mind, a clear burst of light in the midst of chaos, so startling that for a moment he forgot everything else, even where he was. Dapple was alive. Elyas, he thought at the wolf, demanding without words to know if the man was alive. An image came back. Elyas, lying on a bed of evergreen branches beside a small fire in a cave, tending a wound in his side. It all took only an instant. He gaped at Byar, and his face broke into a foolish grin. Elyas was alive. Dapple was alive. Help was coming.

baɪɑɝ pɔzd, ɹɪzən oʊnli tə ə kɹaʊtʃ, lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. "sʌm θɔɾ əz kʌm tə ju, pɛɹɪn ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən aɪ wəd noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz."

Byar paused, risen only to a crouch, looking at him. "Some thought has come to you, Perrin of the Two Rivers, and I would know what it is."

fəɹ ə moʊmən pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i mɛn ðə θɔt fɹəm dæpəl. pænɪk flɛɾ əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs, fɑloʊd baɪ ɹɪlif. baɪɑɝ kəd nɑt pɑsəbli noʊ.

For a moment Perrin thought he meant the thought from Dapple. Panic fled across his face, followed by relief. Byar could not possibly know.

baɪɑɝ wɑtʃt ɪz tʃeɪnʒəz ʌv ɪkspɹɛʃən, ən fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ðə waɪtkloʊks aɪz wɛn tə ðə ɹɑk i hæd tɔst ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Byar watched his changes of expression, and for the first time the Whitecloak's eyes went to the rock he had tossed on the ground.

hi wɑz ɹikənsɪɾɝɪŋ, pɛɹɪn ɹilaɪzd. ɪf i tʃeɪnʒd ɪz maɪn əbaʊt ðə ɹɑk, wəɾ i dɛɹ ɹɪsk livɪŋ əm əlaɪv tə tɔk? ɹoʊps kəd bi fɹeɪɾ æftɝ ðə pipəl wɛɹɪŋ əm wɝ dɛd, ivən ɪf ɪt meɪd fəɹ ɹɪsk ə dɪskʌvɝi. hi lʊkt ɪndə baɪɑɝz aɪz - ðə ʃæɾoʊd hɑloʊz ə ðə mænz aɪ sɑkəts meɪɾ əm əpɪɹ tə stɛɹ əɾ ɪm fɹəm dɑɹk keɪvz - ən i sɔ dɛθ dɪsaɪɾɪd.

He was reconsidering, Perrin realized. If he changed his mind about the rock, would he dare risk leaving them alive to talk? Ropes could be frayed after the people wearing them were dead, even if it made for risk of discovery. He looked into Byar's eyes - the shadowed hollows of the man's eye sockets made them appear to stare at him from dark caves - and he saw death decided.

baɪɑɝ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ən əz pɛɹɪn weɪɾəd fəɹ sɛntəns tə bi pɹənaʊnst, θɪŋz bɪɡæn tə hæpən tu fæs fəɹ θɔt.

Byar opened his mouth, and as Perrin waited for sentence to be pronounced, things began to happen too fast for thought.

sʌɾənli wʌn ə ðə ɡɑɹdz vænɪʃt. wʌn mɪnət ðəɹ wɝ tu dɪm ʃeɪps, ðə nɛks ðə naɪt swɑloʊd wʌn ə ðɛm. ðə sɛkənd ɡɑɹd tɝnd, ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ʌv ə kɹaɪ ɑn ɪz lɪps, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝst sɪləbəl wɑz ʌɾɝd ðəɹ wɑz ə sɑləd tʃʌŋk ən i tɑpəld oʊvɝ laɪk ə fɛl tʃɹi.

Suddenly one of the guards vanished. One minute there were two dim shapes, the next the night swallowed one of them. The second guard turned, the beginning of a cry on his lips, but before the first syllable was uttered there was a solid tchunk and he toppled over like a felled tree.

baɪɑɝ spʌn, swɪft əz ə stʃɹaɪkɪŋ vaɪpɝ, ði æks wɝlɪŋ ɪn ɪz hænz soʊ fæs ðəɾ ɪt hʌmd. pɛɹɪnz aɪz bʌlʒd əz ðə naɪt sim tə floʊ ɪndə ðə læntɝn laɪt. hɪz maʊθ oʊpən tə jɛl, bʌɾ ɪz θɹoʊt lɑk taɪt wɪð fɪɹ. fəɹ ən ɪnstən i ivən fɝɡɑt ðət baɪɑɝ wɑntəd tə kɪl ðɛm. ðə waɪtkloʊk wɑz ənʌðɝ hjumən biɪŋ, ən ðə naɪt hæd kʌm əlaɪv tə teɪk əm ɔl.

Byar spun, swift as a striking viper, the axe whirling in his hands so fast that it hummed. Perrin's eyes bulged as the night seemed to flow into the lantern light. His mouth opened to yell, but his throat locked tight with fear. For an instant he even forgot that Byar wanted to kill them. The Whitecloak was another human being, and the night had come alive to take them all.

ðən ðə dɑɹknəs ɪnveɪɾɪŋ ðə laɪt bɪkeɪm læn, kloʊk swɝlɪŋ θɹu ʃeɪdz ʌv ɡɹeɪ ən blæk əz i muvd. ði æks ɪn baɪɑɝz hænz læʃt aʊt laɪk laɪtnɪŋ . . . ən læn sim tə lin kæʒəwəli əsaɪd, lɛɾɪŋ ðə bleɪd pæs soʊ kloʊs i mʌst əv fɛl ðə wɪn ʌv ɪt. baɪɑɝz aɪz waɪɾənd əz ðə fɔɹs ə hɪz bloʊ kæɹiɾ ɪm ɔf bæləns, əz ðə wɔɹɾɝ stʃɹʌk wɪð hænz ən fiɾ ɪn ɹæpəd səksɛʃən, soʊ kwɪk ðət pɛɹɪn wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i hæd dʒʌst sin. wʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv wɑz baɪɑɝ kəlæpsɪŋ laɪk ə pʌpət. bɪfɔɹ ðə fɔlɪŋ waɪtkloʊk hæd fɪnɪʃt sɛɾəlɪŋ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz ɑn ɪz niz ɪkstɪŋɡwɪʃɪŋ ðə læntɝn.

Then the darkness invading the light became Lan, cloak swirling through shades of gray and black as he moved. The axe in Byar's hands lashed out like lightning . . . and Lan seemed to lean casually aside, letting the blade pass so close he must have felt the wind of it. Byar's eyes widened as the force of his blow carried him off balance, as the Warder struck with hands and feet in rapid succession, so quick that Perrin was not sure what he had just seen. What he was sure of was Byar collapsing like a puppet. Before the falling Whitecloak had finished settling to the ground, the Warder was on his knees extinguishing the lantern.

ɪn ðə sʌɾən ɹɪtɝn tə dɑɹknəs, pɛɹɪn stɛɹd blaɪnli. læn sim tə hæv vænɪʃt əɡɛn.

In the sudden return to darkness, Perrin stared blindly. Lan seemed to have vanished again.

"ɪz ɪt ɹɪli . . . ?" ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə staɪfəl sɑb. "wi θɔt jə wɝ dɛd. wi θɔt jə wɝ ɔl dɛd."

"Is it really . . . ?" Egwene gave a stifled sob. "We thought you were dead. We thought you were all dead."

"nɑt jɛt." ðə wɔɹɾɝz dip wɪspɝ wɑz tɪŋd wɪð əmjuzmənt.

"Not yet." The Warder's deep whisper was tinged with amusement.

hænz tʌtʃt pɛɹɪn, faʊn ɪz bɑnz. ə naɪf slaɪs θɹu ðə ɹoʊps wɪð bɛɹli ə tʌɡ, ən i wɑz fɹi. eɪkɪŋ mʌsəlz pɹətɛstəɾ əz i sæɾ ʌp. ɹʌbɪŋ ɪz ɹɪsts, hi pɪɹɾ ət ðə ɡɹeɪɪŋ maʊn ðət mɑɹk baɪɑɝ. "dɪd jə . . . ? ɪz i . . . ?"

Hands touched Perrin, found his bonds. A knife sliced through the ropes with barely a tug, and he was free. Aching muscles protested as he sat up. Rubbing his wrists, he peered at the graying mound that marked Byar. "Did you . . . ? Is he . . . ?"

"noʊ," lænz vɔɪs ænsɝd kwaɪətli fɹəm ðə dɑɹknəs. "aɪ də nɑt kɪl ənlɛs aɪ min tə. bʌɾ i woʊn bɑðɝ ɛniwʌn fəɹ ə waɪl. stɑp æskɪŋ kwɛstʃənz ən ɡɛɾ ə pɛɹ ə ðɛɹ kloʊks. wi də nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ taɪm."

"No," Lan's voice answered quietly from the darkness. "I do not kill unless I mean to. But he won't bother anyone for a while. Stop asking questions and get a pair of their cloaks. We do not have much time."

pɛɹɪn kɹɔl tə wɛɹ baɪɑɝ leɪ. ɪt tʊk ən ɛfɝt tə tʌtʃ ðə mæn, ən wən i fɛl ðə waɪtkloʊks tʃɛst ɹaɪzɪŋ ən fɔlɪŋ i ɔlmoʊs dʒɝkt ɪz hænz əweɪ. hɪz skɪn kɹɔld əz i meɪd hɪmsɛlf ənfæstən ðə waɪt kloʊk ən pʊl ɪɾ ɔf. dɪspaɪt wʌt læn sɛd, hi kəɾ ɪmædʒən ðə skʌl-feɪs mæn sʌɾənli ɹɪɹɪŋ ʌp. heɪstəli hi fʌmbəld ɝaʊn tɪl i faʊn ɪz æks, ðən kɹɔl tə ənʌðɝ ɡɑɹd. ɪt sim stʃɹeɪnʒ, ət fɝst, ðəɾ i fɛl noʊ ɹɪlʌktəns tə tʌtʃ ðɪs ʌnkɑnʃəs mæn, bʌt ðə ɹizən keɪm tə hɪm. ɔl ðə waɪtkloʊks heɪɾəd hɪm, bʌt ðət wɑz ə hjumən ɪmoʊʃən. baɪɑɝ fɛl nʌθɪŋ bɪɑn ðəɾ i ʃəd daɪ; ðəɹ wɑz noʊ heɪɾ ɪn ɪt, noʊ ɪmoʊʃən əɾ ɔl.

Perrin crawled to where Byar lay. It took an effort to touch the man, and when he felt the Whitecloak's chest rising and falling he almost jerked his hands away. His skin crawled as he made himself unfasten the white cloak and pull it off. Despite what Lan said, he could imagine the skull-faced man suddenly rearing up. Hastily he fumbled around till he found his axe, then crawled to another guard. It seemed strange, at first, that he felt no reluctance to touch this unconscious man, but the reason came to him. All the Whitecloaks hated him, but that was a human emotion. Byar felt nothing beyond that he should die; there was no hate in it, no emotion at all.

ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə tu kloʊks ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz, hi tɝnd - ən pænɪk ɡɹæb hɪm. ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs i sʌɾənli hæd noʊ sɛns ə dɝɛkʃən, ʌv haʊ tə faɪn ɪz weɪ bæk tə læn ən ði ʌðɝz. hɪz fit ɹuɾəd tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, əfɹeɪd tə muv. ivən baɪɑɝ wɑz hɪɾən baɪ ðə naɪt wɪθaʊɾ ɪz waɪt kloʊk. ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ baɪ wɪtʃ tə ɔɹiɛn hɪmsɛlf. ɛni weɪ hi wɛn maɪt bi aʊɾ ɪndə ðə kæmp.

Gathering the two cloaks in his arms, he turned - and panic grabbed him. In the darkness he suddenly had no sense of direction, of how to find his way back to Lan and the others. His feet rooted to the ground, afraid to move. Even Byar was hidden by the night without his white cloak. There was nothing by which to orient himself. Any way he went might be out into the camp.

"hɪɹ."

"Here."

hi stʌmbəl təwɔɹd lænz wɪspɝ əntɪl hænz stɑp hɪm. ɛɡwin wɑz ə dɪm ʃædoʊ, ən lænz feɪs wɑz ə blɝ; ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wɔɹɾɝ sim nɑt tə bi ðəɹ əɾ ɔl. hi kəd fil ðɛɹ aɪz ɑn hɪm, ən i wʌndɝɾ ɪf i ʃəɾ ɪkspleɪn.

He stumbled toward Lan's whisper until hands stopped him. Egwene was a dim shadow, and Lan's face was a blur; the rest of the Warder seemed not to be there at all. He could feel their eyes on him, and he wondered if he should explain.

"pʊɾ ɑn ðə kloʊks," læn sɛd sɔfli. "kwɪkli. bʌndəl jəɹ oʊn. ən meɪk noʊ saʊnd. jə ɑɹən seɪf jɛt."

"Put on the cloaks," Lan said softly. "Quickly. Bundle your own. And make no sound. You aren't safe yet."

hɝidli pɛɹɪn pæst wʌn ə ðə kloʊks tə ɛɡwin, ɹɪlivd ət biɪŋ seɪv fɹəm hævɪŋ tə tɛl ə hɪz fɪɹ. hi meɪɾ ɪz oʊn kloʊk ɪndə ə bʌndəl tə kæɹi, ən swʌŋ ðə waɪt kloʊk ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ɪn ɪts pleɪs. hi fɛlt ə pɹɪkəl əz ɪt sɛɾəld ɝaʊn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ə stæb ʌv wɝi bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz. wɑz ɪt baɪɑɝz kloʊk i hæɾ ɛndəɾ ʌp wɪð? hi ɔlmoʊs θɔɾ i kəd smɛl ðə ɡɔn mæn ɑn ɪt.

Hurriedly Perrin passed one of the cloaks to Egwene, relieved at being saved from having to tell of his fear. He made his own cloak into a bundle to carry, and swung the white cloak around his shoulders in its place. He felt a prickle as it settled around his shoulders, a stab of worry between his shoulder blades. Was it Byar's cloak he had ended up with? He almost thought he could smell the gaunt man on it.

læn dɝɛktəɾ əm tə hoʊl hænz, ən pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪpt ɪz æks ɪn wʌn hæn ən ɛɡwinz hænd wɪð ði ʌðɝ, wɪʃɪŋ ðə wɔɹɾɝ wəd ɡɛɾ ɑn wɪð ðɛɹ ɪskeɪp soʊ hi kəd stɑp ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən fɹəm ɹʌnɪŋ waɪld. bʌt ðeɪ dʒʌst stʊd ðɛɹ, sɝaʊndəd baɪ ðə tɛns ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, tu ʃeɪps ɪn waɪt kloʊks ən wʌn ðət wɑz sɛns bʌt nɑt sin.

Lan directed them to hold hands, and Perrin gripped his axe in one hand and Egwene's hand with the other, wishing the Warder would get on with their escape so he could stop his imagination from running wild. But they just stood there, surrounded by the tents of the Children, two shapes in white cloaks and one that was sensed but not seen.

"sun," læn wɪspɝd. "vɛɹi sun."

"Soon," Lan whispered. "Very soon."

laɪtnɪŋ bɹoʊk ðə naɪɾ əbʌv ðə kæmp, soʊ kloʊs ðət pɛɹɪn fɛl ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz, hɪz hɛd, lɪftɪŋ əz ðə boʊl tʃɑɹdʒ ði ɛɹ. dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə tɛns ði ɝθ ɪɹʌptəd fɹəm ðə bloʊ, ði ɪksploʊʒən ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn mɝdʒɪŋ wɪð ðəɾ ɪn ðə skaɪ. bɪfɔɹ ðə laɪt feɪɾəd læn wɑz liɾɪŋ əm fɔɹwɝd.

Lightning broke the night above the camp, so close that Perrin felt the hair on his arms, his head, lifting as the bolt charged the air. Just beyond the tents the earth erupted from the blow, the explosion on the ground merging with that in the sky. Before the light faded Lan was leading them forward.

ət ðɛɹ fɝst stɛp ənʌðɝ stʃɹaɪk slaɪst oʊpən ðə blæknəs. laɪtnɪŋ keɪm laɪk heɪl, soʊ ðət ðə naɪt flɪkɝɾ əz ɪf ðə dɑɹknəs wɝ kʌmɪŋ ɪn moʊməntɛɹi flæʃɪz. θʌndɝ dʒɹʌmd waɪldli, wʌn ɹɔɹ ɹʌmbəlɪŋ ɪndə ðə nɛkst, wʌn kəntɪnjuəs, ɹɪpəlɪŋ pil. fɪɹ-stʃɹɪkən hɔɹsəz skɹimd, ðɛɹ wɪniz dʒɹaʊn ɪksɛp fəɹ moʊməns wən ðə θʌndɝ feɪɾəd. mɛn tʌmbəld aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ tɛns, səm ɪn ðɛɹ waɪt kloʊks, səm oʊnli hæf kloʊðd, səm dæʃɪŋ tə ən fɹoʊ, səm stændɪŋ əz ɪf stʌnd.

At their first step another strike sliced open the blackness. Lightning came like hail, so that the night flickered as if the darkness were coming in momentary flashes. Thunder drummed wildly, one roar rumbling into the next, one continuous, rippling peal. Fear-stricken horses screamed, their whinnies drowned except for moments when the thunder faded. Men tumbled out of their tents, some in their white cloaks, some only half clothed, some dashing to and fro, some standing as if stunned.

θɹu ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪt læn pʊld əm əɾ ə tʃɹɑt, pɛɹɪn bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ. waɪtkloʊks lʊkt ət ðɛm, waɪld-aɪd, əz ðeɪ pæst. ə fju ʃaʊɾəd ət ðɛm, ðə ʃaʊts lɔst ɪn ðə paʊndɪŋ fɹəm ðə hɛvənz, bʌt wɪð ðɛɹ waɪt kloʊks ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn əm noʊ wʌn tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp ðɛm. θɹu ðə tɛns, aʊɾ ə ðə kæmp ən ɪndə ðə naɪt, ən noʊ wʌn ɹeɪzd ə hæn əɡɛns ðɛm.

Through the middle of it Lan pulled them at a trot, Perrin bringing up the rear. Whitecloaks looked at them, wild-eyed, as they passed. A few shouted at them, the shouts lost in the pounding from the heavens, but with their white cloaks gathered around them no one tried to stop them. Through the tents, out of the camp and into the night, and no one raised a hand against them.

ðə ɡɹaʊn tɝn ənivən ʌndɝ pɛɹɪnz fit, ən bɹʌʃ slæpt əɾ ɪm əz i lɛt hɪmsɛlf bi dʒɹɔn əlɔŋ. ðə laɪtnɪŋ flɪkɝd fɪtfəli ən wɑz ɡɔn. ɛkoʊz ə θʌndɝ ɹoʊld əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ, tu, feɪɾəd əweɪ. pɛɹɪn lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. ə hændfʊl ə faɪɝz bɝn bæk ðɛɹ, əmʌŋ ðə tɛns. səm ə ðə laɪtnɪŋ mʌst əv stʃɹʌk hoʊm, əɹ pɝhæps mɛn hæd nɑkt oʊvɝ læmps ɪn ðɛɹ pænɪk. mɛn stɪl ʃaʊɾəd, vɔɪsəz taɪni ɪn ðə naɪt, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹɪstɔɹ ɔɹɾɝ, tə faɪn aʊt wʌt hæd hæpənd. ðə læn bɪɡæn tə sloʊp ʌpwɝdz, ən tɛns ən faɪɝz ən ʃaʊɾɪŋ wɝ lɛf bɪhaɪnd.

The ground turned uneven under Perrin's feet, and brush slapped at him as he let himself be drawn along. The lightning flickered fitfully and was gone. Echoes of thunder rolled across the sky before they, too, faded away. Perrin looked over his shoulder. A handful of fires burned back there, among the tents. Some of the lightning must have struck home, or perhaps men had knocked over lamps in their panic. Men still shouted, voices tiny in the night, trying to restore order, to find out what had happened. The land began to slope upwards, and tents and fires and shouting were left behind.

sʌɾənli hi ɔlmoʊs tʃɹɑɾ ɑn ɛɡwinz hilz əz læn stɑpt. əhɛɾ ɪn ðə munlaɪt stʊd θɹi hɔɹsəz.

Suddenly he almost trod on Egwene's heels as Lan stopped. Ahead in the moonlight stood three horses.

ə ʃædoʊ stɝd, ən mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs keɪm, weɪɾɪd wɪð ɪɹɪteɪʃən. "nɪneɪiv əz nɑt ɹɪtɝnd. aɪ fɪɹ ðət jʌŋ wʊmən əz dʌn sʌmθɪŋ fulɪʃ." læn spʌn ɑn ɪz hil əz ɪf tə ɹɪtɝn ðə weɪ ðeɪ hæd kʌm, bʌɾ ə sɪŋɡəl wɪp-kɹæk wɝd fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn hɔltəd hɪm. "noʊ!" hi stʊd lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ saɪdweɪz, oʊnli hɪz feɪs ən hænz tʃɹuli vɪzəbəl, ən ðeɪ bʌt dɪmli ʃæɾoʊd blɝz. ʃi wɛn ɑn ɪn ə dʒɛnlɝ toʊn; dʒɛnlɝ bʌt noʊ lɛs fɝm. "sʌm θɪŋz ɑɹ mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən ʌðɝz. jə noʊ ðæt." ðə wɔɹɾɝ dɪd nɑt muv, ən əɹ vɔɪs hɑɹɾənd əɡɛn. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ jəɹ oʊðz, ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən, lɔɹɾ ə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz! wʌɾ ə ði oʊθ ʌv ə daɪəɾɪmd bæɾəl lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔlkɪɹi?"

A shadow stirred, and Moiraine's voice came, weighted with irritation. "Nynaeve has not returned. I fear that young woman has done something foolish." Lan spun on his heel as if to return the way they had come, but a single whip-crack word from Moiraine halted him. "No!" He stood looking at her sideways, only his face and hands truly visible, and they but dimly shadowed blurs. She went on in a gentler tone; gentler but no less firm. "Some things are more important than others. You know that." The Warder did not move, and her voice hardened again. "Remember your oaths, al'Lan Mandragoran, Lord of the Seven Towers! What of the oath of a Diademed Battle Lord of the Malkieri?"

pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt. læn wɑz ɔl ə ðæt? ɛɡwin wɑz mɝmɝɪŋ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt teɪk ɪz aɪz ɔf ðə təbloʊ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, læn stændɪŋ laɪk ə wʊlf fɹəm dæpəlz pæk, ə wʊlf ət beɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə dɪmɪnjəɾɪv ɛɛs sədaɪ ən veɪnli sikɪŋ ɪskeɪp fɹəm dum.

Perrin blinked. Lan was all of that? Egwene was murmuring, but he could not take his eyes off the tableau in front of him, Lan standing like a wolf from Dapple's pack, a wolf at bay before the diminutive Aes Sedai and vainly seeking escape from doom.

ðə fɹoʊzən sin wɑz bɹoʊkən baɪ ə kɹæʃ ə bɹeɪkɪŋ bɹæntʃəz ɪn ðə wʊdz. ɪn tu lɔŋ stʃɹaɪdz læn wɑz bɪtwin mɔɪɹeɪn ən ðə saʊnd, ðə peɪl munlaɪt ɹɪpəlɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪz sɔɹd. tə ðə kɹækəl ən snæp ʌv ʌndɝbɹʌʃ ə pɛɹ ə hɔɹsəz bɝs fɹəm ðə tʃɹiz, wʌn wɪð ə ɹaɪɾɝ.

The frozen scene was broken by a crash of breaking branches in the woods. In two long strides Lan was between Moiraine and the sound, the pale moonlight rippling along his sword. To the crackle and snap of underbrush a pair of horses burst from the trees, one with a rider.

"bɛlə!" ɛɡwin ɪkskleɪmd ət ðə seɪm taɪm ðət nɪneɪiv sɛd fɹəm ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹz bæk, "aɪ ɔlmoʊs dɪdn faɪn jə əɡɛn. ɛɡwin! θæŋk ðə laɪt jəɹ əlaɪv!"

"Bela!" Egwene exclaimed at the same time that Nynaeve said from the shaggy mare's back, "I almost didn't find you again. Egwene! Thank the Light you're alive!"

ʃi slɪd daʊn ɔf bɛlə, bʌɾ əz ʃi stɑɹɾəd təwɔɹd ði ɛmənz fildɝz læn kɑɾ əɹ ɑɹm ən ʃi stɑpt ʃɔɹt, stɛɹɪŋ ʌp ət hɪm.

She slid down off Bela, but as she started toward the Emond's Fielders Lan caught her arm and she stopped short, staring up at him.

"wi mʌst ɡoʊ, læn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, wʌns mɔɹ saʊndɪŋ ənɹʌfəld, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɹilist ɪz ɡɹɪp.

"We must go, Lan," Moiraine said, once more sounding unruffled, and the Warder released his grip.

nɪneɪiv ɹʌbd əɹ ɑɹm əz ʃi hɝid tə hʌɡ ɛɡwin, bʌt pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i hɝɾ əɹ ɡɪv ə loʊ læf, tu. ɪt pʌzəld ɪm kəz i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt hæɾ ɛniθɪŋ tə də wɪð əɹ hæpinəs ət siɪŋ əm əɡɛn.

Nynaeve rubbed her arm as she hurried to hug Egwene, but Perrin thought he heard her give a low laugh, too. It puzzled him because he did not think it had anything to do with her happiness at seeing them again.

"wɛɹ ɑɹ ɹænd ən mæt?" hi æskt.

"Where are Rand and Mat?" he asked.

"ɛlswɛɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd, ən nɪneɪiv mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ə ʃɑɹp toʊn ðət meɪɾ ɛɡwin ɡæsp. pɛɹɪn blɪŋkt; hi hæd kɑt ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə wæɡənɪɹz oʊθ, ən ə kɔɹs wʌn. "ðə laɪt sɛn ðeɪ ɑɹ wɛl," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn ɑn əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt noʊɾəst.

"Elsewhere," Moiraine replied, and Nynaeve muttered something in a sharp tone that made Egwene gasp. Perrin blinked; he had caught the edge of a wagoneer's oath, and a coarse one. "The Light send they are well," the Aes Sedai went on as if she had not noticed.

"wi wɪl nʌn ʌv əs bi wɛl," læn sɛd, "ɪf ðə waɪtkloʊks faɪn ʌs. tʃeɪnʒ jəɹ kloʊks, ən ɡɛt maʊntəd."

"We will none of us be well," Lan said, "if the Whitecloaks find us. Change your cloaks, and get mounted."

pɛɹɪn skɹæmbəld ʌp ɑntu ðə hɔɹs nɪneɪiv hæd bɹɔt bɪhaɪn bɛlə. ðə læk ʌv ə sæɾəl dɪd nɑt hæmpɝ hɪm; hi dɪd nɑt ɹaɪɾ ɔfən ət hoʊm, bʌt wən i dɪɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɹ laɪkli bæɹbæk ðən nɑt. hi stɪl kæɹid ðə waɪt kloʊk, naʊ ɹoʊld ʌp ən taɪd tə hɪz bɛlt. ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd ðeɪ mʌs liv noʊ mɔɹ tʃɹeɪsəz fəɹ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən tə faɪn ðən ðeɪ kəd hɛlp. hi stɪl θɔɾ i kəd smɛl baɪɑɝ ɑn ɪt.

Perrin scrambled up onto the horse Nynaeve had brought behind Bela. The lack of a saddle did not hamper him; he did not ride often at home, but when he did it was more likely bareback than not. He still carried the white cloak, now rolled up and tied to his belt. The Warder said they must leave no more traces for the Children to find than they could help. He still thought he could smell Byar on it.

əz ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd aʊt, ðə wɔɹɾɝ liɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz tɔl blæk stæljən, pɛɹɪn fɛl dæpəlz tʌtʃ ɑn ɪz maɪnd wʌns mɔɹ. wʌn deɪ əɡɛn. mɔɹ ə filɪŋ ðən wɝdz, ɪt saɪd wɪð ðə pɹɑməs ʌv ə miɾɪŋ fɔɹiɔɹdeɪnd, wɪð æntɪsəpeɪʃən ʌv wʌt wɑz tə kʌm, wɪð ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən tə wʌt wɑz tə kʌm, ɔl stʃɹikt ɪn leɪɝz. hi tʃɹaɪd tə æsk wən ən waɪ, fʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn heɪst ən sʌɾən fɪɹ. ðə tʃɹeɪs ə ðə wʊlvz ɡɹu feɪntɝ, feɪɾɪŋ. hɪz fɹæntɪk kwɛstʃənz bɹɔɾ oʊnli ðə seɪm hɛvi-leɪɾən ænsɝ. wʌn deɪ əɡɛn. ɪt hʌŋ hɔntɪŋ ɪn ɪz maɪn lɔŋ æftɝ əwɛɹnəs ə ðə wʊlvz wɪŋkt aʊt.

As they started out, the Warder leading on his tall black stallion, Perrin felt Dapple's touch on his mind once more. One day again. More a feeling than words, it sighed with the promise of a meeting foreordained, with anticipation of what was to come, with resignation to what was to come, all streaked in layers. He tried to ask when and why, fumbling in haste and sudden fear. The trace of the wolves grew fainter, fading. His frantic questions brought only the same heavy-laden answer. One day again. It hung haunting in his mind long after awareness of the wolves winked out.

læn pɹɛst saʊθwɝd sloʊli bʌt stɛɾəli. ðə naɪt-dʒɹeɪpt wɪldɝnəs, ɔl ɹoʊlɪŋ ɡɹaʊn ən ʌndɝbɹʌʃ hɪɾən əntɪl ɪt wɑz ʌndɝfʊt, ʃæɾoʊd tʃɹiz θɪk əɡɛns ðə skaɪ, əlaʊd noʊ ɡɹeɪt spiɾ ɪn ɛni keɪs. twaɪs ðə wɔɹɾɝ lɛf ðɛm, ɹaɪɾɪŋ bæk təwɔɹd ðə slɪvɝd mun, hi ən mændɑɹb bɪkʌmɪŋ wʌn wɪð ðə naɪt bɪhaɪnd. boʊθ taɪmz i ɹɪtɝn tə ɹipɔɹt noʊ saɪn ə pɝsut.

Lan pressed southward slowly but steadily. The night-draped wilderness, all rolling ground and underbrush hidden until it was underfoot, shadowed trees thick against the sky, allowed no great speed in any case. Twice the Warder left them, riding back toward the slivered moon, he and Mandarb becoming one with the night behind. Both times he returned to report no sign of pursuit.

ɛɡwin steɪd kloʊs bɪsaɪd nɪneɪiv. sɑft-spoʊkən skɹæps ʌv ɪksaɪɾəd tɔk floʊɾəd bæk tə pɛɹɪn. ðoʊz tu wɝ əz buiɾ ʌp əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd faʊn hoʊm əɡɛn. hi hʌŋ bæk ət ðə teɪl ə ðɛɹ lɪɾəl kɑləm. səmtaɪmz ðə wɪzdəm tɝn ɪn əɹ sæɾəl tə lʊk bæk ət hɪm, ən itʃ taɪm i ɡeɪv əɹ ə weɪv, əz ɪf tə seɪ ðəɾ i wɑz ɔl ɹaɪt, ən steɪd wɛɹ i wɑz. hi hæɾ ə lɑt tə θɪŋk əbaʊt, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ ɛni ʌv ɪt stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn ɪz hɛd. wʌt wɑz tə kʌm. wʌt wɑz tə kʌm?

Egwene stayed close beside Nynaeve. Soft-spoken scraps of excited talk floated back to Perrin. Those two were as buoyed up as if they had found home again. He hung back at the tail of their little column. Sometimes the Wisdom turned in her saddle to look back at him, and each time he gave her a wave, as if to say that he was all right, and stayed where he was. He had a lot to think about, though he could not get any of it straight in his head. What was to come. What was to come?

pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ɪt kəd nɑt bi mʌtʃ ʃɔɹɾ ə dɔn wən mɔɪɹeɪn faɪnəli kɔld ə hɔlt. læn faʊn ə ɡʌli wɛɹ i kəd bɪld ə faɪɝ hɪɾən wɪðɪn ə hɑloʊ ɪn wʌn ə ðə bæŋks.

Perrin thought it could not be much short of dawn when Moiraine finally called a halt. Lan found a gully where he could build a fire hidden within a hollow in one of the banks.

faɪnəli ðeɪ wɝ əlaʊd tə ɹɪd ðɛmsɛlvz ə ðə waɪt kloʊks, bɛɹiɪŋ əm ɪn ə hoʊl dʌɡ nɪɹ ðə faɪɝ. əz i wɑz əbaʊt tə tɔs ɪn ðə kloʊk i hæd juzd, ði ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɡoʊldən sʌn ɑn ðə bɹɛs kɑɾ ɪz aɪ, ən ðə tu ɡoʊldən stɑɹz bɪniθ. hi dʒɹɑp ðə kloʊk əz ɪf ɪt stʌŋ ən wɔkt əweɪ, skɹʌbɪŋ ɪz hænz ɑn ɪz koʊt, tə sɪɾ əloʊn.

Finally they were allowed to rid themselves of the white cloaks, burying them in a hole dug near the fire. As he was about to toss in the cloak he had used, the embroidered golden sun on the breast caught his eye, and the two golden stars beneath. He dropped the cloak as if it stung and walked away, scrubbing his hands on his coat, to sit alone.

"naʊ," ɛɡwin sɛd, wʌns læn wɑz ʃʌvlɪŋ dɝɾ ɪndə ðə hoʊl, "wɪl sʌmbɑɾi tɛl mi wɛɹ ɹænd ən mæt ɑɹ?"

"Now," Egwene said, once Lan was shoveling dirt into the hole, "will somebody tell me where Rand and Mat are?"

"aɪ bɪliv ðeɪ ɑɹ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kɛɹfəli, "ɔɹ ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ ðɛɹ." nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ə laʊd, dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋ ɡɹʌnt, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn ɑn əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt bɪn ɪntɝʌptɪd. "ɪf ðeɪ ɑɹ nɑt, əl jɛt faɪn ðɛm. ðəɾ aɪ pɹɑməs."

"I believe they are in Caemlyn," Moiraine said carefully, "or on their way there." Nynaeve gave a loud, disparaging grunt, but the Aes Sedai went on as if she had not been interrupted. "If they are not, I will yet find them. That I promise."

ðeɪ meɪɾ ə kwaɪət mil ɑn bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz ən hɑt ti. ivən ɛɡwinz ɪnθuziæzəm səkʌm tə wɪɹinəs. ðə wɪzdəm pɹədust ən ɔɪnmənt fɹəm əɹ bæɡ fəɹ ðə wɛlz ðə ɹoʊps hæd lɛft ɑn ɛɡwinz ɹɪsts, ən ə dɪfɹənt wʌn fəɹ əɹ ʌðɝ bɹuzəz. wən ʃi keɪm tə wɛɹ pɛɹɪn sæɾ ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə ðə faɪɹlaɪt, hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ʌp.

They made a quiet meal on bread and cheese and hot tea. Even Egwene's enthusiasm succumbed to weariness. The Wisdom produced an ointment from her bag for the weals the ropes had left on Egwene's wrists, and a different one for her other bruises. When she came to where Perrin sat on the edge of the firelight, he did not look up.

ʃi stʊd lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm saɪlənli fəɹ ə taɪm, ðən skwɑɾɪd wɪð əɹ bæɡ bɪsaɪd hɝ, seɪɪŋ bɹɪskli, "teɪk jəɹ koʊɾ ən ʃɝɾ ɔf, pɛɹɪn. ðeɪ tɛl mi wʌn ə ðə waɪtkloʊks tʊk ə dɪslaɪk tə ju."

She stood looking at him silently for a time, then squatted with her bag beside her, saying briskly, "Take your coat and shirt off, Perrin. They tell me one of the Whitecloaks took a dislike to you."

hi kəmplaɪd sloʊli, stɪl hæf lɔst ɪn dæpəlz mɛsədʒ, əntɪl nɪneɪiv ɡæspt. stɑɹɾəld, hi stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, ðən əɾ ɪz oʊn bɛɹ tʃɛst. ɪt wɑz ə mæs ə kʌlɝ, ðə nuɝ, pɝpəl blɑtʃəz oʊvɝleɪɪŋ oʊldɝ wʌnz feɪɾəd ɪndə ʃeɪdz ə bɹaʊn ən jɛloʊ. oʊnli θɪk slæbz ə mʌsəl ɝn baɪ aʊɝz ət mæstɝ luhənz fɔɹdʒ hæd seɪvd ɪm fɹəm bɹoʊkən ɹɪbz. wɪð ɪz maɪn fɪl baɪ ðə wʊlvz, hi hæd mænədʒ tə fɝɡɛt ðə peɪn, bʌɾ i wɑz ɹimaɪndəɾ ʌv ɪt naʊ, ən ɪt keɪm bæk ɡlædli. ɪnvoʊlʌntɝɪli hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ, ən klæmpt ɪz lɪps ɑn ə ɡɹoʊn.

He complied slowly, still half lost in Dapple's message, until Nynaeve gasped. Startled, he stared at her, then at his own bare chest. It was a mass of color, the newer, purple blotches overlaying older ones faded into shades of brown and yellow. Only thick slabs of muscle earned by hours at Master Luhhan's forge had saved him from broken ribs. With his mind filled by the wolves, he had managed to forget the pain, but he was reminded of it now, and it came back gladly. Involuntarily he took a deep breath, and clamped his lips on a groan.

"haʊ kəɾ i hæv dɪslaɪk jə soʊ mʌtʃ?" nɪneɪiv æskt wʌndɝɪŋli.

"How could he have disliked you so much?" Nynaeve asked wonderingly.

aɪ kɪl tu mɛn. əlaʊd, hi sɛd, "aɪ doʊnt noʊ."

I killed two men. Aloud, he said, "I don't know."

ʃi ɹʌmɪɡd ɪn əɹ bæɡ, ən i flɪntʃt wən ʃi bɪɡæn spɹɛɾɪŋ ə ɡɹisi ɔɪnmənt oʊvɝ ɪz bɹuzəz. "ɡɹaʊn aɪvi, faɪv-fɪŋɡɝ, ən sʌnbɝst ɹut," ʃi sɛd.

She rummaged in her bag, and he flinched when she began spreading a greasy ointment over his bruises. "Ground ivy, five-finger, and sunburst root," she said.

ɪt wɑz hɑɾ ən koʊld ət ðə seɪm taɪm, meɪkɪŋ ɪm ʃɪvɝ waɪl i bɹoʊk ɪndə ə swɛt, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt pɹoʊtɛst. hi hæd hæɾ ɪkspɪɹiəns ə nɪneɪivz ɔɪnmənts ən poʊltəsəz bɪfɔɹ. əz əɹ fɪŋɡɝz dʒɛnli ɹʌb ðə mɪkstʃɝ ɪn, ðə hiɾ ən koʊl vænɪʃt, teɪkɪŋ ðə peɪn wɪð ðɛm. ðə pɝpəl splətʃəz feɪɾəd tə bɹaʊn, ən ðə bɹaʊn ən jɛloʊ peɪld, səm dɪsəpɪɹɪŋ ɔltəɡɛðɝ. ɪkspɛɹəmɛntəli, hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ; ðəɹ wɑz bɛɹli ə twɪnʒ.

It was hot and cold at the same time, making him shiver while he broke into a sweat, but he did not protest. He had had experience of Nynaeve's ointments and poultices before. As her fingers gently rubbed the mixture in, the heat and cold vanished, taking the pain with them. The purple splotches faded to brown, and the brown and yellow paled, some disappearing altogether. Experimentally, he took a deep breath; there was barely a twinge.

"ju lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd," nɪneɪiv sɛd. ʃi lʊkt ə lɪɾəl sɝpɹaɪz hɝsɛlf, ən stʃɹeɪnʒli fɹaɪɾənd. "nɛks taɪm, jə kən ɡoʊ tə hɝ."

"You look surprised," Nynaeve said. She looked a little surprised herself, and strangely frightened. "Next time, you can go to her."

"nɑt sɝpɹaɪzd," hi sɛd suðɪŋli, "dʒʌst ɡlæd." səmtaɪmz nɪneɪivz ɔɪnmənts wɝk fæst ən səmtaɪmz sloʊ, bʌt ðeɪ ɔlweɪz wɝkt. "wʌt. . . wʌt hæpən tə ɹænd ən mæt?"

"Not surprised," he said soothingly, "just glad." Sometimes Nynaeve's ointments worked fast and sometimes slow, but they always worked. "What. . . what happened to Rand and Mat?"

nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn stʌfɪŋ əɹ vaɪəlz ən pɑts bæk ɪndə hɝ bæɡ, dʒæmɪŋ itʃ wʌn ɪn əz ɪf ʃi wɝ θɹʌstɪŋ ɪt θɹu ə bæɹiɝ. " ʃi sɛz ðəɹ ɔl ɹaɪt. ʃi sɛz wɪl faɪn ðɛm. ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ʃi sɛz. ʃi sɛz ɪts tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt fəɹ əs nɑt tə, wʌtɛvɝ ðət minz. ʃi sɛz ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz."

Nynaeve began stuffing her vials and pots back into her bag, jamming each one in as if she were thrusting it through a barrier. " She says they're all right. She says we'll find them. In Caemlyn, she says. She says it's too important for us not to, Whatever that means. She says a great many things."

pɛɹɪn ɡɹɪn ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. wʌtɛvɝ ɛls hæd tʃeɪnʒd, ðə wɪzdəm wɑz stɪl hɝsɛlf, ən ʃi ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝ stɪl fɑɹ fɹəm fæs fɹɛnz.

Perrin grinned in spite of himself. Whatever else had changed, the Wisdom was still herself, and she and the Aes Sedai were still far from fast friends.

əbɹʌpli nɪneɪiv stɪfənd, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪz feɪs. dʒɹɑpɪŋ əɹ bæɡ, ʃi pɹɛs ðə bæks ə hɝ hænz tə hɪz tʃiks ən fɔɹhɛd. hi tʃɹaɪd tə pʊl bæk, bʌt ʃi kɑɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn boʊθ hænz ən θʌm bæk ɪz aɪlɪdz, piɹɪŋ ɪndə hɪz aɪz ən mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf. dɪspaɪɾ əɹ smɔl saɪz ʃi hɛld ɪz feɪs izəli; ɪt wɑz nɛvɝ izi tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm nɪneɪiv wən ʃi dɪd nɑt wɑn jə tə.

Abruptly Nynaeve stiffened, staring at his face. Dropping her bag, she pressed the backs of her hands to his cheeks and forehead. He tried to pull back, but she caught his head in both hands and thumbed back his eyelids, peering into his eyes and muttering to herself. Despite her small size she held his face easily; it was never easy to get away from Nynaeve when she did not want you to.

"aɪ doʊn ʌndɝstænd," ʃi sɛd faɪnəli, ɹilisɪŋ ɪm ən sɛɾəlɪŋ bæk tə sɪɾ ɑn əɹ hilz. "ɪf ɪt wɑz jɛloʊaɪ fivɝ, jə wʊdn bi eɪbəl tə stænd. bʌt jə doʊn əv ɛni fivɝ, ən ðə waɪts ə jəɹ aɪz ɑɹən jɛloʊd, dʒʌs ði aɪɹəsɪz."

"I don't understand," she said finally, releasing him and settling back to sit on her heels. "If it was yelloweye fever, you wouldn't be able to stand. But you don't have any fever, and the whites of your eyes aren't yellowed, just the irises."

"jɛloʊ?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, ən pɛɹɪn ən nɪneɪiv boʊθ dʒʌmpt wɛɹ ðeɪ sæt. ði ɛɛs sədaɪz əpɹoʊtʃ hæd bɪn ʌɾɝli saɪlənt. ɛɡwin wɑz əslip baɪ ðə faɪɝ, ɹæpt ɪn əɹ kloʊks, pɛɹɪn sɔ. hɪz oʊn aɪlɪdz wɑntəd tə slaɪd kloʊzd.

"Yellow?" Moiraine said, and Perrin and Nynaeve both jumped where they sat. The Aes Sedai's approach had been utterly silent. Egwene was asleep by the fire, wrapped in her cloaks, Perrin saw. His own eyelids wanted to slide closed.

"ɪɾ ɪzən ɛniθɪŋ," hi sɛd, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn pʊɾ ə hæn ʌndɝ ɪz tʃɪn ən tɝn ɪz feɪs ʌp soʊ ʃi kəd pɪɹ ɪndə hɪz aɪz ðə weɪ nɪneɪiv hæd. hi dʒɝkt əweɪ, pɹɪklɪŋ. ðə tu wɪmən wɝ hænlɪŋ ɪm əz ɪf i wɝ ə tʃaɪld. "aɪ sɛɾ ɪɾ ɪzən ɛniθɪŋ."

"It isn't anything," he said, but Moiraine put a hand under his chin and turned his face up so she could peer into his eyes the way Nynaeve had. He jerked away, prickling. The two women were handling him as if he were a child. "I said it isn't anything."

"ðɛɹ wɑz noʊ fɔɹtɛlɪŋ ðɪs." mɔɪɹeɪn spoʊk əz ɪf tə hɝsɛlf. hɝ aɪz sim tə lʊk ət sʌmθɪŋ bɪɑn hɪm. "sʌmθɪŋ ɔɹdeɪn tə bi woʊvən, əɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn? ɪf ə tʃeɪnʒ, baɪ wʌt hænd? ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz. ɪt mʌs bi ðæt."

"There was no foretelling this." Moiraine spoke as if to herself. Her eyes seemed to look at something beyond him. "Something ordained to be woven, or a change in the Pattern? If a change, by what hand? The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills. It must be that."

"du jə noʊ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz?" nɪneɪiv æskt ɹɪlʌktənli, ðən hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "kæn jə də sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ hɪm? jəɹ hilɪŋ?" ðə ɹɪkwɛs fəɹ eɪd, ði ædmɪʃən ðət ʃi kəd də nʌθɪŋ, keɪm aʊɾ ə hɝ əz ɪf dʒɹæɡd.

"Do you know what it is?" Nynaeve asked reluctantly, then hesitated. "Can you do something for him? Your Healing?" The request for aid, the admission that she could do nothing, came out of her as if dragged.

pɛɹɪn ɡlɛɹɾ ət boʊθ ðə wɪmən. "ɪf jəɹ gɑnə tɔk əbaʊt mi, tɔk tə mi. aɪm sɪɾɪŋ ɹaɪt hɪɹ." niðɝ lʊkt ət hɪm.

Perrin glared at both the women. "If you're going to talk about me, talk to me. I'm sitting right here." Neither looked at him.

"hilɪŋ?" mɔɪɹeɪn smaɪld. "hilɪŋ kən də nʌθɪŋ əbaʊt ðɪs. ɪts nɑɾ ən ɪlnəs, ən ɪɾəl nɑt. . . ." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɹifli. ʃi dɪd ɡlæns ət pɛɹɪn, ðɛn, ə kwɪk lʊk ðət ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd mɛni θɪŋz. ðə lʊk dɪd nɑɾ ɪnklud hɪm, ðoʊ, ən i mʌɾɝd saʊɝli əz ʃi tɝn bæk tə nɪneɪiv. "aɪ wɑz gɑnə seɪ ɪɾəl nɑt hɑɹm hɪm, bʌɾ u kən seɪ wʌt ði ɛnd wɪl bi? ət list aɪ kən seɪ ɪɾəl nɑt hɑɹm ɪm dɝɛkli."

"Healing?" Moiraine smiled. "Healing can do nothing about this. It is not an illness, and it will not. . . ." She hesitated briefly. She did glance at Perrin, then, a quick look that regretted many things. The look did not include him, though, and he muttered sourly as she turned back to Nynaeve. "I was going to say it will not harm him, but who can say what the end will be? At least I can say it will not harm him directly."

nɪneɪiv stʊd, dʌstɪŋ ɔf əɹ niz, ən kənfɹʌntəd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ aɪ tə aɪ. "ðæts nɑt ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf. ɪf ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔŋ wɪð - "

Nynaeve stood, dusting off her knees, and confronted the Aes Sedai eye to eye. "That's not good enough. If there's something wrong with - "

"wʌɾ ɪz, ɪz. wʌɾ ɪz woʊvən ɔlɹɛɾi ɪz pæs tʃeɪnʒɪŋ." mɔɪɹeɪn tɝn əweɪ əbɹʌpli. "wi mʌst slip waɪl wi kən ən liv ət fɝs laɪt. ɪf ðə dɑɹk wʌnz hænd ɡɹoʊz tu stʃɹɔŋ. . . . wi mʌst ɹitʃ keɪɛmlɪn kwɪkli."

"What is, is. What is woven already is past changing." Moiraine turned away abruptly. "We must sleep while we can and leave at first light. If the Dark One's hand grows too strong. . . . We must reach Caemlyn quickly."

æŋɡɹəli, nɪneɪiv snætʃt ʌp əɹ bæɡ ən stɔkt ɔf bɪfɔɹ pɛɹɪn kəd spik. hi stɑɹɾəd tə ɡɹaʊl ən oʊθ, bʌɾ ə θɔt hɪɾ ɪm laɪk ə bloʊ ən i sæt ðəɹ ɡeɪpɪŋ saɪlənli. mɔɪɹeɪn nu. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nu əbaʊt ðə wʊlvz. ən ʃi θɔɾ ɪt kəd bi ðə dɑɹk wʌnz duɪŋ. ə ʃɪvɝ ɹæn θɹu hɪm. heɪstəli hi ʃɹʌɡd bæk ɪndə hɪz ʃɝt, tʌkɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn ɔkwɝdli, ən pʊld ɪz koʊɾ ən kloʊk bæk ɑn. ðə kloʊðɪŋ dɪd nɑt hɛlp vɛɹi mʌtʃ; hi fɛl tʃɪld ɹaɪt daʊn tə hɪz boʊnz, hɪz mɛɹoʊ laɪk fɹoʊzən dʒɛli.

Angrily, Nynaeve snatched up her bag and stalked off before Perrin could speak. He started to growl an oath, but a thought hit him like a blow and he sat there gaping silently. Moiraine knew. The Aes Sedai knew about the wolves. And she thought it could be the Dark One's doing. A shiver ran through him. Hastily he shrugged back into his shirt, tucking it in awkwardly, and pulled his coat and cloak back on. The clothing did not help very much; he felt chilled right down to his bones, his marrow like frozen jelly.

læn dʒɹɑp tə ðə ɡɹaʊn kɹɔs-lɛɡəd, tɔsɪŋ bæk ɪz kloʊk. pɛɹɪn wɑz ɡlæɾ ə ðæt. ɪt wɑz ənplɛzənt, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən hævɪŋ ɪz aɪz slaɪd pæst.

Lan dropped to the ground cross-legged, tossing back his cloak. Perrin was glad of that. It was unpleasant, looking at the Warder and having his eyes slide past.

fəɹ ə lɔŋ moʊmən ðeɪ sɪmpli stɛɹɾ ət wʌn ənʌðɝ. ðə hɑɹd pleɪnz ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz feɪs wɝ ənɹiɾəbəl, bʌɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz pɛɹɪn θɔɾ i sɔ . . . sʌmθɪŋ. sɪmpəθi? kjʊɹiɑsəɾi? boʊθ?

For a long moment they simply stared at one another. The hard planes of the Warder's face were unreadable, but in his eyes Perrin thought he saw . . . something. Sympathy? Curiosity? Both?

"ju noʊ?" hi sɛd, ən læn nɑɾəd.

"You know?" he said, and Lan nodded.

"aɪ noʊ sʌm, nɑɾ ɔl. dɪɾ ɪt dʒʌs kʌm tə ju, əɹ dɪd jə miɾ ə ɡaɪd, ən ɪntɝmiɾiɛɹi?"

"I know some, not all. Did it just come to you, or did you meet a guide, an intermediary?"

"ðɛɹ wɑz ə mæn," pɛɹɪn sɛd sloʊli. hi noʊz, bʌt dʌz i θɪŋk ðə seɪm əz mɔɪɹeɪn? "hi sɛɾ ɪz neɪm wɑz ɛlaɪəs. ɛlaɪəs mækɛɹə." læn dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, ən pɛɹɪn lʊkt əɾ ɪm ʃɑɹpli. "ju noʊ hɪm?"

"There was a man," Perrin said slowly. He knows, but does he think the same as Moiraine? "He said his name was Elyas. Elyas Machera." Lan drew a deep breath, and Perrin looked at him sharply. "You know him?"

"aɪ nu hɪm. hi tɔt mi mʌtʃ, əbaʊt ðə blaɪt, ən əbaʊt ðɪs." læn tʌtʃt ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. "hi wɑz ə wɔɹɾɝ, bɪfɔɹ . . . bɪfɔɹ wʌt hæpənd. ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ. . . ." hi ɡlæns tə wɛɹ mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz, laɪɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə faɪɝ.

"I knew him. He taught me much, about the Blight, and about this." Lan touched his sword hilt. "He was a Warder, before . . . before what happened. The Red Ajah. . . ." He glanced to where Moiraine was, lying before the fire.

ɪt wɑz ðə fɝs taɪm pɛɹɪn kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛni ənsɝɾənti ɪn ðə wɔɹɾɝ. ət ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ læn hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ ən stʃɹɔŋ, ən wən i wɑz feɪsɪŋ feɪdz ən tʃɹɑləks. hi wɑz nɑɾ əfɹeɪd naʊ - pɛɹɪn wɑz kənvɪnst ə ðət - bʌɾ i wɑz wɛɹi, əz ɪf i maɪt seɪ tu mʌtʃ. əz ɪf wʌɾ i sɛd kəd bi deɪnʒɝəs.

It was the first time Perrin could remember any uncertainty in the Warder. At Shadar Logoth Lan had been sure and strong, and when he was facing Fades and Trollocs. He was not afraid now - Perrin was convinced of that - but he was wary, as if he might say too much. As if what he said could be dangerous.

"aɪv hɝɾ ə ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ," hi toʊld læn.

"I've heard of the Red Ajah," he told Lan.

"æn moʊst ʌv wʌt juv hɝɾ ɪz ɹɔŋ, noʊ daʊt. jə mʌst ʌndɝstænd, ðəɹ ɑɹ . . . fækʃənz wɪðɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. səm wəd faɪt ðə dɑɹk wʌn wʌn weɪ, səm ənʌðɝ. ðə ɡoʊl ɪz ðə seɪm, bʌt ðə dɪfɝənsɪz . . . ðə dɪfɝənsɪz kən min laɪvz tʃeɪnʒd, əɹ ɛndəd. ðə laɪvz ə mɛn əɹ neɪʃənz. hiz wɛl, ɛlaɪəs?"

"And most of what you've heard is wrong, no doubt. You must understand, there are . . . factions within Tar Valon. Some would fight the Dark One one way, some another. The goal is the same, but the differences . . . the differences can mean lives changed, or ended. The lives of men or nations. He is well, Elyas?"

"aɪ θɪŋk soʊ. ðə waɪtkloʊks sɛd ðeɪ kɪl hɪm, bʌt dæpəl - " pɛɹɪn ɡlænst ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ ənkʌmftəbli. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ." læn sim tə æksɛp ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt, ɹɪlʌktənli, ən ɪɾ ɛmboʊldən ɪm tə ɡoʊ ɑn. "ðɪs kəmjunəkeɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə wʊlvz. mɔɪɹeɪn simz tə θɪŋk ɪts sʌmθɪŋ ðə . . . sʌmθɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn dɪd. ɪɾ ɪzənt, ɪz ɪt?" hi wəd nɑt bɪliv ɛlaɪəs wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd.

"I think so. The Whitecloaks said they killed him, but Dapple - " Perrin glanced at the Warder uncomfortably. "I don't know." Lan seemed to accept that he did not, reluctantly, and it emboldened him to go on. "This communicating with the wolves. Moiraine seems to think it's something the . . . something the Dark One did. It isn't, is it?" He would not believe Elyas was a Darkfriend.

bʌt læn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ən swɛt stɑɹɾəd ɑn pɛɹɪnz feɪs, tʃɪl bidz meɪd koʊldɝ baɪ ðə naɪt. ðeɪ wɝ slaɪɾɪŋ daʊn ɪz tʃiks baɪ ðə taɪm ðə wɔɹɾɝ spoʊk.

But Lan hesitated, and sweat started on Perrin's face, chill beads made colder by the night. They were sliding down his cheeks by the time the Warder spoke.

"nɑɾ ɪn ɪtsɛlf, noʊ. səm bɪliv ɪɾ ɪz, bʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɔŋ; ɪt wɑz oʊld ən lɔs lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑz faʊnd. bʌt wʌɾ ə ðə tʃæns ɪnvɑlvd, blæksmɪθ? səmtaɪmz ðə pæɾɝn əz ə ɹændəmnəs tə ɪt - tə əɹ aɪz, ət list - bʌt wʌt tʃæns ðət jə ʃəd miɾ ə mæn u kəd ɡaɪd jə ɪn ðɪs θɪŋ, ən jə wʌn u kəd fɑloʊ ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ? ðə pæɾɝn ɪz fɔɹmɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt wɛb, wʌt səm kɔl ðə leɪs ʌv eɪdʒəz, ən jə lædz ɑɹ sɛntʃɹəl tə ɪt. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ðəɹ ɪz mʌtʃ tʃæns lɛft ɪn jəɹ laɪvz, naʊ. hæv jə bɪn tʃoʊzən aʊt, ðɛn? ən ɪf soʊ, baɪ ðə laɪt, əɹ baɪ ðə ʃædoʊ?"

"Not in itself, no. Some believe it is, but they are wrong; it was old and lost long before the Dark One was found. But what of the chance involved, blacksmith? Sometimes the Pattern has a randomness to it - to our eyes, at least - but what chance that you should meet a man who could guide you in this thing, and you one who could follow the guiding? The Pattern is forming a Great Web, what some call the Lace of Ages, and you lads are central to it. I don't think there is much chance left in your lives, now. Have you been chosen out, then? And if so, by the Light, or by the Shadow?"

"ðə dɑɹk wʌn kæn tʌtʃ əs ənlɛs wi neɪm hɪm." ɪmiɾiətli pɛɹɪn θɔɾ ə ðə dʒɹimz ə bælzəmən, ðə dʒɹimz ðət wɝ mɔɹ ðən dʒɹimz. hi skɹʌb ðə swɛɾ ɔf ɪz feɪs. "hi kænt."

"The Dark One can't touch us unless we name him." Immediately Perrin thought of the dreams of Ba'alzamon, the dreams that were more than dreams. He scrubbed the sweat off his face. "He can't."

"ɹɑk-hɑɹd stʌbɝn," ðə wɔɹɾɝ mjuzd. "meɪbi stʌbɝn ɪnʌf tə seɪv jɝsɛlf, ɪn ði ɛnd. ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə taɪmz wi lɪv ɪn, blæksmɪθ. ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ toʊl ju. ɪn ðiz taɪmz mɛni θɪŋz ɑɹ dɪzɔlvɪŋ, ən bɹeɪkɪŋ əpɑɹt. oʊl bæɹiɝz wikən, oʊld wɔlz kɹʌmbəl. ðə bæɹiɝz bɪtwin wʌɾ ɪz ən wʌt wɑz, bɪtwin wʌɾ ɪz ən wʌt wɪl bi." hɪz vɔɪs tɝnd ɡɹɪm. "ðə wɔlz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən. ðɪs meɪ bi ði ɛn ʌv ən eɪdʒ. wi meɪ si ə nu eɪdʒ bɔɹn bɪfɔɹ wi daɪ. əɹ pɝhæps ɪts ði ɛn ʌv eɪdʒəz, ði ɛn ə taɪm ɪtsɛlf. ði ɛn ə ðə wɝld." sʌɾənli hi ɡɹɪnd, bʌɾ ɪz ɡɹɪn wɑz əz dɑɹk əz ə skaʊl; hɪz aɪz spɑɹkəl mɛɹəli, læfɪŋ ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə ɡæloʊz. "bʌt ðæts nɑt fəɹ əs tə wɝi əbaʊt, ɛ, blæksmɪθ? wɪl faɪt ðə ʃædoʊ əz lɔŋ əz wɪv bɹɛθ, ən ɪf ɪɾ oʊvɝɹʌnz ʌs, wɪl ɡoʊ ʌndɝ baɪɾɪŋ ən klɔɪŋ. jə tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk ɑɹ tu stʌbɝn tə sɝɛndɝ. doʊn jə wɝi wɛðɝ ðə dɑɹk wʌn əz stɝɾ ɪn jəɹ laɪf. jə ɑɹ bæk əmʌŋ fɹɛnz, naʊ. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, ən ivən ðə dɑɹk wʌn kænɑt tʃeɪnʒ ðæt, nɑt wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn tə wɑtʃ oʊvɝ ju. bʌt wi hæd bɛɾɝ faɪn jəɹ fɹɛnz sun."

"Rock-hard stubborn," the Warder mused. "Maybe stubborn enough to save yourself, in the end. Remember the times we live in, blacksmith. Remember what Moiraine Sedai told you. In these times many things are dissolving, and breaking apart. Old barriers weaken, old walls crumble. The barriers between what is and what was, between what is and what will be." His voice turned grim. "The walls of the Dark One's prison. This may be the end of an Age. We may see a new Age born before we die. Or perhaps it is the end of Ages, the end of time itself. The end of the world." Suddenly he grinned, but his grin was as dark as a scowl; his eyes sparkled merrily, laughing at the foot of the gallows. "But that's not for us to worry about, eh, blacksmith? We'll fight the Shadow as long as we have breath, and if it overruns us, we'll go under biting and clawing. You Two Rivers folk are too stubborn to surrender. Don't you worry whether the Dark One has stirred in your life. You are back among friends, now. Remember, the Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, and even the Dark One cannot change that, not with Moiraine to watch over you. But we had better find your friends soon."

"wʌt dʒju min?"

"What do you mean?"

"ðeɪ hæv noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs tə pɹətɛk ðɛm. blæksmɪθ, pɝhæps ðə wɔlz əv wikən ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hɪmsɛlf tə tʌtʃ ɪvɛns. nɑt wɪð ə fɹi hænd, əɹ wid bi dʌn ɔlɹɛɾi, bʌt meɪbi taɪni ʃɪftɪŋz ɪn ðə θɹɛdz. ə tʃæns tɝnɪŋ ʌv wʌn kɔɹnɝ ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ənʌðɝ, ə tʃæns miɾɪŋ, ə tʃæns wɝd, əɹ wʌt simz laɪk tʃæns, ən ðeɪ kəd bi soʊ fɑɹ ʌndɝ ðə ʃædoʊ nɑɾ ivən mɔɪɹeɪn kəd bɹɪŋ əm bæk."

"They have no Aes Sedai touching the True Source to protect them. Blacksmith, perhaps the walls have weakened enough for the Dark One himself to touch events. Not with a free hand, or we'd be done already, but maybe tiny shiftings in the threads. A chance turning of one corner instead of another, a chance meeting, a chance word, or what seems like chance, and they could be so far under the Shadow not even Moiraine could bring them back."

"wi hæv tə faɪn ðɛm," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡeɪv ə ɡɹʌn ʌv ə læf.

"We have to find them," Perrin said, and the Warder gave a grunt of a laugh.

"wʌɾ əv aɪ bɪn seɪɪŋ? ɡɛt səm slip, blæksmɪθ." lænz kloʊk swʌŋ bæk ɝaʊn ɪm əz i stʊd. ɪn ðə feɪn laɪt fɹəm faɪɝ ən mun i simd ɔlmoʊs pɑɹɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊz bɪɑnd. "wi hæv ə hɑɹd fju deɪz tə keɪɛmlɪn. dʒʌs jə pɹeɪ wi faɪn əm ðɛɹ."

"What have I been saying? Get some sleep, blacksmith." Lan's cloak swung back around him as he stood. In the faint light from fire and moon he seemed almost part of the shadows beyond. "We have a hard few days to Caemlyn. Just you pray we find them there."

"bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn . . . ʃi kən faɪn əm ɛniwɛɹ, kænt ʃi? ʃi sɛz ʃi kæn."

"But Moiraine . . . she can find them anywhere, can't she? She says she can."

"bʌt kən ʃi faɪn əm ɪn taɪm? ɪf ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf tə teɪk ə hæn hɪmsɛlf, taɪm ɪz ɹʌnɪŋ aʊt. jə pɹeɪ wi faɪn əm ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, blæksmɪθ, əɹ wi meɪ ɔl bi lɔst."

"But can she find them in time? If the Dark One is strong enough to take a hand himself, time is running out. You pray we find them in Caemlyn, blacksmith, or we may all be lost."


tʃæptɝ θɝɾinaɪn


CHAPTER 39

wivɪŋ ə ðə wɛb


Weaving of the Web

ɹænd lʊk daʊn ɑn ðə kɹaʊdz fɹəm ðə haɪ wɪndoʊ ʌv ɪz ɹum ɪn ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ. ðeɪ ɹæn ʃaʊɾɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə stʃɹit, ɔl stʃɹimɪŋ ɪn ðə seɪm dɝɛkʃən, weɪvɪŋ pɛnəns ən bænɝz, ðə waɪt laɪən stændɪŋ ɡɑɹɾ ɑn ə θaʊzən filz ə ɹɛd. keɪɛmlaɪnɝz ən aʊtləndɝz, ðeɪ ɹæn təɡɛðɝ, ən fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ noʊ wʌn əpɪɹd tə wɑnə bæʃ ɛniwʌn ɛlsəz hɛd. tədeɪ, meɪbi, ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli wʌn fækʃən.

Rand looked down on the crowds from the high window of his room in The Queen's Blessing. They ran shouting along the street, all streaming in the same direction, waving pennants and banners, the white lion standing guard on a thousand fields of red. Caemlyners and outlanders, they ran together, and for a change no one appeared to want to bash anyone else's head. Today, maybe, there was only one faction.

hi tɝn fɹəm ðə wɪndoʊ ɡɹɪnɪŋ. nɛks tə ðə deɪ wən ɛɡwin ən pɛɹɪn wɔkt ɪn, əlaɪv ən læfɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌt ðeɪ hæd sin, ðɪs wɑz ðə deɪ hi hæd bɪn weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ moʊst.

He turned from the window grinning. Next to the day when Egwene and Perrin walked in, alive and laughing over what they had seen, this was the day he had been waiting for most.

"ɑɹ jə kʌmɪŋ?" hi æskt əɡɛn.

"Are you coming?" he asked again.

mæt ɡlaʊɝd fɹəm wɛɹ i leɪ kɝld ʌp ɪn ə bɔl ɑn ɪz bɛd. "teɪk ðət tʃɹɑlɑk jəɹ soʊ fɹɛnli wɪð."

Mat glowered from where he lay curled up in a ball on his bed. "Take that Trolloc you're so friendly with."

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz, mæt, hiz nɑɾ ə tʃɹɑlɑk. jəɹ dʒʌs biɪŋ stʌbɝn stupəd. haʊ mɛni taɪmz dʒju wɑnə hæv ðɪs ɑɹɡjəmənt? laɪt, ɪts nɑɾ əz ɪf jud nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv oʊɡiɝ bɪfɔɹ."

"Blood and ashes, Mat, he's not a Trolloc. You're just being stubborn stupid. How many times do you want to have this argument? Light, it's not as if you'd never heard of Ogier before."

"aɪ nɛvɝ hɝd ðeɪ lʊk laɪk tʃɹɑləks." mæt pʊʃt ɪz feɪs ɪndə hɪz pɪloʊ ən kɝl hɪmsɛlf taɪɾɝ.

"I never heard they looked like Trollocs." Mat pushed his face into his pillow and curled himself tighter.

"stʌbɝn stupəd," ɹænd mʌɾɝd. "haʊ lɔŋ ɑɹ jə gɑnə haɪɾ ʌp hɪɹ? aɪm nɑt gɑnə kip bɹɪŋɪŋ jə jəɹ milz ʌp ɔl ðoʊz stɛɹz fɝɛvɝ. jə kəd də wɪð ə bæθ, tu." mæt ʃɹʌɡd ɝaʊn ɑn ðə bɛɾ əz ɪf i wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɝoʊ dipɝ ɪndə ɪt. ɹænd saɪd, ðən wɛn tə ðə dɔɹ. "læs tʃæns tə ɡoʊ təɡɛðɝ, mæt. aɪm livɪŋ naʊ." hi kloʊz ðə dɔɹ sloʊli, hoʊpɪŋ ðət mæt wəd tʃeɪnʒ ɪz maɪnd, bʌɾ ɪz fɹɛn dɪd nɑt stɝ. ðə dɔɹ klɪkt ʃʌt.

"Stubborn stupid," Rand muttered. "How long are you going to hide up here? I'm not going to keep bringing you your meals up all those stairs forever. You could do with a bath, too." Mat shrugged around on the bed as if he were trying to burrow deeper into it. Rand sighed, then went to the door. "Last chance to go together, Mat. I'm leaving now." He closed the door slowly, hoping that Mat would change his mind, but his friend did not stir. The door clicked shut.

ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ, hi lin əɡɛns ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm. mæstɝ ɡɪl sɛd ðəɹ wɑz ən oʊld wʊmən tu stʃɹits oʊvɝ, mʌðɝ ɡɹʌb, hu soʊld ɝbz ən poʊltəsəz, bɪsaɪdz bɝθɪŋ beɪbiz, tɛndɪŋ ðə sɪk, ən tɛlɪŋ fɔɹtʃənz. ʃi saʊndəɾ ə lɪɾəl laɪk ə wɪzdəm. nɪneɪiv wɑz u mæt niɾəd, əɹ meɪbi mɔɪɹeɪn, bʌt mʌðɝ ɡɹʌb wɑz u hi hæd. bɹɪŋɪŋ əɹ tə ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ maɪt bɹɪŋ ðə ɹɔŋ kaɪndə ətɛnʃən əz wɛl, ðoʊ, ɪf ʃi wəɾ ivən kʌm. fəɹ əɹ əz wɛl əz fəɹ mæt ən hɪm.

In the hallway, he leaned against the doorframe. Master Gill said there was an old woman two streets over, Mother Grubb, who sold herbs and poultices, besides birthing babies, tending the sick, and telling fortunes. She sounded a little like a Wisdom. Nynaeve was who Mat needed, or maybe Moiraine, but Mother Grubb was who he had. Bringing her to The Queen's Blessing might bring the wrong kind of attention as well, though, if she would even come. For her as well as for Mat and him.

ɝbələsts ən hɛdʒ-dɑktɝz wɝ laɪɪŋ loʊ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ɹaɪt naʊ; ðəɹ wɑz tɔk əɡɛnst ɛniwʌn u dɪɾ ɛni kaɪndə hilɪŋ, əɹ fɔɹtʃəntɛlɪŋ. ɛvɹi naɪt ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ wɑz skɹɔld ɑn dɔɹz wɪð ə fɹi hænd, səmtaɪmz ivən ɪn ðə deɪlaɪt, ən pipəl maɪt fɝɡɛɾ u hæd kjʊɹd ðɛɹ fivɝz ən poʊltəs ðɛɹ tuθætʃɪz wən ðə kɹaɪ ʌv dɑɹkfɹɛnd wɛn ʌp. ðət wɑz ðə tɛmpɝ ɪn ðə sɪɾi.

Herbalists and hedge-doctors were lying low in Caemlyn right now; there was talk against anyone who did any kind of healing, or fortunetelling. Every night the Dragon's Fang was scrawled on doors with a free hand, sometimes even in the daylight, and people might forget who had cured their fevers and poulticed their toothaches when the cry of Darkfriend went up. That was the temper in the city.

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əz ɪf mæt wɝ ɹɪli sɪk. hi eɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɹænd kæɹiɾ ʌp fɹəm ðə kɪtʃən - hi wəd teɪk nʌθɪŋ fɹəm ɛniwʌn ɛlsəz hænd, ðoʊ - ən nɛvɝ kəmpleɪn əbaʊɾ eɪks əɹ fivɝ. hi dʒʌst ɹəfjuz tə liv ðə ɹum. bʌt ɹænd hæd bɪn ʃʊɹ tədeɪ wəd bɹɪŋ ɪm aʊt.

It was not as if Mat were really sick. He ate everything Rand carried up from the kitchen - he would take nothing from anyone else's hand, though - and never complained about aches or fever. He just refused to leave the room. But Rand had been sure today would bring him out.

hi sɛɾəld ɪz kloʊk ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən hɪtʃt ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt ɝaʊn soʊ ðə sɔɹd, ən ðə ɹɛd klɔθ ɹæpt ɝaʊn ɪt, wɑz kʌvɝd mɔɹ.

He settled his cloak on his shoulders and hitched his sword belt around so the sword, and the red cloth wrapped around it, was covered more.

ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə stɛɹz i mɛt mæstɝ ɡɪl dʒʌst stɑɹɾɪŋ ʌp. "ðɛɹz sʌmwʌn bɪn æskɪŋ æftɝ jə ɪn ðə sɪɾi," ði ɪnkipɝ sɛɾ ɝaʊn ɪz paɪp. ɹænd fɛlt ə sɝdʒ ə hoʊp. "æskɪŋ æftɝ jə ən ðoʊz fɹɛnz ə jʊɹz, baɪ neɪm. jə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz, ɛniweɪ. simz tə wɑn jə θɹi lædz moʊst."

At the foot of the stairs he met Master Gill just starting up. "There's someone been asking after you in the city," the innkeeper said around his pipe. Rand felt a surge of hope. "Asking after you and those friends of yours, by name. You younglings, anyway. Seems to want you three lads most."

æŋzaɪəɾi ɹipleɪs hoʊp. "hu?" ɹænd æskt. hi stɪl kəd nɑt hɛlp ɡlænsɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn ðə hɔl. ɪksɛp fəɹ ðeɪ tu, ɪt wɑz ɛmpti, fɹəm ði ɛɡzɪɾ ɪndə ði æli tə ðə kɑmən ɹum dɔɹ.

Anxiety replaced hope. "Who?" Rand asked. He still could not help glancing up and down the hall. Except for they two, it was empty, from the exit into the alley to the common room door.

"doʊnt noʊ hɪz neɪm. dʒʌs hɝɾ əbaʊt hɪm. aɪ hɪɹ moʊs θɪŋz ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ɪvɛntʃəwəli. bɛɡɝ." ði ɪnkipɝ ɡɹʌntɪd. "hæf mæd, aɪ hɪɹ. ivən soʊ, hi kəd teɪk ðə kwinz baʊnti ət ðə pæləs, ivən wɪð θɪŋz əz hɑɹɾ əz ðeɪ ɑɹ. ɑn haɪ deɪz, ðə kwin ɡɪvz ɪɾ aʊt wɪð əɹ oʊn hænz, ən ðɛɹz nɛvɝ ɛniwʌn tɝn əweɪ fəɹ ɛni ɹizən. noʊ wʌn nidz tə bɛɡ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ivən ə mæn ʌndɝ wɔɹən kæn bi ɝɛstəd waɪl hiz teɪkɪŋ ðə kwinz baʊnti."

"Don't know his name. Just heard about him. I hear most things in Caemlyn, eventually. Beggar." The innkeeper grunted. "Half mad, I hear. Even so, he could take the Queen's Bounty at the Palace, even with things as hard as they are. On High Days, the Queen gives it out with her own hands, and there's never anyone turned away for any reason. No one needs to beg in Caemlyn. Even a man under warrant can't be arrested while he's taking the Queen's Bounty."

"eɪ dɑɹkfɹɛnd?" ɹænd sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli. ɪf ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnz noʊ əɹ neɪmz. . . .

"A Darkfriend?" Rand said reluctantly. If the Darkfriends know our names. . . .

"juv ɡɑt dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɑn ðə bɹeɪn, jʌŋ fɛloʊ. ðəɹ ɝaʊnd, sɝɾənli, bʌt dʒʌs kəz ðə waɪtkloʊks əv ɛvɹibɑɾi stɝɾ ʌp ɪz noʊ ɹizən fəɹ jə tə θɪŋk ðə sɪɾiz fʊl ə ðɛm. dʒju noʊ wʌt ɹumɝ ðoʊz ɪɾiəts əv stɑɹɾəd naʊ? 'stʃɹeɪnʒ ʃeɪps.' kən jə bɪliv ɪt? stʃɹeɪnʒ ʃeɪps kɹipɪŋ ɝaʊn aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi ɪn ðə naɪt." ði ɪnkipɝ tʃʌkəl tɪl ɪz bɛli ʃʊk.

"You've got Darkfriends on the brain, young fellow. They're around, certainly, but just because the Whitecloaks have everybody stirred up is no reason for you to think the city's full of them. Do you know what rumor those idiots have started now? 'Strange shapes.' Can you believe it? Strange shapes creeping around outside the city in the night." The innkeeper chuckled till his belly shook.

ɹænd dɪd nɑt fil laɪk læfɪŋ. haɪəm kɪntʃ hæd tɔkt əbaʊt stʃɹeɪnʒ ʃeɪps, ən ðəɹ hæd ʃʊɹli ɪnʌf bɪn ə feɪd bæk ðɛɹ. "wʌt kaɪndə ʃeɪps?"

Rand did not feel like laughing. Hyam Kinch had talked about strange shapes, and there had surely enough been a Fade back there. "What kind of shapes?"

"wʌt kaɪnd? aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt kaɪnd. stʃɹeɪnʒ ʃeɪps. tʃɹɑləks, pɹɑbli. ðə ʃæɾoʊmən. luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ hɪmsɛlf, kʌm bæk fɪfti fit haɪ. wʌt kaɪndə ʃeɪps dʒju θɪŋk pipəl wɪl ɪmædʒən naʊ ði aɪdiəz ɪn ðɛɹ hɛdz? ɪts nʌn ʌv əɹ wɝi." mæstɝ ɡɪl aɪɾ ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "ɡoʊɪŋ aʊt, ɑɹ ju? wɛl, aɪ kæn seɪ aɪ kɛɹ fəɹ ɪt, maɪsɛlf, ivən tədeɪ, bʌt ðɛɹz hɑɹdli ɛnibəɾi lɛf hɪɹ bʌt mi. nɑt jəɹ fɹɛnd?"

"What kind? I don't know what kind. Strange shapes. Trollocs, probably. The Shadowman. Lews Therin Kinslayer himself, come back fifty feet high. What kind of shapes do you think people will imagine now the idea's in their heads? It's none of our worry." Master Gill eyed him for a moment. "Going out, are you? Well, I can't say I care for it, myself, even today, but there's hardly anybody left here but me. Not your friend?"

"mæts nɑt filɪŋ vɛɹi wɛl. meɪbi leɪɾɝ."

"Mat's not feeling very well. Maybe later."

"wɛl, bi ðəɾ əz ɪt meɪ. jə wɑtʃ jɝsɛlf, naʊ. ivən tədeɪ ɡʊd kwinz mɛn wɪl bi aʊtnʌmbɝɾ aʊt ðɛɹ, laɪt bɝn ðə deɪ aɪ ɛvɝ θɔt tə si ɪt soʊ. bɛs jə liv baɪ ði æliweɪ. ðɛɹz tu ʌv ðoʊz blʌd-bi-dæm tʃɹeɪɾɝz sɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit wɑtʃɪŋ maɪ fɹʌn dɔɹ. ðeɪ noʊ wɛɹ aɪ stænd, baɪ ðə laɪt!"

"Well, be that as it may. You watch yourself, now. Even today good Queen's men will be outnumbered out there, Light burn the day I ever thought to see it so. Best you leave by the alleyway. There's two of those blood-be-damned traitors sitting across the street watching my front door. They know where I stand, by the Light!"

ɹænd stʌk ɪz hɛɾ aʊɾ ən lʊk boʊθ weɪz bɪfɔɹ slɪpɪŋ ɪndə ði æli. ə bʌlki mæn mæstɝ ɡɪl hæd haɪɝd stʊɾ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ði æli, linɪŋ ɑn ə spɪɹ ən wɑtʃɪŋ ðə pipəl ɹʌn pæst wɪð ən əpɛɹən læk ʌv ɪntʃɹəst. ɪt wɑz oʊnli əpɛɹənt, ɹænd nu. ðə fɛloʊ - hɪz neɪm wɑz læmɡwɪn - sɔ ɛvɹiθɪŋ θɹu ðoʊz hɛvi-lɪɾɪd aɪz, ən fəɹ ɔl ɪz bʊlɪʃ bʌlk i kəd muv laɪk ə kæt. hi ɔlsoʊ θɔt kwin mɔɹɡeɪs wɑz ðə laɪt meɪd flɛʃ, əɹ nɪɹ ɪnʌf. ðəɹ wɝ ə dʌzən laɪk ɪm skæɾɝd ɝaʊn ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ.

Rand stuck his head out and looked both ways before slipping into the alley. A bulky man Master Gill had hired stood at the head of the alley, leaning on a spear and watching the people run past with an apparent lack of interest. It was only apparent, Rand knew. The fellow - his name was Lamgwin - saw everything through those heavy-lidded eyes, and for all his bullish bulk he could move like a cat. He also thought Queen Morgase was the Light made flesh, or near enough. There were a dozen like him scattered around The Queen's Blessing.

læmɡwɪnz ɪɹ twɪtʃt wən ɹænd ɹitʃt ðə maʊθ ə ði æli, bʌɾ i nɛvɝ tʊk ɪz dɪsɪntɝəst ɔf ðə stʃɹit. ɹænd nu ðə mæn hæd hɝɾ ɪm kʌmɪŋ.

Lamgwin's ear twitched when Rand reached the mouth of the alley, but he never took his disinterest off the street. Rand knew the man had heard him coming.

"wɑtʃ jəɹ bæk tədeɪ, mæn." læmɡwɪnz vɔɪs saʊndəd laɪk ɡɹævəl ɪn ə pæn. "wɛn ðə tʃɹʌbəl stɑɹts, jəl bi ə hændi wʌn tə hæv hɪɹ, nɑt sʌmwɛɹ wɪð ə naɪf ɪn jəɹ bæk."

"Watch your back today, man." Lamgwin's voice sounded like gravel in a pan. "When the trouble starts, you'll be a handy one to have here, not somewhere with a knife in your back."

ɹænd ɡlænst ət ðə blɑki mæn, bʌɾ ɪz sɝpɹaɪz wɑz mjuɾɪd. hi ɔlweɪz tʃɹaɪd tə kip ðə sɔɹɾ aʊɾ ə saɪt, bʌt ðɪs wɑz nɑt ðə fɝs taɪm wʌn ə mæstɝ ɡɪlz mɛn hæɾ əsumd i wəd noʊ hɪz weɪ ɪn ə faɪt. læmɡwɪn dɪd nɑt lʊk bæk ət hɪm. ðə mænz dʒɑb wɑz ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ði ɪn, ən i dɪɾ ɪt.

Rand glanced at the blocky man, but his surprise was muted. He always tried to keep the sword out of sight, but this was not the first time one of Master Gill's men had assumed he would know his way in a fight. Lamgwin did not look back at him. The man's job was guarding the inn, and he did it.

pʊʃɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd bæk ə lɪɾəl fɝðɝ ʌndɝ ɪz kloʊk, ɹænd dʒɔɪn ðə floʊ ʌv pipəl. hi sɔ ðə tu mɛn ði ɪnkipɝ hæd mɛnʃənd, stændɪŋ ɑn ʌptɝn bæɹəlz əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit fɹəm ði ɪn soʊ ðeɪ kəd si oʊvɝ ðə kɹaʊd. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðeɪ noʊɾəst ɪm kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði æli. ðeɪ meɪd noʊ sikɹəɾ ə ðɛɹ əlidʒəns. nɑɾ oʊnli wɝ ðɛɹ sɔɹdz ɹæpt ɪn waɪt taɪd wɪð ɹɛd, ðeɪ wɔɹ waɪɾ ɑɹmbænz ən waɪt kɑkeɪdz ɑn ðɛɹ hæts.

Pushing his sword back a little further under his cloak, Rand joined the flow of people. He saw the two men the innkeeper had mentioned, standing on upturned barrels across the street from the inn so they could see over the crowd. He did not think they noticed him coming out of the alley. They made no secret of their allegiance. Not only were their swords wrapped in white tied with red, they wore white armbands and white cockades on their hats.

hi hæd nɑt bɪn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ lɝnɪŋ ðət ɹɛd ɹæpɪŋz ɑn ə sɔɹd, əɹ ə ɹɛɾ ɑɹmbæn əɹ kɑkeɪd, mɛn səpɔɹt fəɹ kwin mɔɹɡeɪs. waɪt sɛd ðə kwin ən əɹ ɪnvɑlvmənt wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ ən tɑɹ vəlɑn wɝ tə bleɪm fəɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət hæd ɡɔn ɹɔŋ. fəɹ ðə wɛðɝ, ən ðə feɪl kɹɑps. meɪbi ivən fəɹ ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən.

He had not been in Caemlyn long before learning that red wrappings on a sword, or a red armband or cockade, meant support for Queen Morgase. White said the Queen and her involvement with Aes Sedai and Tar Valon were to blame for everything that had gone wrong. For the weather, and the failed crops. Maybe even for the false Dragon.

hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɡɛɾ ɪnvɑlvd ɪn keɪɛmlɪn pɑlətɪks. oʊnli, ɪt wɑz tu leɪt, naʊ. ɪt wɑz nɑt dʒʌs ðəɾ i hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi tʃoʊzən - baɪ æksəɾənt, bʌt ðəɹ ɪt wɑz. mæɾɝz ɪn ðə sɪɾi hæd ɡɔn bɪɑn lɛɾɪŋ ɛniwʌn steɪ nutʃɹəl. ivən aʊtləndɝz wɔɹ kɑkeɪdz ən ɑɹmbænz, əɹ ɹæp ðɛɹ sɔɹdz, ən mɔɹ wɔɹ ðə waɪt ðən ðə ɹɛd. meɪbi səm ə ðɛm dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðət weɪ, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ fɑɹ fɹəm hoʊm ən ðət wɑz ðə weɪ sɛntəmənt wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. mɛn u səpɔɹɾəd ðə kwin wɛn əbaʊɾ ɪn ɡɹups fəɹ ðɛɹ oʊn pɹətɛkʃən, wən ðeɪ wɛn aʊɾ əɾ ɔl.

He did not want to get involved in Caemlyn politics. Only, it was too late, now. It was not just that he had already chosen - by accident, but there it was. Matters in the city had gone beyond letting anyone stay neutral. Even outlanders wore cockades and armbands, or wrapped their swords, and more wore the white than the red. Maybe some of them did not think that way, but they were far from home and that was the way sentiment was running in Caemlyn. Men who supported the Queen went about in groups for their own protection, when they went out at all.

tədeɪ, ðoʊ, ɪt wɑz dɪfɹənt. ɑn ðə sɝfəs, ət list. tədeɪ, keɪɛmlɪn sɛləbɹeɪɾəd ə vɪktɝi ʌv ðə laɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə ʃædoʊ. tədeɪ ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən wɑz biɪŋ bɹɔɾ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, tə bi dɪspleɪd bɪfɔɹ ðə kwin bɪfɔɹ i wɑz teɪkən nɔɹθ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn.

Today, though, it was different. On the surface, at least. Today, Caemlyn celebrated a victory of the Light over the Shadow. Today the false Dragon was being brought into the city, to be displayed before the Queen before he was taken north to Tar Valon.

noʊ wʌn tɔkt əbaʊt ðət pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. noʊ wʌn bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd dil wɪð ə mæn u kəɾ æktʃəli  wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt. ðə laɪt hæd dɪfiɾəd ðə ʃædoʊ, ən soʊlʒɝz fɹəm ændɝ hæd bɪn ɪn ðə fɔɹfɹʌn ə ðə bæɾəl. fəɹ tədeɪ, ðət wɑz ɔl ðət wɑz ɪmpɔɹɾənt. fəɹ tədeɪ, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls kəd bi fɝɡɑɾən.

No one talked about that part of it. No one but the Aes Sedai could deal with a man who could actually wield the One Power, of course, but no one wanted to talk about it. The Light had defeated the Shadow, and soldiers from Andor had been in the forefront of the battle. For today, that was all that was important. For today, everything else could be forgotten.

əɹ kəɾ ɪt, ɹænd wʌndɝd. ðə kɹaʊd ɹæn, sɪŋɪŋ ən weɪvɪŋ bænɝz, læfɪŋ, bʌt mɛn dɪspleɪɪŋ ðə ɹɛd kɛp təɡɛðɝ ɪn nɑts ə tɛn əɹ twɛnti, ən ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wɪmən əɹ tʃɪlʒɹən wɪð ðɛm. hi θɔt ðəɹ wɝ ət lis tɛn mɛn ʃoʊɪŋ waɪt fəɹ ɛvɹi wʌn pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ əlidʒəns tə ðə kwin. nɑt fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm, hi wɪʃt waɪt klɔθ hæd bɪn ðə tʃipɝ. bʌt wəd mæstɝ ɡɪl əv hɛlpt ɪf jud bɪn ʃoʊɪŋ ðə waɪt?

Or could it, Rand wondered. The crowd ran, singing and waving banners, laughing, but men displaying the red kept together in knots of ten or twenty, and there were no women or children with them. He thought there were at least ten men showing white for every one proclaiming allegiance to the Queen. Not for the first time, he wished white cloth had been the cheaper. But would Master Gill have helped if you'd been showing the white?

ðə kɹaʊd wɑz soʊ θɪk ðət dʒɑsəlɪŋ wɑz ɪnɛvəɾəbəl. ivən waɪtkloʊks dɪd nɑɾ ɛndʒɔɪ ðɛɹ lɪɾəl oʊpən speɪsəz ɪn ðə θɹɔŋ tədeɪ. əz ɹænd lɛt ðə kɹaʊd kæɹi hɪm təwɔɹd ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi, hi ɹilaɪz ðət nɑɾ ɔl ænəmɑsəɾiz wɝ biɪŋ ɹeɪn ɪn. hi sɔ wʌn ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, wʌn ə θɹi, bʌmp soʊ hɑɹɾ i ɔlmoʊs fɛl. ðə waɪtkloʊk bɛɹli kɑt hɪmsɛlf ən stɑɹɾəd ən æŋɡɹi oʊθ ət ðə mæn u hæd bʌmpt ɪm wən ənʌðɝ mæn stæɡɝɾ ɪm wɪð ə dɪlɪbɝɪt, eɪmd ʃoʊldɝ. bɪfɔɹ mæɾɝz kəd ɡoʊ ɛni fɝðɝ ðə waɪtkloʊks kəmpænjənz pʊld ɪm oʊvɝ tə ðə saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit tə wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd ʃɛltɝ ɪn ə dɔɹweɪ. ðə θɹi sim kɑt bɪtwin ðɛɹ nɔɹməl ɡlɛɹɪŋ stɛɹ ən dɪsbɪlif. ðə kɹaʊd stʃɹimd ɑn baɪ əz ɪf nʌn hæd noʊɾəst, ən pɝhæps nʌn hæd.

The crowd was so thick that jostling was inevitable. Even Whitecloaks did not enjoy their little open spaces in the throng today. As Rand let the crowd carry him toward the Inner City, he realized that not all animosities were being reined in. He saw one of the Children of the Light, one of three, bumped so hard he almost fell. The Whitecloak barely caught himself and started an angry oath at the man who had bumped him when another man staggered him with a deliberate, aimed shoulder. Before matters could go any further the Whitecloak's companions pulled him over to the side of the street to where they could shelter in a doorway. The three seemed caught between their normal glaring stare and disbelief. The crowd streamed on by as if none had noticed, and perhaps none had.

noʊ wʌn wʊɾə dɛɹd də sətʃ ə θɪŋ tu deɪz ɝliɝ. mɔɹ, ɹænd ɹilaɪzd, ðə mɛn u hæd dʌn ðə bʌmpɪŋ wɔɹ waɪt kɑkeɪdz ɑn ðɛɹ hæts. ɪt wɑz waɪdli bɪliv ðə waɪtkloʊks səpɔɹɾəd ðoʊz u əpoʊz ðə kwin ən əɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ ædvaɪzɝ, bʌt ðət meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns. mɛn wɝ duɪŋ θɪŋz ʌv wɪtʃ ðeɪ hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ θɔt. dʒɑsəlɪŋ ə waɪtkloʊk, tədeɪ. təmɑɹoʊ, pɝhæps pʊlɪŋ daʊn ə kwin? sʌɾənli hi wɪʃt ðəɹ wɝ ə fju mɔɹ mɛn kloʊs tə hɪm ʃoʊɪŋ ɹɛd; dʒɑsəl baɪ waɪt kɑkeɪdz ən ɑɹmbænz, hi əbɹʌpli fɛl vɛɹi əloʊn.

No one would have dared do such a thing two days earlier. More, Rand realized, the men who had done the bumping wore white cockades on their hats. It was widely believed the Whitecloaks supported those who opposed the Queen and her Aes Sedai advisor, but that made no difference. Men were doing things of which they had never before thought. Jostling a Whitecloak, today. Tomorrow, perhaps pulling down a Queen? Suddenly he wished there were a few more men close to him showing red; jostled by white cockades and armbands, he abruptly felt very alone.

ðə waɪtkloʊks noʊɾəst ɪm lʊkɪŋ əɾ əm ən stɛɹd bæk əz ɪf miɾɪŋ ə tʃælənʒ. hi lɛɾ ə sɪŋɪŋ swɝl ɪn ðə kɹaʊd swip ɪm aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ saɪt, ən dʒɔɪn ɪn ðɛɹ sɔŋ.

The Whitecloaks noticed him looking at them and stared back as if meeting a challenge. He let a singing swirl in the crowd sweep him out of their sight, and joined in their song.

"fɔɹwɝd ðə laɪənfɔɹwɝd ðə laɪənðə waɪt laɪən teɪks ðə filʒɹɔɹ dɪfaɪəns ət ðə ʃædoʊfɔɹwɝd ðə laɪənfɔɹwɝd, ændɝ tʃɹaɪʌmfənt."

"Forward the Lion,forward the Lion,the White Lion takes the field.Roar defiance at the Shadow.Forward the Lion,forward, Andor triumphant."

ðə ɹut ðət wəd bɹɪŋ ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən ɪndə keɪɛmlɪn wɑz wɛl noʊn. ðoʊz stʃɹits ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ kɛp klɪɹ baɪ sɑləd laɪnz ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz ən ɹɛd-kloʊk pɪkmɛn, bʌt pipəl pæk ði ɛdʒəz ə ðɛm ʃoʊldɝ tə ʃoʊldɝ, ivən ðə wɪndoʊz ən ðə ɹuftɑps. ɹænd wɝkt ɪz weɪ ɪndə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɡɛt kloʊsɝ tə ðə pæləs. hi hæd səm θɔɾ ʌv æktʃəli  siɪŋ lɑɡən dɪspleɪd bɪfɔɹ ðə kwin. tə si ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən ən ə kwin, boʊθ . . . ðət wɑz sʌmθɪŋ i hæd nɛvɝ dʒɹimd ə bæk hoʊm.

The route that would bring the false Dragon into Caemlyn was well known. Those streets themselves were kept clear by solid lines of the Queen's Guards and red-cloaked pikemen, but people packed the edges of them shoulder to shoulder, even the windows and the rooftops. Rand worked his way into the Inner City, trying to get closer to the Palace. He had some thought of actually seeing Logain displayed before the Queen. To see the false Dragon and a Queen, both . . . that was something he had never dreamed of back home.

ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi wɑz bɪlt ɑn hɪlz, ən mʌtʃ ʌv wʌt ði oʊɡiɝ hæd meɪd stɪl ɹɪmeɪnd. wɛɹ stʃɹits ɪn ðə nu sɪɾi moʊsli ɹæn ɛvɹi wɪtʃ weɪ ɪn ə kɹeɪzi-kwɪlt, hɪɹ ðeɪ fɑloʊd ðə kɝvz ə ðə hɪlz əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ə nætʃɹəl pɑɹɾ ə ði ɝθ. swipɪŋ ɹaɪzəz ən dɪps pɹizɛntəd nu ən sɝpɹaɪzɪŋ vɪstəz əɾ ɛvɹi tɝn. pɑɹks sin fɹəm dɪfɹən æŋɡəlz, ivən fɹəm əbʌv, wɛɹ ðɛɹ wɔks ən mɑnjəməns meɪd pæɾɝnz plizɪŋ tə ði aɪ ðoʊ bɛɹli tʌtʃt wɪð ɡɹin. taʊɝz sʌɾənli ɹɪvild, taɪl-kʌvɝd wɔlz ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt wɪð ə hʌnʒɹəd tʃeɪnʒɪŋ kʌlɝz. sʌɾən ɹaɪzəz wɛɹ ðə ɡeɪz wɑz θɹoʊn aʊɾ əkɹɔs ði ɪntaɪɝ sɪɾi tə ðə ɹoʊlɪŋ pleɪnz ən fɔɹəsts bɪɑnd. ɔl ɪn ɔl, ɪt wʊɾə bɪn sʌmθɪŋ tə si ɪf nɑt fəɹ ðə kɹaʊd ðət hɝiɾ ɪm əlɔŋ bɪfɔɹ i hæɾ ə tʃæns tə ɹɪli teɪk ɪɾ ɪn. ən ɔl ðoʊz kɝvɪŋ stʃɹits meɪɾ ɪɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl tə si vɛɹi fɑɹ əhɛd.

The Inner City was built on hills, and much of what the Ogier had made still remained. Where streets in the New City mostly ran every which way in a crazy-quilt, here they followed the curves of the hills as if they were a natural part of the earth. Sweeping rises and dips presented new and surprising vistas at every turn. Parks seen from different angles, even from above, where their walks and monuments made patterns pleasing to the eye though barely touched with green. Towers suddenly revealed, tile-covered walls glittering in the sunlight with a hundred changing colors. Sudden rises where the gaze was thrown out across the entire city to the rolling plains and forests beyond. All in all, it would have been something to see if not for the crowd that hurried him along before he had a chance to really take it in. And all those curving streets made it impossible to see very far ahead.

əbɹʌpli hi wɑz swɛpt ɝaʊn ə bɛnd, ən ðəɹ wɑz ðə pæləs. ðə stʃɹits, ivən fɑloʊɪŋ ðə nætʃɹəl kɑntʊɹz ə ðə lænd, hæd bɪn leɪɾ aʊt tə spaɪɹəl ɪn ɑn ðɪs - ðɪs ɡlimənz teɪl ə peɪl spaɪɹz ən ɡoʊldən doʊmz ən ɪntʃɹəkət stoʊnwɝk tʃɹeɪsɝiz, wɪð ðə bænɝ ʌv ændɝ weɪvɪŋ fɹəm ɛvɹi pɹɑmənəns, ə sɛntɝpis fəɹ wɪtʃ ɔl ði ʌðɝ vɪstəz hæd bɪn dɪzaɪnd. ɪt simd mɔɹ skʌlptɪd baɪ ən ɑɹɾəst ðən sɪmpli bɪlt laɪk ɔɹɾənɛɹi bɪldɪŋz.

Abruptly he was swept around a bend, and there was the Palace. The streets, even following the natural contours of the land, had been laid out to spiral in on this - this gleeman's tale of pale spires and golden domes and intricate stonework traceries, with the banner of Andor waving from every prominence, a centerpiece for which all the other vistas had been designed. It seemed more sculpted by an artist than simply built like ordinary buildings.

ðət ɡlɪmps ʃoʊɾ ɪm i wəd ɡɛt noʊ nɪɹɝ. noʊ wʌn wɑz biɪŋ əlaʊd kloʊs tə ðə pæləs. kwinz ɡɑɹdz meɪd skɑɹlət ɹæŋks tɛn dip flæŋkɪŋ ðə pæləs ɡeɪts. əlɔŋ ðə tɑps ə ðə waɪt wɔlz, ɑn haɪ bælkəniz ən taʊɝz, mɔɹ ɡɑɹdz stʊd ɹɪdʒɪdli stʃɹeɪt, baʊz pɹɪsaɪsli slæntəɾ əkɹɔs bɹɛstpleɪɾɪd tʃɛsts. ðeɪ, tu, lʊk laɪk sʌmθɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə ɡlimənz teɪl, ə ɡɑɹɾ ʌv ɑnɝ, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑt bɪliv ðət wɑz waɪ ðeɪ wɝ ðɛɹ. ðə klæmɝɪŋ kɹaʊd laɪnɪŋ ðə stʃɹits wɑz ɔlmoʊst sɑləd wɪð waɪt-ɹæp sɔɹdz, waɪɾ ɑɹmbænz, ən waɪt kɑkeɪdz. oʊnli hɪɹ ən ðəɹ wɑz ðə waɪt wɔl bɹoʊkən baɪ ə nɑɾ ə ɹɛd. ðə ɹɛd-junəfɔɹmd ɡɑɹdz simd ə θɪn bæɹiɝ əɡɛnst ɔl ðət waɪt.

That glimpse showed him he would get no nearer. No one was being allowed close to the Palace. Queen's Guards made scarlet ranks ten deep flanking the Palace gates. Along the tops of the white walls, on high balconies and towers, more Guards stood rigidly straight, bows precisely slanted across breastplated chests. They, too, looked like something out of a gleeman's tale, a guard of honor, but Rand did not believe that was why they were there. The clamoring crowd lining the streets was almost solid with white-wrapped swords, white armbands, and white cockades. Only here and there was the white wall broken by a knot of red. The red-uniformed guards seemed a thin barrier against all that white.

ɡɪvɪŋ ʌp ɑn meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ kloʊsɝ tə ðə pæləs, hi sɔɾ ə pleɪs wɛɹ i kəd juz ɪz haɪt tə ædvæntɪdʒ. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə bi ɪn ðə fɹʌn ɹoʊ tə si ɛvɹiθɪŋ. ðə kɹaʊd ʃɪftəd kɑnstənli, pipəl ʃʌvɪŋ tə ɡɛt nɪɹɝ ðə fɹʌnt, pipəl hɝiɪŋ ɔf tə wʌt ðeɪ θɔt wɑz ə bɛɾɝ væntədʒ pɔɪnt. ɪn wʌn ə ðoʊz ʃɪfs i faʊn hɪmsɛlf oʊnli θɹi pipəl fɹəm ði oʊpən stʃɹit, ən ɔl ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm wɝ ʃɔɹɾɝ ðən hi, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə pɪkmɛn. ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz. pipəl kɹaʊɾəd əɡɛnst ɪm fɹəm boʊθ saɪdz, swɛɾɪŋ fɹəm ðə pɹɛs ə soʊ mɛni bɑɾiz. ðoʊz bɪhaɪn ɪm mʌɾɝd əbaʊt nɑt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə si, ən tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪɡəl pæst. hi stʊɾ ɪz ɡɹaʊnd, meɪkɪŋ ən ɪmpɝviəs wɔl wɪð ðoʊz tə iðɝ saɪd. hi wɑz kɑntɛnt. wən ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən pæs baɪ, hi wəd bi kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si ðə mænz feɪs klɪɹli.

Giving up on making his way closer to the Palace, he sought a place where he could use his height to advantage. He did not have to be in the front row to see everything. The crowd shifted constantly, people shoving to get nearer the front, people hurrying off to what they thought was a better vantage point. In one of those shifts he found himself only three people from the open street, and all in front of him were shorter than he, including the pikemen. Almost everyone was. People crowded against him from both sides, sweating from the press of so many bodies. Those behind him muttered about not being able to see, and tried to wriggle past. He stood his ground, making an impervious wall with those to either side. He was content. When the false Dragon passed by, he would be close enough to see the man's face clearly.

əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹiɾ ən daʊn təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪts tə ðə nu sɪɾi, ə ɹɪpəl pæs θɹu ðə taɪt-pækt kɹaʊd; ɝaʊn ðə kɝv, ən ɛɾi ʌv pipəl wɑz dʒɹɔɪŋ bæk tə lɛt sʌmθɪŋ ɡoʊ baɪ. ɪt wɑz nɑt laɪk ðə klɪɹ speɪs ðət fɑloʊd waɪtkloʊks ɑn ɛni deɪ bʌt tədeɪ. ðiz pipəl dʒɝk ðɛmsɛlvz bæk wɪð stɑɹɾəld ɡlænsɪz ðət bɪkeɪm ɡɹɪməsɪz ə dɪsteɪst. pɹɛsɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ, ðeɪ tɝn ðɛɹ feɪsəz fɹəm wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz, bʌt wɑtʃt aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝz ə ðɛɹ aɪz əntɪl ɪt wɑz pæst.

Across the street and down toward the gates to the New City, a ripple passed through the tight-packed crowd; around the curve, an eddy of people was drawing back to let something go by. It was not like the clear space that followed Whitecloaks on any day but today. These people jerked themselves back with startled glances that became grimaces of distaste. Pressing themselves out of the way, they turned their faces from Whatever it was, but watched out of the corners of their eyes until it was past.

ʌðɝ aɪz ɝaʊn ɪm noʊɾəd ðə dɪstɝbəns, tu. kid fəɹ ðə kʌmɪŋ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən bʌt wɪð nʌθɪŋ tə də naʊ bʌt weɪt, ðə kɹaʊd faʊn ɛniθɪŋ əɾ ɔl wɝði ʌv kɑmɛnt. hi hɝd spɛkjəleɪʃən ɹeɪnʒɪŋ fɹəm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ tə lɑɡən hɪmsɛlf, ən ə fju kɔɹsɝ sədʒɛstʃənz ðət bɹɔt ɹʌf læftɝ fɹəm ðə mɛn ən dɪsdeɪnfəl snɪfs fɹəm ðə wɪmən.

Other eyes around him noted the disturbance, too. Keyed for the coming of the Dragon but with nothing to do now but wait, the crowd found anything at all worthy of comment. He heard speculation ranging from an Aes Sedai to Logain himself, and a few coarser suggestions that brought rough laughter from the men and disdainful sniffs from the women.

ðə ɹɪpəl miændɝd θɹu ðə kɹaʊd, dʒɹɔɪŋ kloʊsɝ tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə stʃɹiɾ əz ɪt keɪm. noʊ wʌn sim tə hɛzəteɪɾ ɪn lɛɾɪŋ ɪt ɡoʊ wɛɹ ɪt wɑntəd, ivən ɪf ðət mɛn luzɪŋ ə ɡʊd spɑt fəɹ vjuɪŋ əz ðə kɹaʊd floʊd bæk ɪn ɑn ɪtsɛlf bɪhaɪn ðə pæsɪŋ. faɪnəli, dɝɛkli əkɹɔs fɹəm ɹænd, ðə kɹaʊd bʌlʒd ɪndə ðə stʃɹit, pʊʃɪŋ əsaɪd ɹɛd-kloʊk pɪkmɛn u stʃɹʌɡəl tə ʃʌv əm bæk, ən bɹoʊk oʊpən. ðə stupt ʃeɪp ðət ʃʌfəl hɛzɪɾəntli aʊɾ ɪndə ði oʊpən lʊk mɔɹ laɪk ə paɪl ə fɪlθi ɹæɡz ðən ə mæn. ɹænd hɝd mɝmɝz ə dɪsɡʌst ɝaʊn hɪm.

The ripple meandered through the crowd, drawing closer to the edge of the street as it came. No one seemed to hesitate in letting it go where it wanted, even if that meant losing a good spot for viewing as the crowd flowed back in on itself behind the passing. Finally, directly across from Rand, the crowd bulged into the street, pushing aside red-cloaked pikemen who struggled to shove them back, and broke open. The stooped shape that shuffled hesitantly out into the open looked more like a pile of filthy rags than a man. Rand heard murmurs of disgust around him.

ðə ɹæɡəd mæn pɔzd ɑn ðə fɑɹ ɛdʒ ə ðə stʃɹit. hɪz kaʊl, tɔɹn ən stɪf wɪð dɝt, swʌŋ bæk ən fɔɹθ əz ɪf sɝtʃɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ, əɹ lɪsnɪŋ. əbɹʌpli hi ɡeɪv ə wɝdləs kɹaɪ ən flʌŋ aʊɾ ə dɝɾi klɔ ʌv ə hænd, pɔɪntɪŋ stʃɹeɪɾ ət ɹænd. ɪmiɾiətli hi bɪɡæn tə skʌɾəl əkɹɔs ðə stʃɹit laɪk ə bʌɡ.

The ragged man paused on the far edge of the street. His cowl, torn and stiff with dirt, swung back and forth as if searching for something, or listening. Abruptly he gave a wordless cry and flung out a dirty claw of a hand, pointing straight at Rand. Immediately he began to scuttle across the street like a bug.

ðə bɛɡɝ. wʌtɛvɝ ɪl tʃæns hæd lɛd ðə mæn tə faɪn ɪm laɪk ðɪs, ɹænd wɑz sʌɾənli ʃʊɹ ðæt, dɑɹkfɹɛn əɹ nɑt, hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə miɾ ɪm feɪs-tə-feɪs. hi kəd fil ðə bɛɡɝz aɪz, laɪk ɡɹisi wɔɾɝ ɑn ɪz skɪn. ɪspɛʃli hi dɪd nɑt wɑn ðə mæn kloʊs tə hɪm hɪɹ, sɝaʊndəd baɪ pipəl bælənst ɑn ðə bɹɪŋk ə vaɪələns. ðə seɪm vɔɪsəz ðət hæd læf bɪfɔɹ naʊ kɝst ɪm əz i pʊʃt ɪz weɪ bæk, əweɪ fɹəm ðə stʃɹit.

The beggar. Whatever ill chance had led the man to find him like this, Rand was suddenly sure that, Darkfriend or not, he did not want to meet him face-to-face. He could feel the beggar's eyes, like greasy water on his skin. Especially he did not want the man close to him here, surrounded by people balanced on the brink of violence. The same voices that had laughed before now cursed him as he pushed his way back, away from the street.

hi hɝid, noʊɪŋ ðə dɛnsli pæk mæs θɹu wɪtʃ i hæd tə ʃʌv ən ɹɪɡəl wəd ɡɪv weɪ bɪfɔɹ ðə fɪlθi mæn. stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə fɔɹs ə pæθ θɹu ðə kɹaʊd, hi stæɡɝɾ ən ɔlmoʊs fɛl wən i əbɹʌpli bɹoʊk fɹi. fleɪlɪŋ ɪz ɑɹmz tə kip ɪz bæləns i tɝn ðə stæɡɝ ɪndə ə ɹʌn. pipəl pɔɪntəɾ ət hɪm; hi wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn nɑt pɹɛsɪŋ ði ʌðɝ weɪ, ən ɹʌnɪŋ ət ðæt. ʃaʊts fɑloʊd hɪm. hɪz kloʊk flæp bɪhaɪn hɪm, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ ɪz ɹɛd-klæd sɔɹd. wən i ɹilaɪz ðæt, hi ɹæn fæstɝ. ə loʊn səpɔɹɾɝ ə ðə kwin, ɹʌnɪŋ, kəd wɛl spɑɹk ə waɪt-kɑkeɪɾɪd mɑb tə pɝsut, ivən tədeɪ. hi ɹæn, lɛɾɪŋ ɪz lɔŋ lɛɡz it peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz. nɑɾ əntɪl ðə ʃaʊts wɝ lɛft fɑɹ bɪhaɪn dɪɾ i əlaʊ hɪmsɛlf tə kəlæps əɡɛnst ə wɔl, pæntɪŋ.

He hurried, knowing the densely packed mass through which he had to shove and wriggle would give way before the filthy man. Struggling to force a path through the crowd, he staggered and almost fell when he abruptly broke free. Flailing his arms to keep his balance he turned the stagger into a run. People pointed at him; he was the only one not pressing the other way, and running at that. Shouts followed him. His cloak flapped behind him, exposing his red-clad sword. When he realized that, he ran faster. A lone supporter of the Queen, running, could well spark a white-cockaded mob to pursuit, even today. He ran, letting his long legs eat paving stones. Not until the shouts were left far behind did he allow himself to collapse against a wall, panting.

hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wɛɹ i wɑz, ɪksɛp ðəɾ i wɑz stɪl wɪðɪn ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi. hi kəd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ haʊ mɛni twɪsts ən tɝnz i hæd teɪkən əlɔŋ ðoʊz kɝvɪŋ stʃɹits. pɔɪz tə ɹʌn əɡɛn, hi lʊk bæk ðə weɪ hi hæd kʌm. oʊnli wʌn pɝsən muvd ɑn ðə stʃɹit, ə wʊmən wɔkɪŋ plɑtʃədli əlɔŋ wɪð əɹ ʃɑpɪŋ bæskət. ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə sɪɾi wɑz ɡæðɝd fəɹ ə ɡlɪmps ə ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. hi kæn əv fɑloʊd mi. aɪ mʌst əv lɛft ɪm bɪhaɪnd.

He did not know where he was, except that he was still within the Inner City. He could not remember how many twists and turns he had taken along those curving streets. Poised to run again, he looked back the way he had come. Only one person moved on the street, a woman walking placidly along with her shopping basket. Almost everyone in the city was gathered for a glimpse of the false Dragon. He can't have followed me. I must have left him behind.

ðə bɛɡɝ wəd nɑt ɡɪv ʌp; hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ʌv ɪt, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt seɪ waɪ. ðət ɹæɡəd ʃeɪp wəd bi wɝkɪŋ ɪts weɪ θɹu ðə kɹaʊdz ət ðət vɛɹi mɪnət, sɝtʃɪŋ, ən ɪf ɹænd ɹɪtɝn tə si lɑɡən i ɹæn ðə ɹɪsk ʌv ə miɾɪŋ. fəɹ ə moʊmən i kənsɪɾɝd ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ i wəd nɛvɝ ɡɛɾ ənʌðɝ tʃæns tə si ə kwin, ən i hoʊpt i wəd nɛvɝ əv ənʌðɝ tə si ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. ðəɹ sim tə bi sʌmθɪŋ kaʊɝdli ɪn lɛɾɪŋ ə bɛn bɛɡɝ, ivən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, tʃeɪs ɪm ɪndə haɪɾɪŋ.

The beggar would not give up; he was sure of it, though he could not say why. That ragged shape would be working its way through the crowds at that very minute, searching, and if Rand returned to see Logain he ran the risk of a meeting. For a moment he considered going back to The Queen's Blessing, but he was sure he would never get another chance to see a Queen, and he hoped he would never have another to see a false Dragon. There seemed to be something cowardly in letting a bent beggar, even a Darkfriend, chase him into hiding.

hi lʊkt ɝaʊnd, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. ðə weɪ ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi wɑz leɪɾ aʊt, bɪldɪŋz wɝ kɛp loʊ, ɪf ðəɹ wɝ bɪldɪŋz əɾ ɔl, soʊ ðət sʌmwʌn stændɪŋ əɾ ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ spɑt wəɾ əv nʌθɪŋ tə ɪntɝʌp ðə plæn vju. ðəɹ hæd tə bi pleɪsəz fɹəm wɛɹ i kəd si ðə pɹəsɛʃən pæs wɪð ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. ivən ɪf i kəd nɑt si ðə kwin, hi kəd si lɑɡən. sʌɾənli dɪtɝmənd, hi sɛɾ ɔf.

He looked around, considering. The way the Inner City was laid out, buildings were kept low, if there were buildings at all, so that someone standing at a particular spot would have nothing to interrupt the planned view. There had to be places from where he could see the procession pass with the false Dragon. Even if he could not see the Queen, he could see Logain. Suddenly determined, he set off.

ɪn ðə nɛkst aʊɝ i faʊn sɛvɹəl sətʃ pleɪsəz, ɛvɹi læst wʌn ɔlɹɛɾi pæk tʃik-tə-tʃik wɪð pipəl əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə kɹʌʃ əlɔŋ ðə pɹəsɛʃən ɹut. ðeɪ wɝ ə sɑləd fɹʌn ʌv waɪt kɑkeɪdz ən ɑɹmbænz. noʊ ɹɛɾ əɾ ɔl. θɪŋkɪŋ wʌt ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz sɔɹd maɪt də ɪn ə kɹaʊd laɪk ðæt, hi slɪpt əweɪ kɛɹfəli, ən kwɪkli.

In the next hour he found several such places, every last one already packed cheek-to-cheek with people avoiding the crush along the procession route. They were a solid front of white cockades and armbands. No red at all. Thinking what the sight of his sword might do in a crowd like that, he slipped away carefully, and quickly.

ʃaʊɾɪŋ floʊɾəd ʌp fɹəm ðə nu sɪɾi, kɹaɪz ən ðə blɛɹɪŋ ə tʃɹʌmpəts, ðə mɑɹʃəl biɾ ə dʒɹʌmz. lɑɡən ən ɪz ɛskɔɹt wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ tə ðə pæləs.

Shouting floated up from the New City, cries and the blaring of trumpets, the martial beat of drums. Logain and his escort were already in Caemlyn, already on their way to the Palace.

dɪspɪɹəɾɪd, hi wɑndɝd ði ɔl bʌɾ ɛmpti stʃɹits, stɪl hæfhɑɹɾɪdli hoʊpɪŋ tə faɪn səm weɪ tə si lɑɡən. hɪz aɪz fɛl ɑn ðə sloʊp, bɛɹ ə bɪldɪŋz, ɹaɪzɪŋ əbʌv ðə stʃɹit wɛɹ i wɑz wɔkɪŋ. ɪn ə nɔɹməl spɹɪŋ ðə sloʊp wəd bi ən ɪkspæns ə flaʊɝz ən ɡɹæs, bʌt naʊ ɪt wɑz bɹaʊn ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə haɪ wɔl əlɔŋ ɪts kɹɛst, ə wɔl oʊvɝ wɪtʃ ðə tɑps ə tʃɹiz wɝ vɪzəbəl.

Dispirited, he wandered the all but empty streets, still halfheartedly hoping to find some way to see Logain. His eyes fell on the slope, bare of buildings, rising above the street where he was walking. In a normal spring the slope would be an expanse of flowers and grass, but now it was brown all the way to the high wall along its crest, a wall over which the tops of trees were visible.

ðɪs pɑɹɾ ə ðə stʃɹit hæd nɑt bɪn dɪzaɪn fəɹ ɛni ɡɹæn vju, bʌt dʒʌst əhɛd, oʊvɝ ðə ɹuftɑps, hi kəd si səm ə ðə pæləs spaɪɹz, tɑp baɪ waɪt laɪən bænɝz flʌɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪɡzækli wɛɹ ðə kɝv ə ðə stʃɹit ɹæn æftɝ ɪt ɹaʊndəd ðə hɪl bɪɑn ɪz saɪt, bʌɾ i sʌɾənli hæɾ ə θɔɾ əbaʊt ðət hɪltɑp wɔl.

This part of the street had not been designed for any grand view, but just ahead, over the rooftops, he could see some of the Palace spires, topped by White Lion banners fluttering in the wind. He was not sure exactly where the curve of the street ran after it rounded the hill beyond his sight, but he suddenly had a thought about that hilltop wall.

ðə dʒɹʌmz ən tʃɹʌmpəts wɝ dʒɹɔɪŋ nɪɹɝ, ðə ʃaʊɾɪŋ ɡɹoʊɪŋ laʊɾɝ. æŋkʃəsli hi skɹæmbəld ʌp ðə sloʊp. ɪt wɑz nɑt mɛn tə bi klaɪmd, bʌɾ i dʌɡ hɪz buts ɪndə ðə dɛd sɑɾ ən pʊl hɪmsɛlf ʌp juzɪŋ lifləs ʃɹʌbz əz hændhoʊlz. pæntɪŋ əz mʌtʃ wɪð dɪzaɪɝ əz ɛfɝt, hi skɹæmbəl ðə læs jɑɹdz tə ðə wɔl. ɪt ɹɪɹɾ əbʌv hɪm, izəli twaɪs ɪz haɪɾ ən mɔɹ. ði ɛɹ θʌndɝd wɪð ðə dʒɹʌmbit, ɹæŋ wɪð tʃɹʌmpət blæsts.

The drums and trumpets were drawing nearer, the shouting growing louder. Anxiously he scrambled up the slope. It was not meant to be climbed, but he dug his boots into the dead sod and pulled himself up using leafless shrubs as handholds. Panting as much with desire as effort, he scrambled the last yards to the wall. It reared above him, easily twice his height and more. The air thundered with the drumbeat, rang with trumpet blasts.

ðə feɪs ə ðə wɔl hæd bɪn lɛf mʌtʃ ɪn ðə nætʃɹəl steɪɾ ə ðə stoʊn, ðə hjudʒ blɑks fɪɾəd təɡɛðɝ soʊ wɛl ðət ðə dʒɔɪnz wɝ nɪɹli ɪnvɪzəbəl, ðə ɹʌnəs meɪkɪŋ ɪt sim ɔlmoʊst ə nætʃɹəl klɪf. ɹænd ɡɹɪnd. ðə klɪfs dʒʌs bɪɑn ðə sæn hɪlz wɝ haɪɝ, ən ivən pɛɹɪn hæd klaɪm ðoʊz. hɪz hænz sɔt ɹɑki nɑbz, hɪz buɾɪd fit faʊn ɹɪdʒəz. ðə dʒɹʌmz ɹeɪst ɪm əz i klaɪmd. hi ɹəfjuz tə lɛɾ əm wɪn. hi wəd ɹitʃ ðə tɑp bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə pæləs. ɪn ɪz heɪst, ðə stoʊn tɔɹ ɪz hænz ən skɹeɪpt ɪz niz θɹu hɪz bɹitʃɪz, bʌɾ i flʌŋ ɪz ɑɹmz oʊvɝ ðə tɑp ən hiv hɪmsɛlf ʌp wɪð ə sɛns ə vɪktɝi.

The face of the wall had been left much in the natural state of the stone, the huge blocks fitted together so well that the joins were nearly invisible, the roughness making it seem almost a natural cliff. Rand grinned. The cliffs just beyond the Sand Hills were higher, and even Perrin had climbed those. His hands sought rocky knobs, his booted feet found ridges. The drums raced him as he climbed. He refused to let them win. He would reach the top before they reached the Palace. In his haste, the stone tore his hands and scraped his knees through his breeches, but he flung his arms over the top and heaved himself up with a sense of victory.

heɪstəli hi twɪstəd hɪmsɛlf ɝaʊn tə ə siɾ ɑn ðə flæt, nɛɹoʊ tɑp ə ðə wɔl. ðə lifi bɹæntʃəz ʌv ə taʊɝɪŋ tʃɹi stʌk aʊɾ oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ i hæd noʊ θɔt fəɹ ðæt. hi lʊkt əkɹɔs taɪld ɹuftɑps, bʌt fɹəm ðə wɔl ɪz laɪn ə saɪt wɑz klɪɹ. hi lin aʊt, dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl, ən kəd si ðə pæləs ɡeɪt, ən ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz dʒɹɔn ʌp ðɛɹ, ən ði ɪkspɛktən kɹaʊd. ɪkspɛktənt. ðɛɹ ʃaʊts dʒɹaʊn aʊt baɪ ðə θʌndɝ ə dʒɹʌmz ən tʃɹʌmpəts, bʌt weɪɾɪŋ stɪl. hi ɡɹɪnd. aɪ wʌn.

Hastily he twisted himself around to a seat on the flat, narrow top of the wall. The leafy branches of a towering tree stuck out over his head, but he had no thought for that. He looked across tiled rooftops, but from the wall his line of sight was clear. He leaned out, just a little, and could see the Palace gate, and the Queen's Guards drawn up there, and the expectant crowd. Expectant. Their shouts drowned out by the thunder of drums and trumpets, but waiting still. He grinned. I won.

ivən əz i sɛɾəld ɪn pleɪs, ðə fɝs pɑɹɾ ə ðə pɹəsɛʃən ɹaʊndəd ðə faɪnəl kɝv bɪfɔɹ ðə pæləs. twɛnti ɹæŋks ə tʃɹʌmpəɾɝz keɪm fɝst, splɪɾɪŋ ði ɛɹ wɪð pil æftɝ tʃɹaɪʌmfən pil, ə fænfɛɹ ə vɪktɝi. bɪhaɪn ðɛm, əz mɛni dʒɹʌmɝz θʌndɝd. ðən keɪm ðə bænɝz ə keɪɛmlɪn, waɪt laɪənz ɑn ɹɛd, bɔɹn baɪ maʊntəd mɛn, fɑloʊd baɪ ðə soʊlʒɝz ə keɪɛmlɪn, ɹæŋk ɑn ɹæŋk ɑn ɹæŋk ə hɔɹsmən, ɑɹmɝ ɡlimɪŋ, lænsɪz pɹaʊdli hɛld, kɹɪmzən pɛnəns flʌɾɝɪŋ. tʃɹɛbəl ɹoʊz ə pɪkmɛn ən ɑɹtʃɝz flæŋk ðɛm, ən keɪm ɑn ən ɑn æftɝ ðə hɔɹsmən bɪɡæn pæsɪŋ bɪtwin ðə weɪɾɪŋ ɡɑɹdz ən θɹu ðə pæləs ɡeɪts.

Even as he settled in place, the first part of the procession rounded the final curve before the Palace. Twenty ranks of trumpeters came first, splitting the air with peal after triumphant peal, a fanfare of victory. Behind them, as many drummers thundered. Then came the banners of Caemlyn, white lions on red, borne by mounted men, followed by the soldiers of Caemlyn, rank on rank on rank of horsemen, armor gleaming, lances proudly held, crimson pennants fluttering. Treble rows of pikemen and archers flanked them, and came on and on after the horsemen began passing between the waiting Guards and through the Palace gates.

ðə læst ə ðə fʊt soʊlʒɝz ɹaʊndəd ðə kɝv, ən bɪhaɪn əm wɑz ə mæsɪv wæɡən. sɪkstin hɔɹsəz pʊld ɪɾ ɪn hɪtʃɪz ə fɔɹ. ɪn ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ɪts flæt bɛd wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ keɪdʒ ʌv aɪɝn bɑɹz, ən ɑn itʃ kɔɹnɝ ə ðə wæɡoʊnb sæt tu wɪmən, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə keɪdʒ əz ɪntɛnli əz ɪf ðə pɹəsɛʃən ən ðə kɹaʊd dɪd nɑɾ ɪɡzɪst. ɛɛs sədaɪ, hi wɑz sɝɾən. bɪtwin ðə wæɡən ən ðə fʊtmən, ən tə iðɝ saɪd, ɹoʊɾ ə dʌzən wɔɹɾɝz, ðɛɹ kloʊks swɝlɪŋ ən tæŋəlɪŋ ði aɪ. ɪf ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪɡnɔɹd ðə kɹaʊd, ðə wɔɹɾɝz skæn ɪɾ əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ʌðɝ ɡɑɹdz bʌt ðeɪ.

The last of the foot soldiers rounded the curve, and behind them was a massive wagon. Sixteen horses pulled it in hitches of four. In the center of its flat bed was a large cage of iron bars, and on each corner of the wagonbed sat two women, watching the cage as intently as if the procession and the crowd did not exist. Aes Sedai, he was certain. Between the wagon and the footmen, and to either side, rode a dozen Warders, their cloaks swirling and tangling the eye. If the Aes Sedai ignored the crowd, the Warders scanned it as if there were no other guards but they.

wɪð ɔl ə ðæt, ɪt wɑz ðə mæn ɪn ðə keɪdʒ u kɑɾ ən hɛld ɹændz aɪz. hi wɑz nɑt kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si lɑɡənz feɪs, əz i hæd wɑntəd tə, bʌt sʌɾənli hi θɔɾ i wɑz əz kloʊz əz i kɛɹd fɔɹ. ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən wɑz ə tɔl mæn, wɪð lɔŋ, dɑɹk hɛɹ kɝlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɪz bɹɔd ʃoʊldɝz. hi hɛl hɪmsɛlf əpɹaɪɾ əɡɛns ðə sweɪ ʌv ðə wæɡən wɪð wʌn hæn ɑn ðə bɑɹz oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. hɪz kloʊðz simd ɔɹɾənɛɹi, ə kloʊk ən koʊɾ ən bɹitʃɪz ðət wəd nɑɾ əv kɑz kɑmɛn ɪn ɛni fɑɹmɪŋ vɪlədʒ. bʌt ðə weɪ hi wɔɹ ðɛm. ðə weɪ hi hɛl hɪmsɛlf. lɑɡən wɑz ə kɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi ɪntʃ ə hɪm. ðə keɪdʒ maɪɾ əz wɛl nɑɾ əv bɪn ðɛɹ. hi hɛl hɪmsɛlf ɪɹɛkt, hɛd haɪ, ən lʊkt oʊvɝ ðə kɹaʊɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd kʌm tə də hɪm ɑnɝ. ən wɛɹɛvɝ ɪz ɡeɪz swɛpt, ðəɹ ðə pipəl fɛl saɪlənt, stɛɹɪŋ bæk ɪn ɑ. wən lɑɡənz aɪz lɛf ðɛm, ðeɪ skɹimd wɪð ɹidʌbəl fjʊɹi əz ɪf tə meɪk ʌp fəɹ ðɛɹ saɪləns, bʌɾ ɪt meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns ɪn ðə weɪ ðə mæn stʊd, əɹ ɪn ðə saɪləns ðət pæst əlɔŋ wɪð hɪm. əz ðə wæɡən ɹoʊl θɹu ðə pæləs ɡeɪts, hi tɝn tə lʊk bæk ət ði əsɛmbəl mæsəz. ðeɪ haʊld ət hɪm, bɪɑnd wɝdz, ə weɪv ə ʃɪɹ ænəməl heɪɾ ən fɪɹ, ən lɑɡən θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən læft əz ðə pæləs swɑloʊd hɪm.

With all of that, it was the man in the cage who caught and held Rand's eyes. He was not close enough to see Logain's face, as he had wanted to, but suddenly he thought he was as close as he cared for. The false Dragon was a tall man, with long, dark hair curling around his broad shoulders. He held himself upright against the sway of the wagon with one hand on the bars over his head. His clothes seemed ordinary, a cloak and coat and breeches that would not have caused comment in any farming village. But the way he wore them. The way he held himself. Logain was a king in every inch of him. The cage might as well not have been there. He held himself erect, head high, and looked over the crowd as if they had come to do him honor. And wherever his gaze swept, there the people fell silent, staring back in awe. When Logain's eyes left them, they screamed with redoubled fury as if to make up for their silence, but it made no difference in the way the man stood, or in the silence that passed along with him. As the wagon rolled through the Palace gates, he turned to look back at the assembled masses. They howled at him, beyond words, a wave of sheer animal hate and fear, and Logain threw back his head and laughed as the Palace swallowed him.

ʌðɝ kəntɪnʒənts fɑloʊd bɪhaɪn ðə wæɡənz, wɪð bænɝz ɹɛpɹɪzɛntɪŋ mɔɹ u hæd fɔɾ ən dɪfiɾəd ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. ðə ɡoʊldən biz ʌv ɪljən, ðə θɹi waɪt kɹɛsəns ə tɛɹ, ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn ə kɛɹhin, ʌðɝz, mɛni ʌðɝz, ʌv neɪʃənz ən ə sɪɾiz, ən ʌv ɡɹeɪt mɛn wɪð ðɛɹ oʊn tʃɹʌmpəts, ðɛɹ oʊn dʒɹʌmz tə θʌndɝ ðɛɹ ɡɹænduɹ. ɪt wɑz æntiklaɪmæktɪk æftɝ lɑɡən.

Other contingents followed behind the wagons, with banners representing more who had fought and defeated the false Dragon. The Golden Bees of Illian, the three White Crescents of Tear, the Rising Sun of Cairhien, others, many others, of nations and of cities, and of great men with their own trumpets, their own drums to thunder their grandeur. It was anticlimactic after Logain.

ɹænd lin aʊɾ ə bɪt fɝðɝ tə tʃɹaɪ tə kætʃ wʌn læst saɪɾ ə ðə keɪdʒ mæn. hi wɑz dɪfiɾəd, wɑzn hi? laɪt, hi wʊdn bi ɪn ə blʌɾi keɪdʒ ɪf i wɑzn dɪfiɾəd.

Rand leaned out a bit further to try to catch one last sight of the caged man. He was defeated, wasn't he? Light, he wouldn't be in a bloody cage if he wasn't defeated.

oʊvɝbælənst, hi slɪpt ən ɡɹæbd ət ðə tɑp ə ðə wɔl, pʊl hɪmsɛlf bæk tə ə sʌmwʌt seɪfɝ sit. wɪð lɑɡən ɡɔn, hi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ðə bɝnɪŋ ɪn ɪz hænz, wɛɹ ðə stoʊn hæd skɹeɪpt ɪz pɑmz ən fɪŋɡɝz. jɛɾ i kəd nɑt ʃeɪk fɹi ʌv ði ɪmədʒəz. ðə keɪdʒ ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. lɑɡən, ʌndɪfiɾɪd. noʊ mæɾɝ ðə keɪdʒ, ðət hæd nɑt bɪn ə dɪfiɾəd mæn. hi ʃɪvɝɾ ən ɹʌbd ɪz stɪŋɪŋ hænz ɑn ɪz θaɪz.

Overbalanced, he slipped and grabbed at the top of the wall, pulled himself back to a somewhat safer seat. With Logain gone, he became aware of the burning in his hands, where the stone had scraped his palms and fingers. Yet he could not shake free of the images. The cage and the Aes Sedai. Logain, undefeated. No matter the cage, that had not been a defeated man. He shivered and rubbed his stinging hands on his thighs.

"waɪ wɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm?" hi wʌndɝɾ əlaʊd.

"Why were the Aes Sedai watching him?" he wondered aloud.

"ðeɪɹ kipɪŋ ɪm fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, sɪli."

"They're keeping him from touching the True Source, silly."

hi dʒɝk tə lʊk ʌp, təwɔɹd ðə ɡɝlz vɔɪs, ən sʌɾənli hɪz pɹikɛɹiəs sit wɑz ɡɔn. hi hæɾ oʊnli taɪm tə ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz tɑpəlɪŋ bækwɝd, fɔlɪŋ, wən sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹʌk ɪz hɛɾ ən ə læfɪŋ lɑɡən tʃeɪst ɪm ɪndə spɪnɪŋ dɑɹknəs.

He jerked to look up, toward the girl's voice, and suddenly his precarious seat was gone. He had only time to realize that he was toppling backward, falling, when something struck his head and a laughing Logain chased him into spinning darkness.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾi


CHAPTER 40

ðə wɛb taɪɾənz


The Web Tightens

ɪt sim tə ɹænd ðəɾ i wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ət teɪbəl wɪð lɑɡən ən mɔɪɹeɪn. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən sæt wɑtʃɪŋ ɪm saɪlənli, əz ɪf niðɝ nu ði ʌðɝ wɑz ðɛɹ. əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪz ðə wɔlz ə ðə ɹum wɝ bɪkʌmɪŋ ɪndɪstɪŋkt, feɪɾɪŋ ɔf ɪndə ɡɹeɪ. ə sɛns ə ɝdʒənsi bɪlt ɪn hɪm. ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ, blɝɪŋ əweɪ. wən i lʊk bæk tə ðə teɪbəl, mɔɪɹeɪn ən lɑɡən hæd vænɪʃt, ən bælzəmən sæt ðəɹ ɪnstɛd. ɹændz hoʊl bɑɾi vaɪbɹeɪɾɪd wɪð ɝdʒənsi; ɪt hʌmd ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz hɛd, laʊɾɝ ən laʊɾɝ. ðə hʌm bɪkeɪm ðə paʊndɪŋ ə blʌɾ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz.

It seemed to Rand that he was sitting at table with Logain and Moiraine. The Aes Sedai and the false Dragon sat watching him silently, as if neither knew the other was there. Abruptly he realized the walls of the room were becoming indistinct, fading off into gray. A sense of urgency built in him. Everything was going, blurring away. When he looked back to the table, Moiraine and Logain had vanished, and Ba'alzamon sat there instead. Rand's whole body vibrated with urgency; it hummed inside his head, louder and louder. The hum became the pounding of blood in his ears.

wɪð ə dʒɝk i sæɾ ʌp, ən ɪmiɾiətli ɡɹoʊn ən klʌtʃt ɪz hɛd, sweɪɪŋ. hɪz hoʊl skʌl hɝt; hɪz lɛf hæn faʊn stɪki dæmpnəs ɪn ɪz hɛɹ. hi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ɑn ɡɹin ɡɹæs. ðət tʃɹʌbəl hɪm, veɪɡli, bʌɾ ɪz hɛd spʌn ən ɛvɹiθɪŋ i lʊkt ət lɝtʃt, ən ɔl i kəd θɪŋk ʌv wɑz laɪɪŋ daʊn əntɪl ɪt stɑpt.

With a jerk he sat up, and immediately groaned and clutched his head, swaying. His whole skull hurt; his left hand found sticky dampness in his hair. He was sitting on the ground, on green grass. That troubled him, vaguely, but his head spun and everything he looked at lurched, and all he could think of was lying down until it stopped.

ðə wɔl! ðə ɡɝlz vɔɪs!

The wall! The girl's voice!

stɛɾiɪŋ hɪmsɛlf wɪð wʌn hæn flæɾ ɑn ðə ɡɹæs, hi lʊkt ɝaʊn sloʊli. hi hæd tə də ɪt sloʊli; wən i tʃɹaɪd tə tɝn ɪz hɛd kwɪkli ɛvɹiθɪŋ stɑɹɾəd wɝlɪŋ əɡɛn. hi wɑz ɪn ə ɡɑɹɾən, əɹ ə pɑɹk; ə sleɪt-peɪvd wɔk miændɝd baɪ θɹu flaʊɝɪŋ bʊʃəz nɑt sɪks fiɾ əweɪ, wɪð ə waɪt stoʊn bɛntʃ bɪsaɪɾ ɪɾ ən ə lifi ɑɹbɝ oʊvɝ ðə bɛntʃ fəɹ ʃeɪd. hi hæd fɔlən ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔl. ən ðə ɡɝl?

Steadying himself with one hand flat on the grass, he looked around slowly. He had to do it slowly; when he tried to turn his head quickly everything started whirling again. He was in a garden, or a park; a slate-paved walk meandered by through flowering bushes not six feet away, with a white stone bench beside it and a leafy arbor over the bench for shade. He had fallen inside the wall. And the girl?

hi faʊn ðə tʃɹi, kloʊs bɪhaɪn ɪz bæk, ən faʊn hɝ, tu - klaɪmɪŋ daʊn aʊɾ ʌv ɪt. ʃi ɹitʃt ðə ɡɹaʊn ən tɝn tə feɪs hɪm, ən i blɪŋkt ən ɡɹoʊn əɡɛn. ə dip blu vɛlvət kloʊk laɪnd wɪð peɪl fɝ ɹɛstəɾ ɑn əɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ɪts hʊd hæŋɪŋ daʊn bɪhaɪn tə hɝ weɪst wɪð ə klʌstɝ ə sɪlvɝ bɛlz ət ðə pik. ðeɪ dʒɪŋɡəld wən ʃi muvd. ə sɪlvɝ fɪləɡɹi sɝklət hɛld əɹ lɔŋ, ɹɛd-ɡoʊl kɝlz, ən dɛləkət sɪlvɝ ɹɪŋz hʌŋ əɾ əɹ ɪɹz, waɪl ə nɛkləs ə hɛvi sɪlvɝ lɪŋks ən dɑɹk ɡɹin stoʊnz i θɔt wɝ ɛmɹəlz leɪ ɝaʊn əɹ θɹoʊt. hɝ peɪl blu dʒɹɛs wɑz smʌdʒd wɪð bɑɹk steɪnz fɹəm əɹ tʃɹi klaɪmɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz stɪl sɪlk, ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd wɪð peɪnsteɪkɪŋli ɪntʃɹəkət dɪzaɪnz, ðə skɝt slæʃt wɪð ɪnsɝts ðə kʌlɝ ə ɹɪtʃ kɹim. ə waɪd bɛlt ʌv woʊvən sɪlvɝ ɪnsɝkəld əɹ weɪst, ən vɛlvət slɪpɝz pik fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə hɛm ə hɝ dʒɹɛs.

He found the tree, close behind his back, and found her, too - climbing down out of it. She reached the ground and turned to face him, and he blinked and groaned again. A deep blue velvet cloak lined with pale fur rested on her shoulders, its hood hanging down behind to her waist with a cluster of silver bells at the peak. They jingled when she moved. A silver filigree circlet held her long, red-gold curls, and delicate silver rings hung at her ears, while a necklace of heavy silver links and dark green stones he thought were emeralds lay around her throat. Her pale blue dress was smudged with bark stains from her tree climbing, but it was still silk, and embroidered with painstakingly intricate designs, the skirt slashed with inserts the color of rich cream. A wide belt of woven silver encircled her waist, and velvet slippers peeked from under the hem of her dress.

hi hæɾ oʊnli ɛvɝ sin tu wɪmən dʒɹɛst ɪn ðɪs fæʃən, mɔɪɹeɪn ən ðə dɑɹkfɹɛn u hæd tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mæt ən hɪm. hi kəd nɑt bɪɡɪn tə ɪmædʒən u wəd tʃuz tə klaɪm tʃɹiz ɪn kloʊðz laɪk ðæt, bʌɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ ʃi hæd tə bi sʌmwʌn ɪmpɔɹɾənt. ðə weɪ ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɪm ɹidʌbəl ði ɪmpɹɛʃən. ʃi dɪd nɑt sim ɪn ðə lis tʃɹʌbəld ət hævɪŋ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ tʌmbəl ɪndə hɝ ɡɑɹɾən. ðəɹ wɑz ə sɛlf-pəzɛʃən əbaʊɾ əɹ ðət meɪɾ ɪm θɪŋk ə nɪneɪiv, əɹ mɔɪɹeɪn.

He had only ever seen two women dressed in this fashion, Moiraine and the Darkfriend who had tried to kill Mat and him. He could not begin to imagine who would choose to climb trees in clothes like that, but he was sure she had to be someone important. The way she was looking at him redoubled the impression. She did not seem in the least troubled at having a stranger tumble into her garden. There was a self-possession about her that made him think of Nynaeve, or Moiraine.

hi wɑz soʊ ɛnmɛʃt ɪn wɝiɪŋ wɛðɝ əɹ nɑɾ i hæd ɡɑɾən hɪmsɛlf ɪndə tʃɹʌbəl, wɛðɝ əɹ nɑt ʃi wɑz sʌmwʌn u kəɾ ən wəd kɔl ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz ivən ɑn ə deɪ wən ðeɪ hæɾ ʌðɝ θɪŋz tə ɑkjəpaɪ ðɛm, ðəɾ ɪt tʊk ɪm ə fju moʊməns tə si pæs ði ɪlæbɹət kloʊðz ən lɔfti æɾətud tə ðə ɡɝl hɝsɛlf. ʃi wɑz pɝhæps tu əɹ θɹi jɪɹz jʌŋɡɝ ðən hi, tɔl fəɹ ə ɡɝl, ən bjuɾəfəl, hɝ feɪs ə pɝfəkt oʊvəl fɹeɪm baɪ ðət mæs ə sʌnbɝs kɝlz, hɝ lɪps fʊl ən ɹɛd, hɝ aɪz blɝ ðən i kəd bɪliv. ʃi wɑz kəmplitli dɪfɹən fɹəm ɛɡwin ɪn haɪɾ ən feɪs ən bɑɾi, bʌɾ ɛvɹi bɪɾ əz bjuɾəfəl. hi fɛlt ə twɪnʒ ʌv ɡɪlt, bʌt toʊl hɪmsɛlf ðət dɪnaɪɪŋ wʌɾ ɪz aɪz sɔ wəd nɑt bɹɪŋ ɛɡwin seɪfli tə keɪɛmlɪn wʌn wɪt fæstɝ.

He was so enmeshed in worrying whether or not he had gotten himself into trouble, whether or not she was someone who could and would call the Queen's Guards even on a day when they had other things to occupy them, that it took him a few moments to see past the elaborate clothes and lofty attitude to the girl herself. She was perhaps two or three years younger than he, tall for a girl, and beautiful, her face a perfect oval framed by that mass of sunburst curls, her lips full and red, her eyes bluer than he could believe. She was completely different from Egwene in height and face and body, but every bit as beautiful. He felt a twinge of guilt, but told himself that denying what his eyes saw would not bring Egwene safely to Caemlyn one whit faster.

ə skɹæbəlɪŋ saʊn keɪm fɹəm ʌp ɪn ðə tʃɹi ən bɪts ə bɑɹk fɛl, fɑloʊd baɪ ə bɔɪ dʒɹɑpɪŋ laɪtli tə ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪhaɪn hɝ. hi wɑz ə hɛd tɔlɝ ðən ʃi ən ə lɪɾəl oʊldɝ, bʌɾ ɪz feɪs ən hɛɹ mɑɹkt ɪm əz əɹ kloʊs kɪn. hɪz koʊɾ ən kloʊk wɝ ɹɛɾ ən waɪɾ ən ɡoʊld, ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ən bɹoʊkeɪɾɪd, ən fəɹ ə meɪl ivən mɔɹ ɔɹneɪt ðən hɝz. ðəɾ ɪnkɹist ɹændz æŋzaɪəɾi. oʊnli ɑn ə fistdeɪ wəɾ ɛni ɔɹɾənɛɹi mæn dʒɹɛs ɪn ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ðæt, ən nɛvɝ wɪð ðət mʌtʃ ɡɹænduɹ. ðɪs wɑz noʊ pʌblɪk pɑɹk. pɝhæps ðə ɡɑɹdz wɝ tu bɪzi tə bɑðɝ wɪð tʃɹɛspæsɝz.

A scrabbling sound came from up in the tree and bits of bark fell, followed by a boy dropping lightly to the ground behind her. He was a head taller than she and a little older, but his face and hair marked him as her close kin. His coat and cloak were red and white and gold, embroidered and brocaded, and for a male even more ornate than hers. That increased Rand's anxiety. Only on a feastday would any ordinary man dress in anything like that, and never with that much grandeur. This was no public park. Perhaps the Guards were too busy to bother with trespassers.

ðə bɔɪ stʌɾid ɹænd oʊvɝ ðə ɡɝlz ʃoʊldɝ, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ əɾ ɪz weɪst. ɪt simd mɔɹ ə nɝvəs hæbət ðən ɛni θɔt ðəɾ i maɪt juz ɪt. nɑt kəmplitli, ðoʊ. ðə bɔɪ hæd ðə seɪm sɛlf-pəzɛʃən əz ðə ɡɝl, ən ðeɪ boʊθ lʊkt əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i wɝ ə pʌzəl tə bi sɑlvd. hi hæd ði ɑd filɪŋ ðət ðə ɡɝl, ət list, wɑz kɑɾə loʊɡɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪm fɹəm ðə kəndɪʃən ə hɪz buts tə ðə steɪɾ ə hɪz kloʊk.

The boy studied Rand over the girl's shoulder, fingering the dagger at his waist. It seemed more a nervous habit than any thought that he might use it. Not completely, though. The boy had the same self-possession as the girl, and they both looked at him as if he were a puzzle to be solved. He had the odd feeling that the girl, at least, was cata loguing everything about him from the condition of his boots to the state of his cloak.

"wi wɪl nɛvɝ hɪɹ ði ɛn ə ðɪs, ɪleɪn, ɪf mʌðɝ faɪnz aʊt," ðə bɔɪ sɛd sʌɾənli. "ʃi toʊld əs tə steɪ ɪn əɹ ɹumz, bʌt jə dʒʌs hæd tə ɡɛɾ ə lʊk ət lɑɡən, dɪdn ju? naʊ lʊk wʌɾ ɪts ɡɑɾ ʌs."

"We will never hear the end of this, Elayne, if mother finds out," the boy said suddenly. "She told us to stay in our rooms, but you just had to get a look at Logain, didn't you? Now look what it has got us."

"bi kwaɪət, ɡɔɪn." ʃi wɑz klɪɹli ðə jʌŋɡɝ ə ðə tu, bʌt ʃi spoʊk əz ðoʊ ʃi tʊk ɪt fəɹ ɡɹæntəd ðəɾ i wəɾ oʊbeɪ. ðə bɔɪz feɪs stʃɹʌɡəld əz ɪf i hæd mɔɹ tə seɪ, bʌt tə ɹændz sɝpɹaɪz i hɛld ɪz pis. "ɑɹ jə ɔl ɹaɪt?" ʃi sɛd sʌɾənli.

"Be quiet, Gawyn." She was clearly the younger of the two, but she spoke as though she took it for granted that he would obey. The boy's face struggled as if he had more to say, but to Rand's surprise he held his peace. "Are you all right?" she said suddenly.

ɪt tʊk ɹænd ə mɪnət tə ɹilaɪz ʃi wɑz spikɪŋ tə hɪm. wən i dɪd, hi tʃɹaɪd tə stʃɹʌɡəl tə hɪz fit. "aɪm faɪn. aɪ dʒʌst - " hi tɑɾɝd, ən ɪz lɛɡz ɡeɪv weɪ. hi sæt bæk daʊn hɑɹd. hɪz hɛd swæm. "aɪl dʒʌs klaɪm bæk oʊvɝ ðə wɔl," hi mʌɾɝd. hi ətɛmptəd tə stæn əɡɛn, bʌt ʃi pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, pɹɛsɪŋ ɪm daʊn. hi wɑz soʊ dɪzi ðə slaɪt pɹɛʃɝ wɑz ɪnʌf tə hoʊld ɪm ɪn pleɪs.

It took Rand a minute to realize she was speaking to him. When he did, he tried to struggle to his feet. "I'm fine. I just - " He tottered, and his legs gave way. He sat back down hard. His head swam. "I'll just climb back over the wall," he muttered. He attempted to stand again, but she put a hand on his shoulder, pressing him down. He was so dizzy the slight pressure was enough to hold him in place.

"ju ɑɹ hɝt." ɡɹeɪsfəli ʃi nɛl bɪsaɪd hɪm. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz dʒɛnli pɑɹɾəd ðə blʌd-mæɾɪd hɛɹ ɑn ðə lɛf saɪɾ ə hɪz hɛd. "ju mʌst əv stʃɹʌk ə bɹæntʃ kʌmɪŋ daʊn. jəl bi lʌki ɪf jə dɪdn bɹeɪk ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən jəɹ skælp. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk aɪ ɛvɝ sɔ ɛniwʌn əz skɪlfəl ət klaɪmɪŋ əz ju, bʌt jə doʊn də soʊ wɛl fɔlɪŋ."

"You are hurt." Gracefully she knelt beside him. Her fingers gently parted the blood-matted hair on the left side of his head. "You must have struck a branch coming down. You will be lucky if you didn't break anything more than your scalp. I don't think I ever saw anyone as skillful at climbing as you, but you don't do so well falling."

"jul ɡɛt blʌɾ ɑn jəɹ hænz," hi sɛd, dʒɹɔɪŋ bæk.

"You'll get blood on your hands," he said, drawing back.

fɝmli ʃi pʊld ɪz hɛd bæk tə wɛɹ ʃi kəd ɡɛɾ əɾ ɪt. "hoʊl stɪl." ʃi dɪd nɑt spik ʃɑɹpli, bʌɾ əɡɛn ðəɹ wɑz ðət noʊɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs əz ɪf ʃi ɪkspɛktəd tə bi oʊbeɪd. "ɪt dʌz nɑt lʊk tu bæd, θæŋk ðə laɪt." fɹəm pɑkəts ɑn ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə hɝ kloʊk ʃi bɪɡæn teɪkɪŋ aʊɾ ən ɝeɪ ʌv taɪni vaɪəlz ən twɪstəd pækɪts ə peɪpɝ, fɪnɪʃɪŋ wɪð ə hændfʊl ʌv wɑɾəd bændɪdʒ.

Firmly she pulled his head back to where she could get at it. "Hold still." She did not speak sharply, but again there was that note in her voice as if she expected to be obeyed. "It does not look too bad, thank the Light." From pockets on the inside of her cloak she began taking out an array of tiny vials and twisted packets of paper, finishing with a handful of wadded bandage.

hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə kəlɛkʃən ɪn əmeɪzmənt. ɪt wɑz ðə sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ i wʊɾə ɪkspɛktəɾ ə wɪzdəm tə kæɹi, nɑt sʌmwʌn dʒɹɛst əz ʃi wɑz. ʃi hæd ɡɑɾən blʌɾ ɑn əɹ fɪŋɡɝz, hi sɔ, bʌɾ ɪt dɪd nɑt sim tə bɑðɝ hɝ.

He stared at the collection in amazement. It was the sort of thing he would have expected a Wisdom to carry, not someone dressed as she was. She had gotten blood on her fingers, he saw, but it did not seem to bother her.

"ɡɪv mi jəɹ wɔɾɝ flæsk, ɡɔɪn," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ nid tə wɑʃ ðɪs."

"Give me your water flask, Gawyn," she said. "I need to wash this."

ðə bɔɪ ʃi kɔld ɡɔɪn ənfæsən ə lɛðɝ bɑɾəl fɹəm ɪz bɛlt ən hændəɾ ɪt tə hɝ, ðən skwɑɾɪd izəli ət ɹændz fit wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ ɑn ɪz niz. ɪleɪn wɛn əbaʊt wʌt ʃi wɑz duɪŋ ɪn ə vɛɹi wɝkmænlaɪk mænɝ. hi dɪd nɑt flɪntʃ ət ðə stɪŋ ə koʊld wɔɾɝ wən ʃi wɑʃt ðə kʌɾ ɪn ɪz skælp, bʌt ʃi hɛl ðə tɑp ə hɪz hɛd wɪð wʌn hæn əz ɪf ʃi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm tə tʃɹaɪ tə pʊl əweɪ əɡɛn ən wəɾ əv nʌn ʌv ɪt. ði ɔɪnmənt ʃi smuðd ɑn æftɝ, fɹəm wʌn ə hɝ smɔl vaɪəlz, suðd ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz wʌn ə nɪneɪivz pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz wəd hæv.

The boy she called Gawyn unfastened a leather bottle from his belt and handed it to her, then squatted easily at Rand's feet with his arms folded on his knees. Elayne went about what she was doing in a very workmanlike manner. He did not flinch at the sting of cold water when she washed the cut in his scalp, but she held the top of his head with one hand as if she expected him to try to pull away again and would have none of it. The ointment she smoothed on after, from one of her small vials, soothed almost as much as one of Nynaeve's preparations would have.

ɡɔɪn smaɪld əɾ ɪm əz ʃi wɝkt, ə kɑmɪŋ smaɪl, əz ɪf hi, tu, ɪkspɛktəd ɹænd tə dʒɝk əweɪ ən meɪbi ivən ɹʌn. "ʃiz ɔlweɪz faɪndɪŋ stʃɹeɪ kæts ən bɝdz wɪð bɹoʊkən wɪŋz. jə ɑɹ ðə fɝs hjumən biɪŋ ʃiz hæd tə wɝk ɑn." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən æɾəd, "du nɑt bi əfɛndəd. aɪm nɑt kɔlɪŋ jə ə stʃɹeɪ." ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ən əpɑlədʒi, dʒʌst ə steɪtmən ə fækt.

Gawyn smiled at him as she worked, a calming smile, as if he, too, expected Rand to jerk away and maybe even run. "She's always finding stray cats and birds with broken wings. You are the first human being she has had to work on." He hesitated, then added, "Do not be offended. I am not calling you a stray." It was not an apology, just a statement of fact.

"noʊ əfɛns teɪkən," ɹænd sɛd stɪfli. bʌt ðə pɛɹ wɝ æktɪŋ əz ɪf i wɝ ə skɪɾɪʃ hɔɹs.

"No offense taken," Rand said stiffly. But the pair were acting as if he were a skittish horse.

"ʃi dʌz noʊ wʌt ʃiz duɪŋ," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ʃi hæz hæd ðə bɛs titʃɝz. soʊ də nɑt fɪɹ, jə ɑɹ ɪn ɡʊd hænz."

"She does know what she is doing," Gawyn said. "She has had the best teachers. So do not fear, you are in good hands."

ɪleɪn pɹɛst səm ə ðə bændeɪdʒɪŋ əɡɛnst ɪz tɛmpəl ən pʊld ə sɪlk skɑɹf fɹəm əɹ bɛlt, blu ən kɹim ən ɡoʊld. fəɹ ɛni ɡɝl ɪn ɛmənz fild ɪt wʊɾə bɪn ə tʃɹɛʒɝd fistdeɪ klɔθ. ɪleɪn dɛfli bɪɡæn waɪndɪŋ ɪɾ ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd tə hoʊl ðə wɑɾ ə bændɪdʒ ɪn pleɪs.

Elayne pressed some of the bandaging against his temple and pulled a silk scarf from her belt, blue and cream and gold. For any girl in Emond's Field it would have been a treasured feastday cloth. Elayne deftly began winding it around his head to hold the wad of bandage in place.

"ju kæn jus ðæt," hi pɹətɛstəd.

"You can't use that," he protested.

ʃi wɛn ɑn waɪndɪŋ. "aɪ toʊl jə tə hoʊl stɪl," ʃi sɛd kɑmli.

She went on winding. "I told you to hold still," she said calmly.

ɹænd lʊkt ət ɡɔɪn. "dʌz ʃi ɔlweɪz ɪkspɛkt ɛvɹibɑɾi tə də wʌt ʃi tɛlz ðɛm?"

Rand looked at Gawyn. "Does she always expect everybody to do what she tells them?"

ə flæʃ ə sɝpɹaɪz kɹɔs ðə jʌŋ mænz feɪs, ən ɪz maʊθ taɪɾənd wɪð əmjuzmənt. "moʊst ə ðə taɪm ʃi dʌz. ən moʊst ə ðə taɪm ðeɪ du."

A flash of surprise crossed the young man's face, and his mouth tightened with amusement. "Most of the time she does. And most of the time they do."

"hoʊl ðɪs," ɪleɪn sɛd. "pʊt jəɹ hæn ðəɹ waɪl aɪ taɪ - " ʃi ɪkskleɪmd ət ðə saɪɾ ə hɪz hænz. "ju dɪd nɑt də ðət fɔlɪŋ. klaɪmɪŋ wɛɹ jə ʃəd nɑɾ əv bɪn klaɪmɪŋ ɪz mɔɹ laɪk ɪt." kwɪkli fɪnɪʃɪŋ əɹ nɑt, ʃi tɝn ɪz hænz pɑmz ʌpwɝɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɝsɛlf əbaʊt haʊ lɪɾəl wɔɾɝ wɑz lɛft. ðə wɑʃɪŋ meɪd ðə læsɝeɪʃənz bɝn, bʌɾ əɹ tʌtʃ wɑz sɝpɹaɪzɪŋli dɛləkət. "hoʊl stɪl, ðɪs taɪm."

"Hold this," Elayne said. "Put your hand there while I tie - " She exclaimed at the sight of his hands. "You did not do that falling. Climbing where you should not have been climbing is more like it." Quickly finishing her knot, she turned his hands palms upward in front of him, muttering to herself about how little water was left. The washing made the lacerations burn, but her touch was surprisingly delicate. "Hold still, this time."

ðə vaɪəl ʌv ɔɪnmənt wɑz pɹədust əɡɛn. ʃi spɹɛɾ ɪt θɪnli əlɔŋ ðə skɹeɪps, ɔl ə hɝ ətɛnʃən əpɛɹənli ɑn ɹʌbɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn wɪθaʊt hɝɾɪŋ hɪm. ə kulnəs spɹɛd θɹu hɪz hænz, əz ɪf ʃi wɝ ɹʌbɪŋ ðə tɔɹn pleɪsəz əweɪ.

The vial of ointment was produced again. She spread it thinly along the scrapes, all of her attention apparently on rubbing it in without hurting him. A coolness spread through his hands, as if she were rubbing the torn places away.

"moʊst ə ðə taɪm ðeɪ də ɪɡzækli wʌt ʃi sɛz," ɡɔɪn wɛn ɑn wɪð ən əfɛkʃənət ɡɹɪn ət ðə tɑp ə hɝ hɛd. "moʊs pipəl. nɑt mʌðɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. əɹ ɪleɪɾə. ən nɑt lini. lini wɑz əɹ nɝs. jə kænt ɡɪv ɔɹɾɝz tə sʌmwʌn u swɪtʃt jə fəɹ stilɪŋ fɪɡz wən jə wɝ lɪɾəl. ən ivən nɑt soʊ lɪɾəl." ɪleɪn ɹeɪzd əɹ hɛd lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɡɪv ɪm ə deɪnʒɝəs lʊk. hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən kɛɹfəli blæŋkt ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ ɑn. "ænd ɡɛɹɪθ, ʌv kɔɹs. noʊ wʌn ɡɪvz ɔɹɾɝz tə ɡɛɹɪθ."

"Most of the time they do exactly what she says," Gawyn went on with an affectionate grin at the top of her head. "Most people. Not Mother, of course. Or Elaida. And not Lini. Lini was her nurse. You can't give orders to someone who switched you for stealing figs when you were little. And even not so little." Elayne raised her head long enough to give him a dangerous look. He cleared his throat and carefully blanked his expression before hurrying on. "And Gareth, of course. No one gives orders to Gareth."

"nɑɾ ivən mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd, bɛndɪŋ əɹ hɛd bæk oʊvɝ ɹændz hænz. "ʃi meɪks sədʒɛstʃənz, ən i ɔlweɪz dʌz wʌt ʃi sədʒɛsts, bʌɾ aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ əɹ ɡɪv ɪm ə kəmænd." ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

"Not even Mother," Elayne said, bending her head back over Rand's hands. "She makes suggestions, and he always does what she suggests, but I've never heard her give him a command." She shook her head.

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ ðəɾ ɔlweɪz sɝpɹaɪzəz ju," ɡɔɪn ænsɝd hɝ. "ivən jə doʊn tʃɹaɪ tɛlɪŋ ɡɛɹɪθ wʌt tə du. hiz sɝv θɹi kwinz ən bɪn kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl, ən fɝs pɹɪns ɹidʒənt, fəɹ tu. aɪ dɛɹɪs ðəɹ ɑɹ səm θɪŋk hiz mɔɹ ə sɪmbəl ə ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ ðən ðə kwin ɪz."

"I don't know why that always surprises you," Gawyn answered her. "Even you don't try telling Gareth what to do. He's served three Queens and been Captain-General, and First Prince Regent, for two. I daresay there are some think he's more a symbol of the Throne of Andor than the Queen is."

"mʌðɝ ʃəd ɡoʊ əhɛɾ ən mɛɹi hɪm," ʃi sɛɾ æbsənli. hɝ ətɛnʃən wɑz ɑn ɹændz hænz. "ʃi wɑns tə; ʃi kæn haɪɾ ɪt fɹəm mi. ən ɪt wəd sɑlv soʊ mɛni pɹɑbləmz."

"Mother should go ahead and marry him," she said absently. Her attention was on Rand's hands. "She wants to; she can't hide it from me. And it would solve so many problems."

ɡɔɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "wʌn ə ðɛm mʌs bɛn fɝst. mʌðɝ kænɑt, ən ɡɛɹɪθ wɪl nɑt."

Gawyn shook his head. "One of them must bend first. Mother cannot, and Gareth will not."

"ɪf ʃi kəmændəd hɪm. . . ."

"If she commanded him. . . ."

"hi wəɾ oʊbeɪ. aɪ θɪŋk. bʌt ʃi woʊnt. jə noʊ ʃi woʊnt."

"He would obey. I think. But she won't. You know she won't."

əbɹʌpli ðeɪ tɝn tə stɛɹ ət ɹænd. hi hæd ðə filɪŋ ðeɪ hæd fɝɡɑɾən i wɑz ðɛɹ. "hu . . . ?" hi hæd tə stɑp tə wɛɾ ɪz lɪps. "hu ɪz jəɹ mʌðɝ?"

Abruptly they turned to stare at Rand. He had the feeling they had forgotten he was there. "Who . . . ?" He had to stop to wet his lips. "Who is your mother?"

ɪleɪnz aɪz waɪɾənd ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, bʌt ɡɔɪn spoʊk ɪn ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi toʊn ðət meɪɾ ɪz wɝdz ɔl ðə mɔɹ dʒɑɹɪŋ. "mɔɹɡeɪs, baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə laɪt, kwin ʌv ændɝ, dɪfɛndɝ ə ðə ɹɛlm, pɹətɛktɝ ə ðə pipəl, haɪ siɾ ə ðə haʊs tʃɹəkənd."

Elayne's eyes widened in surprise, but Gawyn spoke in an ordinary tone that made his words all the more jarring. "Morgase, by the Grace of the Light, Queen of Andor, Defender of the Realm, Protector of the People, High Seat of the House Trakand."

"ðə kwin," ɹænd mʌɾɝd, ʃɑk spɹɛɾɪŋ θɹu hɪm ɪn weɪvz ə nʌmnəs. fəɹ ə mɪnəɾ i θɔɾ ɪz hɛd wɑz gɑnə bɪɡɪn spɪnɪŋ əɡɛn. doʊn ətʃɹækt ɛni ətɛnʃən. dʒʌs fɔl ɪndə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹɾən ən lɛt ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tɛn jəɹ kʌts laɪk ə hɛdʒ-dɑktɝ. hi wɑntəd tə læf, ən nu ɪt fəɹ ðə fɹɪnʒɪz ə pænɪk.

"The Queen," Rand muttered, shock spreading through him in waves of numbness. For a minute he thought his head was going to begin spinning again. Don't attract any attention. Just fall into the Queen's garden and let the Daughter-Heir tend your cuts like a hedge-doctor. He wanted to laugh, and knew it for the fringes of panic.

dʒɹɔɪŋ ə dip bɹɛθ, hi skɹæmbəl heɪstəli tə hɪz fit. hi hɛl hɪmsɛlf taɪtli ɪn ɹeɪn əɡɛns ði ɝdʒ tə ɹʌn, bʌt ðə nid tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɪl hɪm, tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls dɪskʌvɝɾ ɪm ðɛɹ.

Drawing a deep breath, he scrambled hastily to his feet. He held himself tightly in rein against the urge to run, but the need to get away filled him, to get away before anyone else discovered him there.

ɪleɪn ən ɡɔɪn wɑtʃt ɪm kɑmli, ən wən i lɛpt ʌp ðeɪ ɹoʊz ɡɹeɪsfəli, nɑt hɝiɾ ɪn ðə list. hi pʊɾ ʌp ə hæn tə pʊl ðə skɑɹf fɹəm ɪz hɛd, ən ɪleɪn sizd ɪz ɛlboʊ. "stɑp ðæt. jəl stɑɹt ðə bliɾɪŋ əɡɛn." hɝ vɔɪs wɑz stɪl kɑm, stɪl ʃʊɹ ðəɾ i wəd də əz i wɑz toʊld.

Elayne and Gawyn watched him calmly, and when he leaped up they rose gracefully, not hurried in the least. He put up a hand to pull the scarf from his head, and Elayne seized his elbow. "Stop that. You will start the bleeding again." Her voice was still calm, still sure that he would do as he was told.

"aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ," ɹænd sɛd. "aɪl dʒʌs klaɪm bæk oʊvɝ ðə wɔl ən - "

"I have to go," Rand said. "I'll just climb back over the wall and - "

"ju ɹɪli dɪdnt noʊ." fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ʃi simd əz stɑɹɾəld əz i wɑz. "du jə min jə klaɪmd ʌp ɑn ðət wɔl tə si lɑɡən wɪθaʊɾ ivən noʊɪŋ wɛɹ jə wɝ? jə cʊɾə ɡɑɾən ə mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ vju daʊn ɪn ðə stʃɹits."

"You really didn't know." For the first time she seemed as startled as he was. "Do you mean you climbed up on that wall to see Logain without even knowing where you were? You could have gotten a much better view down in the streets."

"aɪ . . . aɪ doʊn laɪk kɹaʊdz," hi mʌmbəld. hi skɛtʃt ə baʊ tə itʃ ə ðɛm. "ɪf jəl pɑɹɾən mi, ɑ . . . maɪ leɪɾi." ɪn ðə stɔɹiz, ɹɔɪəl kɔɹts wɝ fʊl ə pipəl ɔl kɔlɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ lɔɹɾ ən leɪɾi ən ɹɔɪəl haɪnəs ən mædʒəsti, bʌɾ ɪf i hæɾ ɛvɝ hɝd ðə kɝɛk fɔɹm ʌv ədʒɹɛs fəɹ ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ, hi kəd nɑt θɪŋk klɪɹli ɪnʌf tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ. hi kəd nɑt θɪŋk klɪɹli əbaʊɾ ɛniθɪŋ bɪɑn ðə nid tə bi fɑɹ əweɪ. "ɪf jəl pɑɹɾən mi, əl dʒʌs liv naʊ. ɑ . . . θæŋk jə fəɹ ðə. . . ." hi tʌtʃt ðə skɑɹf ɝaʊn ɪz hɛd. "θæŋk ju."

"I . . . I don't like crowds," he mumbled. He sketched a bow to each of them. "If you'll pardon me, ah . . . my Lady." In the stories, royal courts were full of people all calling one another Lord and Lady and Royal Highness and Majesty, but if he had ever heard the correct form of address for the Daughter-Heir, he could not think clearly enough to remember. He could not think clearly about anything beyond the need to be far away. "If you will pardon me, I'll just leave now. Ah . . . thank you for the. . . ." He touched the scarf around his head. "Thank you."

"wɪθaʊɾ ivən tɛlɪŋ əs jəɹ neɪm?" ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ə pʊɹ peɪmən fəɹ ɪleɪnz kɛɹ. aɪv bɪn wʌndɝɪŋ əbaʊt ju. jə saʊn laɪk ən ændɔɝmən, ðoʊ nɑɾ ə keɪɛmlaɪnɝ, sɝɾənli, bʌt jə lʊk laɪk. . . . wɛl, jə noʊ əɹ neɪmz. kɝɾəsi wəd sədʒɛs jə ɡɪv əs jʊɹz."

"Without even telling us your name?" Gawyn said. "A poor payment for Elayne's care. I've been wondering about you. You sound like an Andorman, though not a Caemlyner, certainly, but you look like. . . . Well, you know our names. Courtesy would suggest you give us yours."

lʊkɪŋ lɔŋɪŋli ət ðə wɔl, ɹænd ɡeɪv ɪz ɹaɪt neɪm bɪfɔɹ i θɔt wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, ən ivən æɾəd, "fɹʌm ɛmənz fild, ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

Looking longingly at the wall, Rand gave his right name before he thought what he was doing, and even added, "From Emond's Field, in the Two Rivers."

"fɹʌm ðə wɛst," ɡɔɪn mɝmɝd. "vɛɹi fɑɹ tə ðə wɛst."

"From the west," Gawyn murmured. "Very far to the west."

ɹænd lʊkt ɝaʊn əɾ ɪm ʃɑɹpli. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə noʊɾ ə sɝpɹaɪz ɪn ðə jʌŋ mænz vɔɪs, ən ɹænd kɑt səm ʌv ɪt stɪl ɑn ɪz feɪs wən i tɝnd. ɡɔɪn ɹipleɪst ɪt wɪð ə plɛzən smaɪl soʊ kwɪkli, ðoʊ, ðəɾ i ɔlmoʊs daʊɾɪd wʌɾ i hæd sin.

Rand looked around at him sharply. There had been a note of surprise in the young man's voice, and Rand caught some of it still on his face when he turned. Gawyn replaced it with a pleasant smile so quickly, though, that he almost doubted what he had seen.

"təbæk ən wʊl," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "aɪ hæv tə noʊ ðə pɹɪnsəpəl pɹɑɾəkts ʌv ɛvɹi pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹɛlm. ʌv ɛvɹi lænd, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. pɑɹɾ ə maɪ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. pɹɪnsəpəl pɹɑɾəkts ən kɹæfs, ən wʌt ðə pipəl ɑɹ laɪk. ðɛɹ kʌstəmz, ðɛɹ stʃɹɛŋkθs ən wiknəsəz. ɪts sɛd tu ɹɪvɝz pipəl ɑɹ stʌbɝn. ðeɪ kən bi lɛd, ɪf ðeɪ θɪŋk jə ɑɹ wɝði, bʌt ðə hɑɹɾɝ jə tʃɹaɪ tə pʊʃ ðɛm, ðə hɑɹɾɝ ðeɪ dɪɡ ɪn. ɪleɪn ɔt tə tʃuz əɹ hʌzbən fɹəm ðɛɹ. ɪɾəl teɪk ə mæn wɪð ə wɪl laɪk stoʊn tə kip fɹəm biɪŋ tʃɹæmpəl baɪ hɝ."

"Tabac and wool," Gawyn said. "I have to know the principal products of every part of the Realm. Of every land, for that matter. Part of my training. Principal products and crafts, and what the people are like. Their customs, their strengths and weaknesses. It's said Two Rivers people are stubborn. They can be led, if they think you are worthy, but the harder you try to push them, the harder they dig in. Elayne ought to choose her husband from there. It'll take a man with a will like stone to keep from being trampled by her."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət hɪm. ɪleɪn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ, tu. ɡɔɪn lʊkt əz mʌtʃ ʌndɝ kəntʃɹoʊl əz ɛvɝ, bʌɾ i wɑz bæbəlɪŋ. waɪ?

Rand stared at him. Elayne was staring, too. Gawyn looked as much under control as ever, but he was babbling. Why?

"wʌts ðɪs?"

"What's this?"

ɔl θɹi ʌv əm dʒʌmpt ət ðə sʌɾən vɔɪs, ən spʌn tə feɪs ɪt.

All three of them jumped at the sudden voice, and spun to face it.

ðə jʌŋ mæn u stʊd ðəɹ wɑz ðə hænsoʊməs mæn ɹænd hæɾ ɛvɝ sin, ɔlmoʊs tu hænsəm fəɹ mæskjəlɪnəɾi. hi wɑz tɔl ən slɛndɝ, bʌɾ ɪz muvməns spoʊk ʌv wɪpkɔɹd stʃɹɛŋkθ ən ə ʃʊɹ kɑnfəɾəns. dɑɹk ə hɛɹ ən aɪ, hi wɔɹ ɪz kloʊðz, oʊnli ə lɪɾəl lɛs ɪlæbɹəɾ ɪn ɹɛɾ ən waɪt ðən ɡɔɪnz, əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ə noʊ ɪmpɔɹɾəns. wʌn hæn ɹɛstəɾ ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt, ən ɪz aɪz wɝ stɛɾi ɑn ɹænd.

The young man who stood there was the handsomest man Rand had ever seen, almost too handsome for masculinity. He was tall and slender, but his movements spoke of whipcord strength and a sure confidence. Dark of hair and eye, he wore his clothes, only a little less elaborate in red and white than Gawyn's, as if they were of no importance. One hand rested on his sword hilt, and his eyes were steady on Rand.

"stæn əweɪ fɹəm hɪm, ɪleɪn," ðə mæn sɛd. "ju, tu, ɡɔɪn."

"Stand away from him, Elayne," the man said. "You, too, Gawyn."

ɪleɪn stɛpt ɪn fɹʌn ə ɹænd, bɪtwin ɪm ən ðə nukʌmɝ, hɛd haɪ ən əz kɑnfəɾənt əz ɛvɝ. "hi ɪz ə lɔɪəl sʌbʒɪkt ʌv əɹ mʌðɝ, ən ə ɡʊd kwinz mæn. ən hiz ʌndɝ maɪ pɹətɛkʃən, ɡɑləd."

Elayne stepped in front of Rand, between him and the newcomer, head high and as confident as ever. "He is a loyal subject of our mother, and a good Queen's man. And he is under my protection, Galad."

ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌɾ i hæd hɝd fɹəm mæstɝ kɪntʃ, ən sɪns fɹəm mæstɝ ɡɪl. ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd dəmədʒɹd wɑz ɪleɪnz hæf-bɹʌðɝ, ɪleɪnz ən ɡɔɪnz, ɪf i ɹɪmɛmbɝd kɝɛkli; ðə θɹi ʃɛɹd ðə seɪm fɑðɝ. mæstɝ kɪntʃ maɪt nɑɾ əv laɪk tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl dəmədʒɹd tu wɛl - niðɝ dɪɾ ɛniwʌn ɛls ðəɾ i hæd hɝd - bʌt ðə sʌn wɑz wɛl θɔɾ ə baɪ wɛɹɝz ə ðə ɹɛɾ ən ðə waɪɾ əlaɪk, ɪf tɔk ɪn ðə sɪɾi wɑz ɛni ɡaɪd.

Rand tried to remember what he had heard from Master Kinch, and since from Master Gill. Galadedrid Damodred was Elayne's half-brother, Elayne's and Gawyn's, if he remembered correctly; the three shared the same father. Master Kinch might not have liked Taringail Damodred too well - neither did anyone else that he had heard - but the son was well thought of by wearers of the red and the white alike, if talk in the city was any guide.

"aɪ æm əwɛɹ ə jəɹ fɑndnəs fəɹ stʃɹeɪz, ɪleɪn," ðə slɛndɝ mæn sɛd ɹizənəbli, "bʌt ðə fɛloʊ ɪz ɑɹmd, ən i hɑɹdli lʊks ɹɛpjəɾəbəl. ɪn ðiz deɪz, wi kænɑt bi tu kɛɹfəl. ɪf hiz ə lɔɪəl kwinz mæn, wʌɾ ɪz i duɪŋ hɪɹ wɛɹ i dʌz nɑt bɪlɔŋ? ɪts izi ɪnʌf tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə ɹæpɪŋz ɑn ə sɔɹd, ɪleɪn."

"I am aware of your fondness for strays, Elayne," the slender man said reasonably, "but the fellow is armed, and he hardly looks reputable. In these days, we cannot be too careful. If he's a loyal Queen's man, what is he doing here where he does not belong? It is easy enough to change the wrappings on a sword, Elayne."

"hi ɪz hɪɹ əz maɪ ɡɛst, ɡɑləd, ən aɪ vaʊtʃ fəɹ hɪm. əɹ əv jə əpɔɪntəd jɝsɛlf maɪ nɝs, tə dɪsaɪd hum aɪ meɪ tɔk tə, ən wɛn?"

"He is here as my guest, Galad, and I vouch for him. Or have you appointed yourself my nurse, to decide whom I may talk to, and when?"

hɝ vɔɪs wɑz ɹɪtʃ wɪð skɔɹn, bʌt ɡɑləd simd ənmuvd. "ju noʊ aɪ meɪk noʊ kleɪmz fəɹ kəntʃɹoʊl oʊvɝ jəɹ ækʃənz, ɪleɪn, bʌt ðɪs . . . ɡɛst ə jʊɹz ɪz nɑt pɹɑpɝ, ən jə noʊ ðəɾ əz wɛl əz aɪ. ɡɔɪn, hɛlp mi kənvɪns hɝ. əɹ mʌðɝ wəd - "

Her voice was rich with scorn, but Galad seemed unmoved. "You know I make no claims for control over your actions, Elayne, but this . . . guest of yours is not proper, and you know that as well as I. Gawyn, help me convince her. Our mother would - "

"ɪnʌf!" ɪleɪn snæpt. "ju ɑɹ ɹaɪt ðət juv noʊ seɪ oʊvɝ maɪ ækʃənz, nɔɹ əv jə ɛni ɹaɪt tə dʒʌdʒ ðɛm. jə meɪ liv mi. naʊ!"

"Enough!" Elayne snapped. "You are right that you have no say over my actions, nor have you any right to judge them. You may leave me. Now!"

ɡɑləd ɡeɪv ɡɔɪn ə ɹufəl lʊk; ət wʌn ən ðə seɪm taɪm ɪt sim tə æsk fəɹ hɛlp waɪl seɪɪŋ ðəɾ ɪleɪn wɑz tu hɛdstʃɹɔŋ tə bi hɛlpt. ɪleɪnz feɪs dɑɹkənd, bʌt dʒʌst əz ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ əɡɛn, hi baʊd, ɪn ɔl fɔɹmæləɾi jɛt wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪs ʌv ə kæt, tʊk ə stɛp bæk, ðən tɝn ən stʃɹoʊd daʊn ðə peɪv pæθ, hɪz lɔŋ lɛɡz kæɹiɪŋ ɪm kwɪkli aʊɾ ə saɪt bɪɑn ði ɑɹbɝ.

Galad gave Gawyn a rueful look; at one and the same time it seemed to ask for help while saying that Elayne was too headstrong to be helped. Elayne's face darkened, but just as she opened her mouth again, he bowed, in all formality yet with the grace of a cat, took a step back, then turned and strode down the paved path, his long legs carrying him quickly out of sight beyond the arbor.

"aɪ heɪt hɪm," ɪleɪn bɹiðd. "hi ɪz vaɪl ən fʊl ʌv ɛnvi."

"I hate him," Elayne breathed. "He is vile and full of envy."

"ðɛɹ jə ɡoʊ tu fɑɹ, ɪleɪn," ɡɔɪn sɛd. "ɡɑləd dʌz nɑt noʊ ðə minɪŋ ʌv ɛnvi. twaɪs hiz seɪv maɪ laɪf, wɪð nʌn tə noʊ ɪf i hɛld ɪz hænd. ɪf i hæd nɑt, hi wəd bi jəɹ fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹɾ ɪn maɪ pleɪs."

"There you go too far, Elayne," Gawyn said. "Galad does not know the meaning of envy. Twice he has saved my life, with none to know if he held his hand. If he had not, he would be your First Prince of the Sword in my place."

"nɛvɝ, ɡɔɪn. aɪ wəd tʃuz ɛniwʌn bɪfɔɹ ɡɑləd. ɛniwʌn. ðə loʊəst steɪbəlbɔɪ." sʌɾənli ʃi smaɪld ən ɡeɪv əɹ bɹʌðɝ ə mɑk-stɝn lʊk. "ju seɪ aɪm fɑn ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ ɔɹɾɝz. wɛl, aɪ kəmæn jə tə lɛt nʌθɪŋ hæpən tə ju. aɪ kəmæn jə tə bi maɪ fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd wən aɪ teɪk ðə θɹoʊn - ðə laɪt sɛn ðət deɪ ɪz fɑɹ ɔf! - ən tə lid ði ɑɹmiz ʌv ændɝ wɪð ðə sɔɹɾ ʌv ɑnɝ ɡɑləd kænɑt dʒɹim ʌv."

"Never, Gawyn. I would choose anyone before Galad. Anyone. The lowest stableboy." Suddenly she smiled and gave her brother a mock-stern look. "You say I am fond of giving orders. Well, I command you to let nothing happen to you. I command you to be my First Prince of the Sword when I take the throne - the light send that day is far off! - and to lead the armies of Andor with the sort of honor Galad cannot dream of."

"æz jə kəmænd, maɪ leɪɾi." ɡɔɪn læft, hɪz baʊ ə pɛɹəɾi ʌv ɡɑlədz.

"As you command, my Lady." Gawyn laughed, his bow a parody of Galad's.

ɪleɪn ɡeɪv ɹænd ə θɔtfəl fɹaʊn. "naʊ wi mʌst ɡɛt jə aʊɾ ə hɪɹ kwɪkli."

Elayne gave Rand a thoughtful frown. "Now we must get you out of here quickly."

"ɡɑləɾ ɔlweɪz dʌz ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ," ɡɔɪn ɪkspleɪnd, "ivən wən i ʃəd nɑt. ɪn ðɪs keɪs, faɪndɪŋ ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾənz, ðə ɹaɪt θɪŋ ɪz tə noʊɾəfaɪ ðə pæləs ɡɑɹdz. wɪtʃ aɪ səspɛk hiz ɑn ɪz weɪ tə də ɹaɪt ðɪs mɪnət."

"Galad always does the right thing," Gawyn explained, "even when he should not. In this case, finding a stranger in the gardens, the right thing is to notify the Palace guards. Which I suspect he is on his way to do right this minute."

"ðɛn ɪts taɪm aɪ wɑz bæk oʊvɝ ðə wɔl," ɹænd sɛd. ə faɪn deɪ fəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ənnoʊɾɪst! aɪ maɪɾ əz wɛl kæɹi ə saɪn! hi tɝn tə ðə wɔl, bʌɾ ɪleɪn kɑɾ ɪz ɑɹm.

"Then it's time I was back over the wall," Rand said. A fine day for going unnoticed! I might as well carry a sign! He turned to the wall, but Elayne caught his arm.

"nɑɾ æftɝ ðə tʃɹʌbəl aɪ wɛn tə wɪð jəɹ hænz. jəl oʊnli meɪk fɹɛʃ skɹeɪps ən ðən lɛt səm bæk-æli kɹoʊn pʊt ðə laɪt noʊz wʌɾ ɑn ðɛm. ðəɹ ɪz ə smɔl ɡeɪɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə ɡɑɹɾən. ɪts oʊvɝɡɹoʊn, ən noʊ wʌn bʌt mi ivən ɹɪmɛmbɝz ɪts ðɛɹ."

"Not after the trouble I went to with your hands. You'll only make fresh scrapes and then let some back-alley crone put the Light knows what on them. There is a small gate on the other side of the garden. It's overgrown, and no one but me even remembers it's there."

sʌɾənli ɹænd hɝd buts paʊndɪŋ təwɔɹɾ əm oʊvɝ ðə sleɪt peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz.

Suddenly Rand heard boots pounding toward them over the slate paving stones.

"tu leɪt," ɡɔɪn mʌɾɝd. "hi mʌst əv stɑɹɾəd ɹʌnɪŋ əz sun əz i wɑz aʊɾ ʌv aɪʃɑt."

"Too late," Gawyn muttered. "He must have started running as soon as he was out of eyeshot."

ɪleɪn ɡɹaʊld ən oʊθ, ən ɹændz aɪbɹaʊz ʃɑɾ ʌp. hi hæd hɝd ðət wʌn fɹəm ðə steɪbəlmən ət ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ ən hæd bɪn ʃɑk ðɛn. ðə nɛks moʊmənt ʃi wɑz ɪn kul sɛlf-pəzɛʃən wʌns mɔɹ.

Elayne growled an oath, and Rand's eyebrows shot up. He had heard that one from the stablemen at The Queen's Blessing and had been shocked then. The next moment she was in cool self-possession once more.

ɡɔɪn ən ɪleɪn əpɪɹd kɑntɛn tə ɹɪmeɪn wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf steɪ fəɹ ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz wɪð sətʃ ikwənɪmɪɾi. hi stɑɹɾəd wʌns mɔɹ fəɹ ðə wɔl, noʊɪŋ i wəd bi noʊ mɔɹ ðən hæfweɪ ʌp bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡɑɹdz ɝaɪvd, bʌɾ əneɪbəl tə stæn stɪl.

Gawyn and Elayne appeared content to remain where they were, but he could not make himself stay for the Queen's Guards with such equanimity. He started once more for the wall, knowing he would be no more than halfway up before the guards arrived, but unable to stand still.

bɪfɔɹ i hæd teɪkən θɹi stɛps ɹɛd-junəfɔɹmd mɛn bɝst ɪndə saɪt, bɹɛstpleɪts kætʃɪŋ ðə sʌn əz ðeɪ dæʃt ʌp ðə pæθ. ʌðɝz keɪm laɪk bɹeɪkɪŋ weɪvz ə skɑɹləɾ ən pɑlɪʃt stil, simɪŋli fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən. səm hɛl dʒɹɔn sɔɹdz; ʌðɝz oʊnli weɪɾəd tə sɛt ðɛɹ buts bɪfɔɹ ɹeɪzɪŋ baʊz ən nɑkɪŋ fɛðɝd ʃæfs. bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɹd feɪsɡɑɹdz ɛvɹi aɪ wɑz ɡɹɪm, ən ɛvɹi bɹɔdhɛɾ æɹoʊ wɑz pɔɪntəɾ ənwəvɝɪŋli ət hɪm.

Before he had taken three steps red-uniformed men burst into sight, breastplates catching the sun as they dashed up the path. Others came like breaking waves of scarlet and polished steel, seemingly from every direction. Some held drawn swords; others only waited to set their boots before raising bows and nocking feathered shafts. Behind the barred faceguards every eye was grim, and every broadhead arrow was pointed unwaveringly at him.

ɪleɪn ən ɡɔɪn lɛpt əz wʌn, pʊɾɪŋ ðɛmsɛlvz bɪtwin ɪm ən ði æɹoʊz, ðɛɹ ɑɹmz spɹɛd tə kʌvɝ hɪm. hi stʊd vɛɹi stɪl ən kɛpt ɪz hænz ɪn pleɪn saɪt, əweɪ fɹəm ɪz sɔɹd.

Elayne and Gawyn leaped as one, putting themselves between him and the arrows, their arms spread to cover him. He stood very still and kept his hands in plain sight, away from his sword.

waɪl ðə θʌɾ ə buts ən ðə kɹik ə bɑstʃɹɪŋz stɪl hʌŋ ɪn ði ɛɹ, wʌn ə ðə soʊlʒɝz, wɪð ðə ɡoʊldən nɑɾ ʌv ən ɔfəsɝ ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, ʃaʊɾəd, "maɪ leɪɾi, maɪ lɔɹd, daʊn, kwɪkli!"

While the thud of boots and the creak of bowstrings still hung in the air, one of the soldiers, with the golden knot of an officer on his shoulder, shouted, "My Lady, my Lord, down, quickly!"

dɪspaɪɾ əɹ aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt ɑɹmz ɪleɪn dʒɹu hɝsɛlf ʌp ɹiɡəli. "ju dɛɹ tə bɹɪŋ bɛɹ stil ɪndə maɪ pɹɛzəns, tɑlænvɝ? ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn wɪl əv jə mʌkɪŋ steɪbəlz wɪð ðə minəs tʃɹupɝ fəɹ ðɪs, ɪf jə ɑɹ lʌki!"

Despite her outstretched arms Elayne drew herself up regally. "You dare to bring bare steel into my presence, Tallanvor? Gareth Bryne will have you mucking stables with the meanest trooper for this, if you are lucky!"

ðə soʊlʒɝz ɪkstʃeɪnʒd pʌzəld ɡlænsɪz, ən səm ə ðə boʊmən ənizəli hæf loʊɝd ðɛɹ baʊz. oʊnli ðən dɪɾ ɪleɪn lɛɾ əɹ ɑɹmz daʊn, əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ oʊnli hɛld əm ʌp kəz ʃi wɪʃt tə. ɡɔɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ðən fɑloʊɾ əɹ ɪɡzæmpəl. ɹænd kəd kaʊn ðə baʊz ðət hæd nɑt bɪn loʊɝd. ðə mʌsəlz ə hɪz stʌmək tɛnst əz ðoʊ ðeɪ kəd stɑp ə bɹɔdhɛd ʃæft ət twɛnti peɪsɪz.

The soldiers exchanged puzzled glances, and some of the bowmen uneasily half lowered their bows. Only then did Elayne let her arms down, as if she had only held them up because she wished to. Gawyn hesitated, then followed her example. Rand could count the bows that had not been lowered. The muscles of his stomach tensed as though they could stop a broadhead shaft at twenty paces.

ðə mæn wɪð ði ɔfəsɝz nɑt sim ðə moʊs pɝplɛkst ʌv ɔl. "maɪ leɪɾi, fɝɡɪv mi, bʌt lɔɹd ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd ɹipɔɹɾəd ə dɝɾi pɛzən skʌlkɪŋ ɪn ðə ɡɑɹɾənz, ɑɹmd ən ɛndeɪnʒɝɪŋ maɪ leɪɾi ɪleɪn ən maɪ lɔɹd ɡɔɪn." hɪz aɪz wɛn tə ɹænd, ən ɪz vɔɪs fɪnd. "ɪf maɪ leɪɾi ən maɪ lɔɹd wɪl pliz tə stɛp əsaɪd, əl teɪk ðə vɪlən ɪndə kʌstəɾi. ðəɹ ɪz tu mʌtʃ ɹɪf-ɹæf ɪn ðə sɪɾi ðiz deɪz."

The man with the officer's knot seemed the most perplexed of all. "My Lady, forgive me, but Lord Galadedrid reported a dirty peasant skulking in the gardens, armed and endangering my Lady Elayne and my Lord Gawyn." His eyes went to Rand, and his voice finned. "If my Lady and my Lord will please to step aside, I will take the villain into custody. There is too much riff-raff in the city these days."

"aɪ daʊt vɛɹi mʌtʃ ɪf ɡɑləd ɹipɔɹɾəd ɛniθɪŋ ə ðə kaɪnd," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ɡɑləd dʌz nɑt laɪ."

"I doubt very much if Galad reported anything of the kind," Elayne said. "Galad does not lie."

"səmtaɪmz aɪ wɪʃ i wʊd," ɡɔɪn sɛd sɔfli, fəɹ ɹændz ɪɹ. "dʒʌst wʌns. ɪt maɪt meɪk lɪvɪŋ wɪð ɪm iziɝ."

"Sometimes I wish he would," Gawyn said softly, for Rand's ear. "Just once. It might make living with him easier."

"ðɪs mæn ɪz maɪ ɡɛst," ɪleɪn kəntɪnjud, "æn hɪɹ ʌndɝ maɪ pɹətɛkʃən. jə meɪ wɪðdʒɹɔ, tɑlænvɝ."

"This man is my guest," Elayne continued, "and here under my protection. You may withdraw, Tallanvor."

"aɪ ɹəɡɹɛt ðət wɪl nɑt bi pɑsəbəl, maɪ leɪɾi. əz maɪ leɪɾi noʊz, ðə kwin, jəɹ leɪɾi mʌðɝ, hæz ɡɪvən ɔɹɾɝz ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ɛniwʌn ɑn pæləs ɡɹaʊnz wɪθaʊɾ əɹ mædʒəstiz pɝmɪʃən, ən wɝɾ əz bɪn sɛn tə hɝ mædʒəsti ʌv ðɪs ɪntʃɹuɾɝ." ðəɹ wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə hɪn ə sæɾəsfækʃən ɪn tɑlænvɝz vɔɪs. ɹænd səspɛktəd ði ɔfəsɝ hæd hæd tə æksɛpt ʌðɝ kəmænz fɹəm ɪleɪn ðəɾ i dɪd nɑt θɪŋk pɹɑpɝ; ðɪs taɪm ðə mæn wɑz nɑɾ əbaʊt tə, nɑt wən i hæɾ ə pɝfəkt ɪkskjus.

"I regret that will not be possible, my Lady. As my Lady knows, the Queen, your lady mother, has given orders regarding anyone on Palace grounds without Her Majesty's permission, and word has been sent to Her Majesty of this intruder." There was more than a hint of satisfaction in Tallanvor's voice. Rand suspected the officer had had to accept other commands from Elayne that he did not think proper; this time the man was not about to, not when he had a perfect excuse.

ɪleɪn stɛɹd bæk ət tɑlænvɝ; fəɹ wʌns ʃi simd əɾ ə lɔs.

Elayne stared back at Tallanvor; for once she seemed at a loss.

ɹænd lʊkt ə kwɛstʃən ət ɡɔɪn, ən ɡɔɪn ʌndɝstʊd. "pɹɪzən," hi mɝmɝd. ɹændz feɪs wɛnt waɪt, ən ðə jʌŋ mæn æɾəd kwɪkli, "oʊnli fəɹ ə fju deɪz, ən jəl nɑt bi hɑɹmd. jəl bi kwɛstʃən baɪ ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn, ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl, pɝsənəli, bʌt jəl bi sɛt fɹi wʌns ɪts klɪɹ jə mɛnt noʊ hɑɹm." hi pɔzd, hɪɾən θɔts ɪn ɪz aɪz. "aɪ hoʊp jə wɝ tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ, ɹænd ælθɹ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

Rand looked a question at Gawyn, and Gawyn understood. "Prison," he murmured. Rand's face went white, and the young man added quickly, "Only for a few days, and you will not be harmed. You'll be questioned by Gareth Bryne, the Captain-General, personally, but you will be set free once it's clear you meant no harm." He paused, hidden thoughts in his eyes. "I hope you were telling the truth, Rand al'Thor from the Two Rivers."

"ju wɪl kəndʌkt ɔl θɹi ʌv əs tə maɪ mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn ənaʊnst sʌɾənli. ə ɡɹɪn blumd ɑn ɡɔɪnz feɪs.

"You will conduct all three of us to my mother," Elayne announced suddenly. A grin bloomed on Gawyn's face.

bɪhaɪn ðə stil bɑɹz əkɹɔs ɪz feɪs, tɑlænvɝ əpɪɹd teɪkən əbæk. "maɪ leɪɾi, aɪ - "

Behind the steel bars across his face, Tallanvor appeared taken aback. "My Lady, I - "

"ɔɹ ɛls kəndʌkt ɔl θɹi ʌv əs tə ə sɛl," ɪleɪn sɛd. "wi wɪl ɹɪmeɪn təɡɛðɝ. əɹ wɪl jə ɡɪv ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ hænz tə bi leɪɾ əpɑn maɪ pɝsən?" hɝ smaɪl wɑz vɪktɔɹiəs, ən ðə weɪ tɑlænvɝ lʊkt ɝaʊn əz ɪf i ɪkspɛktəd tə faɪn hɛlp ɪn ðə tʃɹiz sɛd hi, tu, θɔt ʃi hæd wʌn.

"Or else conduct all three of us to a cell," Elayne said. "We will remain together. Or will you give orders for hands to be laid upon my person?" Her smile was victorious, and the way Tallanvor looked around as if he expected to find help in the trees said he, too, thought she had won.

wʌn wʌt? haʊ?

Won what? How?

"mʌðɝ ɪz vjuɪŋ lɑɡən," ɡɔɪn sɛd sɔfli, əz ɪf i hæd ɹɛd ɹændz θɔts, "æn ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz nɑt bɪzi, tɑlænvɝ wəd nɑt dɛɹ tʃɹup ɪndə hɝ pɹɛzəns wɪð ɪleɪn ən mi, əz ɪf wi wɝ ʌndɝ ɡɑɹd. mʌðɝ əz ə bɪɾ ʌv ə tɛmpɝ, səmtaɪmz."

"Mother is viewing Logain," Gawyn said softly, as if he had read Rand's thoughts, "and even if she was not busy, Tallanvor would not dare troop into her presence with Elayne and me, as if we were under guard. Mother has a bit of a temper, sometimes."

ɹænd ɹɪmɛmbɝd wʌt mæstɝ ɡɪl hæd sɛɾ əbaʊt kwin mɔɹɡeɪs. ə bɪɾ ʌv ə tɛmpɝ?

Rand remembered what Master Gill had said about Queen Morgase. A bit of a temper?

ənʌðɝ ɹɛd-junəfɔɹm soʊlʒɝ keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ daʊn ðə pæθ, skɪɾɪŋ tə ə hɔl tə səlut wɪð ən ɑɹm əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst. hi spoʊk sɔfli tə tɑlænvɝ, ən ɪz wɝdz bɹɔt sæɾəsfækʃən bæk tə tɑlænvɝz feɪs.

Another red-uniformed soldier came running down the path, skidding to a halt to salute with an arm across his chest. He spoke softly to Tallanvor, and his words brought satisfaction back to Tallanvor's face.

"ðə kwin, jəɹ leɪɾi mʌðɝ," tɑlænvɝ ənaʊnst, "kəmænz mi tə bɹɪŋ ði ɪntʃɹuɾɝ tə hɝ ɪmiɾiətli. ɪts ɔlsoʊ ðə kwinz kəmæn ðət maɪ leɪɾi ɪleɪn ən maɪ lɔɹd ɡɔɪn ətɛn hɝ. ɔlsoʊ ɪmiɾiətli."

"The Queen, your lady mother," Tallanvor announced, "commands me to bring the intruder to her immediately. It is also the Queen's command that my Lady Elayne and my Lord Gawyn attend her. Also immediately."

ɡɔɪn wɪnst, ən ɪleɪn swɑloʊd hɑɹd. hɝ feɪs kəmpoʊzd, ʃi stɪl bɪɡæn ɪndʌstʃɹiəsli bɹʌʃɪŋ ət ðə steɪnz ɑn əɹ dʒɹɛs. əsaɪd fɹəm dɪslɑdʒɪŋ ə fju pisəz ə bɑɹk, hɝ ɛfɝt dɪd lɪɾəl ɡʊd.

Gawyn winced, and Elayne swallowed hard. Her face composed, she still began industriously brushing at the stains on her dress. Aside from dislodging a few pieces of bark, her effort did little good.

"ɪf maɪ leɪɾi plizɪz?" tɑlænvɝ sɛd smʌɡli. "maɪ lɔɹd?"

"If my Lady pleases?" Tallanvor said smugly. "My Lord?"

ðə soʊlʒɝz fɔɹmd ɝaʊn əm ɪn ə hɑloʊ bɑks ðət stɑɹɾəd əlɔŋ ðə sleɪt pæθ wɪð tɑlænvɝ liɾɪŋ. ɡɔɪn ən ɪleɪn wɔkt ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ɹænd, boʊθ əpɪɹɪŋ lɔst ɪn ənplɛzən θɔts. ðə soʊlʒɝz hæd ʃiðd ðɛɹ sɔɹdz ən ɹɪtɝn æɹoʊz tə kwɪvɝz, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ noʊ lɛs ɑn ɡɑɹd ðən wən ðeɪ hæd hæd wɛpənz ɪn hænd. ðeɪ wɑtʃt ɹænd əz ɪf ðeɪ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm əɾ ɛni moʊmən tə snætʃ ɪz sɔɹɾ ən tʃɹaɪ tə kʌɾ ɪz weɪ tə fɹiɾəm.

The soldiers formed around them in a hollow box that started along the slate path with Tallanvor leading. Gawyn and Elayne walked on either side of Rand, both appearing lost in unpleasant thoughts. The soldiers had sheathed their swords and returned arrows to quivers, but they were no less on guard than when they had had weapons in hand. They watched Rand as if they expected him at any moment to snatch his sword and try to cut his way to freedom.

tʃɹaɪ ɛniθɪŋ? aɪ woʊn tʃɹaɪ ɛniθɪŋ. ənnoʊɾɪst! hɑ!

Try anything? I won't try anything. Unnoticed! Hah!

wɑtʃɪŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, hi sʌɾənli bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ðə ɡɑɹɾən. wʌn θɪŋ hæd hæpən æftɝ ənʌðɝ, itʃ nu ʃɑk kʌmɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə læs hæɾ ə tʃæns tə feɪd, ən ɪz sɝaʊndɪŋz hæd bɪn ə blɝ, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə wɔl ən ɪz dɪvaʊt wɪʃ tə bi bæk ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ʌv ɪt. naʊ hi sɔ ðə ɡɹin ɡɹæs ðət hæɾ oʊnli tɪkəl ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪn bɪfɔɹ. ɡɹin! ə hʌnʒɹəd ʃeɪdz ʌv ɡɹin. tʃɹiz ən bʊʃəz ɡɹin ən θɹaɪvɪŋ, θɪk wɪð livz ən fɹut. lʌʃ vaɪnz kʌvɝɪŋ ɑɹbɝz oʊvɝ ðə pæθ. flaʊɝz ɛvɹiwɛɹ. soʊ mɛni flaʊɝz, spɹeɪɪŋ ðə ɡɑɹɾən wɪð kʌlɝ. səm i nu - bɹaɪt ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst ən taɪni pɪŋk tælənd, kɹɪmzən stɑɹbleɪz ən pɝpəl ɛmənz ɡlɔɹi, ɹoʊzɪz ɪn ɛvɹi kʌlɝ fɹəm pjʊɹəst waɪt tə dip, dip ɹɛd - bʌɾ ʌðɝz wɝ stʃɹeɪnʒ, soʊ fænsɪfəl ɪn ʃeɪp ən hju hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðeɪ kəd bi ɹil.

Watching the soldiers watching him, he suddenly became aware of the garden. One thing had happened after another, each new shock coming before the last had a chance to fade, and his surroundings had been a blur, except for the wall and his devout wish to be back on the other side of it. Now he saw the green grass that had only tickled the back of his mind before. Green! A hundred shades of green. Trees and bushes green and thriving, thick with leaves and fruit. Lush vines covering arbors over the path. Flowers everywhere. So many flowers, spraying the garden with color. Some he knew - bright golden sunburst and tiny pink tallowend, crimson starblaze and purple Emond's Glory, roses in every color from purest white to deep, deep red - but others were strange, so fanciful in shape and hue he wondered if they could be real.

"ɪts ɡɹin," hi wɪspɝd. "ɡɹin." ðə soʊlʒɝz mʌɾɝd tə ðɛmsɛlvz; tɑlænvɝ ɡeɪv əm ə ʃɑɹp lʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən ðeɪ fɛl saɪlənt.

"It's green," he whispered. "Green." The soldiers muttered to themselves; Tallanvor gave them a sharp look over his shoulder and they fell silent.

"ɪleɪɾəz wɝk," ɡɔɪn sɛɾ æbsənli.

"Elaida's work," Gawyn said absently.

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑt ɹaɪt," ɪleɪn sɛd. "ʃi æskt ɪf aɪ wɑntəd tə pɪk aʊt ðə wʌn fɑɹm ʃi kəd də ðə seɪm fɔɹ, waɪl ɔl ɝaʊn ɪt ðə kɹɑps stɪl feɪld, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl ɪzən ɹaɪt fəɹ əs tə hæv flaʊɝz wən ðəɹ ɑɹ pipəl u də nɑɾ əv ɪnʌf tə it." ʃi dʒɹu ə dip bɹɛθ, ən ɹifɪld əɹ sɛlf-pəzɛʃən. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ jɝsɛlf," ʃi toʊld ɹænd bɹɪskli. "spik ʌp klɪɹli wən jə ɑɹ spoʊkən tə, ən kip saɪlən ʌðɝwaɪz. ən fɑloʊ maɪ lɛd. ɔl wɪl bi wɛl."

"It is not right," Elayne said. "She asked if I wanted to pick out the one farm she could do the same for, while all around it the crops still failed, but it still isn't right for us to have flowers when there are people who do not have enough to eat." She drew a deep breath, and refilled her self-possession. "Remember yourself," she told Rand briskly. "Speak up clearly when you are spoken to, and keep silent otherwise. And follow my lead. All will be well."

ɹænd wɪʃt i kəd ʃɛɹ əɹ kɑnfəɾəns. ɪt wʊɾə hɛlpt ɪf ɡɔɪn hæd sim tə hæv ɪɾ əz wɛl. əz tɑlænvɝ lɛɾ əm ɪndə ðə pæləs, hi lʊk bæk ət ðə ɡɑɹɾən, əɾ ɔl ðə ɡɹin stʃɹikt wɪð blɑsəmz, kʌlɝz ɹɔt fəɹ ə kwin baɪ ən ɛɛs sədaɪz hænd. hi wɑz ɪn dip wɔɾɝ, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bæŋk ɪn saɪt.

Rand wished he could share her confidence. It would have helped if Gawyn had seemed to have it as well. As Tallanvor led them into the Palace, he looked back at the garden, at all the green streaked with blossoms, colors wrought for a Queen by an Aes Sedai's hand. He was in deep water, and there was no bank in sight.

pæləs sɝvəns fɪl ðə hɔlz, ɪn ɹɛd lɪvɝiz wɪð kɑlɝz ən kʌfs ʌv waɪt, ðə waɪt laɪən ɑn ðə lɛf bɹɛst ə ðɛɹ tunɪks, skɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪntɛn ɑn tæsks ðət wɝ nɑt ɹɛɾəli əpɛɹənt. wən ðə soʊlʒɝz tʃɹup baɪ wɪð ɪleɪn ən ɡɔɪn, ən ɹænd, ɪn ðɛɹ mɪdst, ðeɪ stɑp dɛɾ ɪn ðɛɹ tʃɹæks tə stɛɹ oʊpənməðd.

Palace servants filled the halls, in red liveries with collars and cuffs of white, the White Lion on the left breast of their tunics, scurrying about intent on tasks that were not readily apparent. When the soldiers trooped by with Elayne and Gawyn, and Rand, in their midst, they stopped dead in their tracks to stare openmouthed.

θɹu ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɔl ðə kɑnstɝneɪʃən ə ɡɹeɪ-stʃɹaɪp tɑmkæt wɑndɝɾ ʌnkənsɝnədli daʊn ðə hɔl, wivɪŋ bɪtwin ðə ɡɑəlɪŋ sɝvəns. sʌɾənli ðə kæt stʃɹʌk ɹænd əz ɑd. hi hæd bɪn ɪn bɛɹlən lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə noʊ ðəɾ ivən ðə minəst ʃɑp hæd kæts lɝkɪŋ ɪn ɛvɹi kɔɹnɝ. sɪns ɛntɝɪŋ ðə pæləs, ðə tɑm wɑz ði oʊnli kæɾ i hæd sin.

Through the middle of all the consternation a gray-striped tomcat wandered unconcernedly down the hall, weaving between the goggling servants. Suddenly the cat struck Rand as odd. He had been in Baerlon long enough to know that even the meanest shop had cats lurking in every corner. Since entering the Palace, the tom was the only cat he had seen.

"ju doʊn əv ɹæts?" hi sɛɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif. ɛvɹi pleɪs hæd ɹæts.

"You don't have rats?" he said in disbelief. Every place had rats.

"ɪleɪɾə dʌzn laɪk ɹæts," ɡɔɪn mʌɾɝd veɪɡli. hi wɑz fɹaʊnɪŋ wɝidli daʊn ðə hɔl, əpɛɹənli ɔlɹɛɾi siɪŋ ðə kʌmɪŋ miɾɪŋ wɪð ðə kwin. "wi nɛvɝ əv ɹæts."

"Elaida doesn't like rats," Gawyn muttered vaguely. He was frowning worriedly down the hall, apparently already seeing the coming meeting with the Queen. "We never have rats."

"boʊθ ə jə bi kwaɪət." ɪleɪnz vɔɪs wɑz ʃɑɹp, bʌɾ əz æbsən əz əɹ bɹʌðɝz. "aɪ æm tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɪŋk."

"Both of you be quiet." Elayne's voice was sharp, but as absent as her brother's. "I am trying to think."

ɹænd wɑtʃt ðə kæɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ əntɪl ðə ɡɑɹdz tʊk ɪm ɹaʊn ə kɔɹnɝ, haɪɾɪŋ ðə tɑm fɹəm saɪt. ə lɑɾ ə kæts wʊɾə meɪɾ ɪm fil bɛɾɝ; ɪt wʊɾə bɪn naɪs ɪf ðəɹ wɑz wʌn θɪŋ nɔɹməl əbaʊt ðə pæləs, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz ɹæts.

Rand watched the cat over his shoulder until the guards took him round a corner, hiding the tom from sight. A lot of cats would have made him feel better; it would have been nice if there was one thing normal about the Palace, even if it was rats.

ðə pæθ tɑlænvɝ tʊk tɝn soʊ mɛni taɪmz ðət ɹænd lɔst ɪz sɛns ə dɝɛkʃən. faɪnəli ðə jʌŋ ɔfəsɝ stɑp bɪfɔɹ tɔl dʌbəl dɔɹz ə dɑɹk wʊd wɪð ə ɹɪtʃ ɡloʊ, nɑt soʊ ɡɹæn əz səm ðeɪ hæd pæst, bʌt stɪl kɑɹvd ɔl oʊvɝ wɪð ɹoʊz ə laɪənz, faɪnli ɹɔɾ ɪn dɪteɪl. ə lɪvɹid sɝvən stʊd tə iðɝ saɪd.

The path Tallanvor took turned so many times that Rand lost his sense of direction. Finally the young officer stopped before tall double doors of dark wood with a rich glow, not so grand as some they had passed, but still carved all over with rows of lions, finely wrought in detail. A liveried servant stood to either side.

"æt list ɪɾ ɪzən ðə ɡɹæn hɔl." ɡɔɪn læft ənstɛɾəli. "aɪ nɛvɝ hɝd ðət mʌðɝ kəmændəɾ ɛniwʌnz hɛd kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm hɪɹ." hi saʊndəɾ əz ɪf i θɔt ʃi maɪt sɛɾ ə pɹɛsɪɾənt.

"At least it isn't the Grand Hall." Gawyn laughed unsteadily. "I never heard that Mother commanded anyone's head cut off from here." He sounded as if he thought she might set a precedent.

tɑlænvɝ ɹitʃt fəɹ ɹændz sɔɹd, bʌɾ ɪleɪn muv tə kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "hi ɪz maɪ ɡɛst, ən baɪ kʌstəm ən lɔ, ɡɛsts ə ðə ɹɔɪəl fæmli meɪ ɡoʊ ɑɹmd ivən ɪn mʌðɝz pɹɛzəns. əɹ wɪl jə dɪnaɪ maɪ wɝd ðət hiz maɪ ɡɛst?"

Tallanvor reached for Rand's sword, but Elayne moved to cut him off. "He is my guest, and by custom and law, guests of the royal family may go armed even in Mother's presence. Or will you deny my word that he is my guest?"

tɑlænvɝ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, lɑkɪŋ aɪz wɪð hɝ, ðən nɑɾəd. "vɛɹi wɛl, maɪ leɪɾi." ʃi smaɪld ət ɹænd əz tɑlænvɝ stɛp bæk, bʌɾ ɪt læstəɾ oʊnli ə moʊmənt. "fɝst ɹæŋk tə əkʌmpəni mi," tɑlænvɝ kəmændəd. "ənaʊns ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn ən ðə lɔɹd ɡɔɪn tə hɝ mædʒəsti," hi toʊl ðə dɔɹkipɝz. "ɔlsoʊ ɡɑɹdzmæn-lutɛnən tɑlænvɝ, əɾ əɹ mædʒəstiz kəmænd, wɪð ði ɪntʃɹuɾɝ ʌndɝ ɡɑɹd."

Tallanvor hesitated, locking eyes with her, then nodded. "Very well, my Lady." She smiled at Rand as Tallanvor stepped back, but it lasted only a moment. "First rank to accompany me," Tallanvor commanded. "Announce the Lady Elayne and the Lord Gawyn to Her Majesty," he told the doorkeepers. "Also Guardsman-Lieutenant Tallanvor, at Her Majesty's command, with the intruder under guard."

ɪleɪn skaʊld ət tɑlænvɝ, bʌt ðə dɔɹz wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi swɪŋɪŋ oʊpən. ə sɑnɝəs vɔɪs saʊndəd, ənaʊnsɪŋ ðoʊz u keɪm.

Elayne scowled at Tallanvor, but the doors were already swinging open. A sonorous voice sounded, announcing those who came.

ɡɹænli ɪleɪn swɛp θɹu ðə dɔɹz, spɔɪlɪŋ əɹ ɹiɡəl ɛntʃɹəns oʊnli ə lɪɾəl baɪ moʊʃənɪŋ fəɹ ɹænd tə kip kloʊs bɪhaɪn hɝ. ɡɔɪn skwɛɹɾ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən stʃɹoʊɾ ɪn flæŋkɪŋ hɝ, wʌn mɛʒɝd peɪs tə hɝ ɹɪɹ. ɹænd fɑloʊd, ənsɝteɪnli kipɪŋ lɛvəl wɪð ɡɔɪn ɑn əɹ ʌðɝ saɪd. tɑlænvɝ steɪd kloʊs tə ɹænd, ən tɛn soʊlʒɝz keɪm wɪð hɪm. ðə dɔɹz kloʊz saɪlənli bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

Grandly Elayne swept through the doors, spoiling her regal entrance only a little by motioning for Rand to keep close behind her. Gawyn squared his shoulders and strode in flanking her, one measured pace to her rear. Rand followed, uncertainly keeping level with Gawyn on her other side. Tallanvor stayed close to Rand, and ten soldiers came with him. The doors closed silently behind them.

sʌɾənli ɪleɪn dʒɹɑpt ɪndə ə dip kɝtsi, saɪməlteɪniəsli boʊɪŋ fɹəm ðə weɪst, ən steɪd ðɛɹ, hoʊldɪŋ əɹ skɝt waɪd. ɹænd ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ðən heɪstəli ɛmjəleɪɾɪd ɡɔɪn ən ði ʌðɝ mɛn, ʃɪftɪŋ ɔkwɝdli əntɪl i hæɾ ɪt ɹaɪt. daʊn ɑn ɪz ɹaɪt ni, hɛd baʊd, bɛndɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə pɹɛs ðə nʌkəlz ə hɪz ɹaɪt hæn əɡɛns ðə mɑɹbəl taɪlz, hɪz lɛf hæn ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn ði ɛn ə hɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. ɡɔɪn, wɪθaʊɾ ə sɔɹd, pʊɾ ɪz hæn ɑn ɪz dæɡɝ ðə seɪm weɪ.

Suddenly Elayne dropped into a deep curtsy, simultaneously bowing from the waist, and stayed there, holding her skirt wide. Rand gave a start, then hastily emulated Gawyn and the other men, shifting awkwardly until he had it right. Down on his right knee, head bowed, bending forward to press the knuckles of his right hand against the marble tiles, his left hand resting on the end of his sword hilt. Gawyn, without a sword, put his hand on his dagger the same way.

ɹænd wɑz dʒʌs kənɡɹætʃəleɪɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɑn ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪt ɹaɪt wən i noʊɾəst tɑlænvɝ, hɪz hɛd stɪl bɛnt, ɡlɛɹɪŋ saɪdweɪz əɾ ɪm fɹəm bɪhaɪn ɪz feɪs-ɡɑɹd. wɑz aɪ səpoʊz tə də sʌmθɪŋ ɛls? hi wɑz sʌɾənli æŋɡɹi ðət tɑlænvɝ ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪm tə noʊ wʌt tə də wən noʊ wʌn hæd toʊl hɪm. ən æŋɡɹi oʊvɝ biɪŋ əfɹeɪɾ ə ðə ɡɑɹdz. hi hæd dʌn nʌθɪŋ tə bi fɪɹfəl fɔɹ. hi nu hɪz fɪɹ wɑz nɑt tɑlænvɝz fɔlt, bʌɾ i wɑz æŋɡɹi əɾ ɪm ɛniweɪ.

Rand was just congratulating himself on getting it right when he noticed Tallanvor, his head still bent, glaring sideways at him from behind his face-guard. Was I supposed to do something else? He was suddenly angry that Tallanvor expected him to know what to do when no one had told him. And angry over being afraid of the guards. He had done nothing to be fearful for. He knew his fear was not Tallanvor's fault, but he was angry at him anyway.

ɛvɹiwʌn hɛl ðɛɹ pəzɪʃənz, fɹoʊzən əz ɪf weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ðə spɹɪŋ θɔ. hi dɪd nɑt noʊ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ, bʌɾ i tʊk ði ɑpɝtunəɾi tə stʌɾi ðə pleɪs tə wɪtʃ i hæd bɪn bɹɔt. hi kɛpt ɪz hɛd daʊn, dʒʌs tɝnɪŋ ɪɾ ɪnʌf tə si. tɑlænvɝz skaʊl dipənd, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt.

Everyone held their positions, frozen as if waiting for the spring thaw. He did not know what they were waiting for, but he took the opportunity to study the place to which he had been brought. He kept his head down, just turning it enough to see. Tallanvor's scowl deepened, but he ignored it.

ðə skwɛɹ tʃeɪmbɝ wɑz əbaʊt ðə saɪz ə ðə kɑmən ɹum ət ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ, ɪts wɔlz pɹɪzɛntɪŋ hʌntɪŋ sinz kɑɹvd ɪn ɹɪlif ɪn stoʊn ə ðə pjʊɹəst waɪt. ðə tæpəstʃɹiz bɪtwin ðə kɑɹvɪŋz wɝ dʒɛntəl ɪmədʒəz ə bɹaɪt flaʊɝz ən bɹɪljənli pluməɡd hʌmɪŋbɝdz, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə tu ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə ɹum, wɛɹ ðə waɪt laɪən ʌv ændɝ stʊd tɔlɝ ðən ə mæn ɑn skɑɹlət filz. ðoʊz tu hæŋʒɪŋz flæŋkt ə deɪz, ən ɑn ðə deɪz ə kɑɹvd ən ɡɪldɪd θɹoʊn wɛɹ sæt ðə kwin.

The square chamber was about the size of the common room at The Queen's Blessing, its walls presenting hunting scenes carved in relief in stone of the purest white. The tapestries between the carvings were gentle images of bright flowers and brilliantly plumaged hummingbirds, except for the two at the far end of the room, where the White Lion of Andor stood taller than a man on scarlet fields. Those two hangings flanked a dais, and on the dais a carved and gilded throne where sat the Queen.

ə blʌf, blɑki mæn stʊd bæɹhɛɾɪd baɪ ðə kwinz ɹaɪt hæn ɪn ðə ɹɛɾ ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz, wɪð fɔɹ ɡoʊldən nɑts ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ ə hɪz kloʊk ən waɪd ɡoʊldən bænz bɹeɪkɪŋ ðə waɪɾ ə hɪz kʌfs. hɪz tɛmpəlz wɝ hɛvi wɪð ɡɹeɪ, bʌɾ i lʊkt əz stʃɹɔŋ ən ɪmuvəbəl əz ə ɹɑk. ðət hæd tə bi ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl, ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn. bɪhaɪn ðə θɹoʊn ən tə ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə wʊmən ɪn dip ɡɹin sɪlk sæɾ ɑn ə loʊ stul, nɪɾɪŋ sʌmθɪŋ aʊɾ ə dɑɹk, ɔlmoʊs blæk, wʊl. ət fɝs ðə nɪɾɪŋ meɪd ɹænd θɪŋk ʃi wɑz oʊld, bʌɾ ət sɛkənd ɡlæns i kəd nɑt pʊɾ ən eɪdʒ tə hɝ əɾ ɔl. jʌŋ, oʊld, hi dɪd nɑt noʊ. hɝ ətɛnʃən sim tə bi ɪntaɪɝli ɑn əɹ niɾəlz ən jɑɹn, dʒʌst əz ɪf ðəɹ wɝ nɑɾ ə kwin wɪðɪn ɑɹmz ɹitʃ ə hɝ. ʃi wɑz ə hænsəm wʊmən, aʊtwɝdli plæsəd, jɛt ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ tɛɹəbəl ɪn əɹ kɑnsəntʃɹeɪʃən. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saʊn ɪn ðə ɹum ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə klɪk ə hɝ niɾəlz.

A bluff, blocky man stood bareheaded by the Queen's right hand in the red of the Queen's Guards, with four golden knots on the shoulder of his cloak and wide golden bands breaking the white of his cuffs. His temples were heavy with gray, but he looked as strong and immovable as a rock. That had to be the Captain-General, Gareth Bryne. Behind the throne and to the other side a woman in deep green silk sat on a low stool, knitting something out of dark, almost black, wool. At first the knitting made Rand think she was old, but at second glance he could not put an age to her at all. Young, old, he did not know. Her attention seemed to be entirely on her needles and yarn, just as if there were not a Queen within arm's reach of her. She was a handsome woman, outwardly placid, yet there was something terrible in her concentration. There was no sound in the room except for the click of her needles.

hi tʃɹaɪd tə lʊk əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ, jɛɾ ɪz aɪz kɛpt ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə ðə wʊmən wɪð ðə ɡlimɪŋ ɹiθ ə faɪnli ɹɔt ɹoʊzɪz ɑn əɹ bɹaʊ, ðə ɹoʊz kɹaʊn ʌv ændɝ. ə lɔŋ ɹɛd stoʊl, ðə laɪən ʌv ændɝ mɑɹtʃɪŋ əlɔŋ ɪts lɛŋθ, hʌŋ oʊvɝ əɹ sɪlkən dʒɹɛs ə ɹɛɾ ən waɪt plits, ən wən ʃi tʌtʃt ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəlz ɑɹm wɪð əɹ lɛf hænd, ə ɹɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ə ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt, iɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl, ɡlɪɾɝd. jɛɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə ɡɹænduɹ ə kloʊðz əɹ dʒuəlɹi əɹ ivən kɹaʊn ðət dʒɹu ɹændz aɪz əɡɛn ən əɡɛn: ɪt wɑz ðə wʊmən u wɔɹ ðɛm.

He tried to look at everything, yet his eyes kept going back to the woman with the gleaming wreath of finely wrought roses on her brow, the Rose Crown of Andor. A long red stole, the Lion of Andor marching along its length, hung over her silken dress of red and white pleats, and when she touched the Captain-General's arm with her left hand, a ring in the shape of the Great Serpent, eating its own tail, glittered. Yet it was not the grandeur of clothes or jewelry or even crown that drew Rand's eyes again and again: it was the woman who wore them.

mɔɹɡeɪs hæɾ əɹ dɔɾɝz bjuɾi, mətʃjʊɹɾ ən ɹaɪpənd. hɝ feɪs ən fɪɡjɝ, hɝ pɹɛzəns, fɪl ðə ɹum laɪk ə laɪt ðət dɪm ði ʌðɝ tu wɪð hɝ. ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ə wɪɾoʊ ɪn ɛmənz fild, ʃi wʊɾə hæɾ ə laɪn ə suɾɝz aʊtsaɪɾ əɹ dɔɹ ivən ɪf ʃi wɑz ðə wɝs kʊk ən moʊst slʌvənli haʊs kipɝ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. hi sɔ hɝ stʌɾiɪŋ ɪm ən dʌkt ɪz hɛd, əfɹeɪd ʃi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə tɛl ɪz θɔts fɹəm ɪz feɪs. laɪt, θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊt ðə kwin laɪk ʃi wɑz ə vɪlədʒ wʊmən! jə ful!

Morgase had her daughter's beauty, matured and ripened. Her face and figure, her presence, filled the room like a light that dimmed the other two with her. If she had been a widow in Emond's Field, she would have had a line of suitors outside her door even if she was the worst cook and most slovenly house keeper in the Two Rivers. He saw her studying him and ducked his head, afraid she might be able to tell his thoughts from his face. Light, thinking about the Queen like she was a village woman! You fool!

"ju meɪ ɹaɪz," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛɾ ɪn ə ɹɪtʃ, wɔɹm vɔɪs ðət hɛld ɪleɪnz əʃʊɹəns ʌv oʊbiɾiəns ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz oʊvɝ.

"You may rise," Morgase said in a rich, warm voice that held Elayne's assurance of obedience a hundred times over.

ɹænd stʊd wɪð ðə ɹɛst.

Rand stood with the rest.

"mʌðɝ - " ɪleɪn bɪɡæn, bʌt mɔɹɡeɪs kʌɾ əɹ ɔf.

"Mother - " Elayne began, but Morgase cut her off.

"ju hæv bɪn klaɪmɪŋ tʃɹiz, ɪt simz, dɔɾɝ." ɪleɪn plʌkt ə stʃɹeɪ fɹæɡmən ə bɑɹk fɹəm əɹ dʒɹɛs ænd, faɪndɪŋ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pleɪs tə pʊɾ ɪt, hɛld ɪt klɛntʃt ɪn əɹ hænd. "ɪn fækt," mɔɹɡeɪs wɛn ɑn kɑmli, "ɪt wəd sim ðət dɪspaɪt maɪ ɔɹɾɝz tə ðə kɑntʃɹɛɹi juv kəntʃɹaɪv tə teɪk jəɹ lʊk ət ðɪs lɑɡən. ɡɔɪn, aɪ hæv θɔt bɛɾɝ ə ju. jə mʌs lɝn nɑɾ oʊnli tə oʊbeɪ jəɹ sɪstɝ, bʌɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm tə bi kaʊntɝweɪt fəɹ əɹ əɡɛns dɪzæstɝ." ðə kwinz aɪz swʌŋ tə ðə blɑki mæn bɪsaɪd hɝ, ðən kwɪkli əweɪ əɡɛn. bɹaɪn ɹɪmeɪn ɪmpæsɪv, əz ɪf i hæd nɑt noʊɾəst, bʌt ɹænd θɔt ðoʊz aɪz noʊɾəst ɛvɹiθɪŋ. "ðæt, ɡɔɪn, ɪz əz mʌtʃ ðə duɾi ʌv ðə fɝs pɹɪns əz ɪz liɾɪŋ ði ɑɹmiz ʌv ændɝ. pɝhæps ɪf jəɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ ɪz ɪntɛnsəfaɪd, jəl faɪn lɛs taɪm fəɹ lɛɾɪŋ jəɹ sɪstɝ lɛd jə ɪndə tʃɹʌbəl. əl æsk ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl tə si ðət jə də nɑt læk fəɹ θɪŋz tə də ɑn ðə dʒɝni nɔɹθ."

"You have been climbing trees, it seems, daughter." Elayne plucked a stray fragment of bark from her dress and, finding there was no place to put it, held it clenched in her hand. "In fact," Morgase went on calmly, "it would seem that despite my orders to the contrary you have contrived to take your look at this Logain. Gawyn, I have thought better of you. You must learn not only to obey your sister, but at the same time to be counterweight for her against disaster." The Queen's eyes swung to the blocky man beside her, then quickly away again. Bryne remained impassive, as if he had not noticed, but Rand thought those eyes noticed everything. "That, Gawyn, is as much the duty of the First Prince as is leading the armies of Andor. Perhaps if your training is intensified, you will find less time for letting your sister lead you into trouble. I will ask the Captain-General to see that you do not lack for things to do on the journey north."

ɡɔɪn ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fiɾ əz ɪf əbaʊt tə pɹoʊtɛst, ðən baʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪnstɛd. "æz jə kəmænd, mʌðɝ."

Gawyn shifted his feet as if about to protest, then bowed his head instead. "As you command, mother."

ɪleɪn ɡɹɪməst. "mʌðɝ, ɡɔɪn kænɑt kip mi aʊɾ ə tʃɹʌbəl ɪf hiz nɑt wɪð mi. ɪt wɑz fəɹ ðət ɹizən əloʊn i lɛft ɪz ɹumz. mʌðɝ, ʃʊɹli ðəɹ kəd bi noʊ hɑɹm ɪn dʒʌs lʊkɪŋ ət lɑɡən. ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə sɪɾi wɑz kloʊsɝ tə hɪm ðən wi."

Elayne grimaced. "Mother, Gawyn cannot keep me out of trouble if he is not with me. It was for that reason alone he left his rooms. Mother, surely there could be no harm in just looking at Logain. Almost everyone in the city was closer to him than we."

"ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə sɪɾi ɪz nɑt ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ." ʃɑɹpnəs ʌndɝleɪ ðə kwinz vɔɪs. "aɪ hæv sin ðɪs fɛloʊ lɑɡən fɹəm kloʊs, ən hiz deɪnʒɝəs, tʃaɪld. keɪdʒd, wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ɡɑɹɾ ɪm ɛvɹi mɪnət, hiz stɪl əz deɪnʒɝəs əz ə wʊlf. aɪ wɪʃ i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn bɹɔt nɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn."

"Everyone in the city is not the Daughter-Heir." Sharpness underlay the Queen's voice. "I have seen this fellow Logain from close, and he is dangerous, child. Caged, with Aes Sedai to guard him every minute, he is still as dangerous as a wolf. I wish he had never been brought near Caemlyn."

"hi wɪl bi dɛlt wɪð ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn." ðə wʊmən ɑn ðə stul dɪd nɑt teɪk əɹ aɪz fɹəm əɹ nɪɾɪŋ əz ʃi spoʊk. "wʌɾ ɪz ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɪz ðət ðə pipəl si ðət ðə laɪɾ əz wʌns əɡɛn væŋkwɪʃt ðə dɑɹk. ən ðət ðeɪ si jə ɑɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðət vɪktɝi, mɔɹɡeɪs."

"He will be dealt with in Tar Valon." The woman on the stool did not take her eyes from her knitting as she spoke. "What is important is that the people see that the Light has once again vanquished the Dark. And that they see you are part of that victory, Morgase."

mɔɹɡeɪs weɪvd ə dɪsmɪsɪv hænd. "aɪ wəd stɪl ɹæðɝ i hæd nɛvɝ kʌm nɪɹ keɪɛmlɪn. ɪleɪn, aɪ noʊ jəɹ maɪnd."

Morgase waved a dismissive hand. "I would still rather he had never come near Caemlyn. Elayne, I know your mind."

"mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn pɹətɛstəd, "aɪ də min tə oʊbeɪ ju. tʃɹuli aɪ du."

"Mother," Elayne protested, "I do mean to obey you. Truly I do."

"ju du?" mɔɹɡeɪs æskt ɪn mɑk sɝpɹaɪz, ðən tʃʌkəld. "jɛs, jə də tʃɹaɪ tə bi ə duɾifəl dɔɾɝ. bʌt jə kɑnstənli tɛs haʊ fɑɹ jə meɪ ɡoʊ. wɛl, aɪ dɪd ðə seɪm wɪð maɪ mʌðɝ. ðət spɪɹət wɪl stæn jə ɪn ɡʊd stɛd wən jə əsɛn tə ðə θɹoʊn, bʌt jə ɑɹ nɑt kwin jɛt, tʃaɪld. juv dɪsoʊbeɪd mi ən hæd jəɹ lʊk ət lɑɡən. bi sæɾəsfaɪd wɪð ðæt. ɑn ðə dʒɝni nɔɹθ jəl nɑt bi əlaʊd wɪðɪn wʌn hʌnʒɹəd peɪsɪz ə hɪm, niðɝ jə nɔɹ ɡɔɪn. ɪf aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ dʒʌs haʊ hɑɹd jəɹ lɛsənz wɪl bi ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, aɪ wəd sɛn lini əlɔŋ tə si ðət jə oʊbeɪ. ʃi, ət list, simz eɪbəl tə meɪk jə də əz jə mʌst."

"You do?" Morgase asked in mock surprise, then chuckled. "Yes, you do try to be a dutiful daughter. But you constantly test how far you may go. Well, I did the same with my mother. That spirit will stand you in good stead when you ascend to the throne, but you are not Queen yet, child. You have disobeyed me and had your look at Logain. Be satisfied with that. On the journey north you will not be allowed within one hundred paces of him, neither you nor Gawyn. If I did not know just how hard your lessons will be in Tar Valon, I would send Lini along to see that you obey. She, at least, seems able to make you do as you must."

ɪleɪn baʊɾ əɹ hɛd sʌlənli.

Elayne bowed her head sullenly.

ðə wʊmən bɪhaɪn ðə θɹoʊn simd ɑkjəpaɪd wɪð kaʊntɪŋ əɹ stɪtʃɪz. "ɪn wʌn wik," ʃi sɛd sʌɾənli, "ju wɪl bi wɑntɪŋ tə kʌm hoʊm tə jəɹ mʌðɝ. ɪn ə mʌnθ jəl bi wɑntɪŋ tə ɹʌn əweɪ wɪð ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl. bʌt maɪ sɪstɝz wɪl kip jə əweɪ fɹəm ði ʌnbəlivɝ. ðət sɔɹɾ ə θɪŋ ɪz nɑt fəɹ ju, nɑt jɛt." əbɹʌpli ʃi tɝn ɑn ðə stul tə lʊk ɪntɛnli əɾ ɪleɪn, ɔl əɹ plɑtʃɪɾəti ɡɔn əz ɪf ɪt hæd nɛvɝ bɪn. "ju hæv ɪɾ ɪn jə tə bi ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst kwin ðəɾ ændɝ əz ɛvɝ sin, ðəɾ ɛni læn əz sin ɪn mɔɹ ðən ə θaʊzən jɪɹz. ɪts fəɹ ðət wɪl ʃeɪp ju, ɪf juv ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ fəɹ ɪt."

The woman behind the throne seemed occupied with counting her stitches. "In one week," she said suddenly, "you will be wanting to come home to your mother. In a month you will be wanting to run away with the Traveling People. But my sisters will keep you away from the unbeliever. That sort of thing is not for you, not yet." Abruptly she turned on the stool to look intently at Elayne, all her placidity gone as if it had never been. "You have it in you to be the greatest Queen that Andor has ever seen, that any land has seen in more than a thousand years. It is for that we will shape you, if you have the strength for it."

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət hɝ. ʃi hæd tə bi ɪleɪɾə, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. sʌɾənli hi wɑz ɡlæɾ i hæd nɑt kʌm tə hɝ fəɹ hɛlp, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ əɹ ədʒɑ. ə stɝnnəs fɑɹ bɪɑn mɔɪɹeɪnz ɹeɪɾieɪtəd fɹəm hɝ. hi hæd səmtaɪmz θɔɾ ə mɔɪɹeɪn əz stil kʌvɝd wɪð vɛlvət; wɪð ɪleɪɾə ðə vɛlvət wɑz oʊnli ən ɪluʒən.

Rand stared at her. She had to be Elaida, the Aes Sedai. Suddenly he was glad he had not come to her for help, no matter what her Ajah. A sternness far beyond Moiraine's radiated from her. He had sometimes thought of Moiraine as steel covered with velvet; with Elaida the velvet was only an illusion.

"ɪnʌf, ɪleɪɾə," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ ənizəli. "ʃi hæz hɝd ðət mɔɹ ðən ɪnʌf. ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz." fəɹ ə moʊmənt ʃi wɑz saɪlənt, lʊkɪŋ əɾ əɹ dɔɾɝ. "naʊ ðəɹ ɪz ðə pɹɑbləm ə ðɪs jʌŋ mæn" - ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ɹænd wɪθaʊt teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz ɔf ɪleɪnz feɪs - "æn haʊ ən waɪ hi keɪm hɪɹ, ən waɪ jə kleɪmd ɡɛst-ɹaɪt fəɹ ɪm tə jəɹ bɹʌðɝ."

"Enough, Elaida," Morgase said, frowning uneasily. "She has heard that more than enough. The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills." For a moment she was silent, looking at her daughter. "Now there is the problem of this young man" - she gestured to Rand without taking her eyes off Elayne's face - "and how and why he came here, and why you claimed guest-right for him to your brother."

"meɪ aɪ spik, mʌðɝ?" wən mɔɹɡeɪs nɑɾəd əɹ əsɛnt, ɪleɪn toʊld ʌv ɪvɛns sɪmpli, fɹəm ðə taɪm ʃi fɝst sɔ ɹænd klaɪmɪŋ ʌp ðə sloʊp tə ðə wɔl. hi ɪkspɛktəɾ əɹ tə fɪnɪʃ baɪ pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ ði ɪnəsəns ʌv wʌɾ i hæd dʌn, bʌɾ ɪnstɛd ʃi sɛd, "mʌðɝ, ɔfən jə tɛl mi aɪ mʌs noʊ əɹ pipəl, fɹəm ðə haɪəs tə ðə loʊəst, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ aɪ miɾ ɛni ʌv əm ɪts wɪð ə dʌzən ətɛndəns. haʊ kən aɪ kʌm tə noʊ ɛniθɪŋ ɹil əɹ tʃɹu ʌndɝ sətʃ sɝkəmstænsəz? ɪn spikɪŋ wɪð ðɪs jʌŋ mæn aɪ hæv ɔlɹɛɾi lɝn mɔɹ əbaʊt ðə pipəl ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, wʌt kaɪndə pipəl ðeɪ ɑɹ, ðən aɪ ɛvɝ kəd fɹəm bʊks. ɪt sɛz sʌmθɪŋ ðət hiz kʌm soʊ fɑɹ ən əz pʊɾ ɑn ðə ɹɛd, wən soʊ mɛni ɪnkoʊmɝz wɛɹ ðə waɪt fɹəm fɪɹ. mʌðɝ, aɪ bɛɡ jə nɑt tə mɪsjuz ə lɔɪəl sʌbʒɪkt, ən wʌn u hæz tɔt mi mʌtʃ əbaʊt ðə pipəl jə ɹul."

"May I speak, mother?" When Morgase nodded her assent, Elayne told of events simply, from the time she first saw Rand climbing up the slope to the wall. He expected her to finish by proclaiming the innocence of what he had done, but instead she said, "Mother, often you tell me I must know our people, from the highest to the lowest, but whenever I meet any of them it is with a dozen attendants. How can I come to know anything real or true under such circumstances? In speaking with this young man I have already learned more about the people of the Two Rivers, what kind of people they are, than I ever could from books. It says something that he has come so far and has put on the red, when so many incomers wear the white from fear. Mother, I beg you not to misuse a loyal subject, and one who has taught me much about the people you rule."

"ə lɔɪəl sʌbʒɪkt fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz." mɔɹɡeɪs saɪd. "maɪ tʃaɪld, jə ʃəd peɪ mɔɹ hid tə ðoʊz bʊks. ðə tu ɹɪvɝz əz nɑt sin ə tæks kəlɛktɝ ɪn sɪks dʒɛnɝeɪʃənz, nɔɹ ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz ɪn sɛvən. aɪ dɛɹɪs ðeɪ sɛldəm ivən θɪŋk tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðeɪ ɑɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹɛlm." ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli, ɹɪkɔlɪŋ ɪz sɝpɹaɪz wən i wɑz toʊl ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɑz pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɹɛlm ʌv ændɝ. ðə kwin sɔ hɪm, ən smaɪld ɹufəli əɾ əɹ dɔɾɝ. "ju si, tʃaɪld?"

"A loyal subject from the Two Rivers." Morgase sighed. "My child, you should pay more heed to those books. The Two Rivers has not seen a tax collector in six generations, nor the Queen's Guards in seven. I daresay they seldom even think to remember they are part of the Realm." Rand shrugged uncomfortably, recalling his surprise when he was told the Two Rivers was part of the Realm of Andor. The Queen saw him, and smiled ruefully at her daughter. "You see, child?"

ɪleɪɾə hæd pʊt daʊn əɹ nɪɾɪŋ, ɹænd ɹilaɪzd, ən wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ hɪm. ʃi ɹoʊz fɹəm əɹ stul ən sloʊli keɪm daʊn fɹəm ðə deɪz tə stæn bɪfɔɹ hɪm. "fɹʌm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz?" ʃi sɛd. ʃi ɹitʃt ə hæn təwɔɹɾ ɪz hɛd; hi pʊld əweɪ fɹəm əɹ tʌtʃ, ən ʃi lɛɾ əɹ hæn dʒɹɑp. "wɪð ðət ɹɛɾ ɪn ɪz hɛɹ, ən ɡɹeɪ aɪz? tu ɹɪvɝz pipəl ɑɹ dɑɹk ə hɛɹ ən aɪ, ən ðeɪ sɛldəm əv sətʃ haɪt." hɝ hæn dɑɹɾɪd aʊt tə pʊʃ bæk ɪz koʊt sliv, ɪkspoʊzɪŋ laɪɾɝ skɪn ðə sʌn hæd nɑt ɹitʃt soʊ ɔfən. "ɔɹ sətʃ skɪn."

Elaida had put down her knitting, Rand realized, and was studying him. She rose from her stool and slowly came down from the dais to stand before him. "From the Two Rivers?" she said. She reached a hand toward his head; he pulled away from her touch, and she let her hand drop. "With that red in his hair, and gray eyes? Two Rivers people are dark of hair and eye, and they seldom have such height." Her hand darted out to push back his coat sleeve, exposing lighter skin the sun had not reached so often. "Or such skin."

ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə klɛntʃ ɪz fɪsts. "aɪ wɑz bɔɹn ɪn ɛmənz fild," hi sɛd stɪfli. "maɪ mʌðɝ wɑz ən aʊtləndɝ; ðæts wɛɹ maɪ aɪz kʌm fɹʌm. maɪ fɑðɝ ɪz tæm ælθɹ, ə ʃɛpɝɾ ən fɑɹmɝ, əz aɪ æm."

It was an effort not to clench his fists. "I was born in Emond's Field," he said stiffly. "My mother was an outlander; that's where my eyes come from. My father is Tam al'Thor, a shepherd and farmer, as I am."

ɪleɪɾə nɑɾəd sloʊli, nɛvɝ teɪkɪŋ əɹ aɪz fɹəm ɪz feɪs. hi mɛɾ əɹ ɡeɪz wɪð ə lɛvlnəs ðət bɪlaɪd ðə saʊɝ filɪŋ ɪn ɪz stʌmək. hi sɔ hɝ noʊt ðə stɛɾinɪs ə hɪz lʊk. stɪl miɾɪŋ ɪm aɪ tə aɪ, ʃi muvd əɹ hæn sloʊli təwɔɹɾ ɪm əɡɛn. hi ɹizɑlv nɑt tə flɪntʃ ðɪs taɪm.

Elaida nodded slowly, never taking her eyes from his face. He met her gaze with a levelness that belied the sour feeling in his stomach. He saw her note the steadiness of his look. Still meeting him eye to eye, she moved her hand slowly toward him again. He resolved not to flinch this time.

ɪt wɑz ɪz sɔɹd ʃi tʌtʃt, nɑt hɪm, hɝ hæn kloʊzɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə hɪlt ət ðə vɛɹi tɑp. hɝ fɪŋɡɝz taɪɾənd ən əɹ aɪz oʊpənd waɪd wɪð sɝpɹaɪz. "ə ʃɛpɝd fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," ʃi sɛd sɔfli, ə wɪspɝ mɛn tə bi hɝd baɪ ɔl, "wɪð ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk sɔɹd."

It was his sword she touched, not him, her hand closing around the hilt at the very top. Her fingers tightened and her eyes opened wide with surprise. "A shepherd from the Two Rivers," she said softly, a whisper meant to be heard by all, "with a heron-mark sword."

ðoʊz læs fju wɝdz æktəɾ ɑn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ənaʊns ðə dɑɹk wʌn. lɛðɝ ən mɛɾəl kɹik bɪhaɪn ɹænd, buts skʌfəlɪŋ ɑn ðə mɑɹbəl taɪlz. fɹəm ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ hi kəd si tɑlænvɝ ən ənʌðɝ ə ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn bækɪŋ əweɪ fɹəm ɪm tə ɡeɪn ɹum, hænz ɑn ðɛɹ sɔɹdz, pɹipɛɹd tə dʒɹɔ ænd, fɹəm ðɛɹ feɪsəz, pɹipɛɹd tə daɪ. ɪn tu kwɪk stʃɹaɪdz ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn wɑz ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə deɪz, bɪtwin ɹænd ən ðə kwin. ivən ɡɔɪn pʊt hɪmsɛlf ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɪleɪn, ə wɝid lʊk ɑn ɪz feɪs ən ə hæn ɑn ɪz dæɡɝ. ɪleɪn hɝsɛlf lʊkt əɾ ɪm əz ɪf ʃi wɝ siɪŋ ɪm fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. mɔɹɡeɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ɪkspɹɛʃən, bʌɾ əɹ hænz taɪɾənd ɑn ðə ɡɪldɪɾ ɑɹmz ə hɝ θɹoʊn.

Those last few words acted on the chamber as if she had announced the Dark One. Leather and metal creaked behind Rand, boots scuffling on the marble tiles. From the corner of his eye he could see Tallanvor and another of the guardsmen backing away from him to gain room, hands on their swords, prepared to draw and, from their faces, prepared to die. In two quick strides Gareth Bryne was at the front of the dais, between Rand and the Queen. Even Gawyn put himself in front of Elayne, a worried look on his face and a hand on his dagger. Elayne herself looked at him as if she were seeing him for the first time. Morgase did not change expression, but her hands tightened on the gilded arms of her throne.

oʊnli ɪleɪɾə ʃoʊd lɛs ɹiækʃən ðən ðə kwin. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ðət ʃi hæd sɛɾ ɛniθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi. ʃi tʊk əɹ hæn fɹəm ðə sɔɹd, kɑzɪŋ ðə soʊlʒɝz tə tɛns ivən mɔɹ. hɝ aɪz steɪɾ ɑn hɪz, ənɹʌfəld ən kælkjəleɪɾɪŋ.

Only Elaida showed less reaction than the Queen. The Aes Sedai gave no sign that she had said anything out of the ordinary. She took her hand from the sword, causing the soldiers to tense even more. Her eyes stayed on his, unruffled and calculating.

"ʃʊɹli," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs lɛvəl, "hi ɪz tu jʌŋ tə hæv ɝn ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd. hi kænɑt bi ɛni oʊldɝ ðən ɡɔɪn."

"Surely," Morgase said, her voice level, "he is too young to have earned a heron-mark blade. He cannot be any older than Gawyn."

"ɪt bɪlɔŋz wɪð hɪm," ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn sɛd.

"It belongs with him," Gareth Bryne said.

ðə kwin lʊkt əɾ ɪm ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. "haʊ kən ðət bi?"

The Queen looked at him in surprise. "How can that be?"

"aɪ də nɑt noʊ, mɔɹɡeɪs," bɹaɪn sɛd sloʊli. "hi ɪz tu jʌŋ, jɛt stɪl ɪt bɪlɔŋz wɪð hɪm, ən i wɪð ɪt. lʊk əɾ ɪz aɪz. lʊk haʊ hi stænz, haʊ ðə sɔɹd fɪts hɪm, ən i ɪt. hiz tu jʌŋ, bʌt ðə sɔɹɾ ɪz hɪz."

"I do not know, Morgase," Bryne said slowly. "He is too young, yet still it belongs with him, and he with it. Look at his eyes. Look how he stands, how the sword fits him, and he it. He is too young, but the sword is his."

wən ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl fɛl saɪlənt, ɪleɪɾə sɛd, "haʊ dɪd jə kʌm baɪ ðɪs bleɪd, ɹænd ælθɹ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz?" ʃi sɛɾ ɪɾ əz ɪf ʃi daʊɾɪd ɪz neɪm əz mʌtʃ əz ʃi dɪd wɛɹ i wɑz fɹʌm.

When the Captain-General fell silent, Elaida said, "How did you come by this blade, Rand al'Thor from the Two Rivers?" She said it as if she doubted his name as much as she did where he was from.

"maɪ fɑðɝ ɡeɪv ɪt tə mi," ɹænd sɛd. "ɪt wɑz hɪz. hi θɔɾ aɪd niɾ ə sɔɹd, aʊɾ ɪn ðə wɝld."

"My father gave it to me," Rand said. "It was his. He thought I'd need a sword, out in the world."

"jɛɾ ənʌðɝ ʃɛpɝd fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz wɪð ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd." ɪleɪɾəz smaɪl meɪɾ ɪz maʊθ ɡoʊ dʒɹaɪ. "wɛn dɪd jə ɝaɪv ɪn keɪɛmlɪn?"

"Yet another shepherd from the Two Rivers with a heron-mark blade." Elaida's smile made his mouth go dry. "When did you arrive in Caemlyn?"

hi hæd hæɾ ɪnʌf ə tɛlɪŋ ðɪs wʊmən ðə tʃɹuθ. ʃi meɪɾ ɪm əz əfɹeɪɾ əz ɛni dɑɹkfɹɛn hæd. ɪt wɑz taɪm tə stɑɹt haɪɾɪŋ əɡɛn. "tədeɪ," hi sɛd. "ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ."

He had had enough of telling this woman the truth. She made him as afraid as any Darkfriend had. It was time to start hiding again. "Today," he said. "This morning."

"dʒʌst ɪn taɪm," ʃi mɝmɝd. "wɛɹ ɑɹ jə steɪɪŋ? doʊn seɪ juv nɑt faʊn ə ɹum sʌmwɛɹ. jə lʊk ə lɪɾəl tæɾɝd, bʌt juv hæɾ ə tʃæns tə fɹɛʃən. wɛɹ?"

"Just in time," she murmured. "Where are you staying? Don't say you have not found a room somewhere. You look a little tattered, but you have had a chance to freshen. Where?"

"ðə kɹaʊn ən laɪən." hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd pæsɪŋ ðə kɹaʊn ən laɪən waɪl lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə nu sɪɾi fɹəm mæstɝ ɡɪlz ɪn. "aɪ hæv ə bɛd ðɛɹ. ɪn ði æɾɪk." hi hæd ðə filɪŋ ðət ʃi nu hi wɑz laɪɪŋ, bʌt ʃi oʊnli nɑɾəd.

"The Crown and Lion." He remembered passing The Crown and Lion while looking for The Queen's Blessing. It was on the other side of the New City from Master Gill's inn. "I have a bed there. In the attic." He had the feeling that she knew he was lying, but she only nodded.

"wʌt tʃæns ðɪs?" ʃi sɛd. "tədeɪ ði ʌnbəlivɝ ɪz bɹɔɾ ɪndə keɪɛmlɪn. ɪn tu deɪz hɪl bi teɪkən nɔɹθ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən wɪð ɪm ɡoʊz ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ fəɹ əɹ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ən ət dʒʌs ðɪs dʒʌŋktʃɝ ə jʌŋ mæn əpɪɹz ɪn ðə pæləs ɡɑɹɾənz, kleɪmɪŋ tə bi ə lɔɪəl sʌbʒɪkt fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz . . ."

"What chance this?" she said. "Today the unbeliever is brought into Caemlyn. In two days he will be taken north to Tar Valon, and with him goes the Daughter-Heir for her training. And at just this juncture a young man appears in the Palace gardens, claiming to be a loyal subject from the Two Rivers . . ."

"aɪ æm fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz." ðeɪ wɝ ɔl lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, bʌɾ ɔl ɪɡnɔɹd hɪm. ɔl bʌt tɑlænvɝ ən ðə ɡɑɹdz; ðoʊz aɪz nɛvɝ blɪŋkt.

"I am from the Two Rivers." They were all looking at him, but all ignored him. All but Tallanvor and the guards; those eyes never blinked.

". . . wɪð ə stɔɹi kælkjəleɪɾəd tə ɪntaɪs ɪleɪn ən bɛɹɪŋ ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd. hi dʌz nɑt wɛɹ ən ɑɹmbæn əɹ ə kɑkeɪd tə pɹoʊkleɪm ɪz əlidʒəns, bʌt ɹæpɪŋz ðət kɛɹfəli kənsil ðə hɛɹən fɹəm ɪnkwɪzɪɾɪv aɪz. wʌt tʃæns ðɪs, mɔɹɡeɪs?"

". . . with a story calculated to entice Elayne and bearing a heron-mark blade. He does not wear an armband or a cockade to proclaim his allegiance, but wrappings that carefully conceal the heron from inquisitive eyes. What chance this, Morgase?"

ðə kwin moʊʃən ðə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl tə stæn əsaɪd, ən wən i dɪd ʃi stʌɾid ɹænd wɪð ə tʃɹʌbəld lʊk. ɪt wɑz tə ɪleɪɾə ðət ʃi spoʊk, ðoʊ. "wʌɾ ɑɹ jə neɪmɪŋ hɪm? dɑɹkfɹɛnd? wʌn ə lɑɡənz fɑloʊɝz?"

The Queen motioned the Captain-General to stand aside, and when he did she studied Rand with a troubled look. It was to Elaida that she spoke, though. "What are you naming him? Darkfriend? One of Logain's followers?"

"ðə dɑɹk wʌn stɝz ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹɪplaɪd. "ðə ʃædoʊ laɪz əkɹɔs ðə pæɾɝn, ən ðə fjutʃɝ ɪz bælənst ɑn ðə pɔɪn ʌv ə pɪn. ðɪs wʌn ɪz deɪnʒɝəs."

"The Dark One stirs in Shayol Ghul," the Aes Sedai replied. "The Shadow lies across the Pattern, and the future is balanced on the point of a pin. This one is dangerous."

sʌɾənli ɪleɪn muvd, θɹoʊɪŋ hɝsɛlf ɑntu hɝ niz bɪfɔɹ ðə θɹoʊn. "mʌðɝ, aɪ bɛɡ jə nɑt tə hɑɹm hɪm. hi wʊɾə lɛft ɪmiɾiətli hæɾ aɪ nɑt stɑp hɪm. hi wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ. ɪt wɑz aɪ hu meɪɾ ɪm steɪ. aɪ kænɑt bɪliv hiz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

Suddenly Elayne moved, throwing herself onto her knees before the throne. "Mother, I beg you not to harm him. He would have left immediately had I not stopped him. He wanted to go. It was I who made him stay. I cannot believe he is a Darkfriend."

mɔɹɡeɪs meɪɾ ə suðɪŋ dʒɛstʃɝ təwɔɹɾ əɹ dɔɾɝ, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz ɹɪmeɪn ɑn ɹænd. "ɪz ðɪs ə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ, ɪleɪɾə? ɑɹ jə ɹiɾɪŋ ðə pæɾɝn? jə seɪ ɪt kʌmz ɑn jə wən jə list ɪkspɛkt ɪɾ ən ɡoʊz əz sʌɾənli əz ɪt kʌmz. ɪf ðɪs ɪz ə fɔɹtɛlɪŋ, ɪleɪɾə, aɪ kəmæn jə tə spik ðə tʃɹuθ klɪɹli, wɪθaʊt jəɹ juʒəwəl hæbəɾ ə ɹæpɪŋ ɪɾ ɪn soʊ mʌtʃ mɪstɝi ðət noʊ wʌn kən tɛl ɪf juv sɛd jɛs əɹ noʊ. spik. wʌt dʒju si?"

Morgase made a soothing gesture toward her daughter, but her eyes remained on Rand. "Is this a Foretelling, Elaida? Are you reading the Pattern? You say it comes on you when you least expect it and goes as suddenly as it comes. If this is a Foretelling, Elaida, I command you to speak the truth clearly, without your usual habit of wrapping it in so much mystery that no one can tell if you have said yes or no. Speak. What do you see?"

"ðɪs aɪ fɔɹtɛl," ɪleɪɾə ɹɪplaɪd, "æn swɛɹ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt ðəɾ aɪ kən seɪ noʊ klɪɹɝ. fɹəm ðɪs deɪ ændɝ mɑɹtʃɪz təwɔɹd peɪn ən dɪvɪʒən. ðə ʃædoʊ hæz jɛt tə dɑɹkən tə ɪts blækəst, ən aɪ kænɑt si ɪf ðə laɪt wɪl kʌm æftɝ. wɛɹ ðə wɝld əz wɛpt wʌn tɛɹ, ɪɾəl wip θaʊzənz. ðɪs aɪ fɔɹtɛl."

"This I Foretell," Elaida replied, "and swear under the Light that I can say no clearer. From this day Andor marches toward pain and division. The Shadow has yet to darken to its blackest, and I cannot see if the Light will come after. Where the world has wept one tear, it will weep thousands. This I Foretell."

ə pɑl ə saɪləns klʌŋ tə ðə ɹum, bɹoʊkən oʊnli baɪ mɔɹɡeɪs ɪkspɛlɪŋ əɹ bɹɛθ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ əɹ læst.

A pall of silence clung to the room, broken only by Morgase expelling her breath as if it were her last.

ɪleɪɾə kəntɪnjud tə stɛɹ ɪndə ɹændz aɪz. ʃi spoʊk əɡɛn, bɛɹli muvɪŋ əɹ lɪps, soʊ sɔfli ðəɾ i kəd bɛɹli hɪɹ əɹ lɛs ðən ən ɑɹmz lɛŋθ əweɪ. "ðɪs, tu, aɪ fɔɹtɛl. peɪn ən dɪvɪʒən kʌm tə ðə hoʊl wɝld, ən ðɪs mæn stænz ət ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. aɪ oʊbeɪ ðə kwin," ʃi wɪspɝd, "æn spik ɪt klɪɹli."

Elaida continued to stare into Rand's eyes. She spoke again, barely moving her lips, so softly that he could barely hear her less than an arm's length away. "This, too, I Foretell. Pain and division come to the whole world, and this man stands at the heart of it. I obey the Queen," she whispered, "and speak it clearly."

ɹænd fɛlt əz ɪf ɪz fit hæd bɪkʌm ɹuɾəd ɪn ðə mɑɹbəl flɔɹ. ðə koʊld ən stɪfnəs ə ðə stoʊn kɹɛpt ʌp ɪz lɛɡz ən sɛn ə ʃɪvɝ ʌp ɪz spaɪn. noʊ wʌn ɛls kəɾ əv hɝd. bʌt ʃi wɑz stɪl lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ən i hæd hɝd.

Rand felt as if his feet had become rooted in the marble floor. The cold and stiffness of the stone crept up his legs and sent a shiver up his spine. No one else could have heard. But she was still looking at him, and he had heard.

"ɪm ə ʃɛpɝd," hi sɛd fəɹ ði ɪntaɪɝ ɹum. "fɹʌm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ə ʃɛpɝd."

"I'm a shepherd," he said for the entire room. "From the Two Rivers. A shepherd."

"ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz," ɪleɪɾə sɛɾ əlaʊd, ən i kəd nɑt tɛl ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə tʌtʃ ə mɑkɝi ɪn əɹ toʊn əɹ nɑt.

"The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills," Elaida said aloud, and he could not tell if there was a touch of mockery in her tone or not.

"lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, "aɪ nid ði ædvaɪs ə maɪ kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl."

"Lord Gareth," Morgase said, "I need the advice of my Captain-General."

ðə blɑki mæn ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ sɛz ðə læɾ ɪz deɪnʒɝəs, maɪ kwin, ən ɪf ʃi kəd tɛl mɔɹ aɪ wəd seɪ sʌmən ðə hɛdzmən. bʌɾ ɔl ʃi sɛz ɪz wʌɾ ɛni ʌv əs kən si wɪð əɹ oʊn aɪz. ðɛɹz nɑɾ ə fɑɹmɝ ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd woʊn seɪ θɪŋz wɪl ɡɛt wɝs, wɪθaʊɾ ɛni fɔɹtɛlɪŋ. maɪsɛlf, aɪ bɪliv ðə bɔɪ ɪz hɪɹ θɹu mɪɹ hæpənstæns, ðoʊ ən ɪl wʌn fəɹ hɪm. tə bi seɪf, maɪ kwin, aɪ seɪ klæp ɪm ɪn ə sɛl tɪl ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn ən ðə lɔɹd ɡɔɪn ɑɹ wɛl ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ, ðən lɛɾ ɪm ɡoʊ. ənlɛs, ɛɛs sədaɪ, juv mɔɹ tə fɔɹtɛl kənsɝnɪŋ hɪm?"

The blocky man shook his head. "Elaida Sedai says the lad is dangerous, my Queen, and if she could tell more I would say summon the headsman. But all she says is what any of us can see with our own eyes. There's not a farmer in the countryside won't say things will get worse, without any Foretelling. Myself, I believe the boy is here through mere happenstance, though an ill one for him. To be safe, my Queen, I say clap him in a cell till the Lady Elayne and the Lord Gawyn are well on their way, then let him go. Unless, Aes Sedai, you have more to Foretell concerning him?"

"aɪ hæv sɛɾ ɔl ðəɾ aɪ hæv ɹɛɾ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn, kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl," ɪleɪɾə sɛd. ʃi flæʃt ə hɑɹd smaɪl ət ɹænd, ə smaɪl ðət bɛɹli bɛn əɹ lɪps, mɑkɪŋ ɪz ɪnəbɪlɪɾi tə seɪ ðət ʃi wɑz nɑt tɛlɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ. "ə fju wiks ɪmpɹɪzənd wɪl nɑt hɑɹm hɪm, ən ɪt meɪ ɡɪmi ə tʃæns tə lɝn mɔɹ." hʌŋɡɝ fɪld əɹ aɪz, dipənɪŋ ɪz tʃɪl. "pɝhæps ənʌðɝ fɔɹtɛlɪŋ wɪl kʌm."

"I have said all that I have read in the Pattern, Captain-General," Elaida said. She flashed a hard smile at Rand, a smile that barely bent her lips, mocking his inability to say that she was not telling the truth. "A few weeks imprisoned will not harm him, and it may give me a chance to learn more." Hunger filled her eyes, deepening his chill. "Perhaps another Foretelling will come."

fəɹ ə taɪm mɔɹɡeɪs kənsɪɾɝd, tʃɪn ɑn əɹ fɪst ən ɛlboʊ ɑn ði ɑɹm ə hɝ θɹoʊn. ɹænd wʊɾə ʃɪftəɾ ʌndɝ əɹ fɹaʊnɪŋ ɡeɪz ɪf i cʊɾə muvd əɾ ɔl, bʌɾ ɪleɪɾəz aɪz fɹoʊz ɪm sɑləd. faɪnəli ðə kwin spoʊk.

For a time Morgase considered, chin on her fist and elbow on the arm of her throne. Rand would have shifted under her frowning gaze if he could have moved at all, but Elaida's eyes froze him solid. Finally the Queen spoke.

"səspɪʃən ɪz smʌðɝɪŋ keɪɛmlɪn, pɝhæps ɔl ʌv ændɝ. fɪɹ ən blæk səspɪʃən. wɪmən dɪnaʊns ðɛɹ neɪbɝz fəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. mɛn skɹɔl ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ ɑn ðə dɔɹz ə pipəl ðeɪv noʊn fəɹ jɪɹz. əl nɑt bɪkʌm pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt."

"Suspicion is smothering Caemlyn, perhaps all of Andor. Fear and black suspicion. Women denounce their neighbors for Darkfriends. Men scrawl the Dragon's Fang on the doors of people they have known for years. I will not become part of it."

"mɔɹɡeɪs - " ɪleɪɾə bɪɡæn, bʌt ðə kwin kʌɾ əɹ ɔf.

"Morgase - " Elaida began, but the Queen cut her off.

"aɪ wɪl nɑt bɪkʌm pɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. wən aɪ tʊk ðə θɹoʊn aɪ swɔɹ tə əphoʊl dʒʌstəs fəɹ ðə haɪ ən ðə loʊ, ən əl əphoʊld ɪɾ ivən ɪf aɪm ðə læst ɪn ændɝ tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ dʒʌstəs. ɹænd ælθɹ, dʒju swɛɹ ʌndɝ ðə laɪt ðət jəɹ fɑðɝ, ə ʃɛpɝɾ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ɡeɪv jə ðɪs hɛɹənmɑɹk bleɪd?"

"I will not become part of it. When I took the throne I swore to uphold justice for the high and the low, and I will uphold it even if I am the last in Andor to remember justice. Rand al'Thor, do you swear under the Light that your father, a shepherd in the Two Rivers, gave you this heronmark blade?"

ɹænd wɝkt ɪz maʊθ tə ɡɛɾ ɪnʌf mɔɪstʃɝ tə spik. "aɪ du." əbɹʌpli ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ tə hum i wɑz spikɪŋ i heɪstəli æɾəd, "maɪ kwin." lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ ɹeɪzd ə hɛvi aɪbɹaʊ, bʌt mɔɹɡeɪs dɪd nɑt sim tə maɪnd.

Rand worked his mouth to get enough moisture to speak. "I do." Abruptly remembering to whom he was speaking he hastily added, "My Queen." Lord Gareth raised a heavy eyebrow, but Morgase did not seem to mind.

"æn jə klaɪm ðə ɡɑɹɾən wɔl sɪmpli tə ɡeɪn ə lʊk ət ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən?"

"And you climbed the garden wall simply to gain a look at the false Dragon?"

"jɛs, maɪ kwin."

"Yes, my Queen."

"du jə min hɑɹm tə ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ, əɹ tə maɪ dɔɾɝ, əɹ maɪ sʌn?" hɝ toʊn sɛd ðə læs tu wəd ɡeɪn ɪm ivən ʃɔɹɾɝ ʃɹɪf ðən ðə fɝst.

"Do you mean harm to the throne of Andor, or to my daughter, or my son?" Her tone said the last two would gain him even shorter shrift than the first.

"aɪ min noʊ hɑɹm tə ɛniwʌn, maɪ kwin. tə jə ən jʊɹz list ʌv ɔl."

"I mean no harm to anyone, my Queen. To you and yours least of all."

"aɪ wɪl ɡɪv jə dʒʌstəs ðɛn, ɹænd ælθɹ," ʃi sɛd. "fɝst, kəz aɪ hæv ði ædvæntɪdʒ ʌv ɪleɪɾə ən ɡɛɹɪθ ɪn hævɪŋ hɝd tu ɹɪvɝz spitʃ wən aɪ wɑz jʌŋ. juv nɑt ðə lʊk, bʌɾ ɪf ə dɪm mɛmɹi kən sɝv mi juv ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɑn jəɹ tʌŋ. sɛkənd, noʊ wʌn wɪð jəɹ hɛɹ ən aɪz wəd kleɪm ðət hiz ə tu ɹɪvɝz ʃɛpɝɾ ənlɛs ɪt wɑz tʃɹu. ən ðət jəɹ fɑðɝ ɡeɪv jə ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪɾ ɪz tu pɹɪpɑstɝəs tə bi ə laɪ. ən θɝd, ðə vɔɪs ðət wɪspɝz tə mi ðət ðə bɛs laɪ ɪz ɔfən wʌn tu ɹɪdɪkjələs tə bi teɪkən fəɹ ə laɪ . . . ðət vɔɪs ɪz nɑt pɹuf. əl əphoʊl ðə lɔz aɪ hæv meɪd. aɪ ɡɪv jə jəɹ fɹiɾəm, ɹænd ælθɹ, bʌɾ aɪ sədʒɛs jə teɪk ə kɛɹ wɛɹ jə tʃɹɛspæs ɪn ðə fjutʃɝ. ɪf jə ɑɹ faʊn ɑn ðə pæləs ɡɹaʊnz əɡɛn, ɪɾəl nɑt ɡoʊ soʊ izəli wɪð ju."

"I will give you justice then, Rand al'Thor," she said. "First, because I have the advantage of Elaida and Gareth in having heard Two Rivers speech when I was young. You have not the look, but if a dim memory can serve me you have the Two Rivers on your tongue. Second, no one with your hair and eyes would claim that he is a Two Rivers shepherd unless it was true. And that your father gave you a heron-mark blade is too preposterous to be a lie. And third, the voice that whispers to me that the best lie is often one too ridiculous to be taken for a lie . . . that voice is not proof. I will uphold the laws I have made. I give you your freedom, Rand al'Thor, but I suggest you take a care where you trespass in the future. If you are found on the Palace grounds again, it will not go so easily with you."

"θæŋk ju, maɪ kwin," hi sɛd hɔɹsli. hi kəd fil ɪleɪɾəz dɪsplɛʒɝ laɪk ə hiɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs.

"Thank you, my Queen," he said hoarsely. He could feel Elaida's displeasure like a heat on his face.

"tɑlænvɝ," mɔɹɡeɪs sɛd, "ɛskɔɹt ðɪs . . . ɛskɔɹt maɪ dɔɾɝz ɡɛs fɹəm ðə pæləs, ən ʃoʊ hɪm ɛvɹi kɝɾəsi. ðə ɹɛst ə jə ɡoʊ əz wɛl. noʊ, ɪleɪɾə, jə steɪ. ən ɪf jəl tu, pliz, lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ. aɪ mʌs dɪsaɪd wʌt tə də əbaʊt ðiz waɪtkloʊks ɪn ðə sɪɾi."

"Tallanvor," Morgase said, "escort this . . . escort my daughter's guest from the Palace, and show him every courtesy. The rest of you go as well. No, Elaida, you stay. And if you will too, please, Lord Gareth. I must decide what to do about these Whitecloaks in the city."

tɑlænvɝ ən ðə ɡɑɹdzmɪn ʃiðd ðɛɹ sɔɹdz ɹɪlʌktənli, ɹɛɾi tə dʒɹɔ əɡɛn ɪn ən ɪnstənt. stɪl ɹænd wɑz ɡlæd tə lɛt ðə soʊlʒɝz fɔɹm ə hɑloʊ bɑks ɝaʊn ɪm ən tə fɑloʊ tɑlænvɝ. ɪleɪɾə wɑz oʊnli hæf ətɛndɪŋ wʌt ðə kwin wɑz seɪɪŋ; hi kəd fil əɹ aɪz ɑn ɪz bæk. wʌt wʊɾə hæpən ɪf mɔɹɡeɪs hæd nɑt kɛp ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪð hɝ? ðə θɔt meɪɾ ɪm wɪʃ ðə soʊlʒɝz wəd wɔk fæstɝ.

Tallanvor and the guardsmen sheathed their swords reluctantly, ready to draw again in an instant. Still Rand was glad to let the soldiers form a hollow box around him and to follow Tallanvor. Elaida was only half attending what the Queen was saying; he could feel her eyes on his back. What would have happened if Morgase had not kept the Aes Sedai with her? The thought made him wish the soldiers would walk faster.

tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ɪleɪn ən ɡɔɪn ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə fju wɝdz aʊtsaɪd ðə dɔɹ, ðən fɛl ɪn bɪsaɪd hɪm. tɑlænvɝ wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd, tu. ðə jʌŋ ɔfəsɝ lʊk fɹəm əm bæk tə ðə dɔɹz, kloʊzɪŋ naʊ.

To his surprise, Elayne and Gawyn exchanged a few words outside the door, then fell in beside him. Tallanvor was surprised, too. The young officer looked from them back to the doors, closing now.

"maɪ mʌðɝ," ɪleɪn sɛd, "ɔɹɾɝd ɪm tə bi ɛskɔɹɾɪd fɹəm ðə pæləs, tɑlænvɝ. wɪð ɛvɹi kɝɾəsi. wʌɾ ɑɹ jə weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ?"

"My mother," Elayne said, "ordered him to be escorted from the Palace, Tallanvor. With every courtesy. What are you waiting for?"

tɑlænvɝ skaʊld ət ðə dɔɹz, bɪhaɪnd wɪtʃ ðə kwin wɑz kənfɝɪŋ wɪð əɹ ædvaɪzɝz. "nʌθɪŋ, maɪ leɪɾi," hi sɛd saʊɝli, ən nidləsli ɔɹɾɝd ði ɛskɔɹt fɔɹwɝd.

Tallanvor scowled at the doors, behind which the Queen was conferring with her advisors. "Nothing, my Lady," he said sourly, and needlessly ordered the escort forward.

ðə wʌndɝz ə ðə pæləs slɪd baɪ ɹænd ənsin. hi wɑz bɪfʌɾəld, snætʃɪz ə θɔt spɪnɪŋ baɪ tu fæs tə ɡɹæsp. juv nɑt ðə lʊk. ðɪs mæn stænz ət ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt.

The wonders of the Palace slid by Rand unseen. He was befuddled, snatches of thought spinning by too fast to grasp. You have not the look. This man stands at the heart of it.

ði ɛskɔɹt stɑpt. hi blɪŋkt, stɑɹɾəld tə faɪn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt kɔɹɾ ət ðə fɹʌn ə ðə pæləs, stændɪŋ ət ðə tɔl, ɡɪldɪd ɡeɪts, ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn. ðoʊz ɡeɪts wəd nɑt bi oʊpən fəɹ ə sɪŋɡəl mæn, sɝɾənli nɑt fəɹ ə tʃɹɛspæsɝ, ivən ɪf ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ dɪd kleɪm ɡɛst-ɹaɪt fəɹ hɪm. wɝdləsli tɑlænvɝ ənbæɹɹɾ ə sæli-pɔɹt, ə smɔl dɔɹ sɛt wɪðɪn wʌn ɡeɪt.

The escort stopped. He blinked, startled to find himself in the great court at the front of the Palace, standing at the tall, gilded gates, gleaming in the sun. Those gates would not be opened for a single man, certainly not for a trespasser, even if the Daughter-Heir did claim guest-right for him. Wordlessly Tallanvor unbarred a sally-port, a small door set within one gate.

"ɪɾ ɪz ðə kʌstəm," ɪleɪn sɛd, "tə ɛskɔɹt ɡɛsts əz fɑɹ əz ðə ɡeɪts, bʌt nɑt tə wɑtʃ əm ɡoʊ. ɪts ðə plɛʒɝ ʌv ə ɡɛsts kʌmpəni ðət ʃəd bi ɹɪmɛmbɝd, nɑt ðə sædnəs ə pɑɹɾɪŋ."

"It is the custom," Elayne said, "to escort guests as far as the gates, but not to watch them go. It is the pleasure of a guest's company that should be remembered, not the sadness of parting."

"θæŋk ju, maɪ leɪɾi," ɹænd sɛd. hi tʌtʃt ðə skɑɹf bændeɪdʒɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "fɔɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. kʌstəm ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɪz fəɹ ə ɡɛs tə bɹɪŋ ə smɔl ɡɪft. aɪm əfɹeɪɾ aɪ hæv nʌθɪŋ. ɔlðoʊ," hi æɾəd dʒɹaɪli, "əpɛɹənli aɪ dɪd titʃ jə sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk."

"Thank you, my Lady," Rand said. He touched the scarf bandaging his head. "For everything. Custom in the Two Rivers is for a guest to bring a small gift. I'm afraid I have nothing. Although," he added dryly, "apparently I did teach you something of the Two Rivers folk."

"ɪf aɪ hæd toʊl mʌðɝ aɪ θɪŋk jə ɑɹ hænsəm, ʃi sɝɾənli wʊɾə hæd jə lɑkt ɪn ə sɛl." ɪleɪn feɪvɝɾ ɪm wɪð ə dæzəlɪŋ smaɪl. "fɛɹ jə wɛl, ɹænd ælθɹ."

"If I had told Mother I think you are handsome, she certainly would have had you locked in a cell." Elayne favored him with a dazzling smile. "Fare you well, Rand al'Thor."

ɡeɪpɪŋ, hi wɑtʃt əɹ ɡoʊ, ə jʌŋɡɝ vɝʒən ə mɔɹɡeɪsəz bjuɾi ən mædʒəsti.

Gaping, he watched her go, a younger version of Morgase's beauty and majesty.

"du nɑt tʃɹaɪ tə bændi wɝdz wɪð hɝ." ɡɔɪn læft. "ʃi wɪl wɪn ɛvɹi taɪm."

"Do not try to bandy words with her." Gawyn laughed. "She will win every time."

ɹænd nɑɾəd æbsənli. hænsəm? laɪt, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tə ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ! hi ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk tə klɪɹ ɪz hɛd.

Rand nodded absently. Handsome? Light, the Daughter-Heir to the throne of Andor! He gave himself a shake to clear his head.

ɡɔɪn sim tə bi weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ. ɹænd lʊkt əɾ ɪm fəɹ ə moʊmənt.

Gawyn seemed to be waiting for something. Rand looked at him for a moment.

"maɪ lɔɹd, wən aɪ toʊl jə aɪ wɑz fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz jə wɝ sɝpɹaɪzd. ən ɛvɹibɑɾi ɛls, jəɹ mʌðɝ, lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ, ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ" - ə ʃɪvɝ ɹæn daʊn ɪz bæk - "nʌn ə ðɛm. . . ." hi kəd nɑt fɪnɪʃ ɪt; hi wɑz nɑɾ ivən ʃʊɹ waɪ hi stɑɹɾəd. aɪm tæm ælθɹz sʌn, ivən ɪf aɪ wɑz nɑt bɔɹn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz.

"My Lord, when I told you I was from the Two Rivers you were surprised. And everybody else, your mother, Lord Gareth, Elaida Sedai" - a shiver ran down his back - "none of them. . . ." He could not finish it; he was not even sure why he started. I am Tam al'Thor's son, even if I was not born in the Two Rivers.

ɡɔɪn nɑɾəd əz ɪf ɪt wɑz fəɹ ðɪs i hæd bɪn weɪɾɪŋ. stɪl i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ɹænd oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə teɪk bæk ði ənspoʊkən kwɛstʃən, ən ɡɔɪn sɛd, "ɹæp ə ʃoʊufə ɝaʊn jəɹ hɛd, ɹænd, ən jə wəd bi ði ɪmədʒ ʌv ən ilmən. ɑd, sɪns mʌðɝ simz tə θɪŋk jə saʊn laɪk ə tu ɹɪvɝz mæn, ət list. aɪ wɪʃ wi cʊɾə kʌm tə noʊ wʌn ənʌðɝ, ɹænd ælθɹ. fɛɹ jə wɛl."

Gawyn nodded as if it was for this he had been waiting. Still he hesitated. Rand opened his mouth to take back the unspoken question, and Gawyn said, "Wrap a shoufa around your head, Rand, and you would be the image of an Aielman. Odd, since Mother seems to think you sound like a Two Rivers man, at least. I wish we could have come to know one another, Rand al'Thor. Fare you well."

ən ilmən.

An Aielman.

ɹænd stʊd wɑtʃɪŋ ɡɔɪnz ɹitʃɹiɾɪŋ bæk əntɪl ən ɪmpeɪʃən kɑf fɹəm tɑlænvɝ ɹimaɪndəɾ ɪm wɛɹ i wɑz. hi dʌk θɹu ðə sælipɔɹt, bɛɹli klɪɹɪŋ ɪz hilz bɪfɔɹ tɑlænvɝ slæmd ɪt bɪhaɪn hɪm. ðə bɑɹz ɪnsaɪd wɝ dʒæmd ɪndə pleɪs laʊdli.

Rand stood watching Gawyn's retreating back until an impatient cough from Tallanvor reminded him where he was. He ducked through the sallyport, barely clearing his heels before Tallanvor slammed it behind him. The bars inside were jammed into place loudly.

ði oʊvəl plɑzə ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə pæləs wɑz ɛmpti, naʊ. ɔl ðə soʊlʒɝz ɡɔn, ɔl ðə kɹaʊdz, tʃɹʌmpəts, ən dʒɹʌmz vænɪʃt ɪn saɪləns. nʌθɪŋ lɛf bʌɾ ə skæɾɝɪŋ ə lɪɾɝ bloʊɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə peɪvmən ən ə fju pipəl hɝiɪŋ əbaʊt ðɛɹ bɪznəs naʊ ðət ði ɪksaɪtmənt wɑz dʌn. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊɾ ɪf ðeɪ ʃoʊd ðə ɹɛɾ əɹ ðə waɪt.

The oval plaza in front of the Palace was empty, now. All the soldiers gone, all the crowds, trumpets, and drums vanished in silence. Nothing left but a scattering of litter blowing across the pavement and a few people hurrying about their business now that the excitement was done. He could not make out if they showed the red or the white.

ilmən.

Aielman.

wɪð ə stɑɹɾ i ɹilaɪzd i wɑz stændɪŋ ɹaɪɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə pæləs ɡeɪts, ɹaɪt wɛɹ ɪleɪɾə kəd faɪn ɪm izəli wʌns ʃi fɪnɪʃt wɪð ðə kwin. pʊlɪŋ ɪz kloʊk kloʊs, hi bɹoʊk ɪndə ə tʃɹɑt, əkɹɔs ðə plɑzə ən ɪndə ðə stʃɹits ə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi. hi lʊk bæk fɹikwənli tə si ɪf ɛniwʌn wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ hɪm, bʌt ðə swipɪŋ kɝvz kɛpt ɪm fɹəm siɪŋ vɛɹi fɑɹ. hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪleɪɾəz aɪz ɔl tu wɛl, ðoʊ, ən ɪmædʒən əm wɑtʃɪŋ. baɪ ðə taɪm i ɹitʃt ðə ɡeɪts tə ðə nu sɪɾi, hi wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ.

With a start he realized he was standing right in front of the Palace gates, right where Elaida could find him easily once she finished with the Queen. Pulling his cloak close, he broke into a trot, across the plaza and into the streets of the Inner City. He looked back frequently to see if anyone was following him, but the sweeping curves kept him from seeing very far. He could remember Elaida's eyes all too well, though, and imagined them watching. By the time he reached the gates to the New City, he was running.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾiwʌn


CHAPTER 41

oʊl fɹɛnz ən nu θɹɛts


Old Friends and New Threats

bæk ət ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ, ɹænd θɹu hɪmsɛlf əɡɛns ðə fɹʌn dɔɹfɹeɪm, pæntɪŋ. hi hæd ɹʌn ɔl ðə weɪ, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ ɪf ɛniwʌn sɔ ðəɾ i wɔɹ ðə ɹɛd, əɹ ivən ɪf ðeɪ tʊk ɪz ɹʌnɪŋ əz ən ɪkskjus tə tʃeɪs hɪm. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ivən ə feɪd cʊɾə kɑt hɪm.

Back at The Queen's Blessing, Rand threw himself against the front doorframe, panting. He had run all the way, not caring if anyone saw that he wore the red, or even if they took his running as an excuse to chase him. He did not think even a Fade could have caught him.

læmɡwɪn wɑz sɪɾɪŋ ɑn ə bɛntʃ baɪ ðə dɔɹ, ə bɹɪndəl kæɾ ɪn ɪz ɑɹmz, wən i keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ ʌp. ðə mæn stʊd tə lʊk fəɹ tʃɹʌbəl ðə weɪ ɹænd hæd kʌm, stɪl kɑmli skɹætʃɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə kæts ɪɹz. siɪŋ nʌθɪŋ, hi sæt bæk daʊn əɡɛn, kɛɹfəl nɑt tə dɪstɝb ði ænəməl. "fulz tʃɹaɪd tə stil səm ə ðə kæts ə waɪl bæk," hi sɛd. hi ɪɡzæmən ɪz nʌkəlz bɪfɔɹ ɡoʊɪŋ bæk tə hɪz skɹætʃɪŋ. "ɡʊd mʌni ɪn kæts ðiz deɪz."

Lamgwin was sitting on a bench by the door, a brindle cat in his arms, when he came running up. The man stood to look for trouble the way Rand had come, still calmly scratching behind the cat's ears. Seeing nothing, he sat back down again, careful not to disturb the animal. "Fools tried to steal some of the cats a while back," he said. He examined his knuckles before going back to his scratching. "Good money in cats these days."

ðə tu mɛn ʃoʊɪŋ ðə waɪt wɝ stɪl əkɹɔs ðə weɪ, ɹænd sɔ, wʌn wɪð ə blæk aɪ ən ə swoʊlən dʒɔ. ðət wʌn wɔɹ ə saʊɝ skaʊl ən ɹʌbd ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt wɪð ə sʌlən iɡɝnəs əz i wɑtʃt ði ɪn.

The two men showing the white were still across the way, Rand saw, one with a black eye and a swollen jaw. That one wore a sour scowl and rubbed his sword hilt with a sullen eagerness as he watched the inn.

"wɛɹz mæstɝ ɡɪl?" ɹænd æskt.

"Where's Master Gill?" Rand asked.

"laɪbɹɛɹi," læmɡwɪn ɹɪplaɪd. ðə kæt bɪɡæn pɝɪŋ, ən i ɡɹɪnd. "nʌθɪŋ bɑðɝz ə kæt fəɹ lɔŋ, nɑɾ ivən sʌmbɑɾi tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə stɪk ɪm ɪn ə sæk."

"Library," Lamgwin replied. The cat began purring, and he grinned. "Nothing bothers a cat for long, not even somebody trying to stick him in a sack."

ɹænd hɝiɾ ɪnsaɪd, θɹu ðə kɑmən ɹum, naʊ wɪð ɪts juʒəwəl kɑmpləmən ə mɛn wɛɹɪŋ ðə ɹɛɾ ən tɔkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ eɪl. əbaʊt ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən, ən wɛðɝ ðə waɪtkloʊks wəd meɪk tʃɹʌbəl wən i wɑz teɪkən nɔɹθ. noʊ wʌn kɛɹd wʌt hæpən tə lɑɡən, bʌt ðeɪ ɔl nu ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ən lɔɹd ɡɔɪn wəd bi tʃɹævlɪŋ ɪn ðə pɑɹɾi, ən noʊ mæn ðəɹ wəd kaʊntənəns ɛni ɹɪsk tə ðɛm.

Rand hurried inside, through the common room, now with its usual complement of men wearing the red and talking over their ale. About the false Dragon, and whether the Whitecloaks would make trouble when he was taken north. No one cared what happened to Logain, but they all knew the Daughter-Heir and Lord Gawyn would be traveling in the party, and no man there would countenance any risk to them.

hi faʊn mæstɝ ɡɪl ɪn ðə laɪbɹɛɹi, pleɪɪŋ stoʊnz wɪð lɔɪəl. ə plʌmp tæbi sæɾ ɑn ðə teɪbəl, fit tʌkt ʌndɝ hɝ, wɑtʃɪŋ ðɛɹ hænz muv oʊvɝ ðə kɹɔs-hætʃt bɔɹd.

He found Master Gill in the library, playing stones with Loial. A plump tabby sat on the table, feet tucked under her, watching their hands move over the cross-hatched board.

ði oʊɡiɝ pleɪst ənʌðɝ stoʊn wɪð ə tʌtʃ ɑdli dɛləkət fəɹ ɪz θɪk fɪŋɡɝz. ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, mæstɝ ɡɪl tʊk ði ɪkskjus ə ɹændz əpɪɹəns tə tɝn fɹəm ðə teɪbəl. lɔɪəl ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz wʌn ət stoʊnz. "aɪ wɑz bɪɡɪnɪŋ tə wɝi wɛɹ jə wɝ, læd. θɔt jə maɪɾ əv hæd tʃɹʌbəl wɪð səm ə ðoʊz waɪt-flæʃɪŋ tʃɹeɪɾɝz, əɹ ɹʌn ɪndə ðət bɛɡɝ əɹ sʌmθɪŋ."

The Ogier placed another stone with a touch oddly delicate for his thick fingers. Shaking his head, Master Gill took the excuse of Rand's appearance to turn from the table. Loial almost always won at stones. "I was beginning to worry where you were, lad. Thought you might have had trouble with some of those white-flashing traitors, or run into that beggar or something."

fəɹ ə mɪnət ɹænd stʊd ðəɹ wɪð ɪz maʊθ oʊpən. hi hæd fɝɡɑɾən ɔl əbaʊt ðət bʌndəl-ʌv-ɹæɡz ʌv ə mæn. "aɪ sɔ hɪm," hi sɛd faɪnəli, "bʌt ðæts nʌθɪŋ. aɪ sɔ ðə kwin, tu, ən ɪleɪɾə; ðæts wɛɹ ðə tʃɹʌbəl ɪz."

For a minute Rand stood there with his mouth open. He had forgotten all about that bundle-of-rags of a man. "I saw him," he said finally, "but that's nothing. I saw the Queen, too, and Elaida; that's where the trouble is."

mæstɝ ɡɪl snɔɹɾɪd ə læf. "ðə kwin, ɛ? jə doʊn seɪ. wi hæd ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn aʊɾ ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum ən aʊɝ əɹ soʊ əɡoʊ, ɑɹm-ɹɛslɪŋ ðə lɔɹd kæptən-kəmændɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən, bʌt ðə kwin, naʊ . . . ðæts sʌmθɪŋ."

Master Gill snorted a laugh. "The Queen, eh? You don't say. We had Gareth Bryne out in the common room an hour or so ago, arm-wrestling the Lord Captain-Commander of the Children, but the Queen, now . . . that's something."

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz," ɹænd ɡɹaʊld, "ɛvɹibɑɾi θɪŋks aɪm laɪɪŋ tədeɪ." hi tɔst ɪz kloʊk əkɹɔs ðə bæk ʌv ə tʃɛɹ ən θɹu hɪmsɛlf ɑntu ənʌðɝ. hi wɑz tu waʊn ʌp tə sɪt bæk. hi pɝtʃt ɑn ðə fɹʌn ɛdʒ, mɑpɪŋ ɪz feɪs wɪð ə hæŋkɝtʃɪf. "aɪ sɔ ðə bɛɡɝ, ən i sɔ mi, ən aɪ θɔt. . . . ðæts nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. aɪ klaɪmd ʌp ɑn ə wɔl ɝaʊn ə ɡɑɹɾən, wɛɹ aɪ kəd si ðə plɑzə ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə pæləs, wɛɹ ðeɪ tʊk lɑɡən ɪn. ən aɪ fɛl ɔf, ɑn ði ɪnsaɪd."

"Blood and ashes," Rand growled, "everybody thinks I'm lying today." He tossed his cloak across the back of a chair and threw himself onto another. He was too wound up to sit back. He perched on the front edge, mopping his face with a handkerchief. "I saw the beggar, and he saw me, and I thought. . . . That's not important. I climbed up on a wall around a garden, where I could see the plaza in front of the Palace, where they took Logain in. And I fell off, on the inside."

"aɪ ɔlmoʊs bɪliv jə ɑɹən meɪkɪŋ fʌn," ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd sloʊli.

"I almost believe you aren't making fun," the innkeeper said slowly.

"tɑvɝən," lɔɪəl mɝmɝd.

"Ta'veren," Loial murmured.

"oʊ, ɪt hæpənd," ɹænd sɛd. "laɪt hɛlp mi, ɪt dɪd."

"Oh, it happened," Rand said. "Light help me, it did."

mæstɝ ɡɪlz skɛptɪsɪzəm mɛltəd sloʊli əz i wɛn ɑn, tɝnɪŋ tə kwaɪəɾ əlɑɹm. ði ɪnkipɝ lin mɔɹ ən mɔɹ fɔɹwɝɾ əntɪl i wɑz pɝtʃt ɑn ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz tʃɛɹ ðə seɪm əz ɹænd wɑz. lɔɪəl lɪsən ɪmpæsɪvli, ɪksɛp ðəɾ ɛvɹi soʊ ɔfən i ɹʌbd ɪz bɹɔd noʊz ən ðə tʌfs ɑn ɪz ɪɹz ɡeɪv ə lɪɾəl twɪtʃ.

Master Gill's skepticism melted slowly as he went on, turning to quiet alarm. The innkeeper leaned more and more forward until he was perched on the edge of his chair the same as Rand was. Loial listened impassively, except that every so often he rubbed his broad nose and the tufts on his ears gave a little twitch.

ɹænd toʊld ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət hæd hæpənd, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪksɛpt wʌɾ ɪleɪɾə hæd wɪspɝd tə hɪm. ən wʌt ɡɔɪn hæd sɛɾ ət ðə pæləs ɡeɪt. wʌn i dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk əbaʊt; ði ʌðɝ hæd nʌθɪŋ tə də wɪð ɛniθɪŋ. aɪm tæm ælθɹz sʌn, ivən ɪf aɪ wɑzn bɔɹn ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. aɪ æm! aɪm tu ɹɪvɝz blʌd, ən tæm ɪz maɪ fɑðɝ.

Rand told everything that had happened, everything except what Elaida had whispered to him. And what Gawyn had said at the Palace gate. One he did not want to think about; the other had nothing to do with anything. I'm Tam al'Thor's son, even if I wasn't born in the Two Rivers. I am! I'm Two Rivers blood, and Tam is my father.

əbɹʌpli hi ɹilaɪzd i hæd stɑp tɔkɪŋ, kɑɾ ʌp ɪn ɪz θɔts, ən ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. fəɹ wʌn pænɪki moʊmən i wʌndɝɾ ɪf i hæd sɛd tu mʌtʃ.

Abruptly he realized he had stopped talking, caught up in his thoughts, and they were looking at him. For one panicky moment he wondered if he had said too much.

"wɛl," mæstɝ ɡɪl sɛd, "ðɛɹz noʊ mɔɹ weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ jəɹ fɹɛnz fəɹ ju. jəl əv tə liv ðə sɪɾi, ən fæst. tu deɪz ət ðə moʊst. kən jə ɡɛt mæt ɑn ɪz fiɾ ɪn ðət taɪm, əɹ ʃəɾ aɪ sɛn fəɹ mʌðɝ ɡɹʌb?"

"Well," Master Gill said, "there's no more waiting for your friends for you. You will have to leave the city, and fast. Two days at the most. Can you get Mat on his feet in that time, or should I send for Mother Grubb?"

ɹænd ɡeɪv ɪm ə pɝplɛks lʊk. "tu deɪz?"

Rand gave him a perplexed look. "Two days?"

"ɪleɪɾə ɪz kwin mɔɹɡeɪsəz ædvaɪzɝ, ɹaɪt nɛks tə kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ɡɛɹɪθ bɹaɪn hɪmsɛlf. meɪbi əhɛɾ ə hɪm. ɪf ʃi sɛts ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz lʊkɪŋ fəɹ jə - lɔɹd ɡɛɹɪθ woʊn stɑp əɹ ənlɛs ʃi ɪntɝfɪɹz wɪð ðɛɹ ʌðɝ duɾiz - wɛl, ðə ɡɑɹdz kən sɝtʃ ɛvɹi ɪn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ɪn tu deɪz. ən ðæts seɪɪŋ səm ɪl tʃæns dʌzn bɹɪŋ əm hɪɹ ðə fɝs deɪ, əɹ ðə fɝst aʊɝ. meɪbi ðɛɹz ə lɪɾəl taɪm ɪf ðeɪ stɑɹɾ oʊvɝ ət ðə kɹaʊn ən laɪən, bʌt nʌn fəɹ dɔdlɪŋ."

"Elaida is Queen Morgase's advisor, right next to Captain-General Gareth Bryne himself. Maybe ahead of him. If she sets the Queen's Guards looking for you - Lord Gareth won't stop her unless she interferes with their other duties - well, the Guards can search every inn in Caemlyn in two days. And that's saying some ill chance doesn't bring them here the first day, or the first hour. Maybe there's a little time if they start over at the Crown and Lion, but none for dawdling."

ɹænd nɑɾəd sloʊli. "ɪf aɪ kænt ɡɛt mæt aʊɾ ə ðət bɛd, jə sɛn fəɹ mʌðɝ ɡɹʌb. aɪ hæv ə lɪɾəl mʌni lɛft. meɪbi ɪnʌf."

Rand nodded slowly. "If I can't get Mat out of that bed, you send for Mother Grubb. I have a little money left. Maybe enough."

"aɪl teɪk kɛɹ ə mʌðɝ ɡɹʌb," ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd ɡɹʌflaɪ. "æn aɪ səpoʊz aɪ kən lɛn jə ə kʌpəl ə hɔɹsəz. jə tʃɹaɪ wɔkɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən jəl wɛɹ θɹu wʌts lɛft ə jəɹ buts hæfweɪ ðɛɹ."

"I'll take care of Mother Grubb," the innkeeper said gruffly. "And I suppose I can lend you a couple of horses. You try walking to Tar Valon and you'll wear through what's left of your boots halfway there."

"jɔɹ ə ɡʊd fɹɛnd," ɹænd sɛd. "ɪt simz laɪk wiv bɹɔt jə nʌθɪŋ bʌt tʃɹʌbəl, bʌt jəɹ stɪl wɪlɪŋ tə hɛlp. ə ɡʊd fɹɛnd."

"You're a good friend," Rand said. "It seems like we've brought you nothing but trouble, but you're still willing to help. A good friend."

mæstɝ ɡɪl simd ɪmbɛɹəst. hi ʃɹʌɡd ɪz ʃoʊldɝz ən klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ ən lʊk daʊn. ðət bɹɔɾ ɪz aɪz tə ðə stoʊnz bɔɹd, ən i dʒɝkt əm əweɪ əɡɛn. lɔɪəl wɑz dɛfənətli wɪnɪŋ. "aɪ, wɛl, tɑmz ɔlweɪz bɪn ə ɡʊd fɹɛn tə mi. ɪf hiz wɪlɪŋ tə ɡoʊ aʊɾ ə hɪz weɪ fəɹ ju, aɪ kən də ə lɪɾəl bɪt, tu."

Master Gill seemed embarrassed. He shrugged his shoulders and cleared his throat and looked down. That brought his eyes to the stones board, and he jerked them away again. Loial was definitely winning. "Aye, well, Thom's always been a good friend to me. If he's willing to go out of his way for you, I can do a little bit, too."

"aɪ wəd laɪk tə ɡoʊ wɪð jə wən jə liv, ɹænd," lɔɪəl sɛd sʌɾənli.

"I would like to go with you when you leave, Rand," Loial said suddenly.

"aɪ θɔt ðət wɑz sɛɾəld, lɔɪəl." hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd - mæstɝ ɡɪl stɪl dɪd nɑt noʊ ðə hoʊl ə ðə deɪnʒɝ - ðən æɾəd, "ju noʊ wʌt weɪts fəɹ mæt ən mi, wʌts tʃeɪsɪŋ ʌs."

"I thought that was settled, Loial." He hesitated - Master Gill still did not know the whole of the danger - then added, "You know what waits for Mat and me, what's chasing us."

"dɑɹkfɹɛnz," ði oʊɡiɝ ɹɪplaɪɾ ɪn ə plæsəd ɹʌmbəl, "æn ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðə laɪt noʊz wʌɾ ɛls. əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. jə ɑɹ ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ðəɹ ɪz ə vɛɹi faɪn ɡɹoʊv ðɛɹ, wɪtʃ aɪ hæv hɝd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tɛnd wɛl. ɪn ɛni keɪs, ðəɹ ɪz mɔɹ tə si ɪn ðə wɝl ðən ðə ɡɹoʊvz. jə tʃɹuli ɑɹ tɑvɝən, ɹænd. ðə pæɾɝn wivz ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn ju, ən jə stæn ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt."

"Darkfriends," the Ogier replied in a placid rumble, "and Aes Sedai, and the Light knows what else. Or the Dark One. You are going to Tar Valon, and there is a very fine grove there, which I have heard the Aes Sedai tend well. In any case, there is more to see in the world than the groves. You truly are ta'veren, Rand. The Pattern weaves itself around you, and you stand in the heart of it."

ðɪs mæn stænz ət ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. ɹænd fɛlt ə tʃɪl. "aɪ doʊn stæn ət ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ," hi sɛd hɑɹʃli.

This man stands at the heart of it. Rand felt a chill. "I don't stand at the heart of anything," he said harshly.

mæstɝ ɡɪl blɪŋkt, ən ivən lɔɪəl sim teɪkən əbæk əɾ ɪz æŋɡɝ. ði ɪnkipɝ ən ði oʊɡiɝ lʊkt əɾ itʃ ʌðɝ, ən ðən ət ðə flɔɹ. ɹænd fɔɹst ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən smuð, dʒɹɔɪŋ dip bɹɛθs. fəɹ ə wʌndɝ i faʊn ðə vɔɪd ðət hæɾ ɪluɾɪd ɪm soʊ ɔfən ə leɪt, ən kɑmnəs. ðeɪ dɪd nɑt dɪzɝv ɪz æŋɡɝ.

Master Gill blinked, and even Loial seemed taken aback at his anger. The innkeeper and the Ogier looked at each other, and then at the floor. Rand forced his expression smooth, drawing deep breaths. For a wonder he found the void that had eluded him so often of late, and calmness. They did not deserve his anger.

"ju kən kʌm, lɔɪəl," hi sɛd. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ waɪ jə wəd wɑn tə, bʌɾ aɪd bi ɡɹeɪtfəl fəɹ ðə kʌmpəni. jə . . . jə noʊ haʊ mæt ɪz."

"You can come, Loial," he said. "I don't know why you would want to, but I'd be grateful for the company. You . . . you know how Mat is."

"aɪ noʊ," lɔɪəl sɛd. "aɪ stɪl kænɑt ɡoʊ ɪndə ðə stʃɹits wɪθaʊt ɹeɪzɪŋ ə mɑb ʃaʊɾɪŋ 'tʃɹɑlɑk' æftɝ mi. bʌt mæt, ət list, oʊnli juzɪz wɝdz. hiz nɑt tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl mi."

"I know," Loial said. "I still cannot go into the streets without raising a mob shouting 'Trolloc' after me. But Mat, at least, only uses words. He has not tried to kill me."

"ʌv kɔɹs nɑt," ɹænd sɛd. "nɑt mæt." hi wʊdnt ɡoʊ ðət fɑɹ. nɑt mæt.

"Of course not," Rand said. "Not Mat." He wouldn't go that far. Not Mat.

ə tæp keɪm ət ðə dɔɹ, ən wʌn ə ðə sɝvɪŋ meɪdz, ɡɪldə, stʌk əɹ hɛɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum. hɝ maʊθ wɑz taɪt, ən əɹ aɪz wɝid. "mæstɝ ɡɪl, kʌm kwɪkli, pliz. ðɛɹz waɪtkloʊks ɪn ðə kɑmən ɹum."

A tap came at the door, and one of the serving maids, Gilda, stuck her head into the room. Her mouth was tight, and her eyes worried. "Master Gill, come quickly, please. There's Whitecloaks in the common room."

mæstɝ ɡɪl lɛpt ʌp wɪð ən oʊθ, sɛndɪŋ ðə kæt dʒʌmpɪŋ fɹəm ðə teɪbəl tə stɔk aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum, teɪl stɪf ən əfɛndəd. "aɪl kʌm. ɹʌn tɛl əm aɪm kʌmɪŋ, ðən steɪ aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ weɪ. jə hɪɹ mi, ɡɝl? kip əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm." ɡɪldə bɑbd əɹ hɛɾ ən vænɪʃt. "ju hæd bɛst steɪ hɪɹ," hi toʊld lɔɪəl.

Master Gill leaped up with an oath, sending the cat jumping from the table to stalk out of the room, tail stiff and offended. "I'll come. Run tell them I'm coming, then stay out of their way. You hear me, girl? Keep away from them." Gilda bobbed her head and vanished. "You had best stay here," he told Loial.

ði oʊɡiɝ snɔɹɾɪd, ə saʊn laɪk ʃits ɹɪpɪŋ. "aɪ hæv noʊ dɪzaɪɝ fəɹ ɛni mɔɹ miɾɪŋz wɪð ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt."

The Ogier snorted, a sound like sheets ripping. "I have no desire for any more meetings with the Children of the Light."

mæstɝ ɡɪlz aɪ fɛl ɑn ðə stoʊnz bɔɹɾ ən ɪz mud sim tə laɪɾən. "ɪt lʊks əz ɪf wɪl əv tə stɑɹt ðə ɡeɪm oʊvɝ leɪɾɝ."

Master Gill's eye fell on the stones board and his mood seemed to lighten. "It looks as if we'll have to start the game over later."

"noʊ nid fəɹ ðæt." lɔɪəl stʃɹɛtʃt ən ɑɹm tə ðə ʃɛlvz ən tʊk daʊn ə bʊk; hɪz hænz dwɔɹf ðə klɑθbaʊn vɑljum. "wi kən teɪk ʌp fɹəm wɛɹ ðə bɔɹd laɪz. ɪts jəɹ tɝn."

"No need for that." Loial stretched an arm to the shelves and took down a book; his hands dwarfed the clothbound volume. "We can take up from where the board lies. It is your turn."

mæstɝ ɡɪl ɡɹɪməst. "ɪf ɪɾ ɪzənt wʌn θɪŋ, ɪts ənʌðɝ," hi mʌɾɝd əz i hɝid fɹəm ðə ɹum.

Master Gill grimaced. "If it isn't one thing, it's another," he muttered as he hurried from the room.

ɹænd fɑloʊd hɪm, bʌt sloʊli. hi hæd noʊ mɔɹ dɪzaɪɝ ðən lɔɪəl tə bɪkʌm ɪnvɑlvd wɪð ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ðɪs mæn stænz ət ðə hɑɹɾ ʌv ɪt. hi stɑpt ət ðə dɔɹ tə ðə kɑmən ɹum, wɛɹ i kəd si wʌt wɛn ɑn, bʌt fɑɹ ɪnʌf bæk ðəɾ i hoʊpt i wəd nɑt bi noʊɾəst.

Rand followed him, but slowly. He had no more desire than Loial to become involved with the Children. This man stands at the heart of it. He stopped at the door to the common room, where he could see what went on, but far enough back that he hoped he would not be noticed.

dɛd saɪləns fɪl ðə ɹum. faɪv waɪtkloʊks stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə flɔɹ, stuɾiəsli biɪŋ ɪɡnɔɹd baɪ ðə foʊk ət ðə teɪbəlz. wʌn ə ðɛm hæd ðə sɪlvɝ laɪtnɪŋ-flæʃ ʌv ən ʌndɝ-ɔfəsɝ bɪniθ ðə sʌnbɝst ɑn ɪz kloʊk. læmɡwɪn wɑz laʊnʒɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔl baɪ ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ, ɪntɛnli klinɪŋ ɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz wɪð ə splɪntɝ. fɔɹ mɔɹ ə ðə ɡɑɹdz mæstɝ ɡɪl hæd haɪɝd wɝ speɪst əkɹɔs ðə wɔl fɹəm hɪm, ɔl ɪndʌstʃɹiəsli peɪɪŋ noʊ ətɛnʃən əɾ ɔl tə ðə waɪtkloʊks. ɪf ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt noʊɾəst ɛniθɪŋ, ðeɪ ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn. oʊnli ði ʌndɝ-ɔfəsɝ ʃoʊɾ ɛni ɪmoʊʃən əɾ ɔl, ɪmpeɪʃənli tæpɪŋ ɪz stil-bækt ɡɔnləts əɡɛnst ɪz pɑm əz i weɪɾəd fəɹ ði ɪnkipɝ.

Dead silence filled the room. Five Whitecloaks stood in the middle of the floor, studiously being ignored by the folk at the tables. One of them had the silver lightning-flash of an under-officer beneath the sunburst on his cloak. Lamgwin was lounging against the wall by the front door, intently cleaning his fingernails with a splinter. Four more of the guards Master Gill had hired were spaced across the wall from him, all industriously paying no attention at all to the Whitecloaks. If the Children of the Light noticed anything, they gave no sign. Only the under-officer showed any emotion at all, impatiently tapping his steel-backed gauntlets against his palm as he waited for the innkeeper.

mæstɝ ɡɪl kɹɔs ðə ɹum tə hɪm kwɪkli, ə kɔʃəsli nutʃɹəl lʊk ɑn ɪz feɪs. "ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ju," hi sɛd wɪð ə kɛɹfəl baʊ, nɑt tu dip, bʌt nɑt slaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə æktʃəli  bi ɪnsʌltɪŋ, iðɝ, "æn əɹ ɡʊd kwin mɔɹɡeɪs. haʊ meɪ aɪ hɛlp - "

Master Gill crossed the room to him quickly, a cautiously neutral look on his face. "The Light illumine you," he said with a careful bow, not too deep, but not slight enough to actually be insulting, either, "and our good Queen Morgase. How may I help - "

"aɪv noʊ taɪm fəɹ jəɹ dʒɹɪvəl, ɪnkipɝ," ði ʌndɝ-ɔfəsɝ snæpt. "aɪv bɪn tə twɛnti ɪnz ɔlɹɛɾi tədeɪ, itʃ ə wɝs pɪɡsti ðən ðə læst, ən əl si twɛnti mɔɹ bɪfɔɹ ðə sʌn sɛts. aɪm lʊkɪŋ fəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ə bɔɪ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz - "

"I've no time for your drivel, innkeeper," the under-officer snapped. "I've been to twenty inns already today, each a worse pigsty than the last, and I'll see twenty more before the sun sets. I'm looking for Darkfriends, a boy from the Two Rivers - "

mæstɝ ɡɪlz feɪs ɡɹu dɑɹkɝ wɪð ɛvɹi wɝd. hi pʌft ʌp əz ɪf i wəɾ ɪksploʊd, ən faɪnəli hi dɪd, kʌɾɪŋ ðə waɪtkloʊk ɔf ɪn tɝn. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ noʊ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɪn maɪ ɪstæblɪʃmənt! ɛvɹi mæn hɪɹ ɪz ə ɡʊd kwinz mæn!"

Master Gill's face grew darker with every word. He puffed up as if he would explode, and finally he did, cutting the Whitecloak off in turn. "There are no Darkfriends in my establishment! Every man here is a good Queen's man!"

"jɛs, ən wi ɔl noʊ wɛɹ mɔɹɡeɪs stænz," ði ʌndɝ-ɔfəsɝ twɪstəd ðə kwinz neɪm ɪndə ə snɪɹ, "æn əɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn wɪtʃ, doʊnt wi?"

"Yes, and we all know where Morgase stands," the under-officer twisted the Queen's name into a sneer, "and her Tar Valon witch, don't we?"

ðə skɹeɪp ə tʃɛɹ lɛɡz wɑz laʊd. sʌɾənli ɛvɹi mæn ɪn ðə ɹum wɑz ɑn ɪz fit. ðeɪ stʊd stɪl əz stætʃuz, bʌɾ ɛvɹi wʌn stɛɹɪŋ ɡɹɪmli ət ðə waɪtkloʊks. ði ʌndɝ-ɔfəsɝ dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə noʊɾəs, bʌt ðə fɔɹ bɪhaɪn ɪm lʊkt ɝaʊn ənizəli.

The scrape of chair legs was loud. Suddenly every man in the room was on his feet. They stood still as statues, but every one staring grimly at the Whitecloaks. The under-officer did not appear to notice, but the four behind him looked around uneasily.

"ɪt wɪl ɡoʊ iziɝ wɪð ju, ɪnkipɝ," ði ʌndɝ-ɔfəsɝ sɛd, "ɪf jə koʊɑpɝeɪt. ðə tɛmpɝ ə ðə taɪmz ɡoʊz hɑɹd wɪð ðoʊz u ʃɛltɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. aɪ wʊdn θɪŋk ən ɪn wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ ɑn ɪts dɔɹ wəd ɡɛt mʌtʃ kʌstəm. maɪɾ əv tʃɹʌbəl wɪð faɪɝ, wɪð ðəɾ ɑn jəɹ dɔɹ."

"It will go easier with you, innkeeper," the under-officer said, "if you cooperate. The temper of the times goes hard with those who shelter Darkfriends. I wouldn't think an inn with the Dragon's Fang on its door would get much custom. Might have trouble with fire, with that on your door."

"ju ɡɛɾ aʊɾ ə hɪɹ naʊ," mæstɝ ɡɪl sɛd kwaɪətli, "ɔɹ əl sɛn fəɹ ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz tə kɑɹt wʌts lɛft ə jə tə ðə mɪɾənz."

"You get out of here now," Master Gill said quietly, "or I'll send for the Queen's Guards to cart what's left of you to the middens."

læmɡwɪnz sɔɹd ɹæspt aʊɾ ʌv ɪts ʃiθ, ən ðə kɔɹs skɹeɪp ə stil ɑn lɛðɝ wɑz ɹɪpiɾɪd θɹuaʊt ðə ɹum əz sɔɹdz ən dæɡɝz fɪl hænz. sɝvɪŋ meɪdz skɝid fəɹ ðə dɔɹz.

Lamgwin's sword rasped out of its sheath, and the coarse scrape of steel on leather was repeated throughout the room as swords and daggers filled hands. Serving maids scurried for the doors.

ði ʌndɝ-ɔfəsɝ lʊkt ɝaʊn ɪn skɔɹnfəl dɪsbɪlif. "ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ - "

The under-officer looked around in scornful disbelief. "The Dragon's Fang - "

"woʊn hɛlp jə faɪv," mæstɝ ɡɪl fɪnɪʃt fəɹ hɪm. hi hɛld ʌp ə klɛntʃt fɪst ən ɹeɪzd ɪz fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ. "wʌn."

"Won't help you five," Master Gill finished for him. He held up a clenched fist and raised his forefinger. "One."

"ju mʌs bi mæd, ɪnkipɝ, θɹɛɾənɪŋ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt."

"You must be mad, innkeeper, threatening the Children of the Light."

"waɪtkloʊks hoʊl noʊ ɹɪɾ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. tu."

"Whitecloaks hold no writ in Caemlyn. Two."

"kæn jə ɹɪli bɪliv ðɪs wɪl ɛn hɪɹ?"

"Can you really believe this will end here?"

"θɹi."

"Three."

"wil bi bæk," ði ʌndɝ-ɔfəsɝ snæpt, ən ðən i wɑz heɪstəli tɝnɪŋ ɪz mɛn ɝaʊnd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə pɹitɛn i wɑz livɪŋ ɪn ɡʊɾ ɔɹɾɝ ən ɪn ɪz oʊn taɪm. hi wɑz hæmpɝɾ ɪn ðɪs baɪ ði iɡɝnəs ɪz mɛn ʃoʊd fəɹ ðə dɔɹ, nɑt ɹʌnɪŋ, bʌt nɑt meɪkɪŋ sikɹət ðət ðeɪ wɑntəd tə bi aʊtsaɪd.

"We'll be back," the under-officer snapped, and then he was hastily turning his men around, trying to pretend he was leaving in good order and in his own time. He was hampered in this by the eagerness his men showed for the door, not running, but not making secret that they wanted to be outside.

læmɡwɪn stʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə dɔɹ wɪð ɪz sɔɹd, oʊnli ɡɪvɪŋ weɪ ɪn ɹɪspɑns tə mæstɝ ɡɪlz fɹæntɪk weɪvz. wən ðə waɪtkloʊks wɝ ɡɔn, ði ɪnkipɝ dʒɹɑp hɛvəli ɑntu ə tʃɛɹ. hi ɹʌbd ə hæn əkɹɔs ɪz fɔɹhɛd, ðən stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪɾ əz ɪf sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt kʌvɝd wɪð swɛt. ɔl oʊvɝ ðə ɹum mɛn siɾəd ðɛmsɛlvz əɡɛn, læfɪŋ oʊvɝ wʌt ðeɪ hæd dʌn. səm wɛn oʊvɝ tə klæp mæstɝ ɡɪl ɑn ðə ʃoʊldɝ.

Lamgwin stood across the door with his sword, only giving way in response to Master Gill's frantic waves. When the Whitecloaks were gone, the innkeeper dropped heavily onto a chair. He rubbed a hand across his forehead, then stared at it as if surprised that it was not covered with sweat. All over the room men seated themselves again, laughing over what they had done. Some went over to clap Master Gill on the shoulder.

wən i sɔ ɹænd, ði ɪnkipɝ tɑɾɝd ɔf ðə tʃɛɹ ən oʊvɝ tə hɪm. "hu wʊɾə θɔɾ aɪ hæɾ ɪɾ ɪn mi tə bi ə hɪɹoʊ?" hi sɛd wʌndɝɪŋli. "ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin mi." əbɹʌpli hi ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, ən ɪz vɔɪs ɹiɡeɪn ɔlmoʊst ɪts nɔɹməl toʊn. "jul əv tə steɪ aʊɾ ə saɪɾ əntɪl aɪ kən ɡɛt jə aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi." wɪð ə kɛɹfəl lʊk bæk ɪndə ðə kɑmən ɹum, hi pʊʃt ɹænd dipɝ ɪndə ðə hɔl. "ðæt lɑt wɪl bi bæk, əɹ ɛls ə fju spaɪz wɛɹɪŋ ɹɛd fəɹ ðə deɪ. æftɝ ðət lɪɾəl ʃoʊ aɪ pʊɾ ɑn, aɪ daʊt ðəl kɛɹ wɛðɝ jəɹ hɪɹ əɹ nɑt, bʌt ðəl ækt əz ðoʊ jə ɑɹ."

When he saw Rand, the innkeeper tottered off the chair and over to him. "Who would have thought I had it in me to be a hero?" he said wonderingly. "The Light illumine me." Abruptly he gave himself a shake, and his voice regained almost its normal tone. "You'll have to stay out of sight until I can get you out of the city." With a careful look back into the common room, he pushed Rand deeper into the hall. "That lot will be back, or else a few spies wearing red for the day. After that little show I put on, I doubt they'll care whether you're here or not, but they'll act as though you are."

"ðæts kɹeɪzi," ɹænd pɹətɛstəd. ət ði ɪnkipɝz dʒɛstʃɝ i loʊɝɾ ɪz vɔɪs. "ðə waɪtkloʊks doʊn əv ɛni ɹizən tə bi æftɝ mi."

"That's crazy," Rand protested. At the innkeeper's gesture he lowered his voice. "The Whitecloaks don't have any reason to be after me."

"aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt ɹizənz, læd, bʌt ðəɹ æftɝ jə ən mæt fəɹ sɝɾən ʃʊɹ. wʌɾ əv jə bɪn ʌp tə? ɪleɪɾə ən ðə waɪtkloʊks."

"I don't know about reasons, lad, but they're after you and Mat for certain sure. What have you been up to? Elaida and the Whitecloaks."

ɹænd ɹeɪzd ɪz hænz ɪn pɹoʊɾɛst, ðən lɛɾ əm fɔl. ɪt meɪd noʊ sɛns, bʌɾ i hæd hɝd ðə waɪtkloʊk. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ju? ðə waɪtkloʊks wɪl meɪk tʃɹʌbəl fəɹ jə ivən wən ðeɪ doʊn faɪn ʌs."

Rand raised his hands in protest, then let them fall. It made no sense, but he had heard the Whitecloak. "What about you? The Whitecloaks will make trouble for you even when they don't find us."

"noʊ wɝiz əbaʊt ðæt, læd. ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz stɪl əphoʊl ðə lɔ, ivən ɪf ðeɪ də lɛt tʃɹeɪɾɝz stʃɹʌɾ ɝaʊnd ʃoʊɪŋ waɪt. əz fəɹ ðə naɪt . . . wɛl, læmɡwɪn ən ɪz fɹɛnz maɪt nɑt ɡɛt mʌtʃ slip, bʌɾ aɪ kəɾ ɔlmoʊs pɪɾi ɛnibəɾi hu tʃɹaɪz tə pʊɾ ə mɑɹk ɑn maɪ dɔɹ."

"No worries about that, lad. The Queen's Guards still uphold the law, even if they do let traitors strut around showing white. As for the night . . . well, Lamgwin and his friends might not get much sleep, but I could almost pity anybody who tries to put a mark on my door."

ɡɪldə əpɪɹd bɪsaɪd ðɛm, dʒɹɑpɪŋ ə kɝtsi tə mæstɝ ɡɪl. "sɝ, ðɛɹz . . . ðɛɹz ə leɪɾi. ɪn ðə kɪtʃənz." ʃi saʊndəd skændəlaɪzd ət ðə kɑmbəneɪʃən. "ʃiz æskɪŋ fəɹ mæstɝ ɹænd, sɝ, ən mæstɝ mæt, baɪ neɪm."

Gilda appeared beside them, dropping a curtsy to Master Gill. "Sir, there's . . . there's a lady. In the kitchens." She sounded scandalized at the combination. "She's asking for Master Rand, sir, and Master Mat, by name."

ɹænd ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə pʌzəld lʊk wɪð ði ɪnkipɝ.

Rand exchanged a puzzled look with the innkeeper.

"læd," mæstɝ ɡɪl sɛd, "ɪf juv æktʃəli  mænədʒ tə bɹɪŋ ðə leɪɾi ɪleɪn daʊn fɹəm ðə pæləs tə maɪ ɪn, wɪl ɔl ɛn ʌp feɪsɪŋ ðə hɛdzmən." ɡɪldə skwikt ət ðə mɛnʃən ə ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ən ɡeɪv ɹænd ə ɹaʊnd-aɪd stɛɹ. "ɔf wɪð ju, ɡɝl," ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "æn kip kwaɪəɾ əbaʊt wʌt juv hɝd. ɪts noʊbɑdiz bɪznəs." ɡɪldə bɑbd əɡɛn ən dɑɹɾɪd daʊn ðə hɔlweɪ, flæʃɪŋ ɡlænsɪz oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ ət ɹænd əz ʃi wɛnt. "ɪn faɪv mɪnəts" - mæstɝ ɡɪl saɪd - "ʃi wɪl bi tɛlɪŋ ði ʌðɝ wɪmən jəɹ ə pɹɪns ɪn dɪsɡaɪz. baɪ ɪɾəl wɪl bi ɔl oʊvɝ ðə nu sɪɾi."

"Lad," Master Gill said, "if you've actually managed to bring the Lady Elayne down from the Palace to my inn, we'll all end up facing the headsman." Gilda squeaked at the mention of the Daughter-Heir and gave Rand a round-eyed stare. "Off with you, girl," the innkeeper said sharply. "And keep quiet about what you've heard. It's nobody's business." Gilda bobbed again and darted down the hallway, flashing glances over her shoulder at Rand as she went. "In five minutes" - Master Gill sighed - "she will be telling the other women you're a prince in disguise. By nightfall it will be all over the New City."

"mæstɝ ɡɪl," ɹænd sɛd, "aɪ nɛvɝ mɛnʃən mæt tə ɪleɪn. ɪt kæn bi - " sʌɾənli ə hjudʒ smaɪl lɪɾ ʌp ɪz feɪs, ən i ɹæn fəɹ ðə kɪtʃənz.

"Master Gill," Rand said, "I never mentioned Mat to Elayne. It can't be - " Suddenly a huge smile lit up his face, and he ran for the kitchens.

"weɪt!" ði ɪnkipɝ kɔl bɪhaɪn hɪm. "weɪɾ əntɪl jə noʊ. weɪt, jə ful!"

"Wait!" the innkeeper called behind him. "Wait until you know. Wait, you fool!"

ɹænd θɹu oʊpən ðə dɔɹ tə ðə kɪtʃənz, ən ðəɹ ðeɪ wɝ. mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɛstəɾ əɹ sɝin aɪz ɑn hɪm, ənsɝpɹaɪzd. nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin ɹæn læfɪŋ tə θɹoʊ ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɪm, wɪð pɛɹɪn kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɪn bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ɔl θɹi pæɾɪŋ ɪz ʃoʊldɝz əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd tə bi kənvɪns ðəɾ i wɑz ɹɪli ðɛɹ. ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ liɾɪŋ tə ðə steɪbliɑɹd læn laʊnʒd wɪð wʌn buɾ ʌp ɑn ðə dɔɹfɹeɪm, dɪvaɪɾɪŋ ɪz ətɛnʃən bɪtwin ðə kɪtʃən ən ðə jɑɹɾ aʊtsaɪd.

Rand threw open the door to the kitchens, and there they were. Moiraine rested her serene eyes on him, unsurprised. Nynaeve and Egwene ran laughing to throw their arms around him, with Perrin crowding in behind them, all three patting his shoulders as if they had to be convinced that he was really there. In the doorway leading to the stableyard Lan lounged with one boot up on the doorframe, dividing his attention between the kitchen and the yard outside.

ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə hʌɡ ðə tu wɪmən ən ʃeɪk pɛɹɪnz hænd, ɔl ət ðə seɪm taɪm, ən ɪt wɑz ə tæŋɡəl ʌv ɑɹmz ən læftɝ kɑmpləkeɪɾəd baɪ nɪneɪiv tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə fil ɪz feɪs fəɹ fivɝ. ðeɪ lʊk sʌmwʌt ðə wɝs fəɹ wɛɹ - bɹuzəz ɑn pɛɹɪnz feɪs, ən i hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv kipɪŋ ɪz aɪz daʊnkæs ðəɾ i hæd nɛvɝ hæd bɪfɔɹ - bʌt ðeɪ wɝ əlaɪv, ən təɡɛðɝ əɡɛn. hɪz θɹoʊt wɑz soʊ taɪɾ i kəd bɛɹli tɔk. "aɪ wɑz əfɹeɪɾ aɪd nɛvɝ si jə əɡɛn," hi mænədʒ faɪnəli. "aɪ wɑz əfɹeɪd jə wɝ ɔl. . . ."

Rand tried to hug the two women and shake Perrin's hand, all at the same time, and it was a tangle of arms and laughter complicated by Nynaeve trying to feel his face for fever. They looked somewhat the worse for wear - bruises on Perrin's face, and he had a way of keeping his eyes downcast that he had never had before - but they were alive, and together again. His throat was so tight he could barely talk. "I was afraid I'd never see you again," he managed finally. "I was afraid you were all. . . ."

"aɪ nu jə wɝ əlaɪv," ɛɡwin sɛɾ əɡɛnst ɪz tʃɛst. "aɪ ɔlweɪz nu ɪt. ɔlweɪz."

"I knew you were alive," Egwene said against his chest. "I always knew it. Always."

"aɪ dɪd nɑt," nɪneɪiv sɛd. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz ʃɑɹp fəɹ dʒʌs ðət moʊmənt, bʌɾ ɪt sɔfən ɪn ðə nɛkst, ən ʃi smaɪld ʌp ət hɪm. "ju lʊk wɛl, ɹænd. nɑɾ oʊvɝfɛd baɪ ɛni minz, bʌt wɛl, θæŋk ðə laɪt."

"I did not," Nynaeve said. Her voice was sharp for just that moment, but it softened in the next, and she smiled up at him. "You look well, Rand. Not overfed by any means, but well, thank the Light."

"wɛl," mæstɝ ɡɪl sɛd bɪhaɪn hɪm, "aɪ ɡɛs jə noʊ ðiz pipəl æftɝ ɔl. ðoʊz fɹɛnz jə wɝ lʊkɪŋ fɔɹ?"

"Well," Master Gill said behind him, "I guess you know these people after all. Those friends you were looking for?"

ɹænd nɑɾəd. "jɛs, maɪ fɹɛnz." hi meɪɾ ɪntʃɹədʌkʃənz ɔl ɝaʊnd; ɪt stɪl fɛlt ɑd tə bi ɡɪvɪŋ læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn ðɛɹ ɹaɪt neɪmz. ðeɪ boʊθ aɪɾ ɪm ʃɑɹpli wən i dɪd.

Rand nodded. "Yes, my friends." He made introductions all around; it still felt odd to be giving Lan and Moiraine their right names. They both eyed him sharply when he did.

ði ɪnkipɝ ɡɹiɾəd ɛvɹiwʌn wɪð ən oʊpən smaɪl, bʌɾ i wɑz pɹɑpɝli ɪmpɹɛst ət miɾɪŋ ə wɔɹɾɝ, ən ɪspɛʃli ət mɔɪɹeɪn. əɾ əɹ i ɡeɪpt oʊpənli - ɪt wɑz wʌn θɪŋ noʊɪŋ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd bɪn hɛlpɪŋ ðə bɔɪz, kwaɪt sʌmθɪŋ ɛls hævɪŋ əɹ əpɪɹ ɪn ðə kɪtʃən - ðən baʊd dipli. "ju ɑɹ wɛlkəm tə ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ, ɛɛs sədaɪ, əz maɪ ɡɛst. ðoʊ aɪ səpoʊz jəl bi steɪɪŋ ət ðə pæləs wɪð ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hu keɪm wɪð ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən." boʊɪŋ əɡɛn, hi ɡeɪv ɹænd ə kwɪk, wɝid lʊk. ɪt wɑz ɔl vɛɹi wɛl tə seɪ hi dɪd nɑt spik ɪl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt ðət wɑz nɑt ðə seɪm əz seɪɪŋ i wɑntəd wʌn slipɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz ɹuf.

The innkeeper greeted everyone with an open smile, but he was properly impressed at meeting a Warder, and especially at Moiraine. At her he gaped openly - it was one thing knowing an Aes Sedai had been helping the boys, quite something else having her appear in the kitchen - then bowed deeply. "You are welcome to The Queen's Blessing, Aes Sedai, as my guest. Though I suppose you will be staying at the Palace with Elaida Sedai, and the Aes Sedai who came with the false Dragon." Bowing again, he gave Rand a quick, worried look. It was all very well to say he did not speak ill of Aes Sedai, but that was not the same as saying he wanted one sleeping under his roof.

ɹænd nɑɾəd ɛnkɝɪdʒɪŋli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə tɛl ɪm saɪlənli ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ɔl ɹaɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz nɑt laɪk ɪleɪɾə, wɪð ə θɹɛt hɪɾən bɪhaɪn ɛvɹi ɡlæns, ʌndɝ ɛvɹi wɝd. ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ? ivən naʊ, ɑɹ jə ʃʊɹ?

Rand nodded encouragingly, trying to tell him silently that it was all right. Moiraine was not like Elaida, with a threat hidden behind every glance, under every word. Are you sure? Even now, are you sure?

"aɪ bɪliv əl steɪ hɪɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "fɔɹ ðə ʃɔɹt taɪm aɪ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ən jə mʌst əlaʊ mi tə peɪ."

"I believe I will stay here," Moiraine said, "for the short time I remain in Caemlyn. And you must allow me to pay."

ə kæləkoʊ kæt sɔntɝɾ ɪn fɹəm ðə hɔlweɪ tə stʃɹɑp ði ɪnkipɝz æŋkəlz. noʊ sunɝ hæd ðə kæləkoʊ bɪɡʌn ðən ə fʌzi ɡɹeɪ spɹæŋ fɹəm ʌndɝ ðə teɪbəl, ɑɹtʃɪŋ ɪts bæk ən hɪsɪŋ. ðə kæləkoʊ kɹaʊtʃt wɪð ə θɹɛɾənɪŋ ɡɹaʊl, ən ðə ɡɹeɪ stʃɹik pæs læn ɪndə ðə steɪbliɑɹd.

A calico cat sauntered in from the hallway to strop the innkeeper's ankles. No sooner had the calico begun than a fuzzy gray sprang from under the table, arching its back and hissing. The calico crouched with a threatening growl, and the gray streaked past Lan into the stableyard.

mæstɝ ɡɪl bɪɡæn əpɑlədʒaɪzɪŋ fəɹ ðə kæts ət ðə seɪm taɪm i pɹətɛstəd ðət mɔɪɹeɪn wəɾ ɑnɝ ɪm baɪ biɪŋ ɪz ɡɛst, ən wɑz ʃi ʃʊɹ ʃi wəd nɑt pɹəfɝ ðə pæləs, wɪtʃ i wəd kwaɪɾ ʌndɝstænd, bʌɾ i hoʊpt ʃi wəɾ æksɛpt ɪz bɛst ɹum əz ə ɡɪft. ɪt meɪɾ ə dʒʌmbəl tə wɪtʃ mɔɪɹeɪn sim tə peɪ noʊ ətɛnʃən əɾ ɔl. ɪnstɛd ʃi bɛn daʊn tə skɹætʃ ði ɔɹənʒ-ænd-waɪt kæt; ɪt pɹɑmpli lɛf mæstɝ ɡɪlz æŋkəlz fəɹ hɝz.

Master Gill began apologizing for the cats at the same time he protested that Moiraine would honor him by being his guest, and was she sure she would not prefer the Palace, which he would quite understand, but he hoped she would accept his best room as a gift. It made a jumble to which Moiraine seemed to pay no attention at all. Instead she bent down to scratch the orange-and-white cat; it promptly left Master Gill's ankles for hers.

"aɪv sin fɔɹ ʌðɝ kæts hɪɹ, soʊ fɑɹ," ʃi sɛd. "ju hæv ə pɹɑbləm wɪð maɪs? ɹæts?"

"I've seen four other cats here, so far," she said. "You have a problem with mice? Rats?"

"ɹæts, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ." ði ɪnkipɝ saɪd. "ə tɛɹəbəl pɹɑbləm. nɑt ðəɾ aɪ doʊn kip ə klin pleɪs, jə ʌndɝstænd. ɪts ɔl ðə pipəl. ðə hoʊl sɪɾi ɪz fʊl ə pipəl ən ɹæts. bʌt maɪ kæts teɪk kɛɹ ʌv ɪt. jəl nɑt bi tʃɹʌbəld, aɪ pɹɑməs."

"Rats, Moiraine Sedai." The innkeeper sighed. "A terrible problem. Not that I don't keep a clean place, you understand. It's all the people. The whole city is full of people and rats. But my cats take care of it. You'll not be troubled, I promise."

ɹænd ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə fliɾɪŋ lʊk wɪð pɛɹɪn, hu pʊɾ ɪz aɪz daʊn əɡɛn ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɑɾ əbaʊt pɛɹɪnz aɪz. ən i wɑz soʊ saɪlənt; pɛɹɪn wɑz ɔlmoʊst ɔlweɪz sloʊ tə spik, bʌt naʊ hi wɑz seɪɪŋ nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. "ɪt kəd bi ɔl ðə pipəl," hi sɛd.

Rand exchanged a fleeting look with Perrin, who put his eyes down again right away. There was something odd about Perrin's eyes. And he was so silent; Perrin was almost always slow to speak, but now he was saying nothing at all. "It could be all the people," he said.

"wɪð jəɹ pɝmɪʃən, mæstɝ ɡɪl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, əz ɪf ʃi tʊk ɪt fəɹ ɡɹæntəd. "ɪɾ ɪz ə sɪmpəl mæɾɝ tə kip ɹæts əweɪ fɹəm ðɪs stʃɹit. wɪð lʌk, ðə ɹæts wɪl nɑɾ ivən ɹilaɪz ðeɪ ɑɹ biɪŋ kɛpt əweɪ."

"With your permission, Master Gill," Moiraine said, as if she took it for granted. "It is a simple matter to keep rats away from this street. With luck, the rats will not even realize they are being kept away."

mæstɝ ɡɪl fɹaʊn ət ðət læst, bʌɾ i baʊd, æksɛptɪŋ əɹ ɔfɝ. "ɪf jə ɑɹ ʃʊɹ jə doʊnt wɑnə steɪ ət ðə pæləs, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Master Gill frowned at that last, but he bowed, accepting her offer. "If you are sure you don't want to stay at the Palace, Aes Sedai."

"wɛɹ ɪz mæt?" nɪneɪiv sɛd sʌɾənli. "ʃi sɛɾ i wɑz hɪɹ, tu."

"Where is Mat?" Nynaeve said suddenly. "She said he was here, too."

"əpstɛɹz," ɹænd sɛd. "hiz . . . nɑt filɪŋ wɛl."

"Upstairs," Rand said. "He's . . . not feeling well."

nɪneɪivz hɛd keɪm ʌp. "hiz sɪk? əl liv ðə ɹæts tə hɝ, ən əl ətɛn tə hɪm. teɪk mi tə hɪm naʊ, ɹænd."

Nynaeve's head came up. "He's sick? I'll leave the rats to her, and I'll attend to him. Take me to him now, Rand."

"ɔl ə jə ɡoʊ ʌp," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "aɪ wɪl dʒɔɪn jə ɪn ə fju mɪnəts. wəɹ kɹaʊɾɪŋ mæstɝ ɡɪlz kɪtʃən, ən ɪt wəd bi bɛst ɪf wi kəɾ ɔl bi sʌmwɛɹ kwaɪət fəɹ ə taɪm." ðəɹ wɑz ən ʌndɝkɝən ɪn əɹ vɔɪs. steɪ aʊɾ ə saɪt. ðə haɪɾɪŋ ɪz nɑt dʌn jɛt.

"All of you go up," Moiraine said. "I will join you in a few minutes. We are crowding Master Gill's kitchen, and it would be best if we could all be somewhere quiet for a time." There was an undercurrent in her voice. Stay out of sight. The hiding is not done yet.

"kʌm ɑn," ɹænd sɛd. "wil ɡoʊ ʌp ðə bæk weɪ."

"Come on," Rand said. "We'll go up the back way."

ði ɛmənz fil foʊk kɹaʊɾəd æftɝ ɪm tə ðə bæk stɛɹkeɪs, livɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɪn ðə kɪtʃən wɪð mæstɝ ɡɪl. hi kəd nɑt ɡɛɾ oʊvɝ biɪŋ bæk təɡɛðɝ. ɪt wɑz nɪɹli əz ɪf i wɝ hoʊm əɡɛn. hi kəd nɑt stɑp ɡɹɪnɪŋ.

The Emond's Field folk crowded after him to the back staircase, leaving the Aes Sedai and the Warder in the kitchen with Master Gill. He could not get over being back together. It was nearly as if he were home again. He could not stop grinning.

ðə seɪm ɹɪlif, ɔlmoʊs dʒɔɪəs, sim tə bi əfɛktɪŋ ði ʌðɝz. ðeɪ tʃʌkəl tə ðɛmsɛlvz, ən kɛpt ɹitʃɪŋ aʊt tə ɡɹɪp ɪz ɑɹm. pɛɹɪnz vɔɪs sim səbdud, ən i stɪl kɛpt ɪz hɛd daʊn, bʌɾ i bɪɡæn tə tɔk əz ðeɪ klaɪmd.

The same relief, almost joyous, seemed to be affecting the others. They chuckled to themselves, and kept reaching out to grip his arm. Perrin's voice seemed subdued, and he still kept his head down, but he began to talk as they climbed.

"mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ʃi kəd faɪn jə ən mæt, ən ʃi dɪd. wən wi ɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə sɪɾi, ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs kʊdn stɑp stɛɹɪŋ - wɛl, ɔl ɪksɛp læn, ʌv kɔɹs - ɔl ðə pipəl, ðə bɪldɪŋz, ɛvɹiθɪŋ." hɪz θɪk kɝlz swʌŋ əz i ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn dɪsbɪlif. "ɪts ɔl soʊ bɪɡ. ən soʊ mɛni pipəl. səm ə ðɛm kɛp stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ʌs, tu, ʃaʊɾɪŋ 'ɹɛɾ əɹ waɪt?' laɪk ɪt meɪd səm kaɪndə sɛns."

"Moiraine said she could find you and Mat, and she did. When we rode into the city, the rest of us couldn't stop staring - well, all except Lan, of course - all the people, the buildings, everything." His thick curls swung as he shook his head in disbelief. "It's all so big. And so many people. Some of them kept staring at us, too, shouting 'Red or white?' like it made some kind of sense."

ɛɡwin tʌtʃt ɹændz sɔɹd, fɪŋɡɝɪŋ ðə ɹɛd ɹæpɪŋz. "wʌt dʌz ɪt min?"

Egwene touched Rand's sword, fingering the red wrappings. "What does it mean?"

"nʌθɪŋ," hi sɛd. "nʌθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt. wɝ livɪŋ fəɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɹɪmɛmbɝ?"

"Nothing," he said. "Nothing important. We're leaving for Tar Valon, remember?"

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ɪm ə lʊk, bʌt ʃi ɹimuvd əɹ hæn fɹəm ðə sɔɹɾ ən tʊk ʌp wɛɹ pɛɹɪn hæd lɛft ɔf. "mɔɪɹeɪn dɪdn lʊk əɾ ɛniθɪŋ ɛni mɔɹ ðən læn dɪd. ʃi lɛɾ əs bæk ən fɔɹθ θɹu ɔl ðoʊz stʃɹits soʊ mɛni taɪmz, laɪk ə dɔɡ hʌntɪŋ ə sɛnt, ðəɾ aɪ θɔt jə kʊdn bi hɪɹ. ðɛn, ɔl ʌv ə sʌɾən, ʃi tʊk ɔf daʊn ə stʃɹit, ən ðə nɛks θɪŋ aɪ nu wi wɝ hændɪŋ ðə hɔɹsəz tə ðə steɪbəlmən ən mɑɹtʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə kɪtʃən. ʃi nɛvɝ ivən æskt ɪf jə wɝ hɪɹ. dʒʌs toʊld ə wʊmən u wɑz mɪksɪŋ bæɾɝ tə ɡoʊ tɛl ɹænd ælθɹ ən mæt kɔθən ðət sʌmwʌn wɑntəd tə si ðɛm. ən ðəɹ jə wɝ" - ʃi ɡɹɪnd - "laɪk ə bɔl pɑpɪŋ ɪndə ðə ɡlimənz hæn aʊɾ ə noʊwɛɹ."

Egwene gave him a look, but she removed her hand from the sword and took up where Perrin had left off. "Moiraine didn't look at anything any more than Lan did. She led us back and forth through all those streets so many times, like a dog hunting a scent, that I thought you couldn't be here. Then, all of a sudden, she took off down a street, and the next thing I knew we were handing the horses to the stablemen and marching into the kitchen. She never even asked if you were here. Just told a woman who was mixing batter to go tell Rand al'Thor and Mat Cauthon that someone wanted to see them. And there you were" - she grinned - "like a ball popping into the gleeman's hand out of nowhere."

"wɛɹ ɪz ðə ɡlimən?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "ɪz i wɪð ju?"

"Where is the gleeman?" Perrin asked. "Is he with you?"

ɹændz stʌmək lɝtʃt ən ðə ɡʊd filɪŋ ə hævɪŋ fɹɛnz ɝaʊn ɪm dɪmd. "tɑmz dɛd. aɪ θɪŋk hiz dɛd. ðəɹ wɑz ə feɪd. . . ." hi kəd nɑt seɪ ɛni mɔɹ. nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ.

Rand's stomach lurched and the good feeling of having friends around him dimmed. "Thom's dead. I think he's dead. There was a Fade. . . ." He could not say any more. Nynaeve shook her head, muttering under her breath.

ðə saɪləns θɪkən ɝaʊn ðɛm, staɪflɪŋ ðə lɪɾəl tʃʌkəlz, flæɾənɪŋ ðə dʒɔɪ, əntɪl ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə hɛɾ ə ðə stɛɹz.

The silence thickened around them, stifling the little chuckles, flattening the joy, until they reached the head of the stairs.

"mæts nɑt sɪk, ɪɡzækli," hi sɛd ðɛn. "ɪts. . . . jəl si." hi flʌŋ oʊpən ðə dɔɹ tə ðə ɹum i ʃɛɹd wɪð mæt. "lʊk huz hɪɹ, mæt."

"Mat's not sick, exactly," he said then. "It's. . . . You'll see." He flung open the door to the room he shared with Mat. "Look who's here, Mat."

mæt wɑz stɪl kɝld ʌp ɪn ə bɔl ɑn ðə bɛd, dʒʌst əz ɹænd hæd lɛf hɪm. hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd tə stɛɹ ət ðɛm. "haʊ dʒju noʊ ðəɹ ɹɪli hu ðeɪ lʊk laɪk?" hi sɛd hɔɹsli. hɪz feɪs wɑz flʌʃt, ðə skɪn taɪɾ ən slɪk wɪð swɛt. "haʊ də aɪ noʊ jəɹ u jə lʊk laɪk?"

Mat was still curled up in a ball on the bed, just as Rand had left him. He raised his head to stare at them. "How do you know they're really who they look like?" he said hoarsely. His face was flushed, the skin tight and slick with sweat. "How do I know you're who you look like?"

"nɑt sɪk?" nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ɹænd ə dɪsdeɪnfəl lʊk əz ʃi pʊʃt pæs hɪm, ɔlɹɛɾi ənslɪŋɪŋ əɹ bæɡ fɹəm əɹ ʃoʊldɝ.

"Not sick?" Nynaeve gave Rand a disdainful look as she pushed past him, already unslinging her bag from her shoulder.

"ɛvɹibɑɾi tʃeɪnʒəz," mæt ɹæspt. "haʊ kən aɪ bi ʃʊɹ? pɛɹɪn? ɪz ðət ju? juv tʃeɪnʒd, hævən ju?" hɪz læf saʊndəd mɔɹ laɪk ə kɑf. "oʊ, jɛs, juv tʃeɪnʒd."

"Everybody changes," Mat rasped. "How can I be sure? Perrin? Is that you? You've changed, haven't you?" His laugh sounded more like a cough. "Oh, yes, you've changed."

tə ɹændz sɝpɹaɪz pɛɹɪn dʒɹɑpt ɑntu ði ɛdʒ ə ði ʌðɝ bɛd wɪð ɪz hɛɾ ɪn hænz, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə flɔɹ. mæts hækɪŋ læftɝ sim tə pɪɹs hɪm.

To Rand's surprise Perrin dropped onto the edge of the other bed with his head in hands, staring at the floor. Mat's hacking laughter seemed to pierce him.

nɪneɪiv nɛl bɪsaɪd mæts bɛɾ ən pʊɾ ə hæn tə hɪz feɪs, pʊʃɪŋ ʌp ɪz hɛdklɔθ. hi dʒɝk bæk fɹəm əɹ wɪð ə skɔɹnfəl lʊk. hɪz aɪz wɝ bɹaɪɾ ən ɡleɪzd. "jɔɹ bɝnɪŋ," ʃi sɛd, "bʌt jə ʃəd nɑt bi swɛɾɪŋ wɪð ðɪs mʌtʃ fivɝ." ʃi kəd nɑt kip ðə wɝi aʊɾ ə hɝ vɔɪs. "ɹænd, jə ən pɛɹɪn fɛtʃ səm klin klɔθs ən əz mʌtʃ kul wɔɾɝ əz jə kən kæɹi. əl bɹɪŋ jəɹ tɛmpɹətʃɝ daʊn fɝst, mæt, ən - "

Nynaeve knelt beside Mat's bed and put a hand to his face, pushing up his headcloth. He jerked back from her with a scornful look. His eyes were bright and glazed. "You're burning," she said, "but you should not be sweating with this much fever." She could not keep the worry out of her voice. "Rand, you and Perrin fetch some clean cloths and as much cool water as you can carry. I'll bring your temperature down first, Mat, and - "

"pɹɪɾi nɪneɪiv," mæt spæt. "eɪ wɪzdəm ɪzən səpoʊz tə θɪŋk ə hɝsɛlf əz ə wʊmən, ɪz ʃi? nɑɾ ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən. bʌt jə du, doʊn ju? naʊ. jə kæn meɪk jɝsɛlf fɝɡɛt ðət jəɹ ə pɹɪɾi wʊmən, naʊ, ən ɪt fɹaɪɾənz ju. ɛvɹibɑɾi tʃeɪnʒəz." nɪneɪivz feɪs peɪld əz i spoʊk - wɛðɝ wɪð æŋɡɝ əɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, ɹænd kəd nɑt tɛl. mæt ɡeɪv ə slaɪ læf, ən ɪz fivɝɪʃ aɪz slɪd tə ɛɡwin. "pɹɪɾi ɛɡwin," hi kɹoʊkt. "pɹɪɾi əz nɪneɪiv. ən jə ʃɛɹ ʌðɝ θɪŋz naʊ, doʊn ju? ʌðɝ dʒɹimz. wʌt dʒju dʒɹim əbaʊt naʊ?" ɛɡwin tʊk ə stɛp bæk fɹəm ðə bɛd.

"Pretty Nynaeve," Mat spat. "A Wisdom isn't supposed to think of herself as a woman, is she? Not a pretty woman. But you do, don't you? Now. You can't make yourself forget that you're a pretty woman, now, and it frightens you. Everybody changes." Nynaeve's face paled as he spoke - whether with anger or something else, Rand could not tell. Mat gave a sly laugh, and his feverish eyes slid to Egwene. "Pretty Egwene," he croaked. "Pretty as Nynaeve. And you share other things now, don't you? Other dreams. What do you dream about now?" Egwene took a step back from the bed.

"wi ɑɹ seɪf fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪz fəɹ ðə taɪm biɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn ənaʊnst əz ʃi wɔkt ɪndə ðə ɹum wɪð læn əɾ əɹ hilz. hɝ aɪz fɛl ɑn mæt əz ʃi stɛp θɹu ðə dɔɹweɪ, ən ʃi hɪst əz ɪf ʃi hæd tʌtʃt ə hɑt stoʊv. "ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm!"

"We are safe from the Dark One's eyes for the time being," Moiraine announced as she walked into the room with Lan at her heels. Her eyes fell on Mat as she stepped through the doorway, and she hissed as if she had touched a hot stove. "Get away from him!"

nɪneɪiv dɪd nɑt muv ɪksɛp fəɹ tɝnɪŋ tə stɛɹ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn sɝpɹaɪz. ɪn tu kwɪk stɛps mɔɪɹeɪn siz ðə wɪzdəm baɪ ðə ʃoʊldɝz, hɔlɪŋ əɹ əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ laɪk ə sæk ʌv ɡɹeɪn. nɪneɪiv stʃɹʌɡəld ən pɹətɛstəd, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt ɹilis əɹ əntɪl ʃi wɑz wɛl əweɪ fɹəm ðə bɛd. ðə wɪzdəm kəntɪnjuɾ əɹ pɹoʊɾɛsts əz ʃi ɡɑt tə hɝ fit, æŋɡɹəli stʃɹeɪɾənɪŋ əɹ kloʊðz, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn ɪɡnɔɹɾ əɹ kəmplitli. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑtʃt mæt tə ði ɪkskluʒən ʌv ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɛls, aɪɪŋ ɪm ðə weɪ ʃi wəɾ ə vaɪpɝ.

Nynaeve did not move except for turning to stare at the Aes Sedai in surprise. In two quick steps Moiraine seized the Wisdom by the shoulders, hauling her across the floor like a sack of grain. Nynaeve struggled and protested, but Moiraine did not release her until she was well away from the bed. The Wisdom continued her protests as she got to her feet, angrily straightening her clothes, but Moiraine ignored her completely. The Aes Sedai watched Mat to the exclusion of everything else, eyeing him the way she would a viper.

"ɔl ə jə steɪ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm," ʃi sɛd. "æn bi kwaɪət."

"All of you stay away from him," she said. "And be quiet."

mæt stɛɹd bæk əz ɪntɛnli əz ʃi. hi bɛɹɾ ɪz tiθ ɪn ə saɪlənt, snɑɹlɪŋ ɹɪktəs, ən pʊl hɪmsɛlf ɪndə ən ɛvɝ taɪɾɝ nɑt, bʌɾ i nɛvɝ tʊk ɪz aɪz fɹəm hɝz. sloʊli ʃi pʊt wʌn hæn ɑn hɪm, laɪtli, ɑn ə ni dʒɹɔn ʌp tə hɪz tʃɛst. ə kənvʌlʃən ʃʊk ɪm əɾ əɹ tʌtʃ, ə ʃʌɾɝ ə ɹɪvʌlʃən spæzəmɪŋ θɹu hɪz ɪntaɪɝ bɑɾi, ən əbɹʌpli hi pʊld wʌn hæn aʊt, slæʃɪŋ əɾ əɹ feɪs wɪð ðə ɹubi-hɪltɪd dæɡɝ.

Mat stared back as intently as she. He bared his teeth in a silent, snarling rictus, and pulled himself into an ever tighter knot, but he never took his eyes from hers. Slowly she put one hand on him, lightly, on a knee drawn up to his chest. A convulsion shook him at her touch, a shudder of revulsion spasming through his entire body, and abruptly he pulled one hand out, slashing at her face with the ruby-hilted dagger.

wʌn mɪnət læn wɑz ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, ðə nɛkst i wɑz ət ðə bɛdsaɪd, əz ɪf i hæd nɑt bɑðɝd wɪð ði ɪntɝvinɪŋ speɪs. hɪz hæn kɑt mæts ɹɪst, stɑpɪŋ ðə slæʃ əz ɪf ɪt hæd stʃɹʌk stoʊn. stɪl mæt hɛl hɪmsɛlf ɪn ðət taɪt bɔl. oʊnli ðə hænd wɪð ðə dæɡɝ tʃɹaɪd tə muv, stʃɹeɪnɪŋ əɡɛns ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɪmplækəbəl ɡɹɪp. mæts aɪz nɛvɝ lɛf mɔɪɹeɪn, ən ðeɪ bɝnd wɪð heɪt.

One minute Lan was in the doorway, the next he was at the bedside, as if he had not bothered with the intervening space. His hand caught Mat's wrist, stopping the slash as if it had struck stone. Still Mat held himself in that tight ball. Only the hand with the dagger tried to move, straining against the Warder's implacable grip. Mat's eyes never left Moiraine, and they burned with hate.

mɔɪɹeɪn ɔlsoʊ dɪd nɑt muv. ʃi dɪd nɑt flɪntʃ fɹəm ðə bleɪɾ oʊnli ɪntʃəz fɹəm əɹ feɪs, əz ʃi hæd nɑt wən i fɝst stʃɹʌk. "haʊ dɪɾ i kʌm baɪ ðɪs?" ʃi æskt ɪn ə stil vɔɪs. "aɪ æskt ɪf mɔɹɾɪθ hæd ɡɪvən jə ɛniθɪŋ. aɪ æskt, ən aɪ wɔɹn ju, ən jə sɛɾ i hæd nɑt."

Moiraine also did not move. She did not flinch from the blade only inches from her face, as she had not when he first struck. "How did he come by this?" she asked in a steel voice. "I asked if Mordeth had given you anything. I asked, and I warned you, and you said he had not."

"hi dɪdnt," ɹænd sɛd. "hi. . . . mæt tʊk ɪt fɹəm ðə tʃɹɛʒɝ ɹummɔɪɹeɪn lʊkt ət hɪm, hɝ aɪz simɪŋ tə bɝn əz mʌtʃ əz mæts. hi ɔlmoʊst stɛp bæk bɪfɔɹ ʃi tɝn əweɪ əɡɛn, bæk tə ðə bɛd. "aɪ dɪdnt noʊ əntɪl æftɝ wi wɝ sɛpɝeɪɾəd. aɪ dɪdnt noʊ."

"He didn't," Rand said. "He. . . . Mat took it from the treasure room."Moiraine looked at him, her eyes seeming to burn as much as Mat's. He almost stepped back before she turned away again, back to the bed. "I didn't know until after we were separated. I didn't know."

"ju dɪd nɑt noʊ." mɔɪɹeɪn stʌɾid mæt. hi stɪl leɪ wɪð ɪz niz pʊld ʌp tə hɪz tʃɛst, stɪl snɑɹəl saʊnləsli ət hɝ, ən ɪz hæn jɛt fɔt læn tə ɹitʃ əɹ wɪð ðə dæɡɝ. "ɪɾ ɪz ə wʌndɝ jə ɡɑt ðɪs fɑɹ, kæɹiɪŋ ðɪs. aɪ fɛl ði ivəl ʌv ɪt wən aɪ leɪɾ aɪz ɑn hɪm, ðə tʌtʃ ə mɑʃəɾɝ, bʌɾ ə feɪd kəd sɛns ɪt fəɹ maɪlz. ivən ðoʊ hi wəd nɑt noʊ ɪɡzækli wɛɹ, hi wəd noʊ ɪt wɑz nɪɹ, ən mɑʃəɾɝ wəd dʒɹɔ hɪz spɪɹət waɪl ɪz boʊnz ɹɪmɛmbɝd ðət ðɪs seɪm ivəl swɑloʊɾ ən ɑɹmi - dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz, feɪdz, tʃɹɑləks, ən ɔl. səm dɑɹkfɹɛnz kəd pɹɑbli fil ɪt, tu. ðoʊz u hæv tʃɹuli ɡɪvən əweɪ ðɛɹ soʊlz. ðəɹ kəd nɑt hɛlp bʌt bi ðoʊz u wəd wʌndɝ ət sʌɾənli filɪŋ ðɪs, əz ɪf ðə vɛɹi ɛɹ ɝaʊn əm ɪtʃt. ðeɪ wəd bi kəmpɛl tə sik ɪt. ɪt ʃʊɾə dʒɹɔn əm tə ɪɾ əz ə mæɡnət dʒɹɔz aɪɝn faɪlɪŋz."

"You did not know." Moiraine studied Mat. He still lay with his knees pulled up to his chest, still snarled soundlessly at her, and his hand yet fought Lan to reach her with the dagger. "It is a wonder you got this far, carrying this. I felt the evil of it when I laid eyes on him, the touch of Mashadar, but a Fade could sense it for miles. Even though he would not know exactly where, he would know it was near, and Mashadar would draw his spirit while his bones remembered that this same evil swallowed an army - Dreadlords, Fades, Trollocs, and all. Some Darkfriends could probably feel it, too. Those who have truly given away their souls. There could not help but be those who would wonder at suddenly feeling this, as if the very air around them itched. They would be compelled to seek it. It should have drawn them to it as a magnet draws iron filings."

"ðɛɹ wɝ dɑɹkfɹɛnz," ɹænd sɛd, "mɔɹ ðən wʌns, bʌt wi ɡɑɾ əweɪ fɹəm ðɛm. ən ə feɪd, ðə naɪt bɪfɔɹ wi ɹitʃt keɪɛmlɪn, bʌɾ i nɛvɝ sɔ ʌs." hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ ɹumɝz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋz ɪn ðə naɪɾ aʊtsaɪd ðə sɪɾi. ɪt kəd bi tʃɹɑləks."

"There were Darkfriends," Rand said, "more than once, but we got away from them. And a Fade, the night before we reached Caemlyn, but he never saw us." He cleared his throat. "There are rumors of strange things in the night outside the city. It could be Trollocs."

"oʊ, ɪts tʃɹɑləks, ʃifɝɾɝ," læn sɛd ɹaɪli. "ænd wɛɹ tʃɹɑləks ɑɹ, ðəɹ ɑɹ feɪdz." tɛndənz stʊɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz hæn fɹəm ði ɛfɝɾ ə hoʊldɪŋ mæts ɹɪst, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz noʊ stʃɹeɪn ɪn ɪz vɔɪs. "ðeɪv tʃɹaɪd tə haɪd ðɛɹ pæsədʒ, bʌɾ aɪ hæv sin saɪn fəɹ tu deɪz. ən hɝd fɑɹmɝz ən vɪlɪdʒɝz mʌɾɝ əbaʊt θɪŋz ɪn ðə naɪt. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl mænədʒ tə stʃɹaɪk ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ənsin, sʌmhaʊ, bʌɾ ɛvɹi deɪ ðeɪ kʌm kloʊsɝ tə ðoʊz u kən sɛn soʊlʒɝz tə hʌn əm daʊn. ivən soʊ, ðeɪ woʊn stɑp naʊ, ʃifɝɾɝ."

"Oh, it's Trollocs, sheepherder," Lan said wryly. "And where Trollocs are, there are Fades." Tendons stood out on the back of his hand from the effort of holding Mat's wrist, but there was no strain in his voice. "They've tried to hide their passage, but I have seen sign for two days. And heard farmers and villagers mutter about things in the night. The Myrddraal managed to strike into the Two Rivers unseen, somehow, but every day they come closer to those who can send soldiers to hunt them down. Even so, they won't stop now, sheepherder."

"bʌt wɝ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn," ɛɡwin sɛd. "ðeɪ kænt ɡɛt tə əs əz lɔŋ əz - "

"But we're in Caemlyn," Egwene said. "They can't get to us as long as - "

"ðeɪ kænt?" ðə wɔɹɾɝ kʌɾ əɹ ɔf. "ðə feɪdz ɑɹ bɪldɪŋ ðɛɹ nʌmbɝz ɪn ðə kʌntʃɹisaɪd. ðæts pleɪn ɪnʌf fɹəm ðə saɪn, ɪf jə noʊ wʌt tə lʊk fɔɹ. ɔlɹɛɾi ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ tʃɹɑləks ðən ðeɪ nid dʒʌs tə wɑtʃ ɔl ðə weɪz aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi, ə dʌzən fɪsts, ət list. ðəɹ kən oʊnli bi wʌn ɹizən; wən ðə feɪdz əv ɪnʌf nʌmbɝz, ðəl kʌm ɪndə ðə sɪɾi æftɝ ju. ðəɾ æk meɪ sɛn hæf ði ɑɹmiz ə ðə saʊθ mɑɹtʃɪŋ tə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, bʌt ði ɛvəɾəns ɪz ðət ðəɹ wɪlɪŋ tə teɪk ðət ɹɪsk. jə θɹi hæv ɪskeɪpt əm tu lɔŋ. ɪt lʊks əz ɪf juv bɹɔɾ ə nu tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹ tə keɪɛmlɪn, ʃifɝɾɝ."

"They can't?" the Warder cut her off. "The Fades are building their numbers in the countryside. That's plain enough from the sign, if you know what to look for. Already there are more Trollocs than they need just to watch all the ways out of the city, a dozen fists, at least. There can only be one reason; when the Fades have enough numbers, they will come into the city after you. That act may send half the armies of the south marching to the Borderlands, but the evidence is that they're willing to take that risk. You three have escaped them too long. It looks as if you've brought a new Trolloc War to Caemlyn, sheepherder."

ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ə ɡæspɪŋ sɑb, ən pɛɹɪn ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əz ðoʊ tə dɪnaɪ ɪt. ɹænd fɛlt ə sɪknəs ɪn ɪz stʌmək ət ðə θɔɾ ə tʃɹɑləks ɪn ðə stʃɹits ə keɪɛmlɪn. ɔl ðoʊz pipəl ət wʌn ənʌðɝz θɹoʊts, nɛvɝ ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðə ɹil θɹɛt weɪɾɪŋ tə kʌm oʊvɝ ðə wɔlz. wʌt wəd ðeɪ də wən ðeɪ sʌɾənli faʊn tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz ɪn ðɛɹ mɪdst, kɪlɪŋ ðɛm? hi kəd si ðə taʊɝz bɝnɪŋ, fleɪmz bɹeɪkɪŋ θɹu ðə doʊmz, tʃɹɑləks pɪlɪdʒɪŋ θɹu ðə kɝvɪŋ stʃɹits ən vɪstəz ə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi. ðə pæləs ɪtsɛlf ɪn fleɪmz. ɪleɪn, ən ɡɔɪn, ən mɔɹɡeɪs . . . dɛd.

Egwene gave a gasping sob, and Perrin shook his head as though to deny it. Rand felt a sickness in his stomach at the thought of Trollocs in the streets of Caemlyn. All those people at one another's throats, never realizing the real threat waiting to come over the walls. What would they do when they suddenly found Trollocs and Fades in their midst, killing them? He could see the towers burning, flames breaking through the domes, Trollocs pillaging through the curving streets and vistas of the Inner City. The Palace itself in flames. Elayne, and Gawyn, and Morgase . . . dead.

"nɑt jɛt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ æbsənli. ʃi wɑz stɪl ɪntɛn ɑn mæt. "ɪf wi kən faɪn ə weɪ aʊɾ ə keɪɛmlɪn, ðə hæfmən wɪl əv noʊ mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəs hɪɹ. ɪf. soʊ mɛni ɪfs."

"Not yet," Moiraine said absently. She was still intent on Mat. "If we can find a way out of Caemlyn, the Halfmen will have no more interest here. If. So many if's."

"bɛɾɝ wi wɝ ɔl dɛd," pɛɹɪn sɛd sʌɾənli, ən ɹænd dʒʌmpt ət ði ɛkoʊ ʌv ɪz oʊn θɔts. pɛɹɪn stɪl sæt stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə flɔɹ - ɡlɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪt naʊ - ən ɪz vɔɪs wɑz bɪɾɝ. "ɛvɹiwɛɹ wi ɡoʊ, wi bɹɪŋ peɪn ən sʌfɝɪŋ ɑn əɹ bæks. ɪt wəd bi bɛɾɝ fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪf wi wɝ dɛd."

"Better we were all dead," Perrin said suddenly, and Rand jumped at the echo of his own thoughts. Perrin still sat staring at the floor - glaring at it now - and his voice was bitter. "Everywhere we go, we bring pain and suffering on our backs. It would be better for everyone if we were dead."

nɪneɪiv ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn hɪm, hɝ feɪs hæf fjʊɹi ən hæf wɝid fɪɹ, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn fɔɹstɑl hɝ.

Nynaeve rounded on him, her face half fury and half worried fear, but Moiraine forestalled her.

"wʌt dʒju θɪŋk tə ɡeɪn, fəɹ jɝsɛlf əɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls, baɪ daɪɪŋ?" ði ɛɛs sədaɪ æskt. hɝ vɔɪs wɑz lɛvəl, jɛt ʃɑɹp. "ɪf ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪv əz ɡeɪn əz mʌtʃ fɹiɾəm tə tʌtʃ ðə pæɾɝn əz aɪ fɪɹ, hi kən ɹitʃ jə dɛd mɔɹ izəli ðən əlaɪv, naʊ. dɛd, jə kən hɛlp noʊ wʌn, nɑt ðə pipəl u hæv hɛlp ju, nɑt jəɹ fɹɛnz ən fæmli bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ðə ʃædoʊ ɪz fɔlɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə wɝld, ən nʌn ə jə kən stɑp ɪt dɛd."

"What do you think to gain, for yourself or anyone else, by dying?" the Aes Sedai asked. Her voice was level, yet sharp. "If the Lord of the Grave has gained as much freedom to touch the Pattern as I fear, he can reach you dead more easily than alive, now. Dead, you can help no one, not the people who have helped you, not your friends and family back in the Two Rivers. The Shadow is falling over the world, and none of you can stop it dead."

pɛɹɪn ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛd tə lʊk ət hɝ, ən ɹænd ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. ði aɪɹəsɪz ə hɪz fɹɛnz aɪz wɝ mɔɹ jɛloʊ ðən bɹaʊn. wɪð ɪz ʃæɡi hɛɹ ən ði ɪntɛnsəɾi ʌv ɪz ɡeɪz, ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt hɪm. . . . ɹænd kəd nɑt ɡɹæsp ɪɾ ɪnʌf tə meɪk ɪɾ aʊt.

Perrin raised his head to look at her, and Rand gave a start. The irises of his friend's eyes were more yellow than brown. With his shaggy hair and the intensity of his gaze, there was something about him. . . . Rand could not grasp it enough to make it out.

pɛɹɪn spoʊk wɪð ə sɑft flætnəs ðət ɡeɪv ɪz wɝdz mɔɹ weɪt ðən ɪf i hæd ʃaʊɾəd. "wi kæn stɑp ɪɾ əlaɪv, iðɝ, naʊ kən wi?"

Perrin spoke with a soft flatness that gave his words more weight than if he had shouted. "We can't stop it alive, either, now can we?"

"aɪ wɪl əv taɪm tə ɑɹɡju wɪð jə leɪɾɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "bʌt jəɹ fɹɛnd nidz mi naʊ." ʃi stɛpt əsaɪd soʊ ðeɪ kəɾ ɔl si mæt klɪɹli. hɪz aɪz stɪl ɑn əɹ wɪð ə ɹeɪdʒ-fɪl stɛɹ, hi hæd nɑt muvd əɹ tʃeɪnʒd ɪz pəzɪʃən ɑn ðə bɛd. swɛt stʊɾ aʊɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs, ən ɪz lɪps wɝ blʌdləs ɪn ən əntʃeɪnʒɪŋ snɑɹl. ɔl ə hɪz stʃɹɛŋkθ sim tə bi pɔɹɪŋ ɪndə ði ɛfɝt tə ɹitʃ mɔɪɹeɪn wɪð ðə dæɡɝ læn hɛl moʊʃənləs. "ɔɹ hæd jə fɝɡɑɾən?"

"I will have time to argue with you later," Moiraine said, "but your friend needs me now." She stepped aside so they could all see Mat clearly. His eyes still on her with a rage-filled stare, he had not moved or changed his position on the bed. Sweat stood out on his face, and his lips were bloodless in an unchanging snarl. All of his strength seemed to be pouring into the effort to reach Moiraine with the dagger Lan held motionless. "Or had you forgotten?"

pɛɹɪn ɡeɪv ən ɪmbɛɹəst ʃɹʌɡ ən spɹɛɾ ɪz hænz wɝdləsli.

Perrin gave an embarrassed shrug and spread his hands wordlessly.

"wʌts ɹɔŋ wɪð hɪm?" ɛɡwin æskt, ən nɪneɪiv æɾəd, "ɪz ɪt kætʃɪŋ? aɪ kən stɪl tʃɹit hɪm. aɪ doʊn sim tə kætʃ sɪk, noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɪɾ ɪz."

"What's wrong with him?" Egwene asked, and Nynaeve added, "Is it catching? I can still treat him. I don't seem to catch sick, no matter what it is."

"oʊ, ɪts kætʃɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "æn jəɹ . . . pɹətɛkʃən wəd nɑt seɪv ju." ʃi pɔɪntəd tə ðə ɹubi-hɪltɪd dæɡɝ, kɛɹfəl nɑt tə lɛɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝ tʌtʃ ɪt. ðə bleɪd tʃɹɛmbəld əz mæt stʃɹeɪn tə ɹitʃ əɹ wɪð ɪt. "ðɪs ɪz fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. ðəɹ ɪz nɑɾ ə pɛbəl ə ðət sɪɾi ðəɾ ɪz nɑt teɪntɪɾ ən deɪnʒɝəs tə bɹɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə wɔlz, ən ðɪs ɪz fɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ə pɛbəl. ði ivəl ðət kɪld ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ɪz ɪn ɪt, ən ɪn mæt, tu, naʊ. səspɪʃən ən heɪtʃɹəd soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðəɾ ivən ðoʊz kloʊsəst ɑɹ sin əz ɛnəmiz, ɹuɾəd soʊ dip ɪn ðə boʊn ðəɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ði oʊnli θɔt lɛft ɪz tə kɪl. baɪ kæɹiɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ bɪɑn ðə wɔlz ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ i fɹiɾ ɪt, ðɪs siɾ ʌv ɪt, fɹəm wʌt baʊn ɪt tə ðət pleɪs. ɪɾəl əv wækst ən weɪn ɪn hɪm, wʌt hiz ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə hɪm faɪɾɪŋ wʌt ðə kənteɪdʒən ə mɑʃəɾɝ sɔt tə meɪk hɪm, bʌt naʊ ðə bæɾəl ɪnsaɪɾ ɪm ɪz ɔlmoʊs dʌn, ən i ɔlmoʊs dɪfiɾəd. sun, ɪf ɪt dʌz nɑt kɪl ɪm fɝst, hɪl spɹɛd ðəɾ ivəl laɪk ə pleɪɡ wɛɹɛvɝ i ɡoʊz. dʒʌst əz wʌn skɹætʃ fɹəm ðət bleɪɾ ɪz ɪnʌf tə ɪnfɛkt ən dɪstʃɹɔɪ, soʊ, sun, ə fju mɪnəts wɪð mæt wɪl bi dʒʌst əz dɛdli."

"Oh, it is catching," Moiraine said, "and your . . . protection would not save you." She pointed to the ruby-hilted dagger, careful not to let her finger touch it. The blade trembled as Mat strained to reach her with it. "This is from Shadar Logoth. There is not a pebble of that city that is not tainted and dangerous to bring outside the walls, and this is far more than a pebble. The evil that killed Shadar Logoth is in it, and in Mat, too, now. Suspicion and hatred so strong that even those closest are seen as enemies, rooted so deep in the bone that eventually the only thought left is to kill. By carrying the dagger beyond the walls of Shadar Logoth he freed it, this seed of it, from what bound it to that place. It will have waxed and waned in him, what he is in the heart of him fighting what the contagion of Mashadar sought to make him, but now the battle inside him is almost done, and he almost defeated. Soon, if it does not kill him first, he will spread that evil like a plague wherever he goes. Just as one scratch from that blade is enough to infect and destroy, so, soon, a few minutes with Mat will be just as deadly."

nɪneɪivz feɪs hæd ɡɔn waɪt. "kæn jə də ɛniθɪŋ?" ʃi wɪspɝd.

Nynaeve's face had gone white. "Can you do anything?" she whispered.

"aɪ hoʊp soʊ." mɔɪɹeɪn saɪd. "fɔɹ ðə seɪk ə ðə wɝld, aɪ hoʊp aɪm nɑt tu leɪt." hɝ hæn dɛlvd ɪndə ðə paʊtʃ əɾ əɹ bɛlt ən keɪm aʊt wɪð ðə sɪlk-ʃɹaʊɾɪd æŋɡɹil. "liv mi. steɪ təɡɛðɝ, ən faɪn sʌmwɛɹ jəl nɑt bi sin, bʌt liv mi. əl də wʌɾ aɪ kən fəɹ hɪm."

"I hope so." Moiraine sighed. "For the sake of the world, I hope I am not too late." Her hand delved into the pouch at her belt and came out with the silk-shrouded angreal. "Leave me. Stay together, and find somewhere you will not be seen, but leave me. I will do what I can for him."


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾitu


CHAPTER 42

ɹimɛmbɹəns ə dʒɹimz


Remembrance of Dreams

ɪt wɑz ə səbdud ɡɹup ðət ɹænd lɛd bæk daʊn ðə stɛɹz. nʌn ə ðɛm wɑntəd tə tɔk tə hɪm naʊ, əɹ tə wʌn ənʌðɝ. hi dɪd nɑt fil mʌtʃ laɪk tɔkɪŋ, iðɝ.

It was a subdued group that Rand led back down the stairs. None of them wanted to talk to him now, or to one another. He did not feel much like talking, either.

ðə sʌn wɑz fɑɹ ɪnʌf əkɹɔs ðə skaɪ tə dɪm ðə bæk stɛɹwɛl, bʌt ðə læmps hæd nɑt jɛt bɪn lɪt. sʌnlaɪɾ ən ʃædoʊ stʃɹaɪp ðə stɛɹz. pɛɹɪnz feɪs wɑz əz kloʊzd əz ði ʌðɝz, bʌt wɛɹ wɝi kɹist ɛvɹiwʌn ɛlsəz bɹaʊ, hɪz wɑz smuð. ɹænd θɔt ðə lʊk pɛɹɪn wɔɹ wɑz ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən. hi wʌndɝd waɪ, ən wɑntəd tə æsk, bʌt wɛnɛvɝ pɛɹɪn wɔk θɹu ə dipɝ pætʃ ə ʃædoʊ, hɪz aɪz sim tə ɡæðɝ ɪn wʌt lɪɾəl laɪt ðəɹ wɑz, ɡloʊɪŋ sɔfli laɪk pɑlɪʃt æmbɝ.

The sun was far enough across the sky to dim the back stairwell, but the lamps had not yet been lit. Sunlight and shadow striped the stairs. Perrin's face was as closed as the others, but where worry creased everyone else's brow, his was smooth. Rand thought the look Perrin wore was resignation. He wondered why, and wanted to ask, but whenever Perrin walked through a deeper patch of shadow, his eyes seemed to gather in what little light there was, glowing softly like polished amber.

ɹænd ʃɪvɝɾ ən tʃɹaɪd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ɪz sɝaʊndɪŋz, ɑn ðə wɔlnʌt pænəld wɔlz ən ði oʊk stɛɹ ɹeɪlɪŋ, ɑn stɝɾi, ɛvɹideɪ θɪŋz. hi waɪpt ɪz hænz ɑn ɪz koʊt sɛvɹəl taɪmz, bʌɾ itʃ taɪm swɛt spɹæŋ aʊɾ ɑn ɪz pɑmz ənu. ɪɾəl ɔl bi ɔl ɹaɪt, naʊ. wɝ təɡɛðɝ əɡɛn, ænd. . . . laɪt, mæt.

Rand shivered and tried to concentrate on his surroundings, on the walnut paneled walls and the oak stair railing, on sturdy, everyday things. He wiped his hands on his coat several times, but each time sweat sprang out on his palms anew. It'll all be all right, now. We're together again, and. . . . Light, Mat.

hi tʊk əm tə ðə laɪbɹɛɹi baɪ ðə bæk weɪ ðət wɛn baɪ ðə kɪtʃənz, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə kɑmən ɹum. nɑt mɛni tʃɹævəlɝz juz ðə laɪbɹɛɹi; moʊst ə ðoʊz u kəd ɹid steɪɾ ət mɔɹ ɛləɡən ɪnz ɪn ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi. mæstɝ ɡɪl kɛpt ɪt mɔɹ fəɹ ɪz oʊn ɛndʒɔɪmən ðən fəɹ ðə hændfʊl ə peɪtʃɹənz u wɑntəɾ ə bʊk naʊ ən ðɛn. ɹænd dɪd nɑt wɑnə θɪŋk waɪ mɔɪɹeɪn wɑntəɾ əm tə kip aʊɾ ə saɪt, bʌɾ i kɛpt ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə waɪtkloʊk ʌndɝ-ɔfəsɝ seɪɪŋ i wəd bi bæk, ən ɪleɪɾəz aɪz wən ʃi æskt wɛɹ i wɑz steɪɪŋ. ðoʊz wɝ ɹizənz ɪnʌf, wʌtɛvɝ mɔɪɹeɪn wɑntəd.

He took them to the library by the back way that went by the kitchens, avoiding the common room. Not many travelers used the library; most of those who could read stayed at more elegant inns in the Inner City. Master Gill kept it more for his own enjoyment than for the handful of patrons who wanted a book now and then. Rand did not want to think why Moiraine wanted them to keep out of sight, but he kept remembering the Whitecloak under-officer saying he would be back, and Elaida's eyes when she asked where he was staying. Those were reasons enough, Whatever Moiraine wanted.

hi tʊk faɪv stɛps ɪndə ðə laɪbɹɛɹi bɪfɔɹ i ɹilaɪz ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls hæd stɑpt, kɹaʊɾəd təɡɛðɝ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, oʊpənməðd ən ɡɑəlɪŋ. ə bɹɪsk bleɪz kɹækəld ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs, ən lɔɪəl wɑz spɹɔld ɑn ðə lɔŋ kaʊtʃ, ɹiɾɪŋ, ə smɔl blæk kæt wɪð waɪt fit kɝld ən hæf əslip ɑn ɪz stʌmək. wən ðeɪ ɛntɝɾ i kloʊz ðə bʊk wɪð ə hjudʒ fɪŋɡɝ mɑɹkɪŋ ɪz pleɪs ən dʒɛnli sɛt ðə kæɾ ɑn ðə flɔɹ, ðən stʊd tə baʊ fɔɹməli.

He took five steps into the library before he realized that everyone else had stopped, crowded together in the doorway, openmouthed and goggling. A brisk blaze crackled in the fireplace, and Loial was sprawled on the long couch, reading, a small black cat with white feet curled and half asleep on his stomach. When they entered he closed the book with a huge finger marking his place and gently set the cat on the floor, then stood to bow formally.

ɹænd wɑz soʊ juz tə ði oʊɡiɝ ðəɾ ɪt tʊk ɪm ə mɪnət tə ɹilaɪz ðət lɔɪəl wɑz ði əbdʒɛkt ə ði ʌðɝz' stɛɹz. "ðiz ɑɹ ðə fɹɛnz aɪ wɑz weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ, lɔɪəl," hi sɛd. "ðɪs ɪz nɪneɪiv, ðə wɪzdəm ə maɪ vɪlədʒ. ən pɛɹɪn. ən ðɪs ɪz ɛɡwin."

Rand was so used to the Ogier that it took him a minute to realize that Loial was the object of the others' stares. "These are the friends I was waiting for, Loial," he said. "This is Nynaeve, the Wisdom of my village. And Perrin. And this is Egwene."

"ɑ, jɛs," lɔɪəl bumd, "ɛɡwin. ɹænd əz spoʊkən ə jə ə ɡɹeɪt dil. jɛs. aɪm lɔɪəl."

"Ah, yes," Loial boomed, "Egwene. Rand has spoken of you a great deal. Yes. I am Loial."

"hiz ən oʊɡiɝ," ɹænd ɪkspleɪnd, ən wɑtʃt ðɛɹ əmeɪzmən tʃeɪnʒ ɪn kaɪnd. ivən æftɝ tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz ɪn ðə flɛʃ, ɪt wɑz stɪl əstɑnɪʃɪŋ tə miɾ ə lɛdʒənd wɔkɪŋ ən bɹiðɪŋ. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ɪz oʊn fɝst ɹiækʃən tə lɔɪəl, hi ɡɹɪn ɹufəli. ðeɪ wɝ duɪŋ bɛɾɝ ðən i hæd.

"He's an Ogier," Rand explained, and watched their amazement change in kind. Even after Trollocs and Fades in the flesh, it was still astonishing to meet a legend walking and breathing. Remembering his own first reaction to Loial, he grinned ruefully. They were doing better than he had.

lɔɪəl tʊk ðɛɹ ɡeɪpɪŋ ɪn ɪz stʃɹaɪd. ɹænd səpoʊzd i hɑɹdli noʊɾəst ɪt kəmpɛɹd wɪð ə mɑb ʃaʊɾɪŋ "tʃɹɑlɑk." "æn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ɹænd?" lɔɪəl æskt.

Loial took their gaping in his stride. Rand supposed he hardly noticed it compared with a mob shouting "Trolloc." "And the Aes Sedai, Rand?" Loial asked.

"əpstɛɹz wɪð mæt."

"Upstairs with Mat."

ði oʊɡiɝ ɹeɪzd wʌn bʊʃi aɪbɹaʊ θɔtfəli. "ðɛn hiz ɪl. aɪ sədʒɛst wi ɔl bi siɾəd. ʃɪl bi dʒɔɪnɪŋ ʌs? jɛs. ðən ðɛɹz nʌθɪŋ tə də bʌt weɪt."

The Ogier raised one bushy eyebrow thoughtfully. "Then he is ill. I suggest we all be seated. She will be joining us? Yes. Then there's nothing to do but wait."

ði ækt ə sɪɾɪŋ sim tə lusən səm kætʃ ɪnsaɪd ði ɛmənz fil foʊk, əz ɪf biɪŋ ɪn ə wɛl-stʌf tʃɛɹ wɪð ə faɪɝ ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs ən ə kæt naʊ kɝld ʌp ɑn ðə hɑɹθ meɪɾ əm fil ət hoʊm. əz sun əz ðeɪ wɝ sɛɾəld ðeɪ ɪksaɪɾədli bɪɡæn æskɪŋ ði oʊɡiɝ kwɛstʃənz. tə ɹændz sɝpɹaɪz, pɛɹɪn wɑz ðə fɝs tə spik.

The act of sitting seemed to loosen some catch inside the Emond's Field folk, as if being in a well-stuffed chair with a fire in the fireplace and a cat now curled up on the hearth made them feel at home. As soon as they were settled they excitedly began asking the Ogier questions. To Rand's surprise, Perrin was the first to speak.

"ðə stɛɾɪŋ, lɔɪəl. ɑɹ ðeɪ ɹɪli heɪvənz, ðə weɪ ðə stɔɹiz seɪ?" hɪz vɔɪs wɑz ɪntɛnt, əz ɪf i hæɾ ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ ɹizən fəɹ æskɪŋ.

"The stedding, Loial. Are they really havens, the way the stories say?" His voice was intent, as if he had a particular reason for asking.

lɔɪəl wɑz ɡlæd tə tɛl əbaʊt ðə stɛɾɪŋ, ən haʊ hi keɪm tə bi ət ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ, ən wʌɾ i hæd sin ɪn ɪz tʃɹævəlz. ɹænd sun lin bæk, oʊnli pɑɹtli lɪsnɪŋ. hi hæd hɝɾ ɪɾ ɔl bɪfɔɹ, ɪn dɪteɪl. lɔɪəl laɪk tə tɔk, ən tɔk ət lɛŋθ wən i hæd ðə slaɪɾəst tʃæns, ðoʊ hi juʒəwəli sim tə θɪŋk ə stɔɹi niɾəd tu əɹ θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ə bækɡɹaʊn tə meɪk ɪɾ ʌndɝstʊd. hɪz sɛns ə taɪm wɑz vɛɹi stʃɹeɪnʒ; tə hɪm θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz simd ə ɹizənəbəl lɛŋθ ə taɪm fəɹ ə stɔɹi əɹ ɛkspləneɪʃən tə kʌvɝ. hi ɔlweɪz tɔkt əbaʊt livɪŋ ðə stɛɾɪŋ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ dʒʌst ə fju mʌnθs bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ ɪt hæd faɪnəli kʌm aʊt ðəɾ i hæd bɪn ɡɔn mɔɹ ðən θɹi jɪɹz.

Loial was glad to tell about the stedding, and how he came to be at The Queen's Blessing, and what he had seen in his travels. Rand soon leaned back, only partly listening. He had heard it all before, in detail. Loial liked to talk, and talk at length when he had the slightest chance, though he usually seemed to think a story needed two or three hundred years of background to make it understood. His sense of time was very strange; to him three hundred years seemed a reasonable length of time for a story or explanation to cover. He always talked about leaving the stedding as if it were just a few months before, but it had finally come out that he had been gone more than three years.

ɹændz θɔts dʒɹɪftəd tə mæt. ə dæɡɝ. ə blʌɾi naɪf, ən ɪt maɪt kɪl ɪm dʒʌs fɹəm kæɹiɪŋ ɪt. laɪt, aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɛni mɔɹ ædvɛntʃɝ. ɪf ʃi kən hil hɪm, wi ʃəɾ ɔl ɡoʊ . . . nɑt hoʊm. kænt ɡoʊ hoʊm. sʌmwɛɹ. wɪl ɔl ɡoʊ sʌmwɛɹ ðeɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ əɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. sʌmwɛɹ.

Rand's thoughts drifted to Mat. A dagger. A bloody knife, and it might kill him just from carrying it. Light, I don't want any more adventure. If she can heal him, we should all go . . . not home. Can't go home. Somewhere. We'll all go somewhere they've never heard of Aes Sedai or the Dark One. Somewhere.

ðə dɔɹ oʊpənd, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən ɹænd θɔɾ i wɑz stɪl ɪmædʒənɪŋ. mæt stʊd ðɛɹ, blɪŋkɪŋ, wɪð ɪz koʊt bʌɾənd ʌp ən ðə dɑɹk skɑɹf ɹæp loʊ ɝaʊn ɪz fɔɹhɛd. ðən ɹænd sɔ mɔɪɹeɪn, wɪð əɹ hæn ɑn mæts ʃoʊldɝ, ən læn bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ mæt kɛɹfəli, əz wʌn wɑtʃəz sʌmwʌn oʊnli leɪtli aʊɾ ʌv ə sɪkbd. əz ɔlweɪz, læn wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ waɪl əpɪɹɪŋ tə wɑtʃ nʌθɪŋ.

The door opened, and for a moment Rand thought he was still imagining. Mat stood there, blinking, with his coat buttoned up and the dark scarf wrapped low around his forehead. Then Rand saw Moiraine, with her hand on Mat's shoulder, and Lan behind them. The Aes Sedai was watching Mat carefully, as one watches someone only lately out of a sickbed. As always, Lan was watching everything while appearing to watch nothing.

mæt lʊkt əz ɪf i hæd nɛvɝ bɪn sɪk ə deɪ. hɪz fɝst, hɛzɪɾənt smaɪl ɪnkluɾəd ɛvɹiwʌn, ðoʊ ɪt slɪpt ɪndə ən oʊpənməð stɛɹ ət ðə saɪɾ ə lɔɪəl, əz ɪf i wɝ siɪŋ ði oʊɡiɝ fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm. wɪð ə ʃɹʌɡ ən ə ʃeɪk, hi tɝn ɪz ətɛnʃən bæk tə hɪz fɹɛnz. "aɪ . . . ɑ . . . ðəɾ ɪz. . . ." hi tʊk ə dip bɹɛθ. "ɪt . . . ɑ . . . ɪt simz aɪv bɪn æktɪŋ . . . ɑ . . . sɔɹɾ ʌv ɑdli. aɪ doʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝ mʌtʃ ʌv ɪt, ɹɪli." hi ɡeɪv mɔɪɹeɪn ən ənizi lʊk. ʃi smaɪl bæk kɑnfəɾəntli, ən i wɛn ɑn. "ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪz heɪzi æftɝ waɪtbɹɪdʒ. tɑm, ən ðə. . . ." hi ʃɪvɝɾ ən hɝiɾ ɑn. "ðə fɝðɝ fɹəm waɪtbɹɪdʒ, ðə heɪziɝ ɪt ɡɛts. aɪ doʊn ɹɪli ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɝaɪvɪŋ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn əɾ ɔl." hi aɪd lɔɪəl əskæns. "nɑt ɹɪli. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛz aɪ . . . əpstɛɹz, aɪ . . . ɑ. . . ." hi ɡɹɪnd, ən sʌɾənli hi tʃɹuli wɑz ði oʊl mæt. "ju kæn hoʊld ə mæn tə bleɪm fəɹ wʌɾ i dʌz wən hiz kɹeɪzi, kən ju?"

Mat looked as if he had never been sick a day. His first, hesitant smile included everyone, though it slipped into an openmouthed stare at the sight of Loial, as if he were seeing the Ogier for the first time. With a shrug and a shake, he turned his attention back to his friends. "I . . . ah . . . that is. . . ." He took a deep breath. "It . . . ah . . . it seems I've been acting . . . ah . . . sort of oddly. I don't remember much of it, really." He gave Moiraine an uneasy look. She smiled back confidently, and he went on. "Everything is hazy after Whitebridge. Thom, and the. . . ." He shivered and hurried on. "The further from Whitebridge, the hazier it gets. I don't really remember arriving in Caemlyn at all." He eyed Loial askance. "Not really. Moiraine Sedai says I . . . upstairs, I . . . ah. . . ." He grinned, and suddenly he truly was the old Mat. "You can't hold a man to blame for what he does when he's crazy, can you?"

"ju ɔlweɪz wɝ kɹeɪzi," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən fəɹ ə moʊmən hi, tu, saʊndəɾ əz ʌv oʊld.

"You always were crazy," Perrin said, and for a moment he, too, sounded as of old.

"noʊ," nɪneɪiv sɛd. tɪɹz meɪɾ əɹ aɪz bɹaɪt, bʌt ʃi wɑz smaɪlɪŋ. "nʌn ʌv əs bleɪmz ju."

"No," Nynaeve said. Tears made her eyes bright, but she was smiling. "None of us blames you."

ɹænd ən ɛɡwin bɪɡæn tɔkɪŋ ət wʌns ðɛn, tɛlɪŋ mæt haʊ hæpi ðeɪ wɝ tə si hɪm wɛl ən haʊ wɛl i lʊkt, wɪð ə fju læfɪŋ kɑmɛns θɹoʊn ɪn əbaʊt hoʊpɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz dʌn wɪð tʃɹɪks naʊ ðət wʌn soʊ ʌɡli hæd bɪn pleɪɾ ɑn hɪm. mæt mɛt bæntɝ wɪð bæntɝ əz i faʊn ə tʃɛɹ wɪð ɔl ə hɪz oʊl swæɡɝ. əz i sæt daʊn, stɪl ɡɹɪnɪŋ, hi æbsəntmaɪndɪdli tʌtʃt ɪz koʊɾ əz ɪf tə meɪk ʃʊɹ ðət sʌmθɪŋ tʌk bɪhaɪn ɪz bɛlt wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, ən ɹændz bɹɛθ kɑt.

Rand and Egwene began talking at once then, telling Mat how happy they were to see him well and how well he looked, with a few laughing comments thrown in about hoping that he was done with tricks now that one so ugly had been played on him. Mat met banter with banter as he found a chair with all of his old swagger. As he sat down, still grinning, he absentmindedly touched his coat as if to make sure that something tucked behind his belt was still there, and Rand's breath caught.

"jɛs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kwaɪətli, "hi stɪl əz ðə dæɡɝ." ðə læftɝ ən tɔk wɑz stɪl ɡoʊɪŋ ɑn əmʌŋ ðə ɹɛst ə ði ɛmənz fil foʊk, bʌt ʃi hæd noʊɾəst ɪz sʌɾən ɪnteɪk ə bɹɛθ ən hæd sin wʌt hæd kɑzd ɪt. ʃi muv kloʊsɝ tə hɪz tʃɛɹ, wɛɹ ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə ɹeɪz əɹ vɔɪs fəɹ ɪm tə hɪɹ klɪɹli. "aɪ kænɑt teɪk ɪɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɪm wɪθaʊt kɪlɪŋ hɪm. ðə baɪndɪŋ əz læstəd tu lɔŋ, ən ɡɹoʊn tu stʃɹɔŋ. ðət mʌs bi ənnɑɾɪd ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn; ɪts bɪɑn mi, əɹ ɛni loʊn ɛɛs sədaɪ, ivən wɪð ən æŋɡɹil."

"Yes," Moiraine said quietly, "he still has the dagger." The laughter and talk was still going on among the rest of the Emond's Field folk, but she had noticed his sudden intake of breath and had seen what had caused it. She moved closer to his chair, where she did not have to raise her voice for him to hear clearly. "I cannot take it away from him without killing him. The binding has lasted too long, and grown too strong. That must be unknotted in Tar Valon; it is beyond me, or any lone Aes Sedai, even with an angreal."

"bʌɾ i dʌzn lʊk sɪk ɛnimɔɹ." hi hæɾ ə θɔɾ ən lʊkt ʌp ət hɝ. "æz lɔŋ əz hiz ðə dæɡɝ, ðə feɪdz wɪl noʊ wɛɹ wi ɑɹ. dɑɹkfɹɛnz, tu, səm ə ðɛm. jə sɛd soʊ."

"But he doesn't look sick anymore." He had a thought and looked up at her. "As long as he has the dagger, the Fades will know where we are. Darkfriends, too, some of them. You said so."

"aɪ hæv kənteɪn ðæt, æftɝ ə fæʃən. ɪf ðeɪ kʌm kloʊs ɪnʌf tə sɛns ɪt naʊ, ðəl bi ɑn tɑp ʌv əs ɛniweɪ. aɪ klɛnz ðə teɪn fɹəm hɪm, ɹænd, ən dɪd wʌɾ aɪ kəd tə sloʊ ɪts ɹɪtɝn, bʌt ɹɪtɝn ɪt wɪl, ɪn taɪm, ənlɛs i ɹəsivz hɛlp ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn."

"I have contained that, after a fashion. If they come close enough to sense it now, they will be on top of us anyway. I cleansed the taint from him, Rand, and did what I could to slow its return, but return it will, in time, unless he receives help in Tar Valon."

"ə ɡʊd θɪŋ ðæts wɛɹ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ, ɪzən ɪt?" hi θɔt meɪbi ɪt wɑz ðə ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən ɪn ɪz vɔɪs, ən ðə hoʊp fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, ðət meɪɾ əɹ ɡɪv ɪm ə ʃɑɹp lʊk bɪfɔɹ tɝnɪŋ əweɪ.

"A good thing that's where we're going, isn't it?" He thought maybe it was the resignation in his voice, and the hope for something else, that made her give him a sharp look before turning away.

lɔɪəl wɑz ɑn ɪz fit, boʊɪŋ tə hɝ. "aɪ æm lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən, ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə stɛɾɪŋ ɔfɝz sæŋktʃuɛɹi tə ðə sɝvəns ə ðə laɪt."

Loial was on his feet, bowing to her. "I am Loial, son of Arent son of Halan, Aes Sedai. The stedding offers sanctuary to the Servants of the Light."

"θæŋk ju, lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹənt," mɔɪɹeɪn ænsɝd dʒɹaɪli, "bʌɾ aɪ wəd nɑt bi tu fɹi wɪð ðət ɡɹiɾɪŋ ɪf aɪ wɝ ju. ðəɹ ɑɹ pɝhæps twɛnti ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn ət ðɪs moʊmənt, ən ɛvɹi wʌn bʌɾ aɪ ʌv ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ." lɔɪəl nɑɾəd sədʒli, əz ɪf i ʌndɝstʊd. ɹænd kəɾ oʊnli ʃeɪk ɪz hɛɾ ɪn kənfjuʒən; hi wəd bi laɪtblɪndɪɾ ɪf i nu wʌt ʃi mɛnt. "ɪɾ ɪz stʃɹeɪnʒ tə faɪn jə hɪɹ," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn ɑn. "fju oʊɡiɝ liv ðə stɛɾɪŋ ɪn ɹisən jɪɹz."

"Thank you, Loial, son of Arent," Moiraine answered dryly, "but I would not be too free with that greeting if I were you. There are perhaps twenty Aes Sedai in Caemlyn at this moment, and every one but I of the Red Ajah." Loial nodded sagely, as if he understood. Rand could only shake his head in confusion; he would be Lightblinded if he knew what she meant. "It is strange to find you here," the Aes Sedai went on. "Few Ogier leave the stedding in recent years."

"ði oʊl stɔɹiz kɑt mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ. ði oʊl bʊks fɪl maɪ ənwɝði hɛd wɪð pɪktʃɝz. aɪ wɑnə si ðə ɡɹoʊvz. ən ðə sɪɾiz wi bɪlt, tu. ðəɹ də nɑt sim tə bi mɛni ʌv iðɝ stɪl stændɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪf bɪldɪŋz ɑɹ ə pʊɹ sʌbstətut fəɹ tʃɹiz, ðeɪ ɑɹ stɪl wɝθ siɪŋ. ði ɛldɝz θɪŋk aɪm ɑd, wɑntɪŋ tə tʃɹævəl. aɪ ɔlweɪz hæv, ən ðeɪ ɔlweɪz hæv. nʌn ə ðɛm bɪliv ðəɹ ɪz ɛniθɪŋ wɝθ siɪŋ aʊtsaɪd ðə stɛɾɪŋ. pɝhæps wən aɪ ɹɪtɝn ən tɛl əm wʌɾ aɪv sin, ðəl tʃeɪnʒ ðɛɹ maɪnz. aɪ hoʊp soʊ. ɪn taɪm."

"The old stories caught me, Aes Sedai. The old books filled my unworthy head with pictures. I want to see the groves. And the cities we built, too. There do not seem to be many of either still standing, but if buildings are a poor substitute for trees, they are still worth seeing. The Elders think I'm odd, wanting to travel. I always have, and they always have. None of them believe there is anything worth seeing outside the stedding. Perhaps when I return and tell them what I've seen, they will change their minds. I hope so. In time."

"pɝhæps ðeɪ wɪl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd smuðli. "naʊ, lɔɪəl, jə mʌs fɝɡɪv mi fəɹ biɪŋ əbɹʌpt. ɪts ə feɪlɪŋ ə hjumənkaɪnd, aɪ noʊ. maɪ kəmpænjənz ən aɪ hæv ɝdʒənt nid tə plæn əɹ dʒɝni. ɪf jə kəɾ ɪkskjuz ʌs?"

"Perhaps they will," Moiraine said smoothly. "Now, Loial, you must forgive me for being abrupt. It is a failing of humankind, I know. My companions and I have urgent need to plan our journey. If you could excuse us?"

ɪt wɑz lɔɪəlz tɝn tə lʊk kənfjuzd. ɹænd keɪm tə hɪz ɹɛskju. "hiz kʌmɪŋ wɪð ʌs. aɪ pɹɑməst ɪm i kʊd."

It was Loial's turn to look confused. Rand came to his rescue. "He's coming with us. I promised him he could."

mɔɪɹeɪn stʊd lʊkɪŋ ət ði oʊɡiɝ əz ɪf ʃi hæd nɑt hɝd, bʌt faɪnəli ʃi nɑɾəd. "ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz," ʃi mɝmɝd. "læn, si ðət wəɹ nɑt teɪkən ʌnəwɛɹ." ðə wɔɹɾɝ vænɪʃt fɹəm ðə ɹum, saɪlənli bʌt fəɹ ðə klɪk ə ðə dɔɹ ʃʌɾɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

Moiraine stood looking at the Ogier as if she had not heard, but finally she nodded. "The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills," she murmured. "Lan, see that we are not taken unaware." The Warder vanished from the room, silently but for the click of the door shutting behind him.

lænz dɪsəpɪɹəns æktəd laɪk ə sɪɡnəl; ɔl tɔk wɑz kʌɾ ɔf. mɔɪɹeɪn muv tə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, ən wən ʃi tɝn bæk tə ðə ɹum ɛvɹi aɪ wɑz ɑn hɝ. slaɪɾ ə bɪld əz ʃi wɑz, hɝ pɹɛzəns dɑməneɪɾəd. "wi kænɑt ɹɪmeɪn lɔŋ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, nɔɹ ɑɹ wi seɪf hɪɹ ɪn ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz aɪz ɑɹ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪn ðə sɪɾi. ðeɪv nɑt faʊnd wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ sɝtʃɪŋ fɔɹ, əɹ ðeɪ wəd nɑt stɪl bi lʊkɪŋ. ðət wɪv tə əɹ ædvæntɪdʒ. aɪ hæv sɛt wɔɹdz tə kip əm əweɪ, ən baɪ ðə taɪm ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɹiəlaɪzɪz ðət ðəɹ ɪz ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ðə ɹæts noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɛntɝ, wɪl bi ɡɔn. ɛni wɔɹd ðət wɪl tɝn ə mæn əsaɪd, ðoʊ, wəd bi əz ɡʊɾ əz ə bikən faɪɝ fəɹ ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, ən ðəɹ ɑɹ tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, ɔlsoʊ, lʊkɪŋ fəɹ pɛɹɪn ən ɛɡwin." ɹænd meɪɾ ə saʊnd, ən mɔɪɹeɪn ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət hɪm.

Lan's disappearance acted like a signal; all talk was cut off. Moiraine moved to the fireplace, and when she turned back to the room every eye was on her. Slight of build as she was, her presence dominated. "We cannot remain long in Caemlyn, nor are we safe here in The Queen's Blessing. The Dark One's eyes are already in the city. They have not found what they are searching for, or they would not still be looking. That we have to our advantage. I have set wards to keep them away, and by the time the Dark One realizes that there is a part of the city the rats no longer enter, we will be gone. Any ward that will turn a man aside, though, would be as good as a beacon fire for the Myrddraal, and there are Children of the Light in Caemlyn, also, looking for Perrin and Egwene." Rand made a sound, and Moiraine raised an eyebrow at him.

"aɪ θɔt ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ mæt ən mi," hi sɛd.

"I thought they were looking for Mat and me," he said.

ði ɛkspləneɪʃən meɪd boʊθ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz aɪbɹaʊz lɪft. "waɪ wəd jə θɪŋk ðə waɪtkloʊks wɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ ju?"

The explanation made both the Aes Sedai's eyebrows lift. "Why would you think the Whitecloaks were looking for you?"

"aɪ hɝd wʌn seɪ ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ fəɹ sʌmwʌn fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. dɑɹkfɹɛnz, hi sɛd. wʌɾ ɛls wɑz aɪ səpoʊz tə θɪŋk? wɪð ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðæts bɪn hæpənɪŋ, aɪm lʌki aɪ kən θɪŋk əɾ ɔl."

"I heard one say they were looking for someone from the Two Rivers. Darkfriends, he said. What else was I supposed to think? With everything that's been happening, I'm lucky I can think at all."

"ɪɾ əz bɪn kənfjuzɪŋ, aɪ noʊ, ɹænd," lɔɪəl pʊɾ ɪn, "bʌt jə kən θɪŋk mɔɹ klɪɹli ðən ðæt. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən heɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪleɪɾə wəd nɑt - "

"It has been confusing, I know, Rand," Loial put in, "but you can think more clearly than that. The Children hate Aes Sedai. Elaida would not - "

"ɪleɪɾə?" mɔɪɹeɪn kʌɾ ɪn ʃɑɹpli. "wʌɾ əz ɪleɪɾə sədaɪ tə də wɪð ðɪs?"

"Elaida?" Moiraine cut in sharply. "What has Elaida Sedai to do with this?"

ʃi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət ɹænd soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ i wɑntəd tə lin bæk. "ʃi wɑntəd tə θɹoʊ mi ɪn pɹɪzən," hi sɛd sloʊli. "ɔl aɪ wɑntəd wɑz ə lʊk ət lɑɡən, bʌt ʃi wʊdn bɪliv aɪ wɑz ɪn ðə pæləs ɡɑɹɾənz wɪð ɪleɪn ən ɡɔɪn dʒʌs baɪ tʃæns." ðeɪ wɝ ɔl stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i hæd sʌɾənli spɹaʊɾəd ə θɝɾ aɪ, ɔl ɪksɛp lɔɪəl. "kwin mɔɹɡeɪs lemi ɡoʊ. ʃi sɛd ðəɹ wɑz noʊ pɹuf aɪ mɛn ɛni hɑɹm ən ʃi wɑz gɑnə əphoʊl ðə lɔ noʊ mæɾɝ wʌɾ ɪleɪɾə səspɛktəd." hi ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, ðə mɛmɹi ʌv mɔɹɡeɪs ɪn ɔl əɹ ɹeɪdʒjəns meɪkɪŋ ɪm fɝɡɛt fəɹ ə mɪnət ðəɾ ɛniwʌn wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. "kæn jə ɪmædʒən mi miɾɪŋ ə kwin? ʃiz bjuɾəfəl, laɪk ðə kwinz ɪn stɔɹiz. soʊ ɪz ɪleɪn. ən ɡɔɪn . . . jud laɪk ɡɔɪn, pɛɹɪn. pɛɹɪn? mæt?" ðeɪ wɝ stɪl stɛɹɪŋ. "blʌɾ ən æʃəz, aɪ dʒʌs klaɪmd ʌp ɑn ðə wɔl fəɹ ə lʊk ət ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. aɪ dɪdn də ɛniθɪŋ ɹɔŋ."

She was looking at Rand so hard that he wanted to lean back. "She wanted to throw me in prison," he said slowly. "All I wanted was a look at Logain, but she wouldn't believe I was in the Palace gardens with Elayne and Gawyn just by chance." They were all staring at him as if he had suddenly sprouted a third eye, all except Loial. "Queen Morgase let me go. She said there was no proof I meant any harm and she was going to uphold the law no matter what Elaida suspected." He shook his head, the memory of Morgase in all her radiance making him forget for a minute that anyone was looking at him. "Can you imagine me meeting a Queen? She's beautiful, like the queens in stories. So is Elayne. And Gawyn . . . you'd like Gawyn, Perrin. Perrin? Mat?" They were still staring. "Blood and ashes, I just climbed up on the wall for a look at the false Dragon. I didn't do anything wrong."

"ðæts wʌɾ aɪ ɔlweɪz seɪ," mæt sɛd blænli, ðoʊ hi wɑz sʌɾənli ɡɹɪnɪŋ hɑɹd, ən ɛɡwin æskt ɪn ə dɪsaɪɾədli nutʃɹəl vɔɪs, "huz ɪleɪn?"

"That's what I always say," Mat said blandly, though he was suddenly grinning hard, and Egwene asked in a decidedly neutral voice, "Who's Elayne?"

mɔɪɹeɪn mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ kɹɑsli.

Moiraine muttered something crossly.

"eɪ kwin," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd. "ju ɹɪli hæv hæɾ ædvɛntʃɝz. ɔl wi mɛt wɝ tɪŋkɝz ən səm waɪtkloʊks." hi əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət mɔɪɹeɪn soʊ ɑbviəsli ðət ɹænd sɔ ði əvɔɪɾəns pleɪn. pɛɹɪn tʌtʃt ðə bɹuzəz ɑn ɪz feɪs. "ɑn ðə hoʊl, sɪŋɪŋ wɪð ðə tɪŋkɝz wɑz mɔɹ fʌn ðən ðə waɪtkloʊks."

"A Queen," Perrin said, shaking his head. "You really have had adventures. All we met were Tinkers and some Whitecloaks." He avoided looking at Moiraine so obviously that Rand saw the avoidance plain. Perrin touched the bruises on his face. "On the whole, singing with the Tinkers was more fun than the Whitecloaks."

"ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl lɪv fəɹ ðɛɹ sɔŋz," lɔɪəl sɛd. "fɔɹ ɔl sɔŋz, fəɹ ðət mæɾɝ. fəɹ ðə sɝtʃ fəɹ ðɛm, ət list. aɪ mɛt səm tuætɑn ə fju jɪɹz bæk, ən ðeɪ wɑntəd tə lɝn ðə sɔŋz wi sɪŋ tə tʃɹiz. æktʃəli , ðə tʃɹiz woʊn lɪsən tə vɛɹi mɛni ɛnimɔɹ, ən soʊ nɑt mɛni oʊɡiɝ lɝn ðə sɔŋz. aɪ hæv ə skɹæp ə ðət tælənt, soʊ ɛldɝ ɑɹən ɪnsɪstəɾ aɪ lɝn. aɪ tɔt ðə tuætɑn wʌt ðeɪ kəd lɝn, bʌt ðə tʃɹiz nɛvɝ lɪsən tə hjumənz. fəɹ ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl ðeɪ wɝ oʊnli sɔŋz, ən dʒʌst əz wɛl ɹəsiv fəɹ ðæt, sɪns nʌn wɑz ðə sɔŋ ðeɪ sik. ðæts wʌt ðeɪ kɔl ðə liɾɝ ʌv itʃ bænd, ðə sikɝ. ðeɪ kʌm tə stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ, səmtaɪmz. fju hjumənz du."

"The Traveling People live for their songs," Loial said. "For all songs, for that matter. For the search for them, at least. I met some Tuatha'an a few years back, and they wanted to learn the songs we sing to trees. Actually, the trees won't listen to very many anymore, and so not many Ogier learn the songs. I have a scrap of that Talent, so Elder Arent insisted I learn. I taught the Tuatha'an what they could learn, but the trees never listen to humans. For the Traveling People they were only songs, and just as well received for that, since none was the song they seek. That's what they call the leader of each band, the Seeker. They come to Stedding Shangtai, sometimes. Few humans do."

"ɪf jə pliz, lɔɪəl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, bʌɾ i klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt sʌɾənli ən wɛn ɑn ɪn ə kwɪk ɹʌmbəl əz ɪf əfɹeɪd ʃi maɪt stɑp hɪm.

"If you please, Loial," Moiraine said, but he cleared his throat suddenly and went on in a quick rumble as if afraid she might stop him.

"aɪv dʒʌst ɹɪmɛmbɝd sʌmθɪŋ, ɛɛs sədaɪ, sʌmθɪŋ aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz wɑntəd tə æsk ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪf ɛvɝ aɪ mɛt wʌn, sɪns jə noʊ mɛni θɪŋz ən əv ɡɹeɪt laɪbɹɛɹiz ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən naʊ aɪ hæv, ʌv kɔɹs, ən . . . meɪ aɪ?"

"I've just remembered something, Aes Sedai, something I have always wanted to ask an Aes Sedai if ever I met one, since you know many things and have great libraries in Tar Valon, and now I have, of course, and . . . may I?"

"ɪf jə meɪk ɪt bɹif," ʃi sɛd kɝtli.

"If you make it brief," she said curtly.

"bɹif," hi sɛɾ əz ðoʊ wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt mɛnt. "jɛs. wɛl. bɹif. ðəɹ wɑz ə mæn keɪm tə stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ ə lɪɾəl taɪm bæk. ðɪs wɑz nɑɾ ənjuʒəwəl ɪn ɪtsɛlf, ət ðə taɪm, sɪns ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni ɹɛfjudʒiz hæd kʌm tə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝl fliɪŋ wʌt jə hjumənz kɔl ði il wɔɹ." ɹænd ɡɹɪnd. ə lɪɾəl taɪm bæk; twɛnti jɪɹz, nɪɹ ɪnʌf. "hi wɑz ət ðə pɔɪn ə dɛθ, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ waʊn əɹ mɑɹk ɑn hɪm. ði ɛldɝz θɔɾ ɪt maɪt bi sʌmθɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ hæd dʌn" - lɔɪəl ɡeɪv mɔɪɹeɪn ən əpɑlədʒɛɾɪk lʊk - "sɪns əz sun əz i wɑz wɪðɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ i kwɪkli ɡɑt wɛl. ə fju mʌnθs. wʌn naɪɾ i lɛft wɪθaʊɾ ə wɝd tə ɛniwʌn, sɪmpli snikt əweɪ wən ðə mun wɑz daʊn." hi lʊkt ət mɔɪɹeɪnz feɪs ən klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊɾ əɡɛn. "jɛs. bɹif. bɪfɔɹ i lɛft, hi toʊld ə kjʊɹiəs teɪl wɪtʃ i sɛɾ i mɛn tə kæɹi tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. hi sɛd ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪntɛndəd tə blaɪn ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld, ən sleɪ ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt, kɪl taɪm ɪtsɛlf. ði ɛldɝz sɛɾ i wɑz əz saʊn ɪn ɪz maɪn əz ɪn ɪz bɑɾi, bʌt ðət wɑz wʌɾ i sɛd. wʌɾ aɪ hæv wɑntəd tə æsk ɪz, kən ðə dɑɹk wʌn də sətʃ ə θɪŋ? kɪl taɪm ɪtsɛlf? ən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld? kən i blaɪn ði aɪ ʌv ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt? wʌt dʌz ɪt min?"

"Brief," he said as though wondering what it meant. "Yes. Well. Brief. There was a man came to Stedding Shangtai a little time back. This was not unusual in itself, at the time, since a great many refugees had come to the Spine of the World fleeing what you humans call the Aiel War." Rand grinned. A little time back; twenty years, near enough. "He was at the point of death, though there was no wound or mark on him. The Elders thought it might be something Aes Sedai had done" - Loial gave Moiraine an apologetic look - "since as soon as he was within the stedding he quickly got well. A few months. One night he left without a word to anyone, simply sneaked away when the moon was down." He looked at Moiraine's face and cleared his throat again. "Yes. Brief. Before he left, he told a curious tale which he said he meant to carry to Tar Valon. He said the Dark One intended to blind the Eye of the World, and slay the Great Serpent, kill time itself. The Elders said he was as sound in his mind as in his body, but that was what he said. What I have wanted to ask is, can the Dark One do such a thing? Kill time itself? And the Eye of the World? Can he blind the eye of the Great Serpent? What does it mean?"

ɹænd ɪkspɛktəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪn ɪksɛpt wʌɾ i sɔ. ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɡɪvɪŋ lɔɪəl ən ænsɝ, əɹ tɛlɪŋ ɪm ʃi hæd noʊ taɪm fəɹ ɪt naʊ, ʃi stʊd ðəɹ stɛɹɪŋ ɹaɪt θɹu ði oʊɡiɝ, fɹaʊnɪŋ ɪn θɔt.

Rand expected almost anything from Moiraine except what he saw. Instead of giving Loial an answer, or telling him she had no time for it now, she stood there staring right through the Ogier, frowning in thought.

"ðæts wʌt ðə tɪŋkɝz toʊld ʌs," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"That's what the Tinkers told us," Perrin said.

"jɛs," ɛɡwin sɛd, "ði il stɔɹi."

"Yes," Egwene said, "the Aiel story."

mɔɪɹeɪn tɝn əɹ hɛd sloʊli. noʊ ʌðɝ pɑɹɾ ə hɝ muvd. "wʌt stɔɹi?"

Moiraine turned her head slowly. No other part of her moved. "What story?"

ɪt wɑz ən ɪkspɹɛʃənləs lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪt meɪd pɛɹɪn teɪk ə dip bɹɛθ, ðoʊ wən i spoʊk i wɑz əz dɪlɪbɝɪɾ əz ɛvɝ. "sʌm tɪŋkɝz kɹɔsɪŋ ðə weɪst - ðeɪ sɛd ðeɪ kəd də ðəɾ ənhɑɹmd - faʊn il daɪɪŋ æftɝ ə bæɾəl wɪð tʃɹɑləks. bɪfɔɹ ðə læst il daɪd, ʃi - ðeɪ wɝ ɔl wɪmən, əpɛɹənli - toʊl ðə tɪŋkɝz wʌt lɔɪəl dʒʌst sɛd. ðə dɑɹk wʌn - ðeɪ kɔld ɪm saɪtblɪndɝ - ɪntɛnz tə blaɪn ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld. ðɪs wɑz oʊnli θɹi jɪɹz əɡoʊ, nɑt twɛnti. dʌz ɪt min sʌmθɪŋ?"

It was an expressionless look she gave them, but it made Perrin take a deep breath, though when he spoke he was as deliberate as ever. "Some Tinkers crossing the Waste - they said they could do that unharmed - found Aiel dying after a battle with Trollocs. Before the last Aiel died, she - they were all women, apparently - told the Tinkers what Loial just said. The Dark One - they called him Sightblinder - intends to blind the Eye of the World. This was only three years ago, not twenty. Does it mean something?"

"pɝhæps ɛvɹiθɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. hɝ feɪs wɑz stɪl, bʌt ɹænd hæd ðə filɪŋ əɹ maɪn ɹeɪs bɪhaɪn ðoʊz dɑɹk aɪz.

"Perhaps everything," Moiraine said. Her face was still, but Rand had the feeling her mind raced behind those dark eyes.

"bælzəmən," pɛɹɪn sɛd sʌɾənli. ðə neɪm kʌɾ ɔf ɔl saʊn ɪn ðə ɹum. noʊ wʌn əpɪɹd tə bɹið. pɛɹɪn lʊkt ət ɹænd, ðən ət mæt, hɪz aɪz stʃɹeɪnʒli kɑm ən mɔɹ jɛloʊ ðən ɛvɝ. "æt ðə taɪm aɪ wʌndɝd wɛɹ aɪd hɝd ðət neɪm bɪfɔɹ . . . ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld. naʊ aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ. doʊn ju?"

"Ba'alzamon," Perrin said suddenly. The name cut off all sound in the room. No one appeared to breathe. Perrin looked at Rand, then at Mat, his eyes strangely calm and more yellow than ever. "At the time I wondered where I'd heard that name before . . . the Eye of the World. Now I remember. Don't you?"

"aɪ doʊnt wɑnə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛniθɪŋ," mæt sɛd stɪfli.

"I don't want to remember anything," Mat said stiffly.

"wi hæv tə tɛl hɝ," pɛɹɪn kəntɪnjud. "ɪts ɪmpɔɹɾənt naʊ. wi kæn kip ɪt sikɹəɾ ɛni lɔŋɡɝ. jə si ɪt, doʊn ju, ɹænd?"

"We have to tell her," Perrin continued. "It's important now. We can't keep it secret any longer. You see it, don't you, Rand?"

"tɛl mi wʌt?" mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs wɑz hɑɹʃ, ən ʃi sim tə bi bɹeɪsɪŋ fəɹ ə bloʊ. hɝ ɡeɪz hæd sɛɾəld ɑn ɹænd.

"Tell me what?" Moiraine's voice was harsh, and she seemed to be bracing for a blow. Her gaze had settled on Rand.

hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ænsɝ. hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛni mɔɹ ðən mæt, bʌɾ i dɪd ɹɪmɛmbɝ - ən i nu pɛɹɪn wɑz ɹaɪt. "aɪv. . . ." hi lʊkt əɾ ɪz fɹɛnz. mæt nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli, pɛɹɪn dɪsaɪsɪvli, bʌɾ ət lis ðeɪ hæd dʌn ɪt. hi dɪd nɑɾ əv tə feɪs əɹ əloʊn. "wi hæv hæd . . . dʒɹimz." hi ɹʌb ðə spɑɾ ɑn ɪz fɪŋɡɝ wɛɹ ðə θɔɹn hæd stʌk ɪm wʌns, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə blʌd wən i woʊk. kwizəli ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə sʌnbɝn fil ə hɪz feɪs ənʌðɝ taɪm. "ɪksɛp meɪbi ðeɪ wɝn dʒɹimz, ɪɡzækli. bælzəmən wɑz ɪn ðɛm." hi nu waɪ pɛɹɪn hæd juz ðət neɪm; ɪt wɑz iziɝ ðən seɪɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hæd bɪn ɪn jəɹ dʒɹimz, ɪnsaɪd jəɹ hɛd. "hi sɛd . . . hi sɛɾ ɔl sɔɹts ə θɪŋz, bʌt wʌns i sɛd ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld wəd nɛvɝ sɝv mi." fəɹ ə mɪnuɾ ɪz maʊθ wɑz əz dʒɹaɪ əz dʌst.

He did not want to answer. He did not want to remember any more than Mat, but he did remember - and he knew Perrin was right. "I've. . . ." He looked at his friends. Mat nodded reluctantly, Perrin decisively, but at least they had done it. He did not have to face her alone. "We have had . . . dreams." He rubbed the spot on his finger where the thorn had stuck him once, remembering the blood when he woke. Queasily remembering the sunburned feel of his face another time. "Except maybe they weren't dreams, exactly. Ba'alzamon was in them." He knew why Perrin had used that name; it was easier than saying the Dark One had been in your dreams, inside your head. "He said . . . he said all sorts of things, but once he said the Eye of the World would never serve me." For a minute his mouth was as dry as dust.

"hi toʊl mi ðə seɪm θɪŋ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən mæt saɪd hɛvəli, ðən nɑɾəd. ɹænd faʊn i hæd spɪɾ ɪn ɪz maʊθ əɡɛn. "ju ɑɹən æŋɡɹi wɪð ʌs?" pɛɹɪn æskt, saʊndɪŋ sɝpɹaɪzd, ən ɹænd ɹilaɪz ðət mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt sim æŋɡɹi. ʃi wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ ðɛm, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz wɝ klɪɹ ən kɑm, ɪf ɪntɛnt.

"He told me the same thing," Perrin said, and Mat sighed heavily, then nodded. Rand found he had spit in his mouth again. "You aren't angry with us?" Perrin asked, sounding surprised, and Rand realized that Moiraine did not seem angry. She was studying them, but her eyes were clear and calm, if intent.

"mɔɹ wɪð maɪsɛlf ðən ju. bʌɾ aɪ dɪɾ æsk jə tə tɛl mi ɪf jə hæd stʃɹeɪnʒ dʒɹimz. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, aɪ æskt." ðoʊ hɝ vɔɪs ɹɪmeɪn lɛvəl, ə flæʃ ʌv æŋɡɝ kɹɔst əɹ aɪz, ən wɑz ɡɔn ɪn ən ɪnstənt. "hæɾ aɪ noʊn æftɝ ðə fɝst sʌtʃ, aɪ maɪɾ əv bɪn eɪbəl tə. . . . ðəɹ əz nɑt bɪn ə dʒɹimwɔkɝ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn fəɹ nɪɹli ə θaʊzən jɪɹz, bʌɾ aɪ kəɾ əv tʃɹaɪd. naʊ ɪts tu leɪt. itʃ taɪm ðə dɑɹk wʌn tʌtʃəz ju, hi meɪks ðə nɛks tʌtʃɪŋ iziɝ fəɹ hɪm. pɝhæps maɪ pɹɛzəns kən stɪl ʃil jə sʌmwʌt, bʌɾ ivən ðɛn. . . . ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə stɔɹiz ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən baɪndɪŋ mɛn tə ðɛm? stʃɹɔŋ mɛn, mɛn u hæd fɔt ðə dɑɹk wʌn fɹəm ðə stɑɹt. ðoʊz stɔɹiz ɑɹ tʃɹu, ən nʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən hæɾ ə tɛnθ ə ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə ðɛɹ mæstɝ, nɑɾ eɪdʒɪnɝ əɹ lænfɝ, nɑt bælθəməl əɹ dɪmɑndɝd, nɑɾ ivən ɪʃəml, ðə bɪtʃɹeɪɝ ə hoʊp hɪmsɛlf."

"More with myself than you. But I did ask you to tell me if you had strange dreams. In the beginning, I asked." Though her voice remained level, a flash of anger crossed her eyes, and was gone in an instant. "Had I known after the first such, I might have been able to. . . . There has not been a Dreamwalker in Tar Valon for nearly a thousand years, but I could have tried. Now it is too late. Each time the Dark One touches you, he makes the next touching easier for him. Perhaps my presence can still shield you somewhat, but even then. . . . Remember the stories of the Forsaken binding men to them? Strong men, men who had fought the Dark One from the start. Those stories are true, and none of the Forsaken had a tenth of the strength of their master, not Aginor or Lanfear, not Balthamel or Demandred, not even Ishamael, the Betrayer of Hope himself."

nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ɹænd sɔ, hɪm ən mæt ən pɛɹɪn ɔl θɹi. ðə wɪmənz feɪsəz wɝ ə blʌd-dʒɹeɪn blɛn ə fɪɹ ən hɔɹɝ. ɑɹ ðeɪ əfɹeɪd fəɹ ʌs, əɹ əfɹeɪɾ ʌv ʌs?

Nynaeve and Egwene were looking at him, Rand saw, him and Mat and Perrin all three. The women's faces were a blood-drained blend of fear and horror. Are they afraid for us, or afraid of us?

"wʌt kən wi du?" hi æskt. "ðɛɹ əz tə bi sʌmθɪŋ."

"What can we do?" he asked. "There has to be something."

"steɪɪŋ kloʊs baɪ mi," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd, "wɪl hɛlp. sʌm. ðə pɹətɛkʃən fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ɪkstɛnz ɝaʊn mi ə lɪɾəl, ɹɪmɛmbɝ. bʌt jə kænɑɾ ɔlweɪz ɹɪmeɪn kloʊs tə mi. jə kən dɪfɛn jɝsɛlf, ɪf juv ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ fəɹ ɪt, bʌt jə mʌs faɪn ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ən wɪl wɪðɪn jɝsɛlf. aɪ kænɑt ɡɪv ɪt tə ju."

"Staying close by me," Moiraine replied, "will help. Some. The protection from touching the True Source extends around me a little, remember. But you cannot always remain close to me. You can defend yourself, if you have the strength for it, but you must find the strength and will within yourself. I cannot give it to you."

"aɪ θɪŋk aɪv ɔlɹɛɾi faʊn maɪ pɹətɛkʃən," pɛɹɪn sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɹɪzaɪn ɹæðɝ ðən hæpi.

"I think I've already found my protection," Perrin said, sounding resigned rather than happy.

"jɛs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "aɪ səpoʊz jə hæv." ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm əntɪl i dʒɹɑpt ɪz aɪz, ən ivən ðən ʃi stʊd kənsɪɾɝɪŋ. faɪnəli ʃi tɝn tə ði ʌðɝz. "ðɛɹ ɑɹ lɪməts tə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz paʊɝ ɪnsaɪd ju. jild ivən fəɹ ən ɪnstən ən hɪl əv ə stʃɹɪŋ taɪd tə jəɹ hɑɹt, ə stʃɹɪŋ jə meɪ nɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə kʌt. sɝɛndɝ, ən jəl bi hɪz. dɪnaɪ hɪm, ən ɪz paʊɝ feɪlz. ɪts nɑɾ izi wən i tʌtʃəz jəɹ dʒɹimz, bʌɾ ɪt kən bi dʌn. hi kən stɪl sɛn hæfmən əɡɛns ju, ən tʃɹɑləks, ən dʒɹæɡkɝ, ən ʌðɝ θɪŋz, bʌɾ i kænɑt meɪk jə hɪz ənlɛs jə lɛt hɪm."

"Yes," Moiraine said, "I suppose you have." She looked at him until he dropped his eyes, and even then she stood considering. Finally she turned to the others. "There are limits to the Dark One's power inside you. Yield even for an instant and he will have a string tied to your heart, a string you may never be able to cut. Surrender, and you will be his. Deny him, and his power fails. It is not easy when he touches your dreams, but it can be done. He can still send Halfmen against you, and Trollocs, and Draghkar, and other things, but he cannot make you his unless you let him."

"feɪdz ɑɹ bæɾ ɪnʌf," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Fades are bad enough," Perrin said.

"aɪ doʊnt wɑn ɪm ɪnsaɪd maɪ hɛɾ əɡɛn," mæt ɡɹaʊld. "ɪzən ðəɹ ɛni weɪ tə kip ɪm aʊt?"

"I don't want him inside my head again," Mat growled. "Isn't there any way to keep him out?"

mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "lɔɪəl əz nʌθɪŋ tə fɪɹ, nɔɹ ɛɡwin, nɔɹ nɪneɪiv. aʊɾ ə ðə mæs ə hjumænɪɾi, ðə dɑɹk wʌn kən tʌtʃ ən ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl oʊnli baɪ tʃæns, ənlɛs ðət pɝsən siks ɪt. bʌt fəɹ ə taɪm, ət list, jə θɹi ɑɹ sɛntʃɹəl tə ðə pæɾɝn. eɪ wɛb ə dɛstəni ɪz biɪŋ woʊvən, ən ɛvɹi θɹɛd lidz stʃɹeɪt tə ju. wʌɾ ɛls dɪd ðə dɑɹk wʌn seɪ tə ju?"

Moiraine shook her head. "Loial has nothing to fear, nor Egwene, nor Nynaeve. Out of the mass of humanity, the Dark One can touch an individual only by chance, unless that person seeks it. But for a time, at least, you three are central to the Pattern. A Web of Destiny is being woven, and every thread leads straight to you. What else did the Dark One say to you?"

"aɪ doʊn ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪɾ ɔl ðət wɛl," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðɛɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt wʌn ʌv əs biɪŋ tʃoʊzən, sʌmθɪŋ laɪk ðæt. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪm læfɪŋ," hi fɪnɪʃt blikli, "əbaʊɾ u wi wɝ tʃoʊzən baɪ. hi sɛɾ aɪ - wi kəd sɝv ɪm əɹ daɪ. ən ðən wid stɪl sɝv hɪm."

"I don't remember it all that well," Perrin said. "There was something about one of us being chosen, something like that. I remember him laughing," he finished bleakly, "about who we were chosen by. He said I - we could serve him or die. And then we'd still serve him."

"hi sɛd ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wəd tʃɹaɪ tə juz ʌs," mæt æɾəd, hɪz vɔɪs feɪɾɪŋ əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd tə hum i wɑz spikɪŋ. hi swɑloʊɾ ən wɛn ɑn. "hi sɛd dʒʌs laɪk tɑɹ vəlɑn juzd - hi hæd səm neɪmz. dɑviən, aɪ θɪŋk. aɪ kæn ɹɪmɛmbɝ vɛɹi wɛl, iðɝ."

"He said the Amyrlin Seat would try to use us," Mat added, his voice fading as he remembered to whom he was speaking. He swallowed and went on. "He said just like Tar Valon used - he had some names. Davian, I think. I can't remember very well, either."

"ɹɑoʊlɪn dɑɹksbeɪn," pɛɹɪn sɛd.

"Raolin Darksbane," Perrin said.

"jɛs," ɹænd sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. hi hæd tʃɹaɪd tə fɝɡɛɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ əbaʊt ðoʊz dʒɹimz. ɪt wɑz ənplɛzən bɹɪŋɪŋ əm bæk. "jʊɹiən stoʊnboʊ wɑz ənʌðɝ, ən ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsən." hi stɑp sʌɾənli, hoʊpɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn hæd nɑt noʊɾəst haʊ sʌɾənli. "aɪ doʊn ɹɛkəɡnaɪz ɛni ʌv ðɛm."

"Yes," Rand said, frowning. He had tried to forget everything about those dreams. It was unpleasant bringing them back. "Yurian Stonebow was another, and Guaire Amalasan." He stopped suddenly, hoping Moiraine had not noticed how suddenly. "I don't recognize any of them."

bʌɾ i hæd ɹɛkəɡnaɪzd wʌn, naʊ ðəɾ i dʒɹɛdʒd əm fɹəm ðə dɛpθs ə mɛmɹi. ðə neɪm i hæd bɛɹli stɑp hɪmsɛlf fɹəm seɪɪŋ. lɑɡən. ðə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. laɪt! tɑm sɛd ðeɪ wɝ deɪnʒɝəs neɪmz. ɪz ðət wʌt bælzəmən mɛnt? mɔɪɹeɪn wɑns tə juz wʌn ʌv əs əz ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən? ɛɛs sədaɪ hʌn daʊn fɔls dʒɹæɡənz, ðeɪ doʊn juz ðɛm. də ðeɪ? laɪt hɛlp mi, də ðeɪ?

But he had recognized one, now that he dredged them from the depths of memory. The name he had barely stopped himself from saying. Logain. The false Dragon. Light! Thom said they were dangerous names. Is that what Ba'alzamon meant? Moiraine wants to use one of us as a false Dragon? Aes Sedai hunt down false Dragons, they don't use them. Do they? Light help me, do they?

mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt ɹɛɾ əɹ feɪs. "du jə noʊ ðɛm?" hi æsk hɝ. "du ðeɪ min ɛniθɪŋ?"

Moiraine was looking at him, but he could not read her face. "Do you know them?" he asked her. "Do they mean anything?"

"ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz ɪz ə ɡʊd neɪm fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz ɪz weɪ tə sid ðə wɝm ə daʊt wɛɹɛvɝ i kʊd. ɪɾ its ət mɛnz maɪnz laɪk ə kæŋkɝ. wən jə bɪliv ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz, ɪts ðə fɝst stɛp təwɔɹd sɝɛndɝ. ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ɪf jə sɝɛndɝ tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, hɪl meɪk jə hɪz."

"The Father of Lies is a good name for the Dark One," Moiraine replied. "It was always his way to seed the worm of doubt wherever he could. It eats at men's minds like a canker. When you believe the Father of Lies, it is the first step toward surrender. Remember, if you surrender to the Dark One, he will make you his."

ən ɛɛs sədaɪ nɛvɝ laɪz, bʌt ðə tʃɹuθ ʃi spiks meɪ nɑt bi ðə tʃɹuθ jə θɪŋk jə hɪɹ. ðət wɑz wʌt tæm hæd sɛd, ən ʃi hæd nɑt ɹɪli ænsɝɾ ɪz kwɛstʃən. hi kɛpt ɪz feɪs ɪkspɹɛʃənləs ən hɛld ɪz hænz stɪl ɑn ɪz niz, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə skɹʌb ðə swɛɾ ɔf əm ɑn ɪz bɹitʃɪz.

An Aes Sedai never lies, but the truth she speaks may not be the truth you think you hear. That was what Tam had said, and she had not really answered his question. He kept his face expressionless and held his hands still on his knees, trying not to scrub the sweat off them on his breeches.

ɛɡwin wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ sɔfli. nɪneɪiv hæɾ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝ, bʌt ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə kɹaɪ, tu. ɹænd ɔlmoʊst wɪʃt i kʊd.

Egwene was crying softly. Nynaeve had her arms around her, but she looked as if she wanted to cry, too. Rand almost wished he could.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ ɔl tɑvɝən," lɔɪəl sɛɾ əbɹʌpli. hi sim bɹaɪɾənd baɪ ðə pɹɑspɛkt, lʊkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd tə wɑtʃɪŋ fɹəm kloʊs baɪ əz ðə pæɾɝn woʊv ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn ðɛm. ɹænd lʊkt əɾ ɪm ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli, ən ði oʊɡiɝ ɡeɪv ən əbæʃt ʃɹʌɡ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɪnʌf tə dɪm ɪz iɡɝnəs.

"They are all ta'veren," Loial said abruptly. He seemed brightened by the prospect, looking forward to watching from close by as the Pattern wove itself around them. Rand looked at him incredulously, and the Ogier gave an abashed shrug, but it was not enough to dim his eagerness.

"soʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "θɹi ʌv ðɛm, wən aɪ ɪkspɛktəd wʌn. ə ɡɹeɪt mɛni θɪŋz əv hæpən ðəɾ aɪ dɪd nɑɾ ɪkspɛkt. ðɪs nuz kənsɝnɪŋ ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl tʃeɪnʒəz mʌtʃ." ʃi pɔzd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. "fɔɹ ə taɪm ðə pæɾɝn dʌz sim tə bi swɝlɪŋ ɝaʊn ɔl θɹi ʌv ju, dʒʌst əz lɔɪəl sɛz, ən ðə swɝl wɪl ɡɹoʊ ɡɹeɪɾɝ bɪfɔɹ ɪt bɪkʌmz lɛs. səmtaɪmz biɪŋ tɑvɝən minz ðə pæɾɝn ɪz fɔɹs tə bɛn tə ju, ən səmtaɪmz ɪt minz ðə pæɾɝn fɔɹsɪz jə tə ðə niɾəd pæθ. ðə wɛb kən stɪl bi woʊvən mɛni weɪz, ən səm ə ðoʊz dɪzaɪnz wəd bi dɪzæstʃɹəs. fəɹ ju, fəɹ ðə wɝld.

"So they are," Moiraine said. "Three of them, when I expected one. A great many things have happened that I did not expect. This news concerning the Eye of the World changes much." She paused, frowning. "For a time the Pattern does seem to be swirling around all three of you, just as Loial says, and the swirl will grow greater before it becomes less. Sometimes being ta'veren means the Pattern is forced to bend to you, and sometimes it means the Pattern forces you to the needed path. The Web can still be woven many ways, and some of those designs would be disastrous. For you, for the world.

"wi kænɑt ɹɪmeɪn ɪn keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt baɪ ɛni ɹoʊd, mɹdʒɹɑl ən tʃɹɑləks wɪl bi ɑn əs bɪfɔɹ wɪv ɡɔn tɛn maɪlz. ən dʒʌst ət ðɪs pɔɪnt wi hɪɹ ʌv ə θɹɛt tə ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld, nɑt fɹəm wʌn sɔɹs, bʌt θɹi, itʃ simɪŋ ɪndɪpɛndən ə ði ʌðɝz. ðə pæɾɝn ɪz fɔɹsɪŋ əɹ pæθ. ðə pæɾɝn stɪl wivz ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn jə θɹi, bʌt wʌt hænd naʊ sɛts ðə wɔɹp, ən wʌt hæn kəntʃɹoʊlz ðə ʃʌɾəl? hæz ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən wikən ɪnʌf fəɹ ɪm tə ɪɡzɝt ðət mʌtʃ kəntʃɹoʊl?"

"We cannot remain in Caemlyn, but by any road, Myrddraal and Trollocs will be on us before we have gone ten miles. And just at this point we hear of a threat to the Eye of the World, not from one source, but three, each seeming independent of the others. The Pattern is forcing our path. The Pattern still weaves itself around you three, but what hand now sets the warp, and what hand controls the shuttle? Has the Dark One's prison weakened enough for him to exert that much control?"

"ðɛɹz noʊ nid fəɹ ðət kaɪndə tɔk!" nɪneɪiv sɛd ʃɑɹpli. "jul oʊnli fɹaɪɾən ðɛm."

"There's no need for that kind of talk!" Nynaeve said sharply. "You'll only frighten them."

"bʌt nɑt ju?" mɔɪɹeɪn æskt. "ɪt fɹaɪɾənz mi. wɛl, pɝhæps jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt. fɪɹ kænɑt bi əlaʊd tə əfɛkt əɹ kɔɹs. wɛðɝ ðɪs ɪz ə tʃɹæp əɹ ə taɪmli wɔɹnɪŋ, wi mʌs də wʌt wi mʌst, ən ðəɾ ɪz tə ɹitʃ ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl kwɪkli. ðə ɡɹin mæn mʌs noʊ ʌv ðɪs θɹɛt."

"But not you?" Moiraine asked. "It frightens me. Well, perhaps you are right. Fear cannot be allowed to affect our course. Whether this is a trap or a timely warning, we must do what we must, and that is to reach the Eye of the World quickly. The Green Man must know of this threat."

ɹænd ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt. ðə ɡɹin mæn? ði ʌðɝz stɛɹd, tu, ɔl bʌt lɔɪəl, huz bɹɔd feɪs lʊkt wɝid.

Rand gave a start. The Green Man? The others stared, too, all but Loial, whose broad face looked worried.

"aɪ kænɑɾ ivən ɹɪsk stɑpɪŋ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn fəɹ hɛlp," mɔɪɹeɪn kəntɪnjud. "taɪm tʃɹæps ʌs. ivən ɪf wi kəd ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sɪɾi ənhɪndɝd, ɪt wəd teɪk mɛni wiks tə ɹitʃ ðə blaɪt, ən aɪ fɪɹ wi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ əv wiks."

"I cannot even risk stopping in Tar Valon for help," Moiraine continued. "Time traps us. Even if we could ride out of the city unhindered, it would take many weeks to reach the Blight, and I fear we no longer have weeks."

"ðə blaɪt!" ɹænd hɝd hɪmsɛlf ɛkoʊɾ ɪn ə kɔɹəs, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn ɪɡnɔɹɾ əm ɔl.

"The Blight!" Rand heard himself echoed in a chorus, but Moiraine ignored them all.

"ðə pæɾɝn pɹizɛns ə kɹaɪsəs, ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm ə weɪ tə sɝmaʊn ɪt. ɪf aɪ dɪd nɑt noʊ ɪt wɑz ɪmpɑsəbəl, aɪ kəɾ ɔlmoʊs bɪliv ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ɪz teɪkɪŋ ə hænd. ðəɹ ɪz ə weɪ." ʃi smaɪld əz ɪf əɾ ə pɹaɪvət dʒoʊk, ən tɝn tə lɔɪəl. "ðɛɹ wɑz ən oʊɡiɝ ɡɹoʊv hɪɹ ət keɪɛmlɪn, ən ə weɪɡeɪt. ðə nu sɪɾi naʊ spɹɛdz aʊɾ oʊvɝ wɛɹ ðə ɡɹoʊv wʌns stʊd, soʊ ðə weɪɡeɪt mʌs bi ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz. aɪ noʊ nɑt mɛni oʊɡiɝ lɝn ðə weɪz naʊ, bʌt wʌn u hæz ə tælən ən lɝnz ði oʊl sɔŋz ʌv ɡɹoʊɪŋ mʌs bi dʒɹɔn tə sətʃ nɑlədʒ, ivən ɪf i bɪlivz ɪɾəl nɛvɝ bi juzd. dʒju noʊ ðə weɪz, lɔɪəl?"

"The Pattern presents a crisis, and at the same time a way to surmount it. If I did not know it was impossible, I could almost believe the Creator is taking a hand. There is a way." She smiled as if at a private joke, and turned to Loial. "There was an Ogier grove here at Caemlyn, and a Waygate. The New City now spreads out over where the grove once stood, so the Waygate must be inside the walls. I know not many Ogier learn the Ways now, but one who has a Talent and learns the old Songs of Growing must be drawn to such knowledge, even if he believes it will never be used. Do you know the Ways, Loial?"

ði oʊɡiɝ ʃɪftəɾ ɪz fiɾ ənizəli. "aɪ du, ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌt - "

The Ogier shifted his feet uneasily. "I do, Aes Sedai, but - "

"kæn jə faɪn ðə pæθ tə fæl dæɹə əlɔŋ ðə weɪz?"

"Can you find the path to Fal Dara along the Ways?"

"aɪv nɛvɝ hɝɾ ə fæl dæɹə," lɔɪəl sɛd, saʊndɪŋ ɹɪlivd.

"I've never heard of Fal Dara," Loial said, sounding relieved.

"ɪn ðə deɪz ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ɪt wɑz noʊn əz mæfəl dɑɾɝɑnɛl. dʒju noʊ ðət neɪm?"

"In the days of the Trolloc Wars it was known as Mafal Dadaranell. Do you know that name?"

"aɪ noʊ ɪt," lɔɪəl sɛd ɹɪlʌktənli, "bʌt - "

"I know it," Loial said reluctantly, "but - "

"ðɛn jə kən faɪn ðə pæθ fəɹ ʌs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ə kjʊɹiəs tɝn, ɪndid. wən wi kən niðɝ steɪ nɔɹ liv baɪ ɛni ɔɹɾənɛɹi minz, aɪ lɝn ʌv ə θɹɛt tə ði aɪ, ən ɪn ðə seɪm pleɪs ðəɹ ɪz wʌn u kən teɪk əs ðəɹ ɪn deɪz. wɛðɝ ɪts ðə kɹieɪɾɝ, əɹ feɪt, əɹ ivən ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ðə pæɾɝn əz tʃoʊzən əɹ pæθ fəɹ ʌs."

"Then you can find the path for us," Moiraine said. "A curious turn, indeed. When we can neither stay nor leave by any ordinary means, I learn of a threat to the Eye, and in the same place there is one who can take us there in days. Whether it is the Creator, or fate, or even the Dark One, the Pattern has chosen our path for us."

"noʊ!" lɔɪəl sɛd, ən ɛmfæɾɪk ɹʌmbəl laɪk θʌndɝ. ɛvɹiwʌn tɝn tə lʊk əɾ ɪm ən i blɪŋkt ʌndɝ ði ətɛnʃən, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ hɛzɪɾənt əbaʊɾ ɪz wɝdz. "ɪf wi ɛntɝ ðə weɪz, wɪl ɔl daɪ - əɹ bi swɑloʊd baɪ ðə ʃædoʊ."

"No!" Loial said, an emphatic rumble like thunder. Everyone turned to look at him and he blinked under the attention, but there was nothing hesitant about his words. "If we enter the Ways, we will all die - or be swallowed by the Shadow."


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾiθɹi


CHAPTER 43

dɪsɪʒənz ən æpɹɪʃənz


Decisions and Apparitions

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əpɪɹd tə noʊ wʌt lɔɪəl mɛnt, bʌt ʃi sɛd nʌθɪŋ. lɔɪəl pɪɹɾ ət ðə flɔɹ, ɹʌbɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz noʊz wɪð ə θɪk fɪŋɡɝ, əz ɪf i wɑz əbæʃt baɪ hɪz aʊtbɝst. noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə spik.

The Aes Sedai appeared to know what Loial meant, but she said nothing. Loial peered at the floor, rubbing under his nose with a thick finger, as if he was abashed by his outburst. No one wanted to speak.

"waɪ?" ɹænd æskt ət læst. "waɪ wəd wi daɪ? wʌɾ ɑɹ ðə weɪz?"

"Why?" Rand asked at last. "Why would we die? What are the Ways?"

lɔɪəl ɡlænst ət mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi tɝn əweɪ tə teɪk ə tʃɛɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ðə lɪɾəl kæt stʃɹɛtʃt, ɪts klɔz skɹætʃɪŋ ɑn ðə hɑɹθstoʊn, ən læŋɡwdli wɔkt oʊvɝ tə bʌɾ ɪts hɛɾ əɡɛnst əɹ æŋkəlz. ʃi ɹʌbd bɪhaɪn ɪts ɪɹz wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. ðə kæts pɝɪŋ wɑz ə stʃɹeɪnʒ kaʊntɝpɔɪn tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪz lɛvəl vɔɪs. "ɪɾ ɪz jəɹ nɑlədʒ, lɔɪəl. ðə weɪz ɑɹ ði oʊnli pæθ tə seɪfti fəɹ ʌs, ði oʊnli pæθ tə fɔɹstɑlɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ɪf oʊnli fəɹ ə taɪm, bʌt ðə tɛlɪŋ ɪz jʊɹz."

Loial glanced at Moiraine. She turned away to take a chair in front of the fireplace. The little cat stretched, its claws scratching on the hearthstone, and languidly walked over to butt its head against her ankles. She rubbed behind its ears with one finger. The cat's purring was a strange counterpoint to the Aes Sedai's level voice. "It is your knowledge, Loial. The Ways are the only path to safety for us, the only path to forestalling the Dark One, if only for a time, but the telling is yours."

ði oʊɡiɝ dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ kʌmfɝɾɪd baɪ hɝ spitʃ. hi ʃɪftəɾ ɔkwɝdli ɑn ɪz tʃɛɹ bɪfɔɹ bɪɡɪnɪŋ. "dʊɹɪŋ ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, waɪl ðə wɝld wɑz stɪl biɪŋ bɹoʊkən, ði ɝθ wɑz ɪn əphivəl, ən hjumənkaɪnd wɑz biɪŋ skæɾɝd laɪk dʌst ɑn ðə wɪnd. wi oʊɡiɝ wɝ skæɾɝd, tu, dʒɹɪvən fɹəm ðə stɛɾɪŋ, ɪndə ði ɛɡzaɪl ən ðə lɔŋ wɑndɝɪŋ, wən ðə lɔŋɪŋ wɑz ɡɹeɪvən ɑn əɹ hɑɹts." hi ɡeɪv mɔɪɹeɪn ənʌðɝ saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. hɪz lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹu daʊn ɪndə tu pɔɪns. "aɪ wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə bi bɹif, bʌt ðɪs ɪz nɑɾ ə θɪŋ ðət kən bi toʊl tu bɹifli. ɪts ə ði ʌðɝz aɪ mʌst spik, naʊ, ðoʊz fju oʊɡiɝ u hɛld ɪn ðɛɹ stɛɾɪŋ waɪl ɝaʊn əm ðə wɝld wɑz tɛɹɪŋ əpɑɹt. ən ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ" - hi əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət mɔɪɹeɪn, naʊ - "ðə meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ hu wɝ daɪɪŋ ivən əz ðeɪ dɪstʃɹɔɪd ðə wɝld ɪn ðɛɹ mædnəs. ɪt wɑz tə ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ - ðoʊz u hæd soʊ fɑɹ mænədʒ tə əvɔɪd ðə mædnəs - ðət ðə stɛɾɪŋ fɝs meɪd ði ɔfɝ ə sæŋktʃuɛɹi. mɛni æksɛptɪd, fəɹ ɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ ðeɪ wɝ pɹətɛktəd fɹəm ðə teɪn ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ðət wɑz kɪlɪŋ ðɛɹ kaɪnd. bʌt ðeɪ wɝ kʌɾ ɔf fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. ɪt wɑz nɑt dʒʌs ðət ðeɪ kəd nɑt wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ, əɹ tʌtʃ ðə sɔɹs; ðeɪ kəd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ivən sɛns ðət ðə sɔɹs ɪɡzɪstəd. ɪn ði ɛnd, nʌn kəɾ æksɛp ðəɾ aɪsəleɪʃən, ən wʌn baɪ wʌn ðeɪ lɛf ðə stɛɾɪŋ, hoʊpɪŋ ðət baɪ ðət taɪm ðə teɪnt wɑz ɡɔn. ɪt nɛvɝ wɑz."

The Ogier did not appear comforted by her speech. He shifted awkwardly on his chair before beginning. "During the Time of Madness, while the world was still being broken, the earth was in upheaval, and humankind was being scattered like dust on the wind. We Ogier were scattered, too, driven from the stedding, into the Exile and the Long Wandering, when the Longing was graven on our hearts." He gave Moiraine another sidelong look. His long eyebrows drew down into two points. "I will try to be brief, but this is not a thing that can be told too briefly. It is of the others I must speak, now, those few Ogier who held in their stedding while around them the world was tearing apart. And of the Aes Sedai" - he avoided looking at Moiraine, now - "the male Aes Sedai who were dying even as they destroyed the world in their madness. It was to those Aes Sedai - those who had so far managed to avoid the madness - that the stedding first made the offer of sanctuary. Many accepted, for in the stedding they were protected from the taint of the Dark One that was killing their kind. But they were cut off from the True Source. It was not just that they could not wield the One Power, or touch the Source; they could no longer even sense that the Source existed. In the end, none could accept that isolation, and one by one they left the stedding, hoping that by that time the taint was gone. It never was."

"sʌm ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd kwaɪətli, "kleɪm ðəɾ oʊɡiɝ sæŋktʃuɛɹi pɹəlɔŋ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ən meɪɾ ɪt wɝs. ʌðɝz seɪ ðəɾ ɪf ɔl ə ðoʊz mɛn hæd bɪn əlaʊd tə ɡoʊ mæɾ ət wʌns, ðəɹ wʊɾə bɪn nʌθɪŋ lɛft ə ðə wɝld. aɪm ə ðə blu ədʒɑ, lɔɪəl; ənlaɪk ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, wi hoʊl tə ðə sɛkən vju. sæŋktʃuɛɹi hɛlp tə seɪv wʌt kəd bi seɪvd. kəntɪnju, pliz."

"Some in Tar Valon," Moiraine said quietly, "claim that Ogier sanctuary prolonged the Breaking and made it worse. Others say that if all of those men had been allowed to go mad at once, there would have been nothing left of the world. I am of the Blue Ajah, Loial; unlike the Red Ajah, we hold to the second view. Sanctuary helped to save what could be saved. Continue, please."

lɔɪəl nɑɾəd ɡɹeɪtfəli. ɹɪlivd ʌv ə kənsɝn, ɹænd ɹilaɪzd.

Loial nodded gratefully. Relieved of a concern, Rand realized.

"æz aɪ wɑz seɪɪŋ," ði oʊɡiɝ wɛn ɑn, "ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə meɪl sədaɪ, lɛft. bʌt bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɛnt, ðeɪ ɡeɪv ə ɡɪf tə ði oʊɡiɝ ɪn θæŋks fəɹ əɹ sæŋktʃuɛɹi. ðə weɪz. ɛntɝ ə weɪɡeɪt, wɔk fəɹ ə deɪ, ən jə meɪ dɪpɑɹt θɹu ənʌðɝ weɪɡeɪɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd maɪlz fɹəm wɛɹ jə stɑɹɾəd. əɹ faɪv hʌnʒɹəd. taɪm ən dɪstəns ɑɹ stʃɹeɪnʒ ɪn ðə weɪz. dɪfɹən pæðz, dɪfɹən bɹɪdʒəz, lɛd tə dɪfɹən pleɪsəz, ən haʊ lɔŋ ɪt teɪks tə ɡɛt ðəɹ dɪpɛnz ɑn wɪtʃ pæθ jə teɪk. ɪt wɑz ə mɑɹvələs ɡɪft, meɪd mɔɹ soʊ baɪ ðə taɪmz, fəɹ ðə weɪz ɑɹ nɑt pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɝld wi si ɝaʊn ʌs, nɔɹ pɝhæps ʌv ɛni wɝld aʊtsaɪd ðɛmsɛlvz. nɑɾ oʊnli dɪd ði oʊɡiɝ soʊ ɡɪftəd nɑɾ əv tə tʃɹævəl θɹu ðə wɝld, wɛɹ ivən æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ mɛn fɔt laɪk ænəməlz tə lɪv, ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə ɹitʃ ənʌðɝ stɛɾɪŋ, bʌt wɪðɪn ðə weɪz ðəɹ wɑz noʊ bɹeɪkɪŋ. ðə læn bɪtwin tu stɛɾɪŋ maɪt splɪɾ oʊpən ɪndə dip kænjənz əɹ ɹaɪz ɪn maʊntən ɹeɪnʒəz, bʌɾ ɪn ðə weɪ bɪtwin əm ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃeɪnʒ.

"As I was saying," the Ogier went on, "the Aes Sedai, the male Sedai, left. But before they went, they gave a gift to the Ogier in thanks for our sanctuary. The Ways. Enter a Waygate, walk for a day, and you may depart through another Waygate a hundred miles from where you started. Or five hundred. Time and distance are strange in the Ways. Different paths, different bridges, lead to different places, and how long it takes to get there depends on which path you take. It was a marvelous gift, made more so by the times, for the Ways are not part of the world we see around us, nor perhaps of any world outside themselves. Not only did the Ogier so gifted not have to travel through the world, where even after the Breaking men fought like animals to live, in order to reach another stedding, but within the Ways there was no Breaking. The land between two stedding might split open into deep canyons or rise in mountain ranges, but in the Way between them there was no change.

"wɛn ðə læst ɛɛs sədaɪ lɛf ðə stɛɾɪŋ, ðeɪ ɡeɪv tə ði ɛldɝz ə ki, ə tælɪsmən, ðət kəd bi juz fəɹ ɡɹoʊɪŋ mɔɹ. ðeɪ ɑɹ ə lɪvɪŋ θɪŋ ɪn səm fæʃən, ðə weɪz ən ðə weɪɡeɪts. aɪ də nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn ɪt; noʊ oʊɡiɝ ɛvɝ hæz, ən ivən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ hæv fɝɡɑɾən, aɪm toʊld. oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz ði ɛɡzaɪl ɛndəd fəɹ ʌs. əz ðoʊz oʊɡiɝ u hæd bɪn ɡɪftəd baɪ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ faʊn ə stɛɾɪŋ wɛɹ oʊɡiɝ hæd ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðə lɔŋ wɑndɝɪŋ, ðeɪ ɡɹu ə weɪ tə ɪt. wɪð ðə stoʊnwɝk wi lɝn dʊɹɪŋ ði ɛɡzaɪl, wi bɪl sɪɾiz fəɹ mɛn, ən plæntəd ðə ɡɹoʊvz tə kʌmfɝt ði oʊɡiɝ u dɪd ðə bɪldɪŋ, soʊ ðə lɔŋɪŋ wəd nɑɾ oʊvɝkʌm ðɛm. tə ðoʊz ɡɹoʊvz weɪz wɝ ɡɹoʊn. ðəɹ wɑz ə ɡɹoʊv, ən ə weɪɡeɪt, ət mæfəl dɑɾɝɑnɛl, bʌt ðət sɪɾi wɑz ɹeɪz dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, noʊ stoʊn lɛf stændɪŋ ɑn ənʌðɝ, ən ðə ɡɹoʊv wɑz tʃɑp daʊn ən bɝn fəɹ tʃɹɑlɑk faɪɝz." hi lɛf noʊ daʊt wɪtʃ hæd bɪn ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ kɹaɪm.

"When the last Aes Sedai left the stedding, they gave to the Elders a key, a talisman, that could be used for growing more. They are a living thing in some fashion, the Ways and the Waygates. I do not understand it; no Ogier ever has, and even the Aes Sedai have forgotten, I am told. Over the years the Exile ended for us. As those Ogier who had been gifted by the Aes Sedai found a stedding where Ogier had returned from the Long Wandering, they grew a Way to it. With the stonework we learned during the Exile, we built cities for men, and planted the groves to comfort the Ogier who did the building, so the Longing would not overcome them. To those groves Ways were grown. There was a grove, and a Waygate, at Mafal Dadaranell, but that city was razed during the Trolloc Wars, no stone left standing on another, and the grove was chopped down and burned for Trolloc fires." He left no doubt which had been the greater crime.

"weɪɡeɪts ɑɹ ɔl bʌɾ ɪmpɑsəbəl tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "æn hjumənkaɪnd nɑt mʌtʃ lɛs soʊ. ðəɹ ɑɹ pipəl ət fæl dæɹə stɪl, ðoʊ nɑt ðə ɡɹeɪt sɪɾi ði oʊɡiɝ bɪlt, ən ðə weɪɡeɪt jɛt stænz."

"Waygates are all but impossible to destroy," Moiraine said, "and humankind not much less so. There are people at Fal Dara still, though not the great city the Ogier built, and the Waygate yet stands."

"haʊ dɪd ðeɪ meɪk ðɛm?" ɛɡwin æskt. hɝ pʌzəld lʊk tʊk ɪn mɔɪɹeɪn ən lɔɪəl boʊθ. "ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə mɛn. ɪf ðeɪ kʊdn juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ, haʊ kəd ðeɪ meɪk ðə weɪz? əɹ dɪd ðeɪ juz ðə paʊɝ əɾ ɔl? ðɛɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs wɑz teɪntɪd. ɪz teɪntɪd. aɪ doʊnt noʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ kən du, jɛt. meɪbi ɪts ə sɪli kwɛstʃən."

"How did they make them?" Egwene asked. Her puzzled look took in Moiraine and Loial both. "The Aes Sedai, the men. If they couldn't use the One Power in a stedding, how could they make the Ways? Or did they use the Power at all? Their part of the True Source was tainted. Is tainted. I don't know much about what Aes Sedai can do, yet. Maybe it's a silly question."

lɔɪəl ɪkspleɪnd. "itʃ stɛɾɪŋ əz ə weɪɡeɪɾ ɑn ɪts bɔɹɾɝ, bʌɾ aʊtsaɪd. jəɹ kwɛstʃən ɪz nɑt sɪli. juv faʊn ðə siɾ ʌv waɪ wi də nɑt dɛɹ tʃɹævəl ðə weɪz. noʊ oʊɡiɝ əz juz ðə weɪz ɪn maɪ laɪftaɪm, ən bɪfɔɹ. baɪ iɾɪkt ə ði ɛldɝz, ɔl ði ɛldɝz ʌv ɔl ðə stɛɾɪŋ, nʌn meɪ, hjumən əɹ oʊɡiɝ.

Loial explained. "Each stedding has a Waygate on its border, but outside. Your question is not silly. You've found the seed of why we do not dare travel the Ways. No Ogier has used the Ways in my lifetime, and before. By edict of the Elders, all the Elders of all the stedding, none may, human or Ogier.

"ðə weɪz wɝ meɪd baɪ mɛn wildɪŋ paʊɝ faʊl baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. əbaʊɾ ə θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ, dʊɹɪŋ wʌt jə hjumənz kɔl ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ðə weɪz bɪɡæn tə tʃeɪnʒ. soʊ sloʊli ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ðət nʌn ɹɪli noʊɾəst, ðeɪ ɡɹu dæŋk ən dɪm. ðən dɑɹknəs fɛl əlɔŋ ðə bɹɪdʒəz. səm u wɛn ɪn wɝ nɛvɝ sin əɡɛn. tʃɹævəlɝz spoʊk ə biɪŋ wɑtʃt fɹəm ðə dɑɹk. ðə nʌmbɝz u vænɪʃt ɡɹu, ən səm u keɪm aʊt hæd ɡɔn mæd, ɹeɪvɪŋ əbaʊt mætʃɪn ʃɪn, ðə blæk wɪnd. ɛɛs sədaɪ hilɝz kəɾ eɪd sʌm, bʌɾ ivən wɪð ɛɛs sədaɪ hɛlp ðeɪ wɝ nɛvɝ ðə seɪm. ən ðeɪ nɛvɝ ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɛniθɪŋ ʌv wʌt hæɾ əkɝd. jɛɾ ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ðə dɑɹknəs hæd sʌŋkən ɪndə ðɛɹ boʊnz. ðeɪ nɛvɝ læft əɡɛn, ən ðeɪ fɪɹd ðə saʊn ə ðə wɪnd."

"The Ways were made by men wielding Power fouled by the Dark One. About a thousand years ago, during what you humans call the War of the Hundred Years, the Ways began to change. So slowly in the beginning that none really noticed, they grew dank and dim. Then darkness fell along the bridges. Some who went in were never seen again. Travelers spoke of being watched from the dark. The numbers who vanished grew, and some who came out had gone mad, raving about Machin Shin, the Black Wind. Aes Sedai Healers could aid some, but even with Aes Sedai help they were never the same. And they never remembered anything of what had occurred. Yet it was as if the darkness had sunken into their bones. They never laughed again, and they feared the sound of the wind."

fəɹ ə moʊmən ðəɹ wɑz saɪləns bʌt fəɹ ðə kæt pɝɪŋ bɪsaɪd mɔɪɹeɪnz tʃɛɹ, ən ðə snæp ən kɹækəl ə ðə faɪɝ, pɑpɪŋ aʊt spɑɹks. ðən nɪneɪiv bɝst aʊɾ æŋɡɹəli, "æn jə ɪkspɛkt əs tə fɑloʊ jə ɪndə ðæt? jə mʌs bi mæd!"

For a moment there was silence but for the cat purring beside Moiraine's chair, and the snap and crackle of the fire, popping out sparks. Then Nynaeve burst out angrily, "And you expect us to follow you into that? You must be mad!"

"wɪtʃ wəd jə tʃuz ɪnstɛd?" mɔɪɹeɪn æskt kwaɪətli. "ðə waɪtkloʊks wɪðɪn keɪɛmlɪn, əɹ ðə tʃɹɑləks wɪθaʊt? ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət maɪ pɹɛzəns ɪn ɪtsɛlf ɡɪvz səm pɹətɛkʃən fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌnz wɝks."

"Which would you choose instead?" Moiraine asked quietly. "The Whitecloaks within Caemlyn, or the Trollocs without? Remember that my presence in itself gives some protection from the Dark One's works."

nɪneɪiv sɛɾəld bæk wɪð ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd saɪ.

Nynaeve settled back with an exasperated sigh.

"ju stɪl əv nɑɾ ɪkspleɪn tə mi," lɔɪəl sɛd, "waɪ aɪ ʃəd bɹeɪk ði iɾɪkt ə ði ɛldɝz. ən aɪ hæv noʊ dɪzaɪɝ tə ɛntɝ ðə weɪz. mʌɾi əz ðeɪ ɔfən ɑɹ, ðə ɹoʊdz mɛn meɪk əv sɝv mi wɛl ɪnʌf sɪns aɪ lɛf stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ."

"You still have not explained to me," Loial said, "why I should break the edict of the Elders. And I have no desire to enter the Ways. Muddy as they often are, the roads men make have served me well enough since I left Stedding Shangtai."

"hjumənkaɪn ən oʊɡiɝ, ɛvɹiθɪŋ ðət laɪvz, wəɹ ət wɔɹ wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɝl dʌz nɑɾ ivən noʊ ɪt jɛt, ən moʊst ə ðə fju hu də faɪt skɝmɪʃɪz ən bɪliv ðeɪ ɑɹ bæɾəlz. waɪl ðə wɝld ɹəfjuzəz tə bɪliv, ðə dɑɹk wʌn meɪ bi ət ðə bɹɪŋk ə vɪktɝi. ðəɹ ɪz ɪnʌf paʊɝ ɪn ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl tə əndu hɪz pɹɪzən. ɪf ðə dɑɹk wʌn əz faʊn səm weɪ tə bɛn ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝl tə hɪz jus. . . ."

"Humankind and Ogier, everything that lives, we are at war with the Dark One," Moiraine said. "The greater part of the world does not even know it yet, and most of the few who do fight skirmishes and believe they are battles. While the world refuses to believe, the Dark One may be at the brink of victory. There is enough power in the Eye of the World to undo his prison. If the Dark One has found some way to bend the Eye of the World to his use. . . ."

ɹænd wɪʃt ðə læmps ɪn ðə ɹum wɝ lɪt. ivnɪŋ wɑz kɹipɪŋ oʊvɝ keɪɛmlɪn, ən ðə faɪɝ ɪn ðə faɪɝpleɪs dɪd nɑt ɡɪv ɪnʌf laɪt. hi wɑntəd noʊ ʃædoʊz ɪn ðə ɹum.

Rand wished the lamps in the room were lit. Evening was creeping over Caemlyn, and the fire in the fireplace did not give enough light. He wanted no shadows in the room.

"wʌt kən wi du?" mæt bɝst aʊt. "waɪ ɑɹ wi soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt? waɪ də wɪv tə ɡoʊ tə ðə blaɪt? ðə blaɪt!"

"What can we do?" Mat burst out. "Why are we so important? Why do we have to go to the Blight? The Blight!"

mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt ɹeɪz əɹ vɔɪs, bʌɾ ɪt fɪl ðə ɹum, kəmpɛlɪŋ. hɝ tʃɛɹ baɪ ðə faɪɝ sʌɾənli sim laɪk ə θɹoʊn. sʌɾənli ivən mɔɹɡeɪs wʊɾə peɪld ɪn əɹ pɹɛzəns. "wʌn θɪŋ wi kən du. wi kən tʃɹaɪ. wʌt simz laɪk tʃæns ɪz ɔfən ðə pæɾɝn. θɹi θɹɛdz əv kʌm təɡɛðɝ hɪɹ, itʃ ɡɪvɪŋ ə wɔɹnɪŋ: ði aɪ. ɪt kænɑt bi tʃæns; ɪts ðə pæɾɝn. jə θɹi dɪd nɑt tʃuz; jə wɝ tʃoʊzən baɪ ðə pæɾɝn. ən jə ɑɹ hɪɹ, wɛɹ ðə deɪnʒɝ ɪz noʊn. jə kən stɛp əsaɪd, ən pɝhæps dum ðə wɝld. ɹʌnɪŋ, haɪɾɪŋ, wɪl nɑt seɪv jə fɹəm ðə wivɪŋ ə ðə pæɾɝn. əɹ jə kən tʃɹaɪ. jə kən ɡoʊ tə ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld, θɹi tɑvɝən, θɹi sɛntɝpɔɪns ə ðə wɛb, pleɪst wɛɹ ðə deɪnʒɝ laɪz. lɛt ðə pæɾɝn bi woʊvən ɝaʊn jə ðɛɹ, ən jə meɪ seɪv ðə wɝl fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ. ðə tʃɔɪs ɪz jʊɹz. aɪ kænɑt meɪk jə ɡoʊ."

Moiraine did not raise her voice, but it filled the room, compelling. Her chair by the fire suddenly seemed like a throne. Suddenly even Morgase would have paled in her presence. "One thing we can do. We can try. What seems like chance is often the Pattern. Three threads have come together here, each giving a warning: the Eye. It cannot be chance; it is the Pattern. You three did not choose; you were chosen by the Pattern. And you are here, where the danger is known. You can step aside, and perhaps doom the world. Running, hiding, will not save you from the weaving of the Pattern. Or you can try. You can go to the Eye of the World, three ta'veren, three centerpoints of the Web, placed where the danger lies. Let the Pattern be woven around you there, and you may save the world from the Shadow. The choice is yours. I cannot make you go."

"aɪl ɡoʊ," ɹænd sɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə saʊn ɹɛzəlut. haʊɛvɝ hɑɹɾ i sɔt ðə vɔɪd, ɪmədʒəz kɛp flæʃɪŋ θɹu hɪz hɛd. tæm, ən ðə fɑɹmhaʊs, ən ðə flɑk ɪn ðə pæstʃɝ. ɪt hæd bɪn ə ɡʊd laɪf; hi hæd nɛvɝ ɹɪli wɑntəɾ ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ. ðəɹ wɑz kʌmfɝt - ə smɔl kʌmfɝt - hɪɹɪŋ pɛɹɪn ən mæt æd ðɛɹ əɡɹimən tə hɪz. ðeɪ saʊndəɾ əz dʒɹaɪ-maʊðd əz hi.

"I'll go," Rand said, trying to sound resolute. However hard he sought the void, images kept flashing through his head. Tam, and the farmhouse, and the flock in the pasture. It had been a good life; he had never really wanted anything more. There was comfort - a small comfort - hearing Perrin and Mat add their agreement to his. They sounded as dry-mouthed as he.

"aɪ səpoʊz ðəɹ ɪzən ɛni tʃɔɪs fəɹ ɛɡwin əɹ mi, iðɝ," nɪneɪiv sɛd.

"I suppose there isn't any choice for Egwene or me, either," Nynaeve said.

mɔɪɹeɪn nɑɾəd. "ju ɑɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn, tu, boʊθ ə ju, ɪn səm fæʃən. pɝhæps nɑt tɑvɝən - pɝhæps - bʌt stʃɹɔŋ ivən soʊ. aɪ hæv noʊn ɪt sɪns bɛɹlən. ən noʊ daʊt baɪ ðɪs taɪm ðə feɪdz noʊ ɪt, tu. ən bælzəmən. jɛt juv əz mʌtʃ tʃɔɪs əz ðə jʌŋ mɛn. jə kəd ɹɪmeɪn hɪɹ, pɹoʊsid tə tɑɹ vəlɑn wʌns ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs əv ɡɔn."

Moiraine nodded. "You are part of the Pattern, too, both of you, in some fashion. Perhaps not ta'veren - perhaps - but strong even so. I have known it since Baerlon. And no doubt by this time the Fades know it, too. And Ba'alzamon. Yet you have as much choice as the young men. You could remain here, proceed to Tar Valon once the rest of us have gone."

"steɪ bɪhaɪnd!" ɛɡwin ɪkskleɪmd. "lɛt ðə ɹɛst ə jə ɡoʊ ɔf ɪndə deɪnʒɝ waɪl wi haɪɾ ʌndɝ ðə kʌvɝz? aɪ woʊn də ɪt!" ʃi kɑt ði ɛɛs sədaɪz aɪ ən dʒɹu bæk ə lɪɾəl, bʌt nɑɾ ɔl ə hɝ dɪfaɪəns vænɪʃt. "aɪ woʊn də ɪt," ʃi mʌɾɝd stʌbɝnli.

"Stay behind!" Egwene exclaimed. "Let the rest of you go off into danger while we hide under the covers? I won't do it!" She caught the Aes Sedai's eye and drew back a little, but not all of her defiance vanished. "I won't do it," she muttered stubbornly.

"aɪ səpoʊz ðət minz boʊθ ʌv əs wɪl əkʌmpəni ju." nɪneɪiv saʊndəd ɹɪzaɪnd, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz flæʃt wən ʃi æɾəd, "ju stɪl nid maɪ ɝbz, ɛɛs sədaɪ, ənlɛs juv sʌɾənli ɡeɪn səm əbɪləɾi aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt." hɝ vɔɪs hɛld ə tʃælənʒ ɹænd dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn mɪɹli nɑɾəd ən tɝn tə ði oʊɡiɝ.

"I suppose that means both of us will accompany you." Nynaeve sounded resigned, but her eyes flashed when she added, "You still need my herbs, Aes Sedai, unless you've suddenly gained some ability I don't know about." Her voice held a challenge Rand did not understand, but Moiraine merely nodded and turned to the Ogier.

"wɛl, lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹən sʌn ə hɑlən?"

"Well, Loial, son of Arent son of Halan?"

lɔɪəl oʊpən ɪz maʊθ twaɪs, hɪz tʌftəɾ ɪɹz twɪtʃɪŋ, bɪfɔɹ i spoʊk. "jɛs, wɛl. ðə ɡɹin mæn. ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld. ðəɹ mɛnʃən ɪn ðə bʊks, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ɛni oʊɡiɝ əz æktʃəli  sin əm ɪn, oʊ, kwaɪɾ ə lɔŋ taɪm. aɪ səpoʊz. . . . bʌt mʌst ɪt bi ðə weɪzmɔɪɹeɪn nɑɾəd, ən ɪz lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz sæɡd tɪl ði ɛnz bɹʌʃt ɪz tʃiks. "vɛɹi wɛl, ðɛn. aɪ səpoʊz aɪ mʌst ɡaɪd ju. ɛldɝ heɪmən wəd seɪ ɪts noʊ lɛs ðən aɪ dɪzɝv fəɹ biɪŋ soʊ heɪsti ɔl ðə taɪm."

Loial opened his mouth twice, his tufted ears twitching, before he spoke. "Yes, well. The Green Man. The Eye of the World. They're mentioned in the books, of course, but I don't think any Ogier has actually seen them in, oh, quite a long time. I suppose. . . . But must it be the Ways?"Moiraine nodded, and his long eyebrows sagged till the ends brushed his cheeks. "Very well, then. I suppose I must guide you. Elder Haman would say it's no less than I deserve for being so hasty all the time."

"aʊɝ tʃɔɪsəz ɑɹ meɪd, ðɛn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ænd naʊ ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ meɪd, wi mʌs dɪsaɪd wʌt tə də əbaʊt ðɛm, ən haʊ."

"Our choices are made, then," Moiraine said. "And now that they are made, we must decide what to do about them, and how."

lɔŋ ɪndə ðə naɪt ðeɪ plænd. mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd moʊst ʌv ɪt, wɪð lɔɪəlz ædvaɪs kənsɝnɪŋ ðə weɪz, bʌt ʃi lɪsən tə kwɛstʃənz ən sədʒɛstʃənz fɹəm ɛvɹiwʌn. wʌns dɑɹk fɛl læn dʒɔɪn ðɛm, æɾɪŋ ɪz kɑmɛns ɪn ðəɾ aɪɝn-kɔɹd dʒɹɔl. nɪneɪiv meɪɾ ə lɪst ʌv wʌt səplaɪz ðeɪ niɾəd, dɪpɪŋ əɹ pɛn ɪn ði ɪŋkwɛl wɪð ə stɛɾi hæn dɪspaɪt ðə weɪ ʃi kɛp mʌɾɝɪŋ ʌndɝ əɹ bɹɛθ.

Long into the night they planned. Moiraine did most of it, with Loial's advice concerning the Ways, but she listened to questions and suggestions from everyone. Once dark fell Lan joined them, adding his comments in that iron-cored drawl. Nynaeve made a list of what supplies they needed, dipping her pen in the inkwell with a steady hand despite the way she kept muttering under her breath.

ɹænd wɪʃt i kəd bi əz mæɾɝ-ʌv-fækt əz ðə wɪzdəm. hi kəd nɑt stɑp peɪsɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn, əz ɪf i hæɾ ɛnɝdʒi tə bɝn əɹ bɝs fɹəm ɪt. hi nu hɪz dɪsɪʒən wɑz meɪd, nu ɪt wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn i kəd meɪk wɪð ðə nɑlədʒ i hæd, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt meɪk ɪm laɪk ɪt. ðə blaɪt. ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl wɑz sʌmwɛɹ ɪn ðə blaɪt, bɪɑn ðə blæstəd lænz.

Rand wished he could be as matter-of-fact as the Wisdom. He could not stop pacing up and down, as if he had energy to burn or burst from it. He knew his decision was made, knew it was the only one he could make with the knowledge he had, but that did not make him like it. The Blight. Shayol Ghul was somewhere in the Blight, beyond the Blasted Lands.

hi kəd si ðə seɪm wɝi ɪn mæts aɪz, ðə seɪm fɪɹ i nu wɑz ɪn ɪz oʊn. mæt sæt wɪð ɪz hænz klæspt, nʌkəlz waɪt. ɪf i lɛt ɡoʊ, ɹænd θɔt, hi wəd bi klʌtʃɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ɪnstɛd.

He could see the same worry in Mat's eyes, the same fear he knew was in his own. Mat sat with his hands clasped, knuckles white. If he let go, Rand thought, he would be clutching the dagger from Shadar Logoth instead.

ðəɹ wɑz noʊ wɝi ɑn pɛɹɪnz feɪs əɾ ɔl, bʌt wʌt wɑz ðəɹ wɑz wɝs: ə mæsk ʌv wɪɹi ɹɛzəɡneɪʃən. pɛɹɪn lʊkt əz ðoʊ hi hæd fɔt sʌmθɪŋ əntɪl i kəd faɪɾ ɪt noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ən wɑz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪt tə fɪnɪʃ hɪm. jɛt səmtaɪmz. . . .

There was no worry on Perrin's face at all, but what was there was worse: a mask of weary resignation. Perrin looked as though he had fought something until he could fight it no longer and was waiting for it to finish him. Yet sometimes. . . .

"wi də wʌt wi mʌst, ɹænd," hi sɛd. "ðə blaɪt. . . ." fəɹ ən ɪnstən ðoʊz jɛloʊ aɪz lɪt wɪð iɡɝnəs, flæʃɪŋ ɪn ðə fɪks taɪɹədnəs ə hɪz feɪs, əz ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ə laɪf ə ðɛɹ oʊn əpɑɹt fɹəm ðə bɪɡ blæksmɪθs əpɹɛntəs. "ðɛɹz ɡʊd hʌntɪŋ əlɔŋ ðə blaɪt," hi wɪspɝd. ðən i ʃʌɾɝəd, əz ɪf i hæd dʒʌs hɝd wʌɾ i hæd sɛd, ən wʌns mɔɹ ɪz feɪs wɑz ɹɪzaɪnd.

"We do what we must, Rand," he said. "The Blight. . . ." For an instant those yellow eyes lit with eagerness, flashing in the fixed tiredness of his face, as if they had a life of their own apart from the big blacksmith's apprentice. "There's good hunting along the Blight," he whispered. Then he shuddered, as if he had just heard what he had said, and once more his face was resigned.

ən ɛɡwin. ɹænd dʒɹu hɝ əpɑɹɾ ət wʌn pɔɪnt, oʊvɝ baɪ ðə faɪɝpleɪs wɛɹ ðoʊz plænɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl kəd nɑt hɪɹ. "ɛɡwin, aɪ. . . ."hɝ aɪz, laɪk bɪɡ dɑɹk pulz dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪm ɪn, meɪɾ ɪm stɑp ən swɑloʊ. "ɪts mi ðə dɑɹk wʌnz æftɝ, ɛɡwin. meɪn, ən mæt, ən pɛɹɪn. aɪ doʊn kɛɹ wʌt mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛz. ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ jə ən nɪneɪiv kəd stɑɹt fəɹ hoʊm, əɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn, əɹ ɛniwɛɹ jə wɑnə ɡoʊ, ən noʊbɑdi wɪl tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp ju. nɑt ðə tʃɹɑləks, nɑt ðə feɪdz, nɑɾ ɛnibəɾi. əz lɔŋ əz jə ɑɹənt wɪð ʌs. ɡoʊ hoʊm, ɛɡwin. əɹ ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn. bʌt ɡoʊ."

And Egwene. Rand drew her apart at one point, over by the fireplace where those planning around the table could not hear. "Egwene, I. . . ."Her eyes, like big dark pools drawing him in, made him stop and swallow. "It's me the Dark One's after, Egwene. Me, and Mat, and Perrin. I don't care what Moiraine Sedai says. In the morning you and Nynaeve could start for home, or Tar Valon, or anywhere you want to go, and nobody will try to stop you. Not the Trollocs, not the Fades, not anybody. As long as you aren't with us. Go home, Egwene. Or go to Tar Valon. But go."

hi weɪɾəd fəɹ əɹ tə tɛl ɪm ʃi hæɾ əz mʌtʃ ɹaɪt tə ɡoʊ wɛɹ ʃi wɑntəɾ əz i dɪd, ðəɾ i hæd noʊ ɹaɪt tə tɛl əɹ wʌt tə du. tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz, ʃi smaɪld ən tʌtʃt ɪz tʃik.

He waited for her to tell him she had as much right to go where she wanted as he did, that he had no right to tell her what to do. To his surprise, she smiled and touched his cheek.

"θæŋk ju, ɹænd," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. hi blɪŋkt, ən kloʊzd ɪz maʊθ əz ʃi wɛn ɑn. "ju noʊ aɪ kænt, ðoʊ. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ toʊld əs wʌt mɪn sɔ, ɪn bɛɹlən. jə ʃʊɾə toʊl mi hu mɪn wɑz. aɪ θɔt. . . . wɛl, mɪn sɛz aɪm pɑɹɾ ə ðɪs, tu. ən nɪneɪiv. meɪbi aɪm nɑt tɑvɝən," ʃi stʌmbəld oʊvɝ ðə wɝd, "bʌt ðə pæɾɝn sɛnz mi tə ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld, tu, ɪt simz. wʌtɛvɝ ɪnvɑlvz ju, ɪnvɑlvz mi."

"Thank you, Rand," she said softly. He blinked, and closed his mouth as she went on. "You know I can't, though. Moiraine Sedai told us what Min saw, in Baerlon. You should have told me who Min was. I thought. . . . Well, Min says I am part of this, too. And Nynaeve. Maybe I'm not ta'veren," she stumbled over the word, "but the Pattern sends me to the Eye of the World, too, it seems. Whatever involves you, involves me."

"bʌt, ɛɡwin - "

"But, Egwene - "

"hu ɪz ɪleɪn?"

"Who is Elayne?"

fəɹ ə mɪnəɾ i stɛɹɾ ət hɝ, ðən toʊl ðə sɪmpəl tʃɹuθ. "ʃiz ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tə ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ."

For a minute he stared at her, then told the simple truth. "She's the Daughter-Heir to the throne of Andor."

hɝ aɪz sim tə kætʃ faɪɝ. "ɪf jə kæn bi sɪɹiəs fəɹ mɔɹ ðən ə mɪnət, ɹænd ælθɹ, aɪ də nɑt wɑnə tɔk tə ju."

Her eyes seemed to catch fire. "If you can't be serious for more than a minute, Rand al'Thor, I do not want to talk to you."

ɪnkɹɛdʒələs, hi wɑtʃt əɹ stɪf bæk ɹɪtɝn tə ðə teɪbəl, wɛɹ ʃi lin ɑn əɹ ɛlboʊz nɛks tə mɔɪɹeɪn tə lɪsən tə wʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz seɪɪŋ. aɪ nid tə tɔk tə pɛɹɪn, hi θɔt. hi noʊz haʊ tə dil wɪð wɪmən.

Incredulous, he watched her stiff back return to the table, where she leaned on her elbows next to Moiraine to listen to what the Warder was saying. I need to talk to Perrin, he thought. He knows how to deal with women.

mæstɝ ɡɪl ɛntɝd sɛvɹəl taɪmz, fɝs tə laɪt ðə læmps, ðən tə bɹɪŋ fud wɪð ɪz oʊn hænz, ən leɪɾɝ tə ɹipɔɹɾ ɑn wʌt wɑz hæpənɪŋ aʊtsaɪd. waɪtkloʊks wɝ wɑtʃɪŋ ði ɪn fɹəm daʊn ðə stʃɹiɾ ɪn boʊθ dɝɛkʃənz. ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə ɹaɪəɾ ət ðə ɡeɪts tə ði ɪnɝ sɪɾi, wɪð ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz ɝɛstɪŋ waɪt kɑkeɪdz ən ɹɛɾ əlaɪk. sʌmwʌn hæd tʃɹaɪd tə skɹætʃ ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ ɑn ðə fɹʌn dɔɹ ən bɪn sɛn ɑn ɪz weɪ baɪ læmɡwɪnz but.

Master Gill entered several times, first to light the lamps, then to bring food with his own hands, and later to report on what was happening outside. Whitecloaks were watching the inn from down the street in both directions. There had been a riot at the gates to the Inner City, with the Queen's Guards arresting white cockades and red alike. Someone had tried to scratch the Dragon's Fang on the front door and been sent on his way by Lamgwin's boot.

ɪf ði ɪnkipɝ faʊn ɪɾ ɑd ðət lɔɪəl wɑz wɪð ðɛm, hi ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ʌv ɪt. hi ænsɝd ðə fju kwɛstʃənz mɔɪɹeɪn pʊt tə hɪm wɪθaʊt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dɪskʌvɝ wʌt ðeɪ wɝ plænɪŋ, ən itʃ taɪm i keɪm i nɑkt ət ðə dɔɹ ən weɪɾəd tɪl læn oʊpən ɪt fəɹ hɪm, dʒʌst əz ɪf ɪt wɝ nɑɾ ɪz ɪn ən ɪz laɪbɹɛɹi. ɑn ɪz læs vɪzət, mɔɪɹeɪn ɡeɪv ɪm ðə ʃiɾ ə pɑɹtʃmən kʌvɝɾ ɪn nɪneɪivz nit hænd.

If the innkeeper found it odd that Loial was with them, he gave no sign of it. He answered the few questions Moiraine put to him without trying to discover what they were planning, and each time he came he knocked at the door and waited till Lan opened it for him, just as if it were not his inn and his library. On his last visit, Moiraine gave him the sheet of parchment covered in Nynaeve's neat hand.

"ɪt woʊn bi izi ðɪs taɪm ə naɪt," hi sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ əz i pɝuz ðə lɪst, "bʌɾ əl ɝeɪnʒ ɪɾ ɔl."

"It won't be easy this time of night," he said, shaking his head as he perused the list, "but I'll arrange it all."

mɔɪɹeɪn æɾəd ə smɔl wɑʃ-lɛðɝ bæɡ ðət klɪŋkt əz ʃi hændəɾ ɪt tə hɪm baɪ ðə dʒɹɔstʃɹɪŋz. "ɡʊd. ən si ðət wəɹ wækən bɪfɔɹ deɪbɹeɪk. ðə wɑtʃɝz wɪl bi ət ðɛɹ list əlɝt, ðɛn."

Moiraine added a small wash-leather bag that clinked as she handed it to him by the drawstrings. "Good. And see that we are wakened before daybreak. The watchers will be at their least alert, then."

"wil liv əm wɑtʃɪŋ ən ɛmpti bɑks, ɛɛs sədaɪ." mæstɝ ɡɪl ɡɹɪnd.

"We'll leave them watching an empty box, Aes Sedai." Master Gill grinned.

ɹænd wɑz jɔnɪŋ baɪ ðə taɪm i ʃʌfəld aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum wɪð ðə ɹɛst ɪn sɝtʃ ə bæθs ən bɛdz. əz i skɹʌb hɪmsɛlf, wɪð ə kɔɹs klɔθ ɪn wʌn hæn ən ə bɪɡ jɛloʊ keɪk ə soʊp ɪn ði ʌðɝ, hɪz aɪz dʒɹɪftəd tə ðə stul bɪsaɪd mæts tʌb. ðə ɡoʊldən-ʃið tɪp ə ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ pik fɹəm ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ ə mæts nitli foʊldəd koʊt. læn ɡlænst əɾ ɪt fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm, tu. ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɪt wɑz ɹɪli əz seɪf tə hæv ɝaʊn əz mɔɪɹeɪn kleɪmd.

Rand was yawning by the time he shuffled out of the room with the rest in search of baths and beds. As he scrubbed himself, with a coarse cloth in one hand and a big yellow cake of soap in the other, his eyes drifted to the stool beside Mat's tub. The golden-sheathed tip of the dagger from Shadar Logoth peeked from under the edge of Mat's neatly folded coat. Lan glanced at it from time to time, too. Rand wondered if it was really as safe to have around as Moiraine claimed.

"du jə θɪŋk maɪ dɑl ɛvɝ bɪliv ɪt?" mæt læft, skɹʌbɪŋ ɪz bæk wɪð ə lɔŋ-hændəl bɹʌʃ. "mi, seɪvɪŋ ðə wɝld? maɪ sɪstɝz woʊnt noʊ wɛðɝ tə læf əɹ kɹaɪ."

"Do you think my da'll ever believe it?" Mat laughed, scrubbing his back with a long-handled brush. "Me, saving the world? My sisters won't know whether to laugh or cry."

hi saʊndəd laɪk ði oʊl mæt. ɹænd wɪʃt i kəd fɝɡɛt ðə dæɡɝ.

He sounded like the old Mat. Rand wished he could forget the dagger.

ɪt wɑz pɪtʃ-blæk wən i ən mæt faɪnəli ɡɑɾ ʌp tə ðɛɹ ɹum ʌndɝ ði ivz, ðə stɑɹz əbskjʊɹd baɪ klaʊdz. fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm ɪn ə lɔŋ waɪl mæt ənʒɹəst bɪfɔɹ ɡɛɾɪŋ ɪndə bɛd, bʌɾ i kæʒəwəli tʌk ðə dæɡɝ ʌndɝ ɪz pɪloʊ, tu. ɹænd blu aʊt ðə kændəl ən kɹɔld ɪndə hɪz oʊn bɛd. hi kəd fil ðə ɹɔŋɡnəs fɹəm ði ʌðɝ bɛd, nɑt fɹəm mæt, bʌt fɹəm bɪniθ ɪz pɪloʊ. hi wɑz stɪl wɝiɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt wən slip keɪm.

It was pitch-black when he and Mat finally got up to their room under the eaves, the stars obscured by clouds. For the first time in a long while Mat undressed before getting into bed, but he casually tucked the dagger under his pillow, too. Rand blew out the candle and crawled into his own bed. He could feel the wrongness from the other bed, not from Mat, but from beneath his pillow. He was still worrying about it when sleep came.

fɹəm ðə fɝst i nu ɪt wɑz ə dʒɹim, wʌn ə ðoʊz dʒɹimz ðət wɑz nɑɾ ɪntaɪɝli dʒɹim. hi stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wʊɾən dɔɹ, ɪts sɝfəs dɑɹk ən kɹækt ən ɹʌf wɪð splɪntɝz. ði ɛɹ wɑz koʊld ən dæŋk, θɪk wɪð ðə smɛl ə dəkeɪ. ɪn ðə dɪstəns wɔɾɝ dʒɹɪpt, ðə splæʃəz hɑloʊ ɛkoʊz daʊn stoʊn kɔɹɪɾɝz.

From the first he knew it was a dream, one of those dreams that was not entirely dream. He stood staring at the wooden door, its surface dark and cracked and rough with splinters. The air was cold and dank, thick with the smell of decay. In the distance water dripped, the splashes hollow echoes down stone corridors.

dɪnaɪ ɪt. dɪnaɪ hɪm, ən ɪz paʊɝ feɪlz.

Deny it. Deny him, and his power fails.

hi kloʊzd ɪz aɪz ən kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ, ɑn ɪz bɛd, ɑn hɪmsɛlf əslip ɪn ɪz bɛd. wən i oʊpən ɪz aɪz ðə dɔɹ wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ. ði ɛkoʊɪŋ splæʃəz keɪm ɑn ɪz hɑɹtbit, əz ɪf ɪz pʌls kaʊntəd taɪm fəɹ ðɛm. hi sɔt ðə fleɪm ən ðə vɔɪd, əz tæm hæd tɔt hɪm, ən faʊn ɪnɝ kɑm, bʌt nʌθɪŋ aʊtsaɪɾ ə hɪm tʃeɪnʒd. sloʊli hi oʊpən ðə dɔɹ ən wɛn ɪn.

He closed his eyes and concentrated on The Queen's Blessing, on his bed, on himself asleep in his bed. When he opened his eyes the door was still there. The echoing splashes came on his heartbeat, as if his pulse counted time for them. He sought the flame and the void, as Tam had taught him, and found inner calm, but nothing outside of him changed. Slowly he opened the door and went in.

ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹum ðət sim bɝn aʊɾ ə ðə lɪvɪŋ ɹɑk. tɔl, ɑɹtʃt wɪndoʊz lɛɾ ɑntu ən ənɹeɪl bælkəni, ən bɪɑn ɪt ðə leɪɝd klaʊdz stʃɹim laɪk ə ɹɪvɝ ɪn flʌd. ðə blæk mɛɾəl læmps, ðɛɹ fleɪmz tu bɹaɪt tə lʊk æt, ɡlimd, blæk jɛt sʌmhaʊ əz bɹaɪɾ əz sɪlvɝ. ðə faɪɝ ɹɔɹd bʌt ɡeɪv noʊ hiɾ ɪn ðə fɪɹsəm faɪɝpleɪs, itʃ stoʊn stɪl veɪɡli laɪk ə feɪs ɪn tɔɹmɛnt.

Everything was as he remembered it in the room that seemed burned out of the living rock. Tall, arched windows led onto an unrailed balcony, and beyond it the layered clouds streamed like a river in flood. The black metal lamps, their flames too bright to look at, gleamed, black yet somehow as bright as silver. The fire roared but gave no heat in the fearsome fireplace, each stone still vaguely like a face in torment.

ɔl wɑz ðə seɪm, bʌt wʌn θɪŋ wɑz dɪfɹənt. ɑn ðə pɑlɪʃt teɪbəltɑp stʊd θɹi smɔl fɪɡjɝz, ðə ɹʌf, fitʃɝləs ʃeɪps ə mɛn, əz ɪf ðə skʌlptɝ hæd bɪn heɪsti wɪð ɪz kleɪ. bɪsaɪd wʌn stʊɾ ə wʊlf, ɪts klɪɹ dɪteɪl ɛmfəsaɪz baɪ ðə kɹudnəs ə ðə mæn-ʃeɪp, ən ənʌðɝ klʌtʃt ə taɪni dæɡɝ, ə pɔɪn ə ɹɛɾ ɑn ðə hɪlt ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ ɪn ðə laɪt. ðə læs hɛld ə sɔɹd. ðə hɛɹ stɝɪŋ ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk, hi muv kloʊs ɪnʌf tə si ðə hɛɹən ɪn ɛkskwəzət dɪteɪl ɑn ðət smɔl bleɪd.

All was the same, but one thing was different. On the polished tabletop stood three small figures, the rough, featureless shapes of men, as if the sculptor had been hasty with his clay. Beside one stood a wolf, its clear detail emphasized by the crudeness of the man-shape, and another clutched a tiny dagger, a point of red on the hilt glittering in the light. The last held a sword. The hair stirring on the back of his neck, he moved close enough to see the heron in exquisite detail on that small blade.

hɪz hɛd dʒɝkt ʌp ɪn pænɪk, ən i stɛɹd dɝɛkli ɪndə ðə loʊn mɪɹɝ. hɪz ɹəflɛkʃən wɑz stɪl ə blɝ, bʌt nɑt soʊ mɪsti əz bɪfɔɹ. hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪk aʊɾ ɪz oʊn fitʃɝz. ɪf i ɪmædʒən i wɑz skwɪntɪŋ, hi kəd nɪɹli tɛl u ɪt wɑz.

His head jerked up in panic, and he stared directly into the lone mirror. His reflection was still a blur, but not so misty as before. He could almost make out his own features. If he imagined he was squinting, he could nearly tell who it was.

"juv hɪɾən fɹəm mi tu lɔŋ."

"You've hidden from me too long."

hi wɝl fɹəm ðə teɪbəl, bɹɛθ ɹæspɪŋ ɪz θɹoʊt. ə moʊmən bɪfɔɹ i hæd bɪn əloʊn, bʌt naʊ bælzəmən stʊd bɪfɔɹ ðə wɪndoʊz. wən i spoʊk kævɝnz ə fleɪm ɹipleɪst ɪz aɪz ən maʊθ.

He whirled from the table, breath rasping his throat. A moment before he had been alone, but now Ba'alzamon stood before the windows. When he spoke caverns of flame replaced his eyes and mouth.

"tu lɔŋ, bʌt nɑt mʌtʃ lɔŋɡɝ."

"Too long, but not much longer."

"aɪ dɪnaɪ ju," ɹænd sɛd hɔɹsli. "aɪ dɪnaɪ ðət jə hoʊld ɛni paʊɝ oʊvɝ mi. aɪ dɪnaɪ ðət jə ɑɹ."

"I deny you," Rand said hoarsely. "I deny that you hold any power over me. I deny that you are."

bælzəmən læft, ə ɹɪtʃ saʊn ɹoʊlɪŋ fɹəm faɪɝ. "du jə θɪŋk ɪts ðəɾ izi? bʌt ðɛn, jə ɔlweɪz dɪd. itʃ taɪm wɪv stʊd laɪk ðɪs, juv θɔt jə kəd dɪfaɪ mi."

Ba'alzamon laughed, a rich sound rolling from fire. "Do you think it is that easy? But then, you always did. Each time we have stood like this, you have thought you could defy me."

"wʌt də min, itʃ taɪm? aɪ dɪnaɪ ju!"

"What do mean, each time? I deny you!"

"ju ɔlweɪz du. ɪn ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ðɪs kɑntɛs bɪtwin əs əz teɪkən pleɪs kaʊnləs taɪmz bɪfɔɹ. itʃ taɪm jəɹ feɪs ɪz dɪfɹənt, ən jəɹ neɪm, bʌɾ itʃ taɪm ɪts ju."

"You always do. In the beginning. This contest between us has taken place countless times before. Each time your face is different, and your name, but each time it is you."

"aɪ dɪnaɪ ju." ɪt wɑz ə dɛspɹɪt wɪspɝ.

"I deny you." It was a desperate whisper.

"itʃ taɪm jə θɹoʊ jəɹ pjuni stʃɹɛŋkθ əɡɛns mi, ən itʃ taɪm, ɪn ði ɛnd, jə noʊ wɪtʃ ʌv əs ɪz ðə mæstɝ. eɪdʒ æftɝ eɪdʒ, jə nil tə mi, əɹ daɪ wɪʃɪŋ jə stɪl hæd stʃɹɛŋkθ tə nil. pʊɹ ful, jə kən nɛvɝ wɪn əɡɛns mi."

"Each time you throw your puny strength against me, and each time, in the end, you know which of us is the master. Age after Age, you kneel to me, or die wishing you still had strength to kneel. Poor fool, you can never win against me."

"laɪɝ!" hi ʃaʊɾəd. "fɑðɝ ə laɪz. fɑðɝ ə fulz ɪf jə kæn də bɛɾɝ ðən ðæt. mɛn faʊn jə ɪn ðə læst eɪdʒ, ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ən baʊn jə bæk wɛɹ jə bɪlɔŋ."

"Liar!" he shouted. "Father of Lies. Father of Fools if you can't do better than that. Men found you in the last Age, in the Age of Legends, and bound you back where you belong."

bælzəmən læft əɡɛn, pil æftɝ mɑkɪŋ pil, əntɪl ɹænd wɑntəd tə kʌvɝ ɪz ɪɹz tə ʃʌɾ ɪɾ aʊt. hi fɔɹst ɪz hænz tə steɪ əɾ ɪz saɪdz. vɔɪɾ əɹ noʊ, ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ wən ðə læftɝ faɪnəli stɑpt.

Ba'alzamon laughed again, peal after mocking peal, until Rand wanted to cover his ears to shut it out. He forced his hands to stay at his sides. Void or no, they were trembling when the laughter finally stopped.

"ju wɝm, jə noʊ nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl. əz ɪɡnɝən əz ə biɾəl ʌndɝ ə ɹɑk, ən əz izəli kɹʌʃt. ðɪs stʃɹʌɡəl əz ɡɔn ɑn sɪns ðə moʊmən ə kɹieɪʃən. ɔlweɪz mɛn θɪŋk ɪɾ ə nu wɔɹ, bʌɾ ɪts dʒʌs ðə seɪm wɔɹ dɪskʌvɝɾ ənu. oʊnli naʊ tʃeɪnʒ bloʊz ɑn ðə wɪnz ə taɪm. tʃeɪnʒ. ðɪs taɪm ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ dʒɹɪftɪŋ bæk. ðoʊz pɹaʊɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ hu θɪŋk tə stæn jə ʌp əɡɛns mi. əl dʒɹɛs əm ɪn tʃeɪnz ən sɛn əm ɹʌnɪŋ neɪkəd tə də maɪ bɪɾɪŋ, əɹ stʌf ðɛɹ soʊlz ɪndə ðə pɪɾ ə dum tə skɹim fəɹ ɪtɝnəɾi. ɔl bʌt ðoʊz u ɔlɹɛɾi sɝv mi. ðəl stæn bʌɾ ə stɛp bɪniθ mi. jə kən tʃuz tə stænd wɪð ðɛm, wɪð ðə wɝld ɡɹɔvəlɪŋ ət jəɹ fit. aɪ ɔfɝ ɪt wʌn mɔɹ taɪm, wʌn læs taɪm. jə kən stæn əbʌv ðɛm, əbʌv ɛvɹi paʊɝ ən dəmɪnjən bʌt maɪn. ðəɹ əv bɪn taɪmz wən jə meɪd ðət tʃɔɪs, taɪmz wən jə lɪv lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə noʊ jəɹ paʊɝ."

"You worm, you know nothing at all. As ignorant as a beetle under a rock, and as easily crushed. This struggle has gone on since the moment of creation. Always men think it a new war, but it is just the same war discovered anew. Only now change blows on the winds of time. Change. This time there will be no drifting back. Those proud Aes Sedai who think to stand you up against me. I will dress them in chains and send them running naked to do my bidding, or stuff their souls into the Pit of Doom to scream for eternity. All but those who already serve me. They will stand but a step beneath me. You can choose to stand with them, with the world groveling at your feet. I offer it one more time, one last time. You can stand above them, above every power and dominion but mine. There have been times when you made that choice, times when you lived long enough to know your power."

dɪnaɪ hɪm! ɹænd ɡɹæb hoʊl tə wʌɾ i kəd dɪnaɪ. "noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝv ju. ənʌðɝ laɪ!"

Deny him! Rand grabbed hold to what he could deny. "No Aes Sedai serve you. Another lie!"

"ɪz ðət wʌt ðeɪ toʊl ju? tu θaʊzən jɪɹz əɡoʊ aɪ tʊk maɪ tʃɹɑləks əkɹɔs ðə wɝld, ən ivən əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ aɪ faʊn ðoʊz u nu dɪspɛɹ, hu nu ðə wɝl kəd nɑt stæn bɪfɔɹ ʃeɪtɑn. fəɹ tu θaʊzən jɪɹz ðə blæk ədʒɑ hæz dwɛlt əmʌŋ ði ʌðɝz, ənsin ɪn ðə ʃædoʊz. pɝhæps ivən ðoʊz u kleɪm tə hɛlp ju."

"Is that what they told you? Two thousand years ago I took my Trollocs across the world, and even among Aes Sedai I found those who knew despair, who knew the world could not stand before Shai'tan. For two thousand years the Black Ajah has dwelt among the others, unseen in the shadows. Perhaps even those who claim to help you."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ʃeɪk əweɪ ðə daʊts ðət keɪm wɛlɪŋ ʌp ɪn hɪm, ɔl ðə daʊts i hæd hæɾ əbaʊt mɔɪɹeɪn, əbaʊt wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑntəd wɪð hɪm, əbaʊt wʌt ʃi plæn fəɹ hɪm. "wʌt dʒju wɑn fɹəm mi?" hi kɹaɪd. dɪnaɪ hɪm! laɪt hɛlp mi dɪnaɪ hɪm!

Rand shook his head, trying to shake away the doubts that came welling up in him, all the doubts he had had about Moiraine, about what the Aes Sedai wanted with him, about what she planned for him. "What do you want from me?" he cried. Deny him! Light help me deny him!

"nil!" bælzəmən pɔɪntəd tə ðə flɔɹ əɾ ɪz fit. "nil, ən æknɑlɪdʒ mi jəɹ mæstɝ! ɪn ði ɛnd, jə wɪl. jəl bi maɪ kɹitʃɝ, əɹ jəl daɪ."

"Kneel!" Ba'alzamon pointed to the floor at his feet. "Kneel, and acknowledge me your master! In the end, you will. You will be my creature, or you will die."

ðə læst wɝɾ ɛkoʊd θɹu ðə ɹum, ɹɪvɝbɝeɪɾɪŋ bæk ɑn ɪtsɛlf, dʌbəlɪŋ ən ɹidʌbəlɪŋ, tɪl ɹænd θɹu ʌp ɪz ɑɹmz əz ɪf tə ʃild ɪz hɛd fɹəm ə bloʊ. stæɡɝɪŋ bæk əntɪl i θʌmpt ɪndə ðə teɪbəl, hi ʃaʊɾəd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒɹaʊn ðə saʊn ɪn ɪz ɪɹz. "nuuuuuuuuuuu!"

The last word echoed through the room, reverberating back on itself, doubling and redoubling, till Rand threw up his arms as if to shield his head from a blow. Staggering back until he thumped into the table, he shouted, trying to drown the sound in his ears. "Noooooooooooo!"

əz i kɹaɪɾ aʊt, hi spʌn, swipɪŋ ðə fɪɡjɝz tə ðə flɔɹ. sʌmθɪŋ stæbd ɪz hænd, bʌɾ i ɪɡnɔɹɾ ɪt, stɑmpɪŋ ðə kleɪ tə ʃeɪpləs smɪɹz ʌndɝfʊt. bʌt wən ɪz ʃaʊt feɪld, ði ɛkoʊ wɑz stɪl ðɛɹ, ən ɡɹoʊɪŋ stʃɹɔŋɝ:

As he cried out, he spun, sweeping the figures to the floor. Something stabbed his hand, but he ignored it, stomping the clay to shapeless smears underfoot. But when his shout failed, the echo was still there, and growing stronger:

daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ-daɪ ðə saʊn pʊld ɑn ɪm laɪk ə wɝl pul, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪm ɪn, ɹɪpɪŋ ðə vɔɪɾ ɪn ɪz maɪn tə ʃɹɛdz. ðə laɪt dɪmd, ən ɪz vɪʒən nɛɹoʊd daʊn tə ə tʌnəl wɪð bælzəmən stændɪŋ tɔl ɪn ðə læst spɑɾ ə bɹaɪtnəs ət ði ɛnd, dwɪndəlɪŋ əntɪl ɪt wɑz ðə saɪz ə hɪz hænd, ə fɪŋɡɝneɪl, nʌθɪŋ. ɝaʊn ən ɝaʊn ði ɛkoʊ wɝl hɪm, daʊn ɪndə blæknəs ən dɛθ.

die-die-die-die-die-Die-Die-Die-Die-Die-DIE-DIE-DIE-DIE-DIE-DIE The sound pulled on him like a whirl pool, drawing him in, ripping the void in his mind to shreds. The light dimmed, and his vision narrowed down to a tunnel with Ba'alzamon standing tall in the last spot of brightness at the end, dwindling until it was the size of his hand, a fingernail, nothing. Around and around the echo whirled him, down into blackness and death.

ðə θʌmp əz i hɪt ðə flɔɹ woʊk hɪm, stɪl stʃɹʌɡəlɪŋ tə swɪm ʌp aʊɾ ə ðət dɑɹknəs. ðə ɹum wɑz dɑɹk, bʌt nɑt soʊ dɑɹk əz ðæt. fɹæntəkəli hi tʃɹaɪd tə sɛntɝ ɑn ðə fleɪm, tə ʃʌvəl fɪɹ ɪndə ɪt, bʌt ðə kɑm ə ðə vɔɪɾ ɪluɾɪd hɪm. tʃɹɛmɝz ɹæn daʊn ɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz, bʌɾ i hɛl ði ɪmədʒ ə ðə sɪŋɡəl fleɪm əntɪl ðə blʌd stɑpt paʊndɪŋ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz.

The thump as he hit the floor woke him, still struggling to swim up out of that darkness. The room was dark, but not so dark as that. Frantically he tried to center on the flame, to shovel fear into it, but the calm of the void eluded him. Tremors ran down his arms and legs, but he held the image of the single flame until the blood stopped pounding in his ears.

mæt wɑz tɔsɪŋ ən twɪstɪŋ ɑn ɪz bɛd, ɡɹoʊnɪŋ ɪn ɪz slip. ". . . dɪnaɪ ju, dɪnaɪ ju, dɪnaɪ ju. . . ." ɪt feɪɾəd ɔf ɪndə ʌnɪntɛlədʒəbəl moʊnz.

Mat was tossing and twisting on his bed, groaning in his sleep. ". . . deny you, deny you, deny you. . . ." It faded off into unintelligible moans.

ɹænd ɹitʃt aʊt tə ʃeɪk ɪm əweɪk, ən ət ðə fɝs tʌtʃ mæt sæɾ ʌp wɪð ə stʃɹæŋɡəld ɡɹʌnt. fəɹ ə mɪnət mæt stɛɹɾ ɝaʊnd waɪldli, ðən dʒɹu ə lɔŋ, ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ ən dʒɹɑpt ɪz hɛɾ ɪndə hɪz hænz. əbɹʌpli hi twɪstəɾ ɝaʊnd, dɪɡɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪz pɪloʊ, ðən sæŋk bæk klʌtʃɪŋ ðə ɹubi-hɪltɪd dæɡɝ ɪn boʊθ hænz ɑn ɪz tʃɛst. hi tɝn ɪz hɛd tə lʊk ət ɹænd, hɪz feɪs hɪɾən ɪn ʃædoʊ. "hiz bæk, ɹænd."

Rand reached out to shake him awake, and at the first touch Mat sat up with a strangled grunt. For a minute Mat stared around wildly, then drew a long, shuddering breath and dropped his head into his hands. Abruptly he twisted around, digging under his pillow, then sank back clutching the ruby-hilted dagger in both hands on his chest. He turned his head to look at Rand, his face hidden in shadow. "He's back, Rand."

"aɪ noʊ."

"I know."

mæt nɑɾəd. "ðɛɹ wɝ ðiz θɹi fɪɡjɝz. . . ."

Mat nodded. "There were these three figures. . . ."

"aɪ sɔ ðɛm, tu."

"I saw them, too."

"hi noʊz u aɪ æm, ɹænd. aɪ pɪkt ʌp ðə wʌn wɪð ðə dæɡɝ, ən i sɛd, 'soʊ ðæts u jə ɑɹ.' ən wən aɪ lʊkt əɡɛn, ðə fɪɡjɝ hæd maɪ feɪs. maɪ feɪs, ɹænd! ɪt lʊk laɪk flɛʃ. ɪt fɛlt laɪk flɛʃ. laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪ kəd fil maɪ oʊn hænd ɡɹɪpɪŋ mi, laɪk aɪ wɑz ðə fɪɡjɝ."

"He knows who I am, Rand. I picked up the one with the dagger, and he said, 'So that's who you are.' And when I looked again, the figure had my face. My face, Rand! It looked like flesh. It felt like flesh. Light help me, I could feel my own hand gripping me, like I was the figure."

ɹænd wɑz saɪlən fəɹ ə moʊmənt. "ju hæv tə kip dɪnaɪɪŋ hɪm, mæt."

Rand was silent for a moment. "You have to keep denying him, Mat."

"aɪ dɪd, ən i læft. hi kɛp tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt səm ɪtɝnəl wɔɹ, ən seɪɪŋ wid mɛt laɪk ðəɾ ə θaʊzən taɪmz bɪfɔɹ, ænd. . . . laɪt, ɹænd, ðə dɑɹk wʌn noʊz mi."

"I did, and he laughed. He kept talking about some eternal war, and saying we'd met like that a thousand times before, and. . . . Light, Rand, the Dark One knows me."

"hi sɛd ðə seɪm θɪŋ tə mi. aɪ doʊn θɪŋk i dʌz," hi æɾəd sloʊli. "aɪ doʊn θɪŋk i noʊz wɪtʃ ʌv ʌs. . . ." wɪtʃ ʌv əs wʌt?

"He said the same thing to me. I don't think he does," he added slowly. "I don't think he knows which of us. . . ." Which of us what?

əz i lɛvɝd hɪmsɛlf ʌp, peɪn stæbd ɪz hænd. meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ tə ðə teɪbəl, hi mænədʒ tə ɡɛt ðə kændəl lɪɾ æftɝ θɹi tʃɹaɪz, ðən spɹɛɾ ɪz hæn oʊpən ɪn ðə laɪt. dʒɹɪvən ɪndə hɪz pɑm wɑz ə θɪk splɪntɝ ə dɑɹk wʊd, smuð ən pɑlɪʃt ɑn wʌn saɪd. hi stɛɹɾ əɾ ɪt, nɑt bɹiðɪŋ. əbɹʌpli hi wɑz pæntɪŋ, plʌkɪŋ ət ðə splɪntɝ, fʌmbəlɪŋ wɪð heɪst.

As he levered himself up, pain stabbed his hand. Making his way to the table, he managed to get the candle lit after three tries, then spread his hand open in the light. Driven into his palm was a thick splinter of dark wood, smooth and polished on one side. He stared at it, not breathing. Abruptly he was panting, plucking at the splinter, fumbling with haste.

"wʌts ðə mæɾɝ?" mæt æskt.

"What's the matter?" Mat asked.

"nʌθɪŋ."

"Nothing."

faɪnəli hi hæɾ ɪt, ən ə ʃɑɹp jæŋk pʊld ɪt fɹi. wɪð ə ɡɹʌn ə dɪsɡʌst i dʒɹɑpt ɪt, bʌt ðə ɡɹʌn fɹoʊz ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt. əz sun əz ðə splɪntɝ lɛft ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, ɪt vænɪʃt.

Finally he had it, and a sharp yank pulled it free. With a grunt of disgust he dropped it, but the grunt froze in his throat. As soon as the splinter left his fingers, it vanished.

ðə waʊnd wɑz stɪl ðəɹ ɪn ɪz hænd, ðoʊ, bliɾɪŋ. ðəɹ wɑz wɔɾɝ ɪn ðə stoʊnwɛɹ pɪtʃɝ. hi fɪl ðə beɪsən, hɪz hænz ʃeɪkɪŋ soʊ ðəɾ i splæʃt wɔɾɝ ɑntu ðə teɪbəl. hɝidli hi wɑʃt ɪz hænz, niɾɪŋ ɪz pɑm tɪl ɪz θʌm bɹɔt mɔɹ blʌd, ðən wɑʃt əm əɡɛn. ðə θɔɾ ə ðə smɔləst slɪvɝ ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ ɪn ɪz flɛʃ tɛɹəfaɪd hɪm.

The wound was still there in his hand, though, bleeding. There was water in the stoneware pitcher. He filled the basin, his hands shaking so that he splashed water onto the table. Hurriedly he washed his hands, kneading his palm till his thumb brought more blood, then washed them again. The thought of the smallest sliver remaining in his flesh terrified him.

"laɪt," mæt sɛd, "hi meɪd mi fil dɝɾi, tu." bʌɾ i stɪl leɪ wɛɹ i wɑz, hoʊldɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ ɪn boʊθ hænz.

"Light," Mat said, "he made me feel dirty, too." But he still lay where he was, holding the dagger in both hands.

"jɛs," ɹænd sɛd. "dɝɾi." hi fʌmbəld ə taʊəl fɹəm ðə stæk bɪsaɪd ðə beɪsən. ðəɹ wɑz ə nɑk ət ðə dɔɹ, ən i dʒʌmpt. ɪt keɪm əɡɛn. "jɛs?" hi sɛd.

"Yes," Rand said. "Dirty." He fumbled a towel from the stack beside the basin. There was a knock at the door, and he jumped. It came again. "Yes?" he said.

mɔɪɹeɪn pʊɾ əɹ hɛɾ ɪndə ðə ɹum. "ju ɑɹ əweɪk ɔlɹɛɾi. ɡʊd. dʒɹɛs kwɪkli ən kʌm daʊn. wi mʌs bi əweɪ bɪfɔɹ fɝs laɪt."

Moiraine put her head into the room. "You are awake already. Good. Dress quickly and come down. We must be away before first light."

"naʊ?" mæt ɡɹoʊnd. "wi hævən hæɾ ən aʊɝz slip jɛt."

"Now?" Mat groaned. "We haven't had an hour's sleep yet."

"æn aʊɝ?" ʃi sɛd. "ju hæv hæd fɔɹ. naʊ hɝi, wi də nɑɾ əv mʌtʃ taɪm."

"An hour?" she said. "You have had four. Now hurry, we do not have much time."

ɹænd ʃɛɹɾ ə kənfjuz lʊk wɪð mæt. hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɛvɹi sɛkən ə ðə dʒɹim klɪɹli. ɪt hæd bɪɡʌn əz sun əz i kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, ən læstəɾ oʊnli mɪnəts.

Rand shared a confused look with Mat. He could remember every second of the dream clearly. It had begun as soon as he closed his eyes, and lasted only minutes.

sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðəɾ ɪkstʃeɪnʒ mʌst əv kəmjunəkeɪɾɪd ɪtsɛlf tə mɔɪɹeɪn. ʃi ɡeɪv əm ə pɛnətʃɹeɪɾɪŋ lʊk ən keɪm ɔl ðə weɪ ɪn. "wʌɾ əz hæpənd? ðə dʒɹimz?"

Something in that exchange must have communicated itself to Moiraine. She gave them a penetrating look and came all the way in. "What has happened? The dreams?"

"hi noʊz u aɪ æm," mæt sɛd. "ðə dɑɹk wʌn noʊz maɪ feɪs." ɹænd hɛld ʌp ɪz hænd wɝdləsli, pɑm təwɔɹd hɝ. ivən ɪn ðə ʃæɾoʊd laɪt fɹəm ðə wʌn kændəl ðə blʌd wɑz pleɪn.

"He knows who I am," Mat said. "The Dark One knows my face." Rand held up his hand wordlessly, palm toward her. Even in the shadowed light from the one candle the blood was plain.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ən ɡɹæspt ɪz əphɛl hænd, hɝ θʌm əkɹɔs ɪz pɑm kʌvɝɪŋ ðə waʊnd. koʊl pɪɹst ɪm tə ðə boʊn, soʊ tʃɪl ðəɾ ɪz fɪŋɡɝz kɹæmpt ən i hæd tə faɪt tə kip əm oʊpən. wən ʃi tʊk əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əweɪ, ðə tʃɪl wɛnt, tu.

The Aes Sedai stepped forward and grasped his upheld hand, her thumb across his palm covering the wound. Cold pierced him to the bone, so chill that his fingers cramped and he had to fight to keep them open. When she took her fingers away, the chill went, too.

hi tɝn ɪz hænd, ðɛn, stʌnd, skɹʌb ðə θɪn smɪɹ ə blʌɾ əweɪ. ðə waʊnd wɑz ɡɔn. sloʊli hi ɹeɪzd ɪz aɪz tə mit ðoʊz ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

He turned his hand, then, stunned, scrubbed the thin smear of blood away. The wound was gone. Slowly he raised his eyes to meet those of the Aes Sedai.

"hɝi," ʃi sɛd sɔfli. "taɪm ɡɹoʊz vɛɹi ʃɔɹt."

"Hurry," she said softly. "Time grows very short."

hi nu ʃi wɑz nɑt spikɪŋ ə ðə taɪm fəɹ ðɛɹ livɪŋ ɛnimɔɹ.

He knew she was not speaking of the time for their leaving anymore.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾifɔɹ


CHAPTER 44

ðə dɑɹk əlɔŋ ðə weɪz


The Dark Along the Ways

ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ dɔn ɹænd fɑloʊd mɔɪɹeɪn daʊn tə ðə bæk hɔl, wɛɹ mæstɝ ɡɪl ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ weɪɾɪŋ, nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin əz æŋkʃəsli əz lɔɪəl, pɛɹɪn ɔlmoʊst əz kɑm əz ðə wɔɹɾɝ. mæt steɪɾ ɑn ɹændz hilz əz ɪf i wɝ əfɹeɪd tə bi ivən ə lɪɾəl əloʊn naʊ, ivən əz mʌtʃ əz ə fju fiɾ əweɪ. ðə kʊk ən əɹ hɛlpɝz stʃɹeɪɾənd, stɛɹɪŋ əz ðə pɑɹɾi pæst saɪlənli ɪndə ðə kɪtʃən, ɔlɹɛɾi bɹaɪtli lɪɾ ən hɑt wɪð pɹɛpɝeɪʃənz fəɹ bɹɛkfəst. ɪt wɑz nɑt juʒəwəl fəɹ peɪtʃɹənz ə ði ɪn tə bi ʌp ən aʊɾ ət ðəɾ aʊɝ. ət mæstɝ ɡɪlz suðɪŋ wɝdz, ðə kʊk ɡeɪv ə laʊd snɪf ən slæpt əɹ doʊ daʊn hɑɹd. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl bæk tə tɛndɪŋ ɡɹɪɾəlz ən niɾɪŋ doʊ bɪfɔɹ ɹænd ɹitʃt ðə steɪbliɑɹd dɔɹ.

In the darkness just before dawn Rand followed Moiraine down to the back hall, where Master Gill and the others were waiting, Nynaeve and Egwene as anxiously as Loial, Perrin almost as calm as the Warder. Mat stayed on Rand's heels as if he were afraid to be even a little alone now, even as much as a few feet away. The cook and her helpers straightened, staring as the party passed silently into the kitchen, already brightly lit and hot with preparations for breakfast. It was not usual for patrons of the inn to be up and out at that hour. At Master Gill's soothing words, the cook gave a loud sniff and slapped her dough down hard. They were all back to tending griddles and kneading dough before Rand reached the stableyard door.

aʊtsaɪd, ðə naɪt wɑz stɪl pɪtʃ-blæk. tə ɹænd, ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɑz oʊnli ə dɑɹkɝ ʃædoʊ ət bɛst. hi fɑloʊd ði ɪnkipɝ ən læn blaɪnli, blaɪn ɪn tʃɹuθ, hoʊpɪŋ mæstɝ ɡɪlz nɑlədʒ ə hɪz oʊn steɪbliɑɹɾ ən ðə wɔɹɾɝz ɪnstɪŋks wəd ɡɛɾ əm əkɹɔs ɪt wɪθaʊt sʌmwʌn bɹeɪkɪŋ ə lɛɡ. lɔɪəl stʌmbəl mɔɹ ðən wʌns.

Outside, the night was still pitch-black. To Rand, everyone else was only a darker shadow at best. He followed the innkeeper and Lan blindly, blind in truth, hoping Master Gill's knowledge of his own stableyard and the Warder's instincts would get them across it without someone breaking a leg. Loial stumbled more than once.

"aɪ doʊn si waɪ wi kæn əv dʒʌst wʌn laɪt," ði oʊɡiɝ ɡɹʌmbəld. "wi doʊnt ɡoʊ ɹʌnɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk ɪn ðə stɛɾɪŋ. ɪm ən oʊɡiɝ, nɑɾ ə kæt." ɹænd hæɾ ə sʌɾən ɪmədʒ ə lɔɪəlz tʌftəɾ ɪɹz twɪtʃɪŋ ɪɹɪɾəbli.

"I don't see why we can't have just one light," the Ogier grumbled. "We don't go running about in the dark in the stedding. I'm an Ogier, not a cat." Rand had a sudden image of Loial's tufted ears twitching irritably.

ðə steɪbəl lumd ʌp sʌɾənli aʊɾ ə ðə naɪt, ə θɹɛɾənɪŋ mæs əntɪl ðə steɪbəl dɔɹ kɹikt oʊpən, spɪlɪŋ ə nɛɹoʊ stʃɹim ə laɪɾ ɪndə ðə jɑɹd. ði ɪnkipɝ oʊnli oʊpən ɪt waɪɾ ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə ɡoʊ ɪn wʌn əɾ ə taɪm, ən heɪstəli pʊld ɪt tə bɪhaɪn pɛɹɪn, ɔlmoʊs klɪpɪŋ ɪz hilz. ɹænd blɪŋkt ɪn ðə sʌɾən laɪɾ ɪnsaɪd.

The stable loomed up suddenly out of the night, a threatening mass until the stable door creaked open, spilling a narrow stream of light into the yard. The innkeeper only opened it wide enough for them to go in one at a time, and hastily pulled it to behind Perrin, almost clipping his heels. Rand blinked in the sudden light inside.

ðə steɪbəlmən wɝ nɑt sɝpɹaɪz baɪ ðɛɹ əpɪɹəns, əz ðə kʊk hæd bɪn. ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz wɝ sæɾəld ən weɪɾɪŋ. mændɑɹb stʊɾ ɛɹəɡənli, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ɛvɹiwʌn bʌt læn, bʌɾ ɑldib stʃɹɛtʃt əɹ noʊz aʊt tə nʌzəl mɔɪɹeɪnz hænd. ðəɹ wɑz ə pæk hɔɹs, bʌlki wɪð wɪkɝ pænɪɝz, ən ə hjudʒ ænəməl wɪð hɛɹi fɛtlɑks, tɔlɝ ivən ðən ðə wɔɹɾɝz stæljən, fəɹ lɔɪəl. ɪt lʊk bɪɡ ɪnʌf tə pʊl ə loʊɾəd heɪweɪn baɪ ɪtsɛlf, bʌt kəmpɛɹd wɪð ði oʊɡiɝ ɪt simd ə poʊni.

The stablemen were not surprised by their appearance, as the cook had been. Their horses were saddled and waiting. Mandarb stood arrogantly, ignoring everyone but Lan, but Aldieb stretched her nose out to nuzzle Moiraine's hand. There was a pack horse, bulky with wicker panniers, and a huge animal with hairy fetlocks, taller even than the Warder's stallion, for Loial. It looked big enough to pull a loaded haywain by itself, but compared with the Ogier it seemed a pony.

lɔɪəl aɪd ðə bɪɡ hɔɹs ən mʌɾɝd daʊtfəli, "maɪ oʊn fiɾ əv ɔlweɪz bɪn ɡʊɾ ɪnʌf."

Loial eyed the big horse and muttered doubtfully, "My own feet have always been good enough."

mæstɝ ɡɪl moʊʃən tə ɹænd. ði ɪnkipɝ wɑz lɛndɪŋ ɪm ə beɪ ɔlmoʊs ðə kʌlɝ ə hɪz oʊn hɛɹ, tɔl ən dip ə tʃɛst, bʌt wɪð nʌn ə ðə faɪɝ ɪn ɪz stɛp ðət klaʊd hæd hæd, ɹænd wɑz ɡlæd tə si. mæstɝ ɡɪl sɛɾ ɪz neɪm wɑz ɹɛd.

Master Gill motioned to Rand. The innkeeper was lending him a bay almost the color of his own hair, tall and deep of chest, but with none of the fire in his step that Cloud had had, Rand was glad to see. Master Gill said his name was Red.

ɛɡwin wɛn stʃɹeɪt tə bɛlə, ən nɪneɪiv tə hɝ lɔŋ-lɛɡəd mɛɹ.

Egwene went straight to Bela, and Nynaeve to her long-legged mare.

mæt bɹɔɾ ɪz dʌn-kʌlɝd hɔɹs oʊvɝ baɪ ɹænd. "pɛɹɪnz meɪkɪŋ mi nɝvəs," hi mʌɾɝd. ɹænd lʊkt əɾ ɪm ʃɑɹpli. "wɛl, hiz æktɪŋ stʃɹeɪnʒ. doʊn jə si ɪt, tu? aɪ swɛɹ ɪts nɑt maɪ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, əɹ . . . ɔɹ. . . ."

Mat brought his dun-colored horse over by Rand. "Perrin's making me nervous," he muttered. Rand looked at him sharply. "Well, he's acting strange. Don't you see it, too? I swear it's not my imagination, or . . . or. . . ."

ɹænd nɑɾəd. nɑt ðə dæɡɝ teɪkɪŋ hoʊld ə hɪm əɡɛn, θæŋk ðə laɪt. "hi ɪz, mæt, bʌt dʒʌs bi izi. mɔɪɹeɪn noʊz əbaʊt . . . wʌtɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz. pɛɹɪnz faɪn." hi wɪʃt i kəd bɪliv ɪt, bʌɾ ɪt sim tə sæɾəsfaɪ mæt, ə lɪɾəl ət list.

Rand nodded. Not the dagger taking hold of him again, thank the Light. "He is, Mat, but just be easy. Moiraine knows about . . . Whatever it is. Perrin's fine." He wished he could believe it, but it seemed to satisfy Mat, a little at least.

"ʌv kɔɹs," mæt sɛd heɪstəli, stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ pɛɹɪn aʊɾ ə ðə kɔɹnɝ ə hɪz aɪ. "aɪ nɛvɝ sɛɾ i wɑznt."

"Of course," Mat said hastily, still watching Perrin out of the corner of his eye. "I never said he wasn't."

mæstɝ ɡɪl kənfɝd wɪð ðə hɛd ɡɹum. ðət lɛðɝi-skɪn mæn, wɪð ə feɪs laɪk wʌn ə ðə hɔɹsəz, nʌkəld ɪz fɔɹhɛɾ ən hɝid tə ðə bæk ə ðə steɪbəl. ði ɪnkipɝ tɝn tə mɔɪɹeɪn wɪð ə sæɾəsfaɪd smaɪl ɑn ɪz ɹaʊn feɪs. "ɹæmi sɛz ðə weɪ ɪz klɪɹ, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Master Gill conferred with the head groom. That leathery-skinned man, with a face like one of the horses, knuckled his forehead and hurried to the back of the stable. The innkeeper turned to Moiraine with a satisfied smile on his round face. "Ramey says the way is clear, Aes Sedai."

ðə ɹɪɹ wɔl ə ðə steɪbəl əpɪɹd sɑləɾ ən staʊt, laɪnd wɪð hɛvi ɹæks ə tulz. ɹæmi ən ənʌðɝ steɪbəlmən klɪɹɾ əweɪ ðə heɪfɔɹks, ɹeɪks, ən ʃʌvəlz, ðən ɹitʃt bɪhaɪn ðə ɹæks tə mənɪpjəleɪt hɪɾən lætʃəz. əbɹʌpli ə sɛkʃən ə ðə wɔl swʌŋ ɪnwɝɾ ɑn hɪnʒɪz soʊ wɛl kənsil ðət ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ i kəd faɪn əm ivən wɪð ðə dɪsɡaɪz dɔɹ stændɪŋ oʊpən. laɪt fɹəm ðə steɪbəl ɪluməneɪɾəd ə bɹɪk wɔl oʊnli ə fju fiɾ əweɪ.

The rear wall of the stable appeared solid and stout, lined with heavy racks of tools. Ramey and another stableman cleared away the hayforks, rakes, and shovels, then reached behind the racks to manipulate hidden latches. Abruptly a section of the wall swung inward on hinges so well concealed that Rand was not sure he could find them even with the disguised door standing open. Light from the stable illuminated a brick wall only a few feet away.

"ɪts oʊnli ə nɛɹoʊ ɹʌn bɪtwin bɪldɪŋz," ði ɪnkipɝ sɛd, "bʌt noʊbɑdi aʊtsaɪd ðɪs steɪbəl noʊz ðɛɹz ə weɪ ɪndə ɪt fɹəm hɪɹ. waɪtkloʊks əɹ waɪt kɑkeɪdz, ðɛɹəl nɑt bi ɛni wɑtʃɝz tə si wɛɹ jə kʌm aʊt."

"It's only a narrow run between buildings," the innkeeper said, "but nobody outside this stable knows there's a way into it from here. Whitecloaks or white cockades, there'll not be any watchers to see where you come out."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nɑɾəd. "ɹɪmɛmbɝ, ɡʊɾ ɪnkipɝ, ɪf jə fɪɹ ɛni tʃɹʌbəl fɹəm ðɪs, ɹaɪt tə ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ, ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ, ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən ʃɪl hɛlp. aɪ fɪɹ maɪ sɪstɝz ən aɪ hæv ə ɡʊd dil tə pʊt ɹaɪɾ ɔlɹɛɾi fəɹ ðoʊz u hæv hɛlp mi."

The Aes Sedai nodded. "Remember, good innkeeper, if you fear any trouble from this, write to Sheriam Sedai, of the Blue Ajah, in Tar Valon, and she will help. I fear my sisters and I have a good deal to put right already for those who have helped me."

mæstɝ ɡɪl læft; nɑt ðə læf ʌv ə wɝid mæn. "waɪ, ɛɛs sədaɪ, juv ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɪvən mi ði oʊnli ɪn ɪn ɔl ə keɪɛmlɪn wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ɹæts. wʌt mɔɹ kəɾ aɪ æsk fɔɹ? aɪ kən dʌbəl maɪ kʌstəm ɑn ðəɾ əloʊn." hɪz ɡɹɪn feɪɾəd ɪndə sɪɹiəsnəs. "wʌtɛvɝ jəɹ ʌp tə, ðə kwin hoʊlz wɪð tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən aɪ hoʊld wɪð ðə kwin, soʊ ðəfɝst wɪʃ jə wɛl. ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin jə ɔl."

Master Gill laughed; not the laugh of a worried man. "Why, Aes Sedai, you've already given me the only inn in all of Caemlyn without any rats. What more could I ask for? I can double my custom on that alone." His grin faded into seriousness. "Whatever you're up to, the Queen holds with Tar Valon, and I hold with the Queen, so I wish you well. The Light illumine you, Aes Sedai. The Light illumine you all."

"ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ju, ɔlsoʊ, mæstɝ ɡɪl," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd wɪð ə baʊ ʌv əɹ hɛd. "bʌɾ ɪf ðə laɪɾ ɪz tə ʃaɪn ɑn ɛni ʌv ʌs, wi mʌs bi kwɪk." bɹɪskli ʃi tɝn tə lɔɪəl. "ɑɹ jə ɹɛɾi?"

"The Light illumine you, also, Master Gill," Moiraine replied with a bow of her head. "But if the Light is to shine on any of us, we must be quick." Briskly she turned to Loial. "Are you ready?"

wɪð ə wɛɹi lʊk əɾ ɪts tiθ, ði oʊɡiɝ tʊk ðə ɹeɪnz ə ðə bɪɡ hɔɹs. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip ðət maʊð ðə lɛŋθ ə ðə ɹeɪnz fɹəm ɪz hænd, hi lɛd ði ænəməl tə ði oʊpənɪŋ ət ðə bæk ə ðə steɪbəl. ɹæmi hɑp fɹəm wʌn fʊt tə ði ʌðɝ, ɪmpeɪʃən tə kloʊz ɪɾ əɡɛn. fəɹ ə moʊmən lɔɪəl pɔzd wɪð ɪz hɛd kɑkt əz ɪf filɪŋ ə bɹiz ɑn ɪz tʃik. "ðɪs weɪ," hi sɛd, ən tɝn daʊn ðə nɛɹoʊ æli.

With a wary look at its teeth, the Ogier took the reins of the big horse. Trying to keep that mouth the length of the reins from his hand, he led the animal to the opening at the back of the stable. Ramey hopped from one foot to the other, impatient to close it again. For a moment Loial paused with his head cocked as if feeling a breeze on his cheek. "This way," he said, and turned down the narrow alley.

mɔɪɹeɪn fɑloʊd ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn lɔɪəlz hɔɹs, ðən ɹænd, ən mæt. ɹænd hæd ðə fɝs tɝn liɾɪŋ ðə pæk hɔɹs. nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin meɪd ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə kɑləm, wɪð pɛɹɪn bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən læn bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ. ðə hɪɾən dɔɹ swʌŋ heɪstəli ʃʌɾ əz sun əz mændɑɹb stɛpt ɪndə ðə dɝɾ æliweɪ. ðə snɪk-snɪk ə lætʃəz lɑkɪŋ, ʃʌɾɪŋ əm ɔf, saʊndəɾ ənnətʃɝəli laʊd tə ɹænd.

Moiraine followed right behind Loial's horse, then Rand, and Mat. Rand had the first turn leading the pack horse. Nynaeve and Egwene made the middle of the column, with Perrin behind them, and Lan bringing up the rear. The hidden door swung hastily shut as soon as Mandarb stepped into the dirt alleyway. The snick-snick of latches locking, shutting them off, sounded unnaturally loud to Rand.

ðə ɹʌn, əz mæstɝ ɡɪl hæd kɔld ɪt, wɑz vɛɹi nɛɹoʊ ɪndid, ən ivən dɑɹkɝ ðən ðə steɪbliɑɹd, ɪf ðət wɑz pɑsəbəl. tɔl, blæŋk wɔlz ə bɹɪk əɹ wʊd laɪn boʊθ saɪdz, wɪð oʊnli ə nɛɹoʊ stʃɹɪp ə blæk skaɪ oʊvɝhɛd. ðə bɪɡ, woʊvən bæskəts slʌŋ ɑn ðə pæk hɔɹs skɹeɪp ðə bɪldɪŋz ɑn boʊθ saɪdz. ðə pænɪɝz bʌlʒd wɪð səplaɪz fəɹ ðə dʒɝni, moʊst ʌv ɪt kleɪ dʒɑɹz fɪld wɪð ɔɪl. ə bʌndəl ə poʊlz wɑz læʃt lɛŋθwaɪz daʊn ðə hɔɹsəz bæk, ən itʃ hæɾ ə læntɝn swɪŋɪŋ ət ði ɛn ʌv ɪt. ɪn ðə weɪz, lɔɪəl sɛd, ɪt wɑz dɑɹkɝ ðən ðə dɑɹkəs naɪt.

The run, as Master Gill had called it, was very narrow indeed, and even darker than the stableyard, if that was possible. Tall, blank walls of brick or wood lined both sides, with only a narrow strip of black sky overhead. The big, woven baskets slung on the pack horse scraped the buildings on both sides. The panniers bulged with supplies for the journey, most of it clay jars filled with oil. A bundle of poles was lashed lengthwise down the horse's back, and each had a lantern swinging at the end of it. In the Ways, Loial said, it was darker than the darkest night.

ðə pɑɹʃəli-fɪld læntɝnz slɑʃt wɪð ðə moʊʃən ə ðə hɔɹs, ən klɪŋkt əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ wɪð ə tɪni saʊnd. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə vɛɹi laʊd nɔɪz, bʌɾ ɪn ði aʊɝ bɪfɔɹ dɔn keɪɛmlɪn wɑz kwaɪət. saɪlənt. ðə dʌl mətælɪk klɪŋks saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ kəd bi hɝɾ ə maɪl əweɪ.

The partially-filled lanterns sloshed with the motion of the horse, and clinked against each other with a tinny sound. It was not a very loud noise, but in the hour before dawn Caemlyn was quiet. Silent. The dull metallic clinks sounded as if they could be heard a mile away.

wən ðə ɹʌn lɛɾ aʊɾ ɪndə ə stʃɹit, lɔɪəl tʃoʊz ɪz dɝɛkʃən wɪθaʊɾ ə pɔz. hi sim tə noʊ ɪɡzækli wɛɹ i wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ, naʊ, əz ɪf ðə ɹuɾ i niɾəd tə fɑloʊ wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ klɪɹɝ. ɹænd dɪd nɑɾ ʌndɝstæn haʊ ði oʊɡiɝ kəd faɪn ðə weɪɡeɪt, ən lɔɪəl hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə ɪkspleɪn vɛɹi wɛl. hi dʒʌs nu, hi sɛd; hi kəd fil ɪt. lɔɪəl kleɪmd ɪt wɑz laɪk tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɪkspleɪn haʊ tə bɹið.

When the run let out into a street, Loial chose his direction without a pause. He seemed to know exactly where he was going, now, as if the route he needed to follow was becoming clearer. Rand did not understand how the Ogier could find the Waygate, and Loial had not been able to explain very well. He just knew, he said; he could feel it. Loial claimed it was like trying to explain how to breathe.

əz ðeɪ hɝiɾ ʌp ðə stʃɹit ɹænd lʊk bæk təwɔɹd ðə kɔɹnɝ wɛɹ ðə kwinz blɛsɪŋ leɪ. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə læmɡwɪn, ðəɹ wɝ stɪl hæf ə dʌzən waɪtkloʊks nɑt fɑɹ daʊn fɹəm ðət kɔɹnɝ. ðɛɹ ɪntʃɹəst wɑz ɔl ɑn ði ɪn, bʌɾ ə nɔɪz wəd ʃʊɹli bɹɪŋ ðɛm. noʊ wʌn wɑz aʊɾ ət ðɪs aʊɝ fəɹ ə ɹɛpjəɾəbəl ɹizən. ðə hɔɹs ʃuz sim tə ɹɪŋ ɑn ðə peɪvɪŋ stoʊnz laɪk bɛlz; ðə læntɝnz klæɾɝd əz ɪf ðə pæk hɔɹs wɝ ʃeɪkɪŋ əm dɪlɪbɝətli. nɑɾ əntɪl ðeɪ hæd ɹaʊndəɾ ənʌðɝ kɔɹnɝ dɪɾ i stɑp lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. hi hɝd ɹɪliv saɪz fɹəm ði ʌðɝ ɛmənz fildɝz əz ðeɪ keɪm ɹaʊn ɪt, tu.

As they hurried up the street Rand looked back toward the corner where The Queen's Blessing lay. According to Lamgwin, there were still half a dozen Whitecloaks not far down from that corner. Their interest was all on the inn, but a noise would surely bring them. No one was out at this hour for a reputable reason. The horse shoes seemed to ring on the paving stones like bells; the lanterns clattered as if the pack horse were shaking them deliberately. Not until they had rounded another corner did he stop looking over his shoulder. He heard relieved sighs from the other Emond's Fielders as they came round it, too.

lɔɪəl əpɪɹd tə bi fɑloʊɪŋ ðə moʊs dɝɛk pæθ tə ðə weɪɡeɪt, wɛɹɛvɝ ɪt tʊk ðɛm. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ tʃɹɑɾəd daʊn bɹɔɾ ævənuz, ɛmpti seɪv fəɹ ən əkeɪʒənəl dɔɡ skʌlkɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹk. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ hɝiɾ əlɔŋ æliz əz nɛɹoʊ əz ðə steɪbəl ɹʌn, wɛɹ θɪŋz skwɪʃt ʌndɝ ən ənwɛɹi stɛp. nɪneɪiv kəmpleɪn sɔfli əbaʊt ðə ɹɪzʌltɪŋ smɛlz, bʌt noʊ wʌn sloʊd daʊn.

Loial appeared to be following the most direct path to the Waygate, wherever it took them. Sometimes they trotted down broad avenues, empty save for an occasional dog skulking in the dark. Sometimes they hurried along alleys as narrow as the stable run, where things squished under an unwary step. Nynaeve complained softly about the resulting smells, but no one slowed down.

ðə dɑɹknəs bɪɡæn tə lɛsən, feɪɾɪŋ təwɔɹɾ ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ. feɪnt ɡlɪmɝz ə dɔn pɝl ðə skaɪ əbʌv ði istɝn ɹuftɑps. ə fju pipəl əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə stʃɹits, bʌndəld ʌp əɡɛns ði ɝli koʊld, hɛdz daʊn waɪl ðeɪ jɛt dʒɹimd ə ðɛɹ bɛdz. moʊs peɪd noʊ maɪn tə ɛniwʌn ɛls. oʊnli ə hændfʊl ivən ɡlænst ət ðə laɪn ə pipəl ən hɔɹsəz wɪð lɔɪəl əɾ ɪts hɛd, ən oʊnli wʌn ə ðoʊz tʃɹuli sɔ ðɛm.

The darkness began to lessen, fading toward a dark gray. Faint glimmers of dawn pearled the sky above the eastern rooftops. A few people appeared on the streets, bundled up against the early cold, heads down while they yet dreamed of their beds. Most paid no mind to anyone else. Only a handful even glanced at the line of people and horses with Loial at its head, and only one of those truly saw them.

ðət wʌn mæn flɪkt ɪz aɪz ət ðɛm, dʒʌs laɪk ði ʌðɝz, ɔlɹɛɾi sɪŋkɪŋ bæk ɪndə hɪz oʊn θɔts wən sʌɾənli hi stʌmbəld ən ɔlmoʊs fɛl, tɝnɪŋ hɪmsɛlf bæk ɝaʊn tə stɛɹ. ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli laɪɾ ɪnʌf tə si ʃeɪps, bʌt ðət wɑz tu mʌtʃ. sin əɾ ə dɪstəns baɪ hɪmsɛlf, ði oʊɡiɝ cʊɾə pæs fəɹ ə tɔl mæn liɾɪŋ ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi hɔɹs, əɹ fəɹ ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi mæn liɾɪŋ ən ʌndɝ-saɪz hɔɹs. wɪð ði ʌðɝz ɪn ə laɪn bɪhaɪn ɪm tə ɡɪv pɝspɛktɪv, lɔɪəl lʊkt ɪɡzækli əz bɪɡ əz i wɑz, hæf əɡɛn əz tɔl əz ɛni mæn ʃəd bi. ðə mæn tʊk wʌn lʊk ænd, wɪð ə stʃɹæŋɡəl kɹaɪ, sɛɾ ɔf ɹʌnɪŋ, hɪz kloʊk flæpɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm.

That one man flicked his eyes at them, just like the others, already sinking back into his own thoughts when suddenly he stumbled and almost fell, turning himself back around to stare. There was only light enough to see shapes, but that was too much. Seen at a distance by himself, the Ogier could have passed for a tall man leading an ordinary horse, or for an ordinary man leading an under-sized horse. With the others in a line behind him to give perspective, Loial looked exactly as big as he was, half again as tall as any man should be. The man took one look and, with a strangled cry, set off running, his cloak flapping behind him.

ðəɹ wəd bi mɔɹ pipəl ɪn ðə stʃɹits sun - vɛɹi sun. ɹænd aɪɾ ə wʊmən hɝiɪŋ pæst ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə stʃɹit, siɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌt ðə peɪvmən ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ fit. mɔɹ pipəl tə noʊɾəs sun. ði istɝn skaɪ ɡɹu laɪɾɝ.

There would be more people in the streets soon - very soon. Rand eyed a woman hurrying past on the other side of the street, seeing nothing but the pavement in front of her feet. More people to notice soon. The eastern sky grew lighter.

"ðɛɹ," lɔɪəl ənaʊnst ət læst. "ɪɾ ɪz ʌndɝ ðɛɹ." ɪt wɑz ə ʃɑp i pɔɪntəd tə, stɪl kloʊz fəɹ ðə naɪt. ðə teɪbəlz aʊt fɹʌnt wɝ bɛɹ, ði ɔnɪŋz oʊvɝ əm ɹoʊld ʌp taɪt, ðə dɔɹ staʊtli ʃʌɾɝd. ðə wɪndoʊz əbʌv, wɛɹ ðə ʃɑpkipɝ lɪvd, wɝ stɪl dɑɹk.

"There," Loial announced at last. "It is under there." It was a shop he pointed to, still closed for the night. The tables out front were bare, the awnings over them rolled up tight, the door stoutly shuttered. The windows above, where the shopkeeper lived, were still dark.

"ʌndɝ?" mæt ɪkskleɪmd ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. "haʊ ɪn ðə laɪt kən wi - ?"

"Under?" Mat exclaimed incredulously. "How in the Light can we - ?"

mɔɪɹeɪn ɹeɪzd ə hæn ðət kʌɾ ɪm ɔf, ən moʊʃən fəɹ əm tə fɑloʊ hɝ ɪndə ði æli bɪsaɪd ðə ʃɑp. hɔɹsəz ən pipəl təɡɛðɝ, ðeɪ kɹaʊɾəd ði oʊpənɪŋ bɪtwin ðə tu bɪldɪŋz. ʃeɪɾɪd baɪ ðə wɔlz, ɪt wɑz dɑɹkɝ ðəɹ ðən ɑn ðə stʃɹit, nɪɹ tə fʊl naɪɾ əɡɛn.

Moiraine raised a hand that cut him off, and motioned for them to follow her into the alley beside the shop. Horses and people together, they crowded the opening between the two buildings. Shaded by the walls, it was darker there than on the street, near to full night again.

"ðɛɹ mʌs bi ə sɛlɝ dɔɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn mʌɾɝd. "ɑ, jɛs."

"There must be a cellar door," Moiraine muttered. "Ah, yes."

əbɹʌpli laɪt blɑsəmd. ə kuli ɡloʊɪŋ bɔl ðə saɪz ʌv ə mænz fɪs hʌŋ səspɛndəɾ oʊvɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz pɑm, muvɪŋ əz ʃi muvd əɹ hænd. ɹænd θɔt ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə mɛʒɝ ʌv wʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn θɹu ðəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn sim tə teɪk ɪɾ əz ə mæɾɝ ə kɔɹs. ʃi pʊɾ ɪt kloʊs tə ðə dɔɹz ʃi hæd faʊnd, slæntəɾ ɔlmoʊs flæt tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, wɪð ə hæsp hɛl baɪ θɪk boʊls ən ən aɪɝn lɑk bɪɡɝ ðən ɹændz hæn ən θɪk wɪð oʊld ɹʌst.

Abruptly light blossomed. A coolly glowing ball the size of a man's fist hung suspended over the Aes Sedai's palm, moving as she moved her hand. Rand thought that it was a measure of what they had been through that everyone seemed to take it as a matter of course. She put it close to the doors she had found, slanted almost flat to the ground, with a hasp held by thick bolts and an iron lock bigger than Rand's hand and thick with old rust.

lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ðə lɑk ə tʌɡ. "aɪ kən pʊl ɪɾ ɔf, hæsp ən ɔl, bʌɾ ɪɾəl meɪk ɪnʌf nɔɪz tə weɪk ðə hoʊl neɪbɝhʊd."

Loial gave the lock a tug. "I can pull it off, hasp and all, but it will make enough noise to wake the whole neighborhood."

"lɛɾ əs nɑt dæmədʒ ðə ɡʊdmənz pɹɑpɝɾi ɪf wi kən əvɔɪɾ ɪt." mɔɪɹeɪn stʌɾid ðə lɑk ɪntɛnli fəɹ ə moʊmənt. sʌɾənli ʃi ɡeɪv ðə ɹʌsti aɪɝn ə tæp wɪð əɹ stæf, ən ðə lɑk fɛl oʊpən nitli.

"Let us not damage the goodman's property if we can avoid it." Moiraine studied the lock intently for a moment. Suddenly she gave the rusty iron a tap with her staff, and the lock fell open neatly.

heɪstəli lɔɪəl əndɪd ðə lɑk ən swʌŋ ðə dɔɹz ʌp, pɹɑpɪŋ əm bæk. mɔɪɹeɪn wɛn daʊn ðə ɹæmp ðʌs ɹɪvild, laɪɾɪŋ əɹ weɪ wɪð ðə ɡloʊɪŋ bɔl. ɑldib stɛp dɛləkətli bɪhaɪn hɝ.

Hastily Loial undid the lock and swung the doors up, propping them back. Moiraine went down the ramp thus revealed, lighting her way with the glowing ball. Aldieb stepped delicately behind her.

"laɪt ðə læntɝnz ən kʌm daʊn," ʃi kɔl sɔfli. "ðɛɹ ɪz plɛnti ʌv ɹum. hɝi. ɪɾəl bi laɪɾ aʊt sun."

"Light the lanterns and come down," she called softly. "There is plenty of room. Hurry. It will be light out soon."

ɹænd hɝidli əntaɪd ðə poʊld læntɝnz ɔf ðə pæk hɔɹs, bʌɾ ivən bɪfɔɹ ðə fɝst wɑz lɪɾ i ɹilaɪzd i kəd si mæts fitʃɝz. pipəl wəd bi fɪlɪŋ ðə stʃɹits ɪn mɪnəts, ən ðə ʃɑpkipɝ wəd bi kʌmɪŋ daʊn tə oʊpən ʌp fəɹ bɪznəs, ɔl wʌndɝɪŋ waɪ ði æliweɪ wɑz kɹæm fʊl ə hɔɹsəz. mæt mʌɾɝd sʌmθɪŋ nɝvəsli əbaʊt teɪkɪŋ hɔɹsəz ɪndɔɹz, bʌt ɹænd wɑz ɡlæd tə liɾ ɪz daʊn ðə ɹæmp. mæt fɑloʊd, ɡɹʌmbəlɪŋ bʌt noʊ lɛs kwɪkli.

Rand hurriedly untied the poled lanterns off the pack horse, but even before the first was lit he realized he could see Mat's features. People would be filling the streets in minutes, and the shopkeeper would be coming down to open up for business, all wondering why the alleyway was crammed full of horses. Mat muttered something nervously about taking horses indoors, but Rand was glad to lead his down the ramp. Mat followed, grumbling but no less quickly.

ɹændz læntɝn swʌŋ ɑn ði ɛn ʌv ɪts poʊl, bʌmpɪŋ ðə silɪŋ ɪf i wɑz nɑt kɛɹfəl, ən niðɝ ɹɛd nɔɹ ðə pæk hɔɹs laɪk ðə ɹæmp. ðən i wɑz daʊn ən ɡɛɾɪŋ aʊɾ ə mæts weɪ. mɔɪɹeɪn lɛɾ əɹ floʊɾɪŋ laɪt daɪ, bʌɾ əz ðə ɹɛs dʒɔɪn ðɛm, ði æɾəd læntɝnz lɪt ði oʊpən speɪs.

Rand's lantern swung on the end of its pole, bumping the ceiling if he was not careful, and neither Red nor the pack horse liked the ramp. Then he was down and getting out of Mat's way. Moiraine let her floating light die, but as the rest joined them, the added lanterns lit the open space.

ðə sɛlɝ wɑz əz lɔŋ ən əz waɪɾ əz ðə bɪldɪŋ əbʌv, mʌtʃ ə ðə speɪs teɪkən ʌp baɪ bɹɪk kɑləmz, flɛɹɪŋ ʌp fɹəm nɛɹoʊ beɪsəz tə faɪv taɪmz əz bɪɡ ət ðə silɪŋ. ðə pleɪs simd meɪɾ ʌp fɹəm ə sɪɹiz ʌv ɑɹtʃəz. ðəɹ wɑz plɛnti ʌv ɹum, bʌt ɹænd stɪl fɛl kɹaʊɾəd. lɔɪəlz hɛd bɹʌʃt ðə silɪŋ. əz ðə ɹʌstəd lɑk hæd fɔɹtoʊld, ðə sɛlɝ hæd nɑt bɪn juzd ɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm. ðə flɔɹ wɑz bɛɹ ɪksɛp fəɹ ə fju bɹoʊkən bæɹəlz fɪld wɪð ɑdz ən ɛnz, ən ə θɪk leɪɝ ə dʌst. moʊts, stɝɾ ʌp baɪ soʊ mɛni fit, spɑɹkəld ɪn ðə læntɝn laɪt.

The cellar was as long and as wide as the building above, much of the space taken up by brick columns, flaring up from narrow bases to five times as big at the ceiling. The place seemed made up from a series of arches. There was plenty of room, but Rand still felt crowded. Loial's head brushed the ceiling. As the rusted lock had foretold, the cellar had not been used in a long time. The floor was bare except for a few broken barrels filled with odds and ends, and a thick layer of dust. Motes, stirred up by so many feet, sparkled in the lantern light.

læn wɑz læst ɪn, ən əz sun əz i hæd mændɑɹb daʊn ðə ɹæmp i klaɪm bæk tə pʊl ðə dɔɹz ʃʌt.

Lan was last in, and as soon as he had Mandarb down the ramp he climbed back to pull the doors shut.

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz," mæt ɡɹaʊld, "waɪ wəd ðeɪ bɪld wʌn ə ðiz ɡeɪts ɪn ə pleɪs laɪk ðɪs?"

"Blood and ashes," Mat growled, "why would they build one of these gates in a place like this?"

"ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ɔlweɪz laɪk ðɪs," lɔɪəl sɛd. hɪz ɹʌmbəlɪŋ vɔɪs ɛkoʊɾ ɪn ðə kævɝnəs speɪs. "nɑɾ ɔlweɪz. noʊ!" ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz æŋɡɹi, ɹænd ɹilaɪzd wɪð ə ʃɑk. "wʌns tʃɹiz stʊd hɪɹ. ɛvɹi kaɪndə tʃɹi ðət wəd ɡɹoʊ ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, ɛvɹi kaɪndə tʃɹi ðəɾ oʊɡiɝ kəd koʊks tə ɡɹoʊ hɪɹ. ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz, ə hʌnʒɹəd spænz haɪ. ʃeɪɾ ə bɹæntʃ, ən kul bɹizɪz tə kætʃ ðə smɛl ə lif ən flaʊɝ ən hoʊl ðə mɛmɹi ʌv ðə pis ə ðə stɛɾɪŋ. ɔl ðæt, mɝɾɝd fəɹ ðɪs!" hɪz fɪs θʌmpt ə kɑləm.

"It was not always like this," Loial said. His rumbling voice echoed in the cavernous space. "Not always. No!" The Ogier was angry, Rand realized with a shock. "Once trees stood here. Every kind of tree that would grow in this place, every kind of tree that Ogier could coax to grow here. The Great Trees, a hundred spans high. Shade of branch, and cool breezes to catch the smell of leaf and flower and hold the memory of the peace of the stedding. All that, murdered for this!" His fist thumped a column.

ðə kɑləm sim tə ʃeɪk ʌndɝ ðət bloʊ. ɹænd wɑz sɝɾən i hɝd bɹɪks kɹæk. wɔɾɝfɔlz ə dʒɹaɪ mɔɹɾɝ slɪd daʊn ðə kɑləm.

The column seemed to shake under that blow. Rand was certain he heard bricks crack. Waterfalls of dry mortar slid down the column.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɔlɹɛɾi woʊvən kænɑt bi əndʌn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd dʒɛnli. "ɪt wɪl nɑt meɪk ðə tʃɹiz ɡɹoʊ əɡɛn fəɹ jə tə bɹɪŋ ðə bɪldɪŋ daʊn ɑn əɹ hɛdz." lɔɪəlz dʒɹupɪŋ aɪbɹaʊz meɪɾ ɪm lʊk mɔɹ əbæʃt ðən ə hjumən feɪs kəɾ əv mænədʒd. "wɪð jəɹ hɛlp, lɔɪəl, pɝhæps wi kən kip ðə ɡɹoʊvz ðət stɪl stæn fɹəm fɔlɪŋ ʌndɝ ðə ʃædoʊ. juv bɹɔɾ əs tə wʌt wi sik."

"What is already woven cannot be undone," Moiraine said gently. "It will not make the trees grow again for you to bring the building down on our heads." Loial's drooping eyebrows made him look more abashed than a human face could have managed. "With your help, Loial, perhaps we can keep the groves that still stand from falling under the Shadow. You have brought us to what we seek."

əz ʃi muv tə wʌn ə ðə wɔlz, ɹænd ɹilaɪz ðət ðət wɔl wɑz dɪfɹən fɹəm ði ʌðɝz. ðeɪ wɝ ɔɹɾənɛɹi bɹɪk; ðɪs wɑz ɪntʃɹəkətli wɝk stoʊn, fænsɪfəl swɝlz ə livz ən vaɪnz, peɪl ivən ʌndɝ ɪts koʊɾ ə dʌst. ðə bɹɪk ən mɔɹɾɝ wɝ oʊld, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə stoʊn sɛɾ ɪt hæd stʊd ðəɹ lɔŋ, lɔŋ bɪfɔɹ ðə bɹɪk wɑz faɪɝd. leɪɾɝ bɪldɝz, ðɛmsɛlvz sɛntʃɝiz ɡɔn, hæɾ ɪnkɔɹpɝeɪɾəd wʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi stʊd, ən stɪl leɪɾɝ mɛn hæd meɪɾ ɪt pɑɹɾ ʌv ə sɛlɝ.

As she moved to one of the walls, Rand realized that that wall was different from the others. They were ordinary brick; this was intricately worked stone, fanciful swirls of leaves and vines, pale even under its coat of dust. The brick and mortar were old, but something about the stone said it had stood there long, long before the brick was fired. Later builders, themselves centuries gone, had incorporated what already stood, and still later men had made it part of a cellar.

wʌn pɑɹɾ ə ðə kɑɹv stoʊn wɔl, ɹaɪɾ ɪn ðə sɛntɝ, wɑz mɔɹ ɪlæbɹət ðən ðə ɹɛst. əz wɛl dʌn əz ðə ɹɛst wɑz, ɪɾ əpɪɹɾ ə kɹud kɑpi ɪn kəmpɛɹəsən. wɝkt ɪn hɑɹd stoʊn, ðoʊz livz sim sɑft, kɑɾ ɪn wʌn fɹoʊzən moʊmən əz ə dʒɛntəl sʌmɝ bɹiz stɝd ðɛm. fəɹ ɔl ə ðæt, ðeɪ hæd ðə fil ʌv eɪdʒ, əz mʌtʃ ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ðə ɹɛst ə ðə stoʊn əz ðə ɹɛst wɑz oʊldɝ ðən ðə bɹɪk. ðəɾ oʊld ən mɔɹ. lɔɪəl lʊkt əɾ əm əz ɪf i wəd ɹæðɝ bi ɛniwɛɹ ɛls bʌt ðɛɹ, ivən aʊɾ ɪn ðə stʃɹits wɪð ənʌðɝ mɑb.

One part of the carved stone wall, right in the center, was more elaborate than the rest. As well done as the rest was, it appeared a crude copy in comparison. Worked in hard stone, those leaves seemed soft, caught in one frozen moment as a gentle summer breeze stirred them. For all of that, they had the feel of age, as much greater than the rest of the stone as the rest was older than the brick. That old and more. Loial looked at them as if he would rather be anywhere else but there, even out in the streets with another mob.

"ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə," mɔɪɹeɪn mɝmɝd, ɹɛstɪŋ əɹ hæn ɑn ə tʃɹɛfɔɪl lif ɪn ðə stoʊnwɝk. ɹænd skæn ðə kɑɹvɪŋ; ðət wɑz ði oʊnli lif ʌv ɪts kaɪn i kəd faɪnd. "ðə lif ə ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf ɪz ðə ki," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd, ən ðə lif keɪm əweɪ ɪn əɹ hænd.

"Avendesora," Moiraine murmured, resting her hand on a trefoil leaf in the stonework. Rand scanned the carving; that was the only leaf of its kind he could find. "The leaf of the Tree of Life is the key," the Aes Sedai said, and the leaf came away in her hand.

ɹænd blɪŋkt; fɹəm bɪhaɪn ɪm i hɝd ɡæsps. ðət lif hæd sim noʊ lɛs ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə wɔl ðən ɛni ʌðɝ. dʒʌst əz sɪmpli, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛɾ ɪɾ əɡɛns ðə pæɾɝn ə hændspæn loʊɝ. ðə θɹi-pɔɪntəd lif fɪt ðəɹ əz ɪf ðə speɪs hæd bɪn ɪntɛndəd fəɹ ɪt, ən wʌns mɔɹ ɪt wɑz ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə hoʊl. əz sun əz ɪt wɑz ɪn pleɪs ði ɪntaɪɝ neɪtʃɝ ə ðə sɛntʃɹəl stoʊnwɝk tʃeɪnʒd.

Rand blinked; from behind him he heard gasps. That leaf had seemed no less a part of the wall than any other. Just as simply, the Aes Sedai set it against the pattern a handspan lower. The three-pointed leaf fit there as if the space had been intended for it, and once more it was a part of the whole. As soon as it was in place the entire nature of the central stonework changed.

hi wɑz ʃʊɹ naʊ ðəɾ i kəd si ðə livz ɹʌfəl baɪ səm ənfɛl bɹiz; hi ɔlmoʊs θɔt ðeɪ wɝ vɝɾənt ʌndɝ ðə dʌst, ə tæpəstʃɹi ʌv θɪk spɹɪŋ ɡɹinɝi ðəɹ ɪn ðə læntɝn-lɪt sɛlɝ. ɔlmoʊst ɪmpɝsɛptɪbli ət fɝst, ə splɪɾ oʊpən ʌp ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ði eɪntʃən kɑɹvɪŋ, waɪɾənɪŋ əz ðə tu hævz sloʊli swʌŋ ɪndə ðə sɛlɝ əntɪl ðeɪ stʊd stʃɹeɪɾ aʊt. ðə bæks ə ðə ɡeɪts wɝ wɝkt əz ðə fɹʌns, ðə seɪm pɹəfjuʒən ə vaɪnz ən livz, ɔlmoʊst əlaɪv. bɪhaɪnd, wɛɹ ʃʊɾə bɪn dɝɾ əɹ ðə sɛlɝ ə ðə nɛks bɪldɪŋ, ə dʌl, ɹɪflɛktɪv ʃɪmɝɪŋ feɪnli kɑt ðɛɹ ɪmədʒəz.

He was sure now that he could see the leaves ruffled by some unfelt breeze; he almost thought they were verdant under the dust, a tapestry of thick spring greenery there in the lantern-lit cellar. Almost imperceptibly at first, a split opened up in the middle of the ancient carving, widening as the two halves slowly swung into the cellar until they stood straight out. The backs of the gates were worked as the fronts, the same profusion of vines and leaves, almost alive. Behind, where should have been dirt or the cellar of the next building, a dull, reflective shimmering faintly caught their images.

"aɪ hæv hɝd," lɔɪəl sɛd, hæf mɔɹnɪŋ, hæf fɪɹfəl, "ðæt wʌns ðə weɪɡeɪts ʃoʊn laɪk mɪɹɝz. wʌns, hu ɛntɝd ðə weɪz wɔk θɹu ðə sʌn ən ðə skaɪ. wʌns."

"I have heard," Loial said, half mourning, half fearful, "that once the Waygates shone like mirrors. Once, who entered the Ways walked through the sun and the sky. Once."

"wi hæv noʊ taɪm fəɹ weɪɾɪŋ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd.

"We have no time for waiting," Moiraine said.

læn wɛn pæs hɝ, liɾɪŋ mændɑɹb, poʊld læntɝn ɪn hænd. hɪz ʃæɾoʊi ɹəflɛkʃən əpɹoʊtʃt hɪm, liɾɪŋ ə ʃæɾoʊi hɔɹs. mæn ən ɹəflɛkʃən sim tə stɛp ɪndə itʃ ʌðɝ ət ðə ʃɪmɝɪŋ sɝfəs, ən boʊθ wɝ ɡɔn. fəɹ ə moʊmən ðə blæk stæljən bɔkt, ən əpɛɹənli kəntɪnjuəs ɹeɪn kənɛktɪŋ ɪm tə ðə dɪm ʃeɪp ə hɪz oʊn ɪmədʒ. ðə ɹeɪn taɪɾənd, ən ðə wɔɹhɔɹs, tu, vænɪʃt.

Lan went past her, leading Mandarb, poled lantern in hand. His shadowy reflection approached him, leading a shadowy horse. Man and reflection seemed to step into each other at the shimmering surface, and both were gone. For a moment the black stallion balked, an apparently continuous rein connecting him to the dim shape of his own image. The rein tightened, and the warhorse, too, vanished.

fəɹ ə mɪnəɾ ɛvɹiwʌn ɪn ðə sɛlɝ stʊd stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə weɪɡeɪt.

For a minute everyone in the cellar stood staring at the Waygate.

"hɝi," mɔɪɹeɪn ɝdʒd. "aɪ mʌs bi ðə læs θɹu. wi kænɑt liv ðɪs oʊpən fəɹ ɛniwʌn tə faɪn baɪ tʃæns. hɝi."

"Hurry," Moiraine urged. "I must be the last through. We cannot leave this open for anyone to find by chance. Hurry."

wɪð ə hɛvi saɪ lɔɪəl stʃɹoʊɾ ɪndə ðə ʃɪmɝ. tɔsɪŋ ɪts hɛd, hɪz bɪɡ hɔɹs tʃɹaɪd tə hoʊl bæk fɹəm ðə sɝfəs ən wɑz hɔl θɹu. ðeɪ wɝ ɡɔn əz kəmplitli əz ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən mændɑɹb.

With a heavy sigh Loial strode into the shimmer. Tossing its head, his big horse tried to hold back from the surface and was hauled through. They were gone as completely as the Warder and Mandarb.

hɛzɪɾəntli, ɹænd poʊkt ɪz læntɝn ət ðə weɪɡeɪt. ðə læntɝn sæŋk ɪndə ɪts ɹəflɛkʃən, ðə tu mɝdʒɪŋ əntɪl boʊθ wɝ ɡɔn. hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf kip ɑn wɔkɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə poʊl dɪsəpɪɹ ɪndə ɪtsɛlf ɪntʃ baɪ ɪntʃ, ən ðən i wɑz stɛpɪŋ ɪndə hɪmsɛlf, ɛntɝɪŋ ðə ɡeɪt. hɪz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən. sʌmθɪŋ aɪsi slɪɾ əlɔŋ ɪz skɪn, əz ɪf i wɝ pæsɪŋ θɹu ə wɔl ə koʊld wɔɾɝ. taɪm stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt; ðə koʊld ɛnvɛləpt wʌn hɛɹ əɾ ə taɪm, ʃɪvɝɾ oʊvɝ ɪz kloʊðz θɹɛd baɪ θɹɛd.

Hesitantly, Rand poked his lantern at the Waygate. The lantern sank into its reflection, the two merging until both were gone. He made himself keep on walking forward, watching the pole disappear into itself inch by inch, and then he was stepping into himself, entering the gate. His mouth fell open. Something icy slid along his skin, as if he were passing through a wall of cold water. Time stretched out; the cold enveloped one hair at a time, shivered over his clothes thread by thread.

əbɹʌpli ðə tʃɪl bɝs laɪk ə bʌbəl, ən i pɔz tə kætʃ ɪz bɹɛθ. hi wɑz ɪnsaɪd ðə weɪz. dʒʌst əhɛd læn ən lɔɪəl weɪɾəd peɪʃənli baɪ ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz. ɔl ɝaʊn əm wɑz blæknəs ðət sim tə stʃɹɛtʃ ɑn fɝɛvɝ. ðɛɹ læntɝnz meɪɾ ə smɔl pul ə laɪɾ ɝaʊn ðɛm, tu smɔl, əz ɪf sʌmθɪŋ pɹɛs bæk ðə laɪt, əɹ eɪɾ ɪt.

Abruptly the chill burst like a bubble, and he paused to catch his breath. He was inside the Ways. Just ahead Lan and Loial waited patiently by their horses. All around them was blackness that seemed to stretch on forever. Their lanterns made a small pool of light around them, too small, as if something pressed back the light, or ate it.

ʌv ə sʌɾən æŋkʃəs, hi dʒɝkt əɾ ɪz ɹeɪnz. ɹɛɾ ən ðə pæk hɔɹs keɪm lipɪŋ θɹu, nɪɹli nɑkɪŋ ɪm daʊn. stʌmbəlɪŋ, hi kɑt hɪmsɛlf ən hɝid tə ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən ði oʊɡiɝ, pʊlɪŋ ðə nɝvəs hɔɹsəz bɪhaɪn hɪm. ði ænəməlz wɪkɝd sɔfli. ivən mændɑɹb əpɪɹd tə teɪk səm kʌmfɝt fɹəm ðə pɹɛzəns ʌv ʌðɝ hɔɹsəz.

Of a sudden anxious, he jerked at his reins. Red and the pack horse came leaping through, nearly knocking him down. Stumbling, he caught himself and hurried to the Warder and the Ogier, pulling the nervous horses behind him. The animals whickered softly. Even Mandarb appeared to take some comfort from the presence of other horses.

"ɡoʊ izi wən jə pæs θɹu ə weɪɡeɪt, ɹænd," lɔɪəl kɑʃənd. "θɪŋz ɑɹ . . . dɪfɹən ɪnsaɪd ðə weɪz ðən aʊt. lʊk."

"Go easy when you pass through a Waygate, Rand," Loial cautioned. "Things are . . . different inside the Ways than out. Look."

hi lʊk bæk ðə weɪ ði oʊɡiɝ pɔɪntəd, θɪŋkɪŋ tə si ðə seɪm dʌl ʃɪmɝ. ɪnstɛɾ i kəd si ɪndə ðə sɛlɝ, əz ɪf θɹu ə lɑɹdʒ pis ə smoʊkt ɡlæs sɛɾ ɪn ðə blæknəs. dɪstɝbɪŋli ðə dɑɹknəs ɝaʊn ðə wɪndoʊ ɪndə ðə sɛlɝ ɡeɪv ə sɛns ə dɛpθ, əz ðoʊ ði oʊpənɪŋ stʊɾ əloʊn wɪð nʌθɪŋ ɝaʊn əɹ bɪhaɪn ɪt bʌt ðə dɑɹk. hi sɛɾ əz mʌtʃ wɪð ə ʃeɪki læf, bʌt lɔɪəl tʊk ɪm sɪɹiəsli.

He looked back the way the Ogier pointed, thinking to see the same dull shimmer. Instead he could see into the cellar, as if through a large piece of smoked glass set in the blackness. Disturbingly the darkness around the window into the cellar gave a sense of depth, as though the opening stood alone with nothing around or behind it but the dark. He said as much with a shaky laugh, but Loial took him seriously.

"ju kəd wɔk ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn ɪt, ən jə wəd nɑt si ə θɪŋ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪd. aɪ wəd nɑɾ ædvaɪz ɪt, ðoʊ. ðə bʊks ɑɹən vɛɹi klɪɹ əbaʊt wʌt laɪz bɪhaɪn ðə weɪɡeɪts. aɪ θɪŋk jə kəd bɪkʌm lɔs ðɛɹ, ən nɛvɝ faɪn jəɹ weɪ aʊt."

"You could walk all the way around it, and you would not see a thing from the other side. I would not advise it, though. The books aren't very clear about what lies behind the Waygates. I think you could become lost there, and never find your way out."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ ən tʃɹaɪd tə kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾ ɑn ðə weɪɡeɪɾ ɪtsɛlf ɹæðɝ ðən wʌt leɪ bɪhaɪn ɪt, bʌt ðət wɑz dʒʌst əz dɪstɝbɪŋ ɪn ɪts oʊn fæʃən. ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn ɛniθɪŋ tə lʊk əɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹknəs bɪsaɪdz ðə weɪɡeɪt, hi wʊɾə lʊkt əɾ ɪt. ɪn ðə sɛlɝ, θɹu ðə smoʊki dɪmnəs, mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði ʌðɝz wɝ pleɪn ɪnʌf, bʌt ðeɪ muvd əz ɪf ɪn ə dʒɹim. ɛvɹi blɪŋk ʌv ən aɪ simd ə dɪlɪbɝɪt, ɪɡzædʒɝeɪɾəd dʒɛstʃɝ. mæt wɑz meɪkɪŋ ɪz weɪ tə ðə weɪɡeɪɾ əz ðoʊ wɔkɪŋ θɹu klɪɹ dʒɛli, hɪz lɛɡz simɪŋ tə swɪm fɔɹwɝd.

Rand shook his head and tried to concentrate on the Waygate itself rather than what lay behind it, but that was just as disturbing in its own fashion. If there had been anything to look at in the darkness besides the Waygate, he would have looked at it. In the cellar, through the smoky dimness, Moiraine and the others were plain enough, but they moved as if in a dream. Every blink of an eye seemed a deliberate, exaggerated gesture. Mat was making his way to the Waygate as though walking through clear jelly, his legs seeming to swim forward.

"ðə wil tɝnz fæstɝ ɪn ðə weɪz," lɔɪəl ɪkspleɪnd. hi lʊkt ət ðə dɑɹknəs sɝaʊndɪŋ ðɛm, ən ɪz hɛd sʌŋk ɪn bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. "nʌn əlaɪv noʊ mɔɹ ðən fɹæɡməns. aɪ fɪɹ wʌɾ aɪ doʊnt noʊ əbaʊt ðə weɪz, ɹænd."

"The Wheel turns faster in the Ways," Loial explained. He looked at the darkness surrounding them, and his head sunk in between his shoulders. "None alive know more than fragments. I fear what I don't know about the Ways, Rand."

"ðə dɑɹk wʌn," læn sɛd, "kænɑt bi dɪfiɾəd wɪθaʊt tʃænsɪŋ ɹɪsks. bʌt wəɹ əlaɪv ət ðɪs moʊmənt, ən bɪfɔɹ əs ɪz ðə hoʊp ə ɹɪmeɪnɪŋ əlaɪv. də nɑt sɝɛndɝ bɪfɔɹ jə ɑɹ biɾən, oʊɡiɝ."

"The Dark One," Lan said, "cannot be defeated without chancing risks. But we are alive at this moment, and before us is the hope of remaining alive. Do not surrender before you are beaten, Ogier."

"ju wəd nɑt spik soʊ kɑnfəɾəntli ɪf jə hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn ɪn ðə weɪz." ðə nɔɹməl dɪstən θʌndɝ ə lɔɪəlz vɔɪs wɑz mjuɾɪd. hi stɛɹɾ ət ðə blæknəs əz ɪf i sɔ θɪŋz ðɛɹ. "aɪ nɛvɝ əv bɪfɔɹ, iðɝ, bʌɾ aɪv sin oʊɡiɝ u hæv bɪn θɹu ə weɪɡeɪɾ ən kʌm aʊɾ əɡɛn. jə wəd nɑt spik soʊ ɪf jə hæd."

"You would not speak so confidently if you had ever been in the Ways." The normal distant thunder of Loial's voice was muted. He stared at the blackness as if he saw things there. "I never have before, either, but I've seen Ogier who have been through a Waygate and come out again. You would not speak so if you had."

mæt stɛp θɹu ðə ɡeɪɾ ən ɹiɡeɪnd nɔɹməl spid. fəɹ ən ɪnstən i stɛɹɾ ət ðə simɪŋli ɛnləs dɑɹknəs, ðən keɪm ɹʌnɪŋ tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm, hɪz læntɝn bɑbɪŋ ɑn ɪts poʊl, hɪz hɔɹs lipɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ɔlmoʊst sɛndɪŋ ɪm spɹɔlɪŋ. wʌn baɪ wʌn ði ʌðɝz pæs θɹu, pɛɹɪn ən ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv, itʃ pɔzɪŋ ɪn ʃɑk saɪləns bɪfɔɹ hɝiɪŋ tə dʒɔɪn ðə ɹɛst. itʃ læntɝn ɛnlɑɹdʒ ðə pul ə laɪt, bʌt nɑɾ əz mʌtʃ əz ɪt ʃəd hæv. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ðə dɑɹk bɪkeɪm dɛnsɝ ðə mɔɹ laɪt ðəɹ wɑz, θɪkənɪŋ əz ɪt fɔɾ əɡɛns biɪŋ dɪmɪnɪʃt.

Mat stepped through the gate and regained normal speed. For an instant he stared at the seemingly endless darkness, then came running to join them, his lantern bobbing on its pole, his horse leaping behind him, almost sending him sprawling. One by one the others passed through, Perrin and Egwene and Nynaeve, each pausing in shocked silence before hurrying to join the rest. Each lantern enlarged the pool of light, but not as much as it should have. It was as if the dark became denser the more light there was, thickening as it fought against being diminished.

ðət wɑz nɑɾ ə laɪn ə ɹizənɪŋ ɹænd wɑntəd tə fɑloʊ. ɪt wɑz bæɾ ɪnʌf dʒʌs biɪŋ ðəɹ wɪθaʊt ɡɪvɪŋ ðə dɑɹknəs ə wɪl ʌv ɪts oʊn. ɛvɹiwʌn sim tə fil ði əpɹɛsɪvnəs, ðoʊ. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ ɹaɪ kɑmɛns fɹəm mæt hɪɹ, ən ɛɡwin lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɪʃt ʃi kəd ɹiθɪŋk əɹ dɪsɪʒən tə kʌm. ðeɪ ɔl saɪlənli wɑtʃt ðə weɪɡeɪt, ðət læst wɪndoʊ ɪndə ðə wɝl ðeɪ nu.

That was not a line of reasoning Rand wanted to follow. It was bad enough just being there without giving the darkness a will of its own. Everyone seemed to feel the oppressiveness, though. There were no wry comments from Mat here, and Egwene looked as if she wished she could rethink her decision to come. They all silently watched the Waygate, that last window into the world they knew.

faɪnəli oʊnli mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz lɛft ɪn ðə sɛlɝ, dɪmli lɪt baɪ ðə læntɝn ʃi hæd teɪkən. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stɪl muvd ɪn ðət dʒɹimlaɪk weɪ. hɝ hæn kɹɛpt əz ɪt faʊn ðə lif ʌv ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə. ɪt wɑz loʊkeɪɾəd loʊɝ ɪn ðə stoʊnwɝk ɑn ðɪs saɪd, ɹænd sɔ, dʒʌst wɛɹ ʃi hæd pleɪst ɪɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ. plʌkɪŋ ɪt fɹi, ʃi pʊɾ ɪt bæk ɪn ði ɝɪdʒənəl pəzɪʃən. hi wʌndɝd sʌɾənli ɪf ðə lif ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd hæd muv bæk, tu.

Finally only Moiraine was left in the cellar, dimly lit by the lantern she had taken. The Aes Sedai still moved in that dreamlike way. Her hand crept as it found the leaf of Avendesora. It was located lower in the stonework on this side, Rand saw, just where she had placed it on the other. Plucking it free, she put it back in the original position. He wondered suddenly if the leaf on the other side had moved back, too.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ keɪm θɹu, liɾɪŋ ɑldib, əz ðə stoʊn ɡeɪts sloʊli, sloʊli bɪɡæn kloʊzɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɝ. ʃi keɪm tə dʒɔɪn ðɛm, ðə laɪɾ ə hɝ læntɝn livɪŋ ðə ɡeɪts bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ wɝ ʃʌt. blæknəs swɑloʊd ðə nɛɹoʊɪŋ vju ʌv ðə sɛlɝ. ɪn ðə kənstʃɹeɪn laɪɾ ə ðɛɹ læntɝnz, blæknəs sɝaʊndəɾ əm toʊɾəli.

The Aes Sedai came through, leading Aldieb, as the stone gates slowly, slowly began closing behind her. She came to join them, the light of her lantern leaving the gates before they were shut. Blackness swallowed the narrowing view of the cellar. In the constrained light of their lanterns, blackness surrounded them totally.

sʌɾənli ɪt simd əz ɪf ðə læntɝnz wɝ ði oʊnli laɪt lɛft ɪn ðə wɝld. ɹænd ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz dʒæmd ʃoʊldɝ-tə-ʃoʊldɝ ɪn bɪtwin pɛɹɪn ən ɛɡwin. ɛɡwin ɡeɪv ɪm ə waɪd-aɪd lʊk ən pɹɛs kloʊsɝ, ən pɛɹɪn meɪd noʊ muv tə ɡɪv ɪm ɹum. ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ kʌmfɝɾɪŋ əbaʊt tʌtʃɪŋ ənʌðɝ hjumən biɪŋ wən ðə hoʊl wɝl hæd dʒʌs bɪn swɑloʊɾ ʌp baɪ dɑɹk. ivən ðə hɔɹsəz sim tə fil ðə weɪz pʊʃɪŋ əm ɪndə ə taɪɾɝ ən taɪɾɝ nɑt.

Suddenly it seemed as if the lanterns were the only light left in the world. Rand realized that he was jammed shoulder-to-shoulder in between Perrin and Egwene. Egwene gave him a wide-eyed look and pressed closer, and Perrin made no move to give him room. There was something comforting about touching another human being when the whole world had just been swallowed up by dark. Even the horses seemed to feel the Ways pushing them into a tighter and tighter knot.

aʊtwɝdli ʌnkənsɝnd, mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn swʌŋ ɪndə ðɛɹ sæɾəlz, ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ lin fɔɹwɝd, ɑɹmz ɹɛstɪŋ ɑn əɹ kɑɹv stæf əkɹɔs ðə haɪ pɑməl ə hɝ sæɾəl. "wi mʌs bi ɑn əɹ weɪ, lɔɪəl."

Outwardly unconcerned, Moiraine and Lan swung into their saddles, and the Aes Sedai leaned forward, arms resting on her carved staff across the high pommel of her saddle. "We must be on our way, Loial."

lɔɪəl ɡeɪv ə stɑɹt, ən nɑɾəd vɪɡɝəsli. "jɛs. jɛs, ɛɛs sədaɪ, jə ɑɹ ɹaɪt. nɑɾ ə mɪnət lɔŋɡɝ ðən nid bi." hi pɔɪntəd tə ə bɹɔd stʃɹɪp ʌv waɪt ɹʌnɪŋ ʌndɝ ðɛɹ fit, ən ɹænd stɛpt əweɪ fɹəm ɪt heɪstəli. ɔl ðə tu ɹɪvɝz foʊk dɪd. ɹænd θɔt ðə flɔɹ hæd bɪn smuð wʌns, bʌt ðə smuðnəs wɑz pɪɾəd naʊ, əz ɪf ðə stoʊn hæd ðə pɑks. ðə waɪt laɪn wɑz bɹoʊkən ɪn sɛvɹəl pleɪsəz. "ðɪs lidz fɹəm ðə weɪɡeɪt tə ðə fɝst ɡaɪɾɪŋ. fɹəm ðɛɹ. . . ." lɔɪəl lʊkt ɝaʊn æŋkʃəsli, ðən skɹæmbəld ɑntu hɪz hɔɹs wɪð nʌn ə ðə ɹɪlʌktəns i hæd ʃoʊn ɝliɝ. ðə hɔɹs wɔɹ ðə bɪɡəst sæɾəl ðə hɛd ɡɹum hæd bɪn eɪbəl tə faɪnd, bʌt lɔɪəl fɪld ɪt fɹəm pɑməl tə kæntəl. hɪz fit hʌŋ daʊn ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ɔlmoʊs tə ði ænəməlz niz. "nɑɾ ə mɪnət lɔŋɡɝ ðən nid bi," hi mʌɾɝd. ɹɪlʌktənli ði ʌðɝz maʊntəd.

Loial gave a start, and nodded vigorously. "Yes. Yes, Aes Sedai, you are right. Not a minute longer than need be." He pointed to a broad strip of white running under their feet, and Rand stepped away from it hastily. All the Two Rivers folk did. Rand thought the floor had been smooth once, but the smoothness was pitted now, as if the stone had the pox. The white line was broken in several places. "This leads from the Waygate to the first Guiding. From there. . . ." Loial looked around anxiously, then scrambled onto his horse with none of the reluctance he had shown earlier. The horse wore the biggest saddle the head groom had been able to find, but Loial filled it from pommel to cantle. His feet hung down on either side almost to the animal's knees. "Not a minute longer than need be," he muttered. Reluctantly the others mounted.

mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn ɹoʊɾ ɑn iðɝ saɪɾ ə ði oʊɡiɝ, fɑloʊɪŋ ðə waɪt laɪn θɹu ðə dɑɹk. ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls kɹaʊɾəd ɪn bɪhaɪn əz kloʊs əz ðeɪ kəd ɡɛt, ðə læntɝnz bɑbɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛɹ hɛdz. ðə læntɝnz ʃʊɾə ɡɪvən ɪnʌf laɪt tə fɪl ə haʊs, bʌt tɛn fiɾ əweɪ fɹəm əm ɪt stɑpt. ðə blæknəs stɑpt ɪɾ əz ɪf ɪt hæd stʃɹʌk ə wɔl. ðə kɹik ə sæɾəlz ən klɪk ə hɔɹs ʃuz ɑn stoʊn sim tə tʃɹævəl oʊnli tə ði ɛdʒ ə laɪt.

Moiraine and Lan rode on either side of the Ogier, following the white line through the dark. Everyone else crowded in behind as close as they could get, the lanterns bobbing over their heads. The lanterns should have given enough light to fill a house, but ten feet away from them it stopped. The blackness stopped it as if it had struck a wall. The creak of saddles and click of horse shoes on stone seemed to travel only to the edge of light.

ɹændz hæn kɛp dʒɹɪftɪŋ tə hɪz sɔɹd. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɾ i θɔt ðəɹ wɑz ɛniθɪŋ aʊt ðəɹ əɡɛnst wɪtʃ i kəd juz ðə sɔɹd tə dɪfɛn hɪmsɛlf; ɪt dɪd nɑt sim əz ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛniwɛɹ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə bi. ðə bʌbəl ə laɪɾ ɝaʊn əm kəɾ əz wɛl əv bɪn ə keɪv sɝaʊndəd baɪ stoʊn, kəmplitli sɝaʊndəd, wɪð noʊ weɪ aʊt. ðə hɔɹsəz maɪɾ əv bɪn wɔkɪŋ ə tʃɹɛdmɪl fəɹ ðə tʃeɪnʒ ɝaʊn ðɛm. hi ɡɹɪp ðə hɪlt əz ɪf ðə pɹɛʃɝ ə hɪz hæn ðəɹ kəd pɹɛs əweɪ ðə stoʊn i fɛlt weɪɪŋ daʊn ɑn hɪm. tʌtʃɪŋ ðə sɔɹd, hi kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ tæmz titʃɪŋ. fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl i kəd faɪn ðə kɑm ə ðə vɔɪd. bʌt ðə weɪɾ ɔlweɪz ɹɪtɝnd, kəmpɹɛsɪŋ ðə vɔɪɾ əntɪl ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə kævɝn ɪnsaɪɾ ɪz maɪnd, ən i hæd tə stɑɹɾ oʊvɝ əɡɛn, tʌtʃɪŋ tæmz sɔɹd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ.

Rand's hand kept drifting to his sword. It was not that he thought there was anything out there against which he could use the sword to defend himself; it did not seem as if there was anywhere for something to be. The bubble of light around them could as well have been a cave surrounded by stone, completely surrounded, with no way out. The horses might have been walking a treadmill for the change around them. He gripped the hilt as if the pressure of his hand there could press away the stone he felt weighing down on him. Touching the sword, he could remember Tam's teaching. For a little while he could find the calm of the void. But the weight always returned, compressing the void until it was only a cavern inside his mind, and he had to start over again, touching Tam's sword to remember.

ɪt wɑz ə ɹɪlif wən sʌmθɪŋ dɪd tʃeɪnʒ, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə tɔl slæb ə stoʊn, stændɪŋ ɑn ɛnd, ðəɾ əpɪɹɾ aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹk bɪfɔɹ ðɛm, ðə bɹɔd waɪt laɪn stɑpɪŋ əɾ ɪts beɪs. sɪnwəs kɝvz ə mɛɾəl ɪnleɪd ðə waɪd sɝfəs, ɡɹeɪsfəl laɪnz ðət veɪɡli ɹimaɪndəd ɹænd ə vaɪnz ən livz. dɪskʌlɝd pɑks mɑɹk stoʊn ən mɛɾəl əlaɪk.

It was a relief when something did change, even if it was only a tall slab of stone, standing on end, that appeared out of the dark before them, the broad white line stopping at its base. Sinuous curves of metal inlaid the wide surface, graceful lines that vaguely reminded Rand of vines and leaves. Discolored pocks marked stone and metal alike.

"ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ," lɔɪəl sɛd, ən lin aʊɾ ə hɪz sæɾəl tə fɹaʊn ət ðə kɝsɪv mɛɾəl ɪnleɪz.

"The Guiding," Loial said, and leaned out of his saddle to frown at the cursive metal inlays.

"oʊɡiɝ skɹɪpt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "bʌt soʊ bɹoʊkən aɪ kən bɛɹli meɪk aʊt wʌɾ ɪt sɛz."

"Ogier script," Moiraine said, "but so broken I can barely make out what it says."

"aɪ hɑɹdli kæn, iðɝ," lɔɪəl sɛd, "bʌɾ ɪnʌf tə noʊ wi ɡoʊ ðɪs weɪ." hi tɝn ɪz hɔɹs əsaɪd fɹəm ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ.

"I hardly can, either," Loial said, "but enough to know we go this way." He turned his horse aside from the Guiding.

ði ɛdʒəz ə ðɛɹ laɪt kɑɾ ʌðɝ stoʊnwɝks, wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi stoʊn-wɔl bɹɪdʒəz ɑɹsɪŋ ɔf ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs, ən dʒɛnli sloʊpɪŋ ɹæmps, wɪθaʊt ɹeɪlɪŋz ʌv ɛni kaɪnd, liɾɪŋ ʌp ən daʊn. bɪtwin ðə bɹɪdʒəz ən ðə ɹæmps ɹæn ə tʃɛst-haɪ bəlʌstʃɹeɪd, haʊɛvɝ, əz ðoʊ fɔlɪŋ wɑz ə deɪnʒɝ ðəɹ əɾ ɛni ɹeɪt. pleɪn waɪt stoʊn meɪd ðə bəlʌstʃɹeɪd, ɪn sɪmpəl kɝvz ən ɹaʊnz fɪɾəd təɡɛðɝ ɪn kɑmplɛks pæɾɝnz. sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɔl ʌv ɪt simd ɔlmoʊs fəmɪljɝ tə ɹænd, bʌɾ i nu ɪt hæd tə bi hɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən ɡɹoʊpɪŋ fəɹ ɛniθɪŋ fəmɪljɝ wɛɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ.

The edges of their light caught other stoneworks, what appeared to be stone-walled bridges arcing off into the darkness, and gently sloping ramps, without railings of any kind, leading up and down. Between the bridges and the ramps ran a chest-high balustrade, however, as though falling was a danger there at any rate. Plain white stone made the balustrade, in simple curves and rounds fitted together in complex patterns. Something about all of it seemed almost familiar to Rand, but he knew it had to be his imagination groping for anything familiar where everything was strange.

ət ðə fʊɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðə bɹɪdʒəz lɔɪəl pɔz tə ɹid ðə sɪŋɡəl laɪn ɑn ðə nɛɹoʊ kɑləm stoʊn ðɛɹ. nɑɾɪŋ, hi ɹoʊɾ ʌp ɑntu ðə bɹɪdʒ. "ðɪs ɪz ðə fɝs bɹɪdʒ ʌv əɹ pæθ," hi sɛɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ.

At the foot of one of the bridges Loial paused to read the single line on the narrow column stone there. Nodding, he rode up onto the bridge. "This is the first bridge of our path," he said over his shoulder.

ɹænd wʌndɝd wʌt hɛl ðə bɹɪdʒ ʌp. ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz meɪɾ ə ɡɹɪɾi saʊnd, əz ɪf bɪts ə stoʊn fleɪkt ɔf əɾ ɛvɹi stɛp. ɛvɹiθɪŋ i kəd si wɑz kʌvɝd wɪð ʃæloʊ hoʊlz, səm taɪni pɪnpɹɪks, ʌðɝz ʃæloʊ, ɹʌf-ɛdʒ kɹeɪɾɝz ə stʃɹaɪɾ əkɹɔs, əz ɪf ðəɹ hæd bɪn ə ɹeɪn ʌv æsəd, əɹ ðə stoʊn wɑz ɹɑɾɪŋ. ðə ɡɑɹdwəl ʃoʊd kɹæks ən hoʊlz, tu. ɪn pleɪsəz ɪt wɑz ɡɔn ɔltəɡɛðɝ fəɹ əz mʌtʃ əz ə spæn. fəɹ ɔl i nu ðə bɹɪdʒ kəd bi sɑləd stoʊn ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə sɛntɝ ə ði ɝθ, bʌt wʌɾ i sɔ meɪɾ ɪm hoʊp ɪt wəd stæn lɔŋ ɪnʌf fəɹ əm tə ɹitʃ ði ʌðɝ ɛnd. wɛɹɛvɝ ðəɾ ɪz.

Rand wondered what held the bridge up. The horses' hooves made a gritty sound, as if bits of stone flaked off at every step. Everything he could see was covered with shallow holes, some tiny pinpricks, others shallow, rough-edged craters a stride across, as if there had been a rain of acid, or the stone was rotting. The guardwall showed cracks and holes, too. In places it was gone altogether for as much as a span. For all he knew the bridge could be solid stone all the way to the center of the earth, but what he saw made him hope it would stand long enough for them to reach the other end. Wherever that is.

ðə bɹɪdʒ dɪɾ ɛnd, ɪvɛntʃəwəli, ɪn ə pleɪs ðət lʊk noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ɪts bɪɡɪnɪŋ. ɔl ɹænd kəd si wɑz wʌt ðɛɹ lɪɾəl pul ə laɪt tʌtʃt, bʌɾ i hæd ði ɪmpɹɛʃən ðəɾ ɪt wɑz ə lɑɹdʒ speɪs, laɪk ə flæt-tɑp hɪl, wɪð bɹɪdʒəz ən ɹæmps livɪŋ ɔl ɝaʊn ɪt. ən aɪlənd, lɔɪəl kɔld ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ skɹɪpt-kʌvɝd ɡaɪɾɪŋ - ɹænd pleɪst ɪɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ði aɪlənd, wɪð noʊ weɪ ʌv noʊɪŋ ɪf i wɑz ɹaɪɾ əɹ nɑt. lɔɪəl ɹɛd, ðən tʊk əm ʌp wʌn ə ðə ɹæmps, kɝvɪŋ ʌp ən ʌp.

The bridge did end, eventually, in a place that looked no different from its beginning. All Rand could see was what their little pool of light touched, but he had the impression that it was a large space, like a flat-topped hill, with bridges and ramps leaving all around it. An Island, Loial called it. There was another script-covered Guiding - Rand placed it in the middle of the Island, with no way of knowing if he was right or not. Loial read, then took them up one of the ramps, curving up and up.

æftɝ ən ɪntɝmənəbəl klaɪm, kɝvɪŋ kəntɪnjuəsli, ðə ɹæmp lɛɾ ɔf ɑntu ənʌðɝ aɪlən dʒʌs laɪk ðə wʌn wɛɹ ɪt hæd bɪɡʌn. ɹænd tʃɹaɪd tə ɪmædʒən ðə kɝv ə ðə ɹæmp ən ɡeɪv ʌp. ðɪs aɪlən kæn bi ɹaɪɾ ɑn tɑp ə ði ʌðɝ wʌn. ɪt kæn bi.

After an interminable climb, curving continuously, the ramp let off onto another Island just like the one where it had begun. Rand tried to imagine the curve of the ramp and gave up. This Island can't be right on top of the other one. It can't be.

lɔɪəl kənsʌltəd jɛɾ ənʌðɝ slæb fɪld wɪð oʊɡiɝ skɹɪpt, faʊn ənʌðɝ saɪnpoʊs kɑləm, lɛɾ əm ɑntu ənʌðɝ bɹɪdʒ. ɹænd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hæɾ ɛni aɪdiə ɪn wʌt dɝɛkʃən ðeɪ wɝ tʃɹævlɪŋ.

Loial consulted yet another slab filled with Ogier script, found another signpost column, led them onto another bridge. Rand no longer had any idea in what direction they were traveling.

ɪn ðɛɹ hʌɾəl ə laɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk, wʌn bɹɪdʒ wɑz ɪɡzækli laɪk ənʌðɝ, ɪksɛp ðət səm hæd bɹeɪks ɪn ðə ɡɑɹdwɔlz ən səm dɪd nɑt. oʊnli ðə dɪɡɹi ʌv dæmədʒ tə ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋz ɡeɪv ɛni dɪfɝəns tə ði aɪlənz. ɹænd lɔs tʃɹæk ə taɪm; hi wɑz nɑɾ ivən ʃʊɹ haʊ mɛni bɹɪdʒəz ðeɪ hæd kɹɔst əɹ haʊ mɛni ɹæmps ðeɪ hæd tʃɹævəld. ðə wɔɹɾɝ mʌst əv hæɾ ə klɑk ɪn ɪz hɛd, ðoʊ. dʒʌst wən ɹænd fɛl ðə fɝst stɝ ə hʌŋɡɝ, læn ənaʊns kwaɪətli ðəɾ ɪt wɑz mɪddeɪ ən dɪsmaʊntɪd tə pɑɹsəl aʊt bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz ən dʒɹaɪd mit fɹəm ðə pæk hɔɹs. pɛɹɪn wɑz liɾɪŋ ði ænəməl baɪ ðət taɪm. ðeɪ wɝ ɑn ən aɪlənd, ən lɔɪəl wɑz bɪzəli dəsaɪfɝɪŋ ðə dɝɛkʃənz ɑn ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ.

In their huddle of light in the dark, one bridge was exactly like another, except that some had breaks in the guardwalls and some did not. Only the degree of damage to the Guidings gave any difference to the Islands. Rand lost track of time; he was not even sure how many bridges they had crossed or how many ramps they had traveled. The Warder must have had a clock in his head, though. Just when Rand felt the first stir of hunger, Lan announced quietly that it was midday and dismounted to parcel out bread and cheese and dried meat from the pack horse. Perrin was leading the animal by that time. They were on an Island, and Loial was busily deciphering the directions on the Guiding.

mæt stɑɹɾəd tə klaɪm daʊn fɹəm ɪz sæɾəl, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "taɪm ɪz tu væljəbəl ɪn ðə weɪz tə weɪst. fəɹ ʌs, mʌtʃ tu væljəbəl. wɪl stɑp wən ɪts taɪm tə slip." læn wɑz ɔlɹɛɾi bæk ɑn mændɑɹb.

Mat started to climb down from his saddle, but Moiraine said, "Time is too valuable in the Ways to waste. For us, much too valuable. We will stop when it is time to sleep." Lan was already back on Mandarb.

ɹændz æpətaɪt slɪpt ət ðə θɔɾ ə slipɪŋ ɪn ðə weɪz. ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz naɪt ðɛɹ, bʌt nɑt ðə kaɪndə naɪt fəɹ slipɪŋ. hi eɪt waɪl i ɹoʊd, ðoʊ, laɪk ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. ɪt wɑz ən ɑkwɝɾ əfɛɹ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə dʒʌɡəl ɪz fud, ðə læntɝn poʊl, ən ɪz ɹeɪnz, bʌt fəɹ ɔl ə hɪz ɪmædʒən læk ʌv æpətaɪɾ i lɪk ðə læs kɹʌmz ə bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz ɔf ɪz hænz wən i wɑz dʌn, ən θɔt fɑnli ʌv mɔɹ. hi ivən bɪɡæn tə θɪŋk ðə weɪz wɝ nɑt soʊ bæd, nɑt nɪɹli əz bæɾ əz lɔɪəl meɪɾ aʊt. ðeɪ maɪɾ əv ðə hɛvi fil ə ði aʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ə stɔɹm, bʌt nʌθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd. nʌθɪŋ hæpənd. ðə weɪz wɝ ɔlmoʊs bɔɹɪŋ.

Rand's appetite slipped at the thought of sleeping in the Ways. It was always night there, but not the kind of night for sleeping. He ate while he rode, though, like everyone else. It was an awkward affair, trying to juggle his food, the lantern pole, and his reins, but for all of his imagined lack of appetite he licked the last crumbs of bread and cheese off his hands when he was done, and thought fondly of more. He even began to think the Ways were not so bad, not nearly as bad as Loial made out. They might have the heavy feel of the hour before a storm, but nothing changed. Nothing happened. The Ways were almost boring.

ðən ðə saɪləns wɑz bɹoʊkən baɪ ə stɑɹɾəld ɡɹʌn fɹəm lɔɪəl. ɹænd stʊɾ ɪn ɪz stɝəps tə pɪɹ pæs ði oʊɡiɝ, ən swɑloʊd hɑɹɾ ət wʌɾ i sɔ. ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə bɹɪdʒ, ən oʊnli ə fju fiɾ əhɛɾ ə lɔɪəl ðə bɹɪdʒ ɛndəɾ ɪn ə dʒæɡd ɡæp.

Then the silence was broken by a startled grunt from Loial. Rand stood in his stirrups to peer past the Ogier, and swallowed hard at what he saw. They were in the middle of a bridge, and only a few feet ahead of Loial the bridge ended in a jagged gap.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾifaɪv


CHAPTER 45

wʌt fɑloʊz ɪn ʃædoʊ


What Follows in Shadow

ðə laɪɾ ə ðɛɹ læntɝnz stʃɹɛtʃt dʒʌs fɑɹ ɪnʌf tə tʌtʃ ði ʌðɝ saɪd, θɹʌstɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹk laɪk ə dʒaɪəns bɹoʊkən tiθ. lɔɪəlz hɔɹs stæmpt ə huf nɝvəsli, ən ə lus stoʊn fɛl əweɪ ɪndə ðə dɛd blæk bɪloʊ. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ɛni saʊn ʌv ɪt stʃɹaɪkɪŋ bɑɾəm, ɹænd nɛvɝ hɝɾ ɪt.

The light of their lanterns stretched just far enough to touch the other side, thrusting out of the dark like a giant's broken teeth. Loial's horse stamped a hoof nervously, and a loose stone fell away into the dead black below. If there was any sound of it striking bottom, Rand never heard it.

hi ɛdʒd ɹɛd kloʊsɝ tə ðə ɡæp. əz fɑɹ daʊn əz i kəd θɹʌst ɪz læntɝn ɑn ɪts poʊl, ðəɹ wɑz nʌθɪŋ. blæknəs bɪloʊ əz blæknəs əbʌv, ʃɪɹɪŋ ɔf ðə laɪt. ɪf ðəɹ wɑz ə bɑɾəm, ɪt kəd bi ə θaʊzən fit daʊn. əɹ nɛvɝ. bʌɾ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd, hi kəd si wʌt wɑz ʌndɝ ðə bɹɪdʒ, hoʊldɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp. nʌθɪŋ. lɛs ðən ə spæn ɪn θɪknəs, ən æbsəlutli nʌθɪŋ ʌndɝniθ.

He edged Red closer to the gap. As far down as he could thrust his lantern on its pole, there was nothing. Blackness below as blackness above, shearing off the light. If there was a bottom, it could be a thousand feet down. Or never. But on the other side, he could see what was under the bridge, holding it up. Nothing. Less than a span in thickness, and absolutely nothing underneath.

əbɹʌpli ðə stoʊn ʌndɝ ɪz fit simd əz θɪn əz peɪpɝ, ən ði ɛnləs dʒɹɑp oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ pʊld ət hɪm. ðə læntɝn ən poʊl sim sʌɾənli hɛvi ɪnʌf tə pʊl ɪm ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə sæɾəl. hɛd spɪnɪŋ, hi bæk ðə beɪ əweɪ fɹəm ði əbɪs əz kɔʃəsli əz i hæɾ əpɹoʊtʃt.

Abruptly the stone under his feet seemed as thin as paper, and the endless drop over the edge pulled at him. The lantern and pole seemed suddenly heavy enough to pull him right out of the saddle. Head spinning, he backed the bay away from the abyss as cautiously as he had approached.

"ɪz ɪt tə ðɪs juv bɹɔɾ ʌs, ɛɛs sədaɪ?" nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ɔl ðɪs dʒʌs tə faɪn aʊt wɪv tə ɡoʊ bæk tə keɪɛmlɪn æftɝ ɔl?"

"Is it to this you've brought us, Aes Sedai?" Nynaeve said. "All this just to find out we have to go back to Caemlyn after all?"

"wi də nɑɾ əv tə ɡoʊ bæk," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "nɑɾ ɔl ðə weɪ tə keɪɛmlɪn. ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni pæðz əlɔŋ ðə weɪz tə ɛni pleɪs. wi niɾ oʊnli ɡoʊ bæk fɑɹ ɪnʌf fəɹ lɔɪəl tə faɪn ənʌðɝ pæθ ðət wɪl lid tə fæl dæɹə. lɔɪəl? lɔɪəl!"

"We do not have to go back," Moiraine said. "Not all the way to Caemlyn. There are many paths along the Ways to any place. We need only go back far enough for Loial to find another path that will lead to Fal Dara. Loial? Loial!"

ði oʊɡiɝ pʊl hɪmsɛlf əweɪ fɹəm stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə ɡæp wɪð ə vɪzəbəl ɛfɝt. "wʌt? oʊ. jɛs, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ kən faɪn ənʌðɝ pæθ. aɪ hæd." hɪz aɪz dʒɹɪftəd bæk tə ðə kæzəm, ən ɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃt. "aɪ hæd nɑt dʒɹim ðə dəkeɪ hæd ɡɔn soʊ fɑɹ. ɪf ðə bɹɪdʒəz ðɛmsɛlvz ɑɹ bɹeɪkɪŋ, ɪt meɪ bi ðəɾ aɪ kænɑt faɪn ðə pæθ jə wɑnt. ɪt meɪ bi ðəɾ aɪ kænɑt faɪn ə pæθ bæk, iðɝ. ðə bɹɪdʒəz kəd bi fɔlɪŋ bɪhaɪn əs ivən naʊ."

The Ogier pulled himself away from staring at the gap with a visible effort. "What? Oh. Yes, Aes Sedai. I can find another path. I had." His eyes drifted back to the chasm, and his ears twitched. "I had not dreamed the decay had gone so far. If the bridges themselves are breaking, it may be that I cannot find the path you want. It may be that I cannot find a path back, either. The bridges could be falling behind us even now."

"ðɛɹ əz tə bi ə weɪ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, hɪz vɔɪs flæt. hɪz aɪz sim tə ɡæðɝ ðə laɪt, tə ɡloʊ ɡoʊldən. ə wʊlf ət beɪ, ɹænd θɔt, stɑɹɾəld. ðæts wʌɾ i lʊks laɪk.

"There has to be a way," Perrin said, his voice flat. His eyes seemed to gather the light, to glow golden. A wolf at bay, Rand thought, startled. That's what he looks like.

"ɪt wɪl bi əz ðə wil wivz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt bɪliv ðə dəkeɪ ɪz əz fæst əz jə fɪɹ. lʊk ət ðə stoʊn, lɔɪəl. ivən aɪ kən tɛl ðət ðɪs ɪz ən oʊl bɹeɪk."

"It will be as the Wheel weaves," Moiraine said, "but I do not believe the decay is as fast as you fear. Look at the stone, Loial. Even I can tell that this is an old break."

"jɛs," lɔɪəl sɛd sloʊli. "jɛs, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ kən si ɪt. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ ɹeɪn əɹ wɪn hɪɹ, bʌt ðət stoʊn əz bɪn ɪn ði ɛɹ fəɹ tɛn jɪɹz, ət list." hi nɑɾəd wɪð ə ɹɪlivd ɡɹɪn, soʊ hæpi wɪð ðə dɪskʌvɝi ðət fəɹ ə moʊmən i sim tə fɝɡɛɾ ɪz fɪɹ. ðən i lʊkt ɝaʊn ən ʃɹʌɡd ənkʌmftəbli. "aɪ kəd faɪn ʌðɝ pæðz mɔɹ izəli ðən mæfəl dɑɾɝɑnɛl. tɑɹ vəlɑn, fəɹ ɪnstəns? əɹ stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ. ɪts oʊnli θɹi bɹɪdʒəz tə stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ fɹəm ðə læst aɪlənd. aɪ səpoʊz ði ɛldɝz wɑnə tɔk tə mi baɪ ðɪs taɪm."

"Yes," Loial said slowly. "Yes, Aes Sedai. I can see it. There is no rain or wind here, but that stone has been in the air for ten years, at least." He nodded with a relieved grin, so happy with the discovery that for a moment he seemed to forget his fear. Then he looked around and shrugged uncomfortably. "I could find other paths more easily than Mafal Dadaranell. Tar Valon, for instance? Or Stedding Shangtai. It's only three bridges to Stedding Shangtai from the last Island. I suppose the Elders want to talk to me by this time."

"fæl dæɹə, lɔɪəl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd fɝmli. "ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld laɪz bɪɑn fæl dæɹə, ən wi mʌst ɹitʃ ði aɪ."

"Fal Dara, Loial," Moiraine said firmly. "The Eye of the World lies beyond Fal Dara, and we must reach the Eye."

"fæl dæɹə," ði oʊɡiɝ əɡɹid ɹɪlʌktənli.

"Fal Dara," the Ogier agreed reluctantly.

bæk ət ði aɪlən lɔɪəl pɔɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə skɹɪpt-kʌvɝd slæb ɪntɛnli, dʒɹupɪŋ aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹɔn daʊn əz i mʌɾɝd hæf tə hɪmsɛlf. sun i wɑz tɔkɪŋ kəmplitli tə hɪmsɛlf, fəɹ i dʒɹɑpt ɪndə ði oʊɡiɝ læŋɡwədʒ. ðəɾ ɪnflɛktəd tʌŋ saʊndəd laɪk dip-vɔɪs bɝdz sɪŋɪŋ. ɪt simd ɑd tə ɹænd ðəɾ ə pipəl soʊ bɪɡ hæd sətʃ ə mjuzɪkəl læŋɡwədʒ.

Back at the Island Loial pored over the script-covered slab intently, drooping eyebrows drawn down as he muttered half to himself. Soon he was talking completely to himself, for he dropped into the Ogier language. That inflected tongue sounded like deep-voiced birds singing. It seemed odd to Rand that a people so big had such a musical language.

faɪnəli ði oʊɡiɝ nɑɾəd. əz i lɛɾ əm tə ðə tʃoʊzən bɹɪdʒ, hi tɝn tə pɪɹ fɔɹlɔɹnli ət ðə saɪnpoʊs bɪsaɪɾ ənʌðɝ. "θɹi kɹɔsɪŋz tə stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ." hi saɪd. bʌɾ i tʊk əm ɑn pæst wɪθaʊt stɑpɪŋ ən tɝn ɑntu ðə θɝd bɹɪdʒ bɪɑnd. hi lʊk bæk ɹɪɡɹɛtfəli əz ðeɪ stɑɹɾəd əkɹɔs, ðoʊ ðə bɹɪdʒ tə hɪz hoʊm wɑz hɪɾən ɪn ðə dɑɹk.

Finally the Ogier nodded. As he led them to the chosen bridge, he turned to peer forlornly at the signpost beside another. "Three crossings to Stedding Shangtai." He sighed. But he took them on past without stopping and turned onto the third bridge beyond. He looked back regretfully as they started across, though the bridge to his home was hidden in the dark.

ɹænd tʊk ðə beɪ ʌp bɪsaɪd ði oʊɡiɝ. "wɛn ðɪs ɪz oʊvɝ, lɔɪəl, jə ʃoʊ mi jəɹ stɛɾɪŋ, ən əl ʃoʊ jə ɛmənz fild. noʊ weɪz, ðoʊ. wɪl wɔk, əɹ ɹaɪd, ɪf ɪt teɪks ɔl sʌmɝ."

Rand took the bay up beside the Ogier. "When this is over, Loial, you show me your stedding, and I'll show you Emond's Field. No Ways, though. We'll walk, or ride, if it takes all summer."

"ju bɪliv ɪɾəl ɛvɝ bi oʊvɝ, ɹænd?"

"You believe it will ever be over, Rand?"

hi fɹaʊn ət ði oʊɡiɝ. "ju sɛɾ ɪt wəd teɪk tu deɪz tə ɹitʃ fæl dæɹə."

He frowned at the Ogier. "You said it would take two days to reach Fal Dara."

"nɑt ðə weɪz, ɹænd. ɔl ðə ɹɛst." lɔɪəl lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, tɔkɪŋ sɔfli wɪð læn əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd saɪd-baɪ-saɪd. "wʌt meɪks jə bɪliv ɪɾəl ɛvɝ bi oʊvɝ?"

"Not the Ways, Rand. All the rest." Loial looked over his shoulder at the Aes Sedai, talking softly with Lan as they rode side-by-side. "What makes you believe it will ever be over?"

ðə bɹɪdʒəz ən ɹæmps lɛɾ ʌp ən daʊn ən əkɹɔs. səmtaɪmz ə waɪt laɪn ɹæn ɔf ɪndə ðə dɑɹk fɹəm ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ, dʒʌs laɪk ðə laɪn ðeɪ hæd fɑloʊd fɹəm ðə weɪɡeɪɾ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ɹænd sɔ ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn u aɪd ðoʊz laɪnz kjʊɹiəsli, ən ə lɪɾəl wɪsfəli. nɪneɪiv, pɛɹɪn, mæt, ən ivən ɛɡwin lɛf ðə laɪnz ɹɪlʌktənli. ðəɹ wɑz ə weɪɡeɪɾ ət ði ʌðɝ ɛn ʌv itʃ ə ðɛm, ə ɡeɪt bæk ɪndə ðə wɝld, wɛɹ ðəɹ wɑz skaɪ ən sʌn ən wɪnd. ivən ðə wɪnd wʊɾə bɪn wɛlkəm. liv əm ðeɪ dɪd, ʌndɝ ði ɛɛs sədaɪz ʃɑɹp aɪ. bʌt ɹænd wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn tə lʊk bæk ivən æftɝ dɑɹk swɑloʊɾ aɪlən ən ɡaɪɾɪŋ ən laɪn.

The bridges and ramps led up and down and across. Sometimes a white line ran off into the dark from the Guiding, just like the line they had followed from the Waygate in Caemlyn. Rand saw that he was not the only one who eyed those lines curiously, and a little wistfully. Nynaeve, Perrin, Mat, and even Egwene left the lines reluctantly. There was a Waygate at the other end of each of them, a gate back into the world, where there was sky and sun and wind. Even the wind would have been welcome. Leave them they did, under the Aes Sedai's sharp eye. But Rand was not the only one to look back even after dark swallowed Island and Guiding and line.

ɹænd wɑz jɔnɪŋ baɪ ðə taɪm mɔɪɹeɪn ənaʊns ðət ðeɪ wəd stɑp fəɹ ðə naɪɾ ɑn wʌn ə ði aɪlənz. mæt lʊkt ət ðə blæknəs ɔl ɝaʊn əm ən snɪkɝd laʊdli, bʌɾ i ɡɑt daʊn əz kwɪkli əz ɛniwʌn ɛls. læn ən ðə bɔɪz ənsæɾəld ən hɑbəl ðə hɔɹsəz waɪl nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin sɛɾ ʌp ə smɔl ɔɪl stoʊv tə meɪk ti. lʊkɪŋ laɪk ðə beɪs ʌv ə læntɝn, ɪt wɑz wʌt læn sɛd wɔɹɾɝz juzd ɪn ðə blaɪt, wɛɹ ðə wʊd kəd bi deɪnʒɝəs tə bɝn. ðə wɔɹɾɝ pɹədus tʃɹaɪpɑd lɛɡz fɹəm ðə bæskəts ðeɪ tʊk ɔf ðə pæk hɔɹs, soʊ ðə læntɝn poʊlz kəd bi sɛɾ ɪn ə sɝkəl ɝaʊn ðɛɹ kæmpsaɪt.

Rand was yawning by the time Moiraine announced that they would stop for the night on one of the Islands. Mat looked at the blackness all around them and snickered loudly, but he got down as quickly as anyone else. Lan and the boys unsaddled and hobbled the horses while Nynaeve and Egwene set up a small oil stove to make tea. Looking like the base of a lantern, it was what Lan said Warders used in the Blight, where the wood could be dangerous to burn. The Warder produced tripod legs from the baskets they took off the pack horse, so the lantern poles could be set in a circle around their campsite.

lɔɪəl ɪɡzæmən ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən dʒɹɑp daʊn kɹɑslɛɡd ən ɹʌbd ə hæn əkɹɔs ðə dʌsti, pɑkmɑɹk stoʊn. "wʌns θɪŋz ɡɹu ɑn ði aɪlənz," hi sɛd sædli. "ɔl ðə bʊks tɛl ʌv ɪt. ðəɹ wɑz ɡɹin ɡɹæs tə slip ɑn, sɑft əz ɛni fɛðɝ bɛd. fɹut tʃɹiz tə spaɪs ðə fud jud bɹɔt wɪð ən æpəl əɹ ə pɛɹ əɹ ə bɛlfɹut, swiɾ ən kɹɪsp ən dʒusi wʌtɛvɝ ðə taɪm ə jɪɹ aʊtsaɪd."

Loial examined the Guiding for a moment, then dropped down crosslegged and rubbed a hand across the dusty, pockmarked stone. "Once things grew on the Islands," he said sadly. "All the books tell of it. There was green grass to sleep on, soft as any feather bed. Fruit trees to spice the food you'd brought with an apple or a pear or a bellfruit, sweet and crisp and juicy Whatever the time of year outside."

"nʌθɪŋ tə hʌnt," pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld, ðən lʊk sɝpɹaɪz ðəɾ i hæd spoʊkən.

"Nothing to hunt," Perrin growled, then looked surprised that he had spoken.

ɛɡwin hændəd lɔɪəl ə kʌp ə ti. hi hɛld ɪt wɪθaʊt dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ, stɛɹɪŋ əɾ ɪɾ əz ɪf i kəd faɪn ðə fɹut tʃɹiz ɪn ɪts dɛpθs.

Egwene handed Loial a cup of tea. He held it without drinking, staring at it as if he could find the fruit trees in its depths.

"ɑɹən jə gɑnə sɛt wɔɹdz?" nɪneɪiv æsk mɔɪɹeɪn. "ʃʊɹli ðəɹ mʌs bi wɝs ðən ɹæts ɪn ðɪs. ivən ɪf aɪ hævən sin ɛniθɪŋ, aɪ kən stɪl fil."

"Aren't you going to set wards?" Nynaeve asked Moiraine. "Surely there must be worse than rats in this. Even if I haven't seen anything, I can still feel."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɹʌbd əɹ fɪŋɡɝz əɡɛnst əɹ pɑmz dɪsteɪsfəli. "ju fil ðə teɪnt, ðə kɝʌpʃən ə ðə paʊɝ ðət meɪd ðə weɪz. əl nɑt juz ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪn ðə weɪz ənlɛs aɪ mʌst. ðə teɪn ɪz soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðət wʌtɛvɝ aɪ tʃɹaɪd tə də wəd ʃʊɹli bi kɝʌptɪd."

The Aes Sedai rubbed her fingers against her palms distastefully. "You feel the taint, the corruption of the Power that made the Ways. I will not use the One Power in the Ways unless I must. The taint is so strong that Whatever I tried to do would surely be corrupted."

ðət meɪɾ ɛvɹiwʌn əz saɪlən əz lɔɪəl. læn sɛɾəld daʊn tə hɪz mil məθɑɾɪkəli, əz ɪf i wɝ stoʊkɪŋ ə faɪɝ, ðə fud lɛs ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən fjulɪŋ ɪz bɑɾi. mɔɪɹeɪn eɪt wɛl, tu, ən əz tɪɾəli əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ nɑt skwɑɾɪŋ ɑn bɛɹ stoʊn kwaɪt lɪɾɝəli ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə noʊwɛɹ, bʌt ɹænd oʊnli pɪkt əɾ ɪz fud. ðə taɪni fleɪm ə ði ɔɪl stoʊv ɡeɪv dʒʌst ɪnʌf hit tə bɔɪl wɔɾɝ, bʌɾ i kɹaʊtʃt təwɔɹɾ ɪɾ əz ɪf i kəd soʊk ʌp wɔɹmθ. hɪz ʃoʊldɝz bɹʌʃt mæt ən pɛɹɪn. ðeɪ ɔl meɪɾ ə taɪt sɝkəl ɝaʊn ðə stoʊv. mæt hɛld ɪz bɹɛɾ ən miɾ ən tʃiz fɝɡɑɾən ɪn ɪz hænz, ən pɛɹɪn sɛɾ ɪz tɪn pleɪt daʊn æftɝ oʊnli ə fju baɪts. ðə mud bɪkeɪm mɔɹ ən mɔɹ ɡlʌm, ən ɛvɹiwʌn lʊk daʊn, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðə dɑɹk ɝaʊn ðɛm.

That made everyone as silent as Loial. Lan settled down to his meal methodically, as if he were stoking a fire, the food less important than fueling his body. Moiraine ate well, too, and as tidily as if they were not squatting on bare stone quite literally in the middle of nowhere, but Rand only picked at his food. The tiny flame of the oil stove gave just enough heat to boil water, but he crouched toward it as if he could soak up warmth. His shoulders brushed Mat and Perrin. They all made a tight circle around the stove. Mat held his bread and meat and cheese forgotten in his hands, and Perrin set his tin plate down after only a few bites. The mood became more and more glum, and everyone looked down, avoiding the dark around them.

mɔɪɹeɪn stʌɾid əm əz ʃi eɪt. faɪnəli ʃi pʊɾ əɹ pleɪɾ əsaɪɾ ən pæɾəd əɹ lɪps wɪð ə næpkɪn. "aɪ kən tɛl jə wʌn tʃɪɹfəl θɪŋ. aɪ də nɑt θɪŋk tɑm mɛɹɪlɪn ɪz dɛd."

Moiraine studied them as she ate. Finally she put her plate aside and patted her lips with a napkin. "I can tell you one cheerful thing. I do not think Thom Merrilin is dead."

ɹænd lʊkt əɾ əɹ ʃɑɹpli. "bʌt ðə feɪd."

Rand looked at her sharply. "But the Fade."

"mæt toʊl mi wʌt hæpən ɪn waɪtbɹɪdʒ," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd. "pipəl ðəɹ mɛnʃən ə ɡlimən, bʌt ðeɪ sɛd nʌθɪŋ ə hɪm daɪɪŋ. ðeɪ wəd hæv, aɪ θɪŋk, ɪf ə ɡlimən hæd bɪn kɪld. waɪtbɹɪdʒ ɪz nɑt soʊ bɪɡ əz fəɹ ə ɡlimən tə bi ə smɔl θɪŋ. ən tɑm ɪz ə pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn ðət wivz ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn jə θɹi. tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt ə pɑɹt, aɪ bɪliv, tə bi kʌɾ ɔf jɛt."

"Mat told me what happened in Whitebridge," the Aes Sedai said. "People there mentioned a gleeman, but they said nothing of him dying. They would have, I think, if a gleeman had been killed. Whitebridge is not so big as for a gleeman to be a small thing. And Thom is a part of the Pattern that weaves itself around you three. Too important a part, I believe, to be cut off yet."

tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt? ɹænd θɔt. haʊ kəd mɔɪɹeɪn noʊ? "mɪn? ʃi sɔ sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt tɑm?"

Too important? Rand thought. How could Moiraine know? "Min? She saw something about Thom?"

"ʃi sɔ ə ɡɹeɪt dil," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ɹaɪli. "əbaʊɾ ɔl ə ju. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ kəɾ ʌndɝstæn hæf ʌv wʌt ʃi sɔ, bʌɾ ivən ʃi dʌz nɑt. oʊl bæɹiɝz feɪl. bʌt wɛðɝ wʌt mɪn dʌz ɪz oʊld əɹ nu, ʃi siz tʃɹu. jəɹ feɪts ɑɹ baʊn təɡɛðɝ. tɑm mɛɹɪlɪnz, tu."

"She saw a great deal," Moiraine said wryly. "About all of you. I wish I could understand half of what she saw, but even she does not. Old barriers fail. But whether what Min does is old or new, she sees true. Your fates are bound together. Thom Merrilin's, too."

nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ə dɪsmɪsɪv snɪf ən pɔɹd hɝsɛlf ənʌðɝ kʌp ə ti.

Nynaeve gave a dismissive sniff and poured herself another cup of tea.

"aɪ doʊn si haʊ ʃi sɔ ɛniθɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɛni ʌv ʌs," mæt sɛd wɪð ə ɡɹɪn. "æz aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪt, ʃi spɛn moʊst ə hɝ taɪm lʊkɪŋ ət ɹænd."

"I don't see how she saw anything about any of us," Mat said with a grin. "As I remember it, she spent most of her time looking at Rand."

ɛɡwin ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ. "oʊ? jə dɪdn tɛl mi ðæt, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ."

Egwene raised an eyebrow. "Oh? You didn't tell me that, Moiraine Sedai."

ɹænd ɡlænst ət hɝ. ʃi wɑz nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, bʌɾ əɹ toʊn hæd bɪn tu kɛɹfəli nutʃɹəl. "aɪ tɔk tə hɝ wʌns," hi sɛd. "ʃi dʒɹɛsəz laɪk ə bɔɪ, ən əɹ hɛɹ ɪz əz ʃɔɹɾ əz maɪn."

Rand glanced at her. She was not looking at him, but her tone had been too carefully neutral. "I talked to her once," he said. "She dresses like a boy, and her hair is as short as mine."

"ju tɔk tə hɝ. wʌns." ɛɡwin nɑɾəd sloʊli. stɪl nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ kʌp tə hɝ lɪps.

"You talked to her. Once." Egwene nodded slowly. Still not looking at him, she raised her cup to her lips.

"mɪn wɑz dʒʌst sʌmbɑɾi hu wɝkt ət ði ɪn ɪn bɛɹlən," pɛɹɪn sɛd. "nɑt laɪk ɛɹæm."

"Min was just somebody who worked at the inn in Baerlon," Perrin said. "Not like Aram."

ɛɡwin tʃoʊkt ɑn əɹ ti. "tu hɑt," ʃi mʌɾɝd.

Egwene choked on her tea. "Too hot," she muttered.

"huz ɛɹæm?" ɹænd æskt. pɛɹɪn smaɪld, mʌtʃ laɪk mæts smaɪl ɪn ði oʊl deɪz wən i wɑz ʌp tə mɪstʃəf, ən hɪd bɪhaɪn ɪz kʌp.

"Who's Aram?" Rand asked. Perrin smiled, much like Mat's smile in the old days when he was up to mischief, and hid behind his cup.

"wʌn ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl," ɛɡwin sɛd kæʒəwəli, bʌt ɹɛd spɑts blumd ɪn əɹ tʃiks.

"One of the Traveling People," Egwene said casually, but red spots bloomed in her cheeks.

"wʌn ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl," pɛɹɪn sɛd blænli. "hi dænsəz. laɪk ə bɝd. wɑzn ðət wʌt jə sɛd, ɛɡwin? ɪt wɑz laɪk flaɪɪŋ wɪð ə bɝd?"

"One of the Traveling People," Perrin said blandly. "He dances. Like a bird. Wasn't that what you said, Egwene? It was like flying with a bird?"

ɛɡwin sɛɾ əɹ kʌp daʊn dɪlɪbɝətli. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ ɪf ɛniwʌn ɛls ɪz taɪɝd, bʌɾ aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ tə slip."

Egwene set her cup down deliberately. "I don't know if anyone else is tired, but I'm going to sleep."

əz ʃi ɹoʊl hɝsɛlf ʌp ɪn əɹ blæŋkəts, pɛɹɪn ɹitʃt oʊvɝ tə nʌdʒ ɹænd ɪn ðə ɹɪbz ən wɪŋkt. ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɡɹɪnɪŋ bæk. bɝn mi, ɪf aɪ dɪdn kʌm aʊt bɛs fəɹ ə tʃeɪnʒ. aɪ wɪʃ aɪ nu əz mʌtʃ əbaʊt wɪmən əz pɛɹɪn.

As she rolled herself up in her blankets, Perrin reached over to nudge Rand in the ribs and winked. Rand found himself grinning back. Burn me, if I didn't come out best for a change. I wish I knew as much about women as Perrin.

"meɪbi, ɹænd," mæt sɛd slaɪli, "ju ɔt tə tɛl ɛɡwin əbaʊt fɑɹmɝ ɡɹɪnwɛlz dɔɾɝ, ɛls." ɛɡwin lɪftəɾ əɹ hɛd tə stɛɹ fɝst ət mæt, ðən ət hɪm.

"Maybe, Rand," Mat said slyly, "you ought to tell Egwene about Farmer Grinwell's daughter, Else." Egwene lifted her head to stare first at Mat, then at him.

hi heɪstəli ɡɑɾ ʌp tə fɛtʃ ɪz oʊn blæŋkəts. "slip saʊnz ɡʊd tə mi ɹaɪt naʊ."

He hastily got up to fetch his own blankets. "Sleep sounds good to me right now."

ɔl ði ɛmənz fil pipəl bɪɡæn sikɪŋ ðɛɹ blæŋkəts ðɛn, ən lɔɪəl, tu. mɔɪɹeɪn sæt sɪpɪŋ əɹ ti. ən læn. ðə wɔɹɾɝ dɪd nɑt lʊk əz ɪf i ɛvɝ ɪntɛndəd tə slip, əɹ niɾəd tə.

All the Emond's Field people began seeking their blankets then, and Loial, too. Moiraine sat sipping her tea. And Lan. The Warder did not look as if he ever intended to sleep, or needed to.

ivən ɹoʊld ʌp fəɹ slip, noʊ wʌn wɑntəd tə ɡɛt vɛɹi fɑɹ fɹəm ði ʌðɝz. ðeɪ meɪɾ ə smɔl sɝkəl ə blæŋkət-kʌvɝd maʊnz ɹaɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə stoʊv, ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃɪŋ wʌn ənʌðɝ.

Even rolled up for sleep, no one wanted to get very far from the others. They made a small circle of blanket-covered mounds right around the stove, almost touching one another.

"ɹænd," mæt wɪspɝd, "wɑz ðəɹ ɛniθɪŋ bɪtwin jə ən mɪn? aɪ bɛɹli ɡɑɾ ə lʊk ət hɝ. ʃi wɑz pɹɪɾi, bʌt ʃi mʌs bi nɪɹli əz oʊld əz nɪneɪiv."

"Rand," Mat whispered, "was there anything between you and Min? I barely got a look at her. She was pretty, but she must be nearly as old as Nynaeve."

"wʌɾ əbaʊt ðɪs ɛls?" pɛɹɪn æɾəd fɹəm ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə hɪm. "ʃi pɹɪɾi?"

"What about this Else?" Perrin added from the other side of him. "She pretty?"

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz," hi mʌmbəld, "kæn aɪ ivən tɔk tə ə ɡɝl? jə tu ɑɹ əz bæɾ əz ɛɡwin."

"Blood and ashes," he mumbled, "can't I even talk to a girl? You two are as bad as Egwene."

"æz ðə wɪzdəm wəd seɪ," mæt tʃaɪɾɪd mɑkəŋli, "wɑtʃ jəɹ tʌŋ. wɛl, ɪf jə woʊn tɔk əbaʊɾ ɪt, aɪm gɑnə ɡɛt səm slip."

"As the Wisdom would say," Mat chided mockingly, "watch your tongue. Well, if you won't talk about it, I'm going to get some sleep."

"ɡʊd," ɹænd ɡɹʌmbəld. "ðæts ðə fɝs disən θɪŋ juv sɛd."

"Good," Rand grumbled. "That's the first decent thing you've said."

slip wɑz nɑɾ izəli kʌm baɪ, ðoʊ. ðə stoʊn wɑz hɑɹd, haʊɛvɝ ɹænd leɪ, ən i kəd fil ðə pɪts θɹu hɪz blæŋkət. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ weɪ tə ɪmædʒən i wɑz ɛniwɛɹ bʌɾ ɪn ðə weɪz, meɪd baɪ ðə mɛn u hæd bɹoʊkən ðə wɝld, teɪntɪd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. hi kɛpt pɪktʃɝɪŋ ðə bɹoʊkən bɹɪdʒ, ən ðə nʌθɪŋ ʌndɝ ɪt.

Sleep was not easily come by, though. The stone was hard, however Rand lay, and he could feel the pits through his blanket. There was no way to imagine he was anywhere but in the Ways, made by the men who had broken the world, tainted by the Dark One. He kept picturing the broken bridge, and the nothing under it.

wən i tɝnd wʌn weɪ hi faʊn mæt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm; lʊkɪŋ θɹu hɪm, ɹɪli. mɑkɪŋ wɑz fɝɡɑɾən wən ðə dɑɹk ɝaʊn əm wɑz ɹɪmɛmbɝd. hi ɹoʊl ði ʌðɝ weɪ, ən pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɪz aɪz oʊpən, tu. pɛɹɪnz feɪs wɑz lɛs əfɹeɪd ðən mæts, bʌɾ i hæɾ ɪz hænz ɑn ɪz tʃɛst, tæpɪŋ ɪz θʌmz təɡɛðɝ wɝidli.

When he turned one way he found Mat looking at him; looking through him, really. Mocking was forgotten when the dark around them was remembered. He rolled the other way, and Perrin had his eyes open, too. Perrin's face was less afraid than Mat's, but he had his hands on his chest, tapping his thumbs together worriedly.

mɔɪɹeɪn meɪɾ ə sɝkəɾ ə ðɛm, nilɪŋ baɪ itʃ pɝsənz hɛɾ ən bɛndɪŋ daʊn tə spik sɔfli. ɹænd kəd nɑt hɪɹ wʌt ʃi sɛd tə pɛɹɪn, bʌɾ ɪt meɪɾ ɪz θʌmz stɑp. wən ʃi bɛn oʊvɝ ɹænd, hɝ feɪs ɔlmoʊs tʌtʃɪŋ hɪz, ʃi sɛɾ ɪn ə loʊ, kʌmfɝɾɪŋ vɔɪs, "ivən hɪɹ, jəɹ dɛstəni pɹətɛks ju. nɑɾ ivən ðə dɑɹk wʌn kən tʃeɪnʒ ðə pæɾɝn kəmplitli. jə ɑɹ seɪf fɹəm hɪm, soʊ lɔŋ əz aɪm kloʊs. jəɹ dʒɹimz ɑɹ seɪf. fəɹ ə taɪm, jɛt, ðeɪ ɑɹ seɪf."

Moiraine made a circuit of them, kneeling by each person's head and bending down to speak softly. Rand could not hear what she said to Perrin, but it made his thumbs stop. When she bent over Rand, her face almost touching his, she said in a low, comforting voice, "Even here, your destiny protects you. Not even the Dark One can change the Pattern completely. You are safe from him, so long as I am close. Your dreams are safe. For a time, yet, they are safe."

əz ʃi pæs fɹəm ɪm tə mæt, hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf ʃi θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ðət sɪmpəl, ðət ʃi kəd tɛl ɪm i wɑz seɪf ən i wəd bɪliv ɪt. bʌt sʌmhaʊ hi dɪd fil seɪf - seɪfɝ, ət list. θɪŋkɪŋ ðæt, hi dʒɹɪftəɾ ɪndə slip ən dɪd nɑt dʒɹim.

As she passed from him to Mat, he wondered if she thought it was that simple, that she could tell him he was safe and he would believe it. But somehow he did feel safe - safer, at least. Thinking that, he drifted into sleep and did not dream.

læn woʊk ðɛm. ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd slɛpt; hi dɪd nɑt lʊk taɪɝd, nɑɾ ivən əz taɪɝɾ əz ðoʊz u hæd leɪd səm aʊɝz ɑn ðə hɑɹd stoʊn. mɔɪɹeɪn əlaʊɾ ɪnʌf taɪm tə meɪk ti, bʌɾ oʊnli wʌn kʌp əpis. ðeɪ eɪt bɹɛkfəst ɪn ðə sæɾəl, lɔɪəl ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ liɾɪŋ. ɪt wɑz ðə seɪm mil əz ði ʌðɝz, bɹɛɾ ən miɾ ən tʃiz. ɹænd θɔɾ ɪt wəd bi izi tə ɡɛt taɪɝɾ ə bɹɛɾ ən miɾ ən tʃiz.

Lan woke them. Rand wondered if the Warder had slept; he did not look tired, not even as tired as those who had laid some hours on the hard stone. Moiraine allowed enough time to make tea, but only one cup apiece. They ate breakfast in the saddle, Loial and the Warder leading. It was the same meal as the others, bread and meat and cheese. Rand thought it would be easy to get tired of bread and meat and cheese.

nɑt lɔŋ æftɝ ðə læs kɹʌm wɑz lɪkt ɔf ə fɪŋɡɝ, læn sɛd kwaɪətli, "sʌmwʌn ɪz fɑloʊɪŋ ʌs. əɹ sʌmθɪŋ." ðeɪ wɝ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə bɹɪdʒ, boʊθ ɛnz ʌv ɪt hɪɾən.

Not long after the last crumb was licked off a finger, Lan said quietly, "Someone is following us. Or something." They were in the middle of a bridge, both ends of it hidden.

mæt dʒɝkt ən æɹoʊ fɹəm ɪz kwɪvɝ ænd, bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn kəd stɑp hɪm, lust ɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

Mat jerked an arrow from his quiver and, before anyone could stop him, loosed it in the dark behind them.

"aɪ nu aɪ ʃʊdn əv dʌn ðɪs," lɔɪəl mʌɾɝd. "nɛvɝ dil wɪð ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪksɛpt ɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ."

"I knew I shouldn't have done this," Loial muttered. "Never deal with an Aes Sedai except in a stedding."

læn pʊʃt ðə baʊ daʊn bɪfɔɹ mæt kəd nɑk ənʌðɝ. "stɑp ðæt, jə vɪlədʒ ɪɾiət. ðɛɹz noʊ weɪ tə tɛl u ɪɾ ɪz."

Lan pushed the bow down before Mat could nock another. "Stop that, you village idiot. There's no way to tell who it is."

"ðæts ði oʊnli pleɪs ðəɹ seɪf," ði oʊɡiɝ wɛn ɑn.

"That's the only place they're safe," the Ogier went on.

"wʌɾ ɛls wəd bi ɪn ə pleɪs laɪk ðɪs bɪsaɪdz sʌmθɪŋ ivəl?" mæt dɪmændəd.

"What else would be in a place like this besides something evil?" Mat demanded.

"ðæts wʌt ði ɛldɝz seɪ, ən aɪ ʃʊɾə lɪsən tə ðɛm."

"That's what the Elders say, and I should have listened to them."

"wi ɑɹ, fəɹ wʌn," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd dʒɹaɪli.

"We are, for one," the Warder said dryly.

"meɪbi ɪts ənʌðɝ tʃɹævəlɝ," ɛɡwin sɛd hoʊpfəli. "æn oʊɡiɝ, pɝhæps."

"Maybe it's another traveler," Egwene said hopefully. "An Ogier, perhaps."

"oʊɡiɝ əv mɔɹ sɛns ðən tə juz ðə weɪz," lɔɪəl ɡɹaʊld. "ɔl bʌt lɔɪəl, hu hæz noʊ sɛns əɾ ɔl. ɛldɝ heɪmən ɔlweɪz sɛɾ ɪt, ən ɪts tʃɹu."

"Ogier have more sense than to use the Ways," Loial growled. "All but Loial, who has no sense at all. Elder Haman always said it, and it's true."

"wʌt dʒju fil, læn?" mɔɪɹeɪn æskt. "ɪz ɪt sʌmθɪŋ ðət sɝvz ðə dɑɹk wʌn?"

"What do you feel, Lan?" Moiraine asked. "Is it something that serves the Dark One?"

ðə wɔɹɾɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd sloʊli. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ," hi sɛɾ əz ɪf ðət sɝpɹaɪz hɪm. "aɪ kænɑt tɛl. pɝhæps ɪts ðə weɪz, ən ðə teɪnt. ɪɾ ɔl filz ɹɔŋ. bʌt huɛvɝ ɪɾ ɪz, əɹ wʌɾ ɛvɝ, hiz nɑt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kætʃ ʌs. hi ɔlmoʊs kɑɾ ʌp ət ðə læst aɪlən ən skæmpɝd bæk əkɹɔs ðə bɹɪdʒ soʊ əz nɑt tə. ɪf aɪ fɔl bɪhaɪnd, aɪ maɪt sɝpɹaɪz ɪm ðoʊ, ən si hu, əɹ wʌt, hi ɪz."

The Warder shook his head slowly. "I don't know," he said as if that surprised him. "I cannot tell. Perhaps it's the Ways, and the taint. It all feels wrong. But whoever it is, or what ever, he's not trying to catch us. He almost caught up at the last Island and scampered back across the bridge so as not to. If I fall behind, I might surprise him though, and see who, or what, he is."

"ɪf jə fɔl bɪhaɪnd, wɔɹɾɝ," lɔɪəl sɛd fɝmli, "jul spɛn ðə ɹɛst ə jəɹ laɪf ɪn ðə weɪz. ivən ɪf jə kən ɹiɾ oʊɡiɝ, aɪ hæv nɛvɝ hɝɾ əɹ ɹɛɾ ʌv ə hjumən u kəd faɪn ɪz pæθ ɔf ðə fɝst aɪlən lækɪŋ ən oʊɡiɝ ɡaɪd. kən jə ɹɛɾ oʊɡiɝ?"

"If you fall behind, Warder," Loial said firmly, "you'll spend the rest of your life in the Ways. Even if you can read Ogier, I have never heard or read of a human who could find his path off the first Island lacking an Ogier guide. Can you read Ogier?"

læn ʃʊk ɪz hɛɾ əɡɛn, ən mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "soʊ lɔŋ əz i dʌz nɑt tʃɹʌbəl ʌs, wɪl nɑt tʃɹʌbəl hɪm. wɪv noʊ taɪm. noʊ taɪm."

Lan shook his head again, and Moiraine said, "So long as he does not trouble us, we will not trouble him. We have no time. No time."

əz ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɔf ðə bɹɪdʒ ɑntu ðə nɛkst aɪlənd, lɔɪəl sɛd, "ɪf aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə læst ɡaɪɾɪŋ kɝɛkli, ðəɹ ɪz ə pæθ fɹəm hɪɹ ðət lidz təwɔɹd tɑɹ vəlɑn. hæf ə deɪz dʒɝni ət moʊst. nɑt kwaɪɾ əz lɔŋ əz ɪɾəl teɪk əs tə ɹitʃ mæfəl dɑɾɝɑnɛl. aɪm ʃʊɹ ðət - "

As they rode off the bridge onto the next Island, Loial said, "If I remember the last Guiding correctly, there is a path from here that leads toward Tar Valon. Half a day's journey at most. Not quite as long as it will take us to reach Mafal Dadaranell. I'm sure that - "

hi kʌɾ ɔf əz ðə laɪɾ ə ðɛɹ læntɝnz ɹitʃt ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ. nɪɹ ðə tɑp ə ðə slæb, dipli tʃɪzəld laɪnz, ʃɑɹp ən æŋɡjəlɝ, meɪd wunz ɪn ðə stoʊn. sʌɾənli lænz əlɝtnəs wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ hɪɾən. hi ɹɪmeɪn izəli ɪɹɛkt ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, bʌt ɹænd hæd ðə sʌɾən ɪmpɹɛʃən ðət ðə wɔɹɾɝ kəd fil ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɝaʊn hɪm, ivən fil ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm bɹiðɪŋ. læn bɪɡæn sɝkəlɪŋ ɪz stæljən ɝaʊn ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ, spaɪɹəlɪŋ aʊtwɝd. hi ɹoʊɾ əz ɪf i wɝ ɹɛɾi tə bi ətækt, əɹ tə ətæk hɪmsɛlf.

He cut off as the light of their lanterns reached the Guiding. Near the top of the slab, deeply chiseled lines, sharp and angular, made wounds in the stone. Suddenly Lan's alertness was no longer hidden. He remained easily erect in his saddle, but Rand had the sudden impression that the Warder could feel everything around him, even feel the rest of them breathing. Lan began circling his stallion around the Guiding, spiraling outward. He rode as if he were ready to be attacked, or to attack himself.

"ðɪs ɪkspleɪnz mʌtʃ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɔfli, "æn ɪt meɪks mi əfɹeɪd. soʊ mʌtʃ. aɪ ʃəɾ əv ɡɛst. ðə teɪnt, ðə dəkeɪ. aɪ ʃəɾ əv ɡɛst."

"This explains much," Moiraine said softly, "and it makes me afraid. So much. I should have guessed. The taint, the decay. I should have guessed."

"ɡɛst wʌt?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd dʒʌst əz lɔɪəl æskt, "wʌɾ ɪz ɪt? hu dɪd ðɪs? aɪv nɛvɝ sin əɹ hɝɾ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ laɪk ɪt."

"Guessed what?" Nynaeve demanded just as Loial asked, "What is it? Who did this? I've never seen or heard of anything like it."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ feɪst əm kɑmli. "tʃɹɑləks." ʃi ɪɡnɔɹd ðɛɹ fɹaɪɾənd ɡæsps. "ɔɹ feɪdz. ðoʊz ɑɹ tʃɹɑlɑk ɹunz. ðə tʃɹɑləks əv dɪskʌvɝd haʊ tə ɛntɝ ðə weɪz. ðət mʌs bi haʊ ðeɪ ɡɑt tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ʌndɪskʌvɝd; θɹu ðə weɪɡeɪɾ ət meɪnɛðɝən. ðəɹ ɪz ət list wʌn weɪɡeɪɾ ɪn ðə blaɪt." ʃi ɡlæns təwɔɹd læn bɪfɔɹ kəntɪnjuɪŋ; ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz fɑɹ ɪnʌf əweɪ ðəɾ oʊnli ðə feɪn laɪɾ ə hɪz læntɝn kəd bi sin. "meɪnɛðɝən wɑz dɪstʃɹɔɪd, bʌɾ ɔlmoʊs nʌθɪŋ kən dɪstʃɹɔɪ ə weɪɡeɪt. ðəɾ ɪz haʊ ðə feɪdz kəd ɡæðɝ ə smɔl ɑɹmi ɝaʊn keɪɛmlɪn wɪθaʊt ɹeɪzɪŋ ən əlɑɹm ɪn ɛvɹi neɪʃən bɪtwin ðə blaɪɾ ən ændɝ." pɔzɪŋ, ʃi tʌtʃt əɹ lɪps θɔtfəli. "bʌt ðeɪ kænɑt noʊ ɔl ðə pæðz jɛt, ɛls ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn pɔɹɪŋ ɪndə keɪɛmlɪn θɹu ðə ɡeɪt wi juzd. jɛs."

The Aes Sedai faced them calmly. "Trollocs." She ignored their frightened gasps. "Or Fades. Those are Trolloc runes. The Trollocs have discovered how to enter the Ways. That must be how they got to the Two Rivers undiscovered; through the Waygate at Manetheren. There is at least one Waygate in the Blight." She glanced toward Lan before continuing; the Warder was far enough away that only the faint light of his lantern could be seen. "Manetheren was destroyed, but almost nothing can destroy a Waygate. That is how the Fades could gather a small army around Caemlyn without raising an alarm in every nation between the Blight and Andor." Pausing, she touched her lips thoughtfully. "But they cannot know all the paths yet, else they would have been pouring into Caemlyn through the gate we used. Yes."

ɹænd ʃɪvɝd. wɔkɪŋ θɹu ðə weɪɡeɪt tə faɪn tʃɹɑləks weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə dɑɹk, hʌnʒɹədz ə ðɛm, pɝhæps θaʊzənz, twɪstəd dʒaɪəns wɪð hæf-ænəməl feɪsəz snɑɹlɪŋ əz ðeɪ lɛp fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ðə blæknəs tə kɪl. əɹ wɝs.

Rand shivered. Walking through the Waygate to find Trollocs waiting in the dark, hundreds of them, perhaps thousands, twisted giants with half-animal faces snarling as they leaped forward in the blackness to kill. Or worse.

"ðeɪ doʊn juz ðə weɪz izəli," læn kɔld. hɪz læntɝn wɑz noʊ mɔɹ ðən twɛnti spænz ɔf, bʌt ðə laɪɾ ʌv ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə dɪm, fʌzi bɔl ðət sim vɛɹi dɪstən tə ðoʊz ɝaʊn ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ. mɔɪɹeɪn lɛd ðə weɪ tə hɪm. ɹænd wɪʃt ɪz stʌmək wɝ ɛmpti wən i sɔ wʌt ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd faʊnd.

"They don't use the Ways easily," Lan called. His lantern was no more than twenty spans off, but the light of it was only a dim, fuzzy ball that seemed very distant to those around the Guiding. Moiraine led the way to him. Rand wished his stomach were empty when he saw what the Warder had found.

ət ðə fʊɾ ʌv wʌn ə ðə bɹɪdʒəz ðə fɹoʊzən ʃeɪps ə tʃɹɑləks ɹɪɹd, kɑt fleɪlɪŋ əbaʊɾ əm wɪð hʊkt æksiz ən saɪð-laɪk sɔɹdz. ɡɹeɪ ən pɪɾəd laɪk ðə stoʊn, ðə hjudʒ bɑɾiz wɝ hæf sʌŋkən ɪn ðə swoʊlən, bʌbəl sɝfəs. səm ə ðə bʌbəlz hæd bɝst, ɹɪvilɪŋ mɔɹ snaʊɾəd feɪsəz, fɝɛvɝ snɑɹlɪŋ wɪð fɪɹ. ɹænd hɝd sʌmwʌn ɹɛtʃɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ən swɑloʊd hɑɹd tə kip fɹəm dʒɔɪnɪŋ huɛvɝ ɪt wɑz. ivən fəɹ tʃɹɑləks ɪt hæd bɪn ə hɔɹəbəl weɪ tə daɪ.

At the foot of one of the bridges the frozen shapes of Trollocs reared, caught flailing about them with hooked axes and scythe-like swords. Gray and pitted like the stone, the huge bodies were half sunken in the swollen, bubbled surface. Some of the bubbles had burst, revealing more snouted faces, forever snarling with fear. Rand heard someone retching behind him, and swallowed hard to keep from joining whoever it was. Even for Trollocs it had been a horrible way to die.

ə fju fit bɪɑn ðə tʃɹɑləks ðə bɹɪdʒ ɛndəd. ðə saɪnpoʊs leɪ ʃæɾɝd ɪndə ə θaʊzənd ʃɑɹdz.

A few feet beyond the Trollocs the bridge ended. The signpost lay shattered into a thousand shards.

lɔɪəl ɡɑt daʊn fɹəm ɪz hɔɹs dʒɪnʒɝli, aɪɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑləks, əz ɪf i θɔt ðeɪ maɪt kʌm bæk tə laɪf. hi ɪɡzæmən ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ə ðə saɪnpoʊs hɝidli, pɪkɪŋ aʊt ðə mɛɾəl skɹɪp ðət hæd bɪn ɪnleɪɾ ɪn ðə stoʊn, ðən skɹæmbəl bæk ɪndə hɪz sæɾəl. "ðɪs wɑz ðə fɝs bɹɪdʒ ə ðə pæθ fɹəm hɪɹ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn," hi sɛd.

Loial got down from his horse gingerly, eyeing the Trollocs, as if he thought they might come back to life. He examined the remains of the signpost hurriedly, picking out the metal script that had been inlaid in the stone, then scrambled back into his saddle. "This was the first bridge of the path from here to Tar Valon," he said.

mæt wɑz skɹʌbɪŋ ðə bæk ə hɪz hæn əkɹɔs ɪz maʊθ, wɪð ɪz hɛd tɝn əweɪ fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑləks. ɛɡwin hɪɾ əɹ feɪs ɪn əɹ hænz. ɹænd muvd ɪz hɔɹs kloʊs tə bɛlə ən tʌtʃt əɹ ʃoʊldɝ. ʃi twɪstəɾ ɝaʊn ən klʌtʃt hɪm, ʃʌɾɝɪŋ. hi wɑntəd tə ʃʌɾɝ, tu; hɝ hoʊldɪŋ ɪm wɑz ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət kɛpt ɪm fɹəm ɪt.

Mat was scrubbing the back of his hand across his mouth, with his head turned away from the Trollocs. Egwene hid her face in her hands. Rand moved his horse close to Bela and touched her shoulder. She twisted around and clutched him, shuddering. He wanted to shudder, too; her holding him was the only thing that kept him from it.

"æz wɛl wəɹ nɑt ɡoʊɪŋ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn jɛt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd.

"As well we are not going to Tar Valon yet," Moiraine said.

nɪneɪiv ɹaʊndəɾ ɑn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. "haʊ kən jə teɪk ɪt soʊ kɑmli? ðə seɪm kəd hæpən tə ʌs!"

Nynaeve rounded on the Aes Sedai. "How can you take it so calmly? The same could happen to us!"

"pɝhæps," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɝinəli, ən nɪneɪiv ɡɹaʊn əɹ tiθ soʊ hɑɹd ɹænd kəd hɪɹ əm ɡɹeɪt. "ɪɾ ɪz mɔɹ laɪkli, ðoʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn wɛn ɑn, ənɹʌfəld, "ðæt ðə mɛn, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, hu meɪd ðə weɪz pɹətɛktəd ðɛm, bɪldɪŋ ɪn tʃɹæps fəɹ kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ɪts sʌmθɪŋ ðeɪ mʌst əv fɪɹd ðɛn, bɪfɔɹ ðə hæfmən ən tʃɹɑləks hæd bɪn dʒɹɪvən ɪndə ðə blaɪt. ɪn ɛni keɪs, wi kænɑt tɛɹi hɪɹ, ən wʌtɛvɝ weɪ wi tʃuz, bæk əɹ əhɛd, ɪz əz laɪkli tə hæv ə tʃɹæp əz ɛni ʌðɝ. lɔɪəl, dʒju noʊ ðə nɛks bɹɪdʒ?"

"Perhaps," Moiraine said serenely, and Nynaeve ground her teeth so hard Rand could hear them grate. "It is more likely, though," Moiraine went on, unruffled, "that the men, the Aes Sedai, who made the Ways protected them, building in traps for creatures of the Dark One. It is something they must have feared then, before the Halfmen and Trollocs had been driven into the Blight. In any case, we cannot tarry here, and Whatever way we choose, back or ahead, is as likely to have a trap as any other. Loial, do you know the next bridge?"

"jɛs. jɛs, ðeɪ dɪd nɑt ɹuən ðət pɑɹɾ ə ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ, θæŋk ðə laɪt." fəɹ ðə fɝs taɪm lɔɪəl simd əz iɡɝ tə ɡoʊ ɑn əz mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd. hi hæɾ ɪz bɪɡ hɔɹs muvɪŋ bɪfɔɹ i fɪnɪʃt spikɪŋ.

"Yes. Yes, they did not ruin that part of the Guiding, thank the Light." For the first time Loial seemed as eager to go on as Moiraine did. He had his big horse moving before he finished speaking.

ɛɡwin klʌŋ tə ɹændz ɑɹm fəɹ tu mɔɹ bɹɪdʒəz. hi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd ɪt wən ʃi faɪnəli lɛt ɡoʊ wɪð ə mɝmɝɾ əpɑlədʒi ən ə fɔɹs læf, ən nɑt dʒʌs kəz ɪt hæd fɛlt ɡʊd hævɪŋ əɹ hoʊld ɑntu hɪm ðət weɪ. ɪt wɑz iziɝ tə bi bɹeɪv, hi dɪskʌvɝd, wən sʌmwʌn niɾəd jəɹ pɹətɛkʃən.

Egwene clung to Rand's arm for two more bridges. He regretted it when she finally let go with a murmured apology and a forced laugh, and not just because it had felt good having her hold onto him that way. It was easier to be brave, he discovered, when someone needed your protection.

mɔɪɹeɪn maɪt nɑɾ əv bɪlivd ə tʃɹæp kəd bi sɛt fəɹ ðɛm, bʌt fəɹ ɔl ðə heɪst ʃi spoʊk ʌv, ʃi meɪɾ əm tʃɹævəl mɔɹ sloʊli ðən bɪfɔɹ, pɔzɪŋ bɪfɔɹ lɛɾɪŋ əm ɑntu ɛni bɹɪdʒ, əɹ ɔf wʌn ɑntu ən aɪlənd. ʃi wəd stɛp ɑldib fɔɹwɝd, filɪŋ ði ɛɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ wɪð ən aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt hænd, ən nɑɾ ivən lɔɪəl, əɹ læn, wɑz əlaʊd tə ɡoʊ əhɛɾ əntɪl ʃi ɡeɪv pɝmɪʃən.

Moiraine might not have believed a trap could be set for them, but for all the haste she spoke of, she made them travel more slowly than before, pausing before letting them onto any bridge, or off one onto an Island. She would step Aldieb forward, feeling the air in front of her with an outstretched hand, and not even Loial, or Lan, was allowed to go ahead until she gave permission.

ɹænd hæd tə tʃɹʌst əɹ dʒʌdʒmən əbaʊt tʃɹæps, bʌɾ i pɪɹɾ ɪndə ðə dɑɹknəs ɝaʊn əm əz ɪf i kəɾ æktʃəli  si ɛniθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən tɛn fiɾ əweɪ, ən stʃɹeɪn ɪz ɪɹz lɪsnɪŋ. ɪf tʃɹɑləks kəd juz ðə weɪz, ðən wʌtɛvɝ wɑz fɑloʊɪŋ əm kəd bi ənʌðɝ kɹitʃɝ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. əɹ mɔɹ ðən wʌn. læn hæd sɛɾ i kəd nɑt tɛl ɪn ðə weɪz. bʌɾ əz ðeɪ kɹɔs bɹɪdʒ æftɝ bɹɪdʒ, eɪɾ ə mɪddeɪ mil ɹaɪɾɪŋ, ən kɹɔst stɪl mɔɹ bɹɪdʒəz, ɔl i kəd hɪɹ wɝ ðɛɹ oʊn sæɾəlz kɹikɪŋ, ən ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz, ən səmtaɪmz wʌn ə ði ʌðɝz kɑfɪŋ, əɹ mʌɾɝɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. leɪɾɝ ðəɹ wɑz ə dɪstənt wɪnd, tu, ɔf ɪn ðə blæk sʌmwɛɹ. hi kəd nɑt seɪ ɪn wɪtʃ dɝɛkʃən. ət fɝst i θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən, bʌt wɪð taɪm i bɪkeɪm ʃʊɹ.

Rand had to trust her judgment about traps, but he peered into the darkness around them as if he could actually see anything more than ten feet away, and strained his ears listening. If Trollocs could use the Ways, then Whatever was following them could be another creature of the Dark One. Or more than one. Lan had said he could not tell in the Ways. But as they crossed bridge after bridge, ate a midday meal riding, and crossed still more bridges, all he could hear were their own saddles creaking, and the horses' hooves, and sometimes one of the others coughing, or muttering to himself. Later there was a distant wind, too, off in the black somewhere. He could not say in which direction. At first he thought it was his imagination, but with time he became sure.

ɪɾəl bi ɡʊd tə fil ðə wɪn əɡɛn, ivən ɪf ɪts koʊld.

It'll be good to feel the wind again, even if it's cold.

sʌɾənli hi blɪŋkt. "lɔɪəl, dɪdn jə seɪ ðəɹ ɪzən ɛni wɪn ɪn ðə weɪz?"

Suddenly he blinked. "Loial, didn't you say there isn't any wind in the Ways?"

lɔɪəl pʊld ɪz hɔɹs ʌp dʒʌst ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə nɛkst aɪlən ən kɑkt ɪz hɛd tə lɪsən. sloʊli hɪz feɪs peɪld, ən i lɪkt ɪz lɪps. "mætʃɪn ʃɪn," hi wɪspɝd hɔɹsli. "ðə blæk waɪnd. ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin ən pɹətɛkt ʌs. ɪts ðə blæk wɪnd."

Loial pulled his horse up just short of the next Island and cocked his head to listen. Slowly his face paled, and he licked his lips. "Machin Shin," he whispered hoarsely. "The Black Wind. The Light illumine and protect us. It's the Black Wind."

"haʊ mɛni mɔɹ bɹɪdʒəz?" mɔɪɹeɪn æskt ʃɑɹpli. "lɔɪəl, haʊ mɛni mɔɹ bɹɪdʒəz?"

"How many more bridges?" Moiraine asked sharply. "Loial, how many more bridges?"

"tu. aɪ θɪŋk, tu."

"Two. I think, two."

"kwɪkli, ðɛn," ʃi sɛd, tʃɹɑɾɪŋ ɑldib ɑntu ði aɪlənd. "faɪn ɪt kwɪkli!"

"Quickly, then," she said, trotting Aldieb onto the Island. "Find it quickly!"

lɔɪəl tɔk tə hɪmsɛlf, əɹ tə ɛniwʌn u wɑz lɪsnɪŋ, waɪl i ɹɛd ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ. "ðeɪ keɪm aʊt mæd, skɹimɪŋ əbaʊt mætʃɪn ʃɪn. laɪt hɛlp ʌs! ivən ðoʊz ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd hil, ðeɪ." hi skæn ðə stoʊn heɪstəli, ən ɡæləp təwɔɹd ðə tʃoʊzən bɹɪdʒ wɪð ə ʃaʊɾəd, "ðɪs weɪ!"

Loial talked to himself, or to anyone who was listening, while he read the Guiding. "They came out mad, screaming about Machin Shin. Light help us! Even those Aes Sedai could heal, they." He scanned the stone hastily, and galloped toward the chosen bridge with a shouted, "This way!"

ðɪs taɪm mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑt weɪt tə tʃɛk. ʃi ɝdʒd əm ɑn tə ə ɡæləp, ðə bɹɪdʒ tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ bɪniθ ðə hɔɹsəz, læntɝnz swɪŋɪŋ waɪldli oʊvɝhɛd. lɔɪəl ɹæn ɪz aɪz oʊvɝ ðə nɛkst ɡaɪɾɪŋ ən wild ɪz bɪɡ maʊn ɝaʊn laɪk ə ɹeɪsɝ ɔlmoʊs bɪfɔɹ ɪt hæd stɑpt. ðə saʊn ə ðə wɪn bɪkeɪm laʊɾɝ. ɹænd kəd hɪɹ ɪɾ ivən oʊvɝ ðə paʊndɪŋ ə hʊvz ɑn stoʊn. bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən ɡʌstɪŋ kloʊsɝ.

This time Moiraine did not wait to check. She urged them on to a gallop, the bridge trembling beneath the horses, lanterns swinging wildly overhead. Loial ran his eyes over the next Guiding and wheeled his big mount around like a racer almost before it had stopped. The sound of the wind became louder. Rand could hear it even over the pounding of hooves on stone. Behind them, and gusting closer.

ðeɪ dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ wɪð ðə læst ɡaɪɾɪŋ. əz sun əz ðə laɪɾ ə ðə læntɝnz kɑt ðə waɪt laɪn ɹʌnɪŋ fɹəm ɪt, ðeɪ swʌŋ ɪn ðət dɝɛkʃən, stɪl ɡæləpɪŋ. ði aɪlən vænɪʃt bɪhaɪnd, ən ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə pɪɾəd, ɡɹeɪ stoʊn ʌndɝfʊɾ ən ðə waɪt laɪn. ɹænd wɑz bɹiðɪŋ soʊ hɑɹɾ i wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ʃʊɹ ɪf i kəd hɪɹ ðə wɪnd.

They did not bother with the last Guiding. As soon as the light of the lanterns caught the white line running from it, they swung in that direction, still galloping. The Island vanished behind, and there was only the pitted, gray stone underfoot and the white line. Rand was breathing so hard he was no longer sure if he could hear the wind.

aʊɾ ə ðə dɑɹknəs ðə ɡeɪts əpɪɹd, vaɪn-kɑɹvd ən stændɪŋ əloʊn ɪn ðə blæk laɪk ə taɪni pis ʌv wɔl ɪn ðə naɪt. mɔɪɹeɪn lin aʊɾ ə hɝ sæɾəl, ɹitʃɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə kɑɹvɪŋz, ən sʌɾənli pʊl bæk. "ði ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə lif ɪz nɑt hɪɹ!" ʃi sɛd. "ðə ki ɪz ɡɔn!"

Out of the darkness the gates appeared, vine-carved and standing alone in the black like a tiny piece of wall in the night. Moiraine leaned out of her saddle, reaching toward the carvings, and suddenly pulled back. "The Avendesora leaf is not here!" she said. "The key is gone!"

"laɪt!" mæt ʃaʊɾəd. "blʌɾi laɪt!" lɔɪəl θɹu bæk ɪz hɛɾ ən ɡeɪv ə mɔɹnfəl kɹaɪ, laɪk ə haʊl ə daɪɪŋ.

"Light!" Mat shouted. "Bloody light!" Loial threw back his head and gave a mournful cry, like a howl of dying.

ɛɡwin tʌtʃt ɹændz ɑɹm. hɝ lɪps tʃɹɛmbəld, bʌt ʃi oʊnli lʊkt ət hɪm. hi pʊɾ ɪz hæn ɑn tɑp ə hɝz, hoʊpɪŋ i dɪd nɑt lʊk mɔɹ fɹaɪɾənd ðən ʃi dɪd. hi fɛlt ɪt. bæk təwɔɹd ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ, ðə wɪn haʊld. hi ɔlmoʊs θɔɾ i kəd hɪɹ vɔɪsəz ɪn ɪt, vɔɪsəz skɹimɪŋ vɪlnəs ðæt, ivən hæf ʌndɝstʊd, bɹɔt baɪl ʌp ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt.

Egwene touched Rand's arm. Her lips trembled, but she only looked at him. He put his hand on top of hers, hoping he did not look more frightened than she did. He felt it. Back toward the Guiding, the wind howled. He almost thought he could hear voices in it, voices screaming vileness that, even half understood, brought bile up in his throat.

mɔɪɹeɪn ɹeɪzd əɹ stæf ən fleɪm læns fɹəm ði ɛn ʌv ɪt. ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə pjʊɹ, waɪt fleɪm ðət ɹænd ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɹəm ɛmənz fild, ən ðə bæɾəl bɪfɔɹ ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. sɪkli jɛloʊ stʃɹik θɹu ðə faɪɝ, ən sloʊ-dʒɹɪftɪŋ flɛks ə blæk, laɪk sʊt. ə θɪn, ækɹɪd smoʊk dʒɹɪftəd fɹəm ðə fleɪm, sɛɾɪŋ lɔɪəl kɑfɪŋ ən ðə hɔɹsəz dænsɪŋ nɝvəsli, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn θɹʌst ɪɾ ət ðə ɡeɪts. ðə smoʊk ɹæspt ɹændz θɹoʊɾ ən bɝn ɪz noʊz.

Moiraine raised her staff and flame lanced from the end of it. It was not the pure, white flame that Rand remembered from Emond's Field, and the battle before Shadar Logoth. Sickly yellow streaked through the fire, and slow-drifting flecks of black, like soot. A thin, acrid smoke drifted from the flame, setting Loial coughing and the horses dancing nervously, but Moiraine thrust it at the gates. The smoke rasped Rand's throat and burned his nose.

stoʊn mɛltəd laɪk bʌɾɝ, lif ən vaɪn wɪðɝɪŋ ɪn ðə fleɪm ən vænɪʃɪŋ. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ muv ðə faɪɝ əz fæst əz ʃi kʊd, bʌt kʌɾɪŋ ən oʊpənɪŋ bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn tə ɡɛt θɹu wɑz noʊ kwɪk tæsk. tə ɹænd, ɪt simd əz ɪf ðə laɪn ə mɛltəd stoʊn kɹɛpt əlɔŋ ɪts ɑɹk əɾ ə sneɪlz peɪs. hɪz kloʊk stɝd, əz ɪf kɑt baɪ ði ɛdʒ ʌv ə bɹiz, ən ɪz hɑɹt fɹoʊz.

Stone melted like butter, leaf and vine withering in the flame and vanishing. The Aes Sedai moved the fire as fast as she could, but cutting an opening big enough for everyone to get through was no quick task. To Rand, it seemed as if the line of melted stone crept along its arc at a snail's pace. His cloak stirred, as if caught by the edge of a breeze, and his heart froze.

"aɪ kən fil ɪt," mæt sɛd, hɪz vɔɪs kweɪvɝɪŋ. "laɪt, aɪ kən blʌɾi fil ɪt!"

"I can feel it," Mat said, his voice quavering. "Light, I can bloody feel it!"

ðə fleɪm wɪŋkt aʊt, ən mɔɪɹeɪn loʊɝɾ əɹ stæf. "dʌn," ʃi sɛd. "hæf dʌn."

The flame winked out, and Moiraine lowered her staff. "Done," she said. "Half done."

ə θɪn laɪn ɹæn əkɹɔs ðə stoʊn kɑɹvɪŋ. ɹænd θɔɾ i kəd si laɪt - dɪm, bʌt stɪl laɪt - θɹu ðə kɹæk. bʌt dɪspaɪt ðə kʌɾɪŋ, ðə tu bɪɡ, kɝvd wɛdʒəz ə stoʊn stɪl stʊd ðɛɹ, hæf ən ɑɹk aʊɾ ʌv itʃ dɔɹ. ði oʊpənɪŋ wəd bi bɪɡ ɪnʌf fəɹ ɛvɹiwʌn tə ɹaɪd θɹu, ðoʊ lɔɪəl maɪɾ əv tə laɪ flæɾ ɑn ɪz hɔɹsəz bæk. wʌns ðə tu wɛdʒəz ə stoʊn wɝ ɡɔn, ɪt wəd bi bɪɡ ɪnʌf. hi wʌndɝd haʊ mʌtʃ itʃ weɪd. ə θaʊzən paʊnz? mɔɹ? meɪbi ɪf wi ɔl ɡɛt daʊn ən pʊʃ. meɪbi wi kən pʊʃ wʌn ə ðɛm oʊvɝ bɪfɔɹ ðə wɪnd ɡɛts hɪɹ. ə ɡʌs tʌɡd əɾ ɪz kloʊk. hi tʃɹaɪd nɑt tə lɪsən tə wʌt ðə vɔɪsəz kɹaɪd.

A thin line ran across the stone carving. Rand thought he could see light - dim, but still light - through the crack. But despite the cutting, the two big, curved wedges of stone still stood there, half an arc out of each door. The opening would be big enough for everyone to ride through, though Loial might have to lie flat on his horse's back. Once the two wedges of stone were gone, it would be big enough. He wondered how much each weighed. A thousand pounds? More? Maybe if we all get down and push. Maybe we can push one of them over before the wind gets here. A gust tugged at his cloak. He tried not to listen to what the voices cried.

əz mɔɪɹeɪn stɛp bæk, mændɑɹb lɛp fɔɹwɝd, stʃɹeɪt təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪts, læn kɹaʊtʃt ɪn ðə sæɾəl. ət ðə læst ɪnstən ðə wɔɹhɔɹs twɪstəd tə kætʃ ðə stoʊn wɪð ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, dʒʌst əz i hæd bɪn tɔt tə kætʃ ʌðɝ hɔɹsəz ɪn bæɾəl. wɪð ə kɹæʃ ðə stoʊn tɑpəld aʊtwɝd, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ ən ɪz hɔɹs wɝ kæɹid baɪ ðɛɹ moʊmɛntəm θɹu ðə smoʊki ʃɪmɝ ʌv ə weɪɡeɪt. ðə laɪt ðət keɪm θɹu wɑz mɪd-mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt, peɪl ən θɪn, bʌɾ ɪt sim tə ɹænd əz ɪf ðə nundeɪ sʌmɝ sʌn bleɪzd ɪn ɪz feɪs.

As Moiraine stepped back, Mandarb leaped forward, straight toward the gates, Lan crouched in the saddle. At the last instant the warhorse twisted to catch the stone with his shoulder, just as he had been taught to catch other horses in battle. With a crash the stone toppled outward, and the Warder and his horse were carried by their momentum through the smoky shimmer of a Waygate. The light that came through was mid-morning light, pale and thin, but it seemed to Rand as if the noonday summer sun blazed in his face.

ɑn ðə fɑɹ saɪɾ ə ðə ɡeɪt læn ən mændɑɹb sloʊd tə ə kɹɔl, stʌmbəlɪŋ ɪn sloʊ moʊʃən əz ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɹeɪn bæk ɝaʊn təwɔɹd ðə ɡeɪt. ɹænd dɪd nɑt weɪt. pʊʃɪŋ bɛləz hɛd təwɔɹd ði oʊpənɪŋ, hi slæp ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ hɑɹɾ ɑn ðə kɹup. ɛɡwin hæd dʒʌst ɪnʌf taɪm tə θɹoʊ ə stɑɹɾəld lʊk oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ əɾ ɪm bɪfɔɹ bɛlə kæɹiɾ əɹ aʊɾ ə ðə weɪz.

On the far side of the gate Lan and Mandarb slowed to a crawl, stumbling in slow motion as the Warder reined back around toward the gate. Rand did not wait. Pushing Bela's head toward the opening, he slapped the shaggy mare hard on the croup. Egwene had just enough time to throw a startled look over her shoulder at him before Bela carried her out of the Ways.

"ɔl ə ju, aʊt!" mɔɪɹeɪn dɝɛktəd. "kwɪkli! ɡoʊ!"

"All of you, out!" Moiraine directed. "Quickly! Go!"

əz ʃi spoʊk, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ θɹʌst əɹ stæf aʊɾ əɾ ɑɹmz lɛŋθ, pɔɪntəd bæk təwɔɹd ðə ɡaɪɾɪŋ. sʌmθɪŋ lɛp fɹəm ði ɛn ə ðə stæf, laɪk lɪkwəd laɪt ɹɛndɝd tə ə sɝəp ə faɪɝ, ə bleɪzɪŋ spɪɹ ʌv waɪɾ ən ɹɛɾ ən jɛloʊ, stʃɹikɪŋ ɪndə ðə blæk, ɪksploʊɾɪŋ, kɔɹʌskeɪɾɪŋ laɪk ʃæɾɝd daɪmənz. ðə wɪnd ʃɹikt ɪn æɡəni; ɪt skɹimd ɪn ɹeɪdʒ. ðə θaʊzən mɝmɝz ðət hɪɾ ɪn ðə wɪn ɹɔɹd laɪk θʌndɝ, ɹɔɹz ə mædnəs, hæf-hɝd vɔɪsəz kækəlɪŋ ən haʊlɪŋ pɹɑməsəz ðət twɪstəd ɹændz stʌmək əz mʌtʃ baɪ ðə plɛʒɝ ɪn əm əz baɪ wʌɾ i ɔlmoʊst ʌndɝstʊɾ əm tə seɪ.

As she spoke, the Aes Sedai thrust her staff out at arm's length, pointed back toward the Guiding. Something leaped from the end of the staff, like liquid light rendered to a syrup of fire, a blazing spear of white and red and yellow, streaking into the black, exploding, coruscating like shattered diamonds. The wind shrieked in agony; it screamed in rage. The thousand murmurs that hid in the wind roared like thunder, roars of madness, half-heard voices cackling and howling promises that twisted Rand's stomach as much by the pleasure in them as by what he almost understood them to say.

hi buɾɪd ɹɛd fɔɹwɝd, kɹaʊɾɪŋ ɪndə ði oʊpənɪŋ, skwizɪŋ æftɝ ði ʌðɝz, ɔl fɔɹsɪŋ θɹu ðə smoʊki ɡlɪsnɪŋ ət wʌns. ði aɪsi tʃɪl ɹæn θɹu hɪm əɡɛn, ðə pəkjuljɝ sɛnseɪʃən ə biɪŋ sloʊli loʊɝd feɪsdaʊn ɪndə ə wɪntɝ pɑnd, ðə koʊld wɔɾɝ kɹɔlɪŋ əkɹɔs ɪz skɪn baɪ ɪnfɪnɪtɛsɪməl ɪŋkɹəməns. dʒʌst əz bɪfɔɹ ɪt sim tə ɡoʊ ɑn fɝɛvɝ, waɪl ɪz maɪn ɹeɪst, wʌndɝɪŋ ɪf ðə wɪn kəd kætʃ əm waɪl ðeɪ wɝ hɛld laɪk ðæt.

He booted Red forward, crowding into the opening, squeezing after the others, all forcing through the smoky glistening at once. The icy chill ran through him again, the peculiar sensation of being slowly lowered facedown into a winter pond, the cold water crawling across his skin by infinitesimal increments. Just as before it seemed to go on forever, while his mind raced, wondering if the wind could catch them while they were held like that.

əz sʌɾənli əz ə pɹɪk bʌbəl ðə tʃɪl vænɪʃt, ən i wɑz aʊtsaɪd. hɪz hɔɹs, fəɹ wʌn əbɹʌpt ɪnstən muvɪŋ twaɪs əz fæst əz i hæd bɪn, stʌmbəld ən ɔlmoʊs pɪtʃt ɪm oʊvɝ ɪz hɛd. hi θɹu boʊθ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn ðə beɪz nɛk ən hʌŋ ɑn fəɹ dɪɹ laɪf. waɪl i ɡɑt bæk ɪndə ðə sæɾəl, ɹɛd ʃʊk hɪmsɛlf, ðən tʃɹɑɾəd oʊvɝ tə dʒɔɪn ði ʌðɝz əz kɑmli əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ əɾ ɔl ɑd hæd hæpənd. ɪt wɑz koʊld, nɑt ðə tʃɪl ə ðə weɪɡeɪt, bʌt wɛlkəm, nætʃɹəl wɪntɝ-koʊl ðət sloʊli, stɛɾəli bɝoʊɾ ɪndə flɛʃ.

As suddenly as a pricked bubble the chill vanished, and he was outside. His horse, for one abrupt instant moving twice as fast as he had been, stumbled and almost pitched him over his head. He threw both arms around the bay's neck and hung on for dear life. While he got back into the saddle, Red shook himself, then trotted over to join the others as calmly as if nothing at all odd had happened. It was cold, not the chill of the Waygate, but welcome, natural winter-cold that slowly, steadily burrowed into flesh.

hi pʊld ɪz kloʊk ɝaʊn hɪm, hɪz aɪz ɑn ðə dʌl ɡlɪmɝ ə ðə weɪɡeɪt. bɪsaɪɾ ɪm læn lin fɔɹwɝɾ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, wʌn hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd; mæn ən hɔɹs wɝ tɛnst, əz ɪf ɑn ðə pɔɪn ə tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ bæk θɹu ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ.

He pulled his cloak around him, his eyes on the dull glimmer of the Waygate. Beside him Lan leaned forward in his saddle, one hand on his sword; man and horse were tensed, as if on the point of charging back through if Moiraine did not appear.

ðə weɪɡeɪt stʊɾ ɪn ə dʒʌmbəl ə stoʊnz ət ðə beɪs ʌv ə hɪl, hɪɾən baɪ bʊʃəz ɪksɛpt wɛɹ ðə fɔlɪŋ pisəz hæd bɹoʊkən daʊn ðə bɛɹ, bɹaʊn bɹæntʃəz. əlɔŋsaɪd ðə kɑɹvɪŋz ɑn ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ə ðə ɡeɪts, ðə bɹʌʃ lʊk mɔɹ laɪfləs ðən ðə stoʊn.

The Waygate stood in a jumble of stones at the base of a hill, hidden by bushes except where the falling pieces had broken down the bare, brown branches. Alongside the carvings on the remains of the gates, the brush looked more lifeless than the stone.

sloʊli ðə mɝki sɝfəs bʌlʒd laɪk səm stʃɹeɪnʒ, lɔŋ bʌbəl ɹaɪzɪŋ tə ðə sɝfəs ʌv ə pɑnd. mɔɪɹeɪnz bæk bɹoʊk θɹu ðə bʌbəl. ɪntʃmil, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən əɹ dɪm ɹəflɛkʃən bækt aʊɾ ʌv itʃ ʌðɝ. ʃi stɪl hɛld əɹ stæf aʊɾ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɝ, ən ʃi kɛpt ɪt ðəɹ əz ʃi dʒɹu ɑldib aʊɾ ə ðə weɪɡeɪɾ æftɝ hɝ, ðə waɪt mɛɹ dænsɪŋ wɪð fɪɹ, aɪz ɹoʊlɪŋ. stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ ðə weɪɡeɪt, mɔɪɹeɪn bækt əweɪ.

Slowly the murky surface bulged like some strange, long bubble rising to the surface of a pond. Moiraine's back broke through the bubble. Inchmeal, the Aes Sedai and her dim reflection backed out of each other. She still held her staff out in front of her, and she kept it there as she drew Aldieb out of the Waygate after her, the white mare dancing with fear, eyes rolling. Still watching the Waygate, Moiraine backed away.

ðə weɪɡeɪt dɑɹkənd. ðə heɪzi ʃɪmɝ bɪkeɪm mɝkiɝ, sɪŋkɪŋ θɹu ɡɹeɪ tə tʃɑɹkoʊl, ðən tə blæk əz dip əz ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə weɪz. əz ɪf fɹəm ə ɡɹeɪt dɪstəns ðə wɪn haʊld ət ðɛm, hɪɾən vɔɪsəz fɪld wɪð ən ʊnkwɛnʃəbəl θɝs fəɹ lɪvɪŋ θɪŋz, fɪld wɪð ə hʌŋɡɝ fəɹ peɪn, fɪld wɪð fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən.

The Waygate darkened. The hazy shimmer became murkier, sinking through gray to charcoal, then to black as deep as the heart of the Ways. As if from a great distance the wind howled at them, hidden voices filled with an unquenchable thirst for living things, filled with a hunger for pain, filled with frustration.

ðə vɔɪsəz sim tə wɪspɝ ɪn ɹændz ɪɹz, ɹaɪɾ ət ðə bɹɪŋk ʌv ʌndɝstændɪŋ, ən wɪðɪn ɪt. flɛʃ soʊ faɪn, soʊ faɪn tə tɛɹ, tə ɡæʃ ðə skɪn; skɪn tə stʃɹɪp, tə pleɪt, soʊ naɪs tə pleɪt ðə stʃɹɪps, soʊ naɪs, soʊ ɹɛd ðə dʒɹɑps ðət fɔl; blʌd soʊ ɹɛd, soʊ ɹɛd, soʊ swit; swit skɹimz, pɹɪɾi skɹimz, sɪŋɪŋ skɹimz, skɹim jəɹ sɔŋ, sɪŋ jəɹ skɹimz.

The voices seemed to whisper in Rand's ears, right at the brink of understanding, and within it. Flesh so fine, so fine to tear, to gash the skin; skin to strip, to plait, so nice to plait the strips, so nice, so red the drops that fall; blood so red, so red, so sweet; sweet screams, pretty screams, singing screams, scream your song, sing your screams.

ðə wɪspɝz dʒɹɪftəd, ðə blæknəs lɛsənd, feɪɾəd, ən ðə weɪɡeɪt wɑz əɡɛn ə mɝki ʃɪmɝ sin θɹu ən ɑɹtʃ ə kɑɹv stoʊn.

The whispers drifted, the blackness lessened, faded, and the Waygate was again a murky shimmer seen through an arch of carved stone.

ɹænd lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ, ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ. hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn; hi hɝɾ ʌðɝ ɹɪlivd ɪkshəleɪʃənz. ɛɡwin hæd bɛlə əlɔŋsaɪd nɪneɪivz hɔɹs, ən ðə tu wɪmən hæd ðɛɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn itʃ ʌðɝ, ðɛɹ hɛdz ɑn itʃ ʌðɝz ʃoʊldɝz. ivən læn simd ɹɪlivd, ðoʊ ðə hɑɹd pleɪnz ə hɪz feɪs ʃoʊd nʌθɪŋ; ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ɪn ðə weɪ hi sæt mændɑɹb, ə lusənɪŋ ə ðə ʃoʊldɝz əz i lʊkt ət mɔɪɹeɪn, ə tɪlt ə ðə hɛd.

Rand let out a long, shuddering breath. He was not the only one; he heard other relieved exhalations. Egwene had Bela alongside Nynaeve's horse, and the two women had their arms around each other, their heads on each other's shoulders. Even Lan seemed relieved, though the hard planes of his face showed nothing; it was more in the way he sat Mandarb, a loosening of the shoulders as he looked at Moiraine, a tilt of the head.

"ɪt kəd nɑt pæs," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "aɪ θɔɾ ɪt kəd nɑt; aɪ hoʊpt ɪt kəd nɑt. fɔ!" ʃi tɔst əɹ stæf ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ən skɹʌbd əɹ hæn ɑn əɹ kloʊk. tʃɑɹ, θɪk ən blæk, mɑɹk ðə stæf fəɹ oʊvɝ hæf ɪts lɛŋθ. "ðə teɪn kɝʌps ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɪn ðət pleɪs."

"It could not pass," Moiraine said. "I thought it could not; I hoped it could not. Faugh!" She tossed her staff on the ground and scrubbed her hand on her cloak. Char, thick and black, marked the staff for over half its length. "The taint corrupts everything in that place."

"wʌt wɑz ðæt?" nɪneɪiv dɪmændəd. "wʌt wɑz ɪt?"

"What was that?" Nynaeve demanded. "What was it?"

lɔɪəl əpɪɹd kənfjuzd. "waɪ, mætʃɪn ʃɪn, ʌv kɔɹs. ðə blæk wɪn ðət stilz soʊlz."

Loial appeared confused. "Why, Machin Shin, of course. The Black Wind that steals souls."

"bʌt wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" nɪneɪiv pɝsɪstəd. "ivən wɪð ə tʃɹɑlɑk, jə kən lʊk əɾ ɪt, tʌtʃ ɪɾ ɪf juv ə stʃɹɔŋ stʌmək. bʌt ðæt." ʃi ɡeɪv ə kənvʌlsɪv ʃɪvɝ.

"But what is it?" Nynaeve persisted. "Even with a Trolloc, you can look at it, touch it if you have a strong stomach. But that." She gave a convulsive shiver.

"sʌmθɪŋ lɛft fɹəm ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, pɝhæps," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "ɔɹ ivən fɹəm ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ, ðə wɔɹ ə paʊɝ. sʌmθɪŋ haɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðə weɪz soʊ lɔŋ ɪt kən noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɡɛɾ aʊt. noʊ wʌn, nɑɾ ivən əmʌŋ ði oʊɡiɝ, noʊz haʊ fɑɹ ðə weɪz ɹʌn, əɹ haʊ dip. ɪt kəɾ ivən bi sʌmθɪŋ ə ðə weɪz ðɛmsɛlvz. əz lɔɪəl sɛd, ðə weɪz ɑɹ lɪvɪŋ θɪŋz, ən ɔl lɪvɪŋ θɪŋz əv pɛɹəsaɪts. pɝhæps ivən ə kɹitʃɝ ə ðə kɝʌpʃən ɪtsɛlf, sʌmθɪŋ bɔɹn ə ðə dəkeɪ. sʌmθɪŋ ðət heɪts laɪf ən laɪt."

"Something left from the Time of Madness, perhaps," Moiraine replied. "Or even from the War of the Shadow, the War of Power. Something hiding in the Ways so long it can no longer get out. No one, not even among the Ogier, knows how far the Ways run, or how deep. It could even be something of the Ways themselves. As Loial said, the Ways are living things, and all living things have parasites. Perhaps even a creature of the corruption itself, something born of the decay. Something that hates life and light."

"stɑp!" ɛɡwin kɹaɪd. "aɪ doʊnt wɑnə hɪɹ ɛni mɔɹ. aɪ kəd hɪɹ ɪt, seɪɪŋ." ʃi kʌɾ ɔf, ʃɪvɝɪŋ.

"Stop!" Egwene cried. "I don't want to hear any more. I could hear it, saying." She cut off, shivering.

"ðɛɹ ɪz wɝs tə bi feɪs jɛt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɔfli. ɹænd dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi mɛn ɪt tə bi hɝd.

"There is worse to be faced yet," Moiraine said softly. Rand did not think she meant it to be heard.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ klaɪmd ɪndə hɝ sæɾəl wɛɹəli ən sɛɾəld ðəɹ wɪð ə ɡɹeɪtfəl saɪ. "ðɪs ɪz deɪnʒɝəs," ʃi sɛd, lʊkɪŋ ət ðə bɹoʊkən ɡeɪts. hɝ tʃɑɹd stæf ɹəsivd oʊnli ə ɡlæns. "ðə θɪŋ kænɑt ɡɛɾ aʊt, bʌɾ ɛniwʌn kəd wɑndɝ ɪn. eɪɡəlmɝ mʌst sɛn mɛn tə wɔl ɪɾ ʌp, wʌns wi ɹitʃ fæl dæɹə." ʃi pɔɪntəd tə ðə nɔɹθ, tə taʊɝz ɪn ðə mɪsti dɪstəns əbʌv ðə bæɹən tʃɹitɑps.

The Aes Sedai climbed into her saddle wearily and settled there with a grateful sigh. "This is dangerous," she said, looking at the broken gates. Her charred staff received only a glance. "The thing cannot get out, but anyone could wander in. Agelmar must send men to wall it up, once we reach Fal Dara." She pointed to the north, to towers in the misty distance above the barren treetops.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾisɪks


CHAPTER 46

fæl dæɹə


Fal Dara

ðə kʌntʃɹi ɝaʊn ðə weɪɡeɪt wɑz ɹoʊlɪŋ, fɔɹəstəd hɪlz, bʌɾ əsaɪd fɹəm ðə ɡeɪts ðɛmsɛlvz ðəɹ wɑz noʊ saɪn ʌv ɛni oʊɡiɝ ɡɹoʊv. moʊst ə ðə tʃɹiz wɝ ɡɹeɪ skɛləɾənz klɔɪŋ ət ðə skaɪ. fjuɝ ɛvɝɡɹinz ðən ɹænd wɑz juz tə dɑɾəd ðə fɔɹəst, ən ə ðɛm, dɛd, bɹaʊn niɾəlz ən livz kʌvɝd mɛni. lɔɪəl meɪd noʊ kɑmɛn bɪɑn ə sæd ʃeɪkɪŋ ə hɪz hɛd.

The country around the Waygate was rolling, forested hills, but aside from the gates themselves there was no sign of any Ogier grove. Most of the trees were gray skeletons clawing at the sky. Fewer evergreens than Rand was used to dotted the forest, and of them, dead, brown needles and leaves covered many. Loial made no comment beyond a sad shaking of his head.

"æz dɛɾ əz ðə blæstəd lænz," nɪneɪiv sɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ. ɛɡwin pʊld əɹ kloʊk ɝaʊn əɹ ən ʃɪvɝd.

"As dead as the Blasted Lands," Nynaeve said, frowning. Egwene pulled her cloak around her and shivered.

"æt list wɝ aʊt," pɛɹɪn sɛd, ən mæt æɾəd, "aʊt wɛɹ?"

"At least we're out," Perrin said, and Mat added, "Out where?"

"ʃaɪnɝ," læn toʊl ðɛm. "wɝ ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz." ɪn ɪz hɑɹd vɔɪs wɑz ə noʊt ðət sɛd hoʊm, ɔlmoʊst.

"Shienar," Lan told them. "We're in the Borderlands." In his hard voice was a note that said home, almost.

ɹænd ɡæðɝɾ ɪz kloʊk əɡɛns ðə koʊld. ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ðən ðə blaɪt wɑz kloʊs baɪ. ðə blaɪt. ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld. ən wʌt ðeɪ hæd kʌm tə du.

Rand gathered his cloak against the cold. The Borderlands. Then the Blight was close by. The Blight. The Eye of the World. And what they had come to do.

"wi ɑɹ kloʊs tə fæl dæɹə," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "oʊnli ə fju maɪlz." əkɹɔs ðə tʃɹitɑps, taʊɝz ɹoʊz tə ðə nɔɹθ ən ist ə ðɛm, dɑɹk əɡɛns ðə mɔɹnɪŋ skaɪ. bɪtwin ðə hɪlz ən ðə wʊdz, ðə taʊɝz ɔfən vænɪʃt əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd, oʊnli tə ɹiəpɪɹ əɡɛn wən ðeɪ tɑpt ə pɑɹtɪkjəlɝli tɔl ɹaɪz.

"We are close to Fal Dara," Moiraine said. "Only a few miles." Across the treetops, towers rose to the north and east of them, dark against the morning sky. Between the hills and the woods, the towers often vanished as they rode, only to reappear again when they topped a particularly tall rise.

ɹænd noʊɾəst tʃɹiz splɪɾ oʊpən əz ɪf stʃɹʌk baɪ laɪtnɪŋ.

Rand noticed trees split open as if struck by lightning.

"ðə koʊld," læn ænsɝd wən i æskt. "səmtaɪmz ðə wɪntɝ ɪz soʊ koʊl hɪɹ ðə sæp fɹizɪz, ən tʃɹiz bɝst. ðəɹ ɑɹ naɪts wən jə kən hɪɹ əm kɹækɪŋ laɪk faɪɹwɝks, ən ði ɛɹ ɪz soʊ ʃɑɹp jə θɪŋk ðət maɪt ʃæɾɝ, tu. ðəɹ ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən juʒəwəl, ðɪs wɪntɝ pæst."

"The cold," Lan answered when he asked. "Sometimes the winter is so cold here the sap freezes, and trees burst. There are nights when you can hear them cracking like fireworks, and the air is so sharp you think that might shatter, too. There are more than usual, this winter past."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. tʃɹiz bɝstɪŋ? ən ðət wɑz dʊɹɪŋ ən ɔɹɾənɛɹi wɪntɝ. wʌt mʌs ðɪs wɪntɝ əv bɪn laɪk? ʃʊɹli laɪk nʌθɪŋ i kəɾ ɪmædʒən.

Rand shook his head. Trees bursting? And that was during an ordinary winter. What must this winter have been like? Surely like nothing he could imagine.

"hu sɛz wɪntɝz pæst?" mæt sɛd, hɪz tiθ tʃæɾɝɪŋ.

"Who says winter's past?" Mat said, his teeth chattering.

"waɪ ðɪs, ə faɪn spɹɪŋ, ʃifɝɾɝ," læn sɛd. "ə faɪn spɹɪŋ tə bi əlaɪv. bʌɾ ɪf jə wɑnt wɔɹm, wɛl, ɪɾəl bi wɔɹm ɪn ðə blaɪt."

"Why this, a fine spring, sheepherder," Lan said. "A fine spring to be alive. But if you want warm, well, it will be warm in the Blight."

sɔfli mæt mʌɾɝd, "blʌɾ ən æʃəz. blʌɾ ən blʌɾi æʃəz!" ɹænd bɛɹli hɝd hɪm, bʌɾ ɪt saʊndəd hɑɹtfɛlt.

Softly Mat muttered, "Blood and ashes. Blood and bloody ashes!" Rand barely heard him, but it sounded heartfelt.

ðeɪ bɪɡæn tə pæs fɑɹmz, bʌt ðoʊ ɪt wɑz ði aʊɝ fəɹ mɪddeɪ milz tə bi kʊkɪŋ, noʊ smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə haɪ stoʊn tʃɪmniz. ðə filz wɝ ɛmpti ʌv mɛn ən laɪvstɑk boʊθ, ðoʊ səmtaɪmz ə plaʊ əɹ ə wæɡən stʊɾ əbændən əz ɪf ði oʊnɝ mɛn tə bi bæk ɛni mɪnət.

They began to pass farms, but though it was the hour for midday meals to be cooking, no smoke rose from the high stone chimneys. The fields were empty of men and livestock both, though sometimes a plow or a wagon stood abandoned as if the owner meant to be back any minute.

ət wʌn fɑɹm kloʊs baɪ ðə ɹoʊɾ ə loʊn tʃɪkən skɹætʃt ɪn ðə jɑɹd. wʌn bɑɹn dɔɹ swʌŋ fɹili wɪð ðə wɪnd; ði ʌðɝ hæd bɹoʊkən ɔf ðə bɑɾəm hɪnʒ ən hʌŋ əɾ ən æŋɡəl. ðə tɔl haʊs, ɑd tə ɹændz tu ɹɪvɝz aɪz, wɪð ɪts ʃɑɹp-pikt ɹuf ə bɪɡ wʊɾən ʃɪŋɡəlz ɹʌnɪŋ ɔlmoʊs tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd, wɑz stɪl ən saɪlənt. noʊ dɔɡ keɪm aʊt tə bɑɹk ət ðɛm. ə saɪð leɪ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə bɑɹnjɑɹd; bʌkəts wɝ oʊvɝtɝn ɪn ə hip bɪsaɪd ðə wɛl.

At one farm close by the road a lone chicken scratched in the yard. One barn door swung freely with the wind; the other had broken off the bottom hinge and hung at an angle. The tall house, odd to Rand's Two Rivers eyes, with its sharp-peaked roof of big wooden shingles running almost to the ground, was still and silent. No dog came out to bark at them. A scythe lay in the middle of the barnyard; buckets were overturned in a heap beside the well.

mɔɪɹeɪn fɹaʊn ət ðə fɑɹmhaʊs əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd baɪ. ʃi lɪftəɾ ɑldibz ɹeɪnz, ən ðə waɪt mɛɹ kwɪkən əɹ peɪs.

Moiraine frowned at the farmhouse as they rode by. She lifted Aldieb's reins, and the white mare quickened her pace.

ði ɛmənz fildɝz wɝ klʌstɝd wɪð lɔɪəl ə lɪɾəl bɪhaɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ.

The Emond's Fielders were clustered with Loial a little behind the Aes Sedai and the Warder.

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. hi kəd nɑɾ ɪmædʒən ɛniθɪŋ ɡɹoʊɪŋ ðəɹ ɛvɝ. bʌt ðən i kəd nɑt ɹɪli ɪmædʒən ðə weɪz, iðɝ. ivən naʊ ðəɾ i wɑz pæs ðɛm, hi kəd nɑt.

Rand shook his head. He could not imagine anything growing there ever. But then he could not really imagine the Ways, either. Even now that he was past them, he could not.

"aɪ doʊn θɪŋk ʃi ɪkspɛktəd ðɪs," nɪneɪiv sɛd kwaɪətli, wɪð ə dʒɛstʃɝ ðət tʊk ɪn ɔl ði ɛmpti fɑɹmz ðeɪ hæd sin.

"I don't think she expected this," Nynaeve said quietly, with a gesture that took in all the empty farms they had seen.

"wɛɹ dɪd ðeɪ ɔl ɡoʊ?" ɛɡwin sɛd. "waɪ? ðeɪ kæn əv bɪn ɡɔn vɛɹi lɔŋ."

"Where did they all go?" Egwene said. "Why? They can't have been gone very long."

"wʌt meɪks jə seɪ ðæt?" mæt æskt. "fɹʌm ðə lʊk ə ðət bɑɹn dɔɹ, ðeɪ cʊɾə bɪn ɡɔn ɔl wɪntɝ." nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin boʊθ lʊkt əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i wɝ sloʊ-wɪɾɪd.

"What makes you say that?" Mat asked. "From the look of that barn door, they could have been gone all winter." Nynaeve and Egwene both looked at him as if he were slow-witted.

"ðə kɝɾənz ɪn ðə wɪndoʊz," ɛɡwin sɛd peɪʃənli. "ðeɪ lʊk tu laɪt fəɹ wɪntɝ kɝɾənz, ivən hɪɹ. əz koʊld əz ɪts hɪɹ, noʊ wʊmən wʊɾə hæd ðoʊz ʌp mɔɹ ðən ə wik əɹ tu, meɪbi lɛs." ðə wɪzdəm nɑɾəd.

"The curtains in the windows," Egwene said patiently. "They look too light for winter curtains, even here. As cold as it is here, no woman would have had those up more than a week or two, maybe less." The Wisdom nodded.

"kɝɾənz." pɛɹɪn tʃʌkəld. hi ɪmiɾiətli waɪp ðə smaɪl ɔf ɪz feɪs wən ðə tu wɪmən ɹeɪz ðɛɹ aɪbɹaʊz ət hɪm. "oʊ, aɪ əɡɹi wɪð ju. ðəɹ wɑzn ɪnʌf ɹʌst ɑn ðət saɪð fəɹ ɛni mɔɹ ðən ə wik ɪn ði oʊpən. jə ʃʊɾə sin ðæt, mæt. ivən ɪf jə mɪs ðə kɝɾənz."

"Curtains." Perrin chuckled. He immediately wiped the smile off his face when the two women raised their eyebrows at him. "Oh, I agree with you. There wasn't enough rust on that scythe for any more than a week in the open. You should have seen that, Mat. Even if you missed the curtains."

ɹænd ɡlænst saɪdweɪz ət pɛɹɪn, tʃɹaɪɪŋ nɑt tə stɛɹ. hɪz aɪz wɝ ʃɑɹpɝ ðən pɛɹɪnz - əɹ hæd bɪn, wən ðeɪ juz tə hʌn ɹæbəts təɡɛðɝ - bʌɾ i hæd nɑt bɪn eɪbəl tə si ðət saɪð-bleɪd wɛl ɪnʌf tə meɪk aʊɾ ɛni ɹʌst.

Rand glanced sideways at Perrin, trying not to stare. His eyes were sharper than Perrin's - or had been, when they used to hunt rabbits together - but he had not been able to see that scythe-blade well enough to make out any rust.

"aɪ ɹɪli doʊn kɛɹ wɛɹ ðeɪ wɛnt," mæt ɡɹʌmbəld. "aɪ dʒʌst wɑnə faɪn sʌmpleɪs wɪð ə faɪɝ. sun."

"I really don't care where they went," Mat grumbled. "I just want to find someplace with a fire. Soon."

"bʌt waɪ dɪd ðeɪ ɡoʊ?" ɹænd sɛɾ ʌndɝ ɪz bɹɛθ. ðə blaɪt wɑz nɑt fɑɹ ɔf hɪɹ. ðə blaɪt, wɛɹ ɔl ðə feɪdz ən tʃɹɑləks wɝ, ðoʊz nɑt daʊn ɪn ændɝ tʃeɪsɪŋ ðɛm. ðə blaɪt, wɛɹ ðeɪ wɝ ɡoʊɪŋ.

"But why did they go?" Rand said under his breath. The Blight was not far off here. The Blight, where all the Fades and Trollocs were, those not down in Andor chasing them. The Blight, where they were going.

hi ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs ɪnʌf tə bi hɝd baɪ ðoʊz kloʊs tə hɪm. "nɪneɪiv, meɪbi jə ən ɛɡwin doʊn əv tə ɡoʊ tə ði aɪ wɪð ʌs." ðə tu wɪmən lʊkt əɾ ɪm əz ɪf i wɝ spikɪŋ ɡɪbɝɪʃ, bʌt wɪð ðə blaɪt soʊ kloʊs i hæd tə meɪk wʌn læs tʃɹaɪ. "meɪbi ɪts ɪnʌf fəɹ jə tə bi kloʊs. mɔɪɹeɪn dɪdn seɪ juv tə ɡoʊ. əɹ ju, lɔɪəl. jə kəd steɪ ət fæl dæɹə. əntɪl wi kʌm bæk. əɹ jə kəd stɑɹt fəɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn. meɪbi ðɛɹəl bi ə mɝtʃən tʃɹeɪn, əɹ əl bɛt mɔɪɹeɪn wəɾ ivən haɪɝ ə koʊtʃ. wɪl miɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, wən ɪts ɔl oʊvɝ."

He raised his voice enough to be heard by those close to him. "Nynaeve, maybe you and Egwene don't have to go to the Eye with us." The two women looked at him as if he were speaking gibberish, but with the Blight so close he had to make one last try. "Maybe it's enough for you to be close. Moiraine didn't say you have to go. Or you, Loial. You could stay at Fal Dara. Until we come back. Or you could start for Tar Valon. Maybe there'll be a merchant train, or I'll bet Moiraine would even hire a coach. We will meet in Tar Valon, when it's all over."

"tɑvɝən." lɔɪəlz saɪ wɑz ə ɹʌmbəl laɪk θʌndɝ ɑn ðə hɝaɪzən. "ju swɝl laɪvz ɝaʊn ju, ɹænd ælθɹ, jə ən jəɹ fɹɛnz. jəɹ feɪt tʃuzəz aʊɝz." ði oʊɡiɝ ʃɹʌɡd, ən sʌɾənli ə bɹɔd ɡɹɪn splɪɾ ɪz feɪs. "bɪsaɪdz, ɪɾəl bi sʌmθɪŋ tə mit ðə ɡɹin mæn. ɛldɝ heɪmən ɔlweɪz tɔks əbaʊɾ ɪz miɾɪŋ wɪð ðə ɡɹin mæn, ən soʊ dʌz maɪ fɑðɝ, ən moʊst ə ði ɛldɝz."

"Ta'veren." Loial's sigh was a rumble like thunder on the horizon. "You swirl lives around you, Rand al'Thor, you and your friends. Your fate chooses ours." The Ogier shrugged, and suddenly a broad grin split his face. "Besides, it will be something to meet the Green Man. Elder Haman always talks about his meeting with the Green Man, and so does my father, and most of the Elders."

"soʊ mɛni?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. "ðə stɔɹiz seɪ ðə ɡɹin mæn ɪz hɑɹd tə faɪnd, ən noʊ wʌn kən faɪn ɪm twaɪs."

"So many?" Perrin said. "The stories say the Green Man is hard to find, and no one can find him twice."

"nɑt twaɪs, noʊ," lɔɪəl əɡɹid. "bʌt ðɛn, aɪ hæv nɛvɝ mɛt hɪm, ən niðɝ əv ju. hi dʌzn sim tə əvɔɪɾ oʊɡiɝ kwaɪt ðə weɪ hi dʌz jə hjumənz. hi noʊz soʊ mʌtʃ əbaʊt tʃɹiz. ivən ðə tʃɹi sɔŋz."

"Not twice, no," Loial agreed. "But then, I have never met him, and neither have you. He doesn't seem to avoid Ogier quite the way he does you humans. He knows so much about trees. Even the Tree Songs."

ɹænd sɛd, "ðə pɔɪn aɪ wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə meɪk ɪz - "

Rand said, "The point I was trying to make is - "

ðə wɪzdəm kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. "ʃi sɛz ɛɡwin ən aɪ ɑɹ pɑɹɾ ə ðə pæɾɝn, tu. ɔl woʊvən ɪn wɪð jə θɹi. ɪf ʃiz tə bi bɪlivd, ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə weɪ ðət pis ə ðə pæɾɝn ɪz woʊvən ðət maɪt stɑp ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ən aɪm əfɹeɪɾ aɪ də bɪliv hɝ; tu mʌtʃ əz hæpənd nɑt tə. bʌɾ ɪf ɛɡwin ən aɪ ɡoʊ əweɪ, wʌt maɪt wi tʃeɪnʒ əbaʊt ðə pæɾɝn?"

The Wisdom cut him off. "She says Egwene and I are part of the Pattern, too. All woven in with you three. If she is to be believed, there's something about the way that piece of the Pattern is woven that might stop the Dark One. And I am afraid I do believe her; too much has happened not to. But if Egwene and I go away, what might we change about the Pattern?"

"aɪ wɑz oʊnli tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə - "

"I was only trying to - "

əɡɛn nɪneɪiv ɪntɝʌptɪd, ʃɑɹpli. "aɪ noʊ wʌt jə wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə du." ʃi lʊkt əɾ ɪm əntɪl i ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, ðən əɹ feɪs sɔfənd. "aɪ noʊ wʌt jə wɝ tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə du, ɹænd. aɪ hæv lɪɾəl laɪkɪŋ fəɹ ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðɪs wʌn list ʌv ɔl, aɪ θɪŋk. aɪ hæv lɛs fəɹ ɡoʊɪŋ ɪndə ðə blaɪt, bʌt list ʌv ɔl ɪz ðə laɪkɪŋ aɪ hæv fəɹ ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz. ɪf jə bɔɪz . . . jə mɛn, kən də wʌɾ əz tə bi dʌn wən jud ɹæðɝ də ɔlmoʊst ɛniθɪŋ ɛls, waɪ dʒju θɪŋk əl də lɛs? əɹ ɛɡwin?" ʃi dɪd nɑɾ əpɪɹ tə ɪkspɛkt ən ænsɝ. ɡæðɝɪŋ əɹ ɹeɪnz, ʃi fɹaʊn təwɔɹd ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʌp əhɛd. "aɪ wʌndɝ ɪf wɝ gɑnə ɹitʃ ðɪs fæl dæɹə pleɪs sun, əɹ dʌz ʃi min əs tə spɛn ðə naɪɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðɪs?"

Again Nynaeve interrupted, sharply. "I know what you were trying to do." She looked at him until he shifted uneasily in his saddle, then her face softened. "I know what you were trying to do, Rand. I have little liking for any Aes Sedai, and this one least of all, I think. I have less for going into the Blight, but least of all is the liking I have for the Father of Lies. If you boys . . . you men, can do what has to be done when you'd rather do almost anything else, why do you think I will do less? Or Egwene?" She did not appear to expect an answer. Gathering her reins, she frowned toward the Aes Sedai up ahead. "I wonder if we're going to reach this Fal Dara place soon, or does she mean us to spend the night out in this?"

əz ʃi tʃɹɑɾəd təwɔɹd mɔɪɹeɪn, mæt sɛd, "ʃi kɔld əs mɛn. ɪt simz laɪk oʊnli jɛstɝdeɪ ʃi wɑz seɪɪŋ wi ʃʊdn bi ɔf liɾɪŋ stʃɹɪŋz, ən naʊ ʃi kɔlz əs mɛn."

As she trotted toward Moiraine, Mat said, "She called us men. It seems like only yesterday she was saying we shouldn't be off leading strings, and now she calls us men."

"ju stɪl ʃʊdn bi ɔf jəɹ mʌðɝz eɪpɹən stʃɹɪŋz," ɛɡwin sɛd, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑt θɪŋk əɹ hɑɹt wɑz ɪn ɪt. ʃi muv bɛlə kloʊs tə hɪz beɪ, ən loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs soʊ nʌn ə ði ʌðɝz kəd hɪɹ ɔlðoʊ mæt, ət list, tʃɹaɪd. "aɪ oʊnli dænst wɪð ɛɹæm, ɹænd," ʃi sɛd sɔfli, nɑt lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm. "ju wʊdn hoʊld ɪɾ əɡɛns mi, dænsɪŋ wɪð sʌmbɑɾi əl nɛvɝ si əɡɛn, wəd ju?"

"You still shouldn't be off your mother's apron strings," Egwene said, but Rand did not think her heart was in it. She moved Bela close to his bay, and lowered her voice so none of the others could hear although Mat, at least, tried. "I only danced with Aram, Rand," she said softly, not looking at him. "You wouldn't hold it against me, dancing with somebody I will never see again, would you?"

"noʊ," hi toʊl hɝ. wʌt hæd meɪɾ əɹ bɹɪŋ ɪɾ ʌp naʊ? "ʌv kɔɹs nɑt." bʌt sʌɾənli hi ɹɪmɛmbɝd sʌmθɪŋ mɪn hæd sɛɾ ɪn bɛɹlən, wʌt simd ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz əɡoʊ. ʃiz nɑt fəɹ ju, nɔɹ jə fəɹ hɝ; ət list, nɑɾ ɪn ðə weɪ jə boʊθ wɑnt.

"No," he told her. What had made her bring it up now? "Of course not." But suddenly he remembered something Min had said in Baerlon, what seemed a hundred years ago. She's not for you, nor you for her; at least, not in the way you both want.

ðə taʊn ə fæl dæɹə wɑz bɪlt ɑn hɪlz haɪɝ ðən ðə sɝaʊndɪŋ kʌntʃɹi. ɪt wɑz noʊwɛɹ nɪɹ əz bɪɡ əz keɪɛmlɪn, bʌt ðə wɔl ɝaʊn ɪt wɑz əz haɪ əz keɪɛmlɪnz. fəɹ ə fʊl maɪl aʊtsaɪd ðət wɔl ɪn ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz klɪɹ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ tɔlɝ ðən ɡɹæs, ən ðət kʌt loʊ. nʌθɪŋ kəd kʌm kloʊs wɪθaʊt biɪŋ sin fɹəm wʌn ə ðə mɛni tɔl taʊɝz tɑp baɪ wʊɾən hɔɹɾɪŋz. wɛɹ ðə wɔlz ə keɪɛmlɪn hæɾ ə bjuɾi əbaʊt ðɛm, ðə bɪldɝz ə fæl dæɹə sim nɑt tə hæv kɛɹɾ ɪf ɛniwʌn faʊn ðɛɹ wɔl bjuɾəfəl. ðə ɡɹeɪ stoʊn wɑz ɡɹɪmli ɪmplækəbəl, pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ ðəɾ ɪɾ ɪɡzɪstəd fəɹ wʌn pɝpəs əloʊn: tə hoʊld. pɛnəns ətɑp ðə hɔɹɾɪŋz wɪpt ɪn ðə wɪnd, meɪkɪŋ ðə stupɪŋ blæk hɔk ə ʃaɪnɝ sim tə flaɪ ɔl əlɔŋ ðə wɔlz.

The town of Fal Dara was built on hills higher than the surrounding country. It was nowhere near as big as Caemlyn, but the wall around it was as high as Caemlyn's. For a full mile outside that wall in every direction the ground was clear of anything taller than grass, and that cut low. Nothing could come close without being seen from one of the many tall towers topped by wooden hoardings. Where the walls of Caemlyn had a beauty about them, the builders of Fal Dara seemed not to have cared if anyone found their wall beautiful. The gray stone was grimly implacable, proclaiming that it existed for one purpose alone: to hold. Pennants atop the hoardings whipped in the wind, making the stooping Black Hawk of Shienar seem to fly all along the walls.

læn tɔs bæk ðə hʊɾ ə hɪz kloʊk ænd, dɪspaɪt ðə koʊld, moʊʃən fəɹ ði ʌðɝz tə də ðə seɪm. mɔɪɹeɪn hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi loʊɝd hɝz. "ɪts ðə lɔ ɪn ʃaɪnɝ," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd. "ɪn ɔl ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. noʊ wʌn meɪ haɪɾ ɪz feɪs ɪnsaɪɾ ə taʊnz wɔlz."

Lan tossed back the hood of his cloak and, despite the cold, motioned for the others to do the same. Moiraine had already lowered hers. "It's the law in Shienar," the Warder said. "In all the Borderlands. No one may hide his face inside a town's walls."

"ɑɹ ðeɪ ɔl ðət ɡʊd-lʊkɪŋ?" mæt læft.

"Are they all that good-looking?" Mat laughed.

"eɪ hæfmən kæn haɪd wɪð ɪz feɪs ɪkspoʊzd," ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛɾ ɪn ə flæt vɔɪs.

"A Halfman can't hide with his face exposed," the Warder said in a flat voice.

ɹændz ɡɹɪn slɪɾ ɔf ɪz feɪs. heɪstəli mæt pʊʃt bæk ɪz hʊd.

Rand's grin slid off his face. Hastily Mat pushed back his hood.

ðə ɡeɪts stʊɾ oʊpən, tɔl ən kʌvɝd wɪð dɑɹk aɪɝn, bʌɾ ə dʌzən ɑɹmɝd mɛn stʊd ɡɑɹɾ ɪn ɡoʊldən jɛloʊ sɝkoʊts bɛɹɪŋ ðə blæk hɔk. ðə hɪls ə lɔŋ sɔɹdz ɑn ðɛɹ bæks pikt oʊvɝ ðɛɹ ʃoʊldɝz, ən bɹɔdsɔɹɾ əɹ meɪs əɹ æks hʌŋ əɾ ɛvɹi weɪst. ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz wɝ tɛðɝd nɪɹbaɪ, meɪd ɡɹoʊtɛsk baɪ ðə stil bɑɹɾɪŋz kʌvɝɪŋ tʃɛsts ən nɛks ən hɛdz, wɪð lænsɪz tə stɝəp, ɔl ɹɛɾi tə ɹaɪɾ əɾ ən ɪnstənt. ðə ɡɑɹdz meɪd noʊ muv tə stɑp læn ən mɔɪɹeɪn ən ði ʌðɝz. ɪndid, ðeɪ weɪvd ən kɔld aʊt hæpəli.

The gates stood open, tall and covered with dark iron, but a dozen armored men stood guard in golden yellow surcoats bearing the Black Hawk. The hilts of long swords on their backs peeked over their shoulders, and broadsword or mace or axe hung at every waist. Their horses were tethered nearby, made grotesque by the steel bardings covering chests and necks and heads, with lances to stirrup, all ready to ride at an instant. The guards made no move to stop Lan and Moiraine and the others. Indeed, they waved and called out happily.

"daɪ ʃæn!" wʌn kɹaɪd, ʃeɪkɪŋ stil-ɡɔntələɾəd fɪsts oʊvɝ ɪz hɛɾ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd pæst. "daɪ ʃæn!"

"Dai Shan!" one cried, shaking steel-gauntleted fists over his head as they rode past. "Dai Shan!"

ə nʌmbɝ ʌv ʌðɝz ʃaʊɾəd, "ɡlɔɹi tə ðə bɪldɝz!" ænd, "kaɪsɝi ti wɑnʃoʊ!" lɔɪəl lʊk sɝpɹaɪzd, ðən ə bɹɔd smaɪl splɪɾ ɪz feɪs ən i weɪv tə ðə ɡɑɹdz.

A number of others shouted, "Glory to the Builders!" and, "Kiserai ti Wansho!" Loial looked surprised, then a broad smile split his face and he waved to the guards.

wʌn mæn ɹæn əlɔŋsaɪd lænz hɔɹs ə lɪɾəl weɪ, ənhæmpɝd baɪ ði ɑɹmɝ i wɔɹ. "wɪl ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn flaɪ əɡɛn, daɪ ʃæn?"

One man ran alongside Lan's horse a little way, unhampered by the armor he wore. "Will the Golden Crane fly again, Dai Shan?"

"pis, ɹeɪɡən," wɑz ɔl ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd, ən ðə mæn fɛl əweɪ. hi ɹɪtɝn ðə ɡɑɹdz' weɪvz, bʌɾ ɪz feɪs wɑz sʌɾənli ivən mɔɹ ɡɹɪm.

"Peace, Ragan," was all the Warder said, and the man fell away. He returned the guards' waves, but his face was suddenly even more grim.

əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd θɹu stoʊn-peɪv stʃɹits kɹaʊɾəd wɪð pipəl ən wæɡənz, ɹænd fɹaʊnd wɝidli. fæl dæɹə wɑz bʌlʒɪŋ ət ðə simz, bʌt ðə pipəl wɝ niðɝ ði iɡɝ kɹaʊdz ə keɪɛmlɪn, ɛndʒɔɪɪŋ ðə ɡɹænduɹ ə ðə sɪɾi ivən əz ðeɪ skwɑbəld, nɔɹ ðə mɪlɪŋ θɹɔŋz ə bɛɹlən. pæk tʃik baɪ dʒaʊl, ðiz foʊk wɑtʃt ðɛɹ pɑɹɾi ɹaɪd baɪ wɪð lɛɾən aɪz ən feɪsəz blæŋkt ʌv ɪmoʊʃən. kɑɹts ən wæɡənz dʒæmd ɛvɹi æliweɪ ən hæf ðə stʃɹits, paɪl haɪ wɪð dʒʌmbəl haʊshoʊl fɝnɪʃɪŋz, ən kɑɹv tʃɛsts pæk soʊ taɪt ðət kloʊðz spɪld. ɑn tɑp sæt ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ədʌls kɛp ðə jʌŋɡəlɪŋz ʌp wɛɹ ðeɪ kəd bi sin ən dɪd nɑt lɛɾ əm stʃɹeɪ ivən tə pleɪ. ðə tʃɪlʒɹən wɝ ivən mɔɹ saɪlən ðən ðɛɹ ɛldɝz, ðɛɹ aɪz bɪɡɝ, mɔɹ hɔntɪŋ ɪn ðɛɹ stɛɹz. ðə nʊks ən kɹæniz bɪtwin ðə wæɡənz wɝ fɪld wɪð ʃæɡi kæɾəl ən blæk-spɑɾəd pɪɡz ɪn meɪkʃɪf pɛnz. kɹeɪts ə tʃɪkənz ən dʌks ən ɡis fɪtfəli meɪɾ ʌp fəɹ ðə saɪləns ə ðə pipəl. hi nu naʊ wɛɹ ɔl ðə fɑɹmɝz hæd ɡɔn.

As they rode through stone-paved streets crowded with people and wagons, Rand frowned worriedly. Fal Dara was bulging at the seams, but the people were neither the eager crowds of Caemlyn, enjoying the grandeur of the city even as they squabbled, nor the milling throngs of Baerlon. Packed cheek by jowl, these folk watched their party ride by with leaden eyes and faces blanked of emotion. Carts and wagons jammed every alleyway and half the streets, piled high with jumbled household furnishings, and carved chests packed so tight that clothes spilled. On top sat the children. Adults kept the younglings up where they could be seen and did not let them stray even to play. The children were even more silent than their elders, their eyes bigger, more haunting in their stares. The nooks and crannies between the wagons were filled with shaggy cattle and black-spotted pigs in makeshift pens. Crates of chickens and ducks and geese fitfully made up for the silence of the people. He knew now where all the farmers had gone.

læn lɛd ðə weɪ tə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə taʊn, ə mæsɪv stoʊn paɪl ətɑp ðə haɪəs hɪl. ə dʒɹaɪ moʊt, dip ən waɪd, ɪts bɑɾəm ə fɔɹəst ə ʃɑɹp stil spaɪks, ɹeɪzɝ-ɛdʒd ən əz tɔl əz ə mæn, sɝaʊndəd ðə taʊɝd wɔlz ə ðə kip. ə pleɪs fəɹ ə læs dɪfɛns, ɪf ðə ɹɛst ə ðə taʊn fɛl. fɹəm wʌn ə ðə ɡeɪt taʊɝz ən ɑɹmɝd mæn kɔl daʊn, "wɛlkəm, daɪ ʃæn." ənʌðɝ ʃaʊɾəd tə ði ɪnsaɪɾ ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs, "ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn! ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn!"

Lan led the way to the fortress in the middle of the town, a massive stone pile atop the highest hill. A dry moat, deep and wide, its bottom a forest of sharp steel spikes, razor-edged and as tall as a man, surrounded the towered walls of the keep. A place for a last defense, if the rest of the town fell. From one of the gate towers an armored man called down, "Welcome, Dai Shan." Another shouted to the inside of the fortress, "The Golden Crane! The Golden Crane!"

ðɛɹ hʊvz dʒɹʌmd ɑn ðə hɛvi tɪmbɝz ə ðə loʊɝd dʒɹɔbɹɪdʒ əz ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə moʊɾ ən ɹoʊɾ ʌndɝ ðə ʃɑɹp pɔɪns ə ðə staʊt pɔɹtkʌlɪs. wʌns θɹu ðə ɡeɪts, læn swʌŋ daʊn aʊɾ ə hɪz sæɾəl tə lid mændɑɹb, sɪɡnəlɪŋ ði ʌðɝz tə dɪsmaʊnt.

Their hooves drummed on the heavy timbers of the lowered drawbridge as they crossed the moat and rode under the sharp points of the stout portcullis. Once through the gates, Lan swung down out of his saddle to lead Mandarb, signaling the others to dismount.

ðə fɝs kɔɹtʃjɑɹd wɑz ə hjudʒ skwɛɹ peɪvd wɪð bɪɡ stoʊn blɑks ən sɝaʊndəd baɪ taʊɝz ən bæɾəlmənts əz fɪɹs əz ðoʊz ɑn ði aʊtsaɪɾ ə ðə wɔlz. əz bɪɡ əz ɪt wɑz, ðə kɔɹtʃjɑɹɾ əpɪɹd dʒʌst əz kɹaʊɾəd əz ðə stʃɹits, ən əz mʌtʃ ɪn tɝmɔɪl, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz ən ɔɹɾɝ tə ðə kɹaʊɾɪŋ hɪɹ. ɛvɹiwɛɹ wɝ ɑɹmɝd mɛn ən ɑɹmɝd hɔɹsəz. ət hæf ə dʌzən smɪθiz ɝaʊn ðə kɔɹt, hæmɝz klæŋd, ən bɪɡ bɛloʊz, tʌɡd baɪ tu lɛðɝ-eɪpɹən mɛn əpis, meɪd ðə fɔɹdʒ-faɪɝz ɹɔɹ. ə stɛɾi stʃɹim ə bɔɪz ɹæn wɪð nu-meɪd hɔɹs ʃuz fəɹ ðə fɛɹiɝz. flɛtʃɝz sæt meɪkɪŋ æɹoʊz, ən ɛvɹi taɪm ə bæskət wɑz fɪld ɪt wɑz wɪskt əweɪ ən ɹipleɪst wɪð ən ɛmpti wʌn.

The first courtyard was a huge square paved with big stone blocks and surrounded by towers and battlements as fierce as those on the outside of the walls. As big as it was, the courtyard appeared just as crowded as the streets, and as much in turmoil, though there was an order to the crowding here. Everywhere were armored men and armored horses. At half a dozen smithies around the court, hammers clanged, and big bellows, tugged by two leather-aproned men apiece, made the forge-fires roar. A steady stream of boys ran with new-made horse shoes for the farriers. Fletchers sat making arrows, and every time a basket was filled it was whisked away and replaced with an empty one.

lɪvɹid ɡɹumz əpɪɹɾ ɑn ðə ɹʌn, iɡɝ ən smaɪlɪŋ ɪn blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld. ɹænd heɪstəli əntaɪɾ ɪz bɪlɔŋɪŋz fɹəm bɪhaɪn ðə sæɾəl ən ɡeɪv ðə beɪ ʌp tə wʌn ə ðə ɡɹumz əz ə mæn ɪn pleɪt-ænd-meɪl ən lɛðɝ baʊd fɔɹməli. hi wɔɹ ə bɹaɪt jɛloʊ kloʊk ɛdʒd ɪn ɹɛɾ oʊvɝ ɪz ɑɹmɝ, wɪð ðə blæk hɔk ɑn ðə bɹɛst, ən ə jɛloʊ sɝkoʊt bɛɹɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪ aʊl. hi wɔɹ noʊ hɛlməɾ ən wɑz bæɹhɛɾɪd, tʃɹuli, fəɹ ɪz hɛɹ hæɾ ɔl bɪn ʃeɪvd ɪksɛp fəɹ ə tɑpnɑt taɪd wɪð ə lɛðɝ kɔɹd. "ɪɾ əz bɪn lɔŋ, mɔɪɹeɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɪts ɡʊd tə si ju, daɪ ʃæn. vɛɹi ɡʊd." hi baʊɾ əɡɛn, tə lɔɪəl, ən mɝmɝd, "ɡlɔɹi tə ðə bɪldɝz. kaɪsɝi ti wɑnʃoʊ."

Liveried grooms appeared on the run, eager and smiling in black-and-gold. Rand hastily untied his belongings from behind the saddle and gave the bay up to one of the grooms as a man in plate-and-mail and leather bowed formally. He wore a bright yellow cloak edged in red over his armor, with the Black Hawk on the breast, and a yellow surcoat bearing a gray owl. He wore no helmet and was bareheaded, truly, for his hair had all been shaved except for a topknot tied with a leather cord. "It has been long, Moiraine Aes Sedai. It is good to see you, Dai Shan. Very good." He bowed again, to Loial, and murmured, "Glory to the Builders. Kiserai ti Wansho."

"aɪ æm ənwɝði," lɔɪəl ɹɪplaɪd fɔɹməli, "æn ðə wɝk smɔl. tsɪŋɡʌ mɑ tʃoʊbə."

"I am unworthy," Loial replied formally, "and the work small. Tsingu ma choba."

"ju ɑnɝ ʌs, bɪldɝ," ðə mæn sɛd. "kaɪsɝi ti wɑnʃoʊ." hi tɝn bæk tə læn. "wɝd wɑz sɛn tə lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ, daɪ ʃæn, əz sun əz jə wɝ sin kʌmɪŋ. hiz weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ju. ðɪs weɪ, pliz."

"You honor us, Builder," the man said. "Kiserai ti Wansho." He turned back to Lan. "Word was sent to Lord Agelmar, Dai Shan, as soon as you were seen coming. He is waiting for you. This way, please."

əz ðeɪ fɑloʊɾ ɪm ɪndə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs, əlɔŋ dʒɹæfti stoʊn kɔɹɪɾɝz hʌŋ wɪð kʌlɝfəl tæpəstʃɹiz ən lɔŋ sɪlk skɹinz ə hʌntɪŋ sinz ən bæɾəlz, hi kəntɪnjud. "aɪ æm ɡlæd ðə kɔl ɹitʃt ju, daɪ ʃæn. wɪl jə ɹeɪz ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn bænɝ wʌns mɔɹ?" ðə hɔlz wɝ stɑɹk ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə wɔl hæŋʒɪŋz, ən ivən ðeɪ juz ðə fjuəs fɪɡjɝz meɪd wɪð ðə fjuəs laɪnz nɛsəsɛɹi tə kənveɪ minɪŋ, ðoʊ ɪn bɹaɪt kʌlɝz.

As they followed him into the fortress, along drafty stone corridors hung with colorful tapestries and long silk screens of hunting scenes and battles, he continued. "I am glad the call reached you, Dai Shan. Will you raise the Golden Crane banner once more?" The halls were stark except for the wall hangings, and even they used the fewest figures made with the fewest lines necessary to convey meaning, though in bright colors.

"ɑɹ θɪŋz ɹɪli əz bæɾ əz ðeɪ əpɪɹ, ɪŋtʃɹ?" læn æskt kwaɪətli. ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf ɪz oʊn ɪɹz wɝ twɪtʃɪŋ laɪk lɔɪəlz.

"Are things really as bad as they appear, Ingtar?" Lan asked quietly. Rand wondered if his own ears were twitching like Loial's.

ðə mænz tɑpnɑt sweɪɾ əz i ʃʊk ɪz hɛd, bʌɾ i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ pʊɾɪŋ ɑn ə ɡɹɪn. "θɪŋz ɑɹ nɛvɝ əz bæɾ əz ðeɪ əpɪɹ, daɪ ʃæn. ə lɪɾəl wɝs ðən juʒəwəl ðɪs jɪɹ, ðəɾ ɪz ɔl. ðə ɹeɪdz kəntɪnjud θɹu ðə wɪntɝ, ivən ɪn ðə hɑɹɾəst ʌv ɪt. bʌt ðə ɹeɪɾɪŋ wɑz noʊ wɝs ðən ɛniwɛɹ ɛls əlɔŋ ðə bɔɹɾɝ. ðeɪ stɪl kʌm ɪn ðə naɪt, bʌt wʌɾ ɛls kən bi ɪkspɛktəɾ ɪn ðə spɹɪŋ, ɪf ðɪs kən bi kɔl spɹɪŋ. skaʊts ɹɪtɝn fɹəm ðə blaɪt - ðoʊz u də kʌm bæk - wɪð nuz ə tʃɹɑlɑk kæmps. ɔlweɪz fɹɛʃ nuz ə mɔɹ kæmps. bʌt wɪl miɾ əm ət tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp, daɪ ʃæn, ən tɝn əm bæk əz wi ɔlweɪz hæv."

The man's topknot swayed as he shook his head, but he hesitated before putting on a grin. "Things are never as bad as they appear, Dai Shan. A little worse than usual this year, that is all. The raids continued through the winter, even in the hardest of it. But the raiding was no worse than anywhere else along the Border. They still come in the night, but what else can be expected in the spring, if this can be called spring. Scouts return from the Blight - those who do come back - with news of Trolloc camps. Always fresh news of more camps. But we will meet them at Tarwin's Gap, Dai Shan, and turn them back as we always have."

"ʌv kɔɹs," læn sɛd, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt saʊn sɝɾən.

"Of course," Lan said, but he did not sound certain.

ɪŋtʃɹz ɡɹɪn slɪpt, bʌt keɪm bæk ɪmiɾiətli. saɪlənli hi ʃoʊɾ əm ɪndə lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz stʌɾi, ðən kleɪm ðə pɹɛs ə hɪz duɾiz ən lɛft.

Ingtar's grin slipped, but came back immediately. Silently he showed them into Lord Agelmar's study, then claimed the press of his duties and left.

ɪt wɑz ə ɹum əz pɝpəs-meɪɾ əz ɔl ðə ɹɛst ə ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs, wɪð æɹoʊslɪts ɪn ði aʊɾɝ wɔl ən ə hɛvi bɑɹ fəɹ ðə θɪk dɔɹ, wɪtʃ hæɾ ɪts oʊn æɹoʊpjɹsɪŋz ən wɑz baʊn baɪ aɪɝn stʃɹæps. oʊnli wʌn tæpəstʃɹi hʌŋ hɪɹ. ɪt kʌvɝɾ ən ɪntaɪɝ wɔl ən ʃoʊd mɛn, ɑɹmɝd laɪk ðə mɛn ə fæl dæɹə, faɪɾɪŋ mɹdʒɹɑl ən tʃɹɑləks ɪn ə maʊntən pæs.

It was a room as purpose-made as all the rest of the fortress, with arrowslits in the outer wall and a heavy bar for the thick door, which had its own arrowpiercings and was bound by iron straps. Only one tapestry hung here. It covered an entire wall and showed men, armored like the men of Fal Dara, fighting Myrddraal and Trollocs in a mountain pass.

ə teɪbəl, wʌn tʃɛst, ən ə fju tʃɛɹz wɝ ði oʊnli fɝnɪʃɪŋz ɪksɛp fəɹ tu ɹæks ɑn ðə wɔl, ən ðeɪ kɑt ɹændz aɪ əz mʌtʃ əz ðə tæpəstʃɹi. wʌn hɛld ə tu-hændəd sɔɹd, tɔlɝ ðən ə mæn, ə mɔɹ ɔɹɾənɛɹi bɹɔdsɔɹd, ən bɪloʊ ðɛm ə stʌɾɪd meɪs ən ə lɔŋ, kaɪt-ʃeɪpt ʃil bɛɹɪŋ θɹi fɑksəz. fɹəm ði ʌðɝ hʌŋ ə suɾ ʌv ɑɹmɝ, kəmpliɾ ən ɝeɪnʒd əz wʌn wəd wɛɹ ɪt. kɹɛstəd hɛlmət wɪð ɪts bɑɹd feɪsɡɑɹɾ oʊvɝ ə dʌbəl-meɪl kɑmeɪl. meɪl haʊbɹk, splɪt fəɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ, ən lɛðɝ ʌndɝkoʊt, pɑlɪʃt fɹəm wɛɹ. bɹɛstpleɪt, stil ɡɔnləts, ni ən ɛlboʊ kɑps, ən hæf-pleɪt fəɹ ʃoʊldɝz ən ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz. ivən hɪɹ ɪn ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə kip, wɛpənz ən ɑɹmɝ simd ɹɛɾi tə bi dɑn əɾ ɛni moʊmənt. laɪk ðə fɝnɪtʃɝ, ðeɪ wɝ sɪmpli ən səvɪɹli dɛkɝeɪɾəd wɪð ɡoʊld.

A table, one chest, and a few chairs were the only furnishings except for two racks on the wall, and they caught Rand's eye as much as the tapestry. One held a two-handed sword, taller than a man, a more ordinary broadsword, and below them a studded mace and a long, kite-shaped shield bearing three foxes. From the other hung a suit of armor, complete and arranged as one would wear it. Crested helmet with its barred faceguard over a double-mail camail. Mail hauberk, split for riding, and leather undercoat, polished from wear. Breastplate, steel gauntlets, knee and elbow cops, and half-plate for shoulders and arms and legs. Even here in the heart of the Keep, weapons and armor seemed ready to be donned at any moment. Like the furniture, they were simply and severely decorated with gold.

eɪɡəlmɝ hɪmsɛlf ɹoʊz ət ðɛɹ ɛntʃɹəns ən keɪm ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl, lɪɾɝd wɪð mæps ən ʃifs ə peɪpɝ ən pɛnz stændɪŋ ɪn ɪŋkpɑts. hi simd ət fɝst ɡlæns tu pisfəl fəɹ ðə ɹum ɪn ɪz blu vɛlvət koʊt wɪð ɪts tɔl, waɪd kɑlɝ, ən sɑf lɛðɝ buts, bʌɾ ə sɛkən lʊk ʃoʊd ɹænd dɪfɹənli. laɪk ɔl ðə faɪɾɪŋ mɛn i hæd sin, eɪɡəlmɝz hɛd wɑz ʃeɪvd ɪksɛp fəɹ ə tɑpnɑt, ən ðət pjʊɹ waɪt. hɪz feɪs wɑz əz hɑɹɾ əz lænz, ði oʊnli laɪnz kɹisɪz ət ðə kɔɹnɝz ə hɪz aɪz, ən ðoʊz aɪz laɪk bɹaʊn stoʊn, ðoʊ ðeɪ bɔɹ ə smaɪl naʊ.

Agelmar himself rose at their entrance and came around the table, littered with maps and sheafs of paper and pens standing in inkpots. He seemed at first glance too peaceful for the room in his blue velvet coat with its tall, wide collar, and soft leather boots, but a second look showed Rand differently. Like all the fighting men he had seen, Agelmar's head was shaved except for a topknot, and that pure white. His face was as hard as Lan's, the only lines creases at the corners of his eyes, and those eyes like brown stone, though they bore a smile now.

"pis, bʌɾ ɪts ɡʊd tə si ju, daɪ ʃæn," ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə sɛd. "æn ju, mɔɪɹeɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ, pɝhæps ivən mɔɹ. jəɹ pɹɛzəns wɔɹmz mi, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Peace, but it is good to see you, Dai Shan," the Lord of Fal Dara said. "And you, Moiraine Aes Sedai, perhaps even more. Your presence warms me, Aes Sedai."

"naɪn kəlɪknaɪi noʊ dəmæʃiɾə, eɪɡəlmɝ daɪ ʃæn," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd fɔɹməli, bʌt wɪð ə noʊɾ ɪn əɹ vɔɪs ðət sɛd ðeɪ wɝ oʊl fɹɛnz. "jɔɹ wɛlkəm wɔɹmz mi, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ."

"Ninte calichniye no domashita, Agelmar Dai Shan," Moiraine replied formally, but with a note in her voice that said they were old friends. "Your welcome warms me, Lord Agelmar."

"koʊdoʊm kəlɪknaɪi ɡɑ ni ɛɛs sədaɪ heɪ. hɪɹ ɪz ɔlweɪz ə wɛlkəm fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ." hi tɝn tə lɔɪəl. "ju ɑɹ fɑɹ fɹəm ðə stɛɾɪŋ, oʊɡiɝ, bʌt jə ɑnɝ fæl dæɹə. ɔlweɪz ɡlɔɹi tə ðə bɪldɝz. kaɪsɝi ti wɑnʃoʊ heɪ."

"Kodome calichniye ga ni Aes Sedai hei. Here is always a welcome for Aes Sedai." He turned to Loial. "You are far from the stedding, Ogier, but you honor Fal Dara. Always glory to the Builders. Kiserai ti Wansho hei."

"aɪ æm ənwɝði," lɔɪəl sɛd, boʊɪŋ. "ɪɾ ɪz jə hu də mi ɑnɝ." hi ɡlænst ət ðə stɑɹk stoʊn wɔlz ən sim tə stʃɹʌɡəl wɪð hɪmsɛlf. ɹænd wɑz ɡlæd ði oʊɡiɝ mænədʒ tə ɹɪfɹeɪn fɹəm æɾɪŋ fɝðɝ kɑmɛnt.

"I am unworthy," Loial said, bowing. "It is you who do me honor." He glanced at the stark stone walls and seemed to struggle with himself. Rand was glad the Ogier managed to refrain from adding further comment.

sɝvəns ɪn blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld əpɪɹɾ ɑn saɪlənt, sɑft-slɪpɝd fit. səm bɹɔt foʊldəd klɔθs, dæmp ən hɑt, ɑn sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪz fəɹ waɪpɪŋ ðə dʌs fɹəm feɪsəz ən hænz. ʌðɝz bɔɹ mʌld waɪn ən sɪlvɝ boʊlz ə dʒɹaɪd plʌmz ən æpɹəkɑts. lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ ɡeɪv ɔɹɾɝz fəɹ ɹumz tə bi pɹipɛɹd, ən bæθs.

Servants in black-and-gold appeared on silent, soft-slippered feet. Some brought folded cloths, damp and hot, on silver trays for wiping the dust from faces and hands. Others bore mulled wine and silver bowls of dried plums and apricots. Lord Agelmar gave orders for rooms to be prepared, and baths.

"ə lɔŋ dʒɝni fɹəm tɑɹ vəlɑn," hi sɛd. "ju mʌs bi taɪɝd."

"A long journey from Tar Valon," he said. "You must be tired."

"ə ʃɔɹt dʒɝni ðə pæθ wi keɪm," læn toʊl hɪm, "bʌt mɔɹ taɪɹɪŋ ðən ðə lɔŋ weɪ."

"A short journey the path we came," Lan told him, "but more tiring than the long way."

eɪɡəlmɝ lʊk pʌzəld wən ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd noʊ mɔɹ, bʌɾ i mɪɹli sɛd, "ə fju deɪz' ɹɛst wɪl pʊt jə ɔl ɪn faɪn fɛɾəl."

Agelmar looked puzzled when the Warder said no more, but he merely said, "A few days' rest will put you all in fine fettle."

"aɪ æsk wʌn naɪts ʃɛltɝ, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "fɔɹ aʊɝsɛlvz ən əɹ hɔɹsəz. ən fɹɛʃ səplaɪz ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ, ɪf jə kən spɛɹ ðɛm. wi mʌs liv jə ɝli, aɪm əfɹeɪd."

"I ask one night's shelter, Lord Agelmar," Moiraine said, "for ourselves and our horses. And fresh supplies in the morning, if you can spare them. We must leave you early, I am afraid."

eɪɡəlmɝ fɹaʊnd. "bʌɾ aɪ θɔt. . . . mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, aɪ hæv noʊ ɹaɪt tə æsk ɪɾ ə ju, bʌt jə wəd bi wɝθ ə θaʊzən lænsɪz ɪn tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp. ən ju, daɪ ʃæn. ə θaʊzən mɛn wɪl kʌm wən ðeɪ hɪɹ ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn flaɪz wʌns mɔɹ."

Agelmar frowned. "But I thought. . . . Moiraine Sedai, I have no right to ask it of you, but you would be worth a thousand lances in Tarwin's Gap. And you, Dai Shan. A thousand men will come when they hear the Golden Crane flies once more."

"ðə sɛvən taʊɝz ɑɹ bɹoʊkən," læn sɛd hɑɹʃli, "æn mɔlkiɝ ɪz dɛd; ðə fju ʌv əɹ pipəl lɛft, skæɾɝd əkɹɔs ðə feɪs ə ði ɝθ. aɪm ə wɔɹɾɝ, eɪɡəlmɝ, swɔɹn tə ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ən aɪm baʊn ɪndə ðə blaɪt."

"The Seven Towers are broken," Lan said harshly, "and Malkier is dead; the few of her people left, scattered across the face of the earth. I am a Warder, Agelmar, sworn to the Flame of Tar Valon, and I am bound into the Blight."

"ʌv kɔɹs, daɪ  - læn. ʌv kɔɹs. bʌt ʃʊɹli ə fju deɪz' dɪleɪ, ə fju wiks ət moʊst, wɪl meɪk noʊ dɪfɝəns. jə ɑɹ niɾəd. ju, ən mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ."

"Of course, Dai Sh - Lan. Of course. But surely a few days' delay, a few weeks at most, will make no difference. You are needed. You, and Moiraine Sedai."

mɔɪɹeɪn tʊk ə sɪlvɝ ɡɑblət fɹəm wʌn ə ðə sɝvəns. "ɪŋtʃɹ simz tə bɪliv jəl dɪfit ðɪs θɹɛɾ əz juv dɪfiɾəd mɛni ʌðɝz əkɹɔs ðə jɪɹz."

Moiraine took a silver goblet from one of the servants. "Ingtar seems to believe you will defeat this threat as you have defeated many others across the years."

"ɛɛs sədaɪ," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd ɹaɪli, "ɪf ɪŋtʃɹ hæd tə ɹaɪɾ əloʊn tə tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp, hi wəd ɹaɪd ðə hoʊl weɪ pɹoʊkleɪmɪŋ ðət ðə tʃɹɑləks wəd bi tɝn bæk wʌns mɔɹ. hiz ɔlmoʊs pɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə bɪliv i kəd də ɪɾ əloʊn."

"Aes Sedai," Agelmar said wryly, "if Ingtar had to ride alone to Tarwin's Gap, he would ride the whole way proclaiming that the Trollocs would be turned back once more. He has almost pride enough to believe he could do it alone."

"hi ɪz nɑɾ əz kɑnfəɾənt əz jə θɪŋk, ðɪs taɪm, eɪɡəlmɝ." ðə wɔɹɾɝ hɛld ə kʌp, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt dʒɹɪŋk. "haʊ bæɾ ɪz ɪt?"

"He is not as confident as you think, this time, Agelmar." The Warder held a cup, but he did not drink. "How bad is it?"

eɪɡəlmɝ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, pʊlɪŋ ə mæp fɹəm ðə tæŋɡəl ɑn ðə teɪbəl. hi stɛɹɾ ənsiɪŋ ət ðə mæp fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðən tɔst ɪt bæk. "wɛn wi ɹaɪd tə ðə ɡæp," hi sɛd kwaɪətli, "ðə pipəl wɪl bi sɛn saʊθ tə fæl mɝæn. pɝhæps ðə kæpəɾəl kən hoʊld. pis, ɪt mʌst. sʌmθɪŋ mʌs hoʊld."

Agelmar hesitated, pulling a map from the tangle on the table. He stared unseeing at the map for a moment, then tossed it back. "When we ride to the Gap," he said quietly, "the people will be sent south to Fal Moran. Perhaps the capital can hold. Peace, it must. Something must hold."

"ðæt bæd?" læn sɛd, ən eɪɡəlmɝ nɑɾəd wɛɹəli.

"That bad?" Lan said, and Agelmar nodded wearily.

ɹænd ɪkstʃeɪnʒd wɝid lʊks wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn. ɪt wɑz izi tə bɪliv ðə tʃɹɑləks ɡæðɝɪŋ ɪn ðə blaɪt wɝ æftɝ hɪm, æftɝ ðɛm. eɪɡəlmɝ wɛn ɑn ɡɹɪmli.

Rand exchanged worried looks with Mat and Perrin. It was easy to believe the Trollocs gathering in the Blight were after him, after them. Agelmar went on grimly.

"kændɝ, ɝæfəl, sɑldɑiə - ðə tʃɹɑləks ɹeɪɾɪd əm ɔl stʃɹeɪt θɹu ðə wɪntɝ. nʌθɪŋ laɪk ðəɾ əz hæpən sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz; ðə ɹeɪdz əv nɛvɝ bɪn soʊ fɪɹs, əɹ soʊ lɑɹdʒ, əɹ pɹɛs hoʊm soʊ hɑɹd. ɛvɹi kɪŋ ən kaʊnsəl ɪz ʃʊɹ ə ɡɹeɪt θɹʌst ɪz kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə blaɪt, ən ɛvɹi wʌn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz bɪlivz ɪts kʌmɪŋ ət ðɛm. nʌn ə ðɛɹ skaʊts, ən nʌn ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz, ɹipɔɹt tʃɹɑlɑk mæsɪŋ əbʌv ðɛɹ bɔɹɾɝz, əz wɪv hɪɹ, bʌt ðeɪ bɪliv, ən itʃ ɪz əfɹeɪd tə sɛn faɪɾɪŋ mɛn ɛlswɛɹ. pipəl wɪspɝ ðət ðə wɝld ɪz ɛndɪŋ, ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz lus əɡɛn. ʃaɪnɝ wɪl ɹaɪd tə tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp əloʊn, ən wɪl bi aʊtnʌmbɝɾ ət lis tɛn tə wʌn. ət list. ɪt meɪ bi ðə læst ɪnɡɑðɝɪŋ ə ðə lænsɪz.

"Kandor, Arafel, Saldaea - the Trollocs raided them all straight through the winter. Nothing like that has happened since the Trolloc Wars; the raids have never been so fierce, or so large, or pressed home so hard. Every king and council is sure a great thrust is coming out of the Blight, and every one of the Borderlands believes it is coming at them. None of their scouts, and none of the Warders, report Trolloc massing above their borders, as we have here, but they believe, and each is afraid to send fighting men elsewhere. People whisper that the world is ending, that the Dark One is loose again. Shienar will ride to Tarwin's Gap alone, and we will be outnumbered at least ten to one. At least. It may be the last Ingathering of the Lances.

"læn - noʊ! - daɪ ʃæn, fəɹ jə ɑɹ ə daɪəɾɪmd bæɾəl lɔɹɾ ə mɔlkiɝ wʌtɛvɝ jə seɪ. daɪ ʃæn, ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn bænɝ ɪn ðə væn wəd pʊt hɑɹɾ ɪndə mɛn u noʊ ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹaɪɾɪŋ nɔɹθ tə daɪ. ðə wɝd wɪl spɹɛd laɪk waɪldfaɪɝ, ən ðoʊ ðɛɹ kɪŋz əv toʊld əm tə hoʊld wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ, lænsɪz wɪl kʌm fɹəm ɝæfəl ən kændɝ, ən ivən fɹəm sɑldɑiə. ðoʊ ðeɪ kænɑt kʌm ɪn taɪm tə stænd wɪð əs ɪn ðə ɡæp, ðeɪ meɪ seɪv ʃaɪnɝ."

"Lan - no! - Dai Shan, for you are a Diademed Battle Lord of Malkier Whatever you say. Dai Shan, the Golden Crane banner in the van would put heart into men who know they are riding north to die. The word will spread like wildfire, and though their kings have told them to hold where they are, lances will come from Arafel and Kandor, and even from Saldaea. Though they cannot come in time to stand with us in the Gap, they may save Shienar."

læn pɪɹɾ ɪndə hɪz waɪn. hɪz feɪs dɪd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ, bʌt waɪn slɑpt oʊvɝ ɪz hænd; ðə sɪlvɝ ɡɑblət kɹʌmpəld ɪn ɪz ɡɹɪp. ə sɝvən tʊk ðə ɹuən kʌp ən waɪp ðə wɔɹɾɝz hænd wɪð ə klɔθ; ə sɛkən pʊɾ ə fɹɛʃ ɡɑbləɾ ɪn ɪz hænd waɪl ði ʌðɝ wɑz wɪskt əweɪ. læn dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs. "aɪ kænɑt!" hi wɪspɝd hɔɹsli. wən i ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛɾ ɪz blu aɪz bɝnd wɪð ə fɪɹs laɪt, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs wɑz kɑm əɡɛn, ən flæt. "aɪ æm ə wɔɹɾɝ, eɪɡəlmɝ." hɪz ʃɑɹp ɡeɪz slɪɾ əkɹɔs ɹænd ən mæt ən pɛɹɪn tə mɔɪɹeɪn. "æt fɝs laɪɾ aɪ ɹaɪd tə ðə blaɪt."

Lan peered into his wine. His face did not change, but wine slopped over his hand; the silver goblet crumpled in his grip. A servant took the ruined cup and wiped the Warder's hand with a cloth; a second put a fresh goblet in his hand while the other was whisked away. Lan did not seem to notice. "I cannot!" he whispered hoarsely. When he raised his head his blue eyes burned with a fierce light, but his voice was calm again, and flat. "I am a Warder, Agelmar." His sharp gaze slid across Rand and Mat and Perrin to Moiraine. "At first light I ride to the Blight."

eɪɡəlmɝ saɪd hɛvəli. "mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, wɪl jə nɑt kʌm, ət list? ən ɛɛs sədaɪ kəd meɪk ðə dɪfɝəns."

Agelmar sighed heavily. "Moiraine Sedai, will you not come, at least? An Aes Sedai could make the difference."

"aɪ kænɑt, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ." mɔɪɹeɪn sim tʃɹʌbəld. "ðɛɹ ɪz ɪndiɾ ə bæɾəl tə bi fɔt, ən ɪts nɑt tʃæns ðət ðə tʃɹɑləks ɡæðɝ əbʌv ʃaɪnɝ, bʌɾ əɹ bæɾəl, ðə tʃɹu bæɾəl wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn, wɪl teɪk pleɪs ɪn ðə blaɪt, ət ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld. jə mʌs faɪt jəɹ bæɾəl, ən wi aʊɝz."

"I cannot, Lord Agelmar." Moiraine seemed troubled. "There is indeed a battle to be fought, and it is not chance that the Trollocs gather above Shienar, but our battle, the true battle with the Dark One, will take place in the Blight, at the Eye of the World. You must fight your battle, and we ours."

"ju kænɑt bi seɪɪŋ hiz lus!" ɹɑklaɪk eɪɡəlmɝ saʊndəd ʃeɪkən, ən mɔɪɹeɪn kwɪkli ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

"You cannot be saying he is loose!" Rocklike Agelmar sounded shaken, and Moiraine quickly shook her head.

"nɑt jɛt. ɪf wi wɪn ət ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld, pɝhæps nɑɾ ɛvɝ əɡɛn."

"Not yet. If we win at the Eye of the World, perhaps not ever again."

"kæn jə ivən faɪn ði aɪ, ɛɛs sədaɪ? ɪf hoʊldɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn dɪpɛnz ɑn ðæt, wi maɪɾ əz wɛl bi dɛd. mɛni hæv tʃɹaɪɾ ən feɪld."

"Can you even find the Eye, Aes Sedai? If holding the Dark One depends on that, we might as well be dead. Many have tried and failed."

"aɪ kən faɪn ɪt, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ. hoʊp ɪz nɑt lɔs jɛt."

"I can find it, Lord Agelmar. Hope is not lost yet."

eɪɡəlmɝ stʌɾid hɝ, ən ðən ði ʌðɝz. hi əpɪɹd pʌzəl baɪ nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin; ðɛɹ fɑɹmkloʊðz kəntʃɹæstəd ʃɑɹpli wɪð mɔɪɹeɪnz sɪlk dʒɹɛs, ðoʊ ɔl wɝ tʃɹævəl-steɪnd. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, tu?" hi æsk daʊtfəli. wən mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, hi simd ivən mɔɹ kənfjuzd. hɪz ɡeɪz ɹæn oʊvɝ ðə jʌŋ mɛn fɹəm ɛmənz fild, sɛɾəlɪŋ ɑn ɹænd, bɹʌʃɪŋ ðə ɹɛd-ɹæp sɔɹɾ əɾ ɪz weɪst. "ə stʃɹeɪnʒ ɡɑɹd jə teɪk wɪð ju, ɛɛs sədaɪ. oʊnli wʌn faɪɾɪŋ mæn." hi ɡlænst ət pɛɹɪn, ən ət ði æks hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ɪz bɛlt. "pɝhæps tu. bʌt boʊθ bɛɹli mɔɹ ðən lædz. lemi sɛn mɛn wɪð ju. ə hʌnʒɹəd lænsɪz mɔɹ əɹ lɛs wɪl meɪk noʊ dɪfɝəns ɪn ðə ɡæp, bʌt jəl nid mɔɹ ðən wʌn wɔɹɾɝ ən θɹi juðz. ən tu wɪmən wɪl nɑt hɛlp, ənlɛs ðeɪ ɑɹ il ɪn dɪsɡaɪz. ðə blaɪɾ ɪz wɝs ðən juʒəwəl ðɪs jɪɹ. ɪt - stɝz."

Agelmar studied her, and then the others. He appeared puzzled by Nynaeve and Egwene; their farmclothes contrasted sharply with Moiraine's silk dress, though all were travel-stained. "They are Aes Sedai, too?" he asked doubtfully. When Moiraine shook her head, he seemed even more confused. His gaze ran over the young men from Emond's Field, settling on Rand, brushing the red-wrapped sword at his waist. "A strange guard you take with you, Aes Sedai. Only one fighting man." He glanced at Perrin, and at the axe hanging from his belt. "Perhaps two. But both barely more than lads. Let me send men with you. A hundred lances more or less will make no difference in the Gap, but you will need more than one Warder and three youths. And two women will not help, unless they are Aiel in disguise. The Blight is worse than usual this year. It - stirs."

"ə hʌnʒɹəd lænsɪz wəd bi tu mɛni," læn sɛd, "æn ə θaʊzənd nɑɾ ɪnʌf. ðə lɑɹdʒɝ ðə pɑɹɾi wi teɪk ɪndə ðə blaɪt, ðə mɔɹ tʃæns wɪl ətʃɹækt ətɛnʃən. wi mʌst ɹitʃ ði aɪ wɪθaʊt faɪɾɪŋ, ɪf wi kæn. jə noʊ ði aʊtkʌm ɪz ɔl bʌt fɔɹtoʊld wən tʃɹɑləks fɔɹs bæɾəl ɪnsaɪd ðə blaɪt."

"A hundred lances would be too many," Lan said, "and a thousand not enough. The larger the party we take into the Blight, the more chance we will attract attention. We must reach the Eye without fighting, if we can. You know the outcome is all but foretold when Trollocs force battle inside the Blight."

eɪɡəlmɝ nɑɾəd ɡɹɪmli, bʌɾ i ɹəfjuz tə ɡɪv ʌp. "fjuɝ, ðɛn. ivən tɛn ɡʊd mɛn wəd ɡɪv jə ə bɛɾɝ tʃæns ʌv ɛskɔɹɾɪŋ mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ ən ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən tə ðə ɡɹin mæn ðən wɪl dʒʌs ðiz jʌŋ fɛloʊz."

Agelmar nodded grimly, but he refused to give up. "Fewer, then. Even ten good men would give you a better chance of escorting Moiraine Sedai and the other two women to the Green Man than will just these young fellows."

ɹænd əbɹʌpli ɹilaɪz ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə əsumd ɪt wɑz nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin u wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn wəd faɪɾ əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ɪt wɑz nætʃɹəl. ðət sɔɹɾ ə stʃɹʌɡəl mɛn juzɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən ðət mɛnt wɪmən. ðət sɔɹɾ ə stʃɹʌɡəl minz juzɪŋ ðə paʊɝ. hi tʌkt ɪz θʌmz bɪhaɪn ɪz sɔɹd bɛlt ən ɡɹɪp ðə bʌkəl hɑɹd tə kip ɪz hænz fɹəm ʃeɪkɪŋ.

Rand abruptly realized the Lord of Fal Dara assumed it was Nynaeve and Egwene who with Moiraine would fight against the Dark One. It was natural. That sort of struggle meant using the One Power, and that meant women. That sort of struggle means using the Power. He tucked his thumbs behind his sword belt and gripped the buckle hard to keep his hands from shaking.

"noʊ mɛn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. eɪɡəlmɝ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ əɡɛn, ən ʃi wɛn ɑn bɪfɔɹ i kəd spik. "ɪɾ ɪz ðə neɪtʃɝ ə ði aɪ, ən ðə neɪtʃɝ ə ðə ɡɹin mæn. haʊ mɛni fɹəm fæl dæɹə hæv ɛvɝ faʊn ðə ɡɹin mæn ən ði aɪ?"

"No men," Moiraine said. Agelmar opened his mouth again, and she went on before he could speak. "It is the nature of the Eye, and the nature of the Green Man. How many from Fal Dara have ever found the Green Man and the Eye?"

"ɛvɝ?" eɪɡəlmɝ ʃɹʌɡd. "sɪns ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, jə kəd kaʊn əm ɑn ðə fɪŋɡɝz ʌv wʌn hænd. noʊ mɔɹ ðən wʌn ɪn faɪv jɪɹz fɹəm ɔl ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz təɡɛðɝ."

"Ever?" Agelmar shrugged. "Since the War of the Hundred Years, you could count them on the fingers of one hand. No more than one in five years from all the Borderlands together."

"noʊ wʌn faɪnz ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "ənlɛs ðə ɡɹin mæn wɑns əm tə faɪn ɪt. niɾ ɪz ðə ki, ən ɪntɛntʃən. aɪ noʊ wɛɹ tə ɡoʊ - aɪ hæv bɪn ðəɹ bɪfɔɹ." ɹændz hɛd wɪpt ɝaʊn ɪn sɝpɹaɪz; hɪz wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn əmʌŋ ði ɛmənz fildɝz, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs. "bʌt wʌn əmʌŋ əs sikɪŋ ɡlɔɹi, sikɪŋ tə æɾ ɪz neɪm tə ðoʊz fɔɹ, ən wi meɪ nɛvɝ faɪn ɪt ðoʊ aɪ teɪk əs stʃɹeɪt tə ðə spɑɾ aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ."

"No one finds the Eye of the World," Moiraine said, "unless the Green Man wants them to find it. Need is the key, and intention. I know where to go - I have been there before." Rand's head whipped around in surprise; his was not the only one among the Emond's Fielders, but the Aes Sedai did not seem to notice. "But one among us seeking glory, seeking to add his name to those four, and we may never find it though I take us straight to the spot I remember."

"ju hæv sin ðə ɡɹin mæn, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ?" ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə saʊndəɾ ɪmpɹɛst, bʌɾ ɪn ðə nɛks bɹɛθ i fɹaʊnd. "bʌɾ ɪf juv ɔlɹɛɾi mɛɾ ɪm wʌns. . . ."

"You have seen the Green Man, Moiraine Sedai?" The Lord of Fal Dara sounded impressed, but in the next breath he frowned. "But if you have already met him once. . . ."

"niɾ ɪz ðə ki," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɔfli, "æn ðəɹ kən bi noʊ ɡɹeɪɾɝ nid ðən maɪn. ðən aʊɝz. ən aɪ hæv sʌmθɪŋ ðoʊz ʌðɝ sikɝz əv nɑt."

"Need is the key," Moiraine said softly, "and there can be no greater need than mine. Than ours. And I have something those other seekers have not."

hɝ aɪz bɛɹli stɝd fɹəm eɪɡəlmɝz feɪs, bʌt ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ hæd dʒɹɪftəd təwɔɹd lɔɪəl, dʒʌs fəɹ ən ɪnstən bɪfɔɹ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pʊld əm bæk. ɹænd mɛt ði oʊɡiɝz aɪz, ən lɔɪəl ʃɹʌɡd.

Her eyes barely stirred from Agelmar's face, but Rand was sure they had drifted toward Loial, just for an instant before the Aes Sedai pulled them back. Rand met the Ogier's eyes, and Loial shrugged.

"tɑvɝən," ði oʊɡiɝ sɛd sɔfli.

"Ta'veren," the Ogier said softly.

eɪɡəlmɝ θɹu ʌp ɪz hænz. "ɪt wɪl bi əz jə seɪ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. pis, ɪf ðə ɹil bæɾəl ɪz tə bi ət ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld, aɪm tɛmptəd tə teɪk ðə blæk hɔk bænɝ æftɝ jə ɪnstɛɾ ə tə ðə ɡæp. aɪ kəd kʌɾ ə pæθ fəɹ jə - "

Agelmar threw up his hands. "It will be as you say, Aes Sedai. Peace, if the real battle is to be at the Eye of the World, I am tempted to take the Black Hawk banner after you instead of to the Gap. I could cut a path for you - "

"ðæt wəd bi dɪzæstɝ, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ. boʊθ ət tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp ən ət ði aɪ. juv jəɹ bæɾəl, ən wi aʊɝz."

"That would be disaster, Lord Agelmar. Both at Tarwin's Gap and at the Eye. You have your battle, and we ours."

"pis! əz jə seɪ, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Peace! As you say, Aes Sedai."

hævɪŋ ɹitʃt ə dɪsɪʒən, haʊɛvɝ mʌtʃ i dɪslaɪkt ɪt, ðə ʃeɪvən-hɛɾəd lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə sim tə pʊɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪz maɪnd. hi ɪnvaɪɾəd əm tə teɪbəl wɪð hɪm, ɔl ðə waɪl meɪkɪŋ kɑnvɝseɪʃən əbaʊt hɔks ən hɔɹsəz ən dɑɡz, bʌt wɪð nɛvɝ ə mɛnʃən ə tʃɹɑləks, əɹ tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp, əɹ ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld.

Having reached a decision, however much he disliked it, the shaven-headed Lord of Fal Dara seemed to put it out of his mind. He invited them to table with him, all the while making conversation about hawks and horses and dogs, but with never a mention of Trollocs, or Tarwin's Gap, or the Eye of the World.

ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɛɹ ðeɪ eɪt wɑz əz stɑɹk ən pleɪn əz lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝz stʌɾi hæd bɪn, wɪð lɪɾəl mɔɹ fɝnɪʃɪŋ ɪt ðən ðə teɪbəl ən tʃɛɹz ðɛmsɛlvz, ən ðeɪ wɝ səvɪɹ ɪn laɪn ən fɔɹm. bjuɾəfəl, bʌt səvɪɹ. ə bɪɡ faɪɝpleɪs wɔɹm ðə ɹum, bʌt nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ ðəɾ ə mæn kɔld aʊt hɝidli wəd bi stʌn baɪ ðə koʊld aʊtsaɪd. lɪvɹid sɝvəns bɹɔt sup ən bɹɛɾ ən tʃiz, ən ðə tɔk wɑz ə bʊks ən mjuzɪk əntɪl lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ ɹilaɪz ði ɛmənz fil foʊk wɝ nɑt tɔkɪŋ. laɪk ə ɡʊd hoʊst i æsk dʒɛnli pɹoʊbɪŋ kwɛstʃənz dɪzaɪn tə bɹɪŋ əm aʊɾ ə ðɛɹ kwaɪət.

The chamber where they ate was as stark and plain as Lord Agelmar's study had been, with little more furnishing it than the table and chairs themselves, and they were severe in line and form. Beautiful, but severe. A big fireplace warmed the room, but not so much that a man called out hurriedly would be stunned by the cold outside. Liveried servants brought soup and bread and cheese, and the talk was of books and music until Lord Agelmar realized the Emond's Field folk were not talking. Like a good host he asked gently probing questions designed to bring them out of their quiet.

ɹænd sun faʊn hɪmsɛlf kəmpiɾɪŋ tə tɛl əbaʊɾ ɛmənz fild ən ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ɪt wɑz ən ɛfɝt nɑt tə seɪ tu mʌtʃ. hi hoʊp ði ʌðɝz wɝ ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðɛɹ tʌŋz, mæt ɪspɛʃli. nɪneɪiv əloʊn hɛl hɝsɛlf bæk, iɾɪŋ ən dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ saɪlənli.

Rand soon found himself competing to tell about Emond's Field and the Two Rivers. It was an effort not to say too much. He hoped the others were guarding their tongues, Mat especially. Nynaeve alone held herself back, eating and drinking silently.

"ðɛɹz ə sɔŋ ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz," mæt sɛd. " 'kʌmɪŋ hoʊm fɹəm tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp.' " hi fɪnɪʃt hɛzɪɾəntli, əz ɪf sʌɾənli ɹilaɪzɪŋ ðəɾ i wɑz bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp wʌt ðeɪ hæd bɪn əvɔɪɾɪŋ, bʌɾ eɪɡəlmɝ hændəld ɪt smuðli.

"There's a song in the Two Rivers," Mat said. " 'Coming Home From Tarwin's Gap.' " He finished hesitantly, as if suddenly realizing that he was bringing up what they had been avoiding, but Agelmar handled it smoothly.

"lɪɾəl wʌndɝ. fju lænz əv nɑt sɛn mɛn tə hoʊl bæk ðə blaɪɾ oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz."

"Little wonder. Few lands have not sent men to hold back the Blight over the years."

ɹænd lʊkt ət mæt ən pɛɹɪn. mæt saɪlənli fɔɹm ðə wɝd meɪnɛðɝən.

Rand looked at Mat and Perrin. Mat silently formed the word Manetheren.

eɪɡəlmɝ wɪspɝd tə wʌn ə ðə sɝvəns, ən waɪl ʌðɝz klɪɹd ðə teɪbəl ðət mæn vænɪʃt ən ɹɪtɝnd wɪð ə kænəstɝ, ən kleɪ paɪps fəɹ læn, lɔɪəl, ən lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ. "tu ɹɪvɝz təbæk," ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə sɛɾ əz ðeɪ fɪl ðɛɹ paɪps. "hɑɹd tə kʌm baɪ, hɪɹ, bʌt wɝθ ðə kɑst."

Agelmar whispered to one of the servants, and while others cleared the table that man vanished and returned with a canister, and clay pipes for Lan, Loial, and Lord Agelmar. "Two Rivers tabac," the Lord of Fal Dara said as they filled their pipes. "Hard to come by, here, but worth the cost."

wən lɔɪəl ən ðə tu oʊldɝ mɛn wɝ pʌfɪŋ kəntɛntədli, eɪɡəlmɝ ɡlænst ət ði oʊɡiɝ. "ju sim tʃɹʌbəld, bɪldɝ. nɑt bɪsɛt baɪ ðə lɔŋɪŋ, aɪ hoʊp. haʊ lɔŋ əv jə bɪn əweɪ fɹəm ðə stɛɾɪŋ?"

When Loial and the two older men were puffing contentedly, Agelmar glanced at the Ogier. "You seem troubled, Builder. Not beset by the Longing, I hope. How long have you been away from the stedding?"

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑt ðə lɔŋɪŋ; aɪ hæv nɑt bɪn ɡɔn sətʃ ə taɪm əz ðæt." lɔɪəl ʃɹʌɡd, ən ðə blu-ɡɹeɪ stʃɹimɝ ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ɪz paɪp meɪɾ ə spaɪɹəl əbʌv ðə teɪbəl əz i dʒɛstʃɝd. "aɪ ɪkspɛktəd - hoʊpt - ðət ðə ɡɹoʊv wəd stɪl bi hɪɹ. səm ɹɛmnən ə mæfəl dɑɾɝɑnɛl, ət list."

"It is not the Longing; I have not been gone such a time as that." Loial shrugged, and the blue-gray streamer rising from his pipe made a spiral above the table as he gestured. "I expected - hoped - that the grove would still be here. Some remnant of Mafal Dadaranell, at least."

"kaɪsɝi ti wɑnʃoʊ," eɪɡəlmɝ mɝmɝd. "ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz lɛf nʌθɪŋ bʌt mɛmɹiz, lɔɪəl, sʌn ʌv ɑɹənt, ən pipəl tə bɪld ɑn ðɛm. ðeɪ kəd nɑt dupləkeɪt ðə bɪldɝz' wɝk, ɛni mɔɹ ðən kəɾ aɪ. ðoʊz ɪntʃɹəkət kɝvz ən pæɾɝnz jəɹ pipəl kɹieɪɾ ɑɹ bɪɑn hjumən aɪz ən hænz tə meɪk. pɝhæps wi wɪʃt tə əvɔɪɾ ə pʊɹ ɪməteɪʃən ðət wəɾ oʊnli hæv bɪn ən ɛvɝ-pɹɛzən ɹimaɪndɝ tə əs ʌv wʌt wi hæd lɔst. ðəɹ ɪz ə dɪfɹən bjuɾi ɪn sɪmplɪsəɾi, ɪn ə sɪŋɡəl laɪn pleɪs dʒʌst soʊ, ə sɪŋɡəl flaʊɝ əmʌŋ ðə ɹɑks. ðə hɑɹʃnəs ə ðə stoʊn meɪks ðə flaʊɝ mɔɹ pɹɛʃəs. wi tʃɹaɪ nɑt tə dwɛl tu mʌtʃ ɑn wʌɾ ɪz ɡɔn. ðə stʃɹɔŋɡəs hɑɹt wɪl bɹeɪk ʌndɝ ðət stʃɹeɪn."

"Kiserai ti Wansho," Agelmar murmured. "The Trolloc Wars left nothing but memories, Loial, son of Arent, and people to build on them. They could not duplicate the Builders' work, any more than could I. Those intricate curves and patterns your people create are beyond human eyes and hands to make. Perhaps we wished to avoid a poor imitation that would only have been an ever-present reminder to us of what we had lost. There is a different beauty in simplicity, in a single line placed just so, a single flower among the rocks. The harshness of the stone makes the flower more precious. We try not to dwell too much on what is gone. The strongest heart will break under that strain."

"ðə ɹoʊz pɛɾəl floʊts ɑn wɔɾɝ," læn ɹəsaɪɾəd sɔfli. "ðə kɪŋfɪʃɝ flæʃɪz əbʌv ðə pɑnd. laɪf ən bjuɾi swɝl ɪn ðə mɪdst ə dɛθ."

"The rose petal floats on water," Lan recited softly. "The kingfisher flashes above the pond. Life and beauty swirl in the midst of death."

"jɛs," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd. "jɛs. ðət wʌn əz ɔlweɪz sɪmbəlaɪz ðə hoʊl ʌv ɪt tə mi, tu." ðə tu mɛn baʊd ðɛɹ hɛdz tə wʌn ənʌðɝ.

"Yes," Agelmar said. "Yes. That one has always symbolized the whole of it to me, too." The two men bowed their heads to one another.

poʊətʃɹi aʊɾ ə læn? ðə mæn wɑz laɪk ən ʌnjən; ɛvɹi taɪm ɹænd θɔɾ i nu sʌmθɪŋ əbaʊt ðə wɔɹɾɝ, hi dɪskʌvɝɾ ənʌðɝ leɪɝ ʌndɝniθ.

Poetry out of Lan? The man was like an onion; every time Rand thought he knew something about the Warder, he discovered another layer underneath.

lɔɪəl nɑɾəd sloʊli. "pɝhæps aɪ ɔlsoʊ dwɛl tu mʌtʃ ɑn wʌɾ ɪz ɡɔn. ən jɛt, ðə ɡɹoʊvz wɝ bjuɾəfəl." bʌɾ i wɑz lʊkɪŋ ət ðə stɑɹk ɹum əz ɪf siɪŋ ɪɾ ənu, ən sʌɾənli faɪndɪŋ θɪŋz wɝθ siɪŋ.

Loial nodded slowly. "Perhaps I also dwell too much on what is gone. And yet, the groves were beautiful." But he was looking at the stark room as if seeing it anew, and suddenly finding things worth seeing.

ɪŋtʃɹ əpɪɹɾ ən baʊd tə lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ. "jɔɹ pɑɹɾən, lɔɹd, bʌt jə wɑntəd tə noʊ ʌv ɛniθɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi, haʊɛvɝ smɔl."

Ingtar appeared and bowed to Lord Agelmar. "Your pardon, Lord, but you wanted to know of anything out of the ordinary, however small."

"jɛs, wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?"

"Yes, what is it?"

"ə smɔl θɪŋ, lɔɹd. ə stʃɹeɪnʒɝ tʃɹaɪd tə ɛntɝ ðə taʊn. nɑɾ ə ʃaɪnɝ. baɪ hɪz æksɛnt, ə luɡɑɝɾɝ. səmtaɪmz, ət list. wən ðə saʊθ ɡeɪt ɡɑɹdz ətɛmptəd tə kwɛstʃən hɪm, hi ɹæn əweɪ. hi wɑz sin tə ɛntɝ ðə fɔɹəst, bʌɾ oʊnli ə ʃɔɹt taɪm leɪɾɝ i wɑz faʊn skeɪlɪŋ ðə wɔl."

"A small thing, Lord. A stranger tried to enter the town. Not of Shienar. By his accent, a Lugarder. Sometimes, at least. When the South Gate guards attempted to question him, he ran away. He was seen to enter the forest, but only a short time later he was found scaling the wall."

"ə smɔl θɪŋ!" eɪɡəlmɝz tʃɛɹ skɹeɪpt əkɹɔs ðə flɔɹ əz i stʊd. "pis! ðə taʊɝ wɑtʃ ɪz soʊ nɛɡlədʒən ə mæn kən ɹitʃ ðə wɔlz ənsin, ən jə kɔl ɪɾ ə smɔl θɪŋ?"

"A small thing!" Agelmar's chair scraped across the floor as he stood. "Peace! The tower watch is so negligent a man can reach the walls unseen, and you call it a small thing?"

"hi ɪz ə mædmæn, lɔɹd." ɑ tʌtʃt ɪŋtʃɹz vɔɪs. "ðə laɪt ʃilz mædmən. pɝhæps ðə laɪt kloʊk ðə taʊɝ wɑtʃəz aɪz ən əlaʊɾ ɪm tə ɹitʃ ðə wɔlz. ʃʊɹli wʌn pʊɹ mædmæn kən də noʊ hɑɹm."

"He is a madman, Lord." Awe touched Ingtar's voice. "The Light shields madmen. Perhaps the Light cloaked the tower watch's eyes and allowed him to reach the walls. Surely one poor madman can do no harm."

"hæz i bɪn bɹɔt tə ðə kip jɛt? ɡʊd. bɹɪŋ ɪm tə mi hɪɹ. naʊ." ɪŋtʃɹ baʊɾ ən lɛft, ən eɪɡəlmɝ tɝn tə mɔɪɹeɪn. "jɔɹ pɑɹɾən, ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ aɪ mʌst si tə ðɪs. pɝhæps hiz oʊnli ə pɪɾəfəl ɹɛtʃ wɪð ɪz maɪn blaɪndɪd baɪ ðə laɪt, bʌt. . . . tu deɪz ɡɔn, faɪv ʌv əɹ oʊn pipəl wɝ faʊn ɪn ðə naɪt tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə sɔ θɹu ðə hɪnʒɪz ʌv ə hɔɹs-ɡeɪt. smɔl, bʌɾ ɪnʌf tə lɛt tʃɹɑləks ɪn." hi ɡɹɪməst. "dɑɹkfɹɛnz, aɪ səpoʊz, ðoʊ aɪ heɪt tə θɪŋk ɪɾ ʌv ɛni ʃaɪnɝən. ðeɪ wɝ tɔɹn tə pisəz baɪ ðə pipəl bɪfɔɹ ðə ɡɑɹdz kəd teɪk ðɛm, soʊ əl nɛvɝ noʊ. ɪf ʃaɪnɝənz kən bi dɑɹkfɹɛnz, aɪ mʌs bi ɪspɛʃli kɛɹfəl ʌv aʊtləndɝz ɪn ðiz deɪz. ɪf jə wɪʃ tə wɪðdʒɹɔ, əl əv jə ʃoʊn tə jəɹ ɹumz."

"Has he been brought to the keep yet? Good. Bring him to me here. Now." Ingtar bowed and left, and Agelmar turned to Moiraine. "Your pardon, Aes Sedai, but I must see to this. Perhaps he is only a pitiful wretch with his mind blinded by the Light, but. . . . Two days gone, five of our own people were found in the night trying to saw through the hinges of a horse-gate. Small, but enough to let Trollocs in." He grimaced. "Darkfriends, I suppose, though I hate to think it of any Shienaran. They were torn to pieces by the people before the guards could take them, so I'll never know. If Shienarans can be Darkfriends, I must be especially careful of outlanders in these days. If you wish to withdraw, I will have you shown to your rooms."

"dɑɹkfɹɛnz noʊ niðɝ bɔɹɾɝ nɔɹ blʌd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ðeɪ ɑɹ faʊn ɪn ɛvɹi lænd, ən ɑɹ ə nʌn. aɪ, tu, æm ɪntʃɹəstəɾ ɪn siɪŋ ðɪs mæn. ðə pæɾɝn ɪz fɔɹmɪŋ ə wɛb, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ, bʌt ðə faɪnəl ʃeɪp ə ðə wɛb ɪz nɑt jɛt sɛt. ɪt meɪ jɛɾ ɛntæŋɡəl ðə wɝld, əɹ ənɹævəl ən sɛt ðə wil tə ə nu wivɪŋ. ət ðɪs pɔɪnt, ivən smɔl θɪŋz kən tʃeɪnʒ ðə ʃeɪp ə ðə wɛb. ət ðɪs pɔɪn aɪm wɛɹi ʌv smɔl θɪŋz aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi."

"Darkfriends know neither border nor blood," Moiraine said. "They are found in every land, and are of none. I, too, am interested in seeing this man. The Pattern is forming a Web, Lord Agelmar, but the final shape of the Web is not yet set. It may yet entangle the world, or unravel and set the Wheel to a new weaving. At this point, even small things can change the shape of the Web. At this point I am wary of small things out of the ordinary."

eɪɡəlmɝ ɡlænst ət nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin. "æz jə wɪʃ, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Agelmar glanced at Nynaeve and Egwene. "As you wish, Aes Sedai."

ɪŋtʃɹ ɹɪtɝnd, wɪð tu ɡɑɹdz kæɹiɪŋ lɔŋ bɪlz, ən ɛskɔɹɾɪŋ ə mæn u lʊk laɪk ə ɹæɡbæɡ tɝn ɪnsaɪɾ aʊt. ɡɹaɪm leɪɝɾ ɪz feɪs ən mæɾɪd ɪz skɹæɡli, ʌnkʌt hɛɹ ən bɪɹd. hi hʌntʃt ɪndə ðə ɹum, sʌŋkən aɪz dɑɹɾɪŋ ðɪs weɪ ən ðæt. ə ɹænsɪd smɛl wɑftɪɾ əhɛɾ ə hɪm.

Ingtar returned, with two guards carrying long bills, and escorting a man who looked like a ragbag turned inside out. Grime layered his face and matted his scraggly, uncut hair and beard. He hunched into the room, sunken eyes darting this way and that. A rancid smell wafted ahead of him.

ɹænd sæt fɔɹwɝɾ ɪntɛnli, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si θɹu ɔl ðə dɝt.

Rand sat forward intently, trying to see through all the dirt.

"juv noʊ kɑz tə bi hoʊldɪŋ mi laɪk ðɪs," ðə fɪlθi mæn waɪnd. "aɪm oʊnli ə pʊɹ dɛstətut, əbændən baɪ ðə laɪɾ ən sikɪŋ ə pleɪs, laɪk ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls, tə ʃɛltɝ fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ."

"You've no cause to be holding me like this," the filthy man whined. "I'm only a poor destitute, abandoned by the Light and seeking a place, like everyone else, to shelter from the Shadow."

"ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz ɑɹ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ pleɪs tə sik - " eɪɡəlmɝ bɪɡæn, wən mæt kʌɾ ɪm ɔf.

"The Borderlands are a strange place to seek - " Agelmar began, when Mat cut him off.

"ðə pɛdlɝ!"

"The peddler!"

"pdən feɪn," pɛɹɪn əɡɹid, nɑɾɪŋ.

"Padan Fain," Perrin agreed, nodding.

"ðə bɛɡɝ," ɹænd sɛd, sʌɾənli hɔɹs. hi sæt bæk ət ðə sʌɾən heɪtʃɹəd ðət flɛɹɾ ɪn feɪnz aɪz. "hiz ðə mæn u wɑz æskɪŋ əbaʊɾ əs ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. hiz tə bi."

"The beggar," Rand said, suddenly hoarse. He sat back at the sudden hatred that flared in Fain's eyes. "He's the man who was asking about us in Caemlyn. He has to be."

"soʊ ðɪs kənsɝnz jə æftɝ ɔl, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd sloʊli.

"So this concerns you after all, Moiraine Sedai," Agelmar said slowly.

mɔɪɹeɪn nɑɾəd. "aɪ ɡɹeɪtli fɪɹ ðəɾ ɪt dʌz."

Moiraine nodded. "I greatly fear that it does."

"aɪ dɪdnt wɑn tə." feɪn bɪɡæn tə kɹaɪ. fæt tɪɹz kʌt ɹʌnəlz ɪn ðə dɝɾ ɑn ɪz tʃiks, bʌt ðeɪ wɝ əneɪbəl tə ɹitʃ ðə bɑɾəm leɪɝ. "hi meɪd mi! hɪm ən ɪz bɝnɪŋ aɪz." ɹænd flɪntʃt. mæt hæɾ ɪz hæn ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt, noʊ daʊt klʌtʃɪŋ ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ əɡɛn. "hi meɪd mi hɪz haʊnd! hɪz haʊnd, tə hʌn ən fɑloʊ wɪð nɛvɝ ə bɪɾ ə ɹɛst. oʊnli hɪz haʊnd, ivən æftɝ i θɹu mi əweɪ."

"I didn't want to." Fain began to cry. Fat tears cut runnels in the dirt on his cheeks, but they were unable to reach the bottom layer. "He made me! Him and his burning eyes." Rand flinched. Mat had his hand under his coat, no doubt clutching the dagger from Shadar Logoth again. "He made me his hound! His hound, to hunt and follow with never a bit of rest. Only his hound, even after he threw me away."

"ɪt dʌz kənsɝn əs ɔl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd ɡɹɪmli. "ɪz ðəɹ ə pleɪs wɛɹ aɪ kən tɔk wɪð ɪm əloʊn, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ?" hɝ maʊθ taɪɾənd wɪð dɪsteɪst. "ænd wɑʃ ɪm fɝst. aɪ meɪ nid tə tʌtʃ hɪm." eɪɡəlmɝ nɑɾəd ən spoʊk sɔfli tə ɪŋtʃɹ, hu baʊɾ ən dɪsəpɪɹd θɹu ðə dɔɹ.

"It does concern us all," Moiraine said grimly. "Is there a place where I can talk with him alone, Lord Agelmar?" Her mouth tightened with distaste. "And wash him first. I may need to touch him." Agelmar nodded and spoke softly to Ingtar, who bowed and disappeared through the door.

"aɪ wɪl nɑt bi kəmpɛld!" ðə vɔɪs wɑz feɪnz, bʌɾ i wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ kɹaɪɪŋ, ən ən ɛɹəɡən snæp hæd ɹipleɪs ðə waɪn. hi stʊɾ əpɹaɪt, nɑt kɹaʊtʃɪŋ əɾ ɔl. θɹoʊɪŋ bæk ɪz hɛd, hi ʃaʊɾəd ət ðə silɪŋ. "nɛvɝ əɡɛn! aɪ - wɪl - nɑt!" hi feɪst eɪɡəlmɝ əz ɪf ðə mɛn flæŋkɪŋ ɪm wɝ ɪz oʊn bɑɾiɡɑɹd ən ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə hɪz ikwəl ɹæðɝ ðən ɪz kæptɝ. hɪz toʊn bɪkeɪm slik ən ɔɪli. "ðɛɹ ɪz ə mɪsəndɝstændɪŋ hɪɹ, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. aɪm səmtaɪmz teɪkən baɪ spɛlz, bʌt ðət wɪl pæs sun. jɛs, sun əl bi ɹɪɾ ə ðɛm." kəntɛmptʃwəsli hi flɪkt ɪz fɪŋɡɝz əɡɛns ðə ɹæɡz i wɔɹ. "du nɑt bi mɪslɛd baɪ ðiz, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. aɪ hæv hæd tə dɪsɡaɪz maɪsɛlf əɡɛns ðoʊz u hæv tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp mi, ən maɪ dʒɝni hæz bɪn lɔŋ ən hɑɹd. bʌɾ ət læst aɪ hæv ɹitʃt lænz wɛɹ mɛn stɪl noʊ ðə deɪnʒɝz ə bælzəmən, wɛɹ mɛn stɪl faɪt ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

"I will not be compelled!" The voice was Fain's, but he was no longer crying, and an arrogant snap had replaced the whine. He stood upright, not crouching at all. Throwing back his head, he shouted at the ceiling. "Never again! I - will - not!" He faced Agelmar as if the men flanking him were his own bodyguard and the Lord of Fal Dara his equal rather than his captor. His tone became sleek and oily. "There is a misunderstanding here, Great Lord. I am sometimes taken by spells, but that will pass soon. Yes, soon I will be rid of them." Contemptuously he flicked his fingers against the rags he wore. "Do not be misled by these, Great Lord. I have had to disguise myself against those who have tried to stop me, and my journey has been long and hard. But at last I have reached lands where men still know the dangers of Ba'alzamon, where men still fight the Dark One."

ɹænd stɛɹd, ɡɑəlɪŋ. ɪt wɑz feɪnz vɔɪs, bʌt ðə wɝdz dɪd nɑt saʊn laɪk ðə pɛdlɝ əɾ ɔl.

Rand stared, goggling. It was Fain's voice, but the words did not sound like the peddler at all.

"soʊ juv kʌm hɪɹ kəz wi faɪt tʃɹɑləks," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd. "æn jə ɑɹ soʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðət sʌmwʌn wɑns tə stɑp ju. ðiz pipəl seɪ jə ɑɹ ə pɛdlɝ kɔl pdən feɪn, ən ðət jə ɑɹ fɑloʊɪŋ ðɛm."

"So you've come here because we fight Trollocs," Agelmar said. "And you are so important that someone wants to stop you. These people say you are a peddler called Padan Fain, and that you are following them."

feɪn hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. hi ɡlænst ət mɔɪɹeɪn ən hɝidli pʊld ɪz aɪz əweɪ fɹəm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. hɪz ɡeɪz ɹæn əkɹɔs ði ɛmənz fildɝz, ðən dʒɝk bæk tə eɪɡəlmɝ. ɹænd fɛl ðə heɪɾ ɪn ðət lʊk, ən ðə fɪɹ. wən feɪn spoʊk əɡɛn, ðoʊ, hɪz vɔɪs wɑz ənɹʌfəld. "pdən feɪn ɪz sɪmpli wʌn ə ðə mɛni dɪsɡaɪzɪz aɪ hæv bɪn fɔɹs tə wɛɹ oʊvɝ ðə jɪɹz. fɹɛnz ə ðə dɑɹk pɝsu mi, fəɹ aɪ hæv lɝn haʊ tə dɪfit ðə ʃædoʊ. aɪ kən ʃoʊ jə haʊ tə dɪfit hɪm, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd."

Fain hesitated. He glanced at Moiraine and hurriedly pulled his eyes away from the Aes Sedai. His gaze ran across the Emond's Fielders, then jerked back to Agelmar. Rand felt the hate in that look, and the fear. When Fain spoke again, though, his voice was unruffled. "Padan Fain is simply one of the many disguises I have been forced to wear over the years. Friends of the Dark pursue me, for I have learned how to defeat the Shadow. I can show you how to defeat him, Great Lord."

"wi də əz wɛl əz mɛn kæn," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd dʒɹaɪli. "ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, bʌt wɪv fɔt ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɔlmoʊst sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld wɪθaʊt pɛdlɝz tə titʃ əs haʊ."

"We do as well as men can," Agelmar said dryly. "The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, but we have fought the Dark One almost since the Breaking of the World without peddlers to teach us how."

"ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, jəɹ maɪɾ ɪz ənkwɛstʃənd, bʌt kən ɪt stæn əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk wʌn fɝɛvɝ? dʒju nɑɾ ɔfən faɪn jɝsɛlf pɹɛs tə hoʊld? fɝɡɪv maɪ təmɛɹəɾi, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd; hɪl kɹʌʃ jə ɪn ði ɛnd, əz jə ɑɹ. aɪ noʊ; bɪliv mi, aɪ du. bʌɾ aɪ kən ʃoʊ jə haʊ tə skaʊɝ ðə ʃædoʊ fɹəm ðə lænd, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd." hɪz toʊn bɪkeɪm ivən mɔɹ ʌŋtʃwəs, ðoʊ stɪl hɔɾi. "ɪf jə bʌt tʃɹaɪ wʌɾ aɪ ædvaɪz, jəl si, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. jəl klɛnz ðə lænd. ju, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, kən də ɪt, ɪf jə dɝɛk jəɹ maɪɾ ɪn ðə ɹaɪt dɝɛkʃən. əvɔɪd lɛɾɪŋ tɑɹ vəlɑn ɛntæŋɡəl jə ɪn ɪts snɛɹz, ən jə kən seɪv ðə wɝld. ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, jəl bi ðə mæn ɹɪmɛmbɝd θɹu hɪstɝi fəɹ bɹɪŋɪŋ faɪnəl vɪktɝi tə ðə laɪt." ðə ɡɑɹdz hɛl ðɛɹ pleɪsəz, bʌt ðɛɹ hænz ʃɪftəɾ ɑn ðə lɔŋ ʃæfs ə ðə bɪlz əz ɪf ðeɪ θɔt ðeɪ maɪɾ əv tə juz ðɛm.

"Great Lord, your might is unquestioned, but can it stand against the Dark One forever? Do you not often find yourself pressed to hold? Forgive my temerity, Great Lord; he will crush you in the end, as you are. I know; believe me, I do. But I can show you how to scour the Shadow from the land, Great Lord." His tone became even more unctuous, though still haughty. "If you but try what I advise, you will see, Great Lord. You will cleanse the land. You, Great Lord, can do it, if you direct your might in the right direction. Avoid letting Tar Valon entangle you in its snares, and you can save the world. Great Lord, you will be the man remembered through history for bringing final victory to the Light." The guards held their places, but their hands shifted on the long shafts of the bills as if they thought they might have to use them.

"hi θɪŋks ə ɡɹeɪt dil ə hɪmsɛlf fəɹ ə pɛdlɝ," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd tə læn oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "aɪ θɪŋk ɪŋtʃɹ ɪz ɹaɪt. hiz mæd."

"He thinks a great deal of himself for a peddler," Agelmar said to Lan over his shoulder. "I think Ingtar is right. He is mad."

feɪnz aɪz taɪɾənd æŋɡɹəli, bʌɾ ɪz vɔɪs ɹɪmeɪn smuð. "ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, aɪ noʊ maɪ wɝdz mʌst əpɪɹ ɡɹændioʊs, bʌɾ ɪf jəl oʊnli - " hi kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli, stɛpɪŋ bæk, əz mɔɪɹeɪn ɹoʊz ən stɑɹɾəd sloʊli ɝaʊn ðə teɪbəl. oʊnli ðə ɡɑɹdz' loʊɝd bɪlz kɛp feɪn fɹəm bækɪŋ ɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ə ðə ɹum.

Fain's eyes tightened angrily, but his voice remained smooth. "Great Lord, I know my words must appear grandiose, but if you will only - " He cut off abruptly, stepping back, as Moiraine rose and started slowly around the table. Only the guards' lowered bills kept Fain from backing right out of the room.

stɑpɪŋ bɪhaɪn mæts tʃɛɹ, mɔɪɹeɪn pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən bɛn tə wɪspɝ ɪn ɪz ɪɹ. wʌtɛvɝ ʃi sɛd, ðə tɛnʃən wɛn aʊɾ ə hɪz feɪs, ən i tʊk ɪz hæn fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz koʊt. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn ɑn əntɪl ʃi stʊd bɪsaɪɾ eɪɡəlmɝ, kənfɹʌntɪŋ feɪn. əz ʃi keɪm tə ə hɔlt, ðə pɛdlɝ sæŋk ɪndə ə kɹaʊtʃ wʌns mɔɹ.

Stopping behind Mat's chair, Moiraine put a hand on his shoulder and bent to whisper in his ear. Whatever she said, the tension went out of his face, and he took his hand from under his coat. The Aes Sedai went on until she stood beside Agelmar, confronting Fain. As she came to a halt, the peddler sank into a crouch once more.

"aɪ heɪt hɪm," hi wɪmpɝd. "aɪ wɑnə bi fɹi ʌv hɪm. aɪ wɑnə wɔk ɪn ðə laɪɾ əɡɛn." hɪz ʃoʊldɝz bɪɡæn tə ʃeɪk, ən tɪɹz stʃɹim daʊn ɪz feɪs ivən mɔɹ hɛvəli ðən bɪfɔɹ. "hi meɪd mi də ɪt."

"I hate him," he whimpered. "I want to be free of him. I want to walk in the Light again." His shoulders began to shake, and tears streamed down his face even more heavily than before. "He made me do it."

"aɪ æm əfɹeɪd hiz mɔɹ ðən ə pɛdlɝ, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "lɛs ðən hjumən, wɝs ðən vaɪl, mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən jə kən ɪmædʒən. hi kən bi beɪðd æftɝ aɪ hæv spoʊkən wɪð hɪm. aɪ dɛɹ nɑt weɪst ə mɪnət. kʌm, læn."

"I am afraid he is more than a peddler, Lord Agelmar," Moiraine said. "Less than human, worse than vile, more dangerous than you can imagine. He can be bathed after I have spoken with him. I dare not waste a minute. Come, Lan."


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾisɛvən


CHAPTER 47

mɔɹ teɪlz ə ðə wil


More Tales of the Wheel

ən ɪtʃi ɹɛsləsnəs hæd ɹænd peɪsɪŋ bɪsaɪd ðə daɪnɪŋ teɪbəl. twɛlv stʃɹaɪdz. ðə teɪbəl wɑz ɪɡzækli twɛlv stʃɹaɪdz lɔŋ noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ mɛni taɪmz i stɛpt ɪɾ ɔf. ɪɹɪɾəbli hi meɪd hɪmsɛlf stɑp kipɪŋ tæli. stupəd θɪŋ tə bi duɪŋ. aɪ doʊn kɛɹ haʊ lɔŋ ðə blʌɾi teɪbəl ɪz. ə fju mɪnəts leɪɾɝ i dɪskʌvɝd ðəɾ i wɑz kaʊntɪŋ ðə nʌmbɝ ə tʃɹɪps i meɪɾ ʌp ðə teɪbəl ən bæk. wʌɾ ɪz i seɪɪŋ tə mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn? dʌz i noʊ waɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz æftɝ ʌs? dʌz i noʊ wɪtʃ ʌv əs ðə dɑɹk wʌn wɑns?

An itchy restlessness had Rand pacing beside the dining table. Twelve strides. The table was exactly twelve strides long no matter how many times he stepped it off. Irritably he made himself stop keeping tally. Stupid thing to be doing. I don't care how long the bloody table is. A few minutes later he discovered that he was counting the number of trips he made up the table and back. What is he saying to Moiraine and Lan? Does he know why the Dark One is after us? Does he know which of us the Dark One wants?

hi ɡlænst əɾ ɪz fɹɛnz. pɛɹɪn hæd kɹʌmbəld ə pis ə bɹɛɾ ən wɑz aɪdli pʊʃɪŋ ðə kɹʌmz ɝaʊn ɑn ðə teɪbəl wɪð wʌn fɪŋɡɝ. hɪz jɛloʊ aɪz stɛɹɾ ənblɪŋkɪŋ ət ðə kɹʌmz, bʌt ðeɪ sim tə si sʌmθɪŋ fɑɹ ɔf. mæt slaʊtʃt ɪn ɪz tʃɛɹ, aɪz hæf kloʊzd ən ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋz ʌv ə ɡɹɪn ɑn ɪz feɪs. ɪt wɑz ə nɝvəs ɡɹɪn, nɑɾ əmjuzmənt. aʊtwɝdli hi lʊk laɪk ði oʊl mæt, bʌt fɹəm taɪm tə taɪm i ʌnkɑnʃəsli tʌtʃt ðə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ dæɡɝ θɹu hɪz koʊt. wʌɾ ɪz feɪn tɛlɪŋ hɝ? wʌt dʌz i noʊ?

He glanced at his friends. Perrin had crumbled a piece of bread and was idly pushing the crumbs around on the table with one finger. His yellow eyes stared unblinking at the crumbs, but they seemed to see something far off. Mat slouched in his chair, eyes half closed and the beginnings of a grin on his face. It was a nervous grin, not amusement. Outwardly he looked like the old Mat, but from time to time he unconsciously touched the Shadar Logoth dagger through his coat. What is Fain telling her? What does he know?

lɔɪəl, ət list, dɪd nɑt lʊk wɝid. ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz stʌɾiɪŋ ðə wɔlz. fɝst i hæd stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə ɹum ən stɛɹd, tɝnɪŋ sloʊli ɪn ə sɝkəl; naʊ hi wɑz ɔlmoʊs pɹɛsɪŋ ɪz bɹɔd noʊz əɡɛns ðə stoʊn waɪl i dʒɛnli tʃɹeɪst ə pɝtɪkjəlɝ dʒɔɪn wɪð fɪŋɡɝz θɪkɝ ðən moʊs mɛnz θʌmz. səmtaɪmz i kloʊzd ɪz aɪz, əz ɪf ðə filɪŋ wɑz mɔɹ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ðən siɪŋ. hɪz ɪɹz ɡeɪv ən əkeɪʒənəl twɪtʃ, ən i mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf ɪn oʊɡiɝ, əpɪɹɪŋ tə hæv fɝɡɑɾən ɛniwʌn ɛls wɑz ɪn ðə ɹum wɪð hɪm.

Loial, at least, did not look worried. The Ogier was studying the walls. First he had stood in the middle of the room and stared, turning slowly in a circle; now he was almost pressing his broad nose against the stone while he gently traced a particular join with fingers thicker than most men's thumbs. Sometimes he closed his eyes, as if the feeling was more important than seeing. His ears gave an occasional twitch, and he muttered to himself in Ogier, appearing to have forgotten anyone else was in the room with him.

lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ stʊd tɔkɪŋ kwaɪətli wɪð nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə lɔŋ faɪɝpleɪs ət ði ɛn ə ðə ɹum. hi wɑz ə ɡʊd hoʊst, ədɛpt ət meɪkɪŋ pipəl fɝɡɛt ðɛɹ tʃɹʌbəlz; sɛvɹəl ə hɪz stɔɹiz hæɾ ɛɡwin ɪn ɡɪɡəlz. wʌns ivən nɪneɪiv θɹu bæk əɹ hɛɾ ən ɹɔɹd wɪð læftɝ. ɹænd ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ət ði ʌnɪkspɛktɪd saʊnd, ən dʒʌmpt əɡɛn wən mæts tʃɛɹ kɹæʃt tə ðə flɔɹ.

Lord Agelmar stood talking quietly with Nynaeve and Egwene in front of the long fireplace at the end of the room. He was a good host, adept at making people forget their troubles; several of his stories had Egwene in giggles. Once even Nynaeve threw back her head and roared with laughter. Rand gave a start at the unexpected sound, and jumped again when Mat's chair crashed to the floor.

"blʌɾ ən æʃəz!" mæt ɡɹaʊld, ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə weɪ nɪneɪivz maʊθ taɪɾənd əɾ ɪz læŋɡwədʒ. "wʌts teɪkɪŋ əɹ soʊ lɔŋ?" hi ɹaɪɾɪd ɪz tʃɛɹ ən sæt bæk daʊn wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ əɾ ɛniwʌn. hɪz hæn stʃɹeɪd tə hɪz koʊt.

"Blood and ashes!" Mat growled, ignoring the way Nynaeve's mouth tightened at his language. "What's taking her so long?" He righted his chair and sat back down without looking at anyone. His hand strayed to his coat.

ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə lʊkt ət mæt dɪsəpɹuvɪŋli - hɪz ɡeɪz tʊk ɪn ɹænd ən pɛɹɪn wɪθaʊɾ ɛni ɪmpɹuvmənt - ðən tɝn bæk tə ðə wɪmən. ɹændz peɪsɪŋ hæd teɪkən ɪm kloʊs tə ðɛm.

The Lord of Fal Dara looked at Mat disapprovingly - his gaze took in Rand and Perrin without any improvement - then turned back to the women. Rand's pacing had taken him close to them.

"maɪ lɔɹd," ɛɡwin wɑz seɪɪŋ, əz ɡlɪbli əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn juzɪŋ taɪɾəlz ɔl ə hɝ laɪf, "aɪ θɔɾ i wɑz ə wɔɹɾɝ, bʌt jə kɔl ɪm daɪ ʃæn, ən tɔk əbaʊɾ ə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn bænɝ, ən soʊ dɪd ðoʊz ʌðɝ mɛn. səmtaɪmz jə saʊn ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf hiz ə kɪŋ. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ wʌns mɔɪɹeɪn kɔld ɪm ðə læs lɔɹɾ ə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz. hu ɪz hi?"

"My Lord," Egwene was saying, as glibly as if she had been using titles all of her life, "I thought he was a Warder, but you call him Dai Shan, and talk about a Golden Crane banner, and so did those other men. Sometimes you sound almost as if he's a king. I remember once Moiraine called him the last Lord of the Seven Towers. Who is he?"

nɪneɪiv bɪɡæn stʌɾiɪŋ əɹ kʌp ɪntɛnli, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɑbviəs tə ɹænd ðəɾ əbɹʌpli ʃi wɑz lɪsnɪŋ ivən mɔɹ kloʊsli ðən wɑz ɛɡwin. ɹænd stɑpt ən tʃɹaɪd tə oʊvɝhɪɹ wɪθaʊt simɪŋ tə ivzdʒɹɑp.

Nynaeve began studying her cup intently, but it was obvious to Rand that abruptly she was listening even more closely than was Egwene. Rand stopped and tried to overhear without seeming to eavesdrop.

"lɔɹɾ ə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd wɪð ə fɹaʊn. "æn eɪntʃən taɪɾəl, leɪɾi ɛɡwin. nɑɾ ivən ðə haɪ lɔɹdz ə tiɹ əv oʊldɝ, ðoʊ ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ kʌmz kloʊs." hi hivd ə saɪ, ən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "hi wɪl nɑt spik ʌv ɪt, jɛt ðə stɔɹi ɪz wɛl noʊn əlɔŋ ðə bɔɹɾɝ. hiz ə kɪŋ, əɹ ʃəɾ əv bɪn, ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən, lɔɹɾ ə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz, lɔɹɾ ə ðə leɪks, kɹaʊnləs kɪŋ ə ðə mɔlkɪɹi." hɪz ʃeɪvən hɛd lɪftəd haɪ, ən ðəɹ wɑz ə laɪɾ ɪn ɪz aɪ əz ɪf i fɛlt ə fɑðɝz pɹaɪd. hɪz vɔɪs ɡɹu stʃɹɔŋɝ, fɪld wɪð ðə fɔɹs ə hɪz filɪŋ. ðə hoʊl ɹum kəd hɪɹ wɪθaʊt stʃɹeɪnɪŋ. "wi ʌv ʃaɪnɝ kɔl aʊɝsɛlvz bɔɹɾɝmɪn, bʌt fjuɝ ðən fɪfti jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ʃaɪnɝ wɑz nɑt tʃɹuli ʌv ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. nɔɹθ ʌv ʌs, ən ə ɝæfəl, wɑz mɔlkiɝ. ðə lænsɪz ə ʃaɪnɝ ɹoʊd nɔɹθ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz mɔlkiɝ ðət hɛl bæk ðə blaɪt. mɔlkiɝ, pis feɪvɝ əɹ mɛmɹi, ən ðə laɪɾ ɪlumin əɹ neɪm."

"Lord of the Seven Towers," Agelmar said with a frown. "An ancient title, Lady Egwene. Not even the High Lords of Tear have older, though the Queen of Andor comes close." He heaved a sigh, and shook his head. "He will not speak of it, yet the story is well known along the Border. He is a king, or should have been, al'Lan Mandragoran, Lord of the Seven Towers, Lord of the Lakes, crownless King of the Malkieri." His shaven head lifted high, and there was a light in his eye as if he felt a father's pride. His voice grew stronger, filled with the force of his feeling. The whole room could hear without straining. "We of Shienar call ourselves Bordermen, but fewer than fifty years ago, Shienar was not truly of the Borderlands. North of us, and of Arafel, was Malkier. The lances of Shienar rode north, but it was Malkier that held back the Blight. Malkier, Peace favor her memory, and the Light illumine her name."

"læn ɪz fɹəm mɔlkiɝ," ðə wɪzdəm sɛd sɔfli, lʊkɪŋ ʌp. ʃi sim tʃɹʌbəld.

"Lan is from Malkier," the Wisdom said softly, looking up. She seemed troubled.

ɪt wɑz nɑɾ ə kwɛstʃən, bʌɾ eɪɡəlmɝ nɑɾəd. "jɛs, leɪɾi nɪneɪiv, hiz ðə sʌn ʌv əlækɹ mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən, læs kɹaʊn kɪŋ ə ðə mɔlkɪɹi. haʊ dɪɾ i bɪkʌm əz i ɪz? ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ, pɝhæps, wɑz leɪn. ɑn ə dɛɹ, leɪn mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən, ðə kɪŋz bɹʌðɝ, lɛɾ ɪz lænsɪz θɹu ðə blaɪt tə ðə blæstəd lænz, pɝhæps tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ɪtsɛlf. leɪnz waɪf, bɹeɪən, meɪd ðət dɛɹ fəɹ ði ɛnvi ðət bɝn əɹ hɑɹt ðəɾ əlækɹ hæd bɪn ɹeɪz tə ðə θɹoʊn ɪnstɛɾ ə leɪn. ðə kɪŋ ən leɪn wɝ əz kloʊz əz bɹʌðɝz kəd bi, əz kloʊz əz twɪnz ivən æftɝ ðə ɹɔɪəl 'æl' wɑz æɾəd tə əkɪɹz neɪm, bʌt dʒɛləsi ɹæk bɹeɪən. leɪn wɑz əkleɪm fəɹ ɪz didz, ən ɹaɪtfəli soʊ, bʌt nɑɾ ivən i kəɾ aʊtʃaɪn əlækɹ. hi wɑz, mæn ən kɪŋ, sətʃ əz kʌmz wʌns ɪn ə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ɪf ðæt. pis feɪvɝ hɪm, ən ɛlinə.

It was not a question, but Agelmar nodded. "Yes, Lady Nynaeve, he is the son of al'Akir Mandragoran, last crowned King of the Malkieri. How did he become as he is? The beginning, perhaps, was Lain. On a dare, Lain Mandragoran, the King's brother, led his lances through the Blight to the Blasted Lands, perhaps to Shayol Ghul itself. Lain's wife, Breyan, made that dare for the envy that burned her heart that al'Akir had been raised to the throne instead of Lain. The King and Lain were as close as brothers could be, as close as twins even after the royal 'al' was added to Akir's name, but jealousy wracked Breyan. Lain was acclaimed for his deeds, and rightfully so, but not even he could outshine al'Akir. He was, man and king, such as comes once in a hundred years, if that. Peace favor him, and el'Leanna.

"leɪn daɪɾ ɪn ðə blæstəd lænz wɪð moʊst ə ðoʊz u fɑloʊd hɪm, mɛn mɔlkiɝ kəɾ ɪl əfɔɹd tə luz, ən bɹeɪən bleɪm ðə kɪŋ, seɪɪŋ ðət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ɪtsɛlf wʊɾə fɔlən ɪf əlækɹ hæd lɛd ðə ɹɛst ə ðə mɔlkɪɹi nɔɹθ wɪð əɹ hʌzbənd. fəɹ ɹivɛnʒ, ʃi plɑɾəd wɪð kaʊɪn ɡəmælən, kɔl kaʊɪn fɛɹhɑɹt, tə siz ðə θɹoʊn fəɹ əɹ sʌn, ɪsəm. naʊ fɛɹhɑɹt wɑz ə hɪɹoʊ ɔlmoʊst əz wɛl lʌvd əz əlækɹ hɪmsɛlf, ən wʌn ə ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz, bʌt wən ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz hæd kæs ðə ɹɑdz fəɹ kɪŋ, oʊnli tu sɛpɝeɪɾəd ɪm fɹəm əkɪɹ, ən i nɛvɝ fɝɡɑt ðət tu mɛn leɪɪŋ ə dɪfɹən kʌlɝ ɑn ðə kɹaʊnɪŋ stoʊn wʊɾə sɛɾ ɪm ɑn ðə θɹoʊn ɪnstɛd. bɪtwin ðɛm, kaʊɪn ən bɹeɪən muv soʊlʒɝz bæk fɹəm ðə blaɪt tə siz ðə sɛvən taʊɝz, stʃɹɪpɪŋ ðə bɔɹɾɝfɔɹts tə bɛɹ ɡæɹɪsənz.

"Lain died in the Blasted Lands with most of those who followed him, men Malkier could ill afford to lose, and Breyan blamed the King, saying that Shayol Ghul itself would have fallen if al'Akir had led the rest of the Malkieri north with her husband. For revenge, she plotted with Cowin Gemallan, called Cowin Fairheart, to seize the throne for her son, Isam. Now Fairheart was a hero almost as well loved as al'Akir himself, and one of the Great Lords, but when the Great Lords had cast the rods for king, only two separated him from Akir, and he never forgot that two men laying a different color on the Crowning Stone would have set him on the throne instead. Between them, Cowin and Breyan moved soldiers back from the Blight to seize the Seven Towers, stripping the Borderforts to bare garrisons.

"bʌt kaʊɪnz dʒɛləsi ɹæn dipɝ." dɪsɡʌs tɪŋd eɪɡəlmɝz vɔɪs. "fɛɹhɑɹt ðə hɪɹoʊ, huz ɛksplɔɪts ɪn ðə blaɪt wɝ sʌŋ θɹuaʊt ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, wɑz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd. wɪð ðə bɔɹɾɝfɔɹts wikənd, tʃɹɑləks pɔɹɾ ɪndə mɔlkiɝ laɪk ə flʌd. kɪŋ əlækɹ ən leɪn təɡɛðɝ maɪɾ əv ɹælid ðə lænd; ðeɪ hæd dʌn soʊ bɪfɔɹ. bʌt leɪnz dum ɪn ðə blæstəd lænz hæd ʃeɪkən ðə pipəl, ən ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ɪnveɪʒən bɹoʊk mɛnz spɪɹəɾ ən ðɛɹ wɪl tə ɹɪzɪst. tu mɛni mɛn. oʊvɝwɛlmɪŋ nʌmbɝz pʊʃt ðə mɔlkɪɹi bæk ɪndə ðə hɑɹtlænd.

"But Cowin's jealousy ran deeper." Disgust tinged Agelmar's voice. "Fairheart the hero, whose exploits in the Blight were sung throughout the Borderlands, was a Darkfriend. With the Borderforts weakened, Trollocs poured into Malkier like a flood. King al'Akir and Lain together might have rallied the land; they had done so before. But Lain's doom in the Blasted Lands had shaken the people, and the Trolloc invasion broke men's spirit and their will to resist. Too many men. Overwhelming numbers pushed the Malkieri back into the heartland.

"bɹeɪən flɛd wɪð əɹ ɪnfən sʌn ɪsəm, ən wɑz ɹʌn daʊn baɪ tʃɹɑləks əz ʃi ɹoʊd saʊθ wɪð hɪm. noʊ wʌn noʊz ðɛɹ feɪɾ ʌv ə sɝɾənti, bʌɾ ɪt kən bi ɡɛst. aɪ kən faɪn pɪɾi oʊnli fəɹ ðə bɔɪ. wən kaʊɪn fɛɹhɑɹts tʃɹɛtʃɝi wɑz ɹɪvild ən i wɑz teɪkən baɪ jʌŋ dʒaɪn tʃɛɝɪn - ɔlɹɛɾi kɔl dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ - wən fɛɹhɑɹt wɑz bɹɔt tə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz ɪn tʃeɪnz, ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹdz kɔl fəɹ ɪz hɛɾ ɑn ə paɪk. bʌt kəz i hæd bɪn sɛkən oʊnli tə əlækɹ ən leɪn ɪn ðə hɑɹts ə ðə pipəl, ðə kɪŋ feɪst ɪm ɪn sɪŋɡəl kɑmbæɾ ən slu hɪm. əlækɹ wɛpt wən i kɪl kaʊɪn. səm seɪ hi wɛp fəɹ ə fɹɛn u hæd ɡɪvən hɪmsɛlf tə ðə ʃædoʊ, ən səm seɪ fəɹ mɔlkiɝ." ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə ʃʊk ɪz hɛd sædli.

"Breyan fled with her infant son Isam, and was run down by Trollocs as she rode south with him. No one knows their fate of a certainty, but it can be guessed. I can find pity only for the boy. When Cowin Fairheart's treachery was revealed and he was taken by young Jain Charin - already called Jain Farstrider - when Fairheart was brought to the Seven Towers in chains, the Great Lords called for his head on a pike. But because he had been second only to al'Akir and Lain in the hearts of the people, the King faced him in single combat and slew him. Al'Akir wept when he killed Cowin. Some say he wept for a friend who had given himself to the Shadow, and some say for Malkier." The Lord of Fal Dara shook his head sadly.

"ðə fɝs pil ə ðə dum ə ðə sɛvən taʊɝz hæd bɪn stʃɹʌk. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ taɪm tə ɡæðɝ eɪd fɹəm ʃaɪnɝ əɹ ɝæfəl, ən noʊ hoʊp ðət mɔlkiɝ kəd stæn əloʊn, wɪð faɪv θaʊzən ə hɝ lænsɪz dɛɾ ɪn ðə blæstəd lænz, hɝ bɔɹɾɝfɔɹts oʊvɝɹʌn.

"The first peal of the doom of the Seven Towers had been struck. There was no time to gather aid from Shienar or Arafel, and no hope that Malkier could stand alone, with five thousand of her lances dead in the Blasted Lands, her Borderforts overrun.

"əlækɹ ən ɪz kwin, ɛlinə, hæd læn bɹɔt tə ðɛm ɪn ɪz kɹeɪɾəl. ɪndə hɪz ɪnfən hænz ðeɪ pleɪs ðə sɔɹɾ ə mɔlkɪɹi kɪŋz, ðə sɔɹɾ i wɛɹz tədeɪ. ə wɛpən meɪd baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə paʊɝ, ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ ðət bɹɔt daʊn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ðeɪ ənɔɪntəɾ ɪz hɛd wɪð ɔɪl, neɪmɪŋ ɪm daɪ ʃæn, ə daɪəɾɪmd bæɾəl lɔɹd, ən kɑnsəkɹeɪɾəd ɪm əz ðə nɛks kɪŋ ə ðə mɔlkɪɹi, ən ɪn ɪz neɪm ðeɪ swɔɹ ði eɪntʃən oʊθ ə mɔlkɪɹi kɪŋz ən kwinz." eɪɡəlmɝz feɪs hɑɹɾənd, ən i spoʊk ðə wɝdz əz ɪf hi, tu, hæd swɔɹn ðəɾ oʊθ, əɹ wʌn mʌtʃ sɪməlɝ. "tə stæn əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ soʊ lɔŋ əz aɪɝn ɪz hɑɹɾ ən stoʊn əbaɪdz. tə dɪfɛn ðə mɔlkɪɹi waɪl wʌn dʒɹɑp ə blʌd ɹɪmeɪnz. tə əvɛnʒ wʌt kænɑt bi dɪfɛndəd." ðə wɝdz ɹæŋ ɪn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ.

"Al'Akir and his Queen, el'Leanna, had Lan brought to them in his cradle. Into his infant hands they placed the sword of Malkieri kings, the sword he wears today. A weapon made by Aes Sedai during the War of Power, the War of the Shadow that brought down the Age of Legends. They anointed his head with oil, naming him Dai Shan, a Diademed Battle Lord, and consecrated him as the next King of the Malkieri, and in his name they swore the ancient oath of Malkieri kings and queens." Agelmar's face hardened, and he spoke the words as if he, too, had sworn that oath, or one much similar. "To stand against the Shadow so long as iron is hard and stone abides. To defend the Malkieri while one drop of blood remains. To avenge what cannot be defended." The words rang in the chamber.

"ɛlinə pleɪst ə lɑkəɾ ɝaʊn əɹ sʌnz nɛk, fəɹ ɹimɛmbɹəns, ən ði ɪnfənt, ɹæpt ɪn swɑɾəlɪŋ kloʊðz baɪ ðə kwinz oʊn hænd, wɑz ɡɪvən oʊvɝ tə twɛnti tʃoʊzən fɹəm ðə kɪŋz bɑɾiɡɑɹd, ðə bɛst sɔɝdzmɪn, ðə moʊs dɛdli faɪɾɝz. ðɛɹ kəmænd: tə kæɹi ðə tʃaɪl tə fæl mɝæn.

"El'Leanna placed a locket around her son's neck, for remembrance, and the infant, wrapped in swaddling clothes by the Queen's own hand, was given over to twenty chosen from the King's Bodyguard, the best swordsmen, the most deadly fighters. Their command: to carry the child to Fal Moran.

"ðɛn dɪɾ əlækɹ ən ɛlinə lɛd ðə mɔlkɪɹi aʊt tə feɪs ðə ʃædoʊ wʌn læs taɪm. ðəɹ ðeɪ daɪd, ət hɪɹæts kɹɔsɪŋ, ən ðə mɔlkɪɹi daɪd, ən ðə sɛvən taʊɝz wɝ bɹoʊkən. ʃaɪnɝ, ən ɝæfəl, ən kændɝ, mɛt ðə hæfmən ən ðə tʃɹɑləks ət ðə stɛɹ ə dʒəhɑn ən θɹu ðɛm bæk, bʌt nɑɾ əz fɑɹ əz ðeɪ hæd bɪn. moʊst ə mɔlkiɝ ɹɪmeɪn ɪn tʃɹɑlɑk hænz, ən jɪɹ baɪ jɪɹ, maɪl baɪ maɪl, ðə blaɪɾ əz swɑloʊɾ ɪt." eɪɡəlmɝ dʒɹu ə hɛvaɪɑɹɾɪd bɹɛθ. wən i wɛn ɑn, ðəɹ wɑz ə sæd pɹaɪɾ ɪn ɪz aɪz ən vɔɪs.

"Then did al'Akir and el'Leanna lead the Malkieri out to face the Shadow one last time. There they died, at Herat's Crossing, and the Malkieri died, and the Seven Towers were broken. Shienar, and Arafel, and Kandor, met the Halfmen and the Trollocs at the Stair of Jehaan and threw them back, but not as far as they had been. Most of Malkier remained in Trolloc hands, and year by year, mile by mile, the Blight has swallowed it." Agelmar drew a heavyhearted breath. When he went on, there was a sad pride in his eyes and voice.

"oʊnli faɪv ə ðə bɑɾiɡɑɹdz ɹitʃt fæl mɝæn əlaɪv, ɛvɹi mæn wundəd, bʌt ðeɪ hæd ðə tʃaɪld ənhɑɹmd. fɹəm ðə kɹeɪɾəl ðeɪ tɔɾ ɪm ɔl ðeɪ nu. hi lɝnd wɛpənz əz ʌðɝ tʃɪlʒɹən lɝn tɔɪz, ən ðə blaɪɾ əz ʌðɝ tʃɪlʒɹən ðɛɹ mʌðɝz ɡɑɹɾən. ði oʊθ swɔɹn oʊvɝ ɪz kɹeɪɾəl ɪz ɡɹeɪvən ɪn ɪz maɪnd. ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ lɛf tə dɪfɛnd, bʌɾ i kən əvɛnʒ. hi dɪnaɪz ɪz taɪɾəlz, jɛɾ ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz hiz kɔl ði ʌnkɹoʊnd, ən ɪf ɛvɝ i ɹeɪz ðə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn ə mɔlkiɝ, ən ɑɹmi wəd kʌm tə fɑloʊ. bʌt hɪl nɑt lɛd mɛn tə ðɛɹ dɛθs. ɪn ðə blaɪɾ i kɔɹts dɛθ əz ə suɾɝ kɔɹts ə meɪɾən, bʌt hɪl nɑt lɛɾ ʌðɝz tə ɪt.

"Only five of the Bodyguards reached Fal Moran alive, every man wounded, but they had the child unharmed. From the cradle they taught him all they knew. He learned weapons as other children learn toys, and the Blight as other children their mother's garden. The oath sworn over his cradle is graven in his mind. There is nothing left to defend, but he can avenge. He denies his titles, yet in the Borderlands he is called the Uncrowned, and if ever he raised the Golden Crane of Malkier, an army would come to follow. But he will not lead men to their deaths. In the Blight he courts death as a suitor courts a maiden, but he will not lead others to it.

"ɪf jə mʌst ɛntɝ ðə blaɪt, ən wɪð oʊnli ə fju, ðəɹ ɪz noʊ mæn bɛɾɝ tə teɪk jə ðɛɹ, nɔɹ tə bɹɪŋ jə seɪfli aʊɾ əɡɛn. hiz ðə bɛst ə ðə wɔɹɾɝz, ən ðət minz ðə bɛst ə ðə bɛst. jə maɪɾ əz wɛl liv ðiz bɔɪz hɪɹ, tə ɡeɪn ə lɪɾəl sizənɪŋ, ən pʊt jəɹ ɪntaɪɝ tʃɹʌst ɪn læn. ðə blaɪɾ ɪz noʊ pleɪs fəɹ əntʃɹaɪd bɔɪz."

"If you must enter the Blight, and with only a few, there is no man better to take you there, nor to bring you safely out again. He is the best of the Warders, and that means the best of the best. You might as well leave these boys here, to gain a little seasoning, and put your entire trust in Lan. The Blight is no place for untried boys."

mæt oʊpən ɪz maʊθ, ən ʃʌɾ ɪɾ əɡɛn əɾ ə lʊk fɹəm ɹænd. aɪ wɪʃ hid lɝn tə kip ɪt ʃʌt.

Mat opened his mouth, and shut it again at a look from Rand. I wish he'd learn to keep it shut.

nɪneɪiv hæd lɪsən dʒʌst əz waɪd-aɪɾ əz ɛɡwin, bʌt naʊ ʃi wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ɪndə hɝ kʌp əɡɛn, hɝ feɪs peɪl. ɛɡwin pʊɾ ə hæn ɑn əɹ ɑɹm ən ɡeɪv əɹ ə sɪmpəθɛɾɪk lʊk.

Nynaeve had listened just as wide-eyed as Egwene, but now she was staring into her cup again, her face pale. Egwene put a hand on her arm and gave her a sympathetic look.

mɔɪɹeɪn əpɪɹɾ ɪn ðə dɔɹweɪ, læn əɾ əɹ hilz. nɪneɪiv tɝn əɹ bæk ɑn ðɛm.

Moiraine appeared in the doorway, Lan at her heels. Nynaeve turned her back on them.

"wʌt dɪɾ i seɪ?" ɹænd dɪmændəd. mæt ɹoʊz, ən pɛɹɪn, tu.

"What did he say?" Rand demanded. Mat rose, and Perrin, too.

"kʌntʃɹi ɑf," eɪɡəlmɝ mʌɾɝd, ðən ɹeɪzd ɪz vɔɪs tə ə nɔɹməl toʊn. "dɪd jə lɝn ɛniθɪŋ, ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ ɪz i sɪmpli ə mædmæn?"

"Country oaf," Agelmar muttered, then raised his voice to a normal tone. "Did you learn anything, Aes Sedai, or is he simply a madman?"

"hi ɪz mæd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "ɔɹ kloʊs tə ɪt, bʌt ðəɹ ɪz nʌθɪŋ sɪmpəl əbaʊt pdən feɪn." wʌn ə ðə blæk-ænd-ɡoʊld-lɪvɹid sɝvəns baʊɾ ɪz weɪ ɪn wɪð ə blu wɑʃbeɪsən ən pɪtʃɝ, ə bɑɹ ə jɛloʊ soʊp, ən ə smɔl taʊəl ɑn ə sɪlvɝ tʃɹeɪ; hi lʊkt æŋkʃəsli əɾ eɪɡəlmɝ. mɔɪɹeɪn dɝɛktəɾ ɪm tə pʊɾ əm ɑn ðə teɪbəl. "jɔɹ pɑɹɾən fəɹ kəmændɪŋ jəɹ sɝvəns, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ," ʃi sɛd. "aɪ tʊk ðə lɪbɝɾi ʌv æskɪŋ fəɹ ðɪs."

"He is mad," Moiraine said, "or close to it, but there is nothing simple about Padan Fain." One of the black-and-gold-liveried servants bowed his way in with a blue washbasin and pitcher, a bar of yellow soap, and a small towel on a silver tray; he looked anxiously at Agelmar. Moiraine directed him to put them on the table. "Your pardon for commanding your servants, Lord Agelmar," she said. "I took the liberty of asking for this."

eɪɡəlmɝ nɑɾəd tə ðə sɝvənt, hu pʊt ðə tʃɹeɪ ɑn ðə teɪbəl ən lɛf hɝidli. "maɪ sɝvəns ɑɹ jʊɹz tə kəmænd, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Agelmar nodded to the servant, who put the tray on the table and left hurriedly. "My servants are yours to command, Aes Sedai."

ðə wɔɾɝ mɔɪɹeɪn pɔɹɾ ɪndə ðə beɪsən stimd əz ɪf oʊnli dʒʌst ɔf ðə bɔɪl. ʃi pʊʃt ʌp əɹ slivz ən bɪɡæn vɪɡɝəsli wɑʃɪŋ əɹ hænz wɪθaʊt ɹəɡɑɹd fəɹ ðə hiɾ ə ðə wɔɾɝ. "aɪ sɛɾ i wɑz wɝs ðən vaɪl, bʌɾ aɪ dɪd nɑt kʌm kloʊs. aɪ də nɑt bɪliv aɪ hæv ɛvɝ mɛt sʌmwʌn soʊ æbʒɛkt ən dəbeɪst, jɛɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm soʊ faʊl. aɪ fil sɔɪl fɹəm tʌtʃɪŋ hɪm, ən aɪ də nɑt min fəɹ ðə fɪlθ ɑn ɪz skɪn. sɔɪld ɪn hɪɹ." ʃi tʌtʃt əɹ bɹɛst. "ðə dɛɡɹədeɪʃən ə hɪz soʊl ɔlmoʊs meɪks mi daʊt hiz wʌn. ðəɹ ɪz sʌmθɪŋ wɝs tə hɪm ðən ə dɑɹkfɹɛnd."

The water Moiraine poured into the basin steamed as if only just off the boil. She pushed up her sleeves and began vigorously washing her hands without regard for the heat of the water. "I said he was worse than vile, but I did not come close. I do not believe I have ever met someone so abject and debased, yet at the same time so foul. I feel soiled from touching him, and I do not mean for the filth on his skin. Soiled in here." She touched her breast. "The degradation of his soul almost makes me doubt he has one. There is something worse to him than a Darkfriend."

"hi lʊk soʊ pɪɾəfəl," ɛɡwin mɝmɝd. "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ɪm ɝaɪvɪŋ ɪn ɛmənz fild itʃ spɹɪŋ, ɔlweɪz læfɪŋ ən fʊl ə nuz fɹəm aʊtsaɪd. ʃʊɹli ðɛɹz səm hoʊp fəɹ hɪm? 'noʊ mæn kən stæn ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ soʊ lɔŋ ðəɾ i kænɑt faɪn ðə laɪɾ əɡɛn,' " ʃi kwoʊɾəd.

"He looked so pitiful," Egwene murmured. "I remember him arriving in Emond's Field each spring, always laughing and full of news from outside. Surely there's some hope for him? 'No man can stand in the Shadow so long that he cannot find the Light again,' " she quoted.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ taʊəld əɹ hænz bɹɪskli. "aɪ hæv ɔlweɪz bɪlivd ɪt soʊ," ʃi sɛd. "pɝhæps pdən feɪn kən bi ɹɪdimd. bʌt hiz bɪn ə dɑɹkfɹɛn mɔɹ ðən fɔɹɾi jɪɹz, ən wʌt hiz dʌn fəɹ ðæt, ɪn blʌɾ ən peɪn ən dɛθ, wəd fɹiz jəɹ hɑɹt tə hɪɹ. əmʌŋ ðə list ə ðiz - ðoʊ nɑt smɔl tə ju, aɪ səspɛkt - hi bɹɔt ðə tʃɹɑləks tə ɛmənz fild."

The Aes Sedai toweled her hands briskly. "I have always believed it so," she said. "Perhaps Padan Fain can be redeemed. But he has been a Darkfriend more than forty years, and what he has done for that, in blood and pain and death, would freeze your heart to hear. Among the least of these - though not small to you, I suspect - he brought the Trollocs to Emond's Field."

"jɛs," ɹænd sɛd sɔfli. hi hɝɾ ɛɡwin ɡæsp. aɪ ʃəɾ əv ɡɛst. bɝn mi, aɪ ʃəd hæv, əz sun əz aɪ ɹɛkəɡnaɪz hɪm.

"Yes," Rand said softly. He heard Egwene gasp. I should have guessed. Burn me, I should have, as soon as I recognized him.

"dɪɾ i bɹɪŋ ɛni hɪɹ?" mæt æskt. hi lʊkt ət ðə stoʊn wɔlz ɝaʊn əm ən ʃɪvɝd. ɹænd θɔɾ i wɑz ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə mɪdʒɹɑl mɔɹ ðən tʃɹɑləks; wɔlz hæd nɑt stɑp ðə feɪɾ ət bɛɹlən, əɹ ət waɪtbɹɪdʒ.

"Did he bring any here?" Mat asked. He looked at the stone walls around them and shivered. Rand thought he was remembering the Myddraal more than Trollocs; walls had not stopped the Fade at Baerlon, or at Whitebridge.

"ɪf i dɪd" - eɪɡəlmɝ læft - "ðeɪl bɹeɪk ðɛɹ tiθ ɑn ðə wɔlz ə fæl dæɹə. mɛni ʌðɝz əv bɪfɔɹ." hi wɑz spikɪŋ tə ɛvɹiwʌn, bʌɾ ɑbviəsli ədʒɹɛsɪŋ ɪz wɝdz tə ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv, fɹəm ðə ɡlænsɪz i ɡeɪv ðɛm. "æn də nɑt wɝi jɝsɛlf əbaʊt hæfmən, iðɝ." mæts feɪs ɹɛɾənd. "ɛvɹi stʃɹiɾ ən æli ɪn fæl dæɹə ɪz lɪt baɪ naɪt. ən noʊ mæn meɪ haɪɾ ɪz feɪs ɪnsaɪd ðə wɔlz."

"If he did" - Agelmar laughed - "they'll break their teeth on the walls of Fal Dara. Many others have before." He was speaking to everyone, but obviously addressing his words to Egwene and Nynaeve, from the glances he gave them. "And do not worry yourself about Halfmen, either." Mat's face reddened. "Every street and alley in Fal Dara is lit by night. And no man may hide his face inside the walls."

"waɪ wəd mæstɝ feɪn də ðæt?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"Why would Master Fain do that?" Egwene asked.

"θɹi jɪɹz əɡoʊ. . . ." wɪð ə hɛvi saɪ mɔɪɹeɪn sæt daʊn, foʊldɪŋ ʌp əz ɪf wʌt ʃi hæd dʌn wɪð feɪn hæd dʒɹeɪn hɝ. "θɹi jɪɹz, ðɪs sʌmɝ. əz fɑɹ bæk əz ðæt. ðə laɪt ʃʊɹli feɪvɝz ʌs, ɛls ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz wʊɾə tʃɹaɪəmft waɪl aɪ stɪl sæt plænɪŋ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. θɹi jɪɹz, feɪn əz bɪn hʌntɪŋ jə fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

"Three years ago. . . ." With a heavy sigh Moiraine sat down, folding up as if what she had done with Fain had drained her. "Three years, this summer. As far back as that. The Light surely favors us, else the Father of Lies would have triumphed while I still sat planning in Tar Valon. Three years, Fain has been hunting you for the Dark One."

"ðæts kɹeɪzi!" ɹænd sɛd. "hiz kʌm ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ɛvɹi spɹɪŋ əz ɹɛɡjəlɝ əz ə klɑk. θɹi jɪɹz? wiv bɪn ɹaɪt ðəɹ ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ən i nɛvɝ lʊkt əɾ ɛni ʌv əs twaɪs bɪfɔɹ læs jɪɹ." ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɔɪntəɾ ə fɪŋɡɝ ət hɪm, fɪksɪŋ hɪm.

"That's crazy!" Rand said. "He's come into the Two Rivers every spring as regular as a clock. Three years? We've been right there in front of him, and he never looked at any of us twice before last year." The Aes Sedai pointed a finger at him, fixing him.

"feɪn toʊl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ, ɹænd. əɹ ɔlmoʊst ɛvɹiθɪŋ. aɪ bɪliv i mænədʒ tə hoʊl bæk sʌmθɪŋ, sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt, dɪspaɪɾ ɔl aɪ kəd du, bʌɾ i sɛɾ ɪnʌf. θɹi jɪɹz əɡoʊ, ə hæfmən keɪm fəɹ ɪm ɪn ə taʊn ɪn mʊɹændi. feɪn wɑz tɛɹəfaɪd, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ɪts kənsɪɾɝd ə vɛɹi ɡɹeɪɾ ɑnɝ əmʌŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz tə bi soʊ sʌmənd. feɪn bɪlivd i hæd bɪn tʃoʊzən fəɹ ɡɹeɪt θɪŋz, ən i hæd, ðoʊ nɑɾ ɪn ðə mænɝ i bɪlivd. hi wɑz bɹɔt nɔɹθ tə ðə blaɪt, tə ðə blæstəd lænz. tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. wɛɹ i mɛɾ ə mæn wɪð aɪz ə faɪɝ, hu neɪm hɪmsɛlf bælzəmən."

"Fain told me everything, Rand. Or almost everything. I believe he managed to hold back something, something important, despite all I could do, but he said enough. Three years ago, a Halfman came for him in a town in Murandy. Fain was terrified, of course, but it is considered a very great honor among Darkfriends to be so summoned. Fain believed he had been chosen for great things, and he had, though not in the manner he believed. He was brought north to the Blight, to the Blasted Lands. To Shayol Ghul. Where he met a man with eyes of fire, who named himself Ba'alzamon."

mæt ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli, ən ɹænd swɑloʊd hɑɹd. ɪt hæd tə hæv bɪn ðət weɪ, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌt ðət dɪd nɑt meɪk ɪɾ ɛni iziɝ tə æksɛpt. oʊnli pɛɹɪn lʊkt ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ kəd sɝpɹaɪz ɪm ɛni lɔŋɡɝ.

Mat shifted uneasily, and Rand swallowed hard. It had to have been that way, of course, but that did not make it any easier to accept. Only Perrin looked at the Aes Sedai as if nothing could surprise him any longer.

"ðə laɪt pɹətɛkt ʌs," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd fɝvənli.

"The Light protect us," Agelmar said fervently.

"feɪn dɪd nɑt laɪk wʌt wɑz dʌn tə hɪm ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl," mɔɪɹeɪn kəntɪnjud kɑmli. "waɪl wi tɔkt, hi skɹimd ɔfən ə faɪɝ ən bɝnɪŋ. ɪɾ ɔlmoʊs kɪl hɪm, bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪɾ ɔl aʊt fɹəm wɛɹ i hæɾ ɪt hɪɾən. ivən wɪð maɪ hilɪŋ hiz ə ʃæɾɝd ɹuən. ɪɾəl teɪk mʌtʃ tə meɪk ɪm hoʊl əɡɛn. əl meɪk ði ɛfɝt, ðoʊ, ɪf fəɹ noʊ ʌðɝ ɹizən ðən tə lɝn wʌt mɔɹ i stɪl haɪdz. hi hæd bɪn tʃoʊzən kəz ʌv wɛɹ i dɪɾ ɪz pɛɾəlɪŋ. noʊ," ʃi sɛd kwɪkli wən ðeɪ stɝd, "nɑt ðə tu ɹɪvɝz oʊnli, nɑt ðɛn. ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz nu ɹʌfli wɛɹ tə faɪnd wʌɾ i sɔt, bʌt nɑt mʌtʃ bɛɾɝ ðən wi ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn.

"Fain did not like what was done to him at Shayol Ghul," Moiraine continued calmly. "While we talked, he screamed often of fire and burning. It almost killed him, bringing it all out from where he had it hidden. Even with my Healing he is a shattered ruin. It will take much to make him whole again. I will make the effort, though, if for no other reason than to learn what more he still hides. He had been chosen because of where he did his peddling. No," she said quickly when they stirred, "not the Two Rivers only, not then. The Father of Lies knew roughly where to find what he sought, but not much better than we in Tar Valon.

"feɪn sɛd hiz bɪn meɪd ðə dɑɹk wʌnz haʊnd, ən ɪn ə weɪ hiz ɹaɪt. ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz sɛt feɪn tə hʌnt, fɝs tʃeɪnʒɪŋ ɪm soʊ hi kəd kæɹi aʊt ðət hʌnt. ɪts ðə θɪŋz dʌn tə bɹɪŋ əbaʊt ðoʊz tʃeɪnʒəz ðət feɪn fɪɹz tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ; hi heɪts ɪz mæstɝ fəɹ əm əz mʌtʃ əz i fɪɹz hɪm. soʊ feɪn wɑz sɛn snɪfɪŋ ən hʌntɪŋ θɹu ɔl ðə vɪlədʒəz ɝaʊn bɛɹlən, ən ɔl ðə weɪ tə ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, ən daʊn tə ðə tɛɹən ən əkɹɔs ɪndə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz."

"Fain said he has been made the Dark One's hound, and in a way he is right. The Father of Lies set Fain to hunt, first changing him so he could carry out that hunt. It is the things done to bring about those changes that Fain fears to remember; he hates his master for them as much as he fears him. So Fain was sent sniffing and hunting through all the villages around Baerlon, and all the way to the Mountains of Mist, and down to the Taren and across into the Two Rivers."

"θɹi spɹɪŋz əɡoʊ?" pɛɹɪn sɛd sloʊli. "aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðət spɹɪŋ. feɪn keɪm leɪɾɝ ðən juʒəwəl, bʌt wʌt wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒ wɑz ðəɾ i lɪŋɡɝɾ ɑn. ə hoʊl wik i ɹɪmeɪnd, aɪɾəl ən næʃɪŋ ɪz tiθ əbaʊt leɪɪŋ aʊt mʌni fəɹ ə ɹum ət ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ ɪn. feɪn laɪks ɪz mʌni."

"Three springs ago?" Perrin said slowly. "I remember that spring. Fain came later than usual, but what was strange was that he lingered on. A whole week he remained, idle and gnashing his teeth about laying out money for a room at the Winespring Inn. Fain likes his money."

"aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ, naʊ," mæt sɛd. "ɛvɹibɑɾi wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ wɑz i sɪk, əɹ hæɾ i fɔlən fəɹ ə loʊkəl wʊmən? nɑt ðəɾ ɛni ʌv əm wəd mɛɹi ə pɛdlɝ, ʌv kɔɹs. əz wɛl mɛɹi wʌn ə ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl." ɛɡwin ɹeɪzd ən aɪbɹaʊ ət hɪm, ən i ʃʌɾ ɪz maʊθ.

"I remember, now," Mat said. "Everybody was wondering was he sick, or had he fallen for a local woman? Not that any of them would marry a peddler, of course. As well marry one of the Traveling People." Egwene raised an eyebrow at him, and he shut his mouth.

"æftɝ ðæt, feɪn wɑz teɪkən tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl əɡɛn, ən ɪz maɪnd wɑz - dɪstɪld." ɹændz stʌmək tɝn oʊvɝ ət ðə toʊn ɪn ði ɛɛs sədaɪz vɔɪs; ɪt toʊl mɔɹ ʌv wʌt ʃi mɛn ðən ðə ɡɹɪmɑs ðət flæʃt əkɹɔs əɹ feɪs. "wʌɾ i hæd . . . sɛnst . . . wɑz kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ən fɛd bæk. wən i ɛntɝd ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ðə nɛks jɪɹ, hi wɑz eɪbəl tə tʃuz ɪz tɑɹɡəts aʊt mɔɹ klɪɹli. ɪndid, mɔɹ klɪɹli ivən ðən ðə dɑɹk wʌn hæɾ ɪkspɛktəd. feɪn nu fəɹ ə sɝɾənti ðət ðə wʌn i sɔt wɑz wʌn ə θɹi ɪn ɛmənz fild."

"After that, Fain was taken to Shayol Ghul again, and his mind was - distilled." Rand's stomach turned over at the tone in the Aes Sedai's voice; it told more of what she meant than the grimace that flashed across her face. "What he had . . . sensed . . . was concentrated and fed back. When he entered the Two Rivers the next year, he was able to choose his targets out more clearly. Indeed, more clearly even than the Dark One had expected. Fain knew for a certainty that the one he sought was one of three in Emond's Field."

pɛɹɪn ɡɹʌntɪd, ən mæt bɪɡæn kɝsɪŋ ɪn ə sɑf mɑnətoʊn ðəɾ ivən nɪneɪivz ɡlɛɹ dɪd nɑt stɑp. eɪɡəlmɝ lʊkt əɾ əm kjʊɹiəsli. ɹænd fɛlt oʊnli ðə feɪntəs tʃɪl, ən wʌndɝɾ əɾ ɪt. θɹi jɪɹz ðə dɑɹk wʌn hæd bɪn hʌntɪŋ ɪm . . . hʌntɪŋ ðɛm. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ɪt ʃʊɾə meɪɾ ɪz tiθ tʃæɾɝ.

Perrin grunted, and Mat began cursing in a soft monotone that even Nynaeve's glare did not stop. Agelmar looked at them curiously. Rand felt only the faintest chill, and wondered at it. Three years the Dark One had been hunting him . . . hunting them. He was sure it should have made his teeth chatter.

mɔɪɹeɪn dɪd nɑɾ əlaʊ mæt tə ɪntɝʌp hɝ. ʃi ɹeɪzd əɹ vɔɪs ɪnʌf tə bi hɝɾ oʊvɝ hɪm. "wɛn feɪn ɹɪtɝn tə luɡɹd, bælzəmən keɪm tə hɪm ɪn ə dʒɹim. feɪn əbeɪs hɪmsɛlf ən pɝfɔɹmd ɹaɪts ðət wəd stʃɹaɪk jə dɛf tə hɪɹ ðə hæf ə ðɛm, baɪndɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ivən mɔɹ taɪtli tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. wʌɾ ɪz dʌn ɪn dʒɹimz kən bi mɔɹ deɪnʒɝəs ðən wʌɾ ɪz dʌn əweɪk." ɹænd stɝɾ ət ðə ʃɑɹp, wɔɹnɪŋ lʊk, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt pɔz. "hi wɑz pɹɑməst ɡɹeɪt ɹɪwɔɹdz, paʊɝ oʊvɝ kɪŋdəmz æftɝ bælzəmənz vɪktɝi, ən toʊl ðət wən i ɹɪtɝn tə ɛmənz fild i wɑz tə mɑɹk ðə θɹi hi hæd faʊnd. eɪ hæfmən wəd bi ðɛɹ, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ɪm wɪð tʃɹɑləks. wi noʊ naʊ haʊ ðə tʃɹɑləks keɪm tə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ðəɹ mʌst əv bɪn ən oʊɡiɝ ɡɹoʊv ən ə weɪɡeɪɾ ət meɪnɛðɝən."

Moiraine did not allow Mat to interrupt her. She raised her voice enough to be heard over him. "When Fain returned to Lugard, Ba'alzamon came to him in a dream. Fain abased himself and performed rites that would strike you deaf to hear the half of them, binding himself even more tightly to the Dark One. What is done in dreams can be more dangerous than what is done awake." Rand stirred at the sharp, warning look, but she did not pause. "He was promised great rewards, power over kingdoms after Ba'alzamon's victory, and told that when he returned to Emond's Field he was to mark the three he had found. A Halfman would be there, waiting for him with Trollocs. We know now how the Trollocs came to the Two Rivers. There must have been an Ogier grove and a Waygate at Manetheren."

"ðə moʊs bjuɾəfəl ʌv ɔl," lɔɪəl sɛd, "ɪksɛp fəɹ tɑɹ vəlɑn." hi hæd bɪn lɪsnɪŋ əz ɪntɛnli əz ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls. "meɪnɛðɝən ɪz ɹɪmɛmbɝd fɑnli baɪ ði oʊɡiɝ." eɪɡəlmɝ fɔɹm ðə neɪm saɪlənli, hɪz aɪbɹaʊz ɹeɪzd ɪn wʌndɝ. meɪnɛðɝən.

"The most beautiful of all," Loial said, "except for Tar Valon." He had been listening as intently as everyone else. "Manetheren is remembered fondly by the Ogier." Agelmar formed the name silently, his eyebrows raised in wonder. Manetheren.

"lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "aɪ wɪl tɛl jə haʊ tə faɪn ðə weɪɡeɪɾ ə mæfəl dɑɾɝɑnɛl. ɪt mʌs bi wɔld ʌp ən ə ɡɑɹd sɛt, ən nʌn əlaʊd nɪɹ. ðə hæfmən əv nɑt lɝn ɔl ə ðə weɪz jɛt, bʌt ðət weɪɡeɪɾ ɪz tə ðə saʊθ ən oʊnli aʊɝz fɹəm fæl dæɹə."

"Lord Agelmar," Moiraine said, "I will tell you how to find the Waygate of Mafal Dadaranell. It must be walled up and a guard set, and none allowed near. The Halfmen have not learned all of the Ways yet, but that Waygate is to the south and only hours from Fal Dara."

ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə ɡeɪv hɪmsɛlf ə ʃeɪk, əz ɪf i wɝ kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ə tʃɹæns. "saʊθ? pis! wi doʊnt nid ðæt, ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn ʌs. ɪt ʃæl bi dʌn."

The Lord of Fal Dara gave himself a shake, as if he were coming out of a trance. "South? Peace! We don't need that, the Light shine on us. It shall be done."

"dɪd feɪn fɑloʊ əs θɹu ðə weɪz?" pɛɹɪn æskt. "hi mʌst əv dʌn."

"Did Fain follow us through the Ways?" Perrin asked. "He must have done."

mɔɪɹeɪn nɑɾəd. "feɪn wəd fɑloʊ jə θɹi ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪv, kəz i mʌst. wən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl feɪld əɾ ɛmənz fild, ɪt bɹɔt feɪn wɪð ðə tʃɹɑləks ɑn əɹ tʃɹeɪl. ðə feɪd wəd nɑt lɛt feɪn ɹaɪd wɪð hɪm; ɔlðoʊ hi θɔɾ i ʃəɾ əv ðə bɛs hɔɹs ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz ən ɹaɪɾ ət ðə hɛɾ ə ðə bænd, ðə mɹdʒɹɑl fɔɹst ɪm tə ɹʌn wɪð ðə tʃɹɑləks, ən ðə tʃɹɑləks tə kæɹi hɪm wən ɪz fit ɡeɪv aʊt. ðeɪ tɔk soʊ ðəɾ i kəɾ ʌndɝstænd, ɑɹɡjuɪŋ əbaʊt ðə bɛst weɪ tə kʊk ɪm wən ɪz jusfəlnəs wɑz dʌn. feɪn kleɪmz i tɝn əɡɛns ðə dɑɹk wʌn bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə tɛɹən. bʌt səmtaɪmz ɪz ɡɹid fəɹ ɪz pɹɑməst ɹɪwɔɹdz sips ɪndə ði oʊpən.

Moiraine nodded. "Fain would follow you three into the grave, because he must. When the Myrddraal failed at Emond's Field, it brought Fain with the Trollocs on our trail. The Fade would not let Fain ride with him; although he thought he should have the best horse in the Two Rivers and ride at the head of the band, the Myrddraal forced him to run with the Trollocs, and the Trollocs to carry him when his feet gave out. They talked so that he could understand, arguing about the best way to cook him when his usefulness was done. Fain claims he turned against the Dark One before they reached the Taren. But sometimes his greed for his promised rewards seeps into the open.

"wɛn wi hæɾ ɪskeɪpt əkɹɔs ðə tɛɹən ðə mɹdʒɹɑl tʊk ðə tʃɹɑləks bæk tə ðə kloʊsəst weɪɡeɪt, ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, ən sɛn feɪn əkɹɔs əloʊn. hi θɔɾ i wɑz fɹi ðɛn, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt bɛɹlən ənʌðɝ feɪd faʊn hɪm, ən ðət wʌn wɑz nɑt soʊ kaɪnd. ɪt meɪɾ ɪm slip dʌbəld ʌp ɑn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə tʃɹɑlɑk kɛɾəl ət naɪt, tə ɹimaɪn ɪm ə ðə pɹaɪs ə feɪljɝ. ðət wʌn juzd ɪm əz fɑɹ əz ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. baɪ ðən feɪn wɑz wɪlɪŋ tə ɡɪv ðə mɹdʒɹɑl ɪz mʌðɝ ɪf ɪt wəd fɹi hɪm, bʌt ðə dɑɹk wʌn nɛvɝ wɪlɪŋli lusənz ə hoʊl hiz ɡeɪnd.

"When we had escaped across the Taren the Myrddraal took the Trollocs back to the closest Waygate, in the Mountains of Mist, and sent Fain across alone. He thought he was free then, but before he reached Baerlon another Fade found him, and that one was not so kind. It made him sleep doubled up on himself in a Trolloc kettle at night, to remind him of the price of failure. That one used him as far as Shadar Logoth. By then Fain was willing to give the Myrddraal his mother if it would free him, but the Dark One never willingly loosens a hold he has gained.

"wʌɾ aɪ dɪd ðɛɹ, sɛndɪŋ ən ɪluʒən ʌv əɹ tʃɹæks ən smɛl ɔf təwɔɹd ðə maʊntənz, ful ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, bʌt nɑt feɪn. ðə hæfmən dɪd nɑt bɪliv hɪm; æftɝwɝd, ðeɪ dʒɹæɡd ɪm bɪhaɪn əm ɑn ə liʃ. oʊnli wən wi sim tə kip ɔlweɪz dʒʌst əhɛd, noʊ mæɾɝ haʊ hɑɹd ðeɪ pɹɛst, dɪd səm bɪɡɪn tə kɹɛɾət hɪm. ðoʊz wɝ ðə fɔɹ u ɹɪtɝn tə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. feɪn kleɪmz ɪt wɑz bælzəmən hɪmsɛlf u dʒɹoʊv ðə mɹdʒɹɑl."

"What I did there, sending an illusion of our tracks and smell off toward the mountains, fooled the Myrddraal, but not Fain. The Halfmen did not believe him; afterward, they dragged him behind them on a leash. Only when we seemed to keep always just ahead, no matter how hard they pressed, did some begin to credit him. Those were the four who returned to Shadar Logoth. Fain claims it was Ba'alzamon himself who drove the Myrddraal."

eɪɡəlmɝ ʃʊk ɪz hɛd kəntɛmptʃwəsli. "ðə dɑɹk wʌn? pæ! ðə mænz laɪɪŋ əɹ mæd. ɪf hɑɹtsbeɪn wɝ lus, wiɾ ɔl ʌv əs bi dɛd baɪ naʊ, əɹ wɝs."

Agelmar shook his head contemptuously. "The Dark One? Pah! The man's lying or mad. If Heartsbane were loose, we'd all of us be dead by now, or worse."

"feɪn spoʊk ðə tʃɹuθ əz i sɔ ɪt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "hi kəd nɑt laɪ tə mi, ðoʊ hi hɪd mʌtʃ. hɪz wɝdz. 'bælzəmən əpɪɹd laɪk ə flɪkɝɪŋ kændəl fleɪm, vænɪʃɪŋ ən ɹiəpɪɹɪŋ, nɛvɝ ɪn ðə seɪm pleɪs twaɪs. hɪz aɪz sɪɹd ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, ən ðə faɪɝz ə hɪz maʊθ skaʊɝdʒd ʌs.' "

"Fain spoke the truth as he saw it," Moiraine said. "He could not lie to me, though he hid much. His words. 'Ba'alzamon appeared like a flickering candle flame, vanishing and reappearing, never in the same place twice. His eyes seared the Myrddraal, and the fires of his mouth scourged us.' "

"sʌmθɪŋ," læn sɛd, "dʒɹoʊv fɔɹ feɪdz tə wɛɹ ðeɪ fɪɹd tə ɡoʊ - ə pleɪs ðeɪ fɪɹ ɔlmoʊst əz mʌtʃ əz ðeɪ fɪɹ ðə ɹæθ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

"Something," Lan said, "drove four Fades to where they feared to go - a place they fear almost as much as they fear the wrath of the Dark One."

eɪɡəlmɝ ɡɹʌntɪɾ əz ɪf i hæd bɪn kɪkt; hi lʊk sɪk.

Agelmar grunted as if he had been kicked; he looked sick.

"ɪt wɑz ivəl əɡɛnst ivəl ɪn ðə ɹuənz ə ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ," mɔɪɹeɪn kəntɪnjud, "faʊl faɪɾɪŋ vaɪl. wən feɪn spoʊk ʌv ɪt, hɪz tiθ tʃæɾɝd ən i wɪmpɝd. mɛni tʃɹɑləks wɝ sleɪn, kənsum baɪ mɑʃəɾɝ ən ʌðɝ θɪŋz, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ðət hɛl feɪnz liʃ. hi flɛd ðə sɪɾi əz ɪf ɪt wɝ ðə pɪɾ ə dum, ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl.

"It was evil against evil in the ruins of Shadar Logoth," Moiraine continued, "foul fighting vile. When Fain spoke of it, his teeth chattered and he whimpered. Many Trollocs were slain, consumed by Mashadar and other things, including the Trolloc that held Fain's leash. He fled the city as if it were the Pit of Doom, at Shayol Ghul.

"feɪn bɪlivd i wɑz fɹi ət læst. hi ɪntɛndəd tə ɹʌn əntɪl bælzəmən kəd nɛvɝ faɪn ɪm əɡɛn, tə ði ɛnz ə ði ɝθ ɪf nɛsəsɛɹi. ɪmædʒən ɪz hɔɹɝ wən i dɪskʌvɝd ðət ðə kəmpʌlʃən tə hʌn dɪd nɑt lɛsən. ɪnstɛd, ɪt ɡɹu stʃɹɔŋɝ ən ʃɑɹpɝ wɪð ɛvɹi deɪ ðət pæst. hi kəd nɑɾ it, ɪksɛpt wʌɾ i kəd skævənʒ waɪl i hʌntəd jə - biɾəlz ən lɪzɝdz snætʃt waɪl i ɹæn, hæf-ɹɑɾən ɹɛfjus dʌɡ fɹəm mɪɾən hips ɪn ðə dɑɹk ə naɪt - nɔɹ kəɾ i stɑp əntɪl ɪɡzɔstʃən kəlæpst ɪm laɪk ən ɛmpti sæk. ən əz sun əz i hæd stʃɹɛŋkθ tə stæn əɡɛn, hi wɑz dʒɹɪvən ɑn. baɪ ðə taɪm i ɹitʃt keɪɛmlɪn i kəd fil ɪz kwɔɹi ivən wən ɪt wɑz ə maɪl əweɪ. hɪɹ, ɪn ðə sɛlz bɪloʊ, hi wəd səmtaɪmz lʊk ʌp wɪθaʊt ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ. hi wɑz lʊkɪŋ ɪn ðə dɝɛkʃən ə ðɪs ɹum."

"Fain believed he was free at last. He intended to run until Ba'alzamon could never find him again, to the ends of the earth if necessary. Imagine his horror when he discovered that the compulsion to hunt did not lessen. Instead, it grew stronger and sharper with every day that passed. He could not eat, except what he could scavenge while he hunted you - beetles and lizards snatched while he ran, half-rotten refuse dug from midden heaps in the dark of night - nor could he stop until exhaustion collapsed him like an empty sack. And as soon as he had strength to stand again, he was driven on. By the time he reached Caemlyn he could feel his quarry even when it was a mile away. Here, in the cells below, he would sometimes look up without realizing what he was doing. He was looking in the direction of this room."

ɹænd hæɾ ə sʌɾən ɪtʃ bɪtwin ɪz ʃoʊldɝ bleɪdz; ɪt wɑz əz ɪf i kəd fil feɪnz aɪz ɑn ɪm ðɛn, θɹu ði ɪntɝvinɪŋ stoʊn. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ noʊɾəst ɪz ənizi ʃɹʌɡ, bʌt ʃi wɛn ɑn ɪmplækəbli.

Rand had a sudden itch between his shoulder blades; it was as if he could feel Fain's eyes on him then, through the intervening stone. The Aes Sedai noticed his uneasy shrug, but she went on implacably.

"ɪf feɪn wɑz hæf mæd baɪ ðə taɪm i ɹitʃt keɪɛmlɪn, hi sæŋk ivən fɝðɝ wən i ɹilaɪz ðəɾ oʊnli tu ʌv ðoʊz i sɔt wɝ ðɛɹ. hi wɑz kəmpɛl tə faɪn ɔl ə ju, bʌɾ i kəd də noʊ ʌðɝ ðən fɑloʊ ðə tu hu wɝ ðɛɹ, iðɝ. hi spoʊk ə skɹimɪŋ wən ðə weɪɡeɪɾ oʊpən ɪn keɪɛmlɪn. ðə nɑlədʒ ə haʊ tə də ɪt wɑz ɪn ɪz maɪnd; hi dʌz nɑt noʊ haʊ ɪt keɪm ðɛɹ; hɪz hænz muvd ə ðɛɹ oʊn əkɔɹd, bɝnɪŋ wɪð ðə faɪɝz ə bælzəmən wən i tʃɹaɪd tə stɑp ðɛm. ði oʊnɝ ə ðə ʃɑp, hu keɪm tə ɪnvɛstəɡeɪt ðə nɔɪz, feɪn mɝɾɝd. nɑt kəz i hæd tə, bʌɾ aʊɾ ʌv ɛnvi ðət ðə mæn kəd wɔk fɹili aʊɾ ə ðə sɛlɝ waɪl ɪz fit kæɹiɾ ɪm ɪnɛksɝəbli ɪndə ðə weɪz."

"If Fain was half mad by the time he reached Caemlyn, he sank even further when he realized that only two of those he sought were there. He was compelled to find all of you, but he could do no other than follow the two who were there, either. He spoke of screaming when the Waygate opened in Caemlyn. The knowledge of how to do it was in his mind; he does not know how it came there; his hands moved of their own accord, burning with the fires of Ba'alzamon when he tried to stop them. The owner of the shop, who came to investigate the noise, Fain murdered. Not because he had to, but out of envy that the man could walk freely out of the cellar while his feet carried him inexorably into the Ways."

"ðɛn feɪn wɑz ðə wʌn jə sɛns fɑloʊɪŋ ʌs," ɛɡwin sɛd. læn nɑɾəd. "haʊ dɪɾ i ɪskeɪp ðə . . . ðə blæk waɪnd?" hɝ vɔɪs ʃʊk; ʃi stɑp tə swɑloʊ. "ɪt wɑz ɹaɪt bɪhaɪn əs ət ðə weɪɡeɪt."

"Then Fain was the one you sensed following us," Egwene said. Lan nodded. "How did he escape the . . . the Black Wind?" Her voice shook; she stopped to swallow. "It was right behind us at the Waygate."

"hi ɪskeɪpt, ən i dɪd nɑt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ðə blæk wɪn kɑɾ ɪm - ən i kleɪm tə ʌndɝstæn ðə vɔɪsəz. səm ɡɹiɾəd ɪm əz laɪk tə ðɛm; ʌðɝz fɪɹd hɪm. noʊ sunɝ dɪd ðə wɪn ɪnvɛləp feɪn ðən ɪt flɛd."

"He escaped, and he did not," Moiraine said. "The Black Wind caught him - and he claimed to understand the voices. Some greeted him as like to them; others feared him. No sooner did the Wind envelop Fain than it fled."

"ðə laɪt pɹəzɝv ʌs." lɔɪəlz wɪspɝ ɹʌmbəld laɪk ə dʒaɪən bʌmbəlɪbi.

"The Light preserve us." Loial's whisper rumbled like a giant bumblebee.

"pɹeɪ ðəɾ ɪt dʌz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ðɛɹ ɪz mʌtʃ jɛt hɪɾən əbaʊt pdən feɪn, mʌtʃ aɪ mʌs lɝn. ði ivəl ɡoʊz dipɝ ɪn hɪm, ən stʃɹɔŋɝ, ðən ɪn ɛni mæn aɪ hæv jɛt sin. ɪt meɪbi ðət ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ɪn duɪŋ wʌɾ i dɪd tə feɪn, ɪmpɹɛst səm pɑɹɾ ə hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə mæn, pɝhæps ivən, ənnoʊɪŋ, səm pɑɹɾ ə hɪz ɪntɛnt. wən aɪ mɛnʃən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld, feɪn klæmpt ɪz dʒɔz ʃʌt, bʌɾ aɪ fɛl sʌmθɪŋ noʊɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðə saɪləns. ɪf oʊnli aɪ hæd ðə taɪm naʊ. bʌt wi kænɑt weɪt."

"Pray that it does," Moiraine said. "There is much yet hidden about Padan Fain, much I must learn. The evil goes deeper in him, and stronger, than in any man I have yet seen. It maybe that the Dark One, in doing what he did to Fain, impressed some part of himself on the man, perhaps even, unknowing, some part of his intent. When I mentioned the Eye of the World, Fain clamped his jaws shut, but I felt something knowing behind the silence. If only I had the time now. But we cannot wait."

"ɪf ðɪs mæn noʊz sʌmθɪŋ," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd, "aɪ kən ɡɛɾ ɪɾ aʊɾ ə hɪm." hɪz feɪs hɛl noʊ mɝsi fəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz; hɪz vɔɪs pɹɑməs noʊ pɪɾi fəɹ feɪn. "ɪf jə kən lɝn ivən ə pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌt jəl feɪs ɪn ðə blaɪt, ɪts wɝθ ən ɛkstʃɹə deɪ. bæɾəlz əv bɪn lɔs fəɹ nɑt noʊɪŋ wʌt ði ɛnəmi ɪntɛnz."

"If this man knows something," Agelmar said, "I can get it out of him." His face held no mercy for Darkfriends; his voice promised no pity for Fain. "If you can learn even a part of what you will face in the Blight, it's worth an extra day. Battles have been lost for not knowing what the enemy intends."

mɔɪɹeɪn saɪɾ ən ʃʊk əɹ hɛd ɹufəli. "maɪ lɔɹd, ɪf wi dɪd nɑt niɾ ət list wʌn ɡʊd naɪts slip bɪfɔɹ feɪsɪŋ ðə blaɪt, aɪ wəd ɹaɪd wɪðɪn ði aʊɝ, ðoʊ ɪt mɛn ðə ɹɪsk ə miɾɪŋ ə tʃɹɑlɑk ɹeɪɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk. kənsɪɾɝ wʌɾ aɪ dɪd lɝn fɹəm feɪn. θɹi jɪɹz əɡoʊ ðə dɑɹk wʌn hæd tə hæv feɪn bɹɔt tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl tə tʌtʃ hɪm, dɪspaɪt ðə fæk ðət feɪn ɪz ə dɑɹkfɹɛn dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə hɪz mɛɹoʊ. wʌn jɪɹ əɡoʊ, ðə dɑɹk wʌn kəd kəmæn feɪn, ðə dɑɹkfɹɛnd, θɹu hɪz dʒɹimz. ðɪs jɪɹ, bælzəmən wɔks ɪn ðə dʒɹimz ə ðoʊz u lɪv ɪn ðə laɪt, ən æktʃəli  əpɪɹz, ɪf wɪð dɪfəkəlti, ət ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ. nɑɾ ɪn ɪz oʊn bɑɾi, ʌv kɔɹs, bʌɾ ivən ə pɹədʒɛkʃən ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz maɪnd, ivən ə pɹədʒɛkʃən ðət flɪkɝz ən kænɑt hoʊld, ɪz mɔɹ dɛθli deɪnʒɝəs tə ðə wɝl ðən ɔl ðə tʃɹɑlɑk hɔɹdz kəmbaɪnd. ðə silz ɑn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl ɑɹ wikənɪŋ dɛspɝətli, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ taɪm."

Moiraine sighed and shook her head ruefully. "My lord, if we did not need at least one good night's sleep before facing the Blight, I would ride within the hour, though it meant the risk of meeting a Trolloc raid in the dark. Consider what I did learn from Fain. Three years ago the Dark One had to have Fain brought to Shayol Ghul to touch him, despite the fact that Fain is a Darkfriend dedicated to his marrow. One year ago, the Dark One could command Fain, the Darkfriend, through his dreams. This year, Ba'alzamon walks in the dreams of those who live in the Light, and actually appears, if with difficulty, at Shadar Logoth. Not in his own body, of course, but even a projection of the Dark One's mind, even a projection that flickers and cannot hold, is more deathly dangerous to the world than all the Trolloc hordes combined. The seals on Shayol Ghul are weakening desperately, Lord Agelmar. There is no time."

eɪɡəlmɝ baʊɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn ækwiɛsəns, bʌt wən i ɹeɪzd ɪɾ əɡɛn ðəɹ wɑz stɪl ə stʌbɝn sɛt tə hɪz maʊθ. "ɛɛs sədaɪ, aɪ kən æksɛp ðət wən aɪ lɛd ðə lænsɪz tə tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp wɪl bi noʊ mɔɹ ðən ə daɪvɝʒən, əɹ ə skɝmɪʃ ɑn ði aʊtskɝts ə ðə ɹil bæɾəl. duɾi teɪks mɛn wɛɹ ɪɾəl əz ʃʊɹli əz dʌz ðə pæɾɝn, ən niðɝ pɹɑməsəz ðət wʌt wi də wɪl əv ɡɹeɪtnəs. bʌɾ əɹ skɝmɪʃ wɪl bi jusləs, ivən ʃəd wi wɪn, ɪf jə luz ðə bæɾəl. ɪf jə seɪ jəɹ pɑɹɾi mʌs bi smɔl, aɪ seɪ wɛl ən ɡʊd, bʌɾ aɪ bɛɡ jə tə meɪk ɛvɹi ɛfɝt tə si ðət jə kən wɪn. liv ðiz jʌŋ mɛn hɪɹ, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ swɛɹ tə jə ðəɾ aɪ kən faɪn θɹi ɪkspɪɹiəns mɛn wɪð noʊ θɔɾ ʌv ɡlɔɹi ɪn ðɛɹ hɛdz tə ɹipleɪs ðɛm, ɡʊd sɔɝdzmɪn u ɑɹ ɔlmoʊst əz hændi ɪn ðə blaɪɾ əz læn. lemi ɹaɪd tə ðə ɡæp noʊɪŋ ðəɾ aɪ hæv dʌn wʌɾ aɪ kən tə hɛlp jə bi vɪktɔɹiəs."

Agelmar bowed his head in acquiescence, but when he raised it again there was still a stubborn set to his mouth. "Aes Sedai, I can accept that when I lead the lances to Tarwin's Gap we will be no more than a diversion, or a skirmish on the outskirts of the real battle. Duty takes men where it will as surely as does the Pattern, and neither promises that what we do will have greatness. But our skirmish will be useless, even should we win, if you lose the battle. If you say your party must be small, I say well and good, but I beg you to make every effort to see that you can win. Leave these young men here, Aes Sedai. I swear to you that I can find three experienced men with no thought of glory in their heads to replace them, good swordsmen who are almost as handy in the Blight as Lan. Let me ride to the Gap knowing that I have done what I can to help you be victorious."

"aɪ mʌs teɪk əm ən noʊ ʌðɝz, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd dʒɛnli. "ðeɪ ɑɹ ðə wʌnz u wɪl faɪt ðə bæɾəl ət ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld."

"I must take them and no others, Lord Agelmar," Moiraine said gently. "They are the ones who will fight the battle at the Eye of the World."

eɪɡəlmɝz dʒɔ dʒɹɑpt, ən i stɛɹɾ ət ɹænd ən mæt ən pɛɹɪn. sʌɾənli ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə tʊk ə stɛp bæk, hɪz hænd ɡɹoʊpɪŋ ʌnkɑnʃəsli fəɹ ðə sɔɹɾ i nɛvɝ wɔɹ ɪnsaɪd ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs. "ðeɪ ɑɹənt. . . . jə ɑɹ nɑt ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, bʌt ʃʊɹli nɑɾ ivən jə wʊd. . . ." sʌɾən swɛt ɡlɪsən ɑn ɪz ʃeɪvən hɛd.

Agelmar's jaw dropped, and he stared at Rand and Mat and Perrin. Suddenly the Lord of Fal Dara took a step back, his hand groping unconsciously for the sword he never wore inside the fortress. "They aren't. . . . You are not Red Ajah, Moiraine Sedai, but surely not even you would. . . ." Sudden sweat glistened on his shaven head.

"ðeɪ ɑɹ tɑvɝən," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd suðɪŋli. "ðə pæɾɝn wivz ɪtsɛlf ɝaʊn ðɛm. ɔlɹɛɾi ðə dɑɹk wʌn əz tʃɹaɪd tə kɪl itʃ ə ðɛm mɔɹ ðən wʌns. θɹi tɑvɝən ɪn wʌn pleɪs ɑɹ ɪnʌf tə tʃeɪnʒ ðə laɪf ɝaʊn əm əz ʃʊɹli əz ə wɝl pul tʃeɪnʒəz ðə pæθ ʌv ə stʃɹɔ. wən ðə pleɪs ɪz ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld, ðə pæɾɝn maɪt wiv ivən ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz ɪndə ɪtsɛlf, ən meɪk ɪm hɑɹmləs əɡɛn."

"They are ta'veren," Moiraine said soothingly. "The Pattern weaves itself around them. Already the Dark One has tried to kill each of them more than once. Three ta'veren in one place are enough to change the life around them as surely as a whirl pool changes the path of a straw. When the place is the Eye of the World, the Pattern might weave even the Father of Lies into itself, and make him harmless again."

eɪɡəlmɝ stɑp tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə faɪn ɪz sɔɹd, bʌɾ i stɪl lʊkt ət ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz daʊtfəli. "mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, ɪf jə seɪ ðeɪ ɑɹ, ðən ðeɪ ɑɹ, bʌɾ aɪ kænɑt si ɪt. fɑɹmbɔɪz. ɑɹ jə sɝɾən, ɛɛs sədaɪ?"

Agelmar stopped trying to find his sword, but he still looked at Rand and the others doubtfully. "Moiraine Sedai, if you say they are, then they are, but I cannot see it. Farmboys. Are you certain, Aes Sedai?"

"ði oʊl blʌd," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "splɪɾ aʊt laɪk ə ɹɪvɝ bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪndə ə θaʊzən taɪmz ə θaʊzən stʃɹimz, bʌt səmtaɪmz stʃɹimz dʒɔɪn təɡɛðɝ tə meɪk ə ɹɪvɝ əɡɛn. ði oʊl blʌɾ ə meɪnɛðɝən ɪz stʃɹɔŋ ən pjʊɹ ɪn ɔlmoʊst ɔl ðiz jʌŋ mɛn. kən jə daʊt ðə stʃɹɛŋkθ ə meɪnɛðɝənz blʌd, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ?"

"The old blood," Moiraine said, "split out like a river breaking into a thousand times a thousand streams, but sometimes streams join together to make a river again. The old blood of Manetheren is strong and pure in almost all these young men. Can you doubt the strength of Manetheren's blood, Lord Agelmar?"

ɹænd ɡlænst saɪdweɪz ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ɔlmoʊst ɔl. hi ɹɪskt ə lʊk ət nɪneɪiv; ʃi hæd tɝn bæk tə wɑtʃ əz wɛl əz lɪsən, ðoʊ ʃi stɪl əvɔɪɾəd lʊkɪŋ ət læn. hi kɑt ðə wɪzdəmz aɪ. ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd; ʃi hæd nɑt toʊl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ðəɾ i wɑz nɑt tu ɹɪvɝz bɔɹn. wʌt dʌz mɔɪɹeɪn noʊ?

Rand glanced sideways at the Aes Sedai. Almost all. He risked a look at Nynaeve; she had turned back to watch as well as listen, though she still avoided looking at Lan. He caught the Wisdom's eye. She shook her head; she had not told the Aes Sedai that he was not Two Rivers born. What does Moiraine know?

"meɪnɛðɝən," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd sloʊli, nɑɾɪŋ. "aɪ wəd nɑt daʊt ðət blʌd." ðɛn, mɔɹ kwɪkli, "ðə wil bɹɪŋz stʃɹeɪnʒ taɪmz. fɑɹmbɔɪz kæɹi ði ɑnɝ ə meɪnɛðɝən ɪndə ðə blaɪt, jɛɾ ɪf ɛni blʌd kən stʃɹaɪk ə fɛl bloʊ ət ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ɪt wəd bi ðə blʌɾ ə meɪnɛðɝən. ɪt ʃæl bi dʌn əz jə wɪʃ, ɛɛs sədaɪ."

"Manetheren," Agelmar said slowly, nodding. "I would not doubt that blood." Then, more quickly, "The Wheel brings strange times. Farmboys carry the honor of Manetheren into the Blight, yet if any blood can strike a fell blow at the Dark One, it would be the blood of Manetheren. It shall be done as you wish, Aes Sedai."

"ðɛn lɛɾ əs ɡoʊ tə əɹ ɹumz," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "wi mʌs liv wɪð ðə sʌn, fəɹ taɪm ɡɹoʊz ʃɔɹt. ðə jʌŋ mɛn mʌst slip kloʊs tə mi. taɪm ɪz tu ʃɔɹt bɪfɔɹ ðə bæɾəl tə əlaʊ ðə dɑɹk wʌn ənʌðɝ stʃɹaɪk ət ðɛm. tu ʃɔɹt."

"Then let us go to our rooms," Moiraine said. "We must leave with the sun, for time grows short. The young men must sleep close to me. Time is too short before the battle to allow the Dark One another strike at them. Too short."

ɹænd fɛlt əɹ aɪz ɑn hɪm, stʌɾiɪŋ ɪm ən ɪz fɹɛnz, weɪɪŋ ðɛɹ stʃɹɛŋkθ, ən i ʃɪvɝd. tu ʃɔɹt.

Rand felt her eyes on him, studying him and his friends, weighing their strength, and he shivered. Too short.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾieɪt


CHAPTER 48

ðə blaɪt


The Blight

ðə wɪnd wɪp lænz kloʊk, səmtaɪmz meɪkɪŋ ɪm hɑɹd tə si ivən ɪn ðə sʌnlaɪt, ən ɪŋtʃɹ ən ðə hʌnʒɹəd lænsɪz lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ hæd sɛn tə ɛskɔɹɾ əm tə ðə bɔɹɾɝ, ɪn keɪs ðeɪ mɛɾ ə tʃɹɑlɑk ɹeɪd, meɪɾ ə bɹeɪv dɪspleɪ ɪn dʌbəl kɑləm wɪð ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ ən ðɛɹ ɹɛd pɛnəns ən ðɛɹ stil-klæd hɔɹsəz lɛd baɪ ɪŋtʃɹz ɡɹeɪ aʊl bænɝ. ðeɪ wɝ izəli əz ɡɹæn əz ə hʌnʒɹəd ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹdz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðə taʊɝz dʒʌst ɪn saɪɾ əhɛɾ ə ðɛm ðət ɹænd stʌɾid. hi hæd hæɾ ɔl mɔɹnɪŋ tə wɑtʃ ðə ʃaɪnɝən lænsɪz.

The wind whipped Lan's cloak, sometimes making him hard to see even in the sunlight, and Ingtar and the hundred lances Lord Agelmar had sent to escort them to the Border, in case they met a Trolloc raid, made a brave display in double column with their armor and their red pennants and their steel-clad horses led by Ingtar's Gray Owl banner. They were easily as grand as a hundred of the Queen's Guards, but it was the towers just in sight ahead of them that Rand studied. He had had all morning to watch the Shienaran lances.

itʃ taʊɝ stʊd tɔl ən sɑləɾ ətɑp ə hɪl, hæf ə maɪl fɹəm ɪts neɪbɝ. ist ən wɛst ʌðɝz ɹoʊz, ən mɔɹ bɪɑn ðoʊz. ə bɹɔd, wɔld ɹæmp spaɪɹəld ɝaʊn itʃ stoʊn ʃæft, waɪndɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊn baɪ ðə taɪm ɪt ɹitʃt ðə hɛvi ɡeɪts hæfweɪ tə ðə kɹɛnɛleɪɾɪd tɑp. ə sɔɹɾi fɹəm ðə ɡɛɹɪsən wəd bi pɹətɛktəd baɪ ðə wɔl əntɪl ɪt ɹitʃt ðə ɡɹaʊnd, bʌɾ ɛnəmiz stʃɹaɪvɪŋ tə ɹitʃ ðə ɡeɪt wəd klaɪm ʌndɝ ə heɪl ʌv æɹoʊz ən stoʊnz ən hɑɾ ɔɪl fɹəm ðə bɪɡ kɛɾəlz pɔɪzd ɑn ði aʊtwɝd flɛɹɪŋ ɹæmpɑɹts əbʌv. ə lɑɹdʒ stil mɪɹɝ, kɛɹfəli tɝn daʊn, əweɪ fɹəm ðə sʌn, naʊ, ɡlɪɾɝd ətɑp itʃ taʊɝ bɪloʊ ðə haɪ aɪɝn kʌp wɛɹ sɪɡnəl faɪɝz kəd bi lɪt wən ðə sʌn dɪd nɑt ʃaɪn. ðə sɪɡnəl wəd bi flæʃt, tə taʊɝz fɝðɝ fɹəm ðə bɔɹɾɝ, ən baɪ ðoʊz tə stɪl ʌðɝz, ən soʊ ɹileɪd tə ðə hɑɹtlæn fɔɹtʃɹəsəz, fɹəm wɛɹ ðə lænsɪz wəd ɹaɪd tə tɝn bæk ðə ɹeɪd. wɝ taɪmz nɔɹməl, ðeɪ wʊd.

Each tower stood tall and solid atop a hill, half a mile from its neighbor. East and west others rose, and more beyond those. A broad, walled ramp spiraled around each stone shaft, winding all the way around by the time it reached the heavy gates halfway to the crenellated top. A sortie from the garrison would be protected by the wall until it reached the ground, but enemies striving to reach the gate would climb under a hail of arrows and stones and hot oil from the big kettles poised on the outward flaring ramparts above. A large steel mirror, carefully turned down, away from the sun, now, glittered atop each tower below the high iron cup where signal fires could be lit when the sun did not shine. The signal would be flashed, to towers further from the Border, and by those to still others, and so relayed to the heartland fortresses, from where the lances would ride to turn back the raid. Were times normal, they would.

fɹəm ðə tu nɪɹəs taʊɝ tɑps mɛn wɑtʃt əm əpɹoʊtʃ. dʒʌst ə fju mɛn ɑn itʃ, piɹɪŋ kjʊɹiəsli θɹu ðə kɹɛnəlz. ɪn ðə bɛst ə taɪmz ðə taʊɝz wɝ oʊnli mæn ɪnʌf fəɹ sɛlf-dɪfɛns, dɪpɛndɪŋ mɔɹ ɑn stoʊn wɔlz ðən stʃɹɔŋ ɑɹmz tə sɝvaɪv, bʌɾ ɛvɹi mæn u kəd bi spɛɹd, ən mɔɹ, wɑz ɹaɪɾɪŋ tə tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp. ðə fɔl ə ðə taʊɝz wəd nɑt mæɾɝ ɪf ðə lænsɪz feɪl tə hoʊl ðə ɡæp.

From the two nearest tower tops men watched them approach. Just a few men on each, peering curiously through the crenels. In the best of times the towers were only manned enough for self-defense, depending more on stone walls than strong arms to survive, but every man who could be spared, and more, was riding to Tarwin's Gap. The fall of the towers would not matter if the lances failed to hold the Gap.

ɹænd ʃɪvɝɾ əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd bɪtwin ðə taʊɝz. ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊst əz ɪf i hæd ɹɪɾən θɹu ə wɔl ə koʊldɝ ɛɹ. ðɪs wɑz ðə bɔɹɾɝ. ðə læn bɪɑn lʊk noʊ dɪfɹən fɹəm ʃaɪnɝ, bʌɾ aʊt ðɛɹ, sʌmwɛɹ bɪɑn ðə lifləs tʃɹiz, wɑz ðə blaɪt.

Rand shivered as they rode between the towers. It was almost as if he had ridden through a wall of colder air. This was the Border. The land beyond looked no different from Shienar, but out there, somewhere beyond the leafless trees, was the Blight.

ɪŋtʃɹ lɪftəɾ ə stil fɪs tə hɔl ðə lænsɪz ʃɔɹɾ ʌv ə pleɪn stoʊn poʊst ɪn saɪɾ ə ðə taʊɝz. ə bɔɹɾɝpoʊst, mɑɹkɪŋ ðə baʊndɝi bɪtwin ʃaɪnɝ ən wʌt wʌns wɑz mɔlkiɝ. "jɔɹ pɑɹɾən, mɔɪɹeɪn ɛɛs sədaɪ. pɑɹɾən, daɪ ʃæn. pɑɹɾən, bɪldɝ. lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ kəmændəd mi tə ɡoʊ noʊ fɝðɝ." hi saʊndəɾ ənhæpi əbaʊɾ ɪt, dɪsɡɹʌntəld ət laɪf ɪn dʒɛnɝəl.

Ingtar lifted a steel fist to halt the lances short of a plain stone post in sight of the towers. A borderpost, marking the boundary between Shienar and what once was Malkier. "Your pardon, Moiraine Aes Sedai. Pardon, Dai Shan. Pardon, Builder. Lord Agelmar commanded me to go no further." He sounded unhappy about it, disgruntled at life in general.

"ðæɾ ɪz əz wi plænd, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ ən aɪ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd.

"That is as we planned, Lord Agelmar and I," Moiraine said.

ɪŋtʃɹ ɡɹʌntɪd saʊɝli. "pɑɹɾən, ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi əpɑlədʒaɪzd, nɑt saʊndɪŋ əz ɪf i mɛn ɪt. "tə ɛskɔɹt jə hɪɹ minz wi meɪ nɑt ɹitʃ ðə ɡæp bɪfɔɹ ðə faɪɾɪŋ ɪz dʌn. aɪm ɹɑbd ə ðə tʃæns tə stænd wɪð ðə ɹɛst, ən ət ðə seɪm taɪm aɪm kəmændəd nɑt tə ɹaɪd wʌn stɛp bɪɑn ðə bɔɹɾɝpoʊst, əz ɪf aɪ hæd nɛvɝ bɪfɔɹ bɪn ɪn ðə blaɪt. ən maɪ lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ wɪl nɑt tɛl mi waɪ." bɪhaɪn ðə bɑɹz ə hɪz feɪs-ɡɑɹd, hɪz aɪz tɝn ðə læst wɝɾ ɪndə ə kwɛstʃən tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. hi skɔɹn tə lʊk ət ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz; hi hæd lɝn ðeɪ wəɾ əkʌmpəni læn ɪndə ðə blaɪt.

Ingtar grunted sourly. "Pardon, Aes Sedai," he apologized, not sounding as if he meant it. "To escort you here means we may not reach the Gap before the fighting is done. I am robbed of the chance to stand with the rest, and at the same time I am commanded not to ride one step beyond the borderpost, as if I had never before been in the Blight. And My Lord Agelmar will not tell me why." Behind the bars of his face-guard, his eyes turned the last word into a question to the Aes Sedai. He scorned to look at Rand and the others; he had learned they would accompany Lan into the Blight.

"hi kən əv maɪ pleɪs," mæt mʌɾɝd tə ɹænd. læn ɡeɪv əm boʊθ ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. mæt dʒɹɑpt ɪz aɪz, hɪz feɪs tɝnɪŋ ɹɛd.

"He can have my place," Mat muttered to Rand. Lan gave them both a sharp look. Mat dropped his eyes, his face turning red.

"itʃ ʌv əs əz ɪz pɑɹɾ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn, ɪŋtʃɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd fɝmli. "fɹʌm hɪɹ wi mʌs θɹɛɾ aʊɝz əloʊn."

"Each of us has his part in the Pattern, Ingtar," Moiraine said firmly. "From here we must thread ours alone."

ɪŋtʃɹz baʊ wɑz stɪfɝ ðən ɪz ɑɹmɝ meɪɾ ɪt. "æz jə wɪʃ ɪt, ɛɛs sədaɪ. aɪ mʌs liv ju, naʊ, ən ɹaɪd hɑɹɾ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə ɹitʃ tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp. ət list əl bi . . . əlaʊd . . . tə feɪs tʃɹɑləks ðɛɹ."

Ingtar's bow was stiffer than his armor made it. "As you wish it, Aes Sedai. I must leave you, now, and ride hard in order to reach Tarwin's Gap. At least I will be . . . allowed . . . to face Trollocs there."

"ɑɹ jə tʃɹuli ðəɾ iɡɝ?" nɪneɪiv æskt. "tə faɪt tʃɹɑləks?"

"Are you truly that eager?" Nynaeve asked. "To fight Trollocs?"

ɪŋtʃɹ ɡeɪv əɹ ə pʌzəld lʊk, ðən ɡlænst ət læn əz ɪf ðə wɔɹɾɝ maɪɾ ɪkspleɪn. "ðæɾ ɪz wʌɾ aɪ du, leɪɾi," hi sɛd sloʊli. "ðæɾ ɪz waɪ aɪ æm." hi ɹeɪzd ə ɡɔntələɾəd hæn tə læn, oʊpən pɑm təwɔɹd ðə wɔɹɾɝ. "sɝævaɪ nɪntoʊ mænʃimə teɪʃaɪt, daɪ ʃæn. pis feɪvɝ jəɹ sɔɹd." pʊlɪŋ ɪz hɔɹs ɝaʊnd, ɪŋtʃɹ ɹoʊɾ ist wɪð ɪz bænɝmən ən ɪz hʌnʒɹəd lænsɪz. ðeɪ wɛn əɾ ə wɔk, bʌɾ ə stɛɾi peɪs, əz fæst əz ɑɹmɝd hɔɹsəz kəd mænədʒ wɪð ə fɑɹ dɪstəns jɛt tə ɡoʊ.

Ingtar gave her a puzzled look, then glanced at Lan as if the Warder might explain. "That is what I do, Lady," he said slowly. "That is why I am." He raised a gauntleted hand to Lan, open palm toward the warder. "Suravye ninto manshima taishite, Dai Shan. Peace favor your sword." Pulling his horse around, Ingtar rode east with his bannerman and his hundred lances. They went at a walk, but a steady pace, as fast as armored horses could manage with a far distance yet to go.

"wʌɾ ə stʃɹeɪnʒ θɪŋ tə seɪ," ɛɡwin sɛd. "waɪ də ðeɪ juz ɪt laɪk ðæt? pis."

"What a strange thing to say," Egwene said. "Why do they use it like that? Peace."

"wɛn juv nɛvɝ noʊn ə θɪŋ ɪksɛp tə dʒɹim," læn ɹɪplaɪd, hilɪŋ mændɑɹb fɔɹwɝd, "ɪt bɪkʌmz mɔɹ ðən ə tælɪsmən."

"When you have never known a thing except to dream," Lan replied, heeling Mandarb forward, "it becomes more than a talisman."

əz ɹænd fɑloʊd ðə wɔɹɾɝ pæs ðə stoʊn bɔɹɾɝpoʊst, hi tɝn ɪn ɪz sæɾəl tə lʊk bæk, wɑtʃɪŋ ɪŋtʃɹ ən ðə lænsɪz dɪsəpɪɹ bɪhaɪn bæɹən tʃɹiz, ən ðə bɔɹɾɝpoʊst vænɪʃ, ən læst ʌv ɔl ðə taʊɝz ɑn ðɛɹ hɪltɑps, lʊkɪŋ oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹiz. ɔl tu sun ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn, ɹaɪɾɪŋ nɔɹθ ʌndɝ ðə lifləs kænəpi ʌv ðə fɔɹəst. ɹænd sæŋk ɪndə wɑtʃfəl saɪləns, ən fəɹ wʌns ivən mæt hæd nʌθɪŋ tə seɪ.

As Rand followed the Warder past the stone borderpost, he turned in his saddle to look back, watching Ingtar and the lances disappear behind barren trees, and the borderpost vanish, and last of all the towers on their hilltops, looking over the trees. All too soon they were alone, riding north under the leafless canopy of the forest. Rand sank into watchful silence, and for once even Mat had nothing to say.

ðət mɔɹnɪŋ ðə ɡeɪts ə fæl dæɹə hæɾ oʊpənd wɪð ðə dɔn. lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ, ɑɹmɝɾ ən hɛlməɾɪd naʊ laɪk ɪz soʊlʒɝz, ɹoʊd wɪð ðə blæk hɔk bænɝ ən ðə θɹi fɑksəz fɹəm ði ist ɡeɪt təwɔɹd ðə sʌn, stɪl oʊnli ə ɹɛd slɪvɝ əbʌv ðə tʃɹiz. laɪk ə stil sneɪk ʌnʒəleɪtɪŋ tə maʊntəd kɛɾəlɪdʒɹəmz, ðə kɑləm waʊn ɪts weɪ aʊɾ ə ðə taʊn fɔɹ əbɹɛst, eɪɡəlmɝ əɾ ɪts hɛd hɪɾən ɪn ðə fɔɹəs bɪfɔɹ ɪts teɪl lɛft fæl dæɹə kip. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ tʃɪɹz ɪn ðə stʃɹits tə spiɾ əm ɑn ðɛɹ weɪ, oʊnli ðɛɹ oʊn dʒɹʌmz ən ðɛɹ pɛnəns' kɹækɪŋ ɪn ðə wɪnd, bʌt ðɛɹ aɪz lʊk təwɔɹd ðə ɹaɪzɪŋ sʌn wɪð pɝpəs. istwɝd ðeɪ wəd dʒɔɪn ʌðɝ stil sɝpəns, fɹəm fæl mɝæn, bɪhaɪn kɪŋ isɑɹ hɪmsɛlf wɪð ɪz sʌnz əɾ ɪz saɪd, ən fɹəm ɑŋkɝ deɪl, ðət hɛl ði istɝn mɑɹtʃɪz ən ɡɑɹɾəd ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld; fɹəm mɔs ʃɪɹɛɹ ən fæl sən ən kæmɹən kɑn, ən ɔl ði ʌðɝ fɔɹtʃɹəsəz ɪn ʃaɪnɝ, ɡɹeɪɾ ən smɔl. dʒɔɪn ɪndə ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ sɝpənt, ðeɪ wəd tɝn nɔɹθ tə tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp.

That morning the gates of Fal Dara had opened with the dawn. Lord Agelmar, armored and helmeted now like his soldiers, rode with the Black Hawk banner and the Three Foxes from the East Gate toward the sun, still only a red sliver above the trees. Like a steel snake undulating to mounted kettledrums, the column wound its way out of the town four abreast, Agelmar at its head hidden in the forest before its tail left Fal Dara keep. There were no cheers in the streets to speed them on their way, only their own drums and their pennants' cracking in the wind, but their eyes looked toward the rising sun with purpose. Eastward they would join other steel serpents, from Fal Moran, behind King Easar himself with his sons at his side, and from Ankor Dail, that held the Eastern Marches and guarded the Spine of the World; from Mos Shirare and Fal Sion and Camron Caan, and all the other fortresses in Shienar, great and small. Joined into a greater serpent, they would turn north to Tarwin's Gap.

ənʌðɝ ɛksəɾəs hæd bɪɡʌn ət ðə seɪm taɪm, juzɪŋ ðə kɪŋz ɡeɪt ðət lɛɾ aʊɾ ɑn ðə weɪ tə fæl mɝæn. kɑɹts ən wæɡənz, pipəl maʊntəɾ ən pipəl əfʊt, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðɛɹ laɪvstɑk, kæɹiɪŋ tʃɪlʒɹən ɑn ðɛɹ bæks, feɪsəz əz lɔŋ əz ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ʃædoʊz. ɹɪlʌktəns tə liv ðɛɹ hoʊmz, pɝhæps fɝɛvɝ, sloʊd ðɛɹ fit, jɛt fɪɹ ʌv wʌt wɑz kʌmɪŋ spɝd ðɛm, soʊ ðət ðeɪ wɛn ɪn bɝsts, fit dʒɹæɡɪŋ, ðən bɹeɪkɪŋ ɪndə ə ɹʌn fəɹ ə dʌzən peɪsɪz oʊnli tə fɔl bæk, wʌns mɔɹ, tə ʃʌflɪŋ θɹu ðə dʌst. ə fju pɔzd aʊtsaɪd ðə taʊn tə wɑtʃ ðə soʊlʒɝz' ɑɹmɝd laɪn waɪndɪŋ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst. hoʊp blɑsəmd ɪn səm aɪz, ən pɹɛɹz wɝ mʌɾɝd, pɹɛɹz fəɹ ðə soʊlʒɝz, pɹɛɹz fəɹ ðɛmsɛlvz, bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ tɝn saʊθ əɡɛn, tʃɹʌdʒɪŋ.

Another exodus had begun at the same time, using the King's Gate that led out on the way to Fal Moran. Carts and wagons, people mounted and people afoot, driving their livestock, carrying children on their backs, faces as long as the morning shadows. Reluctance to leave their homes, perhaps forever, slowed their feet, yet fear of what was coming spurred them, so that they went in bursts, feet dragging, then breaking into a run for a dozen paces only to fall back, once more, to shuffling through the dust. A few paused outside the town to watch the soldiers' armored line winding into the forest. Hope blossomed in some eyes, and prayers were muttered, prayers for the soldiers, prayers for themselves, before they turned south again, trudging.

ðə smɔləs kɑləm wɛn aʊɾ ə ðə mɔlkiɝ ɡeɪt. lɛf bɪhaɪnd wɝ ə fju hu wəd ɹɪmeɪn, soʊlʒɝz ən ə spɹɪŋklɪŋ ʌv oʊldɝ mɛn, ðɛɹ waɪvz dɛɾ ən ðɛɹ ɡɹoʊn tʃɪlʒɹən meɪkɪŋ ðə sloʊ weɪ saʊθ. ə læs hændfʊl soʊ ðət wʌtɛvɝ hæpən ɪn tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp, fæl dæɹə wəd nɑt fɔl ʌndɪfɛndəd. ɪŋtʃɹz ɡɹeɪ aʊl lɛd ðə weɪ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz mɔɪɹeɪn u tʊk əm nɔɹθ. ðə moʊst ɪmpɔɹɾənt kɑləm ʌv ɔl, ən ðə moʊs dɛspɹɪt.

The smallest column went out of the Malkier Gate. Left behind were a few who would remain, soldiers and a sprinkling of older men, their wives dead and their grown children making the slow way south. A last handful so that Whatever happened in Tarwin's Gap, Fal Dara would not fall undefended. Ingtar's Gray Owl led the way, but it was Moiraine who took them north. The most important column of all, and the most desperate.

fəɹ ət list ən aʊɝ æftɝ ðeɪ pæs ðə bɔɹɾɝpoʊst ðəɹ wɑz noʊ tʃeɪnʒ ɪn læn əɹ fɔɹəst. ðə wɔɹɾɝ kɛpt əm əɾ ə hɑɹd peɪs, əz fæst ə wɔk əz ðə hɔɹsəz kəd meɪnteɪn, bʌt ɹænd kɛpt wʌndɝɪŋ wən ðeɪ wəd ɹitʃ ðə blaɪt. ðə hɪlz bɪkeɪm ə lɪɾəl haɪɝ, bʌt ðə tʃɹiz, ən ðə kɹipɝz, ən ði ʌndɝbɹʌʃ wɝ noʊ dɪfɹən ðən wʌɾ i hæd sin ɪn ʃaɪnɝ, ɡɹeɪ ən ɔl bʌt lifləs. hi bɪɡæn tə fil wɔɹmɝ, wɔɹm ɪnʌf tə slɪŋ ɪz kloʊk əkɹɔs ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl.

For at least an hour after they passed the borderpost there was no change in land or forest. The Warder kept them at a hard pace, as fast a walk as the horses could maintain, but Rand kept wondering when they would reach the Blight. The hills became a little higher, but the trees, and the creepers, and the underbrush were no different than what he had seen in Shienar, gray and all but leafless. He began to feel warmer, warm enough to sling his cloak across the pommel of his saddle.

"ðɪs ɪz ðə bɛst wɛðɝ wiv sin ɔl jɪɹ," ɛɡwin sɛd, ʃɹʌɡɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɝ oʊn kloʊk.

"This is the best weather we've seen all year," Egwene said, shrugging out of her own cloak.

nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd, fɹaʊnɪŋ əz ɪf lɪsnɪŋ tə ðə wɪnd. "ɪt filz ɹɔŋ."

Nynaeve shook her head, frowning as if listening to the wind. "It feels wrong."

ɹænd nɑɾəd. hi kəd fil ɪt, tu, ðoʊ hi kəd nɑt seɪ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ɪɡzækli hi wɑz filɪŋ. ðə ɹɔŋɡnəs wɛn bɪɑn ðə fɝst wɔɹmθ i kəd ɹɪmɛmbɝ aʊɾ ə dɔɹz ðɪs jɪɹ; ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ðə sɪmpəl fæk ðəɾ ɪt ʃəd nɑt bi soʊ wɔɹm ðɪs fɑɹ nɔɹθ. ɪt mʌs bi ðə blaɪt, bʌt ðə lænd wɑz ðə seɪm.

Rand nodded. He could feel it, too, though he could not say what it was exactly he was feeling. The wrongness went beyond the first warmth he could remember out of doors this year; it was more than the simple fact that it should not be so warm this far north. It must be the Blight, but the land was the same.

ðə sʌn klaɪm haɪ, ə ɹɛd bɔl ðət kəd nɑt ɡɪv soʊ mʌtʃ wɔɹmθ dɪspaɪt ðə klaʊdləs skaɪ. ə lɪɾəl waɪl leɪɾɝ i ənbʌɾənd ɪz koʊt. swɛt tʃɹɪkəl daʊn ɪz feɪs.

The sun climbed high, a red ball that could not give so much warmth despite the cloudless sky. A little while later he unbuttoned his coat. Sweat trickled down his face.

hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn. mæt tʊk ɪz koʊɾ ɔf, oʊpənli dɪspleɪɪŋ ðə ɡoʊld-ænd-ɹubi dæɡɝ, ən waɪpt ɪz feɪs wɪð ði ɛn ə hɪz skɑɹf. blɪŋkɪŋ, hi ɹiwaʊn ðə skɑɹf ɪndə ə nɛɹoʊ bæn loʊ oʊvɝ ɪz aɪz. nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin fæn ðɛmsɛlvz; ðeɪ ɹoʊd slʌmpt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ wɪltɪŋ. lɔɪəl əndɪɾ ɪz haɪ-kɑlɝd tunɪk ɔl ðə weɪ daʊn, ən ɪz ʃɝɾ əz wɛl; ði oʊɡiɝ hæɾ ə nɛɹoʊ stʃɹɪp ə hɛɹ ʌp ðə mɪɾəl ə hɪz tʃɛst, əz θɪk əz fɝ. hi mʌɾɝd əpɑlədʒiz ɔl ɝaʊnd.

He was not the only one. Mat took his coat off, openly displaying the gold-and-ruby dagger, and wiped his face with the end of his scarf. Blinking, he rewound the scarf into a narrow band low over his eyes. Nynaeve and Egwene fanned themselves; they rode slumped as if they were wilting. Loial undid his high-collared tunic all the way down, and his shirt as well; the Ogier had a narrow strip of hair up the middle of his chest, as thick as fur. He muttered apologies all around.

"ju mʌs fɝɡɪv mi. stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ ɪz ɪn ðə maʊntənz, ən kul." hɪz bɹɔd nɑstʃɹəlz flɛɹd, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪn ɛɹ ðət wɑz bɪkʌmɪŋ wɔɹmɝ baɪ ðə mɪnət. "aɪ doʊn laɪk ðɪs hit, ən dæmp."

"You must forgive me. Stedding Shangtai is in the mountains, and cool." His broad nostrils flared, drawing in air that was becoming warmer by the minute. "I don't like this heat, and damp."

ɪt wɑz dæmp, ɹænd ɹilaɪzd. ɪt fɛlt laɪk ðə maɪɹ ɪn ðə dɛpθs ə sʌmɝ, bæk ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. ɪn ðət bɑi swɑmp ɛvɹi bɹɛθ keɪm əz ɪf θɹu ə wʊl blæŋkət soʊkt ɪn hɑt wɔɾɝ. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ sɑɡi ɡɹaʊn hɪɹ - oʊnli ə fju pɑnz ən stʃɹimz, tʃɹɪkəlz tə sʌmwʌn juz tə ðə wɔɾɝwʊd - bʌt ði ɛɹ wɑz laɪk ðəɾ ɪn ðə maɪɹ. oʊnli pɛɹɪn, stɪl ɪn ɪz koʊt, wɑz bɹiðɪŋ izəli. pɛɹɪn ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ.

It was damp, Rand realized. It felt like the Mire in the depths of summer, back in the Two Rivers. In that boggy swamp every breath came as if through a wool blanket soaked in hot water. There was no soggy ground here - only a few ponds and streams, trickles to someone used to the Waterwood - but the air was like that in the Mire. Only Perrin, still in his coat, was breathing easily. Perrin and the Warder.

ðəɹ wɝ ə fju livz naʊ, ɑn tʃɹiz ðət wɝ nɑɾ ɛvɝɡɹin. ɹænd ɹitʃt aʊt tə tʌtʃ ə bɹæntʃ, ən stɑpt wɪð ɪz hænd ʃɔɹɾ ə ðə livz. sɪkli jɛloʊ mɑɾəld ðə ɹɛɾ ə ðə nu ɡɹoʊθ, ən blæk flɛks laɪk dɪziz.

There were a few leaves now, on trees that were not evergreen. Rand reached out to touch a branch, and stopped with his hand short of the leaves. Sickly yellow mottled the red of the new growth, and black flecks like disease.

"aɪ toʊl jə nɑt tə tʌtʃ ɛniθɪŋ." ðə wɔɹɾɝz vɔɪs wɑz flæt. hi stɪl wɔɹ ɪz ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk, əz ɪf hit meɪd noʊ mɔɹ ɪmpɹɛʃən ɑn ɪm ðən koʊld; ɪɾ ɔlmoʊs meɪɾ ɪz æŋɡjəlɝ feɪs sim tə floʊɾ ənsəpɔɹɾɪd əbʌv mændɑɹbz bæk. "flaʊɝz kən kɪl ɪn ðə blaɪt, ən livz meɪm. ðɛɹz ə lɪɾəl θɪŋ kɔld ə stɪk ðət laɪks tə haɪd wɛɹ ðə livz ɑɹ θɪkəst, lʊkɪŋ laɪk ɪts neɪm, weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ sʌmθɪŋ tə tʌtʃ ɪt. wən sʌmθɪŋ dʌz, ɪt baɪts. nɑt pɔɪzən. ðə dʒus bɪɡɪnz tə daɪdʒɛs ðə stɪks pɹeɪ fəɹ ɪt. ði oʊnli θɪŋ ðət kən seɪv jə ɪz tə kʌɾ ɔf ði ɑɹm əɹ lɛɡ ðət wɑz bɪɾən. bʌɾ ə stɪk woʊn baɪɾ ənlɛs jə tʌtʃ ɪt. ʌðɝ θɪŋz ɪn ðə blaɪt wɪl."

"I told you not to touch anything." The Warder's voice was flat. He still wore his shifting cloak, as if heat made no more impression on him than cold; it almost made his angular face seem to float unsupported above Mandarb's back. "Flowers can kill in the Blight, and leaves maim. There's a little thing called a Stick that likes to hide where the leaves are thickest, looking like its name, waiting for something to touch it. When something does, it bites. Not poison. The juice begins to digest the Stick's prey for it. The only thing that can save you is to cut off the arm or leg that was bitten. But a Stick won't bite unless you touch it. Other things in the Blight will."

ɹænd dʒɝkt ɪz hæn bæk, livz əntʌtʃt, ən waɪpt ɪɾ ɑn ɪz pæns lɛɡ.

Rand jerked his hand back, leaves untouched, and wiped it on his pants leg.

"ðɛn wɝ ɪn ðə blaɪt?" pɛɹɪn sɛd. stʃɹeɪnʒli, hi dɪd nɑt saʊn fɹaɪɾənd.

"Then we're in the Blight?" Perrin said. Strangely, he did not sound frightened.

"dʒʌs ðə fɹɪnʒ," læn sɛd ɡɹɪmli. hɪz stæljən kɛp muvɪŋ fɔɹwɝd, ən i spoʊk oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. "ðə ɹil blaɪt stɪl laɪz əhɛd. ðəɹ ɑɹ θɪŋz ɪn ðə blaɪt ðət hʌn baɪ saʊnd, ən səm meɪ hæv wɑndɝd ðɪs fɑɹ saʊθ. səmtaɪmz ðeɪ kɹɔs ðə maʊntənz ə dum. mʌtʃ wɝs ðən stɪks. kip kwaɪəɾ ən kip ʌp, ɪf jə wɑnə steɪ əlaɪv." hi kəntɪnjud tə sɛɾ ə hɑɹd peɪs, nɑt weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ ən ænsɝ.

"Just the fringe," Lan said grimly. His stallion kept moving forward, and he spoke over his shoulder. "The real Blight still lies ahead. There are things in the Blight that hunt by sound, and some may have wandered this far south. Sometimes they cross the Mountains of Dhoom. Much worse than Sticks. Keep quiet and keep up, if you want to stay alive." He continued to set a hard pace, not waiting for an answer.

maɪl baɪ maɪl ðə kɝʌpʃən ə ðə blaɪt bɪkeɪm mɔɹ əpɛɹənt. livz kʌvɝd ðə tʃɹiz ɪn ɛvɝ ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɹəfjuʒən, bʌt steɪn ən spɑɾəd wɪð jɛloʊ ən blæk, wɪð lɪvɪd ɹɛd stʃɹiks laɪk blʌd pɔɪzənɪŋ. ɛvɹi lif ən kɹipɝ sim bloʊɾɪd, ɹɛɾi tə bɝst əɾ ə tʌtʃ. flaʊɝz hʌŋ ɑn tʃɹiz ən widz ɪn ə pɛɹəɾi ʌv spɹɪŋ, sɪkli peɪl ən pʌlpi, wæksən θɪŋz ðəɾ əpɪɹd tə bi ɹɑɾɪŋ waɪl ɹænd wɑtʃt. wən i bɹið θɹu hɪz noʊz, ðə swit stɛntʃ ə dəkeɪ, hɛvi ən θɪk, sɪkən hɪm; wən i tʃɹaɪd bɹiðɪŋ θɹu hɪz maʊθ, hi ɔlmoʊst ɡæɡd. ði ɛɹ teɪstəd laɪk ə maʊθfʊl ə spɔɪl mit. ðə hɔɹsəz' hʊvz meɪɾ ə sɑf skwɪʃɪŋ əz ɹɑɾən-ɹaɪp θɪŋz bɹoʊk oʊpən ʌndɝ ðɛm.

Mile by mile the corruption of the Blight became more apparent. Leaves covered the trees in ever greater profusion, but stained and spotted with yellow and black, with livid red streaks like blood poisoning. Every leaf and creeper seemed bloated, ready to burst at a touch. Flowers hung on trees and weeds in a parody of spring, sickly pale and pulpy, waxen things that appeared to be rotting while Rand watched. When he breathed through his nose, the sweet stench of decay, heavy and thick, sickened him; when he tried breathing through his mouth, he almost gagged. The air tasted like a mouthful of spoiled meat. The horses' hooves made a soft squishing as rotten-ripe things broke open under them.

mæt lin aʊɾ ə hɪz sæɾəl ən spjuɾ əntɪl ɪz stʌmək wɑz ɛmpti. ɹænd sɔt ðə vɔɪd, bʌt kɑmnəs wɑz lɪɾəl hɛlp əɡɛns ðə bɝnɪŋ baɪl ðət kɛp kɹipɪŋ ʌp ɪz θɹoʊt. ɛmpti əɹ nɑt, mæt hivd əɡɛn ə maɪl leɪɾɝ, bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp nʌθɪŋ, ən jɛɾ əɡɛn æftɝ ðæt. ɛɡwin lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə bi sɪk, tu, swɑloʊɪŋ kɑnstənli, ən nɪneɪivz feɪs wɑz ə waɪt mæsk ə dɪtɝməneɪʃən, hɝ dʒɔ sɛɾ ən əɹ aɪz fɪkst ɑn mɔɪɹeɪnz bæk. ðə wɪzdəm wəd nɑɾ ədmɪt tə filɪŋ ɪl ənlɛs ði ɛɛs sədaɪ dɪd, fɝst, bʌt ɹænd dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ʃi wəɾ əv tə weɪt lɔŋ. mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪz wɝ taɪt, ən əɹ lɪps peɪl.

Mat leaned out of his saddle and spewed until his stomach was empty. Rand sought the void, but calmness was little help against the burning bile that kept creeping up his throat. Empty or not, Mat heaved again a mile later, bringing up nothing, and yet again after that. Egwene looked as if she wanted to be sick, too, swallowing constantly, and Nynaeve's face was a white mask of determination, her jaw set and her eyes fixed on Moiraine's back. The Wisdom would not admit to feeling ill unless the Aes Sedai did, first, but Rand did not think she would have to wait long. Moiraine's eyes were tight, and her lips pale.

dɪspaɪt ðə hiɾ ən dæmp, lɔɪəl ɹæpt ə skɑɹf ɝaʊn ɪz noʊz ən maʊθ. wən i mɛt ɹændz ɡeɪz, ði oʊɡiɝz aʊtʃɹeɪdʒ ən dɪsɡʌst wɝ pleɪn ɪn ɪz aɪz. "aɪ hæd hɝd - " hi bɪɡæn, hɪz vɔɪs mʌfəl baɪ ðə wʊl, ðən stɑp tə klɪɹ ɪz θɹoʊt wɪð ə ɡɹɪmɑs. "fɔ! ɪt teɪsts laɪk. . . . fɔ! aɪ hæd hɝɾ ən ɹɛɾ əbaʊt ðə blaɪt, bʌt nʌθɪŋ kəd dɪskɹaɪb. . . ." hɪz dʒɛstʃɝ sʌmhaʊ tʊk ɪn ðə smɛl əz wɛl əz ði aɪ-sɪkənɪŋ ɡɹoʊθ. "ðæɾ ivən ðə dɑɹk wʌn ʃəd də ðɪs tə tʃɹiz! fɔ!"

Despite the heat and damp, Loial wrapped a scarf around his nose and mouth. When he met Rand's gaze, the Ogier's outrage and disgust were plain in his eyes. "I had heard - " he began, his voice muffled by the wool, then stopped to clear his throat with a grimace. "Faugh! It tastes like. . . . Faugh! I had heard and read about the Blight, but nothing could describe. . . ." His gesture somehow took in the smell as well as the eye-sickening growth. "That even the Dark One should do this to trees! Faugh!"

ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz nɑɾ əfɛktəd, ʌv kɔɹs, ət lis nɑt ðət ɹænd kəd si, bʌt tə hɪz sɝpɹaɪz niðɝ wɑz pɛɹɪn. əɹ ɹæðɝ, nɑɾ ɪn ðə weɪ ðə ɹɛst ə ðɛm wɝ. ðə bɪɡ juθ ɡlɛɹɾ ət ði ɑbsin fɔɹəs θɹu wɪtʃ ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ əz i maɪɾ əv əɾ ən ɛnəmi, əɹ ðə bænɝ ʌv ən ɛnəmi. hi kɝɛs ði æks əɾ ɪz bɛlt əz ɪf ʌnəwɛɹ ʌv wʌɾ i wɑz duɪŋ, ən mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf, hæf ɡɹoʊlɪŋ ɪn ə weɪ ðət meɪd ðə hɛɹ ɑn ɹændz nɛk stɝ. ivən ɪn fʊl sʌnlaɪɾ ɪz aɪz ɡloʊd, ɡoʊldən ən fɪɹs.

The Warder was not affected, of course, at least not that Rand could see, but to his surprise neither was Perrin. Or rather, not in the way the rest of them were. The big youth glared at the obscene forest through which they rode as he might have at an enemy, or the banner of an enemy. He caressed the axe at his belt as if unaware of what he was doing, and muttered to himself, half growling in a way that made the hair on Rand's neck stir. Even in full sunlight his eyes glowed, golden and fierce.

ðə hit dɪd nɑɾ əbeɪɾ əz ðə blʌɾi sʌn fɛl təwɔɹd ðə hɝaɪzən. ɪn ðə dɪstəns tə ðə nɔɹθ, maʊntənz ɹoʊz, haɪɝ ðən ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst, blæk əɡɛns ðə skaɪ. səmtaɪmz ən aɪsi wɪn fɹəm ðə ʃɑɹp piks ɡʌstɪd fɑɹ ɪnʌf tə ɹitʃ ðɛm. ðə tɔɹəd hjumɪɾəti litʃt əweɪ moʊst ə ðə maʊntən tʃɪl, bʌt wʌt ɹɪmeɪnd wɑz wɪntɝ-koʊl kəmpɛɹd tə ðə swɛltɝ ɪt ɹipleɪst, ɪf dʒʌs fəɹ ə moʊmənt. ðə swɛɾ ɑn ɹændz feɪs sim tə flæʃ ɪndə bidz ʌv aɪs; əz ðə wɪn daɪd, ðə bidz mɛltəɾ əɡɛn, ɹʌnɪŋ æŋɡɹi laɪnz daʊn ɪz tʃiks, ən ðə θɪk hit ɹɪtɝn hɑɹɾɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ baɪ kəmpɛɹəsən. fəɹ ði ɪnstən ðə wɪn sɝaʊndəd ðɛm, ɪt swɛpt əweɪ ðə fɛɾɝ, jɛɾ i wʊɾə dʌn wɪθaʊt ðæt, tu, ɪf i kəd hæv. ðə koʊld wɑz ðə tʃɪl ə ðə ɡɹeɪv, ən ɪt kæɹid ðə dʌsti mʌst ʌv ən oʊl tum nuli oʊpənd.

The heat did not abate as the bloody sun fell toward the horizon. In the distance to the north, mountains rose, higher than the Mountains of Mist, black against the sky. Sometimes an icy wind from the sharp peaks gusted far enough to reach them. The torrid humidity leached away most of the mountain chill, but what remained was winter-cold compared to the swelter it replaced, if just for a moment. The sweat on Rand's face seemed to flash into beads of ice; as the wind died, the beads melted again, running angry lines down his cheeks, and the thick heat returned harder than before by comparison. For the instant the wind surrounded them, it swept away the fetor, yet he would have done without that, too, if he could have. The cold was the chill of the grave, and it carried the dusty must of an old tomb newly opened.

"wi kænɑt ɹitʃ ðə maʊntənz baɪ naɪtfɔl," læn sɛd, "æn ɪts deɪnʒɝəs tə muv ət naɪt, ivən fəɹ ə wɔɹɾɝ əloʊn."

"We cannot reach the mountains by nightfall," Lan said, "and it is dangerous to move at night, even for a Warder alone."

"ðɛɹ ɪz ə pleɪs nɑt fɑɹ ɔf," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɪt wɪl bi ə ɡʊɾ oʊmən fəɹ əs tə kæmp ðɛɹ."

"There is a place not far off," Moiraine said. "It will be a good omen for us to camp there."

ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɡeɪv əɹ ə flæt lʊk, ðən nɑɾəd ɹɪlʌktənli. "jɛs. wi mʌs kæmp sʌmwɛɹ. ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl bi ðɛɹ."

The Warder gave her a flat look, then nodded reluctantly. "Yes. We must camp somewhere. It might as well be there."

"ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld wɑz bɪɑn ðə haɪ pæsəz wən aɪ faʊn ɪt," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "bɛɾɝ tə kɹɔs ðə maʊntənz ə dum ɪn fʊl deɪlaɪt, ət nun, wən ðə dɑɹk wʌnz paʊɝz ɪn ðɪs wɝld ɑɹ wikəst."

"The Eye of the World was beyond the high passes when I found it," Moiraine said. "Better to cross the Mountains of Dhoom in full daylight, at noon, when the Dark One's powers in this world are weakest."

"ju tɔk əz ɪf ði aɪ ɪzən ɔlweɪz ɪn ðə seɪm pleɪs." ɛɡwin spoʊk tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz lɔɪəl u ænsɝd.

"You talk as if the Eye isn't always in the same place." Egwene spoke to the Aes Sedai, but it was Loial who answered.

"noʊ tu əmʌŋ ði oʊɡiɝ əv faʊn ɪɾ ɪn ɪɡzækli ðə seɪm pleɪs. ðə ɡɹin mæn simz tə bi faʊnd wɛɹ hiz niɾəd. bʌɾ ɪts ɔlweɪz bɪn bɪɑn ðə haɪ pæsəz. ðeɪ ɑɹ tʃɹɛtʃɝəs, ðə haɪ pæsəz, ən hɔntəd baɪ kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

"No two among the Ogier have found it in exactly the same place. The Green Man seems to be found where he is needed. But it has always been beyond the high passes. They are treacherous, the high passes, and haunted by creatures of the Dark One."

"wi mʌst ɹitʃ ðə pæsəz bɪfɔɹ wi nid wɝi əbaʊt ðɛm," læn sɛd. "təmɑɹoʊ wɪl bi tʃɹuli ɪndə ðə blaɪt."

"We must reach the passes before we need worry about them," Lan said. "Tomorrow we will be truly into the Blight."

ɹænd lʊkt ət ðə fɔɹəst ɝaʊn hɪm, ɛvɹi lif ən flaʊɝ dɪzizd, ɛvɹi kɹipɝ dəkeɪɪŋ əz ɪt ɡɹu, ən i kəd nɑt ɹipɹɛs ə ʃʌɾɝ. ɪf ðɪs ɪzən tʃɹuli ðə blaɪt, wʌɾ ɪz?

Rand looked at the forest around him, every leaf and flower diseased, every creeper decaying as it grew, and he could not repress a shudder. If this isn't truly the Blight, what is?

læn tɝn əm wɛstwɝd, əɾ ən æŋɡəl tə ðə sɪŋkɪŋ sʌn. ðə wɔɹɾɝ meɪnteɪn ðə peɪs i hæd sɛt bɪfɔɹ, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ɹɪlʌktəns ɪn ðə sɛɾ ə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz.

Lan turned them westward, at an angle to the sinking sun. The Warder maintained the pace he had set before, but there was reluctance in the set of his shoulders.

ðə sʌn wɑz ə sʌlən ɹɛd bɔl dʒʌs tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹitɑps wən ðeɪ kɹɛstəɾ ə hɪl ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ dʒɹu ɹeɪn. bɪɑn əm tə ðə wɛs leɪ ə nɛtwɝk ə leɪks, ðə wɔɾɝz ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ dɑɹkli ɪn ðə slæntɪŋ sʌnlaɪt, laɪk bidz ə ɹændəm saɪz ɑn ə nɛkləs ə mɛni stʃɹɪŋz. ɪn ðə dɪstəns, sɝkəl baɪ ðə leɪks, stʊd dʒæɡd-tɑp hɪlz, θɪk ɪn ðə kɹipɪŋ ʃædoʊz ʌv ivnɪŋ. fəɹ wʌn bɹif ɪnstən ðə sʌnz ɹeɪz kɑt ðə ʃæɾɝd tɑps, ən ɹændz bɹɛθ stɪld. nɑt hɪlz. ðə bɹoʊkən ɹɛmnəns ə sɛvən taʊɝz. hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf ɛniwʌn ɛls hæd sin ɪt; ðə saɪt wɑz ɡɔn əz kwɪkli əz ɪt keɪm. ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz dɪsmaʊntɪŋ, hɪz feɪs əz lækɪŋ ɪn ɪmoʊʃən əz ə stoʊn.

The sun was a sullen red ball just touching the treetops when they crested a hill and the Warder drew rein. Beyond them to the west lay a network of lakes, the waters glittering darkly in the slanting sunlight, like beads of random size on a necklace of many strings. In the distance, circled by the lakes, stood jagged-topped hills, thick in the creeping shadows of evening. For one brief instant the sun's rays caught the shattered tops, and Rand's breath stilled. Not hills. The broken remnants of seven towers. He was not sure if anyone else had seen it; the sight was gone as quickly as it came. The Warder was dismounting, his face as lacking in emotion as a stone.

"kʊdnt wi kæmp daʊn baɪ ðə leɪks?" nɪneɪiv æskt, pæɾɪŋ əɹ feɪs wɪð əɹ kɝtʃəf. "ɪt mʌs bi kulɝ daʊn baɪ ðə wɔɾɝ."

"Couldn't we camp down by the lakes?" Nynaeve asked, patting her face with her kerchief. "It must be cooler down by the water."

"laɪt," mæt sɛd, "aɪd dʒʌs laɪk tə stɪk maɪ hɛɾ ɪn wʌn ə ðɛm. aɪ maɪt nɛvɝ teɪk ɪɾ aʊt."

"Light," Mat said, "I'd just like to stick my head in one of them. I might never take it out."

dʒʌs ðən sʌmθɪŋ ɹɔɪl ðə wɔɾɝz ə ðə nɪɹəs leɪk, ðə dɑɹk wɔɾɝ fɑsfɝɛsɪŋ əz ə hjudʒ bɑɾi ɹoʊl bɪniθ ðə sɝfəs. lɛŋθ ɑn mæn-θɪk lɛŋθ sɛn ɹɪpəlz spɹɛɾɪŋ, ɹoʊlɪŋ ɑn ən ɑn əntɪl ət læst ə teɪl ɹoʊz, weɪvɪŋ ə pɔɪn laɪk ə wɑsps stɪŋɝ fəɹ ən ɪnstən ɪn ðə twaɪlaɪt, ət lis faɪv spænz ɪndə ði ɛɹ. ɔl əlɔŋ ðət lɛŋθ fæt tɛntəkəlz ɹɪθ laɪk mɑnstʃɹəs wɝmz, əz mɛni əz ə sɛntɪpidz lɛɡz. ɪt slɪd sloʊli bɪniθ ðə sɝfəs ən wɑz ɡɔn, oʊnli ðə feɪɾɪŋ ɹɪpəlz tə seɪ ɪt hæɾ ɛvɝ bɪn.

Just then something roiled the waters of the nearest lake, the dark water phosphorescing as a huge body rolled beneath the surface. Length on man-thick length sent ripples spreading, rolling on and on until at last a tail rose, waving a point like a wasp's stinger for an instant in the twilight, at least five spans into the air. All along that length fat tentacles writhed like monstrous worms, as many as a centipede's legs. It slid slowly beneath the surface and was gone, only the fading ripples to say it had ever been.

ɹænd kloʊzd ɪz maʊθ ən ɪkstʃeɪnʒd ə lʊk wɪð pɛɹɪn. pɛɹɪnz jɛloʊ aɪz wɝ əz dɪsbɪlivɪŋ əz i nu hɪz oʊn mʌs bi. nʌθɪŋ ðət bɪɡ kəd lɪv ɪn ə leɪk ðət saɪz. ðoʊz kʊdn əv bɪn hænz ɑn ðoʊz tɛntəkəlz. ðeɪ kʊdn əv bɪn.

Rand closed his mouth and exchanged a look with Perrin. Perrin's yellow eyes were as disbelieving as he knew his own must be. Nothing that big could live in a lake that size. Those couldn't have been hands on those tentacles. They couldn't have been.

"ɑn sɛkən θɔt," mæt sɛd feɪnli, "aɪ laɪk ɪt ɹaɪt hɪɹ dʒʌs faɪn."

"On second thought," Mat said faintly, "I like it right here just fine."

"aɪ wɪl sɛt ɡɑɹɾɪŋ wɔɹdz ɝaʊn ðɪs hɪl," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dɪsmaʊntɪd fɹəm ɑldib. "ə tʃɹu bæɹiɝ wəd dʒɹɔ ði ətɛnʃən wi də nɑt wɑn laɪk flaɪz tə hʌni, bʌɾ ɪf ɛni kɹieɪʃən ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ðət sɝvz ðə ʃædoʊ kʌmz wɪðɪn ə maɪl ʌv ʌs, əl noʊ."

"I will set guarding wards around this hill," Moiraine said. She had already dismounted from Aldieb. "A true barrier would draw the attention we do not want like flies to honey, but if any creation of the Dark One or anything that serves the Shadow comes within a mile of us, I will know."

"aɪd bi hæpiɝ wɪð ðə bæɹiɝ," mæt sɛɾ əz ɪz buts tʌtʃt ðə ɡɹaʊnd, "dʒʌst əz lɔŋ əz ɪt kɛp ðæt, ðət . . . θɪŋ ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪd."

"I'd be happier with the barrier," Mat said as his boots touched the ground, "just as long as it kept that, that . . . thing on the other side."

"oʊ, də bi kwaɪət, mæt," ɛɡwin sɛd kɝtli, ət ðə seɪm taɪm əz nɪneɪiv spoʊk. "æn əv əm weɪɾɪŋ fəɹ əs wən wi liv ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ? jə ɑɹ ə ful, meɪtʃɹim kɔθən." mæt ɡlaʊɝɾ ət ðə tu wɪmən əz ðeɪ klaɪm daʊn, bʌɾ i kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt.

"Oh, do be quiet, Mat," Egwene said curtly, at the same time as Nynaeve spoke. "And have them waiting for us when we leave in the morning? You are a fool, Matrim Cauthon." Mat glowered at the two women as they climbed down, but he kept his mouth shut.

əz i tʊk bɛləz ɹeɪnz, ɹænd ʃɛɹɾ ə ɡɹɪn wɪð pɛɹɪn. fəɹ ə moʊmən ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊs laɪk biɪŋ hoʊm, hævɪŋ mæt seɪɪŋ wʌɾ i ʃəd nɑɾ ət ðə wɝs pɑsəbəl taɪm. ðən ðə smaɪl feɪɾəd fɹəm pɛɹɪnz feɪs; ɪn ðə twaɪlaɪɾ ɪz aɪz dɪd ɡloʊ, əz ɪf ðeɪ hæɾ ə jɛloʊ laɪt bɪhaɪn ðɛm. ɹændz ɡɹɪn slɪpt əweɪ, tu. ɪɾ ɪzən laɪk hoʊm əɾ ɔl.

As he took Bela's reins, Rand shared a grin with Perrin. For a moment it was almost like being home, having Mat saying what he should not at the worst possible time. Then the smile faded from Perrin's face; in the twilight his eyes did glow, as if they had a yellow light behind them. Rand's grin slipped away, too. It isn't like home at all.

ɹænd ən mæt ən pɛɹɪn hɛlp læn ənsæɾəl ən hɑbəl ðə hɔɹsəz waɪl ði ʌðɝz bɪɡæn sɛɾɪŋ ʌp ðə kæmp. lɔɪəl mʌɾɝd tə hɪmsɛlf əz i sɛɾ ʌp ðə wɔɹɾɝz taɪni stoʊv, bʌɾ ɪz θɪk fɪŋɡɝz muv dɛfli. ɛɡwin wɑz hʌmɪŋ əz ʃi fɪl ðə ti kɛɾəl fɹəm ə bʌlʒɪŋ wɔɾɝbæɡ. ɹænd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wʌndɝd waɪ ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæɾ ɪnsɪstəɾ ɑn bɹɪŋɪŋ soʊ mɛni fʊl wɔɾɝskɪnz.

Rand and Mat and Perrin helped Lan unsaddle and hobble the horses while the others began setting up the camp. Loial muttered to himself as he set up the Warder's tiny stove, but his thick fingers moved deftly. Egwene was humming as she filled the tea kettle from a bulging waterbag. Rand no longer wondered why the Warder had insisted on bringing so many full waterskins.

sɛɾɪŋ ðə beɪz sæɾəl ɪn laɪn wɪð ði ʌðɝz, hi ənfæsən ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl fɹəm ðə kæntəl, tɝnd, ən stɑpt wɪð ə tɪŋɡəl ə fɪɹ. ði oʊɡiɝ ən ðə wɪmən wɝ ɡɔn. soʊ wɑz ðə stoʊv ən ɔl ðə wɪkɝ pænɪɝz fɹəm ðə pæk hɔɹs. ðə hɪltɑp wɑz ɛmpti ɪksɛp fəɹ ivnɪŋ ʃædoʊz.

Setting the bay's saddle in line with the others, he unfastened his saddlebags and blanketroll from the cantle, turned, and stopped with a tingle of fear. The Ogier and the women were gone. So was the stove and all the wicker panniers from the pack horse. The hilltop was empty except for evening shadows.

wɪð ə nʌm hæn i fʌmbəl fəɹ ɪz sɔɹd, dɪmli hɪɹɪŋ mæt kɝs. pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɪz æks aʊt, hɪz ʃæɡi hɛd swɪvəlɪŋ tə faɪn ðə deɪnʒɝ.

With a numb hand he fumbled for his sword, dimly hearing Mat curse. Perrin had his axe out, his shaggy head swiveling to find the danger.

"ʃifɝɾɝz," læn mʌɾɝd. ʌnkənsɝnədli ðə wɔɹɾɝ stʃɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə hɪltɑp, ən əɾ ɪz θɝd stɛp, hi vænɪʃt.

"Sheepherders," Lan muttered. Unconcernedly the Warder strode across the hilltop, and at his third step, he vanished.

ɹænd ɪkstʃeɪnʒd waɪd-aɪd lʊks wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn, ən ðən ðeɪ wɝ ɔl dɑɹɾɪŋ fəɹ wɛɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd dɪsəpɪɹd. əbɹʌpli ɹænd skɪɾəd tə ə hɔlt, teɪkɪŋ ənʌðɝ stɛp wən mæt ɹæn ɪndə hɪz bæk. ɛɡwin lʊkt ʌp fɹəm sɛɾɪŋ ðə kɛɾəl ətɑp ðə taɪni stoʊv. nɪneɪiv wɑz kloʊzɪŋ ðə mæntəl ɑn ə sɛkən lɪt læntɝn. ðeɪ wɝ ɔl ðɛɹ, mɔɪɹeɪn sɪɾɪŋ kɹɔs-lɛɡəd, læn laʊnʒɪŋ ɑn ən ɛlboʊ, lɔɪəl teɪkɪŋ ə bʊk aʊɾ ə hɪz pæk.

Rand exchanged wide-eyed looks with Mat and Perrin, and then they were all darting for where the Warder had disappeared. Abruptly Rand skidded to a halt, taking another step when Mat ran into his back. Egwene looked up from setting the kettle atop the tiny stove. Nynaeve was closing the mantle on a second lit lantern. They were all there, Moiraine sitting cross-legged, Lan lounging on an elbow, Loial taking a book out of his pack.

kɔʃəsli ɹænd lʊk bɪhaɪn hɪm. ðə hɪlsaɪd wɑz ðəɹ əz ɪt hæd bɪn, ðə ʃæɾoʊd tʃɹiz, ðə leɪks bɪɑn sɪŋkɪŋ ɪndə dɑɹknəs. hi wɑz əfɹeɪd tə stɛp bæk, əfɹeɪd ðeɪ wəɾ ɔl dɪsəpɪɹ əɡɛn ən pɝhæps ðɪs taɪm i wəd nɑt bi eɪbəl tə faɪn ðɛm. ɛdʒɪŋ kɛɹfəli ɝaʊn hɪm, pɛɹɪn lɛɾ aʊɾ ə lɔŋ bɹɛθ.

Cautiously Rand looked behind him. The hillside was there as it had been, the shadowed trees, the lakes beyond sinking into darkness. He was afraid to step back, afraid they would all disappear again and perhaps this time he would not be able to find them. Edging carefully around him, Perrin let out a long breath.

mɔɪɹeɪn noʊɾəst ðə θɹi ʌv əm stændɪŋ ðɛɹ, ɡeɪpɪŋ. pɛɹɪn lʊkt əbæʃt, ən slɪpt ɪz æks bæk ɪndə ðə hɛvi bɛlt lup əz ɪf i θɔt noʊ wʌn maɪt noʊɾəs. ə smaɪl tʌtʃt əɹ lɪps. "ɪɾ ɪz ə sɪmpəl θɪŋ," ʃi sɛd, "ə bɛndɪŋ, soʊ ɛni aɪ lʊkɪŋ əɾ əs siz ɝaʊn ʌs, ɪnstɛd. wi kænɑɾ əv ði aɪz ðət wɪl bi aʊt ðəɹ siɪŋ əɹ laɪts tənaɪt, ən ðə blaɪɾ ɪz noʊ pleɪs tə bi ɪn ðə dɑɹk."

Moiraine noticed the three of them standing there, gaping. Perrin looked abashed, and slipped his axe back into the heavy belt loop as if he thought no one might notice. A smile touched her lips. "It is a simple thing," she said, "a bending, so any eye looking at us sees around us, instead. We cannot have the eyes that will be out there seeing our lights tonight, and the Blight is no place to be in the dark."

"mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛz aɪ maɪt bi eɪbəl tə də ɪt." ɛɡwinz aɪz wɝ bɹaɪt. "ʃi sɛz aɪ kən hændəl ɪnʌf ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɹaɪt naʊ."

"Moiraine Sedai says I might be able to do it." Egwene's eyes were bright. "She says I can handle enough of the One Power right now."

"nɑt wɪθaʊt tʃɹeɪnɪŋ, tʃaɪld," mɔɪɹeɪn kɑʃənd. "ðə sɪmpləs mæɾɝ kənsɝnɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ kən bi deɪnʒɝəs tə ði əntʃɹeɪnd, ən tə ðoʊz ɝaʊn ðɛm." pɛɹɪn snɔɹɾɪd, ən ɛɡwin lʊk soʊ ənkʌmftəɹbəl ðət ɹænd wʌndɝɾ ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi bɪn tʃɹaɪɪŋ əɹ əbɪləɾiz.

"Not without training, child," Moiraine cautioned. "The simplest matter concerning the One Power can be dangerous to the untrained, and to those around them." Perrin snorted, and Egwene looked so uncomfortable that Rand wondered if she had already been trying her abilities.

nɪneɪiv sɛt daʊn ðə læntɝn. təɡɛðɝ wɪð ðə taɪni fleɪm ə ðə stoʊv, ðə pɛɹ ə læntɝnz ɡeɪv ə dʒɛnɝəs laɪt. "wɛn jə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɛɡwin," ʃi sɛd kɛɹfəli, "pɝhæps əl ɡoʊ wɪð ju." ðə lʊk ʃi ɡeɪv mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz stʃɹeɪnʒli dɪfɛnsɪv. "ɪt wɪl də hɝ ɡʊd tə si ə fəmɪljɝ feɪs əmʌŋ stʃɹeɪnʒɝz. ʃɪl nid sʌmwʌn tə ædvaɪz əɹ bɪsaɪdz ɛɛs sədaɪ."

Nynaeve set down the lantern. Together with the tiny flame of the stove, the pair of lanterns gave a generous light. "When you go to Tar Valon, Egwene," she said carefully, "perhaps I'll go with you." The look she gave Moiraine was strangely defensive. "It will do her good to see a familiar face among strangers. She'll need someone to advise her besides Aes Sedai."

"pɝhæps ðət wəd bi fəɹ ðə bɛst, wɪzdəm," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɪmpli.

"Perhaps that would be for the best, Wisdom," Moiraine said simply.

ɛɡwin læft ən klæpt əɹ hænz. "oʊ, ðət wɪl bi wʌndɝfəl. ən ju, ɹænd. jəl kʌm, tu, woʊn ju?" hi pɔzd ɪn ði ækt ə sɪɾɪŋ əkɹɔs ðə stoʊv fɹəm hɝ, ðən sloʊli loʊɝd hɪmsɛlf. hi θɔɾ əɹ aɪz hæd nɛvɝ bɪn bɪɡɝ, əɹ bɹaɪɾɝ, əɹ mɔɹ laɪk pulz ðəɾ i kəd luz hɪmsɛlf ɪn. spɑts ə kʌlɝ əpɪɹɾ ɪn əɹ tʃiks, ən ʃi ɡeɪv ə smɔlɝ læf. "pɛɹɪn, mæt, jə tu wɪl kʌm, woʊn ju? wɪl ɔl bi təɡɛðɝ." mæt ɡeɪv ə ɡɹʌn ðət cʊɾə sɪɡnəfaɪɾ ɛniθɪŋ, ən pɛɹɪn oʊnli ʃɹʌɡd, bʌt ʃi tʊk ɪt fəɹ əsɛnt. "ju si, ɹænd. wɪl ɔl bi təɡɛðɝ."

Egwene laughed and clapped her hands. "Oh, that will be wonderful. And you, Rand. You'll come, too, won't you?" He paused in the act of sitting across the stove from her, then slowly lowered himself. He thought her eyes had never been bigger, or brighter, or more like pools that he could lose himself in. Spots of color appeared in her cheeks, and she gave a smaller laugh. "Perrin, Mat, you two will come, won't you? We'll all be together." Mat gave a grunt that could have signified anything, and Perrin only shrugged, but she took it for assent. "You see, Rand. We'll all be together."

laɪt, bʌɾ ə mæn kəd dʒɹaʊn ɪn ðoʊz aɪz ən bi hæpi duɪŋ ɪt. ɪmbɛɹəst, hi klɪɹɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. "du ðeɪv ʃip ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn? ðæts ɔl aɪ noʊ, hɝɾɪŋ ʃip ən ɡɹoʊɪŋ təbæk."

Light, but a man could drown in those eyes and be happy doing it. Embarrassed, he cleared his throat. "Do they have sheep in Tar Valon? That's all I know, herding sheep and growing tabac."

"aɪ bɪliv," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, "ðæɾ aɪ kən faɪn sʌmθɪŋ fəɹ jə tə də ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn. fəɹ ɔl ə ju. nɑt hɝɾɪŋ ʃip, pɝhæps, bʌt sʌmθɪŋ jəl faɪn ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ."

"I believe," Moiraine said, "that I can find something for you to do in Tar Valon. For all of you. Not herding sheep, perhaps, but something you will find interesting."

"ðɛɹ," ɛɡwin sɛɾ əz ɪf ɪt wɝ sɛɾəld. "aɪ noʊ. əl meɪk jə maɪ wɔɹɾɝ, wən ɪm ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. jə wəd laɪk biɪŋ ə wɔɹɾɝ, wʊdn ju? maɪ wɔɹɾɝ?" ʃi saʊndəd ʃʊɹ, bʌɾ i sɔ ðə kwɛstʃən ɪn əɹ aɪz. ʃi wɑntəɾ ən ænsɝ, niɾəd ɪt.

"There," Egwene said as if it were settled. "I know. I will make you my Warder, when I'm an Aes Sedai. You would like being a Warder, wouldn't you? My Warder?" She sounded sure, but he saw the question in her eyes. She wanted an answer, needed it.

"aɪd laɪk biɪŋ jəɹ wɔɹɾɝ," hi sɛd. ʃiz nɑt fəɹ ju, nɔɹ jə fəɹ hɝ. waɪ dɪd mɪn əv tə tɛl mi ðæt?

"I'd like being your Warder," he said. She's not for you, nor you for her. Why did Min have to tell me that?

dɑɹknəs keɪm daʊn hɛvəli, ən ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz taɪɝd. lɔɪəl wɑz ðə fɝs tə ɹoʊl oʊvɝ ən ɹɛɾi hɪmsɛlf fəɹ slip, bʌɾ ʌðɝz fɑloʊd sun æftɝ. noʊ wʌn juz ðɛɹ blæŋkəts, ɪksɛp fəɹ ə pɪloʊ. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd pʊt sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ði ɔɪl ə ðə læmps ðət dɪspɛl ðə stɛntʃ ə ðə blaɪt fɹəm ðə hɪltɑp, bʌt nʌθɪŋ dɪmɪnɪʃt ðə hit. ðə mun ɡeɪv ə weɪvɝɪŋ, wɔɾɝi laɪt, bʌt ðə sʌn maɪɾ əv bɪn əɾ ɪts zinəθ fəɹ ɔl ðə kul ðə naɪt hæd.

Darkness came down heavily, and everyone was tired. Loial was the first to roll over and ready himself for sleep, but others followed soon after. No one used their blankets, except for a pillow. Moiraine had put something in the oil of the lamps that dispelled the stench of the Blight from the hilltop, but nothing diminished the heat. The moon gave a wavering, watery light, but the sun might have been at its zenith for all the cool the night had.

ɹænd faʊn slip ɪmpɑsəbəl, ivən wɪð ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stʃɹɛtʃt aʊt nɑɾ ə spæn əweɪ tə ʃild ɪz dʒɹimz. ɪt wɑz ðə θɪk ɛɹ ðət kɛpt ɪm əweɪk. lɔɪəlz sɑf snɔɹz wɝ ə ɹʌmbəl ðət meɪd pɛɹɪnz sim nɑnəɡzɪstənt, bʌt ðeɪ dɪd nɑt stɑp wɪɹinəs fɹəm kleɪmɪŋ ði ʌðɝz. ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz stɪl əweɪk, siɾəd nɑt fɑɹ fɹəm ɪm wɪð ɪz sɔɹɾ əkɹɔs ɪz niz, wɑtʃɪŋ ðə naɪt. tə ɹændz sɝpɹaɪz, soʊ wɑz nɪneɪiv.

Rand found sleep impossible, even with the Aes Sedai stretched out not a span away to shield his dreams. It was the thick air that kept him awake. Loial's soft snores were a rumble that made Perrin's seem nonexistent, but they did not stop weariness from claiming the others. The Warder was still awake, seated not far from him with his sword across his knees, watching the night. To Rand's surprise, so was Nynaeve.

ðə wɪzdəm lʊkt ət læn saɪlənli fəɹ ə lɔŋ taɪm, ðən pɔɹɾ ə kʌp ə ti ən bɹɔɾ ɪt tə hɪm. wən i ɹitʃt aʊt wɪð ə mɝmɝ ə θæŋks, ʃi dɪd nɑt lɛt ɡoʊ ɹaɪɾ əweɪ. "aɪ ʃʊɾə noʊn jə wəd bi ə kɪŋ," ʃi sɛd kwaɪətli. hɝ aɪz wɝ stɛɾi ɑn ðə wɔɹɾɝz feɪs, bʌɾ əɹ vɔɪs tʃɹɛmbəl slaɪtli.

The Wisdom looked at Lan silently for a long time, then poured a cup of tea and brought it to him. When he reached out with a murmur of thanks, she did not let go right away. "I should have known you would be a king," she said quietly. Her eyes were steady on the Warder's face, but her voice trembled slightly.

læn lʊk bæk əɾ əɹ dʒʌst əz ɪntɛnli. ɪt sim tə ɹænd ðət ðə wɔɹɾɝz feɪs æktʃəli  sɔfənd. "aɪ æm nɑɾ ə kɪŋ, nɪneɪiv. dʒʌst ə mæn. ə mæn wɪθaʊɾ əz mʌtʃ tə hɪz neɪm əz ivən ðə minəs fɑɹmɝz kɹɔft."

Lan looked back at her just as intently. It seemed to Rand that the Warder's face actually softened. "I am not a king, Nynaeve. Just a man. A man without as much to his name as even the meanest farmer's croft."

nɪneɪivz vɔɪs stɛɾid. "sʌm wɪmən doʊn æsk fəɹ lænd, əɹ ɡoʊld. dʒʌs ðə mæn."

Nynaeve's voice steadied. "Some women don't ask for land, or gold. Just the man."

"æn ðə mæn u wəɾ æsk əɹ tə æksɛp soʊ lɪɾəl wəd nɑt bi wɝði ʌv hɝ. jə ɑɹ ə ɹɪmɑɹkəbəl wʊmən, əz bjuɾəfəl əz ðə sʌnɹaɪz, əz fɪɹs əz ə wɔɹiɝ. jə ɑɹ ə laɪoʊnəs, wɪzdəm."

"And the man who would ask her to accept so little would not be worthy of her. You are a remarkable woman, as beautiful as the sunrise, as fierce as a warrior. You are a lioness, Wisdom."

"eɪ wɪzdəm sɛldəm wɛdz." ʃi pɔz tə teɪk ə dip bɹɛθ, əz ɪf stilɪŋ hɝsɛlf. "bʌɾ ɪf aɪ ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɪt meɪ bi ðəɾ əl bi sʌmθɪŋ ʌðɝ ðən ə wɪzdəm."

"A Wisdom seldom weds." She paused to take a deep breath, as if steeling herself. "But if I go to Tar Valon, it may be that I will be something other than a Wisdom."

"ɛɛs sədaɪ mɛɹi əz sɛldəm əz wɪsdəmz. fju mɛn kən lɪv wɪð soʊ mʌtʃ paʊɝ ɪn ə waɪf, dɪmɪŋ əm baɪ hɝ ɹeɪdʒjəns wɛðɝ ʃi wɪʃɪz tə əɹ nɑt."

"Aes Sedai marry as seldom as Wisdoms. Few men can live with so much power in a wife, dimming them by her radiance whether she wishes to or not."

"sʌm mɛn ɑɹ stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf. aɪ noʊ wʌn sʌtʃ." ɪf ðəɹ cʊɾə bɪn ɛni daʊt, hɝ lʊk lɛf nʌn əz tə hum ʃi mɛnt.

"Some men are strong enough. I know one such." If there could have been any doubt, her look left none as to whom she meant.

"ɔl aɪ hæv ɪz ə sɔɹd, ən ə wɔɹ wʌn kænɑt wɪn, bʌt kən nɛvɝ stɑp faɪɾɪŋ."

"All I have is a sword, and a war I cannot win, but can never stop fighting."

"aɪv toʊl jə aɪ kɛɹ nʌθɪŋ fəɹ ðæt. laɪt, juv meɪd mi seɪ mɔɹ ðən ɪz pɹɑpɝ ɔlɹɛɾi. wɪl jə ʃeɪm mi tə ðə pɔɪn ʌv æskɪŋ ju?"

"I've told you I care nothing for that. Light, you've made me say more than is proper already. Will you shame me to the point of asking you?"

"aɪ wɪl nɛvɝ ʃeɪm ju." ðə dʒɛntəl toʊn, laɪk ə kɝɛs, saʊndəɾ ɑd tə ɹændz ɪɹz ɪn ðə wɔɹɾɝz vɔɪs, bʌɾ ɪt meɪd nɪneɪivz aɪz bɹaɪɾən. "aɪ wɪl heɪt ðə mæn jə tʃuz kəz hiz nɑt mi, ən lʌv ɪm ɪf i meɪks jə smaɪl. noʊ wʊmən dɪzɝvz ðə ʃʊɹ nɑlədʒ ʌv wɪɾoʊz blæk əz əɹ bɹɪɾɪpɹaɪs, jə list ʌv ɔl." hi sɛt ði əntʌtʃt kʌp ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ən ɹoʊz. "aɪ mʌs tʃɛk ðə hɔɹsəz."

"I will never shame you." The gentle tone, like a caress, sounded odd to Rand's ears in the Warder's voice, but it made Nynaeve's eyes brighten. "I will hate the man you choose because he is not me, and love him if he makes you smile. No woman deserves the sure knowledge of widow's black as her brideprice, you least of all." He set the untouched cup on the ground and rose. "I must check the horses."

nɪneɪiv ɹɪmeɪn ðɛɹ, nilɪŋ, æftɝ i hæd ɡɔn.

Nynaeve remained there, kneeling, after he had gone.

slip əɹ noʊ, ɹænd kloʊzd ɪz aɪz. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ðə wɪzdəm wəd laɪk ɪɾ ɪf i wɑtʃt əɹ kɹaɪ.

Sleep or no, Rand closed his eyes. He did not think the Wisdom would like it if he watched her cry.


tʃæptɝ fɔɹɾinaɪn


CHAPTER 49

ðə dɑɹk wʌn stɝz


The Dark One Stirs

dɔn woʊk ɹænd wɪð ə stɑɹt, ðə sʌlən sʌn pɹɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪlɪdz əz ɪt pikt ɹɪlʌktənli oʊvɝ ðə tʃɹitɑps ə ðə blaɪt. ivən soʊ ɝli, hit kʌvɝd ðə spɔɪld lænz ɪn ə hɛvi blæŋkət. hi leɪ ɑn ɪz bæk wɪð ɪz hɛd pɪloʊɾ ɑn ɪz blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə skaɪ. ɪt wɑz stɪl blu, ðə skaɪ. ivən hɪɹ, ðæt, ət list, wɑz əntʌtʃt.

Dawn woke Rand with a start, the sullen sun pricking his eyelids as it peeked reluctantly over the treetops of the Blight. Even so early, heat covered the spoiled lands in a heavy blanket. He lay on his back with his head pillowed on his blanketroll, staring at the sky. It was still blue, the sky. Even here, that, at least, was untouched.

hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i hæd slɛpt. fəɹ ə mɪnət ðə dɪm mɛmɹi ʌv ə kɑnvɝseɪʃən oʊvɝhɝd sim laɪk pɑɹɾ ə səm dʒɹim. ðən i sɔ nɪneɪivz ɹɛd-ɹɪmd aɪz; ʃi hæd nɑt slɛpt, ɑbviəsli. lænz feɪs wɑz hɑɹɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ, əz ɪf i hæd ɹɪzumd ə mæsk ən dɪd nɑɾ ɪntɛn tə lɛɾ ɪt slɪp əɡɛn.

He was surprised to realize that he had slept. For a minute the dim memory of a conversation overheard seemed like part of some dream. Then he saw Nynaeve's red-rimmed eyes; she had not slept, obviously. Lan's face was harder than ever, as if he had resumed a mask and did not intend to let it slip again.

ɛɡwin wɛn oʊvɝ ən kɹaʊtʃt bɪsaɪd ðə wɪzdəm, hɝ feɪs kənsɝnd. hi kəd nɑt meɪk aʊt wʌt ðeɪ sɛd. ɛɡwin spoʊk, ən nɪneɪiv ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. ɛɡwin sɛd sʌmθɪŋ ɛls, ən ðə wɪzdəm weɪvd əɹ əweɪ dɪsmɪsɪvli. ɪnstɛɾ ʌv ɡoʊɪŋ, ɛɡwin bɛn əɹ hɛd kloʊsɝ, ən fəɹ ə fju mɪnəts ðə tu wɪmən tɔkt ivən mɔɹ sɔfli, wɪð nɪneɪiv stɪl ʃeɪkɪŋ əɹ hɛd. ðə wɪzdəm ɛndəɾ ɪt wɪð ə læf, hʌɡɪŋ ɛɡwin ænd, baɪ hɝ ɪkspɹɛʃən, meɪkɪŋ suðɪŋ tɔk. wən ɛɡwin stʊd, ðoʊ, ʃi ɡlɛɹɾ ət ðə wɔɹɾɝ. læn dɪd nɑt sim tə noʊɾəs; hi dɪd nɑt lʊk ɪn nɪneɪivz dɝɛkʃən əɾ ɔl.

Egwene went over and crouched beside the Wisdom, her face concerned. He could not make out what they said. Egwene spoke, and Nynaeve shook her head. Egwene said something else, and the Wisdom waved her away dismissively. Instead of going, Egwene bent her head closer, and for a few minutes the two women talked even more softly, with Nynaeve still shaking her head. The Wisdom ended it with a laugh, hugging Egwene and, by her expression, making soothing talk. When Egwene stood, though, she glared at the Warder. Lan did not seem to notice; he did not look in Nynaeve's direction at all.

ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, ɹænd ɡæðɝɾ ɪz θɪŋz, ən ɡeɪv ɪz hænz ən feɪs ən tiθ ə heɪsti wɑʃ wɪð ðə lɪɾəl wɔɾɝ læn əlaʊd fəɹ sətʃ θɪŋz. hi wʌndɝɾ ɪf wɪmən hæɾ ə weɪ ʌv ɹiɾɪŋ mɛnz maɪnz. ɪt wɑz ən ənsɛɾəlɪŋ θɔt. ɔl wɪmən ɑɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ. tɛlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf i wɑz lɛɾɪŋ ðə blaɪt ɡɛt tə hɪm, hi ɹɪnst aʊɾ ɪz maʊθ ən hɝid tə ɡɛt ðə beɪ sæɾəld.

Shaking his head, Rand gathered his things, and gave his hands and face and teeth a hasty wash with the little water Lan allowed for such things. He wondered if women had a way of reading men's minds. It was an unsettling thought. All women are Aes Sedai. Telling himself he was letting the Blight get to him, he rinsed out his mouth and hurried to get the bay saddled.

ɪt wɑz mɔɹ ðən ə lɪɾəl dɪskənsɝɾɪŋ, hævɪŋ ðə kæmpsaɪt dɪsəpɪɹ bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ðə hɔɹsəz, bʌt baɪ ðə taɪm ɪz sæɾəl ɡɝθ wɑz taɪɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ɑn ðə hɪl wɪŋk bæk ɪndə vju. ɛvɹiwʌn wɑz hɝiɪŋ.

It was more than a little disconcerting, having the campsite disappear before he reached the horses, but by the time his saddle girth was tight everything on the hill winked back into view. Everyone was hurrying.

ðə sɛvən taʊɝz stʊd pleɪn ɪn ðə mɔɹnɪŋ laɪt, dɪstən bɹoʊkən stʌmps, laɪk hjudʒ, ɹʌf hɪlz ðət mɪɹli hɪntəɾ ət ɡɹænduɹ ɡɔn. ðə hʌnʒɹəd leɪks wɝ ə smuð, ənɹʌfəl blu. nʌθɪŋ bɹoʊk ðə sɝfəs ðɪs mɔɹnɪŋ. wən i lʊkt ət ðə leɪks ən ðə ɹuən taʊɝz, hi kəɾ ɔlmoʊst ɪɡnɔɹ ðə sɪkli θɪŋz ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɝaʊn ðə hɪl. læn dɪd nɑt sim tə bi əvɔɪɾɪŋ lʊkɪŋ ət ðə taʊɝz, ɛni mɔɹ ðən i sim tə bi əvɔɪɾɪŋ nɪneɪiv, bʌt sʌmhaʊ hi nɛvɝ dɪɾ əz i kɑnsəntʃɹeɪɾəd ɑn ɡɛɾɪŋ əm ɹɛɾi tə ɡoʊ.

The seven towers stood plain in the morning light, distant broken stumps, like huge, rough hills that merely hinted at grandeur gone. The hundred lakes were a smooth, unruffled blue. Nothing broke the surface this morning. When he looked at the lakes and the ruined towers, he could almost ignore the sickly things growing around the hill. Lan did not seem to be avoiding looking at the towers, any more than he seemed to be avoiding Nynaeve, but somehow he never did as he concentrated on getting them ready to go.

æftɝ ðə wɪkɝ pænɪɝz wɝ fæsən ɑn ðə pæk hɔɹs, æftɝ ɛvɹi skɹæp ən smʌdʒ ən tʃɹæk wɝ ɡɔn ən ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls wɑz maʊntəd, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ stʊɾ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə hɪltɑp wɪð əɹ aɪz kloʊzd, nɑɾ ivən simɪŋ tə bɹið. nʌθɪŋ hæpən ðət ɹænd kəd si, ɪksɛp ðət nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin ʃɪvɝd dɪspaɪt ðə hiɾ ən ɹʌb ðɛɹ ɑɹmz bɹɪskli. ɛɡwinz hænz sʌɾənli fɹoʊz ɑn əɹ ɑɹmz, ən ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə wɪzdəm. bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd spik, nɪneɪiv ɔlsoʊ sist əɹ ɹʌbɪŋ ən ɡeɪv əɹ ə ʃɑɹp lʊk. ðə tu wɪmən lʊkt ət wʌn ənʌðɝ, ðən ɛɡwin nɑɾəd ən ɡɹɪnd, ən æftɝ ə moʊmənt nɪneɪiv dɪd, tu, ðoʊ hɝ smaɪl wɑz oʊnli hæfhɑɹɾɪd.

After the wicker panniers were fastened on the pack horse, after every scrap and smudge and track were gone and everyone else was mounted, the Aes Sedai stood in the middle of the hilltop with her eyes closed, not even seeming to breathe. Nothing happened that Rand could see, except that Nynaeve and Egwene shivered despite the heat and rubbed their arms briskly. Egwene's hands suddenly froze on her arms, and she opened her mouth, staring at the Wisdom. Before she could speak, Nynaeve also ceased her rubbing and gave her a sharp look. The two women looked at one another, then Egwene nodded and grinned, and after a moment Nynaeve did, too, though her smile was only halfhearted.

ɹænd skɹʌbd ɪz fɪŋɡɝz θɹu hɪz hɛɹ, ɔlɹɛɾi mɔɹ dæmp wɪð swɛt ðən wɪð ðə wɔɾɝ i hæd splæʃt ɪn ɪz feɪs. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə saɪlən ɪkstʃeɪnʒ ðəɾ i ʃəɾ ʌndɝstænd, bʌt ðət fɛðɝ-laɪt bɹʌʃ əkɹɔs ɪz maɪn vænɪʃt bɪfɔɹ i kəd ɡɹæsp ɪt.

Rand scrubbed his fingers through his hair, already more damp with sweat than with the water he had splashed in his face. He was sure there was something in the silent exchange that he should understand, but that feather-light brush across his mind vanished before he could grasp it.

"wʌɾ ɑɹ wi weɪɾɪŋ fɔɹ?" mæt dɪmændəd, ðə loʊ bæn ə hɪz skɑɹf əkɹɔs ɪz fɔɹhɛd. hi hæɾ ɪz baʊ əkɹɔs ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl wɪð ən æɹoʊ nɑkt, ən ɪz kwɪvɝ pʊld ɝaʊn ɑn ɪz bɛl fəɹ ən izi ɹitʃ.

"What are we waiting for?" Mat demanded, the low band of his scarf across his forehead. He had his bow across the pommel of his saddle with an arrow nocked, and his quiver pulled around on his belt for an easy reach.

mɔɪɹeɪn oʊpən əɹ aɪz ən stɑɹɾəd daʊn ðə hɪl. "fɔɹ mi tə ɹimuv ðə læs vɛstɪdʒ ʌv wʌɾ aɪ dɪd hɪɹ læs naɪt. ðə ɹɛzəduz wʊɾə dɪsəpeɪɾɪd ɑn ðɛɹ oʊn ɪn ə deɪ, bʌɾ əl nɑt teɪk ɛni ɹɪsk aɪ kən əvɔɪd naʊ. wəɹ tu kloʊz, ən ðə ʃædoʊ ɪz tu stʃɹɔŋ hɪɹ. læn?"

Moiraine opened her eyes and started down the hill. "For me to remove the last vestige of what I did here last night. The residues would have dissipated on their own in a day, but I will not take any risk I can avoid now. We are too close, and the Shadow is too strong here. Lan?"

ðə wɔɹɾɝ oʊnli weɪɾəd fəɹ əɹ tə sɛɾəl ɪn ɑldibz sæɾəl bɪfɔɹ i lɛɾ əm nɔɹθ, təwɔɹd ðə maʊntənz ə dum, lumɪŋ ɪn ðə nɪɹ dɪstəns. ivən ʌndɝ ðə sʌnɹaɪz ðə piks ɹoʊz blæk ən laɪfləs, laɪk dʒæɡd tiθ. ɪn ə wɔl ðeɪ stʃɹɛtʃt, ist ən wɛst əz fɑɹ əz ði aɪ kəd si.

The Warder only waited for her to settle in Aldieb's saddle before he led them north, toward the Mountains of Dhoom, looming in the near distance. Even under the sunrise the peaks rose black and lifeless, like jagged teeth. In a wall they stretched, east and west as far as the eye could see.

"wɪl wi ɹitʃ ði aɪ tədeɪ, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ?" ɛɡwin æskt.

"Will we reach the Eye today, Moiraine Sedai?" Egwene asked.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪv lɔɪəl ə saɪɾɛlɔŋ lʊk. "aɪ hoʊp ðət wi wɪl. wən aɪ faʊn ɪt bɪfɔɹ, ɪt wɑz dʒʌs ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə maʊntənz, ət ðə fʊɾ ə ðə haɪ pæsəz."

The Aes Sedai gave Loial a sidelong look. "I hope that we will. When I found it before, it was just the other side of the mountains, at the foot of the high passes."

"hi sɛz ɪt muvz," mæt sɛd, nɑɾɪŋ ət lɔɪəl. "wʌɾ ɪf ɪɾ ɪzənt wɛɹ jə ɪkspɛkt?"

"He says it moves," Mat said, nodding at Loial. "What if it isn't where you expect?"

"ðɛn wɪl kəntɪnju tə hʌn əntɪl wi də faɪn ɪt. ðə ɡɹin mæn sɛnsɪz nid, ən ðəɹ kən bi noʊ nid ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən aʊɝz. əɹ niɾ ɪz ðə hoʊp ə ðə wɝld."

"Then we will continue to hunt until we do find it. The Green Man senses need, and there can be no need greater than ours. Our need is the hope of the world."

əz ðə maʊntənz dʒɹu kloʊsɝ, soʊ dɪd ðə tʃɹu blaɪt. wɛɹ ə lif hæd bɪn spɑɾəd blæk ən mɑɾəld jɛloʊ bɪfɔɹ, naʊ foʊlɪdʒ fɛl wɛtli waɪl i wɑtʃt, bɹeɪkɪŋ əpɑɹt fɹəm ðə weɪɾ ʌv ɪts oʊn kɝʌpʃən. ðə tʃɹiz ðɛmsɛlvz wɝ tɔɹtʃɝd, kɹɪpəl θɪŋz, twɪstəd bɹæntʃəz klɔɪŋ ət ðə skaɪ əz ɪf bɛɡɪŋ mɝsi fɹəm səm paʊɝ ðət ɹəfjuz tə hɪɹ. uz slɪd laɪk pʌs fɹəm bɑɹk kɹækt ən splɪt. əz ɪf nʌθɪŋ tʃɹuli sɑləd wɑz lɛf tə ðɛm, ðə tʃɹiz sim tə tʃɹɛmbəl fɹəm ðə pæsədʒ ə ðə hɔɹsəz oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

As the mountains drew closer, so did the true Blight. Where a leaf had been spotted black and mottled yellow before, now foliage fell wetly while he watched, breaking apart from the weight of its own corruption. The trees themselves were tortured, crippled things, twisted branches clawing at the sky as if begging mercy from some power that refused to hear. Ooze slid like pus from bark cracked and split. As if nothing truly solid was left to them, the trees seemed to tremble from the passage of the horses over the ground.

"lʊk əz ɪf ðeɪ wɑnə ɡɹæb ʌs," mæt sɛd nɝvəsli. nɪneɪiv ɡeɪv ɪm ən ɪɡzæspɝeɪɾɪd, skɔɹnfəl lʊk, ən i æɾəd fɪɹsli, "wɛl, ðeɪ də lʊk ɪt."

"Look as if they want to grab us," Mat said nervously. Nynaeve gave him an exasperated, scornful look, and he added fiercely, "Well, they do look it."

"æn səm ə ðɛm də wɑn ɪt," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd. hɝ aɪz oʊvɝ əɹ ʃoʊldɝ wɝ hɑɹɾɝ ðən lænz fəɹ ən ɪnstənt. "bʌt ðeɪ wɑnt noʊ pɑɹɾ ʌv wʌɾ aɪ æm, ən maɪ pɹɛzəns pɹətɛks ju."

"And some of them do want it," the Aes Sedai said. Her eyes over her shoulder were harder than Lan's for an instant. "But they want no part of what I am, and my presence protects you."

mæt læft ənizəli, əz ɪf i θɔɾ ɪɾ ə dʒoʊk ɑn əɹ pɑɹt.

Mat laughed uneasily, as if he thought it a joke on her part.

ɹænd wɑz nɑt soʊ ʃʊɹ. ðɪs wɑz ðə blaɪt, æftɝ ɔl. bʌt tʃɹiz doʊn muv. waɪ wəɾ ə tʃɹi ɡɹæb ə mæn, ivən ɪf ɪt kʊd? wɝ ɪmædʒənɪŋ θɪŋz, ən ʃiz dʒʌs tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kip əs əlɝt.

Rand was not so sure. This was the Blight, after all. But trees don't move. Why would a tree grab a man, even if it could? We're imagining things, and she's just trying to keep us alert.

əbɹʌpli hi stɛɹɾ ɔf tə hɪz lɛft, ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst. ðət tʃɹi, nɑt twɛnti peɪsɪz əweɪ, hæd tʃɹɛmbəld, ən ɪt wɑz nʌn ə hɪz ɪmædʒəneɪʃən. hi kəd nɑt seɪ wʌt kaɪn ɪt wɑz, əɹ hæd bɪn, soʊ nɑɹld ən tɔɹmɛntɪd wɑz ɪts ʃeɪp. əz i wɑtʃt, ðə tʃɹi sʌɾənli wɪp bæk ən fɔɹθ əɡɛn, ðən bɛn daʊn, fleɪlɪŋ ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd. sʌmθɪŋ skɹimd, ʃɹɪl ən pɪɹsɪŋ. ðə tʃɹi spɹæŋ bæk stʃɹeɪt; ɪts lɪmz ɛntwaɪn ɝaʊn ə dɑɹk mæs ðət ɹɪθd ən spæɾ ən skɹimd.

Abruptly he stared off to his left, into the forest. That tree, not twenty paces away, had trembled, and it was none of his imagination. He could not say what kind it was, or had been, so gnarled and tormented was its shape. As he watched, the tree suddenly whipped back and forth again, then bent down, flailing at the ground. Something screamed, shrill and piercing. The tree sprang back straight; its limbs entwined around a dark mass that writhed and spat and screamed.

hi swɑloʊd hɑɹɾ ən tʃɹaɪd tə ɛdʒ ɹɛɾ əweɪ, bʌt tʃɹiz stʊɾ ɑn ɛvɹi saɪd, ən tʃɹɛmbəld. ðə beɪ ɹoʊld ɪz aɪz, waɪts ʃoʊɪŋ ɔl ðə weɪ ɝaʊnd. ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ə sɑləd nɑɾ ə hɔɹs flɛʃ əz ɛvɹiwʌn ɛls tʃɹaɪd tə də ðə seɪm əz hi.

He swallowed hard and tried to edge Red away, but trees stood on every side, and trembled. The bay rolled his eyes, whites showing all the way around. Rand found himself in a solid knot of horse flesh as everyone else tried to do the same as he.

"kip muvɪŋ," læn kəmændəd, dʒɹɔɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd. ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɔɹ stil-bækt ɡɔnləts naʊ, ən ɪz ɡɹeɪ-ɡɹin skeɪl tunɪk. "steɪ wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ." hi pʊl mændɑɹb ɝaʊnd, nɑt təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹi ən ɪts pɹeɪ, bʌɾ ɪn ði ʌðɝ dɝɛkʃən. wɪð ɪz kʌlɝ-ʃɪftɪŋ kloʊk, hi wɑz swɑloʊd baɪ ðə blaɪt bɪfɔɹ ðə blæk stæljən wɑz aʊɾ ə saɪt.

"Keep moving," Lan commanded, drawing his sword. The Warder wore steel-backed gauntlets now, and his gray-green scale tunic. "Stay with Moiraine Sedai." He pulled Mandarb around, not toward the tree and its prey, but in the other direction. With his color-shifting cloak, he was swallowed by the Blight before the black stallion was out of sight.

"kloʊs," mɔɪɹeɪn ɝdʒd. ʃi dɪd nɑt sloʊ hɝ waɪt mɛɹ, bʌt ʃi moʊʃən ði ʌðɝz tə hʌɾəl nɪɹɝ tə hɝ. "steɪ əz kloʊs əz jə kæn."

"Close," Moiraine urged. She did not slow her white mare, but she motioned the others to huddle nearer to her. "Stay as close as you can."

ə ɹɔɹ spɹæŋ ʌp fɹəm ðə dɝɛkʃən ðə wɔɹɾɝ hæd ɡɔn. ɪt biɾ ət ði ɛɹ, ən ðə tʃɹiz kwɪvɝd fɹəm ɪt, ən wən ɪt feɪɾəd əweɪ, ɪt sim tə ɛkoʊ stɪl. əɡɛn ðə ɹɔɹ keɪm, fɪld wɪð ɹeɪdʒ ən dɛθ.

A roar sprang up from the direction the Warder had gone. It beat at the air, and the trees quivered from it, and when it faded away, it seemed to echo still. Again the roar came, filled with rage and death.

"læn," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "hi - "

"Lan," Nynaeve said. "He - "

ði ɑfəl saʊn kʌɾ əɹ ɔf, bʌt ðəɹ wɑz ə nu noʊɾ ɪn ɪt. fɪɹ. əbɹʌpli ɪt wɑz ɡɔn.

The awful sound cut her off, but there was a new note in it. Fear. Abruptly it was gone.

"læn kən lʊk æftɝ hɪmsɛlf," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɹaɪd, wɪzdəm."

"Lan can look after himself," Moiraine said. "Ride, Wisdom."

fɹəm aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz ðə wɔɹɾɝ əpɪɹd, hoʊldɪŋ ɪz sɔɹd wɛl klɪɹ ə hɪmsɛlf ən ɪz maʊnt. blæk blʌd steɪn ðə bleɪd, ən stim ɹoʊz fɹəm ɪt. kɛɹfəli, læn waɪp ðə bleɪd klin wɪð ə klɔθ i tʊk fɹəm ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz, ɪɡzæmɪnɪŋ ðə stil tə meɪk ʃʊɹ i hæd ɡɑɾən ɛvɹi spɑt. wən i dʒɹɑp ðə klɔθ, ɪt fɛl əpɑɹt bɪfɔɹ ɪt ɹitʃt ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ivən ðə fɹæɡməns dɪzɔlvɪŋ.

From out of the trees the Warder appeared, holding his sword well clear of himself and his mount. Black blood stained the blade, and steam rose from it. Carefully, Lan wiped the blade clean with a cloth he took from his saddlebags, examining the steel to make sure he had gotten every spot. When he dropped the cloth, it fell apart before it reached the ground, even the fragments dissolving.

saɪlənli ə mæsɪv bɑɾi lɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz ət ðɛm. ðə wɔɹɾɝ spʌn mændɑɹb, bʌɾ ivən əz ðə wɔɹhɔɹs ɹɪɹd, ɹɛɾi tə stʃɹaɪk wɪð stilʃɑd hʊvz, mæts æɹoʊ flæʃt, pɪɹsɪŋ ðə wʌn aɪ ɪn ə hɛd ðət simd moʊsli maʊθ ən tiθ. kɪkɪŋ ən skɹimɪŋ, ðə θɪŋ fɛl, wʌn baʊnd ʃɔɹɾ ə ðɛm. ɹænd stɛɹɾ əz ðeɪ hɝid pæst. stɪf hɛɹ laɪk lɔŋ bɹɪsəlz kʌvɝɾ ɪt, ən ɪt hæd tu mɛni lɛɡz, dʒɔɪnɪŋ ə bɑɾi əz bɪɡ əz ə bɛɹ əɾ ɑɾ æŋɡəlz. səm ə ðɛm ət list, ðoʊz kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ʌv ɪts bæk, hæd tə bi jusləs fəɹ wɔkɪŋ, bʌt ðə fɪŋɡɝ-lɔŋ klɔz ət ðɛɹ ɛnz tɔɹ ði ɝθ ɪn ɪts dɛθ æɡəni.

Silently a massive body leaped out of the trees at them. The Warder spun Mandarb, but even as the warhorse reared, ready to strike with steelshod hooves, Mat's arrow flashed, piercing the one eye in a head that seemed mostly mouth and teeth. Kicking and screaming, the thing fell, one bound short of them. Rand stared as they hurried past. Stiff hair like long bristles covered it, and it had too many legs, joining a body as big as a bear at odd angles. Some of them at least, those coming out of its back, had to be useless for walking, but the finger-long claws at their ends tore the earth in its death agony.

"ɡʊd ʃuɾɪŋ, ʃifɝɾɝ." lænz aɪz hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi fɝɡɑɾən wʌt wɑz daɪɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛm, ən wɝ sɝtʃɪŋ ðə fɔɹəst.

"Good shooting, sheepherder." Lan's eyes had already forgotten what was dying behind them, and were searching the forest.

mɔɪɹeɪn ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ɪt ʃəd nɑɾ əv bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə kʌm soʊ kloʊs tə wʌn u tʌtʃəz ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs."

Moiraine shook her head. "It should not have been willing to come so close to one who touches the True Source."

"eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd ðə blaɪt stɝz," læn sɛd. "pɝhæps ðə blaɪɾ ɔlsoʊ noʊz ə wɛb ɪz fɔɹmɪŋ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn."

"Agelmar said the Blight stirs," Lan said. "Perhaps the Blight also knows a Web is forming in the Pattern."

"hɝi." mɔɪɹeɪn dʌɡ hɝ hilz ɪndə ɑldibz flæŋks. "wi mʌst ɡɛɾ oʊvɝ ðə haɪ pæsəz kwɪkli."

"Hurry." Moiraine dug her heels into Aldieb's flanks. "We must get over the high passes quickly."

bʌɾ ivən əz ʃi spoʊk ðə blaɪt ɹoʊz əɡɛns ðɛm. tʃɹiz wɪpt ɪn, ɹitʃɪŋ fəɹ ðɛm, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn tʌtʃt ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs əɹ nɑt.

But even as she spoke the Blight rose against them. Trees whipped in, reaching for them, not caring if Moiraine touched the True Source or not.

ɹændz sɔɹd wɑz ɪn ɪz hænd; hi dɪd nɑt ɹɪmɛmbɝ ənʃiðɪŋ ɪt. hi stʃɹʌk aʊɾ əɡɛn ən əɡɛn, ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd slaɪsɪŋ θɹu kɝʌptɪd lɪmz. hʌŋɡɹi bɹæntʃəz dʒɝk bæk sɛvɝd, ɹaɪðɪŋ stʌmps - hi ɔlmoʊs θɔɾ i hɝɾ əm skɹim - bʌɾ ɔlweɪz mɔɹ keɪm, ɹɪəlɪŋ laɪk sneɪks, ətɛmptɪŋ tə snɛɹ ɪz ɑɹmz, hɪz weɪst, hɪz nɛk. tiθ bɛɹɾ ɪn ə ɹɪktəs snɑɹl, hi sɔt ðə vɔɪd, ən faʊn ɪɾ ɪn ðə stoʊni, stʌbɝn sɔɪl ə ðə tu ɹɪvɝz. "meɪnɛðɝən!" hi skɹim bæk ət ðə tʃɹiz tɪl ɪz θɹoʊɾ ætʃt. ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk stil flæʃt ɪn ðə stʃɹɛŋkθləs sʌnlaɪt. "meɪnɛðɝən! meɪnɛðɝən!"

Rand's sword was in his hand; he did not remember unsheathing it. He struck out again and again, the heron-mark blade slicing through corrupted limbs. Hungry branches jerked back severed, writhing stumps - he almost thought he heard them scream - but always more came, wriggling like snakes, attempting to snare his arms, his waist, his neck. Teeth bared in a rictus snarl, he sought the void, and found it in the stony, stubborn soil of the Two Rivers. "Manetheren!" He screamed back at the trees till his throat ached. The heron-mark steel flashed in the strengthless sunlight. "Manetheren! Manetheren!"

stændɪŋ ɪn ɪz stɝəps, mæt sɛn æɹoʊ æftɝ æɹoʊ flæʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə fɔɹəst, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ət dɪfɔɹmd ʃeɪps ðət snɑɹəld ən næʃt ʌnkaʊntɪd tiθ ɑn ðə ʃæfs ðət kɪl ðɛm, bɪɾ ət ðə klɔd fɔɹmz faɪɾɪŋ tə ɡɛɾ oʊvɝ ðɛm, tə ɹitʃ ðə maʊntəd fɪɡjɝz. mæt, tu, wɑz lɔs tə ðə pɹɛzənt. "kæɹɑi ən kɑldəzɑɹ!" hi ʃaʊɾəd əz i dʒɹu flɛtʃɪŋz tə tʃik ən lust. "kæɹɑi ən ɛlɪsɑnd! æl ɛlɪsɑnd! mɔɹdɛɹoʊ dɑɡeɪn pɑz dunti kwbɪjɑɹ! æl ɛlɪsɑnd!"

Standing in his stirrups, Mat sent arrow after arrow flashing into the forest, striking at deformed shapes that snarled and gnashed uncounted teeth on the shafts that killed them, bit at the clawed forms fighting to get over them, to reach the mounted figures. Mat, too, was lost to the present. "Carai an Caldazar!" he shouted as he drew fletchings to cheek and loosed. "Carai an Ellisande! Al Ellisande! Mordero daghain pas duente cuebiyar! Al Ellisande!"

pɛɹɪn ɔlsoʊ stʊɾ ɪn ɪz stɝəps, saɪlən ən ɡɹɪm. hi hæd teɪkən ðə lɛd, ən ɪz æks huɾ ə pæθ θɹu fɔɹəst ən faʊl flɛʃ əlaɪk, wɪtʃɛvɝ keɪm bɪfɔɹ hɪm. fleɪlɪŋ tʃɹiz ən haʊlɪŋ θɪŋz ʃaɪd fɹəm ðə stɑki æksəmən, ʃaɪɪŋ əz mʌtʃ fɹəm ðə fɪɹs ɡoʊldən aɪz əz fɹəm ðə wɪslɪŋ æks. hi fɔɹst ɪz hɔɹs fɔɹwɝd, stɛp baɪ dɪtɝmən stɛp.

Perrin also stood in his stirrups, silent and grim. He had taken the lead, and his axe hewed a path through forest and foul flesh alike, whichever came before him. Flailing trees and howling things shied from the stocky axeman, shying as much from the fierce golden eyes as from the whistling axe. He forced his horse forward, step by determined step.

faɪɝbɔlz stʃɹik fɹəm mɔɪɹeɪnz hænz, ən wɛɹ ðeɪ stʃɹʌk, ə ɹaɪðɪŋ tʃɹi bɪkeɪm ə tɔɹtʃ, ə tuθt ʃeɪp ʃɹikt ən bit wɪð hjumən hænz, ɹɛn ɪts oʊn fleɪmɪŋ flɛʃ wɪð fɪɹs klɔz əntɪl ɪt daɪd.

Fireballs streaked from Moiraine's hands, and where they struck, a writhing tree became a torch, a toothed shape shrieked and beat with human hands, rent its own flaming flesh with fierce claws until it died.

əɡɛn ən əɡɛn ðə wɔɹɾɝ tʊk mændɑɹb ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz, hɪz bleɪɾ ən ɡɔnləts dʒɹɪpɪŋ wɪð blʌd ðət bʌbəld ən stimd. wən i keɪm bæk naʊ, mɔɹ ɔfən ðən nɑt ðəɹ wɝ ɡæʃəz ɪn ɪz ɑɹmɝ, bliɾɪŋ ɡæʃəz ɪn ɪz flɛʃ, ən ɪz wɔɹhɔɹs stʌmbəld ən blɛd, tu. itʃ taɪm ði ɛɛs sədaɪ pɔz tə leɪ hɝ hænz ɑn ðə wunz, ən wən ʃi tʊk əm əweɪ, oʊnli ðə blʌd wɑz lɛft ɑn ənmɑɹk flɛʃ.

Again and again the Warder took Mandarb into the trees, his blade and gauntlets dripping with blood that bubbled and steamed. When he came back now, more often than not there were gashes in his armor, bleeding gashes in his flesh, and his warhorse stumbled and bled, too. Each time the Aes Sedai paused to lay her hands on the wounds, and when she took them away, only the blood was left on unmarked flesh.

"aɪ laɪt sɪɡnəl faɪɝz fəɹ ðə hæfmən," ʃi sɛd bɪɾɝli. "pɹɛs ɑn. pɹɛs ɑn!" ðeɪ meɪd ðɛɹ weɪ wʌn sloʊ peɪs əɾ ə taɪm.

"I light signal fires for the Halfmen," she said bitterly. "Press on. Press on!" They made their way one slow pace at a time.

ɪf ðə tʃɹiz hæd nɑt stʃɹʌk ɪndə ðə mæs ʌv ətækɪŋ flɛʃ əz mʌtʃ əz ət ðə hjumənz, ɪf ðə kɹitʃɝz, noʊ tu əlaɪk, hæd nɑt fɔt ðə tʃɹiz ən wʌn ənʌðɝ əz mʌtʃ əz tə ɹitʃ ðɛm, ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wʊɾə bɪn oʊvɝwɛlmd. hi wɑz nɑt sɝɾən ɪt wəd nɑt hæpən stɪl. ðən ə fluɾɪŋ kɹaɪ ɝoʊz bɪhaɪn ðɛm. dɪstən ən θɪn, ɪt kʌt θɹu ðə snɑɹlɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɛnəzənz ə ðə blaɪɾ ɝaʊn ðɛm.

If the trees had not struck into the mass of attacking flesh as much as at the humans, if the creatures, no two alike, had not fought the trees and one another as much as to reach them, Rand was sure they would have been overwhelmed. He was not certain it would not happen still. Then a fluting cry arose behind them. Distant and thin, it cut through the snarling from the denizens of the Blight around them.

ɪn ən ɪnstən ðə snɑɹlɪŋ sist, əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn slaɪst ɔf wɪð ə naɪf. ði ətækɪŋ ʃeɪps fɹoʊz; ðə tʃɹiz wɛn stɪl. əz sʌɾənli əz ðə θɪŋz wɪð lɛɡz hæɾ əpɪɹd, ðeɪ mɛltəɾ əweɪ, vænɪʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə twɪstəd fɔɹəst.

In an instant the snarling ceased, as if it had been sliced off with a knife. The attacking shapes froze; the trees went still. As suddenly as the things with legs had appeared, they melted away, vanishing into the twisted forest.

ðə ɹiɾi ʃɹɪl keɪm əɡɛn, laɪk ə kɹækt ʃɛpɝdz paɪps, ən wɑz ænsɝɾ ɪn kaɪn baɪ ə kɔɹəs. hæf ə dʌzən, sɪŋɪŋ əmʌŋ ðɛmsɛlvz, fɑɹ bɪhaɪnd.

The reedy shrill came again, like a cracked shepherd's pipes, and was answered in kind by a chorus. Half a dozen, singing among themselves, far behind.

"wɝmz," læn sɛd ɡɹɪmli, bɹɪŋɪŋ ə moʊn fɹəm lɔɪəl. "ðeɪv ɡɪvən əs ə ɹɛspɪt, ɪf wɪv taɪm tə juz ɪt." hɪz aɪz wɝ mi sʊɹɪŋ ðə dɪstəns jɛt tə ðə maʊntənz. "fju θɪŋz ɪn ðə blaɪt wɪl feɪs ə wɝm, kən ɪt bi əvɔɪɾəd." hi dʌɡ hɪz hilz ɪndə mændɑɹbz flæŋks. "ɹaɪd!" ðə hoʊl pɑɹɾi plʌnʒd æftɝ hɪm, θɹu ə blaɪt ðət sʌɾənli sim tʃɹuli dɛd, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə paɪpɪŋ bɪhaɪnd.

"Worms," Lan said grimly, bringing a moan from Loial. "They've given us a respite, if we have time to use it." His eyes were mea suring the distance yet to the mountains. "Few things in the Blight will face a Worm, can it be avoided." He dug his heels into Mandarb's flanks. "Ride!" The whole party plunged after him, through a Blight that suddenly seemed truly dead, except for the piping behind.

"ðeɪ wɝ skɛɹɾ ɔf baɪ wɝmz?" mæt sɛɾ ɪnkɹɛdʒjələsli. hi wɑz baʊnsɪŋ ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə slɪŋ ɪz baʊ əkɹɔs ɪz bæk.

"They were scared off by worms?" Mat said incredulously. He was bouncing in his saddle, trying to sling his bow across his back.

"eɪ wɝm" - ðəɹ wɑz ə ʃɑɹp dɪfɝəns ɪn ðə weɪ ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛɾ ɪt fɹəm ðə weɪ mæt hæd - "kæn kɪl ə feɪd, ɪf ðə feɪd hæzən ðə dɑɹk wʌnz oʊn lʌk wɪð ɪt. wɪv ən ɪntaɪɝ pæk ɑn əɹ tʃɹeɪl. ɹaɪd! ɹaɪd!" ðə dɑɹk piks wɝ kloʊsɝ naʊ. ən aʊɝ, ɹænd ɛstəmeɪɾəd, ət ðə peɪs ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑz sɛɾɪŋ.

"A Worm" - there was a sharp difference in the way the Warder said it from the way Mat had - "can kill a Fade, if the Fade hasn't the Dark One's own luck with it. We have an entire pack on our trail. Ride! Ride!" The dark peaks were closer now. An hour, Rand estimated, at the pace the Warder was setting.

"woʊn ðə wɝmz fɑloʊ əs ɪndə ðə maʊntənz?" ɛɡwin æsk bɹɛθləsli, ən læn ɡeɪv ə ʃɑɹp læf.

"Won't the Worms follow us into the mountains?" Egwene asked breathlessly, and Lan gave a sharp laugh.

"ðeɪ woʊnt. wɝmz ɑɹ əfɹeɪɾ ʌv wʌt laɪvz ɪn ðə haɪ pæsəz." lɔɪəl moʊn əɡɛn.

"They won't. Worms are afraid of what lives in the high passes." Loial moaned again.

ɹænd wɪʃt ði oʊɡiɝ wəd stɑp duɪŋ ðæt. hi wɑz wɛl əwɛɹ ðət lɔɪəl nu mɔɹ əbaʊt ðə blaɪt ðən ɛni ʌv əm ɪksɛp læn, ivən ɪf ɪt wɑz fɹəm ɹiɾɪŋ bʊks ɪn ðə seɪfti ʌv ə stɛɾɪŋ. bʌt waɪ dʌz i hæv tə kip ɹimaɪndɪŋ mi ðət ðɛɹz wɝs jɛt ðən wiv sin?

Rand wished the Ogier would stop doing that. He was well aware that Loial knew more about the Blight than any of them except Lan, even if it was from reading books in the safety of a stedding. But why does he have to keep reminding me that there's worse yet than we've seen?

ðə blaɪt floʊd pæst, widz ən ɡɹæsəz splæʃɪŋ ɹɑɾən ʌndɝ ɡæləpɪŋ hʊvz. tʃɹiz ə ðə kaɪnz ðət hæɾ ɝliɝ ətæk dɪd nɑt soʊ mʌtʃ əz twɪtʃ ivən wən ðeɪ ɹoʊd dɝɛkli ʌndɝ ðə twɪstəd bɹæntʃəz. ðə maʊntənz ə dum fɪl ðə skaɪ əhɛd, blæk ən blik, ən ɔlmoʊs nɪɹ ɪnʌf tə tʌtʃ, ɪt simd. ðə paɪpɪŋ keɪm boʊθ ʃɑɹp ən klɪɹ, ən ðəɹ wɝ skwɪʃɪŋ saʊnz bɪhaɪn ðɛm, laʊɾɝ ðən ðə θɪŋz kɹʌʃt ʌndɝ hʊvz. tu laʊd, əz ɪf hæf-dəkeɪd tʃɹiz wɝ biɪŋ kɹʌʃt baɪ hjudʒ bɑɾiz slɪðɝɪŋ oʊvɝ ðɛm. tu nɪɹ. ɹænd lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ. bæk ðəɹ tʃɹitɑps wɪpt ən wɛn daʊn laɪk ɡɹæs. ðə læn bɪɡæn sloʊpɪŋ ʌpwɝd, təwɔɹd ðə maʊntənz, tɪltɪŋ ɪnʌf soʊ ðəɾ i nu ðeɪ wɝ klaɪmɪŋ.

The Blight flowed past, weeds and grasses splashing rotten under galloping hooves. Trees of the kinds that had earlier attacked did not so much as twitch even when they rode directly under the twisted branches. The Mountains of Dhoom filled the sky ahead, black and bleak, and almost near enough to touch, it seemed. The piping came both sharp and clear, and there were squishing sounds behind them, louder than the things crushed under hooves. Too loud, as if half-decayed trees were being crushed by huge bodies slithering over them. Too near. Rand looked over his shoulder. Back there treetops whipped and went down like grass. The land began sloping upward, toward the mountains, tilting enough so that he knew they were climbing.

"wi ɑɹ nɑt gɑnə meɪk ɪt," læn ənaʊnst. hi dɪd nɑt sloʊ mændɑɹbz ɡæləp, bʌɾ ɪz sɔɹd wɑz sʌɾənli ɪn ɪz hæn əɡɛn. "wɑtʃ jɝsɛlf ɪn ðə haɪ pæsəz, mɔɪɹeɪn, ən jəl ɡɛt θɹu."

"We are not going to make it," Lan announced. He did not slow Mandarb's gallop, but his sword was suddenly in his hand again. "Watch yourself in the high passes, Moiraine, and you'll get through."

"noʊ, læn!" nɪneɪiv kɔld.

"No, Lan!" Nynaeve called.

"bi kwaɪət, ɡɝl! læn, ivən jə kænɑt stɑp ə wɝmpæk. əl nɑɾ əv ɪt. əl nid jə fəɹ ði aɪ."

"Be quiet, girl! Lan, even you cannot stop a Wormpack. I will not have it. I will need you for the Eye."

"æɹoʊz," mæt kɔl bɹɛθləsli.

"Arrows," Mat called breathlessly.

"ðə wɝmz wʊdn ivən fil ðɛm," ðə wɔɹɾɝ ʃaʊɾəd. "ðeɪ mʌs bi kʌt tə pisəz. doʊn fil mʌtʃ bʌt hʌŋɡɝ. səmtaɪmz fɪɹ."

"The Worms wouldn't even feel them," the Warder shouted. "They must be cut to pieces. Don't feel much but hunger. Sometimes fear."

klɪŋɪŋ tə hɪz sæɾəl wɪð ə dɛθɡɹɪp, ɹænd ʃɹʌɡd, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə lusən ðə taɪtnəs ɪn ɪz ʃoʊldɝz. hɪz hoʊl tʃɛs fɛl taɪt, əntɪl i kəd hɑɹdli bɹið, ən ɪz skɪn stʌŋ ɪn hɑt pɪnpɹɪks. ðə blaɪt hæd tɝn tə fʊthɪlz. hi kəd si ðə ɹut ðeɪ mʌs klaɪm wʌns ðeɪ ɹitʃt ðə maʊntənz, ðə twɪstɪŋ pæθ ən ðə haɪ pæs bɪɑnd, laɪk ən æks bloʊ klivɪŋ ɪndə ðə blæk stoʊn. laɪt, wʌts ʌp əhɛd ðət kən skɛɹ wʌts bɪhaɪnd? laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪv nɛvɝ bɪn soʊ əfɹeɪd. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə ɡoʊ ɛni fɝðɝ. noʊ fɝðɝ! sikɪŋ ðə fleɪm ən ðə vɔɪd, hi ɹeɪld ət hɪmsɛlf. ful! jə fɹaɪɾənd, kaʊɝdli ful! jə kæn steɪ hɪɹ, ən jə kænt ɡoʊ bæk. ɑɹ jə gɑnə liv ɛɡwin tə feɪs ɪɾ əloʊn? ðə vɔɪɾ ɪluɾɪd hɪm, fɔɹmɪŋ, ðən ʃɪvɝɪŋ ɪndə ə θaʊzən pɔɪns ə laɪt, ɹeɪ-fɔɹmɪŋ ən ʃæɾɝɪŋ əɡɛn, itʃ pɔɪn bɝnɪŋ ɪndə hɪz boʊnz əntɪl i kwɪvɝd wɪð ðə peɪn ən θɔɾ i mʌs bɝst oʊpən. laɪt hɛlp mi, aɪ kænt ɡoʊ ɑn. laɪt hɛlp mi!

Clinging to his saddle with a deathgrip, Rand shrugged, trying to loosen the tightness in his shoulders. His whole chest felt tight, until he could hardly breathe, and his skin stung in hot pinpricks. The Blight had turned to foothills. He could see the route they must climb once they reached the mountains, the twisting path and the high pass beyond, like an axe blow cleaving into the black stone. Light, what's up ahead that can scare what's behind? Light help me, I've never been so afraid. I don't want to go any further. No further! Seeking the flame and the void, he railed at himself. Fool! You frightened, cowardly fool! You can't stay here, and you can't go back. Are you going to leave Egwene to face it alone? The void eluded him, forming, then shivering into a thousand points of light, re-forming and shattering again, each point burning into his bones until he quivered with the pain and thought he must burst open. Light help me, I can't go on. Light help me!

hi wɑz ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə beɪz ɹeɪnz tə tɝn bæk, tə feɪs ðə wɝmz əɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɹæðɝ ðən wʌt leɪ əhɛd, wən ðə neɪtʃɝ ə ðə læn tʃeɪnʒd. bɪtwin wʌn sloʊp ʌv ə hɪl ən ðə nɛkst, bɪtwin kɹɛst ən pik, ðə blaɪt wɑz ɡɔn.

He was gathering the bay's reins to turn back, to face the Worms or anything rather than what lay ahead, when the nature of the land changed. Between one slope of a hill and the next, between crest and peak, the Blight was gone.

ɡɹin livz kʌvɝd pisfəli spɹɛɾɪŋ bɹæntʃəz. waɪldflaʊɹz meɪɾ ə kɑɹpəɾ ə bɹaɪt pætʃəz ɪn ɡɹæsəz stɝd baɪ ə swit spɹɪŋ bɹiz. bʌɾɝflaɪz flʌɾɝd fɹəm blɑsəm tə blɑsəm, wɪð bʌzɪŋ biz, ən bɝdz tʃɹɪl ðɛɹ sɔŋz.

Green leaves covered peacefully spreading branches. Wildflowers made a carpet of bright patches in grasses stirred by a sweet spring breeze. Butterflies fluttered from blossom to blossom, with buzzing bees, and birds trilled their songs.

ɡeɪpɪŋ, hi ɡæləpt ɑn, əntɪl i sʌɾənli ɹilaɪz ðət mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn ən lɔɪəl hæd stɑpt, ði ʌðɝz, tu. sloʊli hi dʒɹu ɹeɪn, hɪz feɪs fɹoʊzən ɪn əstɑnɪʃmənt. ɛɡwinz aɪz wɝ əbaʊt tə kʌm aʊɾ ə hɝ hɛd, ən nɪneɪivz dʒɔ hæd dʒɹɑpt.

Gaping, he galloped on, until he suddenly realized that Moiraine and Lan and Loial had stopped, the others, too. Slowly he drew rein, his face frozen in astonishment. Egwene's eyes were about to come out of her head, and Nynaeve's jaw had dropped.

"wi hæv ɹitʃt seɪfti," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ðɪs ɪz ðə ɡɹin mænz pleɪs, ən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld ɪz hɪɹ. nʌθɪŋ ə ðə blaɪt kən ɛntɝ hɪɹ."

"We have reached safety," Moiraine said. "This is the Green Man's place, and the Eye of the World is here. Nothing of the Blight can enter here."

"aɪ θɔɾ ɪt wɑz ɑn ði ʌðɝ saɪɾ ə ðə maʊntənz," ɹænd mʌmbəld. hi kəd stɪl si ðə piks fɪlɪŋ ðə nɔɹðɝn hɝaɪzən, ən ðə haɪ pæsəz. "ju sɛɾ ɪt wɑz ɔlweɪz bɪɑn ðə pæsəz."

"I thought it was on the other side of the mountains," Rand mumbled. He could still see the peaks filling the northern horizon, and the high passes. "You said it was always beyond the passes."

"ðɪs pleɪs," sɛɾ ə dip vɔɪs fɹəm ðə tʃɹiz, "ɪz ɔlweɪz wɛɹ ɪɾ ɪz. ɔl ðət tʃeɪnʒəz ɪz wɛɹ ðoʊz u niɾ ɪɾ ɑɹ."

"This place," said a deep voice from the trees, "is always where it is. All that changes is where those who need it are."

ə fɪɡjɝ stɛpt aʊɾ ə ðə foʊlɪdʒ, ə mæn-ʃeɪp əz mʌtʃ bɪɡɝ ðən lɔɪəl əz ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz bɪɡɝ ðən ɹænd. ə mæn-ʃeɪp ʌv woʊvən vaɪnz ən livz, ɡɹin ən ɡɹoʊɪŋ. hɪz hɛɹ wɑz ɡɹæs, floʊɪŋ tə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz; hɪz aɪz, hjudʒ heɪzəlnʌts; hɪz fɪŋɡɝneɪlz, eɪkɔɹnz. ɡɹin livz meɪɾ ɪz tunɪk ən tʃɹaʊzɝz; simləs bɑɹk, hɪz buts. bʌɾɝflaɪz swɝld ɝaʊn hɪm, laɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz fɪŋɡɝz, hɪz ʃoʊldɝz, hɪz feɪs. oʊnli wʌn θɪŋ spɔɪl ðə vɝɾənt pɝfɛkʃən. ə dip fɪʃɝ ɹæn ʌp ɪz tʃik ən tɛmpəl əkɹɔs ðə tɑp ə hɪz hɛd, ən ɪn ðət ðə vaɪnz wɝ bɹaʊn ən wɪðɝd.

A figure stepped out of the foliage, a man-shape as much bigger than Loial as the Ogier was bigger than Rand. A man-shape of woven vines and leaves, green and growing. His hair was grass, flowing to his shoulders; his eyes, huge hazelnuts; his fingernails, acorns. Green leaves made his tunic and trousers; seamless bark, his boots. Butterflies swirled around him, lighting on his fingers, his shoulders, his face. Only one thing spoiled the verdant perfection. A deep fissure ran up his cheek and temple across the top of his head, and in that the vines were brown and withered.

"ðə ɡɹin mæn," ɛɡwin wɪspɝd, ən ðə skɑɹd feɪs smaɪld. fəɹ ə moʊmən ɪt simd əz ɪf ðə bɝdz sæŋ laʊɾɝ.

"The Green Man," Egwene whispered, and the scarred face smiled. For a moment it seemed as if the birds sang louder.

"ʌv kɔɹs aɪ æm. hu ɛls wəd bi hɪɹ?" ðə heɪzəlnʌɾ aɪz ɹəɡɑɹɾəd lɔɪəl. "ɪɾ ɪz ɡʊd tə si ju, lɪɾəl bɹʌðɝ. ɪn ðə pæst, mɛni ʌv jə keɪm tə vɪzət mi, bʌt fju ʌv ɹisən deɪz."

"Of course I am. Who else would be here?" The hazelnut eyes regarded Loial. "It is good to see you, little brother. In the past, many of you came to visit me, but few of recent days."

lɔɪəl skɹæmbəl daʊn fɹəm ɪz bɪɡ hɔɹs ən baʊd fɔɹməli. "ju ɑnɝ mi, tʃɹibɹəðɝ. tsɪŋɡʌ mɑ tʃɑʃə, tɪŋʃən."

Loial scrambled down from his big horse and bowed formally. "You honor me, Treebrother. Tsingu ma choshih, T'ingshen."

smaɪlɪŋ, ðə ɡɹin mæn pʊɾ ən ɑɹm ɝaʊn ði oʊɡiɝz ʃoʊldɝz. əlɔŋsaɪd lɔɪəl, hi lʊk laɪk ə mæn bɪsaɪɾ ə bɔɪ. "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ ɑnɝɪŋ, lɪɾəl bɹʌðɝ. wɪl sɪŋ tʃɹi sɔŋz təɡɛðɝ, ən ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə ɡɹeɪt tʃɹiz, ən ðə stɛɾɪŋ, ən hoʊl ðə lɔŋɪŋ ət beɪ." hi stʌɾid ði ʌðɝz, dʒʌs naʊ ɡɛɾɪŋ daʊn fɹəm ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz, ən ɪz aɪz lɪɾ ɑn pɛɹɪn. "eɪ wʊlfbɹəðɝ! də ði oʊl taɪmz tʃɹuli wɔk əɡɛn ðɛn?"

Smiling, the Green Man put an arm around the Ogier's shoulders. Alongside Loial, he looked like a man beside a boy. "There is no honoring, little brother. We will sing Tree Songs together, and remember the Great Trees, and the stedding, and hold the Longing at bay." He studied the others, just now getting down from their horses, and his eyes lit on Perrin. "A Wolfbrother! Do the old times truly walk again then?"

ɹænd stɛɹɾ ət pɛɹɪn. fəɹ ɪz pɑɹt, pɛɹɪn tɝn ɪz hɔɹs soʊ ɪt wɑz bɪtwin ɪm ən ðə ɡɹin mæn, ən bɛn tə tʃɛk ðə ɡɝθ. ɹænd wɑz ʃʊɹ i dʒʌst wɑntəd tə əvɔɪd ðə ɡɹin mænz sɝtʃɪŋ ɡeɪz. sʌɾənli ðə ɡɹin mæn spoʊk tə ɹænd.

Rand stared at Perrin. For his part, Perrin turned his horse so it was between him and the Green Man, and bent to check the girth. Rand was sure he just wanted to avoid the Green Man's searching gaze. Suddenly the Green Man spoke to Rand.

"stʃɹeɪnʒ kloʊðz jə wɛɹ, tʃaɪld ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. hæz ðə wil tɝn soʊ fɑɹ? də ðə pipəl ə ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹɪtɝn tə ðə fɝs kʌvənənt? bʌt jə wɛɹ ə sɔɹd. ðəɾ ɪz niðɝ naʊ nɔɹ ðɛn."

"Strange clothes you wear, Child of the Dragon. Has the Wheel turned so far? Do the People of the Dragon return to the first Covenant? But you wear a sword. That is neither now nor then."

ɹænd hæd tə wɝk mɔɪstʃɝ ɪn ɪz maʊθ bɪfɔɹ i kəd spik. "aɪ doʊnt noʊ wʌt jəɹ tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt. wʌt dʒju min?"

Rand had to work moisture in his mouth before he could speak. "I don't know what you're talking about. What do you mean?"

ðə ɡɹin mæn tʌtʃt ðə bɹaʊn skɑɹ əkɹɔs ɪz hɛd. fəɹ ə moʊmən i sim kənfjuzd. "aɪ . . . kænɑt seɪ. maɪ mɛmɹiz ɑɹ tɔɹn ən ɔfən fliɾɪŋ, ən mʌtʃ ʌv wʌt ɹɪmeɪnz ɪz laɪk livz vɪzəɾəd baɪ kæɾəpɪlɝz. jɛt, aɪm ʃʊɹ. . . . noʊ, ɪts ɡɔn. bʌt jə ɑɹ wɛlkəm hɪɹ. ju, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, ɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ə sɝpɹaɪz. wən ðɪs pleɪs wɑz meɪd, ɪt wɑz meɪd soʊ ðət nʌn kəd faɪn ɪt twaɪs. haʊ hæv jə kʌm hɪɹ?"

The Green Man touched the brown scar across his head. For a moment he seemed confused. "I . . . cannot say. My memories are torn and often fleeting, and much of what remains is like leaves visited by caterpillars. Yet, I am sure. . . . No, it is gone. But you are welcome here. You, Moiraine Sedai, are more than a surprise. When this place was made, it was made so that none could find it twice. How have you come here?"

"nid," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "maɪ nid, ðə wɝlz nid. moʊst ʌv ɔl ɪz ðə wɝlz nid. wɪv kʌm tə si ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld."

"Need," Moiraine replied. "My need, the world's need. Most of all is the world's need. We have come to see the Eye of the World."

ðə ɡɹin mæn saɪd, ðə wɪn saɪɪŋ θɹu θɪk-lif bɹæntʃəz. "ðɛn ɪts kʌm əɡɛn. ðət mɛmɹi ɹɪmeɪnz hoʊl. ðə dɑɹk wʌn stɝz. aɪ hæv fɪɹɾ ɪt. ɛvɹi tɝnɪŋ ə jɪɹz, ðə blaɪt stʃɹaɪvz hɑɹɾɝ tə kʌm ɪnsaɪd, ən ðɪs tɝn ðə stʃɹʌɡəl tə kip ɪɾ aʊɾ əz bɪn ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ɛvɝ sɪns ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ. kʌm, əl teɪk ju."

The Green Man sighed, the wind sighing through thick-leafed branches. "Then it has come again. That memory remains whole. The Dark One stirs. I have feared it. Every turning of years, the Blight strives harder to come inside, and this turn the struggle to keep it out has been greater than ever since the beginning. Come, I will take you."


tʃæptɝ fɪfti


CHAPTER 50

miɾɪŋz ət ði aɪ


Meetings at the Eye

liɾɪŋ ðə beɪ, ɹænd fɑloʊd ðə ɡɹin mæn wɪð ði ʌðɝ ɛmənz fildɝz, ɔl stɛɹɪŋ əz ɪf ðeɪ kəd nɑt dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ tə lʊk ət ðə ɡɹin mæn əɹ ðə fɔɹəst. ðə ɡɹin mæn wɑz ə lɛdʒənd, ʌv kɔɹs, wɪð stɔɹiz toʊld əbaʊt hɪm, ən ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf, ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛvɹi faɪɝpleɪs ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz, ən nɑt dʒʌs fəɹ ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. bʌɾ æftɝ ðə blaɪt, ðə tʃɹiz ən flaʊɝz wʊɾə bɪn ə wʌndɝ ə nɔɹmæləɾi ivən ɪf ðə ɹɛst ə ðə wɝld wɑz nɑt stɪl tʃɹæpt ɪn wɪntɝ.

Leading the bay, Rand followed the Green Man with the other Emond's Fielders, all staring as if they could not decide whether to look at the Green Man or the forest. The Green Man was a legend, of course, with stories told about him, and the Tree of Life, in front of every fireplace in the Two Rivers, and not just for the children. But after the Blight, the trees and flowers would have been a wonder of normality even if the rest of the world was not still trapped in winter.

pɛɹɪn hʌŋ ə lɪɾəl tə ðə ɹɪɹ. wən ɹænd ɡlæns bæk, ðə bɪɡ, kɝli-hɛɹd juθ lʊkt əz ɪf i dɪd nɑt wɑnə hɪɹ ɛniθɪŋ ɛls ðə ɡɹin mæn hæd tə seɪ. hi kəɾ ʌndɝstæn ðæt. tʃaɪld ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. wɛɹəli hi wɑtʃt ðə ɡɹin mæn, wɔkɪŋ əhɛd wɪð mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn, bʌɾɝflaɪz sɝaʊndɪŋ ɪm ɪn ə klaʊɾ ə jɛloʊz ən ɹɛdz. wʌɾ i min? noʊ. aɪ doʊnt wɑnə noʊ.

Perrin hung a little to the rear. When Rand glanced back, the big, curly-haired youth looked as if he did not want to hear anything else the Green Man had to say. He could understand that. Child of the Dragon. Warily he watched the Green Man, walking ahead with Moiraine and Lan, butterflies surrounding him in a cloud of yellows and reds. What did he mean? No. I don't want to know.

ivən soʊ, hɪz stɛp fɛlt laɪɾɝ, hɪz lɛɡz spɹɪŋʒiɝ. ði ʌnizinəs stɪl leɪ ɪn ɪz ɡʌt, tʃɝnɪŋ ɪz stʌmək, bʌt ðə fɪɹ hæd bɪkʌm soʊ dɪfjuz ɪt maɪɾ əz wɛl bi ɡɔn. hi dɪd nɑt θɪŋk i kəɾ ɪkspɛk mɔɹ, nɑt wɪð ðə blaɪt hæf ə maɪl əweɪ, ivən ɪf mɔɪɹeɪn wɑz ɹaɪɾ əbaʊt nʌθɪŋ fɹəm ðə blaɪt biɪŋ eɪbəl tə ɛntɝ hɪɹ. ðə θaʊzənz ə bɝnɪŋ pɔɪns pɪɹsɪŋ ɪz boʊnz hæd wɪŋkt aʊt; ət ðə vɛɹi moʊmən i keɪm wɪðɪn ðə ɡɹin mænz doʊmeɪn, hi wɑz ʃʊɹ. ɪts ɪm ðət wɪŋkt əm aʊt, hi θɔt, ðə ɡɹin mæn, ən ðɪs pleɪs.

Even so, his step felt lighter, his legs springier. The uneasiness still lay in his gut, churning his stomach, but the fear had become so diffuse it might as well be gone. He did not think he could expect more, not with the Blight half a mile away, even if Moiraine was right about nothing from the Blight being able to enter here. The thousands of burning points piercing his bones had winked out; at the very moment he came within the Green Man's domain, he was sure. It's him that winked them out, he thought, the Green Man, and this place.

ɛɡwin fɛlt ɪt, ən nɪneɪiv, tu, ðə suðɪŋ pis, ðə kɑm ə bjuɾi. hi kəd tɛl. ðeɪ wɔɹ smɔl, sɝin smaɪlz, ən bɹʌʃt flaʊɝz wɪð ðɛɹ fɪŋɡɝz, pɔzɪŋ tə smɛl, ən bɹiðɪŋ dip.

Egwene felt it, and Nynaeve, too, the soothing peace, the calm of beauty. He could tell. They wore small, serene smiles, and brushed flowers with their fingers, pausing to smell, and breathing deep.

wən ðə ɡɹin mæn noʊɾəst, hi sɛd, "flaʊɝz ɑɹ mɛn tə ədɔɹn. ðə plæns əɹ hjumənz, ɪts mʌtʃ ðə seɪm. nʌn maɪnd, soʊ lɔŋ əz jə doʊn teɪk tu mɛni." ən i bɪɡæn plʌkɪŋ wʌn fɹəm ðɪs plæn ən wʌn fɹəm ðæt, nɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən tu fɹəm ɛni. sun nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin wɔɹ kæps ə blɑsəmz ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ, pɪŋk waɪldʒɹoʊz ən jɛloʊbɛl ən waɪt mɔɹnɪŋstɑɹ. ðə wɪzdəmz bɹeɪd simd ə ɡɑɹɾən ə pɪŋk ən waɪt tə hɝ weɪst. ivən mɔɪɹeɪn ɹəsivd ə peɪl ɡɑɹlən ə mɔɹnɪŋstɑɹ ɑn əɹ bɹaʊ, woʊvən soʊ dɛfli ðət ðə flaʊɝz stɪl sim tə bi ɡɹoʊɪŋ.

When the Green Man noticed, he said, "Flowers are meant to adorn. The plants or humans, it is much the same. None mind, so long as you don't take too many." And he began plucking one from this plant and one from that, never more than two from any. Soon Nynaeve and Egwene wore caps of blossoms in their hair, pink wildrose and yellowbell and white morningstar. The Wisdom's braid seemed a garden of pink and white to her waist. Even Moiraine received a pale garland of morningstar on her brow, woven so deftly that the flowers still seemed to be growing.

ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ðeɪ wɝ nɑt ɡɹoʊɪŋ. ðə ɡɹin mæn tɛndəɾ ɪz fɔɹəst ɡɑɹɾən əz i wɔkt, waɪl i tɔk sɔfli tə mɔɪɹeɪn, teɪkɪŋ kɛɹ ʌv wʌtɛvɝ niɾəd kɛɹ wɪθaʊt ɹɪli θɪŋkɪŋ əbaʊɾ ɪt. hɪz heɪzəlnʌɾ aɪz kɑɾ ə kɹʊkəd lɪm ɑn ə klaɪmɪŋ waɪldʒɹoʊz, fɔɹst ɪndə ən ɑkwɝɾ æŋɡəl baɪ ðə blɑsəm-kʌvɝd lɪm ʌv ən æpəl tʃɹi, ən i pɔzd, stɪl tɔkɪŋ, tə ɹʌn ɪz hæn əlɔŋ ðə bɛnd. ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪf ɪz aɪz wɝ pleɪɪŋ tʃɹɪks, əɹ ɪf θɔɹnz æktʃəli  dɪd bɛn aʊɾ ə ðə weɪ soʊ əz nɑt tə pɹɪk ðoʊz ɡɹin fɪŋɡɝz. wən ðə taʊɝɪŋ ʃeɪp ə ðə ɡɹin mæn muvd ɑn, ðə lɪm ɹæn stʃɹeɪɾ ən tʃɹu, spɹɛɾɪŋ ɹɛd pɛɾəlz əmʌŋ ðə waɪɾ ʌv æpəl blɑsəmz. hi bɛn tə kʌp wʌn hjudʒ hæn ɝaʊn ə taɪni sid laɪɪŋ ɑn ə pætʃ ə pɛbəlz, ən wən i stʃɹeɪɾənd, ə smɔl ʃut hæd ɹuts θɹu ðə ɹɑks tə ɡʊd sɔɪl.

Rand was not sure they were not growing. The Green Man tended his forest garden as he walked, while he talked softly to Moiraine, taking care of Whatever needed care without really thinking about it. His hazelnut eyes caught a crooked limb on a climbing wildrose, forced into an awkward angle by the blossom-covered limb of an apple tree, and he paused, still talking, to run his hand along the bend. Rand was not sure if his eyes were playing tricks, or if thorns actually did bend out of the way so as not to prick those green fingers. When the towering shape of the Green Man moved on, the limb ran straight and true, spreading red petals among the white of apple blossoms. He bent to cup one huge hand around a tiny seed lying on a patch of pebbles, and when he straightened, a small shoot had roots through the rocks to good soil.

"ɔl θɪŋz mʌst ɡɹoʊ wɛɹ ðeɪ ɑɹ, əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə pæɾɝn," hi ɪkspleɪn oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, əz ɪf əpɑlədʒaɪzɪŋ, "æn feɪs ðə tɝnɪŋ ə ðə wil, bʌt ðə kɹieɪɾɝ wɪl nɑt maɪn ɪf aɪ ɡɪv dʒʌst ə lɪɾəl hɛlp."

"All things must grow where they are, according to the Pattern," he explained over his shoulder, as if apologizing, "and face the turning of the Wheel, but the Creator will not mind if I give just a little help."

ɹænd lɛd ɹɛɾ ɝaʊn ðə ʃut, kɛɹfəl nɑt tə lɛt ðə beɪz hʊvz kɹʌʃ ɪt. ɪt dɪd nɑt sim ɹaɪt tə dɪstʃɹɔɪ wʌt ðə ɡɹin mæn hæd dʌn dʒʌs tə əvɔɪɾ ən ɛkstʃɹə stɛp. ɛɡwin smaɪld ət hɪm, wʌn ə hɝ sikɹət smaɪlz, ən tʌtʃt ɪz ɑɹm. ʃi wɑz soʊ pɹɪɾi, wɪð əɹ ənbaʊn hɛɹ fʊl ə flaʊɝz, ðəɾ i smaɪl bæk əɾ əɹ əntɪl ʃi blʌʃt ən loʊɝɾ əɹ aɪz. əl pɹətɛk ju, hi θɔt. wʌtɛvɝ ɛls hæpənz, əl si jə seɪf, aɪ swɛɹ ɪt.

Rand led Red around the shoot, careful not to let the bay's hooves crush it. It did not seem right to destroy what the Green Man had done just to avoid an extra step. Egwene smiled at him, one of her secret smiles, and touched his arm. She was so pretty, with her unbound hair full of flowers, that he smiled back at her until she blushed and lowered her eyes. I will protect you, he thought. Whatever else happens, I will see you safe, I swear it.

ɪndə ðə hɑɹɾ ə ðə spɹɪŋ fɔɹəs ðə ɡɹin mæn tʊk ðɛm, tə ən ɑɹtʃt oʊpənɪŋ ɪn ðə saɪɾ ʌv ə hɪl. ɪt wɑz ə sɪmpəl stoʊn ɑɹtʃ, tɔl ən waɪt, ən ɑn ðə kistoʊn wɑz ə sɝkəl hæv baɪ ə sɪnwəs laɪn, wʌn hæf ɹʌf, ði ʌðɝ smuð. ði eɪntʃən sɪmbəl ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ. ði oʊpənɪŋ ɪtsɛlf wɑz ʃæɾoʊd.

Into the heart of the spring forest the Green Man took them, to an arched opening in the side of a hill. It was a simple stone arch, tall and white, and on the keystone was a circle halved by a sinuous line, one half rough, the other smooth. The ancient symbol of Aes Sedai. The opening itself was shadowed.

fəɹ ə moʊmən ɛvɹiwʌn sɪmpli lʊkt ɪn saɪləns. ðən mɔɪɹeɪn ɹimuv ðə ɡɑɹlən fɹəm əɹ hɛɹ ən dʒɛnli hʌŋ ɪɾ ɑn ðə lɪm ʌv ə switbɛɹi bʊʃ bɪsaɪd ði ɑɹtʃ. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf əɹ muvmən ɹɪstɔɹd spitʃ.

For a moment everyone simply looked in silence. Then Moiraine removed the garland from her hair and gently hung it on the limb of a sweetberry bush beside the arch. It was as if her movement restored speech.

"ɪts ɪn ðɛɹ?" nɪneɪiv æskt. "wʌt wiv kʌm fɔɹ?"

"It's in there?" Nynaeve asked. "What we've come for?"

"aɪd ɹɪli laɪk tə si ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf," mæt sɛd, nɑt teɪkɪŋ ɪz aɪz ɔf ðə hæv sɝkəl əbʌv ðɛm. "wi kən weɪt ðət lɔŋ, kænt wi?"

"I'd really like to see the Tree of Life," Mat said, not taking his eyes off the halved circle above them. "We can wait that long, can't we?"

ðə ɡɹin mæn ɡeɪv ɹænd ən ɑd lʊk, ðən ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə ɪz nɑt hɪɹ. aɪ hæv nɑt ɹɛstəd bɪniθ ɪts ʌnʒəntəl bɹæntʃəz ɪn tu θaʊzən jɪɹz."

The Green Man gave Rand an odd look, then shook his head. "Avendesora is not here. I have not rested beneath its ungentle branches in two thousand years."

"ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf ɪz nɑt waɪ wi keɪm," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd fɝmli. ʃi dʒɛstʃɝd tə ði ɑɹtʃ. "ɪn ðɛɹ, ɪz."

"The Tree of Life is not why we came," Moiraine said firmly. She gestured to the arch. "In there, is."

"aɪ wɪl nɑt ɡoʊ ɪn wɪð ju," ðə ɡɹin mæn sɛd. ðə bʌɾɝflaɪz ɝaʊn ɪm swɝld əz ɪf ðeɪ ʃɛɹd səm ædʒəteɪʃən. "aɪ wɑz sɛt tə ɡɑɹɾ ɪt lɔŋ, lɔŋ əɡoʊ, bʌɾ ɪt meɪks mi ənizi tə kʌm tu kloʊs. aɪ fil maɪsɛlf biɪŋ ənmeɪd; maɪ ɛn ɪz lɪŋkt wɪð ɪt, sʌmhaʊ. aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðə meɪkɪŋ ʌv ɪt. səm ə ðə meɪkɪŋ. sʌm." hɪz heɪzəlnʌɾ aɪz stɛɹd, lɔst ɪn mɛmɹi, ən i fɪŋɡɝɾ ɪz skɑɹ. "ɪt wɑz ðə fɝs deɪz ə ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, wən ðə dʒɔɪ ʌv vɪktɝi oʊvɝ ðə dɑɹk wʌn tɝn bɪɾɝ wɪð ðə nɑlədʒ ðəɾ ɔl maɪt jɛt bi ʃæɾɝd baɪ ðə weɪɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. ə hʌnʒɹəd ə ðɛm meɪɾ ɪt, mɛn ən wɪmən təɡɛðɝ. ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ɛɛs sədaɪ wɝks wɝ ɔlweɪz dʌn soʊ, dʒɔɪnɪŋ seɪɾɪn ən seɪaɪdɑɹ, əz ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ɪz dʒɔɪnd. ðeɪ daɪd, ɔl, tə meɪk ɪt pjʊɹ, waɪl ðə wɝld wɑz tɔɹn ɝaʊn ðɛm. noʊɪŋ ðeɪ wəd daɪ, ðeɪ tʃɑɹdʒ mi tə ɡɑɹɾ ɪɾ əɡɛns ðə nid tə kʌm. ɪt wɑz nɑt wʌɾ aɪ wɑz meɪd fɔɹ, bʌɾ ɔl wɑz bɹeɪkɪŋ əpɑɹt, ən ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn, ən aɪ wɑz ɔl ðeɪ hæd. ɪt wɑz nɑt wʌɾ aɪ wɑz meɪd fɔɹ, bʌɾ aɪ hæv kɛp ðə feɪθ." hi lʊk daʊn ət mɔɪɹeɪn, nɑɾɪŋ tə hɪmsɛlf. "aɪ hæv kɛp feɪθ, əntɪl ɪt wɑz niɾəd. ən naʊ ɪɾ ɛnz."

"I will not go in with you," the Green Man said. The butterflies around him swirled as if they shared some agitation. "I was set to guard it long, long ago, but it makes me uneasy to come too close. I feel myself being unmade; my end is linked with it, somehow. I remember the making of it. Some of the making. Some." His hazelnut eyes stared, lost in memory, and he fingered his scar. "It was the first days of the Breaking of the World, when the joy of victory over the Dark One turned bitter with the knowledge that all might yet be shattered by the weight of the Shadow. A hundred of them made it, men and women together. The greatest Aes Sedai works were always done so, joining saidin and saidar, as the True Source is joined. They died, all, to make it pure, while the world was torn around them. Knowing they would die, they charged me to guard it against the need to come. It was not what I was made for, but all was breaking apart, and they were alone, and I was all they had. It was not what I was made for, but I have kept the faith." He looked down at Moiraine, nodding to himself. "I have kept faith, until it was needed. And now it ends."

"ju hæv kɛp ðə feɪθ bɛɾɝ ðən moʊst ʌv əs u ɡeɪv jə ðə tʃɑɹdʒ," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd. "pɝhæps ɪɾəl nɑt kʌm əz bædli əz jə fɪɹ."

"You have kept the faith better than most of us who gave you the charge," the Aes Sedai said. "Perhaps it will not come as badly as you fear."

ðə skɑɹd, lifi hɛd ʃʊk sloʊli fɹəm saɪd tə saɪd. "aɪ noʊ ən ɛndɪŋ wən ɪt kʌmz, ɛɛs sədaɪ. əl faɪn ənʌðɝ pleɪs tə meɪk θɪŋz ɡɹoʊ." nʌtbɹoʊn aɪz swɛp sædli oʊvɝ ðə ɡɹin fɔɹəst. "ənʌðɝ pleɪs, pɝhæps. wən jə kʌm aʊt, əl si jə əɡɛn, ɪf ðəɹ ɪz taɪm." wɪð ðəɾ i stʃɹoʊɾ əweɪ, tʃɹeɪlɪŋ bʌɾɝflaɪz, bɪkʌmɪŋ wʌn wɪð ðə fɔɹəs mɔɹ kəmplitli ðən lænz kloʊk ɛvɝ kʊd.

The scarred, leafy head shook slowly from side to side. "I know an ending when it comes, Aes Sedai. I will find another place to make things grow." Nutbrown eyes swept sadly over the green forest. "Another place, perhaps. When you come out, I will see you again, if there is time." With that he strode away, trailing butterflies, becoming one with the forest more completely than Lan's cloak ever could.

"wʌt dɪɾ i min?" mæt dɪmændəd. "ɪf ðɛɹz taɪm?"

"What did he mean?" Mat demanded. "If there's time?"

"kʌm," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. ən ʃi stɛp θɹu ði ɑɹtʃ. læn wɛn əɾ əɹ hilz.

"Come," Moiraine said. And she stepped through the arch. Lan went at her heels.

ɹænd wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ wʌɾ i ɪkspɛktəd wən i fɑloʊd. ðə hɛɹ stɝɾ ənizəli ɑn ɪz ɑɹmz, ən ɹoʊz ɑn ðə bæk ə hɪz nɛk. bʌɾ ɪt wɑz oʊnli ə kɔɹəɾɝ, ɪts pɑlɪʃt wɔlz ɹaʊndəɾ oʊvɝhɛd laɪk ði ɑɹtʃ, waɪndɪŋ dʒɛnli daʊnwɝd. ðəɹ wɑz hɛdʒɹum ɪnʌf ən tə spɛɹ fəɹ lɔɪəl; ðəɹ wʊɾə bɪn ɹum ɪnʌf fəɹ ðə ɡɹin mæn. ðə smuð flɔɹ, slɪk tə ði aɪ laɪk ɔɪl sleɪt, jɛt sʌmhaʊ ɡeɪv ə ʃʊɹ fʊɾɪŋ. simləs, waɪt wɔlz ɡlɪɾɝd wɪð ʌnkaʊntɪd flɛks ɪn əntoʊl kʌlɝz, ɡɪvɪŋ ə loʊ, sɑf laɪɾ ivən æftɝ ðə sʌnlɪɾ ɑɹtʃweɪ vænɪʃt ɝaʊn ə kɝv bɪhaɪnd. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə laɪt wɑz noʊ nætʃɹəl θɪŋ, bʌɾ i sɛnst ɪt wɑz bɪnaɪn, tu. ðən waɪ ɪz jəɹ skɪn stɪl kɹɔlɪŋ? daʊn ðeɪ wɛnt, ən daʊn.

Rand was not sure what he expected when he followed. The hair stirred uneasily on his arms, and rose on the back of his neck. But it was only a corridor, its polished walls rounded overhead like the arch, winding gently downward. There was headroom enough and to spare for Loial; there would have been room enough for the Green Man. The smooth floor, slick to the eye like oiled slate, yet somehow gave a sure footing. Seamless, white walls glittered with uncounted flecks in untold colors, giving a low, soft light even after the sunlit archway vanished around a curve behind. He was sure the light was no natural thing, but he sensed it was benign, too. Then why is your skin still crawling? Down they went, and down.

"ðɛɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ ət læst, pɔɪntɪŋ. "əhɛd."

"There," Moiraine said at last, pointing. "Ahead."

ən ðə kɔɹəɾɝ oʊpən ɪndə ə væst, doʊm speɪs, ðə ɹʌf, lɪvɪŋ ɹɑk ʌv ɪts silɪŋ dɑɾəd wɪð klʌmps ʌv ɡloʊɪŋ kɹɪstəlz. bɪloʊ ɪt, ə pul tʊk ʌp ði ɪntaɪɝ kævɝn, ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə wɔkweɪ ɝaʊn ɪt, pɝhæps faɪv peɪsɪz waɪd. ɪn ði oʊvəl ʃeɪp ʌv ən aɪ, ðə pul wɑz laɪn əbaʊɾ ɪts ɹɪm wɪð ə loʊ, flæɾ ɛdʒɪŋ ə kɹɪstəlz ðət ɡloʊd wɪð ə dʌlɝ, jɛt fɪɹsɝ, laɪt ðən ðoʊz əbʌv. ɪts sɝfəs wɑz əz smuð əz ɡlæs ən əz klɪɹ əz ðə waɪnspɹɪŋ wɔɾɝ. ɹænd fɛlt əz ɪf ɪz aɪz kəd pɛnətʃɹeɪɾ ɪt fɝɛvɝ, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt si ɛni bɑɾəm tə ɪt.

And the corridor opened into a vast, domed space, the rough, living rock of its ceiling dotted with clumps of glowing crystals. Below it, a pool took up the entire cavern, except for the walkway around it, perhaps five paces wide. In the oval shape of an eye, the pool was lined about its rim with a low, flat edging of crystals that glowed with a duller, yet fiercer, light than those above. Its surface was as smooth as glass and as clear as the Winespring Water. Rand felt as if his eyes could penetrate it forever, but he could not see any bottom to it.

"ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd sɔfli bɪsaɪd hɪm.

"The Eye of the World," Moiraine said softly beside him.

əz i lʊkt ɝaʊn ɪn wʌndɝ, hi ɹilaɪz ðət ðə lɔŋ jɪɹz sɪns ðə meɪkɪŋ - θɹi θaʊzən ə ðɛm - hæd wɝk ðɛɹ weɪ waɪl noʊ wʌn keɪm. nɑɾ ɔl ðə kɹɪstəlz ɪn ðə doʊm ɡloʊd wɪð ðə seɪm ɪntɛnsəɾi. səm wɝ stʃɹɔŋɝ, səm wikɝ; səm flɪkɝd, ən ʌðɝz wɝ oʊnli fæsəɾɪd lʌmps tə spɑɹkəl ɪn ə kæptʃɝd laɪt. hæɾ ɔl ʃoʊn, ðə doʊm wʊɾə bɪn əz bɹaɪɾ əz nundeɪ, bʌt ðeɪ meɪɾ ɪɾ oʊnli leɪɾ æftɝnun, naʊ. dʌs koʊɾəd ðə wɔkweɪ, ən bɪts ə stoʊn ən ivən kɹɪstəl. lɔŋ jɪɹz weɪɾɪŋ, waɪl ðə wil tɝn ən ɡɹaʊnd.

As he looked around in wonder, he realized that the long years since the making - three thousand of them - had worked their way while no one came. Not all the crystals in the dome glowed with the same intensity. Some were stronger, some weaker; some flickered, and others were only faceted lumps to sparkle in a captured light. Had all shone, the dome would have been as bright as noonday, but they made it only late afternoon, now. Dust coated the walkway, and bits of stone and even crystal. Long years waiting, while the Wheel turned and ground.

"bʌt wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" mæt æskt ənizəli. "ðæt dʌzn lʊk laɪk ɛni wɔɾɝ aɪ ɛvɝ sɔ." hi kɪkt ə lʌmp ə dɑɹk stoʊn ðə saɪz ə hɪz fɪst oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ. "ɪt - "

"But what is it?" Mat asked uneasily. "That doesn't look like any water I ever saw." He kicked a lump of dark stone the size of his fist over the edge. "It - "

ðə stoʊn stʃɹʌk ðə ɡlæsi sɝfəs ən slɪɾ ɪndə ðə pul wɪθaʊɾ ə splæʃ, əɹ soʊ mʌtʃ əz ə ɹɪpəl. əz ɪt sæŋk, ðə ɹɑk bɪɡæn tə swɛl, ɡɹoʊɪŋ ɛvɝ lɑɹdʒɝ, lɑɹdʒɝ ən mɔɹ ətɛnjueɪɾɪd, ə blɑb ðə saɪz ə hɪz hɛd ðət ɹænd kəɾ ɔlmoʊst si θɹu, ə feɪn blɝ əz waɪɾ əz ɪz ɑɹm wɑz lɔŋ. ðən ɪt wɑz ɡɔn. hi θɔɾ ɪz skɪn wəd kɹip ɹaɪɾ ɔf ɪz bɑɾi.

The stone struck the glassy surface and slid into the pool without a splash, or so much as a ripple. As it sank, the rock began to swell, growing ever larger, larger and more attenuated, a blob the size of his head that Rand could almost see through, a faint blur as wide as his arm was long. Then it was gone. He thought his skin would creep right off his body.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" hi dɪmændəd, ən wɑz ʃɑkt ət ðə hɔɹs hɑɹʃnəs ə hɪz oʊn vɔɪs.

"What is it?" he demanded, and was shocked at the hoarse harshness of his own voice.

"ɪt maɪt bi kɔl ði ɛsəns ə seɪɾɪn." ði ɛɛs sədaɪz wɝdz ɛkoʊd ɹaʊn ðə doʊm. "ði ɛsəns ə ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, ðə pjʊɹ ɛsəns ə ðə paʊɝ wildɪd baɪ mɛn bɪfɔɹ ðə taɪm ə mædnəs. ðə paʊɝ tə mɛn ðə sil ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən, əɹ tə bɹeɪk ɪɾ oʊpən kəmplitli."

"It might be called the essence of saidin." The Aes Sedai's words echoed round the dome. "The essence of the male half of the True Source, the pure essence of the Power wielded by men before the Time of Madness. The Power to mend the seal on the Dark One's prison, or to break it open completely."

"ðə laɪt ʃaɪn ɑn əs ən pɹətɛkt ʌs," nɪneɪiv wɪspɝd. ɛɡwin klʌtʃt əɹ əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə haɪd bɪhaɪn ðə wɪzdəm. ivən læn stɝɾ ənizəli, ðoʊ ðəɹ wɑz noʊ sɝpɹaɪz ɪn ɪz aɪz.

"The Light shine on us and protect us," Nynaeve whispered. Egwene clutched her as if she wanted to hide behind the Wisdom. Even Lan stirred uneasily, though there was no surprise in his eyes.

stoʊn θʌddɪɾ ɪndə ɹændz ʃoʊldɝz, ən i ɹilaɪzd i hæd bækt əz fɑɹ əz ðə wɔl, əz fɑɹ fɹəm ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld əz i kəd ɡɛt. hi wʊɾə pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf ɹaɪt θɹu ðə wɔl, ɪf i kəd hæv. mæt, tu, wɑz spleɪɾ aʊɾ əɡɛns ðə stoʊn əz flæɾ əz i kəd meɪk hɪmsɛlf. pɛɹɪn wɑz stɛɹɪŋ ət ðə pul wɪð ɪz æks hæf dʒɹɔn. hɪz aɪz ʃoʊn, jɛloʊ ən fɪɹs.

Stone thudded into Rand's shoulders, and he realized he had backed as far as the wall, as far from the Eye of the World as he could get. He would have pushed himself right through the wall, if he could have. Mat, too, was splayed out against the stone as flat as he could make himself. Perrin was staring at the pool with his axe half drawn. His eyes shone, yellow and fierce.

"aɪ ɔlweɪz wʌndɝd," lɔɪəl sɛɾ ənizəli. "wɛn aɪ ɹɛɾ əbaʊɾ ɪt, aɪ ɔlweɪz wʌndɝd wʌɾ ɪt wɑz. waɪ? waɪ dɪd ðeɪ də ɪt? ən haʊ?"

"I always wondered," Loial said uneasily. "When I read about it, I always wondered what it was. Why? Why did they do it? And how?"

"noʊ wʌn lɪvɪŋ noʊz." mɔɪɹeɪn noʊ lɔŋɡɝ lʊkt ət ðə pul. ʃi wɑz wɑtʃɪŋ ɹænd ən ɪz tu fɹɛnz, stʌɾiɪŋ ðɛm, hɝ aɪz weɪɪŋ. "niðɝ ðə haʊ, nɔɹ mɔɹ ə ðə waɪ ðən ðəɾ ɪt wəd bi niɾəd wʌn deɪ, ən ðət ðət nid wəd bi ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ən moʊs dɛspɹɪt ðə wɝl hæd feɪs tə ðət taɪm. pɝhæps ɛvɝ wəd feɪs.

"No one living knows." Moiraine no longer looked at the pool. She was watching Rand and his two friends, studying them, her eyes weighing. "Neither the how, nor more of the why than that it would be needed one day, and that that need would be the greatest and most desperate the world had faced to that time. Perhaps ever would face.

"mɛni ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn əv ətɛmptəd tə faɪn ə weɪ tə juz ðɪs paʊɝ, bʌɾ ɪts əz əntʌtʃəbəl fəɹ ɛni wʊmən əz ðə mun ɪz fəɹ ə kæt. oʊnli ə mæn kəd tʃænəl ɪt, bʌt ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz nɪɹli θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz ɡɔn. jɛt ðə nid ðeɪ sɔ wɑz ə dɛspɹɪt wʌn. ðeɪ wɝk θɹu ðə teɪn ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɑn seɪɾɪn tə meɪk ɪt, ən meɪk ɪt pjʊɹ, noʊɪŋ ðət duɪŋ soʊ wəd kɪl əm ɔl. meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ ən fimeɪl təɡɛðɝ. ðə ɡɹin mæn spoʊk tʃɹu. ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst wʌndɝz ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz wɝ dʌn ɪn ðət weɪ, seɪɾɪn ən seɪaɪdɑɹ təɡɛðɝ. ɔl ðə wɪmən ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn, ɔl ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪn ɔl ðə kɔɹts ən sɪɾiz, ivən wɪð ðoʊz ɪn ðə lænz bɪɑn ðə weɪst, ivən kaʊntɪŋ ðoʊz u meɪ stɪl laɪv bɪɑn ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, kəd nɑt fɪl ə spun wɪð ðə paʊɝ, lækɪŋ mɛn tə wɝk wɪð ðɛm."

"Many in Tar Valon have attempted to find a way to use this Power, but it is as untouchable for any woman as the moon is for a cat. Only a man could channel it, but the last male Aes Sedai is nearly three thousand years gone. Yet the need they saw was a desperate one. They worked through the taint of the Dark One on saidin to make it, and make it pure, knowing that doing so would kill them all. Male Aes Sedai and female together. The Green Man spoke true. The greatest wonders of the Age of Legends were done in that way, saidin and saidar together. All the women in Tar Valon, all the Aes Sedai in all the courts and cities, even with those in the lands beyond the Waste, even counting those who may still live beyond the Aryth Ocean, could not fill a spoon with the Power, lacking men to work with them."

ɹændz θɹoʊt ɹæspt əz ɪf i hæd bɪn skɹimɪŋ. "waɪ dɪd jə bɹɪŋ əs hɪɹ?"

Rand's throat rasped as if he had been screaming. "Why did you bring us here?"

"bɪkɔz jə ɑɹ tɑvɝən." ði ɛɛs sədaɪz feɪs wɑz ənɹiɾəbəl. hɝ aɪz ʃɪmɝd, ən sim tə pʊl ət hɪm. "bɪkɔz ðə dɑɹk wʌnz paʊɝ wɪl stʃɹaɪk hɪɹ, ən kəz ɪt mʌs bi kənfɹʌntəɾ ən stɑpt, əɹ ðə ʃædoʊ wɪl kʌvɝ ðə wɝld. ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid ɡɹeɪɾɝ ðən ðæt. lɛɾ əs ɡoʊ aʊɾ ɪndə ðə sʌnlaɪɾ əɡɛn, waɪl ðəɹ ɪz jɛt taɪm." wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ tə si ɪf ðeɪ wəd fɑloʊ, ʃi stɑɹɾəd bæk ʌp ðə kɔɹəɾɝ wɪð læn, hu stɛpt pɝhæps ə bɪt mɔɹ kwɪkli ðən juʒəwəl fəɹ hɪm. ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv hɝid bɪhaɪn hɝ.

"Because you are ta'veren." The Aes Sedai's face was unreadable. Her eyes shimmered, and seemed to pull at him. "Because the Dark One's power will strike here, and because it must be confronted and stopped, or the Shadow will cover the world. There is no need greater than that. Let us go out into the sunlight again, while there is yet time." Without waiting to see if they would follow, she started back up the corridor with Lan, who stepped perhaps a bit more quickly than usual for him. Egwene and Nynaeve hurried behind her.

ɹænd ɛdʒd əlɔŋ ðə wɔl - hi kəd nɑt meɪk hɪmsɛlf ɡɛɾ ivən wʌn stɛp kloʊsɝ tə wʌt ðə pul wɑz - ən skɹæmbəld ɪndə ðə kɔɹəɾɝ ɪn ə tæŋɡəl wɪð mæt ən pɛɹɪn. hi wʊɾə ɹʌn ɪf ɪt hæd nɑt mɛn tʃɹæmplɪŋ ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv, mɔɪɹeɪn ən læn. hi kəd nɑt stɑp ʃeɪkɪŋ ivən wən i wɑz bæk aʊtsaɪd.

Rand edged along the wall - he could not make himself get even one step closer to what the pool was - and scrambled into the corridor in a tangle with Mat and Perrin. He would have run if it had not meant trampling Egwene and Nynaeve, Moiraine and Lan. He could not stop shaking even when he was back outside.

"aɪ də nɑt laɪk ðɪs, mɔɪɹeɪn," nɪneɪiv sɛɾ æŋɡɹəli wən ðə sʌn ʃoʊn ɑn əm əɡɛn. "aɪ bɪliv ðə deɪnʒɝ ɪz əz ɡɹeɪɾ əz jə seɪ əɹ aɪ wəd nɑt bi hɪɹ, bʌt ðɪs ɪz - "

"I do not like this, Moiraine," Nynaeve said angrily when the sun shone on them again. "I believe the danger is as great as you say or I would not be here, but this is - "

"aɪ hæv faʊn jə ət læst."

"I have found you at last."

ɹænd dʒɝkt əz ɪf ə ɹoʊp hæd taɪɾənd ɝaʊn ɪz nɛk. ðə wɝdz, ðə vɔɪs . . . fəɹ ə moʊmən i bɪlivd ɪt wɑz bælzəmən. bʌt ðə tu mɛn u wɔkt aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz, feɪsəz hɪɾən baɪ ðɛɹ kaʊlz, dɪd nɑt wɛɹ kloʊks ðə kʌlɝ ə dʒɹaɪd blʌd. wʌn kloʊk wɑz ə dɑɹk ɡɹeɪ, ði ʌðɝ ɔlmoʊst əz dɑɹk ə ɡɹin, ən ðeɪ simd mʌsti ivən ɪn ði oʊpən ɛɹ. ən ðə mɛn wɝ nɑt feɪdz; ðə bɹiz stɝd ðɛɹ kloʊks.

Rand jerked as if a rope had tightened around his neck. The words, the voice . . . for a moment he believed it was Ba'alzamon. But the two men who walked out of the trees, faces hidden by their cowls, did not wear cloaks the color of dried blood. One cloak was a dark gray, the other almost as dark a green, and they seemed musty even in the open air. And the men were not Fades; the breeze stirred their cloaks.

"hu ɑɹ ju?" lænz stæns wɑz kɔʃəs, hɪz hæn ɑn ɪz sɔɹd hɪlt. "haʊ dɪd jə kʌm hɪɹ? ɪf jə ɑɹ sikɪŋ ðə ɡɹin mæn - "

"Who are you?" Lan's stance was cautious, his hand on his sword hilt. "How did you come here? If you are seeking the Green Man - "

"hi ɡaɪɾəd ʌs." ðə hæn ðət pɔɪntəd tə mæt wɑz oʊld ən ʃɹɪvəl tə skɛɹsli hjumən, lækɪŋ ə fɪŋɡɝneɪl ən wɪð nʌkəlz nɑɹld laɪk nɑts ɪn ə pis ə ɹoʊp. mæt tʊk ə stɛp bæk, aɪz waɪɾənɪŋ. "æn oʊl θɪŋ, ən oʊl fɹɛnd, ən oʊld ɛnəmi. bʌt hiz nɑt ðə wʌn wi sik," ðə ɡɹin-kloʊk mæn fɪnɪʃt. ði ʌðɝ mæn stʊɾ əz ɪf i wəd nɛvɝ spik.

"He guided us." The hand that pointed to Mat was old and shriveled to scarcely human, lacking a fingernail and with knuckles gnarled like knots in a piece of rope. Mat took a step back, eyes widening. "An old thing, an old friend, an old enemy. But he is not the one we seek," the green-cloaked man finished. The other man stood as if he would never speak.

mɔɪɹeɪn stʃɹeɪɾənd tə hɝ fʊl haɪt, noʊ mɔɹ ðən ʃoʊldɝ haɪ tə ɛni mæn ðɛɹ, bʌt sʌɾənli simɪŋ əz tɔl əz ðə hɪlz. hɝ vɔɪs ɹæŋ laɪk ə bɛl, dɪmændɪŋ, "hu ɑɹ ju?"

Moiraine straightened to her full height, no more than shoulder high to any man there, but suddenly seeming as tall as the hills. Her voice rang like a bell, demanding, "Who are you?"

hænz pʊʃt bæk hʊdz, ən ɹænd ɡɑɡəld. ði oʊl mæn wɑz oʊldɝ ðən oʊld; hi meɪd sɛn bui lʊk laɪk ə tʃaɪld ɪn ðə blum ə hɛlθ. ðə skɪn ə hɪz feɪs wɑz laɪk kɹeɪz pɑɹtʃmən dʒɹɔn taɪɾ oʊvɝ ə skʌl, ðən pʊl taɪɾɝ stɪl. wɪspi tʌfs ə bɹɪɾəl hɛɹ stʊɾ əɾ ɑd pleɪsəz ɑn ɪz skəbɹəs skælp. hɪz ɪɹz wɝ wɪðɝd bɪts laɪk skɹæps ʌv eɪntʃən lɛðɝ; hɪz aɪz sʌŋkən, piɹɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛɾ əz ɪf fɹəm ði ɛnz ə tʌnəlz. jɛt ði ʌðɝ wɑz wɝs. ə taɪt, blæk lɛðɝ kæɹəpɑtʃ kʌvɝd ðət wʌnz hɛɾ ən feɪs kəmplitli, bʌt ðə fɹʌn ʌv ɪt wɑz wɝkt ɪndə ə pɝfək feɪs, ə jʌŋ mænz feɪs, læfɪŋ waɪldli, læfɪŋ ənseɪnli, fɹoʊzən fɝɛvɝ. wʌɾ ɪz i haɪɾɪŋ ɪf ði ʌðɝ ʃoʊz wʌɾ i ʃoʊz? ðən ivən θɔt fɹoʊz ɪn ɪz hɛd, ʃæɾɝd tə dʌst ən blu əweɪ.

Hands pushed back hoods, and Rand goggled. The old man was older than old; he made Cenn Buie look like a child in the bloom of health. The skin of his face was like crazed parchment drawn tight over a skull, then pulled tighter still. Wispy tufts of brittle hair stood at odd places on his scabrous scalp. His ears were withered bits like scraps of ancient leather; his eyes sunken, peering out of his head as if from the ends of tunnels. Yet the other was worse. A tight, black leather carapace covered that one's head and face completely, but the front of it was worked into a perfect face, a young man's face, laughing wildly, laughing insanely, frozen forever. What is he hiding if the other shows what he shows? Then even thought froze in his head, shattered to dust and blew away.

"aɪ æm kɔld eɪdʒɪnɝ," ði oʊld wʌn sɛd. "æn hiz bælθəməl. hi noʊ lɔŋɡɝ spiks wɪð ɪz tʌŋ. ðə wil ɡɹaɪnz ɪksiɾɪŋli faɪn oʊvɝ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz ɪmpɹɪzənd." hɪz sʌŋkən aɪz slɪd tə ði ɑɹtʃ; bælθəməl lin fɔɹwɝd, hɪz mæsks aɪz ɑn ðə waɪt stoʊn oʊpənɪŋ, əz ɪf i wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ stʃɹeɪɾ ɪn. "soʊ lɔŋ wɪθaʊt," eɪdʒɪnɝ sɛd sɔfli. "soʊ lɔŋ."

"I am called Aginor," the old one said. "And he is Balthamel. He no longer speaks with his tongue. The Wheel grinds exceedingly fine over three thousand years imprisoned." His sunken eyes slid to the arch; Balthamel leaned forward, his mask's eyes on the white stone opening, as if he wanted to go straight in. "So long without," Aginor said softly. "So long."

"ðə laɪt pɹətɛkt - " lɔɪəl bɪɡæn, hɪz vɔɪs ʃeɪkɪŋ, ən kʌɾ ɔf əbɹʌpli wən eɪdʒɪnɝ lʊkt ət hɪm.

"The Light protect - " Loial began, his voice shaking, and cut off abruptly when Aginor looked at him.

"ðə fɔɹseɪkən," mæt sɛd hɔɹsli, "ɑɹ baʊn ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl - "

"The Forsaken," Mat said hoarsely, "are bound in Shayol Ghul - "

"wɝ baʊnd." eɪdʒɪnɝ smaɪld; hɪz jɛloʊd tiθ hæd ðə lʊk ə fæŋz. "sʌm ʌv əs ɑɹ baʊnd noʊ lɔŋɡɝ. ðə silz wikən, ɛɛs sədaɪ. laɪk ɪʃəml, wi wɔk ðə wɝld əɡɛn, ən sun ðə ɹɛst ʌv əs wɪl kʌm. aɪ wɑz tu kloʊz tə ðɪs wɝld ɪn maɪ kæptɪvəɾi, aɪ ən bælθəməl, tu kloʊs tə ðə ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ə ðə wil, bʌt sun ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wɪl bi fɹi, ən ɡɪv əs nu flɛʃ, ən ðə wɝld wɪl bi aʊɝz wʌns mɔɹ. jəl əv noʊ luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ, ðɪs taɪm. noʊ lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ tə seɪv ju. wi noʊ ðə wʌn wi sik naʊ, ən ðəɹ ɪz noʊ mɔɹ nid fəɹ ðə ɹɛst ə ju."

"Were bound." Aginor smiled; his yellowed teeth had the look of fangs. "Some of us are bound no longer. The seals weaken, Aes Sedai. Like Ishamael, we walk the world again, and soon the rest of us will come. I was too close to this world in my captivity, I and Balthamel, too close to the grinding of the Wheel, but soon the Great Lord of the Dark will be free, and give us new flesh, and the world will be ours once more. You will have no Lews Therin Kinslayer, this time. No Lord of the Morning to save you. We know the one we seek now, and there is no more need for the rest of you."

lænz sɔɹd spɹæŋ fɹəm ɪts skæbɝd tu fæs fəɹ ɹændz aɪ tə fɑloʊ. jɛt ðə wɔɹɾɝ hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, aɪz flɪkɝɪŋ tə mɔɪɹeɪn, tə nɪneɪiv. ðə tu wɪmən stʊd wɛl əpɑɹt; tə pʊt hɪmsɛlf bɪtwin iðɝ ə ðɛm ən ðə fɔɹseɪkən wəd pʊɾ ɪm fɝðɝ fɹəm ði ʌðɝ. oʊnli fəɹ ə hɑɹtbit ðə hɛzəteɪʃən læstəd, bʌɾ əz ðə wɔɹɾɝz fit muvd, eɪdʒɪnɝ ɹeɪzd ɪz hænd. ɪt wɑz ə skɔɹnfəl dʒɛstʃɝ, ə flɪpɪŋ ə hɪz nɑɹl fɪŋɡɝz əz ɪf tə ʃu əweɪ ə flaɪ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ flu bækwɝdz θɹu ði ɛɹ əz ðoʊ ə hjudʒ fɪs hæd kɑt hɪm. wɪð ə dʌl θʌd læn stʃɹʌk ðə stoʊn ɑɹtʃ, hæŋɪŋ ðəɹ fəɹ ən ɪnstən bɪfɔɹ dʒɹɑpɪŋ ɪn ə flæksɪd hip, hɪz sɔɹd laɪɪŋ nɪɹ ɪz aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt hænd.

Lan's sword sprang from its scabbard too fast for Rand's eye to follow. Yet the Warder hesitated, eyes flickering to Moiraine, to Nynaeve. The two women stood well apart; to put himself between either of them and the Forsaken would put him further from the other. Only for a heartbeat the hesitation lasted, but as the Warder's feet moved, Aginor raised his hand. It was a scornful gesture, a flipping of his gnarled fingers as if to shoo away a fly. The Warder flew backwards through the air as though a huge fist had caught him. With a dull thud Lan struck the stone arch, hanging there for an instant before dropping in a flaccid heap, his sword lying near his outstretched hand.

"noʊ!" nɪneɪiv skɹimd.

"NO!" Nynaeve screamed.

"bi stɪl!" mɔɪɹeɪn kəmændəd, bʌt bɪfɔɹ ɛniwʌn ɛls kəd muv ðə wɪzdəmz naɪf hæd lɛft əɹ bɛlt, ən ʃi wɑz ɹʌnɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə fɔɹseɪkən, hɝ smɔl bleɪɾ əpɹeɪzd.

"Be still!" Moiraine commanded, but before anyone else could move the Wisdom's knife had left her belt, and she was running toward the Forsaken, her small blade upraised.

"ðə laɪt blaɪn ju," ʃi kɹaɪd, stʃɹaɪkɪŋ əɾ eɪdʒɪnɝz tʃɛst.

"The Light blind you," she cried, striking at Aginor's chest.

ði ʌðɝ fɔɹseɪkən muv laɪk ə vaɪpɝ. waɪl əɹ bloʊ stɪl fɛl, bælθəməlz lɛðɝ-keɪs hæn dɑɹɾɪd aʊt tə siz əɹ tʃɪn, fɪŋɡɝz sɪŋkɪŋ ɪndə wʌn tʃik waɪl θʌm dʌɡ ɪndə ði ʌðɝ, dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ðə blʌɾ aʊt wɪð ðɛɹ pɹɛʃɝ ən ɹeɪzɪŋ ðə flɛʃ ɪn peɪl ɹɪdʒəz. ə kənvʌlʃən ɹæk nɪneɪiv fɹəm hɛd tə toʊ, əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn kɹæk laɪk ə wɪp. hɝ naɪf dʒɹɑp jusləsli fɹəm dæŋɡəlɪŋ fɪŋɡɝz əz bælθəməl lɪftəɾ əɹ baɪ hɪz ɡɹɪp, bɹɔɾ əɹ ʌp tə wɛɹ ðə lɛðɝ mæsk stɛɹɾ ɪndə hɝ stɪlkwɪvɝɪŋ feɪs. hɝ toʊz spæzmd ə fʊɾ əbʌv ðə ɡɹaʊnd; flaʊɝz ɹeɪn fɹəm əɹ hɛɹ.

The other Forsaken moved like a viper. While her blow still fell, Balthamel's leather-cased hand darted out to seize her chin, fingers sinking into one cheek while thumb dug into the other, driving the blood out with their pressure and raising the flesh in pale ridges. A convulsion wracked Nynaeve from head to toe, as if she had been cracked like a whip. Her knife dropped uselessly from dangling fingers as Balthamel lifted her by his grip, brought her up to where the leather mask stared into her stillquivering face. Her toes spasmed a foot above the ground; flowers rained from her hair.

"aɪ hæv ɔlmoʊs fɝɡɑɾən ðə plɛʒɝz ə ðə flɛʃ." eɪdʒɪnɝz tʌŋ kɹɔst ɪz wɪðɝd lɪps, saʊndɪŋ laɪk stoʊn ɑn ɹʌf lɛðɝ. "bʌt bælθəməl ɹɪmɛmbɝz mʌtʃ." ðə læftɝ ə ðə mæsk sim tə ɡɹoʊ waɪldɝ, ən ðə weɪl ðət lɛf nɪneɪiv bɝn ɹændz ɪɹz laɪk dɪspɛɹ ɹɪp fɹəm əɹ lɪvɪŋ hɑɹt.

"I have almost forgotten the pleasures of the flesh." Aginor's tongue crossed his withered lips, sounding like stone on rough leather. "But Balthamel remembers much." The laughter of the mask seemed to grow wilder, and the wail that left Nynaeve burned Rand's ears like despair ripped from her living heart.

sʌɾənli ɛɡwin muvd, ən ɹænd sɔ ðət ʃi wɑz gɑnə hɛlp nɪneɪiv. "ɛɡwin, noʊ!" hi ʃaʊɾəd, bʌt ʃi dɪd nɑt stɑp. hɪz hæn hæd ɡɔn tə hɪz sɔɹɾ ət nɪneɪivz kɹaɪ, bʌt naʊ hi əbændən ɪɾ ən θɹu hɪmsɛlf əɾ ɛɡwin. hi θʌddɪɾ ɪndə hɝ bɪfɔɹ ʃi tʊk əɹ θɝd stɛp, kæɹiɪŋ əm boʊθ tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. ɛɡwin lændəɾ ʌndɝ ɪm wɪð ə ɡæsp, ɪmiɾiətli θɹæʃɪŋ tə ɡɛt fɹi.

Suddenly Egwene moved, and Rand saw that she was going to help Nynaeve. "Egwene, no!" he shouted, but she did not stop. His hand had gone to his sword at Nynaeve's cry, but now he abandoned it and threw himself at Egwene. He thudded into her before she took her third step, carrying them both to the ground. Egwene landed under him with a gasp, immediately thrashing to get free.

ʌðɝz wɝ muvɪŋ, tu, hi ɹilaɪzd. pɛɹɪnz æks wɝld ɪndə hɪz hænz, ən ɪz aɪz ɡloʊd ɡoʊldən ən fɪɹs. "wɪzdəm!" mæt haʊld, ðə dæɡɝ fɹəm ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ ɪn ɪz fɪst.

Others were moving, too, he realized. Perrin's axe whirled into his hands, and his eyes glowed golden and fierce. "Wisdom!" Mat howled, the dagger from Shadar Logoth in his fist.

"noʊ!" ɹænd kɔld. "ju kæn faɪt ðə fɔɹseɪkən!" bʌt ðeɪ ɹæn pæst ɪm əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd nɑt hɝd, ðɛɹ aɪz ɑn nɪneɪiv ən ðə tu fɔɹseɪkən.

"No!" Rand called. "You can't fight the Forsaken!" But they ran past him as if they had not heard, their eyes on Nynaeve and the two Forsaken.

eɪdʒɪnɝ ɡlænst ət ðɛm, ʌnkənsɝnədli . . . ən smaɪld.

Aginor glanced at them, unconcernedly . . . and smiled.

ɹænd fɛl ði ɛɹ stɝ əbʌv ɪm laɪk ðə kɹæk ʌv ə dʒaɪəns wɪp. mæt ən pɛɹɪn, nɑɾ ivən hæfweɪ tə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, stɑpt əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd ɹʌn ɪndə ə wɔl, baʊns bæk tə spɹɔl ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

Rand felt the air stir above him like the crack of a giant's whip. Mat and Perrin, not even halfway to the Forsaken, stopped as if they had run into a wall, bounced back to sprawl on the ground.

"ɡʊd," eɪdʒɪnɝ sɛd. "ə fɪɾɪŋ pleɪs fəɹ ju. ɪf jə lɝn tə əbeɪs jɝsɛlf pɹɑpɝli ɪn wɝʃəp ʌv ʌs, aɪ maɪt lɛt jə lɪv."

"Good," Aginor said. "A fitting place for you. If you learn to abase yourself properly in worship of us, I might let you live."

heɪstəli ɹænd skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fit. pɝhæps i kəd nɑt faɪt ðə fɔɹseɪkən - noʊ ɔɹɾənɛɹi hjumən kəd - bʌɾ i wəd nɑt lɛɾ əm bɪliv fəɹ ə mɪnət ðəɾ i wɑz ɡɹɔvəlɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ðɛm. hi tʃɹaɪd tə hɛlp ɛɡwin ʌp, bʌt ʃi slæpt ɪz hænz əweɪ ən stʊd baɪ hɝsɛlf, æŋɡɹəli bɹʌʃɪŋ ɔf əɹ dʒɹɛs. mæt ən pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɔlsoʊ stʌbɝnli pʊʃt ðɛmsɛlvz ənstɛɾəli ɪɹɛkt.

Hastily Rand scrambled to his feet. Perhaps he could not fight the Forsaken - no ordinary human could - but he would not let them believe for a minute that he was groveling before them. He tried to help Egwene up, but she slapped his hands away and stood by herself, angrily brushing off her dress. Mat and Perrin had also stubbornly pushed themselves unsteadily erect.

"ju wɪl lɝn," eɪdʒɪnɝ sɛd, "ɪf jə wɑnə lɪv. naʊ ðəɾ aɪ hæv faʊnd wʌɾ aɪ nid" - hɪz aɪz wɛn tə ðə stoʊn ɑɹtʃweɪ - "aɪ meɪ teɪk ðə taɪm tə titʃ ju."

"You will learn," Aginor said, "if you want to live. Now that I have found what I need" - his eyes went to the stone archway - "I may take the time to teach you."

"ðɪs ʃæl nɑt bi!" ðə ɡɹin mæn stʃɹoʊɾ aʊɾ ə ðə tʃɹiz wɪð ə vɔɪs laɪk laɪtnɪŋ stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ən eɪntʃən oʊk. "ju də nɑt bɪlɔŋ hɪɹ!"

"This shall not be!" The Green Man strode out of the trees with a voice like lightning striking an ancient oak. "You do not belong here!"

eɪdʒɪnɝ spɛɹɾ ɪm ə bɹif, kəntɛmptʃuəs ɡlæns. "bɪɡɔn! jəɹ taɪm ɪz ɛndəd, ɔl jəɹ kaɪn bʌt jə lɔŋ sɪns dʌst. lɪv wʌt laɪf ɪz lɛf tə jə ən bi ɡlæd jə ɑɹ bɪniθ əɹ noʊɾəs."

Aginor spared him a brief, contemptuous glance. "Begone! Your time is ended, all your kind but you long since dust. Live what life is left to you and be glad you are beneath our notice."

"ðɪs ɪz maɪ pleɪs," ðə ɡɹin mæn sɛd, "æn jə ʃæl hɝt noʊ lɪvɪŋ θɪŋ hɪɹ."

"This is my place," the Green Man said, "and you shall hurt no living thing here."

bælθəməl tɔs nɪneɪiv əsaɪd laɪk ə ɹæɡ, ən laɪk ə kɹʌmpəld ɹæɡ ʃi fɛl, aɪz stɛɹɪŋ, lɪmp əz ɪf ɔl əɹ boʊnz hæd mɛltəd. wʌn lɛðɝ-klæd hæn lɪftəd, ən ðə ɡɹin mæn ɹɔɹɾ əz smoʊk ɹoʊz fɹəm ðə vaɪnz ðət woʊv hɪm. ðə wɪn ɪn ðə tʃɹiz ɛkoʊɾ ɪz peɪn.

Balthamel tossed Nynaeve aside like a rag, and like a crumpled rag she fell, eyes staring, limp as if all her bones had melted. One leather-clad hand lifted, and the Green Man roared as smoke rose from the vines that wove him. The wind in the trees echoed his pain.

eɪdʒɪnɝ tɝn bæk tə ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz, əz ɪf ðə ɡɹin mæn hæd bɪn dɛlt wɪð, bʌt wʌn lɔŋ stʃɹaɪɾ ən mæsɪv, lifi ɑɹmz ɹæp ðɛmsɛlvz ɝaʊn bælθəməl, ɹeɪzɪŋ ɪm haɪ, kɹʌʃɪŋ ɪm əɡɛnst ə tʃɛst ə θɪk kɹipɝz, blæk lɛðɝ mæsk læfɪŋ ɪndə heɪzəlnʌɾ aɪz dɑɹk wɪð æŋɡɝ. laɪk sɝpəns bælθəməlz ɑɹmz ɹɪθ fɹi, hɪz ɡlʌv hænz ɡɹæspɪŋ ðə ɡɹin mænz hɛɾ əz ðoʊ hi wəd ɹɛntʃ ɪɾ ɔf. fleɪmz ʃɑɾ ʌp wɛɹ ðoʊz hænz tʌtʃt, vaɪnz wɪðɝɪŋ, livz fɔlɪŋ. ðə ɡɹin mæn bɛloʊɾ əz θɪk, dɑɹk smoʊk pɔɹɾ aʊt bɪtwin ðə vaɪnz ə hɪz bɑɾi. ɑn ən ɑn i ɹɔɹd, əz ɪf ɔl ə hɪm wɝ kʌmɪŋ aʊɾ ə hɪz maʊθ wɪð ðə smoʊk ðət bɪloʊd bɪtwin ɪz lɪps.

Aginor turned back to Rand and the others, as if the Green Man had been dealt with, but one long stride and massive, leafy arms wrapped themselves around Balthamel, raising him high, crushing him against a chest of thick creepers, black leather mask laughing into hazelnut eyes dark with anger. Like serpents Balthamel's arms writhed free, his gloved hands grasping the Green Man's head as though he would wrench it off. Flames shot up where those hands touched, vines withering, leaves falling. The Green Man bellowed as thick, dark smoke poured out between the vines of his body. On and on he roared, as if all of him were coming out of his mouth with the smoke that billowed between his lips.

sʌɾənli bælθəməl dʒɝkt ɪn ðə ɡɹin mænz ɡɹæsp. ðə fɔɹseɪkənz hænz tʃɹaɪd tə pʊʃ ɪm əweɪ ɪnstɛɾ ə klʌtʃɪŋ hɪm. wʌn ɡlʌv hæn flʌŋ waɪd . . . ən ə taɪni kɹipɝ bɝs θɹu ðə blæk lɛðɝ. ə fʌŋɡəs, sətʃ əz ɹɪŋz tʃɹiz ɪn ðə dip ʃædoʊz ə ðə fɔɹəst, ɹɪŋd ɪz ɑɹm, spɹæŋ fɹəm noʊwɛɹ tə fʊl-ɡɹoʊn, swɛlɪŋ tə kʌvɝ ðə lɛŋθ ʌv ɪt. bælθəməl θɹæʃt, ən ə ʃuɾ ə stɪŋkwid ɹɪpt oʊpən ɪz kæɹəpɑtʃ, laɪkənz dʌɡ ɪn ðɛɹ ɹuts ən splɪt taɪni kɹæks əkɹɔs ðə lɛðɝ ə hɪz feɪs, nɛɾəlz bɹoʊk ði aɪz ə hɪz mæsk, dɛθshɛd mʌʃɹumz tɔɹ oʊpən ðə maʊθ.

Suddenly Balthamel jerked in the Green Man's grasp. The Forsaken's hands tried to push him away instead of clutching him. One gloved hand flung wide . . . and a tiny creeper burst through the black leather. A fungus, such as rings trees in the deep shadows of the forest, ringed his arm, sprang from nowhere to full-grown, swelling to cover the length of it. Balthamel thrashed, and a shoot of stinkweed ripped open his carapace, lichens dug in their roots and split tiny cracks across the leather of his face, nettles broke the eyes of his mask, deathshead mushrooms tore open the mouth.

ðə ɡɹin mæn θɹu ðə fɔɹseɪkən daʊn. bælθəməl twɪstəɾ ən dʒɝkt əz ɔl ðə θɪŋz ðət ɡɹu ɪn ðə dɑɹk pleɪsəz, ɔl ðə θɪŋz wɪð spɔɹz, ɔl ðə θɪŋz ðət lʌv ðə dæŋk, swɛld ən ɡɹu, tɔɹ klɔθ ən lɛðɝ ən flɛʃ - wɑz ɪt flɛʃ, sin ɪn ðət bɹif moʊmən ə vɝɾənt ɹeɪdʒ? - tə tæɾɝd ʃɹɛdz ən kʌvɝɾ ɪm əntɪl oʊnli ə maʊn ɹɪmeɪnd, ɪndɪstɪŋɡwɪʃəbəl fɹəm mɛni ɪn ðə ʃeɪɾɪd dɛpθs ə ðə ɡɹin fɔɹəst, ən ðə maʊn muv noʊ mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ.

The Green Man threw the Forsaken down. Balthamel twisted and jerked as all the things that grew in the dark places, all the things with spores, all the things that loved the dank, swelled and grew, tore cloth and leather and flesh - Was it flesh, seen in that brief moment of verdant rage? - to tattered shreds and covered him until only a mound remained, indistinguishable from many in the shaded depths of the green forest, and the mound moved no more than they.

wɪð ə ɡɹoʊn laɪk ə lɪm bɹeɪkɪŋ ʌndɝ tu ɡɹeɪɾ ə weɪt, ðə ɡɹin mæn kɹæʃt tə ðə ɡɹaʊnd. hæf ɪz hɛd wɑz tʃɑɹd blæk. tɛnʒɹəlz ə smoʊk stɪl ɹoʊz fɹəm hɪm, laɪk ɡɹeɪ kɹipɝz. bɝn livz fɛl fɹəm ɪz ɑɹm əz i peɪnfəli stʃɹɛtʃt aʊɾ ɪz blækən hæn tə dʒɛnli kʌp ən eɪkɔɹn.

With a groan like a limb breaking under too great a weight, the Green Man crashed to the ground. Half his head was charred black. Tendrils of smoke still rose from him, like gray creepers. Burned leaves fell from his arm as he painfully stretched out his blackened hand to gently cup an acorn.

ði ɝθ ɹʌmbəld əz ən oʊk sidlɪŋ pʊʃt ʌp bɪtwin ɪz fɪŋɡɝz. ðə ɡɹin mænz hɛd fɛl, bʌt ðə sidlɪŋ ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə sʌn, stʃɹeɪnɪŋ. ɹuts ʃɑɾ aʊɾ ən θɪkənd, dɛlv bɪniθ ðə ɡɹaʊn ən ɹoʊz əɡɛn, θɪkən mɔɹ əz ðeɪ sæŋk. ðə tʃɹʌŋk bɹɔɾənd ən stʃɹɛtʃt ʌpwɝd, bɑɹk tɝnɪŋ ɡɹeɪ ən fɪʃɝɾ ən eɪntʃənt. lɪmz spɹɛɾ ən ɡɹu hɛvi, əz bɪɡ əz ɑɹmz, əz bɪɡ əz mɛn, ən lɪftəd tə kɝɛs ðə skaɪ, θɪk wɪð ɡɹin livz, dɛns wɪð eɪkɔɹnz. ðə mæsɪv wɛb ə ɹuts tɝn ði ɝθ laɪk plaʊz əz ɪt spɹɛd; ði ɔlɹɛɾi hjudʒ tʃɹʌŋk ʃɪvɝd, ɡɹu waɪɾɝ, ɹaʊn əz ə haʊs. stɪlnəs keɪm. ən ən oʊk ðət cʊɾə stʊd faɪv hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz kʌvɝd ðə spɑt wɛɹ ðə ɡɹin mæn hæd bɪn, mɑɹkɪŋ ðə tum ʌv ə lɛdʒənd. nɪneɪiv leɪ ɑn ðə nɑɹld ɹuts, ɡɹoʊn kɝv tə hɝ ʃeɪp, tə meɪk ə bɛd fəɹ əɹ tə ɹɛst əpɑn. ðə wɪn saɪd θɹu ði oʊks bɹæntʃəz; ɪt sim tə mɝmɝ fɛɹwɛl.

The earth rumbled as an oak seedling pushed up between his fingers. The Green Man's head fell, but the seedling reached for the sun, straining. Roots shot out and thickened, delved beneath the ground and rose again, thickened more as they sank. The trunk broadened and stretched upward, bark turning gray and fissured and ancient. Limbs spread and grew heavy, as big as arms, as big as men, and lifted to caress the sky, thick with green leaves, dense with acorns. The massive web of roots turned the earth like plows as it spread; the already huge trunk shivered, grew wider, round as a house. Stillness came. And an oak that could have stood five hundred years covered the spot where the Green Man had been, marking the tomb of a legend. Nynaeve lay on the gnarled roots, grown curved to her shape, to make a bed for her to rest upon. The wind sighed through the oak's branches; it seemed to murmur farewell.

ivən eɪdʒɪnɝ sim stʌnd. ðən ɪz hɛd lɪftəd, kævɝnəs aɪz bɝnɪŋ wɪð heɪt. "ɪnʌf! ɪts pæs taɪm tə ɛn ðɪs!"

Even Aginor seemed stunned. Then his head lifted, cavernous eyes burning with hate. "Enough! It is past time to end this!"

"jɛs, fɔɹseɪkən," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd, hɝ vɔɪs əz koʊld əz dipwɪntɝ aɪs. "pæs taɪm!"

"Yes, Forsaken," Moiraine said, her voice as cold as deepwinter ice. "Past time!"

ði ɛɛs sədaɪz hæn ɹoʊz, ən ðə ɡɹaʊn fɛl əweɪ bɪniθ eɪdʒɪnɝz fit. fleɪm ɹɔɹd fɹəm ðə kæzəm, wɪp tə ə fɹɛnzi baɪ wɪn haʊlɪŋ ɪn fɹəm ɛvɹi dɝɛkʃən, sʌkɪŋ ə meɪlstʃɹəm ə livz ɪndə ðə faɪɝ, wɪtʃ sim tə səlɪɾəfaɪ ɪndə ə ɹɛd-stʃɹik jɛloʊ dʒɛli ʌv pjʊɹ hit. ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ɪɾ eɪdʒɪnɝ stʊd, hɪz fit səpɔɹɾəd oʊnli baɪ ɛɹ. ðə fɔɹseɪkən lʊk stɑɹɾəld, bʌt ðən i smaɪld ən tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd. ɪt wɑz ə sloʊ stɛp, əz ɪf ðə faɪɝ tʃɹaɪd tə ɹuɾ ɪm tə ðə spɑt, bʌɾ i tʊk ɪt, ən ðən ənʌðɝ.

The Aes Sedai's hand rose, and the ground fell away beneath Aginor's feet. Flame roared from the chasm, whipped to a frenzy by wind howling in from every direction, sucking a maelstrom of leaves into the fire, which seemed to solidify into a red-streaked yellow jelly of pure heat. In the middle of it Aginor stood, his feet supported only by air. The Forsaken looked startled, but then he smiled and took a step forward. It was a slow step, as if the fire tried to root him to the spot, but he took it, and then another.

"ɹʌn!" mɔɪɹeɪn kəmændəd. hɝ feɪs wɑz waɪt wɪð stʃɹeɪn. "ɔl ə jə ɹʌn!" eɪdʒɪnɝ stɛpt əkɹɔs ði ɛɹ, təwɔɹd ði ɛdʒ ə ðə fleɪmz.

"Run!" Moiraine commanded. Her face was white with strain. "All of you run!" Aginor stepped across the air, toward the edge of the flames.

ɹænd wɑz əwɛɹ ʌv ʌðɝz muvɪŋ, mæt ən pɛɹɪn dæʃɪŋ əweɪ ət ði ɛdʒ ə hɪz vɪʒən, lɔɪəlz lɔŋ lɛɡz kæɹiɪŋ ɪm ɪndə ðə tʃɹiz, bʌɾ ɔl i kəd ɹɪli si wɑz ɛɡwin. ʃi stʊd ðəɹ ɹɪdʒəd, feɪs peɪl ən aɪz kloʊzd. ɪt wɑz nɑt fɪɹ ðət hɛl hɝ, hi ɹilaɪzd. ʃi wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə θɹoʊ hɝ pjuni, əntʃɹeɪnd wildɪŋ ə ðə paʊɝ əɡɛns ðə fɔɹseɪkən.

Rand was aware of others moving, Mat and Perrin dashing away at the edge of his vision, Loial's long legs carrying him into the trees, but all he could really see was Egwene. She stood there rigid, face pale and eyes closed. It was not fear that held her, he realized. She was trying to throw her puny, untrained wielding of the Power against the Forsaken.

ɹʌfli hi ɡɹæbd əɹ ɑɹm ən pʊld əɹ ɝaʊn tə feɪs hɪm. "ɹʌn!" hi ʃaʊɾəd ət hɝ. hɝ aɪz oʊpənd, stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm, æŋɡɹi wɪð ɪm fəɹ ɪntɝfɪɹɪŋ, lɪkwəd wɪð heɪt fəɹ eɪdʒɪnɝ, wɪð fɪɹ ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. "ɹʌn," hi sɛd, pʊʃɪŋ əɹ təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹiz hɑɹɾ ɪnʌf tə stɑɹt hɝ. "ɹʌn!" wʌns stɑɹɾəd, ʃi dɪd ɹʌn.

Roughly he grabbed her arm and pulled her around to face him. "Run!" he shouted at her. Her eyes opened, staring at him, angry with him for interfering, liquid with hate for Aginor, with fear of the Forsaken. "Run," he said, pushing her toward the trees hard enough to start her. "Run!" Once started, she did run.

bʌɾ eɪdʒɪnɝz wɪðɝd feɪs tɝn təwɔɹd hɪm, təwɔɹd ðə ɹʌnɪŋ ɛɡwin bɪhaɪn hɪm, əz ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɔk θɹu ðə fleɪmz, əz ɪf wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz duɪŋ dɪd nɑt kənsɝn eɪdʒɪnɝ əɾ ɔl. təwɔɹɾ ɛɡwin.

But Aginor's withered face turned toward him, toward the running Egwene behind him, as the Forsaken walked through the flames, as if what the Aes Sedai was doing did not concern Aginor at all. Toward Egwene.

"nɑt hɝ!" ɹænd ʃaʊɾəd. "ðə laɪt bɝn ju, nɑt hɝ!" hi snætʃt ʌp ə ɹɑk ən θɹu ɪt, minɪŋ tə dʒɹɔ eɪdʒɪnɝz ətɛnʃən. hæfweɪ tə ðə fɔɹseɪkənz feɪs, ðə stoʊn tɝn tə ə hændfʊl ə dʌst.

"Not her!" Rand shouted. "The Light burn you, not her!" He snatched up a rock and threw it, meaning to draw Aginor's attention. Halfway to the Forsaken's face, the stone turned to a handful of dust.

hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd oʊnli ə moʊmənt, lɔŋ ɪnʌf tə ɡlæns oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ ən si ðəɾ ɛɡwin wɑz hɪɾən ɪn ðə tʃɹiz. ðə fleɪmz stɪl sɝaʊndəɾ eɪdʒɪnɝ, pætʃəz ə hɪz kloʊk smoʊldɝɪŋ, bʌɾ i wɔkt əz ɪf i hæɾ ɔl ðə taɪm ɪn ðə wɝld, ən ðə faɪɝz ɹɪm wɑz nɪɹ. ɹænd tɝn ən ɹæn. bɪhaɪn ɪm i hɝd mɔɪɹeɪn bɪɡɪn tə skɹim.

He hesitated only a moment, long enough to glance over his shoulder and see that Egwene was hidden in the trees. The flames still surrounded Aginor, patches of his cloak smoldering, but he walked as if he had all the time in the world, and the fire's rim was near. Rand turned and ran. Behind him he heard Moiraine begin to scream.


tʃæptɝ fɪftiwʌn


CHAPTER 51

əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ


Against the Shadow

ðə læn tɛndəɾ ʌpwɝd ðə weɪ ɹænd wɛnt, bʌt fɪɹ lɛn ɪz lɛɡz stʃɹɛŋkθ ən ðeɪ eɪt ɡɹaʊn ɪn lɔŋ stʃɹaɪdz, tɛɹɪŋ ɪz weɪ θɹu flaʊɝɪŋ bʊʃəz ən tæŋɡəlz ʌv waɪldʒɹoʊz, skæɾɝɪŋ pɛɾəlz, nɑt kɛɹɪŋ ɪf θɔɹnz ɹɪpt ɪz kloʊðz əɹ ivən ɪz flɛʃ. mɔɪɹeɪn hæd stɑp skɹimɪŋ. ɪt simd əz ɪf ðə ʃɹiks hæd ɡɔn ɑn fɝɛvɝ, itʃ wʌn mɔɹ θɹoʊt-ɹɛntʃɪŋ ðən ðə læst, bʌɾ i nu ðeɪ hæd læstəɾ oʊnli moʊməns ɔltəɡɛðɝ. moʊməns bɪfɔɹ eɪdʒɪnɝ wəd bi ɑn ɪz tʃɹeɪl. hi nu ɪt wəd bi hɪm ðəɾ eɪdʒɪnɝ fɑloʊd. hi hæd sin ðə sɝɾənti ɪn ðə fɔɹseɪkənz hɑloʊ aɪz, ɪn ðət læst sɛkən bɪfɔɹ tɛɹɝ wɪpt ɪz fit tə ɹʌn.

The land tended upward the way Rand went, but fear lent his legs strength and they ate ground in long strides, tearing his way through flowering bushes and tangles of wildrose, scattering petals, not caring if thorns ripped his clothes or even his flesh. Moiraine had stopped screaming. It seemed as if the shrieks had gone on forever, each one more throat-wrenching than the last, but he knew they had lasted only moments altogether. Moments before Aginor would be on his trail. He knew it would be him that Aginor followed. He had seen the certainty in the Forsaken's hollow eyes, in that last second before terror whipped his feet to run.

ðə lænd ɡɹu ɛvɝ stipɝ, bʌɾ i skɹæmbəld ɑn, pʊlɪŋ hɪmsɛlf fɔɹwɝd baɪ hænfəlz ʌv ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ, ɹɑks ən dɝɾ ən livz spɪlɪŋ daʊn ðə sloʊp fɹəm ʌndɝ ɪz fit, faɪnəli kɹɔlɪŋ ɑn hænz ən niz wən ðə slæn bɪkeɪm tu ɡɹeɪt. əhɛd, əbʌv, ɪt lɛvəld aʊɾ ə lɪɾəl. pæntɪŋ, hi skɹæbəld ɪz weɪ ðə læs fju spænz, ɡɑt tə hɪz fit, ən stɑpt, wɑntɪŋ tə haʊl əlaʊd.

The land grew ever steeper, but he scrambled on, pulling himself forward by handfuls of undergrowth, rocks and dirt and leaves spilling down the slope from under his feet, finally crawling on hands and knees when the slant became too great. Ahead, above, it leveled out a little. Panting, he scrabbled his way the last few spans, got to his feet, and stopped, wanting to howl aloud.

tɛn peɪsɪz ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪm, ðə hɪltɑp dʒɹɑpt əweɪ ʃɑɹpli. hi nu wʌɾ i wəd si bɪfɔɹ i ɹitʃt ɪt, bʌɾ i tʊk ðə stɛps ɛniweɪ, itʃ hɛviɝ ðən ðə wʌn bɪfɔɹ, hoʊpɪŋ ðəɹ maɪt bi səm tʃɹæk, ə ɡoʊt pæθ, ɛniθɪŋ. ət ði ɛdʒ i lʊk daʊn ə ʃɪɹ hʌnʒɹəd-fʊt dʒɹɑp, ə stoʊn wɔl əz smuð əz pleɪn tɪmbɝ.

Ten paces in front of him, the hilltop dropped away sharply. He knew what he would see before he reached it, but he took the steps anyway, each heavier than the one before, hoping there might be some track, a goat path, anything. At the edge he looked down a sheer hundred-foot drop, a stone wall as smooth as planed timber.

ðəɹ əz tə bi səm weɪ. əl ɡoʊ bæk ən faɪn ə weɪ ɝaʊnd. ɡoʊ bæk ən -  wən i tɝnd, eɪdʒɪnɝ wɑz ðɛɹ, dʒʌst ɹitʃɪŋ ðə kɹɛst. ðə fɔɹseɪkən tɑp ðə hɪl wɪθaʊɾ ɛni dɪfəkəlti, wɔkɪŋ ʌp ðə stip sloʊp əz ɪf ɪt wɝ lɛvəl ɡɹaʊnd. dip-sʌŋkən aɪz bɝn əɾ ɪm fɹəm ðət dʒɹɔn pɑɹtʃmən feɪs; sʌmhaʊ, ɪt sim lɛs wɪðɝd ðən bɪfɔɹ, mɔɹ flɛʃt, əz ɪf eɪdʒɪnɝ hæd fɛd wɛl ɑn sʌmθɪŋ. ðoʊz aɪz wɝ fɪkst ɑn hɪm, jɛt wən eɪdʒɪnɝ spoʊk, ɪt wɑz ɔlmoʊs tə hɪmsɛlf.

There has to be some way. I'll go back and find a way around. Go back and -  When he turned, Aginor was there, just reaching the crest. The Forsaken topped the hill without any difficulty, walking up the steep slope as if it were level ground. Deep-sunken eyes burned at him from that drawn parchment face; somehow, it seemed less withered than before, more fleshed, as if Aginor had fed well on something. Those eyes were fixed on him, yet when Aginor spoke, it was almost to himself.

"bælzəmən wɪl ɡɪv ɹɪwɔɹdz bɪɑn mɔɹɾəl dʒɹimɪŋ fəɹ ðə wʌn u bɹɪŋz jə tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. jɛt maɪ dʒɹimz əv ɔlweɪz bɪn bɪɑn ðoʊz ʌv ʌðɝ mɛn, ən aɪ lɛf mɔɹtæləɾi bɪhaɪn məlɛniə əɡoʊ. wʌt dɪfɝəns ɪf jə sɝv ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk əlaɪv əɹ dɛd? nʌn, tə ðə spɹɛɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ ʃɛɹ paʊɝ wɪð ju? waɪ ʃəɾ aɪ bɛnd ni tə ju? aɪ, hu feɪs luz θɝɪn tɛləmən ɪn ðə hɔl ə ðə sɝvəns ɪtsɛlf. aɪ, hu θɹu maɪ maɪɾ əɡɛns ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ ən mɛɾ ɪm stʃɹoʊk fəɹ stʃɹoʊk. aɪ θɪŋk nɑt."

"Ba'alzamon will give rewards beyond mortal dreaming for the one who brings you to Shayol Ghul. Yet my dreams have always been beyond those of other men, and I left mortality behind millennia ago. What difference if you serve the Great Lord of the Dark alive or dead? None, to the spread of the Shadow. Why should I share power with you? Why should I bend knee to you? I, who faced Lews Therin Telamon in the Hall of the Servants itself. I, who threw my might against the Lord of the Morning and met him stroke for stroke. I think not."

ɹændz maʊθ dʒɹaɪd laɪk dʌst; hɪz tʌŋ fɛlt əz ʃɹɪvəld əz eɪdʒɪnɝ. ði ɛdʒ ə ðə pɹɛsəpəs ɡɹeɪɾɪd ʌndɝ ɪz hilz, stoʊn fɔlɪŋ əweɪ. hi dɪd nɑt dɛɹ lʊk bæk, bʌɾ i hɝd ðə ɹɑks baʊndɪŋ ən ɹɪbaʊndɪŋ fɹəm ðə ʃɪɹ wɔl, dʒʌst əz ɪz bɑɾi wəɾ ɪf i muvd ənʌðɝ ɪntʃ. ɪt wɑz ðə fɝst i nu ðəɾ i hæd bɪn bækɪŋ ʌp, əweɪ fɹəm ðə fɔɹseɪkən. hɪz skɪn kɹɔld əntɪl i θɔɾ i mʌst si ɪt ɹaɪðɪŋ ɪf i lʊkt, ɪf i kəɾ oʊnli teɪk ɪz aɪz ɔf ðə fɔɹseɪkən. ðəɹ əz tə bi səm weɪ tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm hɪm. səm weɪ tə ɪskeɪp! ðəɹ əz tə bi! səm weɪ!

Rand's mouth dried like dust; his tongue felt as shriveled as Aginor. The edge of the precipice grated under his heels, stone falling away. He did not dare look back, but he heard the rocks bounding and rebounding from the sheer wall, just as his body would if he moved another inch. It was the first he knew that he had been backing up, away from the Forsaken. His skin crawled until he thought he must see it writhing if he looked, if he could only take his eyes off the Forsaken. There has to be some way to get away from him. Some way to escape! There has to be! Some way!

sʌɾənli hi fɛl sʌmθɪŋ, sɔ ɪt, ðoʊ hi nu ɪt wɑz nɑt ðəɹ tə si. ə ɡloʊɪŋ ɹoʊp ɹæn ɔf fɹəm eɪdʒɪnɝ, bɪhaɪn hɪm, waɪt laɪk sʌnlaɪt sin θɹu ðə pjʊɹəs klaʊd, hɛviɝ ðən ə blæksmɪθs ɑɹm, laɪɾɝ ðən ɛɹ, kənɛktɪŋ ðə fɔɹseɪkən tə sʌmθɪŋ dɪstən bɪɑnd noʊɪŋ, sʌmθɪŋ wɪðɪn ðə tʌtʃ ə ɹændz hænd. ðə ɹoʊp pʌlsd, ən wɪð ɛvɹi θɹəb eɪdʒɪnɝ ɡɹu stʃɹɔŋɝ, mɔɹ fʊli flɛʃt, ə mæn əz tɔl ən stʃɹɔŋ əz hɪmsɛlf, ə mæn hɑɹɾɝ ðən ðə wɔɹɾɝ, mɔɹ dɛdli ðən ðə blaɪt. jɛt bɪsaɪd ðət ʃaɪnɪŋ kɔɹd, ðə fɔɹseɪkən simd ɔlmoʊs nɑt tə ɪɡzɪst. ðə kɔɹd wɑz ɔl. ɪt hʌmd. ɪt sæŋ. ɪt kɔld ɹændz soʊl. wʌn bɹaɪt fɪŋɡɝ-stʃɹæn lɪftəɾ əweɪ, dʒɹɪftəd, tʌtʃt hɪm, ən i ɡæspt. laɪt fɪl hɪm, ən hit ðət ʃʊɾə bɝn jɛɾ oʊnli wɔɹmd əz ɪf ɪt tʊk ðə tʃɪl ə ðə ɡɹeɪv fɹəm ɪz boʊnz. ðə stʃɹæn θɪkənd. aɪ hæv tə ɡɛɾ əweɪ!

Suddenly he felt something, saw it, though he knew it was not there to see. A glowing rope ran off from Aginor, behind him, white like sunlight seen through the purest cloud, heavier than a blacksmith's arm, lighter than air, connecting the Forsaken to something distant beyond knowing, something within the touch of Rand's hand. The rope pulsed, and with every throb Aginor grew stronger, more fully fleshed, a man as tall and strong as himself, a man harder than the Warder, more deadly than the Blight. Yet beside that shining cord, the Forsaken seemed almost not to exist. The cord was all. It hummed. It sang. It called Rand's soul. One bright finger-strand lifted away, drifted, touched him, and he gasped. Light filled him, and heat that should have burned yet only warmed as if it took the chill of the grave from his bones. The strand thickened. I have to get away!

"noʊ!" eɪdʒɪnɝ ʃaʊɾəd. "ju ʃæl nɑɾ əv ɪt! ɪts maɪn!"

"No!" Aginor shouted. "You shall not have it! It is mine!"

ɹænd dɪd nɑt muv, ən niðɝ dɪd ðə fɔɹseɪkən, jɛt ðeɪ fɔɾ əz ʃʊɹli əz ɪf ðeɪ ɡɹæpəld ɪn ðə dʌst. swɛt biɾɪd ɑn eɪdʒɪnɝz feɪs, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ wɪðɝd, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ oʊld, ðəɾ ʌv ə stʃɹɔŋ mæn ɪn ɪz pɹaɪm. ɹænd pʌlsd wɪð ðə biɾɪŋ ɪn ðə kɔɹd, laɪk ðə hɑɹtbiɾ ə ðə wɝld. ɪt fɪld ɪz biɪŋ. laɪt fɪld ɪz maɪnd, tɪl oʊnli ə kɔɹnɝ wɑz lɛft fəɹ wʌt wɑz hɪmsɛlf. hi ɹæp ðə vɔɪɾ ɝaʊn ðət nʊk; ʃɛltɝɾ ɪn ɛmptinəs. əweɪ!

Rand did not move, and neither did the Forsaken, yet they fought as surely as if they grappled in the dust. Sweat beaded on Aginor's face, no longer withered, no longer old, that of a strong man in his prime. Rand pulsed with the beating in the cord, like the heartbeat of the world. It filled his being. Light filled his mind, till only a corner was left for what was himself. He wrapped the void around that nook; sheltered in emptiness. Away!

"maɪn!" eɪdʒɪnɝ kɹaɪd. "maɪn!"

"Mine!" Aginor cried. "Mine!"

wɔɹmθ bɪlt ɪn ɹænd, ðə wɔɹmθ ə ðə sʌn, ðə ɹeɪdʒjəns ə ðə sʌn, bɝstɪŋ, ði ɑfəl ɹeɪdʒjəns ə laɪt, ʌv ðə laɪt. əweɪ!

Warmth built in Rand, the warmth of the sun, the radiance of the sun, bursting, the awful radiance of light, of the Light. Away!

"maɪn!" fleɪm ʃɑt fɹəm eɪdʒɪnɝz maʊθ, bɹoʊk θɹu hɪz aɪz laɪk spɪɹz ə faɪɝ, ən i skɹimd.

"Mine!" Flame shot from Aginor's mouth, broke through his eyes like spears of fire, and he screamed.

əweɪ!

Away!

ən ɹænd wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ɑn ðə hɪltɑp. hi kwɪvɝd wɪð ðə laɪt ðət səfjuz hɪm. hɪz maɪnd wəd nɑt wɝk; laɪɾ ən hit blaɪndɪɾ ɪt. ðə laɪt. ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ðə vɔɪd, ðə laɪt blaɪndɪɾ ɪz maɪnd, stʌn ɪm wɪð ɑ.

And Rand was no longer on the hilltop. He quivered with the Light that suffused him. His mind would not work; light and heat blinded it. The Light. In the midst of the void, the Light blinded his mind, stunned him with awe.

hi stʊɾ ɪn ə bɹɔd maʊntən pæs, sɝaʊndəd baɪ dʒæɡd blæk piks laɪk ðə tiθ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ɪt wɑz ɹil; hi wɑz ðɛɹ. hi fɛl ðə ɹɑks ʌndɝ ɪz buts, ði aɪsi bɹiz ɑn ɪz feɪs.

He stood in a broad mountain pass, surrounded by jagged black peaks like the teeth of the Dark One. It was real; he was there. He felt the rocks under his boots, the icy breeze on his face.

bæɾəl sɝaʊndəd hɪm, əɹ ðə teɪl ɛn ə bæɾəl. ɑɹmɝd mɛn ɑn ɑɹmɝd hɔɹsəz, ʃaɪnɪŋ stil dʌsti naʊ, slæʃt ən stæbd ət snɑɹlɪŋ tʃɹɑləks wildɪŋ spaɪkt æksiz ən saɪð-laɪk sɔɹdz. səm mɛn fɔɾ əfʊt, ðɛɹ hɔɹsəz daʊn, ən bɑɹɾɪd hɔɹsəz ɡæləp θɹu ðə faɪt wɪð ɛmpti sæɾəlz. feɪdz muvd əmʌŋ əm ɔl, naɪtblæk kloʊks hæŋɪŋ stɪl haʊɛvɝ ðɛɹ dɑɹk maʊns ɡæləpt, ən wɛɹɛvɝ ðɛɹ laɪɾitɪŋ sɔɹdz swʌŋ, mɛn daɪd. saʊn biɾ ət ɹænd, biɾ əɾ ɪm ən baʊns fɹəm ðə stʃɹeɪnʒnəs ðət hæɾ ɪm baɪ ðə θɹoʊt. ðə klæʃ ə stil əɡɛnst stil, ðə pæntɪŋ ən ɡɹʌntɪŋ ə mɛn ən tʃɹɑləks stʃɹaɪvɪŋ, ðə skɹimz ə mɛn ən tʃɹɑləks daɪɪŋ. oʊvɝ ðə dɪn, bænɝz weɪvd ɪn dʌst-fɪld ɛɹ. ðə blæk hɔk ə fæl dæɹə, ðə waɪt hɑɹɾ ə ʃaɪnɝ, ʌðɝz. ən tʃɹɑlɑk bænɝz. ɪn dʒʌs ðə lɪɾəl speɪs ɝaʊn ɪm i sɔ ðə hɔɹn skʌl ə ðə dɑvɑl, ðə blʌd-ɹɛd tʃɹaɪɾənt ə ðə koʊbəl, ði aɪɝn fɪst ə ðə deɪmən.

Battle surrounded him, or the tail end of battle. Armored men on armored horses, shining steel dusty now, slashed and stabbed at snarling Trollocs wielding spiked axes and scythe-like swords. Some men fought afoot, their horses down, and barded horses galloped through the fight with empty saddles. Fades moved among them all, nightblack cloaks hanging still however their dark mounts galloped, and wherever their lighteating swords swung, men died. Sound beat at Rand, beat at him and bounced from the strangeness that had him by the throat. The clash of steel against steel, the panting and grunting of men and Trollocs striving, the screams of men and Trollocs dying. Over the din, banners waved in dust-filled air. The Black Hawk of Fal Dara, the White Hart of Shienar, others. And Trolloc banners. In just the little space around him he saw the horned skull of the Dha'vol, the blood-red trident of the Ko'bal, the iron fist of the Dhai'mon.

jɛɾ ɪt wɑz ɪndid ðə teɪl ɛn ə bæɾəl, ə pɔzɪŋ, əz hjumənz ən tʃɹɑləks əlaɪk fɛl bæk tə ɹiɡɹup. nʌn sim tə noʊɾəs ɹænd əz ðeɪ peɪɾ ə fju læst stʃɹoʊks ən bɹoʊk əweɪ, ɡæləpɪŋ, əɹ ɹʌnɪŋ ɪn ə stæɡɝ, tə ði ɛnz ə ðə pæs.

Yet it was indeed the tail end of battle, a pausing, as humans and Trollocs alike fell back to regroup. None seemed to notice Rand as they paid a few last strokes and broke away, galloping, or running in a stagger, to the ends of the pass.

ɹænd faʊn hɪmsɛlf feɪsɪŋ ði ɛn ə ðə pæs wɛɹ ðə hjumənz wɝ ɹeɪ-fɔɹmɪŋ, pɛnəns stɝɪŋ bɪniθ ɡlimɪŋ lænsəpɔɪns. wundəd mɛn weɪvɝɾ ɪn ðɛɹ sæɾəlz. ɹaɪɾɝləs hɔɹsəz ɹɪɹɾ ən ɡæləpt. pleɪnli ðeɪ kəd nɑt stæn ənʌðɝ miɾɪŋ, jɛt dʒʌst əz pleɪnli ðeɪ ɹɛɾid ðɛmsɛlvz fəɹ wʌn faɪnəl tʃɑɹdʒ. səm ə ðɛm sɔ hɪm naʊ; mɛn stʊɾ ɪn ðɛɹ stɝəps tə pɔɪn ət hɪm. ðɛɹ ʃaʊts keɪm tə hɪm əz taɪni paɪpɪŋ.

Rand found himself facing the end of the pass where the humans were re-forming, pennants stirring beneath gleaming lancepoints. Wounded men wavered in their saddles. Riderless horses reared and galloped. Plainly they could not stand another meeting, yet just as plainly they readied themselves for one final charge. Some of them saw him now; men stood in their stirrups to point at him. Their shouts came to him as tiny piping.

stæɡɝɪŋ, hi tɝnd. ðə fɔɹsɪz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn fɪl ði ʌðɝ ɛn ə ðə pæs, bɹɪsəlɪŋ blæk paɪks ən spɪɹpɔɪns swɛlɪŋ ʌp ɑntu maʊntən sloʊps meɪd blækɝ stɪl baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪt mæs ə tʃɹɑləks ðət dwɔɹf ði ɑɹmi ʌv ʃaɪnɝ. feɪdz ɪn hʌnʒɹədz ɹoʊɾ əkɹɔs ðə fɹʌn ə ðə hɔɹd, ðə fɪɹs, mʌzəl feɪsəz ə tʃɹɑləks tɝnɪŋ əweɪ ɪn fɪɹ əz ðeɪ pæst, hjudʒ bɑɾiz pʊlɪŋ bæk tə meɪk weɪ. oʊvɝhɛd, dʒɹæɡkɝ wild ɑn lɛðɝi pɪnjənz, ʃɹiks tʃælənʒɪŋ ðə wɪnd. hæfmən sɔ hɪm naʊ, tu, pɔɪntəd, ən dʒɹæɡkɝ spʌn ən dʌv. tu. θɹi. sɪks ə ðɛm, kɹaɪɪŋ ʃɹɪli əz ðeɪ plʌməɾɪd təwɔɹd hɪm.

Staggering, he turned. The forces of the Dark One filled the other end of the pass, bristling black pikes and spearpoints swelling up onto mountain slopes made blacker still by the great mass of Trollocs that dwarfed the army of Shienar. Fades in hundreds rode across the front of the horde, the fierce, muzzled faces of Trollocs turning away in fear as they passed, huge bodies pulling back to make way. Overhead, Draghkar wheeled on leathery pinions, shrieks challenging the wind. Halfmen saw him now, too, pointed, and Draghkar spun and dove. Two. Three. Six of them, crying shrilly as they plummeted toward him.

hi stɛɹɾ ət ðɛm. hit fɪl hɪm, ðə bɝnɪŋ hiɾ ə ðə tʌtʃt sʌn. hi kəd si ðə dʒɹæɡkɝ klɪɹli, soʊlləs aɪz ɪn peɪl mɛnz feɪsəz ɑn wɪŋ bɑɾiz ðət hæd nʌθɪŋ ə hjumænɪɾi əbaʊt ðɛm. tɛɹəbəl hit. kɹæklɪŋ hit.

He stared at them. Heat filled him, the burning heat of the touched sun. He could see the Draghkar clearly, soulless eyes in pale men's faces on winged bodies that had nothing of humanity about them. Terrible heat. Crackling heat.

fɹəm ðə klɪɹ skaɪ laɪtnɪŋ keɪm, itʃ boʊl kɹɪsp ən ʃɑɹp, sɪɹɪŋ ɪz aɪz, itʃ boʊl stʃɹaɪkɪŋ ə wɪŋ blæk ʃeɪp. hʌntɪŋ kɹaɪz bɪkeɪm ʃɹiks ə dɛθ, ən tʃɑɹd fɔɹmz fɛl tə liv ðə skaɪ klin əɡɛn.

From the clear sky lightning came, each bolt crisp and sharp, searing his eyes, each bolt striking a winged black shape. Hunting cries became shrieks of death, and charred forms fell to leave the sky clean again.

ðə hit. ðə tɛɹəbəl hiɾ ə ðə laɪt.

The heat. The terrible heat of the Light.

hi fɛl tə hɪz niz; hi θɔɾ i kəd hɪɹ ɪz tɪɹz sɪzəlɪŋ ɑn ɪz tʃiks. "noʊ!" hi klʌtʃt ət tʌfs ʌv wɪɹi ɡɹæs fəɹ səm hoʊld ɑn ɹiæləɾi; ðə ɡɹæs bɝst ɪn fleɪm. "pliz, nuuuuuu!"

He fell to his knees; he thought he could hear his tears sizzling on his cheeks. "No!" He clutched at tufts of wiry grass for some hold on reality; the grass burst in flame. "Please, nooooooo!"

ðə wɪn ɹoʊz wɪð ɪz vɔɪs, haʊld wɪð ɪz vɔɪs, ɹɔɹd wɪð ɪz vɔɪs daʊn ðə pæs, wɪpɪŋ ðə fleɪmz tə ə wɔl ə faɪɝ ðət spɛɾ əweɪ fɹəm ɪm ən təwɔɹd ðə tʃɹɑlɑk hoʊs fæstɝ ðən ə hɔɹs kəd ɹʌn. faɪɝ bɝn ɪndə ðə tʃɹɑləks, ən ðə maʊntənz tʃɹɛmbəld wɪð ðɛɹ skɹimz, skɹimz ɔlmoʊst əz laʊɾ əz ðə wɪn ən ɪz vɔɪs.

The wind rose with his voice, howled with his voice, roared with his voice down the pass, whipping the flames to a wall of fire that sped away from him and toward the Trolloc host faster than a horse could run. Fire burned into the Trollocs, and the mountains trembled with their screams, screams almost as loud as the wind and his voice.

"ɪɾ əz tə ɛnd!"

"It has to end!"

hi biɾ ət ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɪð ɪz fɪst, ən ði ɝθ tɑld laɪk ə ɡɔŋ. hi bɹuzd ɪz hænz ɑn stoʊni sɔɪl, ən ði ɝθ tʃɹɛmbəld. ɹɪpəlz ɹæn θɹu ðə ɡɹaʊn əhɛɾ ə hɪm ɪn ɛvɛɹaɪzɪŋ weɪvz, weɪvz ə dɝɾ ən ɹɑk taʊɝɪŋ oʊvɝ tʃɹɑləks ən feɪdz, bɹeɪkɪŋ oʊvɝ əm əz ðə maʊntənz ʃæɾɝd ʌndɝ ðɛɹ huv fit. ə bɔɪlɪŋ mæs ə flɛʃ ən ɹʌbəl tʃɝn əkɹɔs ðə tʃɹɑlɑk ɑɹmi. wʌt wɑz lɛf stændɪŋ wɑz stɪl ə maɪɾi hoʊst, bʌt naʊ noʊ mɔɹ ðən twaɪs ðə hjumən ɑɹmi ɪn nʌmbɝz, ən mɪlɪŋ ɪn fɹaɪɾ ən kənfjuʒən.

He beat at the ground with his fist, and the earth tolled like a gong. He bruised his hands on stony soil, and the earth trembled. Ripples ran through the ground ahead of him in everrising waves, waves of dirt and rock towering over Trollocs and Fades, breaking over them as the mountains shattered under their hooved feet. A boiling mass of flesh and rubble churned across the Trolloc army. What was left standing was still a mighty host, but now no more than twice the human army in numbers, and milling in fright and confusion.

ðə wɪn daɪd. ðə skɹimz daɪd. ði ɝθ wɑz stɪl. dʌst ən smoʊk swɝl bæk daʊn ðə pæs tə sɝaʊn hɪm.

The wind died. The screams died. The earth was still. Dust and smoke swirled back down the pass to surround him.

"ðə laɪt blaɪn ju, bælzəmən! ðɪs əz tə ɛnd!"

"The Light blind you, Ba'alzamon! This has to end!"

ɪts nɑt hɪɹ.

IT IS NOT HERE.

ɪt wɑz nɑt ɹændz θɔt, meɪkɪŋ ɪz skʌl vaɪbɹeɪt.

It was not Rand's thought, making his skull vibrate.

əl teɪk noʊ pɑɹt. oʊnli ðə tʃoʊzən wʌn kən də wʌt mʌs bi dʌn, ɪf i wɪl.

I WILL TAKE NO PART. ONLY THE CHOSEN ONE CAN DO WHAT MUST BE DONE, IF HE WILL.

"wɛɹ?" hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə seɪ ɪt, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt stɑp hɪmsɛlf. "wɛɹ?"

"Where?" He did not want to say it, but he could not stop himself. "Where?"

ðə heɪz sɝaʊndɪŋ ɪm pɑɹɾəd, livɪŋ ə doʊm ə klɪɹ, klin ɛɹ tɛn spænz haɪ, wɔl baɪ bɪloʊɪŋ smoʊk ən dʌst. stɛps ɹoʊz bɪfɔɹ hɪm, itʃ stændɪŋ əloʊn ən ənsəpɔɹɾɪd, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ʌp ɪndə ðə mɝk ðəɾ əbskjʊɹd ðə sʌn.

The haze surrounding him parted, leaving a dome of clear, clean air ten spans high, walled by billowing smoke and dust. Steps rose before him, each standing alone and unsupported, stretching up into the murk that obscured the sun.

nɑt hɪɹ.

NOT HERE.

θɹu ðə mɪst, əz fɹəm ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ði ɝθ, keɪm ə kɹaɪ. "ðə laɪt wɪlz ɪt!" ðə ɡɹaʊn ɹʌmbəld wɪð ðə θʌndɝ ə hʊvz əz ðə fɔɹsɪz ə hjumənkaɪn lɔntʃt ðɛɹ læs tʃɑɹdʒ.

Through the mist, as from the far end of the earth, came a cry. "The Light wills it!" The ground rumbled with the thunder of hooves as the forces of humankind launched their last charge.

wɪðɪn ðə vɔɪd, hɪz maɪnd nu ə moʊmən ə pænɪk. ðə tʃɑɹdʒɪŋ hɔɹsmən kəd nɑt si hɪm ɪn ðə dʌst; ðɛɹ tʃɑɹdʒ wəd tʃɹæmpəl ɹaɪɾ oʊvɝ hɪm. ðə ɡɹeɪɾɝ pɑɹɾ ə hɪm ɪɡnɔɹd ðə ʃeɪkɪŋ ɡɹaʊn əz ə pɛɾi θɪŋ bɪniθ kənsɝn. dʌl æŋɡɝ dʒɹaɪvɪŋ ɪz fit, hi maʊntəd ðə fɝst stɛps. ɪts tə bi ɛndəd!

Within the void, his mind knew a moment of panic. The charging horsemen could not see him in the dust; their charge would trample right over him. The greater part of him ignored the shaking ground as a petty thing beneath concern. Dull anger driving his feet, he mounted the first steps. It has to be ended!

dɑɹknəs sɝaʊndəd hɪm, ði ʌɾɝ blæknəs ə toʊɾəl nʌθɪŋ. ðə stɛps wɝ stɪl ðɛɹ, hæŋɪŋ ɪn ðə blæk, ʌndɝ ɪz fiɾ ən əhɛd. wən i lʊk bæk, ðoʊz bɪhaɪnd wɝ ɡɔn, feɪɾəd əweɪ tə nʌθɪŋ, ɪndə ðə nʌθɪŋnəs ɝaʊn hɪm. bʌt ðə kɔɹd wɑz jɛt ðɛɹ, stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ bɪhaɪn hɪm, ðə ɡloʊɪŋ laɪn dwɪndəlɪŋ ən vænɪʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə dɪstəns. ɪt wɑz nɑt soʊ θɪk əz bɪfɔɹ, bʌɾ ɪt stɪl pʌlsd, pʌmpɪŋ stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪndə hɪm, pʌmpɪŋ laɪf, fɪlɪŋ ɪm wɪð ðə laɪt. hi klaɪmd.

Darkness surrounded him, the utter blackness of total nothing. The steps were still there, hanging in the black, under his feet and ahead. When he looked back, those behind were gone, faded away to nothing, into the nothingness around him. But the cord was yet there, stretching behind him, the glowing line dwindling and vanishing into the distance. It was not so thick as before, but it still pulsed, pumping strength into him, pumping life, filling him with the Light. He climbed.

ɪt sim fɝɛvɝ ðəɾ i klaɪmd. fɝɛvɝ, ən mɪnəts. taɪm stʊd stɪl ɪn nʌθɪŋnəs. taɪm ɹæn fæstɝ. hi klaɪmd əntɪl sʌɾənli ə dɔɹ stʊd bɪfɔɹ hɪm, ɪts sɝfəs ɹʌf ən splɪntɝɾ ən oʊld, ə dɔɹ wɛl-ɹɪmɛmbɝd. hi tʌtʃt ɪt, ən ɪt bɝs tə fɹæɡmɛns. waɪl ðeɪ stɪl fɛl, hi stɛp θɹu, bɪts ə ʃæɾɝd wʊd fɔlɪŋ fɹəm ɪz ʃoʊldɝz.

It seemed forever that he climbed. Forever, and minutes. Time stood still in nothingness. Time ran faster. He climbed until suddenly a door stood before him, its surface rough and splintered and old, a door well-remembered. He touched it, and it burst to fragments. While they still fell, he stepped through, bits of shattered wood falling from his shoulders.

ðə tʃeɪmbɝ, tu, wɑz əz i ɹɪmɛmbɝd, ðə mæd, stʃɹieɪɾɪd skaɪ bɪɑn ðə bælkəni, ðə mɛltəd wɔlz, ðə pɑlɪʃt teɪbəl, ðə tɛɹəbəl faɪɝpleɪs wɪð ɪts ɹɔɹɪŋ, hitləs fleɪmz. səm ə ðoʊz feɪsəz ðət meɪd ðə faɪɝpleɪs, ɹaɪðɪŋ ɪn tɔɹmɛnt, ʃɹikɪŋ ɪn saɪləns, tʌɡd əɾ ɪz mɛmɹi əz ɪf i nu ðɛm, bʌɾ i hɛl ðə vɔɪd kloʊs, floʊɾəd wɪðɪn hɪmsɛlf ɪn ɛmptinəs. hi wɑz əloʊn. wən i lʊkt ət ðə mɪɹɝ ɑn ðə wɔl, hɪz feɪs wɑz ðəɹ əz klɪɹ əz ɪf ɪt wɑz hɪm. ðəɹ ɪz kɑm ɪn ðə vɔɪd.

The chamber, too, was as he remembered, the mad, striated sky beyond the balcony, the melted walls, the polished table, the terrible fireplace with its roaring, heatless flames. Some of those faces that made the fireplace, writhing in torment, shrieking in silence, tugged at his memory as if he knew them, but he held the void close, floated within himself in emptiness. He was alone. When he looked at the mirror on the wall, his face was there as clear as if it was him. There is calm in the void.

"jɛs," bælzəmən sɛd fɹəm ɪn fɹʌn ə ðə faɪɝpleɪs, "aɪ θɔɾ eɪdʒɪnɝz ɡɹid wəɾ oʊvɝkʌm hɪm. bʌɾ ɪt meɪks noʊ dɪfɝəns ɪn ði ɛnd. ə lɔŋ sɝtʃ, bʌɾ ɛndəd naʊ. jə ɑɹ hɪɹ, ən aɪ noʊ ju."

"Yes," Ba'alzamon said from in front of the fireplace, "I thought Aginor's greed would overcome him. But it makes no difference in the end. A long search, but ended now. You are here, and I know you."

ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ðə laɪt ðə vɔɪd dʒɹɪftəd, ən ɪn ðə mɪdst ə ðə vɔɪd floʊɾəd ɹænd. hi ɹitʃt fəɹ ðə sɔɪl ə hɪz hoʊm, ən fɛl hɑɹd ɹɑk, ənjildɪŋ ən dʒɹaɪ, stoʊn wɪθaʊt pɪɾi, wɛɹ oʊnli ðə stʃɹɔŋ kəd sɝvaɪv, oʊnli ðoʊz əz hɑɹɾ əz ðə maʊntənz. "aɪ æm taɪɝɾ ə ɹʌnɪŋ." hi kəd nɑt bɪliv ɪz vɔɪs wɑz soʊ kɑm. "taɪɝɾ ə jə θɹɛɾənɪŋ maɪ fɹɛnz. əl ɹʌn noʊ mɔɹ." bælzəmən hæɾ ə kɔɹd, tu, hi sɔ. ə blæk kɔɹd, θɪkɝ baɪ fɑɹ ðən ɪz oʊn, soʊ waɪɾ ɪt ʃʊɾə dwɔɹf ðə hjumən bɑɾi, jɛt dwɔɹf baɪ bælzəmən, ɪnstɛd. itʃ pʌls əlɔŋ ðət blæk veɪn eɪt laɪt.

In the midst of the Light the void drifted, and in the midst of the void floated Rand. He reached for the soil of his home, and felt hard rock, unyielding and dry, stone without pity, where only the strong could survive, only those as hard as the mountains. "I am tired of running." He could not believe his voice was so calm. "Tired of you threatening my friends. I will run no more." Ba'alzamon had a cord, too, he saw. A black cord, thicker by far than his own, so wide it should have dwarfed the human body, yet dwarfed by Ba'alzamon, instead. Each pulse along that black vein ate light.

"ju θɪŋk ɪt meɪks ɛni dɪfɝəns, wɛðɝ jə ɹʌn əɹ steɪ?" ðə fleɪmz ə bælzəmənz maʊθ læft. ðə feɪsəz ɪn ðə hɑɹθ wɛpt ət ðɛɹ mæstɝz mɝθ. "ju hæv flɛd fɹəm mi mɛni taɪmz, ən itʃ taɪm aɪ ɹʌn jə daʊn ən meɪk jə it jəɹ pɹaɪd wɪð snaɪvəlɪŋ tɪɹz fəɹ spaɪs. mɛni taɪmz juv stʊɾ ən fɔt, ðən ɡɹoʊvəld ɪn dɪfit, bɛɡɪŋ mɝsi. juv ðɪs tʃɔɪs, wɝm, ən ðɪs tʃɔɪs oʊnli: nil ət maɪ fiɾ ən sɝv mi wɛl, ən əl ɡɪv jə paʊɝ əbʌv θɹoʊnz; əɹ bi tɑɹ vəlɑnz pʌpət ful ən skɹim waɪl jə ɑɹ ɡɹaʊn ɪndə ðə dʌst ə taɪm."

"You think it makes any difference, whether you run or stay?" The flames of Ba'alzamon's mouth laughed. The faces in the hearth wept at their master's mirth. "You have fled from me many times, and each time I run you down and make you eat your pride with sniveling tears for spice. Many times you have stood and fought, then groveled in defeat, begging mercy. You have this choice, worm, and this choice only: kneel at my feet and serve me well, and I will give you power above thrones; or be Tar Valon's puppet fool and scream while you are ground into the dust of time."

ɹænd ʃɪftəd, ɡlænsɪŋ bæk θɹu ðə dɔɹ əz ɪf sikɪŋ ə weɪ tə ɪskeɪp. lɛt ðə dɑɹk wʌn θɪŋk ðæt. bɪɑn ðə dɔɹweɪ wɑz stɪl ðə blæk ə nʌθɪŋ, splɪt baɪ ðə ʃaɪnɪŋ θɹɛd ðət ɹæn fɹəm ɪz bɑɾi. ən aʊt ðəɹ bælzəmənz hɛviɝ kɔɹd ɹæn əz wɛl, soʊ blæk ðəɾ ɪt stʊɾ aʊɾ ɪn ðə dɑɹk əz ɪf əɡɛnst snoʊ. ðə tu kɔɹdz bit laɪk hɑɹtvnz ɪn kaʊntɝtaɪm, əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ, ðə laɪt bɛɹli ɹɪzɪstɪŋ ðə weɪvz ə dɑɹk.

Rand shifted, glancing back through the door as if seeking a way to escape. Let the Dark One think that. Beyond the doorway was still the black of nothing, split by the shining thread that ran from his body. And out there Ba'alzamon's heavier cord ran as well, so black that it stood out in the dark as if against snow. The two cords beat like heartveins in countertime, against each other, the light barely resisting the waves of dark.

"ðɛɹ ɑɹ ʌðɝ tʃɔɪsəz," ɹænd sɛd. "ðə wil wivz ðə pæɾɝn, nɑt ju. ɛvɹi tʃɹæp juv leɪd fəɹ mi, aɪ hæv ɪskeɪpt. aɪv ɪskeɪp jəɹ feɪdz ən tʃɹɑləks, ɪskeɪp jəɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. aɪ tʃɹæk jə hɪɹ, ən dɪstʃɹɔɪd jəɹ ɑɹmi ɑn ðə weɪ. jə də nɑt wiv ðə pæɾɝn."

"There are other choices," Rand said. "The Wheel weaves the Pattern, not you. Every trap you've laid for me, I have escaped. I've escaped your Fades and Trollocs, escaped your Darkfriends. I tracked you here, and destroyed your army on the way. You do not weave the Pattern."

bælzəmənz aɪz ɹɔɹd laɪk tu fɝnəsəz. hɪz lɪps dɪd nɑt muv, bʌt ɹænd θɔɾ i hɝɾ ə kɝs skɹimd əɾ eɪdʒɪnɝ. ðən ðə faɪɝz daɪd, ən ðəɾ ɔɹɾənɛɹi hjumən feɪs smaɪld əɾ ɪm ɪn ə weɪ ðət tʃɪld ivən θɹu ðə wɔɹmθ ə ðə laɪt.

Ba'alzamon's eyes roared like two furnaces. His lips did not move, but Rand thought he heard a curse screamed at Aginor. Then the fires died, and that ordinary human face smiled at him in a way that chilled even through the warmth of the Light.

"ʌðɝ ɑɹmiz kən bi ɹeɪzd, ful. ɑɹmiz juv nɑt dʒɹimd ʌv wɪl jɛt kʌm. ən jə tʃɹæk mi? jə slʌɡ ʌndɝ ə ɹɑk, tʃɹæk mi? aɪ bɪɡæn ðə sɛɾɪŋ ə jəɹ pæθ ðə deɪ jə wɝ bɔɹn, ə pæθ tə lid jə tə jəɹ ɡɹeɪv, əɹ hɪɹ. il əlaʊd tə fli, ən wʌn tə lɪv, tə spik ðə wɝdz ðət wəɾ ɛkoʊ daʊn ðə jɪɹz. dʒaɪn fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ, ə hɪɹoʊ," hi twɪstəd ðə wɝd tə ə snɪɹ, "hum aɪ peɪntəd laɪk ə ful ən sɛn tə ði oʊɡiɝ θɪŋkɪŋ i wɑz fɹi ʌv mi. ðə blæk ədʒɑ, ɹɪəlɪŋ laɪk wɝmz ɑn ðɛɹ bɛliz əkɹɔs ðə wɝl tə sɝtʃ jə aʊt. aɪ pʊl ðə stʃɹɪŋz ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit dænsəz ən θɪŋks ʃi kəntʃɹoʊlz ɪvɛns."

"Other armies can be raised, fool. Armies you have not dreamed of will yet come. And you tracked me? You slug under a rock, track me? I began the setting of your path the day you were born, a path to lead you to your grave, or here. Aiel allowed to flee, and one to live, to speak the words that would echo down the years. Jain Farstrider, a hero," he twisted the word to a sneer, "whom I painted like a fool and sent to the Ogier thinking he was free of me. The Black Ajah, wriggling like worms on their bellies across the world to search you out. I pull the strings and the Amyrlin Seat dances and thinks she controls events."

ðə vɔɪd tʃɹɛmbəld; heɪstəli ɹænd fɝmd ɪɾ əɡɛn. hi noʊz ɪɾ ɔl. hi kəɾ əv dʌn. ɪt kəd bi ðə weɪ hi sɛz. ðə laɪt wɔɹm ðə vɔɪd. daʊt kɹaɪɾ aʊɾ ən wɑz stɪld, tɪl oʊnli ðə sid ɹɪmeɪnd. hi stʃɹʌɡəld, nɑt noʊɪŋ wɛðɝ i wɑntəd tə bɛɹi ðə siɾ əɹ meɪk ɪt ɡɹoʊ. ðə vɔɪd stɛɾid, smɔlɝ ðən bɪfɔɹ, ən i floʊɾəd ɪn kɑm.

The void trembled; hastily Rand firmed it again. He knows it all. He could have done. It could be the way he says. The Light warmed the void. Doubt cried out and was stilled, till only the seed remained. He struggled, not knowing whether he wanted to bury the seed or make it grow. The void steadied, smaller than before, and he floated in calm.

bælzəmən sim tə noʊɾəs nʌθɪŋ. "ɪt mæɾɝz lɪɾəl ɪf aɪ hæv jə əlaɪv əɹ dɛd, ɪksɛp tə ju, ən tə wʌt paʊɝ jə maɪt hæv. jəl sɝv mi, əɹ jəɹ soʊl wɪl. bʌɾ aɪ wəd ɹæðɝ əv jə nil tə mi əlaɪv ðən dɛd. ə sɪŋɡəl fɪst ə tʃɹɑləks sɛn tə jəɹ vɪlədʒ wən aɪ cʊɾə sɛn ə θaʊzənd. wʌn dɑɹkfɹɛn tə feɪs jə wɛɹ ə hʌnʒɹəd kəd kʌm ɑn jə əslip. ən ju, ful, jə doʊn ivən noʊ ðɛm ɔl, niðɝ ðoʊz əhɛd, nɔɹ ðoʊz bɪhaɪnd, nɔɹ ðoʊz baɪ jəɹ saɪd. jə ɑɹ maɪn, hæv ɔlweɪz bɪn maɪn, maɪ dɔɡ ɑn ə liʃ, ən aɪ bɹɔt jə hɪɹ tə nil tə jəɹ mæstɝ əɹ daɪ ən lɛt jəɹ soʊl nil."

Ba'alzamon seemed to notice nothing. "It matters little if I have you alive or dead, except to you, and to what power you might have. You will serve me, or your soul will. But I would rather have you kneel to me alive than dead. A single fist of Trollocs sent to your village when I could have sent a thousand. One Darkfriend to face you where a hundred could come on you asleep. And you, fool, you don't even know them all, neither those ahead, nor those behind, nor those by your side. You are mine, have always been mine, my dog on a leash, and I brought you here to kneel to your master or die and let your soul kneel."

"aɪ dɪnaɪ ju. juv noʊ paʊɝ oʊvɝ mi, ən əl nɑt nil tə ju, əlaɪv əɹ dɛd."

"I deny you. You have no power over me, and I will not kneel to you, alive or dead."

"lʊk," bælzəmən sɛd. "lʊk." ənwɪlɪŋ, ɹænd jɛt tɝn ɪz hɛd.

"Look," Ba'alzamon said. "Look." Unwilling, Rand yet turned his head.

ɛɡwin stʊd ðɛɹ, ən nɪneɪiv, peɪl ən fɹaɪɾənd, wɪð flaʊɝz ɪn ðɛɹ hɛɹ. ən ənʌðɝ wʊmən, lɪɾəl oʊldɝ ðən ðə wɪzdəm, ɡɹeɪ-aɪɾ ən bjuɾəfəl, kloʊðd ɪn ə tu ɹɪvɝz dʒɹɛs, bɹaɪt blɑsəmz ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd ɹaʊn ðə nɛk.

Egwene stood there, and Nynaeve, pale and frightened, with flowers in their hair. And another woman, little older than the Wisdom, gray-eyed and beautiful, clothed in a Two Rivers dress, bright blossoms embroidered round the neck.

"mʌðɝ?" hi bɹiðd, ən ʃi smaɪld, ə hoʊpləs smaɪl. hɪz mʌðɝz smaɪl. "noʊ! maɪ mʌðɝ ɪz dɛd, ən ði ʌðɝ tu ɑɹ seɪf əweɪ fɹəm hɪɹ. aɪ dɪnaɪ ju!" ɛɡwin ən nɪneɪiv blɝd, bɪkeɪm wɑftɪŋ mɪst, dɪsəpeɪɾɪd. kɛɹi ælθɹ stɪl stʊd ðɛɹ, hɝ aɪz bɪɡ wɪð fɪɹ.

"Mother?" he breathed, and she smiled, a hopeless smile. His mother's smile. "No! My mother is dead, and the other two are safe away from here. I deny you!" Egwene and Nynaeve blurred, became wafting mist, dissipated. Kari al'Thor still stood there, her eyes big with fear.

"ʃi, ət list," bælzəmən sɛd, "ɪz maɪn tə də wɪð əz aɪ wɪl."

"She, at least," Ba'alzamon said, "is mine to do with as I will."

ɹænd ʃʊk ɪz hɛd. "aɪ dɪnaɪ ju." hi hæd tə fɔɹs ðə wɝdz aʊt. "ʃi ɪz dɛd, ən seɪf fɹəm jə ɪn ðə laɪt."

Rand shook his head. "I deny you." He had to force the words out. "She is dead, and safe from you in the Light."

hɪz mʌðɝz lɪps tʃɹɛmbəld. tɪɹz tʃɹɪkəl daʊn əɹ tʃiks; itʃ wʌn bɝn ɪm laɪk æsəd. "ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪz stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən i wʌns wɑz, maɪ sʌn," ʃi sɛd. "hɪz ɹitʃ ɪz lɔŋɡɝ. ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz əz ə hʌnid tʌŋ fəɹ ənwɛɹi soʊlz. maɪ sʌn. maɪ oʊnli, dɑɹlɪŋ sʌn. aɪ wəd spɛɹ jə ɪf aɪ kʊd, bʌt hiz maɪ mæstɝ, naʊ, hɪz wɪm, ðə lɔ ʌv maɪ ɛɡzɪstəns. aɪ kən bʌɾ oʊbeɪ hɪm, ən ɡɹɑvəl fəɹ ɪz feɪvɝ. oʊnli jə kən fɹi mi. pliz, maɪ sʌn. pliz hɛlp mi. hɛlp mi. hɛlp mi! pliz!"

His mother's lips trembled. Tears trickled down her cheeks; each one burned him like acid. "The Lord of the Grave is stronger than he once was, my son," she said. "His reach is longer. The Father of Lies has a honeyed tongue for unwary souls. My son. My only, darling son. I would spare you if I could, but he is my master, now, his whim, the law of my existence. I can but obey him, and grovel for his favor. Only you can free me. Please, my son. Please help me. Help me. Help me! PLEASE!"

ðə weɪl ɹɪpt aʊɾ ə hɝ əz bæɹəfeɪs feɪdz, peɪl ən aɪləs, kloʊzd ɹaʊnd. hɝ kloʊðz ɹɪpt əweɪ ɪn ðɛɹ blʌdləs hænz, hænz ðət wildɪd pɪnsɝz ən klæmps ən θɪŋz ðət stʌŋ ən bɝn ən wɪpt əɡɛnst əɹ neɪkəd flɛʃ. hɝ skɹim wəd nɑɾ ɛnd.

The wail ripped out of her as barefaced Fades, pale and eyeless, closed round. Her clothes ripped away in their bloodless hands, hands that wielded pincers and clamps and things that stung and burned and whipped against her naked flesh. Her scream would not end.

ɹændz skɹim ɛkoʊd hɝz. ðə vɔɪd bɔɪld ɪn ɪz maɪnd. hɪz sɔɹd wɑz ɪn ɪz hænd. nɑt ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd, bʌɾ ə bleɪɾ ə laɪt, ə bleɪɾ ə ðə laɪt. ivən əz i ɹeɪzd ɪt, ə faɪɝi waɪt boʊlt ʃɑt fɹəm ðə pɔɪnt, əz ɪf ðə bleɪɾ ɪtsɛlf hæd ɹitʃt aʊt. ɪt tʌtʃt ðə nɪɹəs feɪd, ən blaɪndɪŋ kɑnɛsəns fɪl ðə tʃeɪmbɝ, ʃaɪnɪŋ θɹu ðə hæfmən laɪk ə kændəl θɹu peɪpɝ, bɝnɪŋ θɹu ðɛm, blaɪndɪŋ ɪz aɪz tə ðə sin.

Rand's scream echoed hers. The void boiled in his mind. His sword was in his hand. Not the heron-mark blade, but a blade of light, a blade of the Light. Even as he raised it, a fiery white bolt shot from the point, as if the blade itself had reached out. It touched the nearest Fade, and blinding canescence filled the chamber, shining through the Halfmen like a candle through paper, burning through them, blinding his eyes to the scene.

fɹəm ðə mɪdst ə ðə bɹɪljəns, hi hɝɾ ə wɪspɝ. "θæŋk ju, maɪ sʌn. ðə laɪt. ðə blɛsɪd laɪt."

From the midst of the brilliance, he heard a whisper. "Thank you, my son. The Light. The blessed Light."

ðə flæʃ feɪɾəd, ən i wɑz əloʊn ɪn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɪð bælzəmən. bælzəmənz aɪz bɝn laɪk ðə pɪɾ ə dum, bʌɾ i ʃaɪd bæk fɹəm ðə sɔɹɾ əz ɪf ɪt tʃɹuli wɝ ðə laɪɾ ɪtsɛlf. "ful! jəl dɪstʃɹɔɪ jɝsɛlf! jə kænɑt wild ɪt soʊ, nɑt jɛt! nɑɾ əntɪl aɪ titʃ ju!"

The flash faded, and he was alone in the chamber with Ba'alzamon. Ba'alzamon's eyes burned like the Pit of Doom, but he shied back from the sword as if it truly were the Light itself. "Fool! You will destroy yourself! You cannot wield it so, not yet! Not until I teach you!"

"ɪɾ ɪz ɛndəd," ɹænd sɛd, ən i swʌŋ ðə sɔɹɾ ət bælzəmənz blæk kɔɹd.

"It is ended," Rand said, and he swung the sword at Ba'alzamon's black cord.

bælzəmən skɹimd əz ðə sɔɹd fɛl, skɹim tɪl ðə stoʊn wɔlz tʃɹɛmbəld, ən ði ɛnləs haʊl ɹidʌbəld əz ðə bleɪɾ ə laɪt sɛvɝd ðə kɔɹd. ðə kʌɾ ɛnz ɹɪbaʊndɪɾ əpɑɹɾ əz ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn ʌndɝ tɛnʃən. ði ɛn stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ ɪndə ðə nʌθɪŋnəs aʊtsaɪd bɪɡæn tə ʃɹɪvəl əz ɪt spɹæŋ əweɪ; ði ʌðɝ wɪp bæk ɪndə bælzəmən, hɝlɪŋ ɪm əɡɛns ðə faɪɝpleɪs. ðəɹ wɑz saɪlən læftɝ ɪn ðə saʊnləs ʃɹiks ə ðə tɔɹtʃɝd feɪsəz. ðə wɔlz ʃɪvɝɾ ən kɹækt; ðə flɔɹ hivd, ən tʃʌŋks ə stoʊn kɹæʃt tə ðə flɔɹ fɹəm ðə silɪŋ.

Ba'alzamon screamed as the sword fell, screamed till the stone walls trembled, and the endless howl redoubled as the blade of Light severed the cord. The cut ends rebounded apart as if they had been under tension. The end stretching into the nothingness outside began to shrivel as it sprang away; the other whipped back into Ba'alzamon, hurling him against the fireplace. There was silent laughter in the soundless shrieks of the tortured faces. The walls shivered and cracked; the floor heaved, and chunks of stone crashed to the floor from the ceiling.

əz ɔl bɹoʊk əpɑɹɾ ɝaʊn hɪm, ɹænd pɔɪntəd ðə sɔɹɾ ət bælzəmənz hɑɹt. "ɪɾ ɪz ɛndəd!"

As all broke apart around him, Rand pointed the sword at Ba'alzamon's heart. "It is ended!"

laɪt læns fɹəm ðə bleɪd, kɔɹʌskeɪɾɪŋ ɪn ə ʃaʊɝ ə faɪɝi spɑɹks laɪk dʒɹɑpləts ə moʊltən, waɪt mɛɾəl. weɪlɪŋ, bælzəmən θɹu ʌp ɪz ɑɹmz ɪn ə veɪn ɛfɝt tə ʃil hɪmsɛlf. fleɪmz ʃɹikt ɪn ɪz aɪz, dʒɔɪnɪŋ wɪð ʌðɝ fleɪmz əz ðə stoʊn ɪɡnaɪɾɪd, ðə stoʊn ə ðə kɹækɪŋ wɔlz, ðə stoʊn ə ðə pɪtʃɪŋ flɔɹ, ðə stoʊn ʃaʊɝɪŋ fɹəm ðə silɪŋ. ɹænd fɛl ðə bɹaɪt θɹɛɾ ətætʃt tə hɪm θɪnɪŋ, tɪl oʊnli ðə ɡloʊ ɪtsɛlf ɹɪmeɪnd, bʌɾ i stʃɹeɪn hɑɹɾɝ, nɑt noʊɪŋ wʌɾ i dɪd, əɹ haʊ, oʊnli ðət ðɪs hæd tə bi ɛndəd. ɪts tə bi ɛndəd!

Light lanced from the blade, coruscating in a shower of fiery sparks like droplets of molten, white metal. Wailing, Ba'alzamon threw up his arms in a vain effort to shield himself. Flames shrieked in his eyes, joining with other flames as the stone ignited, the stone of the cracking walls, the stone of the pitching floor, the stone showering from the ceiling. Rand felt the bright thread attached to him thinning, till only the glow itself remained, but he strained harder, not knowing what he did, or how, only that this had to be ended. It has to be ended!

faɪɝ fɪl ðə tʃeɪmbɝ, ə sɑləd fleɪm. hi kəd si bælzəmən wɪðɝɪŋ laɪk ə lif, hɪɹ ɪm haʊlɪŋ, fil ðə ʃɹiks ɡɹeɪɾɪŋ ɑn ɪz boʊnz. ðə fleɪm bɪkeɪm pjʊɹ, waɪt laɪt, bɹaɪɾɝ ðən ðə sʌn. ðən ðə læs flɪkɝ ə ðə θɹɛd wɑz ɡɔn, ən i wɑz fɔlɪŋ θɹu ɛnləs blæk ən bælzəmənz feɪɾɪŋ haʊl.

Fire filled the chamber, a solid flame. He could see Ba'alzamon withering like a leaf, hear him howling, feel the shrieks grating on his bones. The flame became pure, white light, brighter than the sun. Then the last flicker of the thread was gone, and he was falling through endless black and Ba'alzamon's fading howl.

sʌmθɪŋ stʃɹʌk ɪm wɪð tʃɹəmɛndəs fɔɹs, tɝnɪŋ ɪm tə dʒɛli, ən ðə dʒɛli ʃʊk ən skɹim fɹəm ðə faɪɝ ɹeɪdʒɪŋ ɪnsaɪd, ðə hʌŋɡɹi koʊl bɝnɪŋ wɪθaʊɾ ɛnd.

Something struck him with tremendous force, turning him to jelly, and the jelly shook and screamed from the fire raging inside, the hungry cold burning without end.


tʃæptɝ fɪftiɾu


CHAPTER 52

ðəɹ ɪz niðɝ bɪɡɪnɪŋ nɔɹ ɛnd


There Is Neither Beginning Nor End

hi bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ə ðə sʌn, fɝst, muvɪŋ əkɹɔs ə klaʊdləs skaɪ, fɪlɪŋ ɪz ənblɪŋkɪŋ aɪz. ɪt sim tə ɡoʊ baɪ fɪts ən stɑɹts, stændɪŋ stɪl fəɹ deɪz, ðən dɑɹɾɪŋ əhɛɾ ɪn ə stʃɹik ə laɪt, dʒɝkɪŋ təwɔɹd ðə fɑɹ hɝaɪzən, deɪ fɔlɪŋ wɪð ɪt. laɪt. ðət ʃəd min sʌmθɪŋ. θɔt wɑz ə nu θɪŋ. aɪ kən θɪŋk. aɪ minz mi. peɪn keɪm nɛkst, ðə mɛmɹi ʌv ɹeɪdʒɪŋ fivɝ, ðə bɹuzəz wɛɹ ʃeɪkɪŋ tʃɪlz hæd θɹoʊn ɪm ɝaʊn laɪk ə ɹæɡ dɑl. ən ə stɪŋk. ə ɡɹisi, bɝn smɛl, fɪlɪŋ ɪz nɑstʃɹəlz, ən ɪz hɛd.

He became aware of the sun, first, moving across a cloudless sky, filling his unblinking eyes. It seemed to go by fits and starts, standing still for days, then darting ahead in a streak of light, jerking toward the far horizon, day falling with it. Light. That should mean something. Thought was a new thing. I can think. I means me. Pain came next, the memory of raging fever, the bruises where shaking chills had thrown him around like a rag doll. And a stink. A greasy, burned smell, filling his nostrils, and his head.

wɪð eɪkɪŋ mʌsəlz, hi hiv hɪmsɛlf oʊvɝ, pʊʃt ʌp tə hænz ən niz. ʌnkɑmpɹihɛndɪŋ, hi stɛɹɾ ət ði ɔɪli æʃəz ɪn wɪtʃ i hæd bɪn laɪɪŋ, æʃəz skæɾɝd ən smɪɹɾ oʊvɝ ðə stoʊn ə ðə hɪltɑp. bɪts ə dɑɹk ɡɹin klɔθ leɪ mɪkst ɪn ðə tʃɑɹ, ɛdʒ-blækən skɹæps ðət hæɾ ɪskeɪp ðə fleɪmz.

With aching muscles, he heaved himself over, pushed up to hands and knees. Uncomprehending, he stared at the oily ashes in which he had been lying, ashes scattered and smeared over the stone of the hilltop. Bits of dark green cloth lay mixed in the char, edge-blackened scraps that had escaped the flames.

eɪdʒɪnɝ.

Aginor.

hɪz stʌmək hivd ən twɪstəd. tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə bɹʌʃ blæk stʃɹiks ʌv æʃ fɹəm ɪz kloʊðz, hi lɝtʃt əweɪ fɹəm ðə ɹɪmeɪnz ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən. hɪz hænz flæp fibli, nɑt meɪkɪŋ mʌtʃ hɛdweɪ. hi tʃɹaɪd tə juz boʊθ hænz ən fɛl fɔɹwɝd. ə ʃɪɹ dʒɹɑp lumd ʌndɝ ɪz feɪs, ə smuð ɹɑk wɔl spɪnɪŋ ɪn ɪz aɪz, dɛpθ pʊlɪŋ hɪm. hɪz hɛd swʌm, ən i vɑməɾəd oʊvɝ ði ɛdʒ ə ðə klɪf.

His stomach heaved and twisted. Trying to brush black streaks of ash from his clothes, he lurched away from the remains of the Forsaken. His hands flapped feebly, not making much headway. He tried to use both hands and fell forward. A sheer drop loomed under his face, a smooth rock wall spinning in his eyes, depth pulling him. His head swum, and he vomited over the edge of the cliff.

tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ, hi kɹɔl bækwɝdz ɑn ɪz bɛli əntɪl ðəɹ wɑz sɑləd stoʊn ʌndɝ ɪz aɪz, ðən flɑpt oʊvɝ ɑntu hɪz bæk, pæntɪŋ fəɹ bɹɛθ. wɪð ən ɛfɝɾ i fʌmbəld ɪz sɔɹd fɹəm ɪts skæbɝd. oʊnli ə fju æʃəz ɹɪmeɪn fɹəm ðə ɹɛd klɔθ. hɪz hænz ʃʊk wən i hɛld ɪɾ ʌp ɪn fɹʌn ə hɪz feɪs; ɪt tʊk boʊθ hænz. ɪt wɑz ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd - hɛɹən-mɑɹk? jɛs. tæm. maɪ fɑðɝ - bʌɾ oʊnli stil fəɹ ðæt. hi niɾəd θɹi weɪvɝɪŋ tʃɹaɪz tə ʃið ɪɾ əɡɛn. ɪt hæd bɪn sʌmθɪŋ ɛls. əɹ ðəɹ wɑz ənʌðɝ sɔɹd.

Trembling, he crawled backwards on his belly until there was solid stone under his eyes, then flopped over onto his back, panting for breath. With an effort he fumbled his sword from its scabbard. Only a few ashes remained from the red cloth. His hands shook when he held it up in front of his face; it took both hands. It was a heron-mark blade - Heron-mark? Yes. Tam. My father - but only steel for that. He needed three wavering tries to sheathe it again. It had been something else. Or there was another sword.

"maɪ neɪm," hi sɛɾ æftɝ ə waɪl, "ɪz ɹænd ælθɹ." mɔɹ mɛmɹi kɹæʃt bæk ɪndə hɪz hɛd laɪk ə lɛd bɔl, ən i ɡɹoʊnd. "ðə dɑɹk wʌn," hi wɪspɝd tə hɪmsɛlf. "ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪz dɛd." ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɔɹ nid fəɹ kɑʃən. "ʃeɪtɑn ɪz dɛd." ðə wɝl sim tə lɝtʃ. hi ʃʊk ɪn saɪlən mɝθ əntɪl tɪɹz pɔɹd fɹəm ɪz aɪz. "ʃeɪtɑn ɪz dɛd!" hi læft ət ðə skaɪ. ʌðɝ mɛmɹiz. "ɛɡwin!" ðət neɪm mɛn sʌmθɪŋ ɪmpɔɹɾənt.

"My name," he said after a while, "is Rand al'Thor." More memory crashed back into his head like a lead ball, and he groaned. "The Dark One," he whispered to himself. "The Dark One is dead." There was no more need for caution. "Shai'tan is dead." The world seemed to lurch. He shook in silent mirth until tears poured from his eyes. "Shai'tan is dead!" He laughed at the sky. Other memories. "Egwene!" That name meant something important.

peɪnfəli hi ɡɑt tə hɪz fit, weɪvɝɪŋ laɪk ə wɪloʊ ɪn ə haɪ wɪnd, ən stæɡɝd pæst eɪdʒɪnɝz æʃəz wɪθaʊt lʊkɪŋ ət ðɛm. nɑɾ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɛnimɔɹ. hi fɛl mɔɹ ðən klaɪm daʊn ðət fɝst, stip pɑɹɾ ə ðə sloʊp, tʌmbəlɪŋ ən slaɪɾɪŋ fɹəm bʊʃ tə bʊʃ. baɪ ðə taɪm i ɹitʃt mɔɹ lɛvəl ɡɹaʊnd, hɪz bɹuzəz ætʃt twaɪs əz mʌtʃ, bʌɾ i faʊn stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪnʌf tə stænd, bɛɹli. ɛɡwin. hi bɹoʊk ɪndə ə ʃæmbəlɪŋ ɹʌn. livz ən flaʊɝ pɛɾəlz ʃaʊɝɾ ɝaʊn ɪm əz i blʌndɝd θɹu ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ. hæv tə faɪn hɝ. hu ɪz ʃi?

Painfully he got to his feet, wavering like a willow in a high wind, and staggered past Aginor's ashes without looking at them. Not important anymore. He fell more than climbed down that first, steep part of the slope, tumbling and sliding from bush to bush. By the time he reached more level ground, his bruises ached twice as much, but he found strength enough to stand, barely. Egwene. He broke into a shambling run. Leaves and flower petals showered around him as he blundered through the undergrowth. Have to find her. Who is she?

hɪz ɑɹmz ən lɛɡz sim tə fleɪl əbaʊt mɔɹ laɪk lɔŋ bleɪdz ʌv ɡɹæs ðən ɡoʊ əz i wɑntəɾ əm tə. tɑɾɝɪŋ, hi fɛl əɡɛnst ə tʃɹi, slæmɪŋ əɡɛns ðə tʃɹʌŋk soʊ hɑɹd ðəɾ i ɡɹʌntɪd. foʊlɪdʒ ɹeɪn ɑn ɪz hɛd waɪl i pɹɛst ɪz feɪs tə ðə ɹʌf bɑɹk, klʌtʃɪŋ tə kip fɹəm fɔlɪŋ. ɛɡwin. hi pʊʃt hɪmsɛlf əweɪ fɹəm ðə tʃɹi ən hɝiɾ ɑn. ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli hi tɪltəɾ əɡɛn, fɔlɪŋ, bʌɾ i fɔɹst ɪz lɛɡz tə wɝk fæstɝ, tə ɹʌn ɪndə ðə fɔl soʊ ðəɾ i wɑz stæɡɝɪŋ əlɔŋ əɾ ə ɡʊd klɪp, ɔl ðə waɪl wʌn stɛp fɹəm fɔlɪŋ flæɾ ɑn ɪz feɪs. muvɪŋ meɪɾ ɪz lɛɡz bɪɡɪn tə oʊbeɪ hɪm mɔɹ. sloʊli, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf ɹʌnɪŋ əpɹaɪt, ɑɹmz pʌmpɪŋ, lɔŋ lɛɡz pʊlɪŋ ɪm daʊn ðə sloʊp ɪn lips. hi baʊndəɾ ɪndə ðə klɪɹɪŋ, hæf-fɪl naʊ baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪɾ oʊk mɑɹkɪŋ ðə ɡɹin mænz ɡɹeɪv. ðəɹ wɑz ðə waɪt stoʊn ɑɹtʃ mɑɹkt wɪð ði eɪntʃən sɪmbəl ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən ðə blækənd, ɡeɪpɪŋ pɪt wɛɹ faɪɝ ən wɪn hæd tʃɹaɪd tə tʃɹæp eɪdʒɪnɝ ən feɪld.

His arms and legs seemed to flail about more like long blades of grass than go as he wanted them to. Tottering, he fell against a tree, slamming against the trunk so hard that he grunted. Foliage rained on his head while he pressed his face to the rough bark, clutching to keep from falling. Egwene. He pushed himself away from the tree and hurried on. Almost immediately he tilted again, falling, but he forced his legs to work faster, to run into the fall so that he was staggering along at a good clip, all the while one step from falling flat on his face. Moving made his legs begin to obey him more. Slowly, he found himself running upright, arms pumping, long legs pulling him down the slope in leaps. He bounded into the clearing, half-filled now by the great oak marking the Green Man's grave. There was the white stone arch marked with the ancient symbol of the Aes Sedai, and the blackened, gaping pit where fire and wind had tried to trap Aginor and failed.

"ɛɡwin! ɛɡwin, wɛɹ ɑɹ ju?" ə pɹɪɾi ɡɝl lʊkt ʌp wɪð bɪɡ aɪz fɹəm wɛɹ ʃi nɛl bɪniθ ðə spɹɛɾɪŋ bɹæntʃəz, flaʊɝz ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, ən bɹaʊn oʊk livz. ʃi wɑz slɛndɝ ən jʌŋ, ən fɹaɪɾənd. jɛs, ðæts u ʃi ɪz. ʌv kɔɹs. "ɛɡwin, θæŋk ðə laɪt jəɹ ɔl ɹaɪt."

"Egwene! Egwene, where are you?" A pretty girl looked up with big eyes from where she knelt beneath the spreading branches, flowers in her hair, and brown oak leaves. She was slender and young, and frightened. Yes, that's who she is. Of course. "Egwene, thank the Light you're all right."

ðəɹ wɝ tu ʌðɝ wɪmən wɪð hɝ, wʌn wɪð hɔntəɾ aɪz ən ə lɔŋ bɹeɪd, stɪl dɛkɝeɪɾəd wɪð ə fju waɪt mɔɹnɪŋstɑɹz. ði ʌðɝ leɪ aʊtstʃɹɛtʃt, hɝ hɛd pɪloʊɾ ɑn foʊldəd kloʊks, hɝ oʊn skaɪ-blu kloʊk nɑt kwaɪt haɪɾɪŋ əɹ tæɾɝd dʒɹɛs. tʃɑɹd spɑts ən tɪɹz ɪn ðə ɹɪtʃ klɔθ ʃoʊd, ən əɹ feɪs wɑz peɪl, bʌɾ əɹ aɪz wɝ oʊpən. mɔɪɹeɪn. jɛs, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ən ðə wɪzdəm, nɪneɪiv. ɔl θɹi wɪmən lʊkt ət hɪm, ənblɪŋkɪŋ ən ɪntɛnt.

There were two other women with her, one with haunted eyes and a long braid, still decorated with a few white morningstars. The other lay outstretched, her head pillowed on folded cloaks, her own sky-blue cloak not quite hiding her tattered dress. Charred spots and tears in the rich cloth showed, and her face was pale, but her eyes were open. Moiraine. Yes, the Aes Sedai. And the Wisdom, Nynaeve. All three women looked at him, unblinking and intent.

"ju ɑɹ ɔl ɹaɪt, ɑɹən ju? ɛɡwin? hi dɪdn hɑɹm ju." hi kəd wɔk wɪθaʊt stʌmbəlɪŋ, naʊ - ðə saɪɾ ə hɝ meɪɾ ɪm fil laɪk dænsɪŋ, bɹuzəz ən ɔl - bʌɾ ɪt stɪl fɛlt ɡʊd tə dʒɹɑp daʊn kɹɔs-lɛɡəd bɪsaɪd ðɛm.

"You are all right, aren't you? Egwene? He didn't harm you." He could walk without stumbling, now - the sight of her made him feel like dancing, bruises and all - but it still felt good to drop down cross-legged beside them.

"aɪ nɛvɝ ivən sɔ hɪm æftɝ jə pʊʃt - " hɝ aɪz wɝ ənsɝɾən ɑn ɪz feɪs. "wʌɾ əbaʊt ju, ɹænd?"

"I never even saw him after you pushed - " Her eyes were uncertain on his face. "What about you, Rand?"

"aɪm faɪn." hi læft. hi tʌtʃt əɹ tʃik, ən wʌndɝɾ ɪf i hæɾ ɪmædʒən ə slaɪt pʊlɪŋ əweɪ. "ə lɪɾəl ɹɛst, ən əl bi numeɪd. nɪneɪiv? mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ?" ðə neɪmz fɛl nu ɪn ɪz maʊθ.

"I'm fine." He laughed. He touched her cheek, and wondered if he had imagined a slight pulling away. "A little rest, and I'll be newmade. Nynaeve? Moiraine Sedai?" The names felt new in his mouth.

ðə wɪzdəmz aɪz wɝ oʊld, eɪntʃən ɪn əɹ jʌŋ feɪs, bʌt ʃi ʃʊk əɹ hɛd. "ə lɪɾəl bɹuzd," ʃi sɛd, stɪl wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm. "mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz ði oʊnli . . . ði oʊnli wʌn ʌv əs u wɑz ɹɪli hɝt."

The Wisdom's eyes were old, ancient in her young face, but she shook her head. "A little bruised," she said, still watching him. "Moiraine is the only . . . the only one of us who was really hurt."

"aɪ sʌfɝd mɔɹ ɪnʒɝi tə maɪ pɹaɪd ðən ɛniθɪŋ ɛls," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛɾ ɪɹɪɾəbli, plʌkɪŋ əɾ əɹ kloʊk blæŋkət. ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi hæd bɪn ə lɔŋ taɪm ɪl, əɹ hɑɹd juzd, bʌt dɪspaɪt ðə dɑɹk sɝkəlz ʌndɝ əm əɹ aɪz wɝ ʃɑɹp ən fʊl ə paʊɝ. "eɪdʒɪnɝ wɑz sɝpɹaɪzd ən æŋɡɹi ðəɾ aɪ hɛld ɪm əz lɔŋ əz aɪ dɪd, bʌt fɔɹtʃənətli, hi hæd noʊ taɪm tə spɛɹ fəɹ mi. aɪm sɝpɹaɪz maɪsɛlf ðəɾ aɪ hɛld ɪm soʊ lɔŋ. ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, eɪdʒɪnɝ wɑz kloʊs bɪhaɪn ðə kɪnsleɪɝ ən ɪʃəml ɪn paʊɝ."

"I suffered more injury to my pride than anything else," the Aes Sedai said irritably, plucking at her cloak blanket. She looked as if she had been a long time ill, or hard used, but despite the dark circles under them her eyes were sharp and full of power. "Aginor was surprised and angry that I held him as long as I did, but fortunately, he had no time to spare for me. I am surprised myself that I held him so long. In the Age of Legends, Aginor was close behind the Kinslayer and Ishamael in power."

" 'ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ɔl ðə fɔɹseɪkən,' " ɛɡwin kwoʊɾəd ɪn ə feɪnt, ənstɛɾi vɔɪs, " 'ɑɹ baʊn ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, baʊn baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ. . . .' " ʃi dʒɹu ə ʃʌɾɝɪŋ bɹɛθ.

" 'The Dark One and all the Forsaken,' " Egwene quoted in a faint, unsteady voice, " 'are bound in Shayol Ghul, bound by the Creator. . . .' " She drew a shuddering breath.

"eɪdʒɪnɝ ən bælθəməl mʌst əv bɪn tʃɹæp nɪɹ ðə sɝfəs." mɔɪɹeɪn saʊndəɾ əz ɪf ʃi hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ɪkspleɪn ðɪs, ɪmpeɪʃən ət duɪŋ soʊ əɡɛn. "ðə pætʃ ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən wikən ɪnʌf tə fɹi ðɛm. lɛɾ əs bi θæŋkfəl noʊ mɔɹ ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɝ fɹid. ɪf ðeɪ hæd bɪn, wi wʊɾə sin ðɛm."

"Aginor and Balthamel must have been trapped near the surface." Moiraine sounded as if she had already explained this, impatient at doing so again. "The patch on the Dark One's prison weakened enough to free them. Let us be thankful no more of the Forsaken were freed. If they had been, we would have seen them."

"ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ," ɹænd sɛd. "eɪdʒɪnɝ ən bælθəməl ɑɹ dɛd, ən soʊ ɪz ʃaɪ' - "

"It doesn't matter," Rand said. "Aginor and Balthamel are dead, and so is Shai' - "

"ðə dɑɹk wʌn," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kʌɾ ɪm ɔf. ɪl əɹ nɑt, hɝ vɔɪs wɑz fɝm, ən əɹ dɑɹk aɪz kəmændɪŋ. "bɛst wi stɪl kɔl ɪm ðə dɑɹk wʌn. əɹ bælzəmən, ət list."

"The Dark One," the Aes Sedai cut him off. Ill or not, her voice was firm, and her dark eyes commanding. "Best we still call him the Dark One. Or Ba'alzamon, at least."

hi ʃɹʌɡd. "æz jə wɪʃ. bʌt hiz dɛd. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz dɛd. aɪ kɪl hɪm. aɪ bɝn ɪm wɪð. . . ." ðə ɹɛst ə mɛmɹi flʌɾəd bæk ðɛn, livɪŋ ɪz maʊθ hæŋɪŋ oʊpən. ðə wʌn paʊɝ. aɪ wildɪd ðə wʌn paʊɝ. noʊ mæn kæn. . . . hi lɪk lɪps ðət wɝ sʌɾənli dʒɹaɪ. ə ɡʌst ʌv wɪn swɝl fɔlən ən fɔlɪŋ livz ɝaʊn ðɛm, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz noʊ koʊldɝ ðən ɪz hɑɹt. ðeɪ wɝ lʊkɪŋ ət hɪm, ðə θɹi ʌv ðɛm. wɑtʃɪŋ. nɑɾ ivən blɪŋkɪŋ. hi ɹitʃt aʊt tə ɛɡwin, ən ðəɹ wɑz noʊ ɪmædʒəneɪʃən ɪn əɹ dʒɹɔɪŋ bæk ðɪs taɪm. "ɛɡwin?" ʃi tɝn əɹ feɪs əweɪ, ən i lɛɾ ɪz hæn dʒɹɑp.

He shrugged. "As you wish. But he's dead. The Dark One's dead. I killed him. I burned him with. . . ." The rest of memory flooded back then, leaving his mouth hanging open. The One Power. I wielded the One Power. No man can. . . . He licked lips that were suddenly dry. A gust of wind swirled fallen and falling leaves around them, but it was no colder than his heart. They were looking at him, the three of them. Watching. Not even blinking. He reached out to Egwene, and there was no imagination in her drawing back this time. "Egwene?" She turned her face away, and he let his hand drop.

əbɹʌpli ʃi flʌŋ əɹ ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɪm, bɛɹiɪŋ əɹ feɪs ɪn ɪz tʃɛst. "aɪm sɑɹi, ɹænd. aɪm sɑɹi. aɪ doʊn kɛɹ. tʃɹuli, aɪ doʊnt." hɝ ʃoʊldɝz ʃʊk. hi θɔt ʃi wɑz kɹaɪɪŋ. ɔkwɝdli pæɾɪŋ əɹ hɛɹ, hi lʊkt ət ði ʌðɝ tu wɪmən oʊvɝ ðə tɑp ə hɝ hɛd.

Abruptly she flung her arms around him, burying her face in his chest. "I'm sorry, Rand. I'm sorry. I don't care. Truly, I don't." Her shoulders shook. He thought she was crying. Awkwardly patting her hair, he looked at the other two women over the top of her head.

"ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz," nɪneɪiv sɛd sloʊli, "bʌt jə ɑɹ stɪl ɹænd ælθɹ ʌv ɛmənz fild. bʌt, ðə laɪt hɛlp mi, ðə laɪt hɛlp əs ɔl, jə ɑɹ tu deɪnʒɝəs, ɹænd." hi flɪntʃt fɹəm ðə wɪzdəmz aɪz, sæd, ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪŋ, ən ɔlɹɛɾi æksɛptɪŋ lɔs.

"The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills," Nynaeve said slowly, "but you are still Rand al'Thor of Emond's Field. But, the Light help me, the Light help us all, you are too dangerous, Rand." He flinched from the Wisdom's eyes, sad, regretting, and already accepting loss.

"wʌt hæpənd?" mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "tɛl mi ɛvɹiθɪŋ!"

"What happened?" Moiraine said. "Tell me everything!"

ən wɪð əɹ aɪz ɑn hɪm, kəmpɛlɪŋ, hi dɪd. hi wɑntəd tə tɝn əweɪ, tə meɪk ɪt ʃɔɹt, liv θɪŋz aʊt, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪz aɪz dʒɹu ɛvɹiθɪŋ fɹəm hɪm. tɪɹz ɹæn daʊn ɪz feɪs wən i keɪm tə kɛɹi ælθɹ. hɪz mʌðɝ. hi ɛmfəsaɪz ðæt. "hi hæd maɪ mʌðɝ. maɪ mʌðɝ!" ðəɹ wɑz sɪmpəθi ən peɪn ɑn nɪneɪivz feɪs, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪz aɪz dʒɹoʊv ɪm ɑn, tə ðə sɔɹɾ ə laɪt, tə sɛvɝɪŋ ðə blæk kɔɹd, ən ðə fleɪmz kənsumɪŋ bælzəmən. ɛɡwinz ɑɹmz taɪɾənd ɝaʊn ɪm əz ɪf ʃi wəd pʊl ɪm bæk fɹəm wʌt hæd hæpənd. "bʌɾ ɪt wɑzn mi," hi fɪnɪʃt. "ðə laɪt . . . pʊl mi əlɔŋ. ɪt wɑzn ɹɪli mi. dʌzn ðət meɪk ɛni dɪfɝəns?"

And with her eyes on him, compelling, he did. He wanted to turn away, to make it short, leave things out, but the Aes Sedai's eyes drew everything from him. Tears ran down his face when he came to Kari al'Thor. His mother. He emphasized that. "He had my mother. My mother!" There was sympathy and pain on Nynaeve's face, but the Aes Sedai's eyes drove him on, to the sword of Light, to severing the black cord, and the flames consuming Ba'alzamon. Egwene's arms tightened around him as if she would pull him back from what had happened. "But it wasn't me," he finished. "The Light . . . pulled me along. It wasn't really me. Doesn't that make any difference?"

"aɪ hæd səspɪʃənz fɹəm ðə fɝst," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "səspɪʃənz ɑɹ nɑt pɹuf, ðoʊ. æftɝ aɪ ɡeɪv jə ðə toʊkən, ðə kɔɪn, ən meɪd ðət bɑndɪŋ, jə ʃʊɾə bɪn wɪlɪŋ tə fɔl ɪn wɪð wʌtɛvɝ aɪ wɑntəd, bʌt jə ɹɪzɪstɪd, kwɛstʃənd. ðət toʊl mi sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt nɑɾ ɪnʌf. meɪnɛðɝən blʌd wɑz ɔlweɪz stʌbɝn, ən mɔɹ soʊ æftɝ æɛmən daɪɾ ən ɛldʒɹinz hɑɹt wɑz ʃæɾɝd. ðən ðəɹ wɑz bɛlə."

"I had suspicions from the first," Moiraine said. "Suspicions are not proof, though. After I gave you the token, the coin, and made that bonding, you should have been willing to fall in with Whatever I wanted, but you resisted, questioned. That told me something, but not enough. Manetheren blood was always stubborn, and more so after Aemon died and Eldrene's heart was shattered. Then there was Bela."

"bɛlə?" hi sɛd. nʌθɪŋ meɪks ɛni dɪfɝəns.

"Bela?" he said. Nothing makes any difference.

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ nɑɾəd. "æt wɑtʃ hɪl, bɛlə hæd noʊ niɾ ə mi tə klɛnz əɹ ə taɪɹədnəs; sʌmwʌn hæɾ ɔlɹɛɾi dʌn ɪt. ʃi cʊɾə aʊtʃɹʌn mændɑɹb, ðət naɪt. aɪ ʃʊɾə θɔɾ ə hu bɛlə kæɹid. wɪð tʃɹɑləks ɑn əɹ hilz, ə dʒɹæɡkɝ oʊvɝhɛd, ən ə hæfmən ðə laɪɾ əloʊn nu wɛɹ, haʊ jə mʌst əv fɪɹd ðəɾ ɛɡwin wəd bi lɛf bɪhaɪnd. jə niɾəd sʌmθɪŋ mɔɹ ðən jə hæɾ ɛvɝ niɾəd ɛniθɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ɪn jəɹ laɪf, ən jə ɹitʃt aʊt tə ðə wʌn θɪŋ ðət kəd ɡɪv ɪt tə ju. seɪɾɪn."

The Aes Sedai nodded. "At Watch Hill, Bela had no need of me to cleanse her of tiredness; someone had already done it. She could have outrun Mandarb, that night. I should have thought of who Bela carried. With Trollocs on our heels, a Draghkar overhead, and a Halfman the Light alone knew where, how you must have feared that Egwene would be left behind. You needed something more than you had ever needed anything before in your life, and you reached out to the one thing that could give it to you. Saidin."

hi ʃɪvɝd. hi fɛl soʊ koʊld ɪz fɪŋɡɝz hɝt. "ɪf aɪ nɛvɝ də ɪɾ əɡɛn, ɪf aɪ nɛvɝ tʌtʃ ɪɾ əɡɛn, aɪ woʊnt. . . ." hi kəd nɑt seɪ ɪt. ɡoʊ mæd. tɝn ðə læn ən pipəl ɝaʊn ɪm tə mædnəs. daɪ, ɹɑɾɪŋ waɪl i stɪl lɪvd.

He shivered. He felt so cold his fingers hurt. "If I never do it again, if I never touch it again, I won't. . . ." He could not say it. Go mad. Turn the land and people around him to madness. Die, rotting while he still lived.

"pɝhæps," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɪt wəd bi mʌtʃ iziɝ ɪf ðəɹ wɑz sʌmwʌn tə titʃ ju, bʌɾ ɪt maɪt bi dʌn, wɪð ə səpɹim ɛfɝɾ ʌv wɪl."

"Perhaps," Moiraine said. "It would be much easier if there was someone to teach you, but it might be done, with a supreme effort of will."

"ju kən titʃ mi. ʃʊɹli, jə - " hi stɑpt wən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ʃʊk əɹ hɛd.

"You can teach me. Surely, you - " He stopped when the Aes Sedai shook her head.

"kæn ə kæt titʃ ə dɔɡ tə klaɪm tʃɹiz, ɹænd? kən ə fɪʃ titʃ ə bɝd tə swɪm? aɪ noʊ seɪaɪdɑɹ, bʌɾ aɪ kən titʃ jə nʌθɪŋ ə seɪɾɪn. ðoʊz u kəɾ ɑɹ θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz dɛd. pɝhæps jə ɑɹ stʌbɝn ɪnʌf, ðoʊ. pɝhæps jəɹ wɪl ɪz stʃɹɔŋ ɪnʌf."

"Can a cat teach a dog to climb trees, Rand? Can a fish teach a bird to swim? I know saidar, but I can teach you nothing of saidin. Those who could are three thousand years dead. Perhaps you are stubborn enough, though. Perhaps your will is strong enough."

ɛɡwin stʃɹeɪɾənd, waɪpɪŋ ɹɛɾənd aɪz wɪð ðə bæk ə hɝ hænd. ʃi lʊkt əz ɪf ʃi wɑntəd tə seɪ sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt wən ʃi oʊpən əɹ maʊθ, nʌθɪŋ keɪm aʊt. ət list ʃi ɪzən pʊlɪŋ əweɪ. ət list ʃi kən lʊk ət mi wɪθaʊt skɹimɪŋ.

Egwene straightened, wiping reddened eyes with the back of her hand. She looked as if she wanted to say something, but when she opened her mouth, nothing came out. At least she isn't pulling away. At least she can look at me without screaming.

"ði ʌðɝz?" hi sɛd.

"The others?" he said.

"læn tʊk əm ɪndə ðə kævɝn," nɪneɪiv sɛd. "ði aɪ ɪz ɡɔn, bʌt ðɛɹz sʌmθɪŋ ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ə ðə pul, ə kɹɪstəl kɑləm, ən stɛps tə ɹitʃ ɪt. mæt ən pɛɹɪn wɑntəd tə lʊk fəɹ jə fɝst - lɔɪəl dɪd, tu - bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. . . ." ʃi ɡlænst ət ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, tʃɹʌbəld. mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪtɝn əɹ lʊk kɑmli. "ʃi sɛd wi mʌsnt dɪstɝb jə waɪl jə wɝ. . . ."

"Lan took them into the cavern," Nynaeve said. "The Eye is gone, but there's something in the middle of the pool, a crystal column, and steps to reach it. Mat and Perrin wanted to look for you first - Loial did, too - but Moiraine said. . . ." She glanced at the Aes Sedai, troubled. Moiraine returned her look calmly. "She said we mustn't disturb you while you were. . . ."

hɪz θɹoʊt kənstʃɹɪktəɾ əntɪl i kəd hɑɹdli bɹið. wɪl ðeɪ tɝn ðɛɹ feɪsəz ðə weɪ ɛɡwin dɪd? wɪl ðeɪ skɹim ən ɹʌn əweɪ laɪk ɪm ə feɪd? mɔɪɹeɪn spoʊk əz ɪf ʃi dɪd nɑt noʊɾəs ðə blʌd dʒɹeɪnɪŋ fɹəm ɪz feɪs.

His throat constricted until he could hardly breathe. Will they turn their faces the way Egwene did? Will they scream and run away like I'm a Fade? Moiraine spoke as if she did not notice the blood draining from his face.

"ðɛɹ wɑz ə væst əmaʊn ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪn ði aɪ. ivən ɪn ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, fju cʊɾə tʃænəl soʊ mʌtʃ əneɪɾɪd wɪθaʊt biɪŋ dɪstʃɹɔɪd. vɛɹi fju."

"There was a vast amount of the One Power in the Eye. Even in the Age of Legends, few could have channeled so much unaided without being destroyed. Very few."

"ju toʊl ðɛm?" hi sɛd hɔɹsli. "ɪf ɛvɹibɑɾi noʊz. . . ."

"You told them?" he said hoarsely. "If everybody knows. . . ."

"oʊnli læn," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd dʒɛnli. "hi mʌs noʊ. ən nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin, fəɹ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ ən wʌt ðəl bɪkʌm. ði ʌðɝz əv noʊ nid, jɛt."

"Only Lan," Moiraine said gently. "He must know. And Nynaeve and Egwene, for what they are and what they will become. The others have no need, yet."

"waɪ nɑt?" ðə ɹæsp ɪn ɪz θɹoʊt meɪɾ ɪz vɔɪs hɑɹʃ. "ju wɪl bi wɑntɪŋ tə dʒɛntəl mi, woʊn ju? ɪzən ðət wʌɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ də tə mɛn u kən wil ðə paʊɝ? tʃeɪnʒ əm soʊ ðeɪ kænt? meɪk əm seɪf? tɑm sɛd mɛn u hæv bɪn dʒɛntəl daɪ kəz ðeɪ stɑp wɑntɪŋ tə lɪv. waɪ ɑɹən jə tɔkɪŋ əbaʊt teɪkɪŋ mi tə tɑɹ vəlɑn tə bi dʒɛntəld?"

"Why not?" The rasp in his throat made his voice harsh. "You will be wanting to gentle me, won't you? Isn't that what Aes Sedai do to men who can wield the Power? Change them so they can't? Make them safe? Thom said men who have been gentled die because they stop wanting to live. Why aren't you talking about taking me to Tar Valon to be gentled?"

"ju ɑɹ tɑvɝən," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. "pɝhæps ðə pæɾɝn əz nɑt fɪnɪʃt wɪð ju."

"You are ta'veren," Moiraine replied. "Perhaps the Pattern has not finished with you."

ɹænd sæɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt. "ɪn ðə dʒɹimz bælzəmən sɛd tɑɹ vəlɑn ən ði æmɪɝlɪn sit wəd tʃɹaɪ tə juz mi. hi neɪm neɪmz, ən aɪ ɹɪmɛmbɝ ðɛm, naʊ. ɹɑoʊlɪn dɑɹksbeɪn ən ɡɛɹ əmɑlɑsən. jʊɹiən stoʊnboʊ. dɑviən. lɑɡən." ðə læst wɑz ðə hɑɹɾəst ʌv ɔl tə seɪ. nɪneɪiv wɛn peɪl ən ɛɡwin ɡæspt, bʌɾ i pɹɛst ɑn æŋɡɹəli. "ɛvɹi wʌn ə fɔls dʒɹæɡən. doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə dɪnaɪ ɪt. wɛl, aɪ woʊn bi juzd. aɪm nɑɾ ə tul jə kən θɹoʊ ɑn ðə mɪɾən hip wən ɪts wɔɹn aʊt."

Rand sat up straight. "In the dreams Ba'alzamon said Tar Valon and the Amyrlin Seat would try to use me. He named names, and I remember them, now. Raolin Darksbane and Guaire Amalasan. Yurian Stonebow. Davian. Logain." The last was the hardest of all to say. Nynaeve went pale and Egwene gasped, but he pressed on angrily. "Every one a false Dragon. Don't try to deny it. Well, I won't be used. I am not a tool you can throw on the midden heap when it's worn out."

"ə tul meɪd fəɹ ə pɝpəs ɪz nɑt dɪmin baɪ biɪŋ juz fəɹ ðət pɝpəs," mɔɪɹeɪnz vɔɪs wɑz əz hɑɹʃ əz ɪz oʊn, "bʌɾ ə mæn u bɪlivz ðə fɑðɝ ə laɪz dɪminz hɪmsɛlf. jə seɪ jəl nɑt bi juzd, ən ðən jə lɛt ðə dɑɹk wʌn sɛt jəɹ pæθ laɪk ə haʊn sɛn æftɝ ə ɹæbət baɪ hɪz mæstɝ."

"A tool made for a purpose is not demeaned by being used for that purpose," Moiraine's voice was as harsh as his own, "but a man who believes the Father of Lies demeans himself. You say you will not be used, and then you let the Dark One set your path like a hound sent after a rabbit by his master."

hɪz fɪsts klɛntʃt, ən i tɝn ɪz hɛɾ əweɪ. ɪt wɑz tu kloʊz tə ðə θɪŋz bælzəmən hæd sɛd. "aɪ æm noʊ wʌnz haʊnd. dʒju hɪɹ mi? noʊ wʌnz!"

His fists clenched, and he turned his head away. It was too close to the things Ba'alzamon had said. "I am no one's hound. Do you hear me? No one's!"

lɔɪəl ən ði ʌðɝz əpɪɹɾ ɪn ði ɑɹtʃ, ən ɹænd skɹæmbəl tə hɪz fit, lʊkɪŋ ət mɔɪɹeɪn.

Loial and the others appeared in the arch, and Rand scrambled to his feet, looking at Moiraine.

"ðeɪ wɪl nɑt noʊ," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd, "əntɪl ðə pæɾɝn meɪks ɪt soʊ."

"They will not know," the Aes Sedai said, "until the Pattern makes it so."

ðən ɪz fɹɛnz wɝ kʌmɪŋ kloʊs. læn lɛd ðə weɪ, lʊkɪŋ əz hɑɹɾ əz ɛvɝ bʌt stɪl sʌmwʌt ðə wɝs fəɹ wɛɹ. hi hæd wʌn ə nɪneɪivz bændədʒəz ɝaʊn ɪz tɛmpəlz, ən ə stɪfbækt weɪ ʌv wɔkɪŋ. bɪhaɪn hɪm, lɔɪəl kæɹiɾ ə lɑɹdʒ ɡoʊl tʃɛst, ɔɹnətli wɝkt ən tʃeɪst wɪð sɪlvɝ. noʊ wʌn bʌɾ ən oʊɡiɝ cʊɾə lɪftəɾ ɪɾ əneɪɾɪd. pɛɹɪn hæɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ɹæpt ɝaʊn ə bɪɡ bʌndəl ə foʊldəd waɪt klɔθ, ən mæt wɑz kʌpɪŋ wʌɾ əpɪɹd tə bi fɹæɡmɛns ə pɑɾɝi ɪn ɪz tu hænz.

Then his friends were coming close. Lan led the way, looking as hard as ever but still somewhat the worse for wear. He had one of Nynaeve's bandages around his temples, and a stiffbacked way of walking. Behind him, Loial carried a large gold chest, ornately worked and chased with silver. No one but an Ogier could have lifted it unaided. Perrin had his arms wrapped around a big bundle of folded white cloth, and Mat was cupping what appeared to be fragments of pottery in his two hands.

"soʊ jəɹ əlaɪv æftɝ ɔl." mæt læft. hɪz feɪs dɑɹkənd, ən i dʒɝkt ɪz hɛɾ ət mɔɪɹeɪn. "ʃi wʊdn lɛɾ əs lʊk fəɹ ju. sɛd wi hæd tə faɪn aʊt wʌt ði aɪ wɑz haɪɾɪŋ. aɪɾ əv ɡɔn ɛniweɪ, bʌt nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin saɪɾəd wɪð əɹ ən ɔlmoʊs θɹu mi θɹu ði ɑɹtʃ."

"So you're alive after all." Mat laughed. His face darkened, and he jerked his head at Moiraine. "She wouldn't let us look for you. Said we had to find out what the Eye was hiding. I'd have gone anyway, but Nynaeve and Egwene sided with her and almost threw me through the arch."

"jɔɹ hɪɹ, naʊ," pɛɹɪn sɛd, "ænd nɑt tu bædli biɾən əbaʊt, baɪ ðə lʊk ə ju." hɪz aɪz dɪd nɑt ɡloʊ, bʌt ði aɪɹəsɪz wɝ ɔl jɛloʊ, naʊ. "ðæts ði ɪmpɔɹɾənt θɪŋ. jəɹ hɪɹ, ən wɝ dʌn wɪð wʌt wi keɪm fɔɹ, wʌtɛvɝ ɪt wɑz. mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛz wɝ dʌn, ən wi kən ɡoʊ. hoʊm, ɹænd. ðə laɪt bɝn mi, bʌɾ aɪ wɑnə ɡoʊ hoʊm."

"You're here, now," Perrin said, "and not too badly beaten about, by the look of you." His eyes did not glow, but the irises were all yellow, now. "That's the important thing. You're here, and we're done with what we came for, Whatever it was. Moiraine Sedai says we're done, and we can go. Home, Rand. The Light burn me, but I want to go home."

"ɡʊd tə si jə əlaɪv, ʃifɝɾɝ," læn sɛd ɡɹʌflaɪ. "aɪ si jə hʌŋ ɑntu jəɹ sɔɹd. meɪbi jəl lɝn tə juz ɪt, naʊ." ɹænd fɛlt ə sʌɾən bɝst ʌv əfɛkʃən fəɹ ðə wɔɹɾɝ; læn nu, bʌɾ ɑn ðə sɝfəs ət list, nʌθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd. hi θɔt ðət pɝhæps, fəɹ læn, nʌθɪŋ hæd tʃeɪnʒd ɪnsaɪɾ iðɝ.

"Good to see you alive, sheepherder," Lan said gruffly. "I see you hung onto your sword. Maybe you'll learn to use it, now." Rand felt a sudden burst of affection for the Warder; Lan knew, but on the surface at least, nothing had changed. He thought that perhaps, for Lan, nothing had changed inside either.

"aɪ mʌst seɪ," lɔɪəl sɛd, sɛɾɪŋ ðə tʃɛs daʊn, "ðæt tʃɹævlɪŋ wɪð tɑvɝən əz tɝn aʊt tə bi ivən mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ ðən aɪ ɪkspɛktəd." hɪz ɪɹz twɪtʃt vaɪələnli. "ɪf ɪt bɪkʌmz ɛni mɔɹ ɪntʃɹəstɪŋ, əl ɡoʊ bæk tə stɛɾɪŋ ʃæŋktaɪ ɪmiɾiətli, kənfɛs ɛvɹiθɪŋ tə ɛldɝ heɪmən, ən nɛvɝ liv maɪ bʊks əɡɛn." sʌɾənli ði oʊɡiɝ ɡɹɪnd, ðət waɪd maʊθ splɪɾɪŋ ɪz feɪs ɪn tu. "ɪɾ ɪz soʊ ɡʊd tə si ju, ɹænd ælθɹ. ðə wɔɹɾɝ ɪz ði oʊnli wʌn ə ðiz θɹi hu kɛɹz mʌtʃ əɾ ɔl fəɹ bʊks, ən i woʊn tɔk. wʌt hæpən tə ju? wi ɔl ɹæn ɔf ən hɪɾ ɪn ðə wʊdz əntɪl mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛn læn tə faɪn ʌs, bʌt ʃi wəd nɑt lɛɾ əs lʊk fəɹ ju. waɪ wɝ jə ɡɔn soʊ lɔŋ, ɹænd?"

"I must say," Loial said, setting the chest down, "that traveling with ta'veren has turned out to be even more interesting than I expected." His ears twitched violently. "If it becomes any more interesting, I will go back to Stedding Shangtai immediately, confess everything to Elder Haman, and never leave my books again." Suddenly the Ogier grinned, that wide mouth splitting his face in two. "It is so good to see you, Rand al'Thor. The Warder is the only one of these three who cares much at all for books, and he won't talk. What happened to you? We all ran off and hid in the woods until Moiraine Sedai sent Lan to find us, but she would not let us look for you. Why were you gone so long, Rand?"

"aɪ ɹæn ən ɹæn," hi sɛd sloʊli, "əntɪl aɪ fɛl daʊn ə hɪl ən hɪt maɪ hɛɾ ɑn ə ɹɑk. aɪ θɪŋk aɪ hɪɾ ɛvɹi ɹɑk ɑn ðə weɪ daʊn." ðət ʃəɾ ɪkspleɪn ɪz bɹuzəz. hi tʃɹaɪd tə wɑtʃ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin, tu, bʌt ðɛɹ feɪsəz nɛvɝ tʃeɪnʒd. "wɛn aɪ keɪm tə, aɪ wɑz lɔst, ən faɪnəli aɪ stʌmbəl bæk hɪɹ. aɪ θɪŋk eɪdʒɪnɝ ɪz dɛd, bɝnd. aɪ faʊn səm æʃəz, ən pisəz ə hɪz kloʊk."

"I ran and ran," he said slowly, "until I fell down a hill and hit my head on a rock. I think I hit every rock on the way down." That should explain his bruises. He tried to watch the Aes Sedai, and Nynaeve and Egwene, too, but their faces never changed. "When I came to, I was lost, and finally I stumbled back here. I think Aginor is dead, burned. I found some ashes, and pieces of his cloak."

ðə laɪz saʊndəd hɑloʊ ɪn ɪz ɪɹz. hi kəd nɑɾ ʌndɝstænd waɪ ðeɪ dɪd nɑt læf wɪð skɔɹn ən dɪmæn ðə tʃɹuθ, bʌɾ ɪz fɹɛnz nɑɾəd, æksɛptɪŋ, ən meɪd sɪmpəθɛɾɪk saʊnz əz ðeɪ ɡæðɝɾ ɝaʊn ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə ʃoʊ hɝ wʌt ðeɪ hæd faʊnd.

The lies sounded hollow in his ears. He could not understand why they did not laugh with scorn and demand the truth, but his friends nodded, accepting, and made sympathetic sounds as they gathered around the Aes Sedai to show her what they had found.

"hɛlp mi ʌp," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin lɪftəɾ əɹ əntɪl ʃi wɑz sɪɾɪŋ; ðeɪ hæd tə səpɔɹɾ əɹ ivən ðɛn.

"Help me up," Moiraine said. Nynaeve and Egwene lifted her until she was sitting; they had to support her even then.

"haʊ kəd ðiz θɪŋz bi ɪnsaɪd ði aɪ," mæt æskt, "wɪθaʊt biɪŋ dɪstʃɹɔɪd laɪk ðət ɹɑk?"

"How could these things be inside the Eye," Mat asked, "without being destroyed like that rock?"

"ðeɪ wɝ nɑt pʊt ðəɹ tə bi dɪstʃɹɔɪd," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɛd kɝtli, ən fɹaʊn əweɪ ðɛɹ kwɛstʃənz waɪl ʃi tʊk ðə pɑɾɝi fɹæɡməns, blæk ən waɪɾ ən ʃaɪni, fɹəm mæt.

"They were not put there to be destroyed," the Aes Sedai said curtly, and frowned away their questions while she took the pottery fragments, black and white and shiny, from Mat.

ðeɪ sim laɪk ɹʌbəl tə ɹænd, bʌt ʃi fɪɾəd əm təɡɛðɝ dɛfli ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn bɪsaɪd hɝ, meɪkɪŋ ə pɝfək sɝkəl ðə saɪz ʌv ə mænz hænd. ði eɪntʃən sɪmbəl ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðə fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn dʒɔɪnd wɪð ðə dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ, blæk saɪɾɪŋ waɪt. fəɹ ə moʊmən mɔɪɹeɪn oʊnli lʊkt əɾ ɪt, hɝ feɪs ənɹiɾəbəl, ðən ʃi tʊk ðə naɪf fɹəm əɹ bɛlt ən hændəɾ ɪt tə læn, nɑɾɪŋ tə ðə sɝkəl.

They seemed like rubble to Rand, but she fitted them together deftly on the ground beside her, making a perfect circle the size of a man's hand. The ancient symbol of the Aes Sedai, the Flame of Tar Valon joined with the Dragon's Fang, black siding white. For a moment Moiraine only looked at it, her face unreadable, then she took the knife from her belt and handed it to Lan, nodding to the circle.

ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛpɝeɪɾəd aʊt ðə lɑɹdʒəs pis, ðən ɹeɪz ðə naɪf haɪ ən bɹɔɾ ɪt daʊn wɪð ɔl ɪz maɪt. ə spɑɹk flu, ðə fɹæɡmən lɛpt wɪð ðə fɔɹs ə ðə bloʊ, ən ðə bleɪd snæpt wɪð ə ʃɑɹp kɹæk. hi ɪɡzæmən ðə stʌmp lɛft ətætʃt tə ðə hɪlt, ðən tɔst ɪɾ əsaɪd. "ðə bɛst stil fɹəm tɛɹ," hi sɛd dʒɹaɪli.

The Warder separated out the largest piece, then raised the knife high and brought it down with all his might. A spark flew, the fragment leaped with the force of the blow, and the blade snapped with a sharp crack. He examined the stump left attached to the hilt, then tossed it aside. "The best steel from Tear," he said dryly.

mæt snætʃt ðə fɹæɡmɛn ʌp ən ɡɹʌntɪd, ðən ʃoʊɾ ɪɾ ɝaʊnd. ðəɹ wɑz noʊ mɑɹk ɑn ɪt.

Mat snatched the fragment up and grunted, then showed it around. There was no mark on it.

"kwəndɪlɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "hɑɹtstoʊn. noʊ wʌn əz bɪn eɪbəl tə meɪk ɪt sɪns ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ən ivən ðən ɪt wɑz meɪɾ oʊnli fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst pɝpəs. wʌns meɪd, nʌθɪŋ kən bɹeɪk ɪt. nɑt ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪtsɛlf wildɪd baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ɛɛs sədaɪ hu ɛvɝ lɪvd eɪɾəd baɪ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl sɑŋɡɹil ɛvɝ meɪd. ɛni paʊɝ dɝɛktəɾ əɡɛns hɑɹtstoʊn oʊnli meɪks ɪt stʃɹɔŋɝ."

"Cuendillar," Moiraine said. "Heartstone. No one has been able to make it since the Age of Legends, and even then it was made only for the greatest purpose. Once made, nothing can break it. Not the One Power itself wielded by the greatest Aes Sedai who ever lived aided by the most powerful sa'angreal ever made. Any power directed against heartstone only makes it stronger."

"ðɛn haʊ . . . ?" mæts dʒɛstʃɝ wɪð ðə pis i hɛl tʊk ɪn ði ʌðɝ bɪts ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊnd.

"Then how . . . ?" Mat's gesture with the piece he held took in the other bits on the ground.

"ðɪs wɑz wʌn ə ðə sɛvən silz ɑn ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. mæt dʒɹɑp ðə pis əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪkʌm waɪt-hɑt. fəɹ ə moʊmənt, pɛɹɪnz aɪz sim tə ɡloʊ əɡɛn. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ kɑmli bɪɡæn ɡæðɝɪŋ ðə fɹæɡməns.

"This was one of the seven seals on the Dark One's prison," Moiraine said. Mat dropped the piece as if it had become white-hot. For a moment, Perrin's eyes seemed to glow again. The Aes Sedai calmly began gathering the fragments.

"ɪt dʌzn mæɾɝ ɛnimɔɹ," ɹænd sɛd. hɪz fɹɛnz lʊkt əɾ ɪm ɑdli, ən i wɪʃt i hæd kɛpt ɪz maʊθ ʃʌt.

"It doesn't matter anymore," Rand said. His friends looked at him oddly, and he wished he had kept his mouth shut.

"ʌv kɔɹs," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd. bʌt ʃi kɛɹfəli pʊɾ ɔl ðə pisəz ɪndə hɝ paʊtʃ. "bɹɪŋ mi ðə tʃɛst." lɔɪəl lɪftəɾ ɪt kloʊsɝ.

"Of course," Moiraine replied. But she carefully put all the pieces into her pouch. "Bring me the chest." Loial lifted it closer.

ðə flæɾənd kjub ʌv ɡoʊld ən sɪlvɝ əpɪɹd tə bi sɑləd, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪz fɪŋɡɝz fɛlt əkɹɔs ði ɪntʃɹəkət wɝk, pɹɛsɪŋ, ən wɪð ə sʌɾən klɪk ə tɑp flʌŋ bæk əz ɪf ɑn spɹɪŋz. ə kɝld, ɡoʊl hɔɹn nɛsəld wɪðɪn. dɪspaɪɾ ɪts ɡlim, ɪt sim pleɪn bɪsaɪd ðə tʃɛs ðət hɛld ɪt. ði oʊnli mɑɹkɪŋz wɝ ə laɪn ə sɪlvɝ skɹɪpt ɪnleɪɾ ɝaʊn ðə maʊθ ə ðə bɛl. mɔɪɹeɪn lɪftəd ðə hɔɹn aʊɾ əz ɪf lɪftɪŋ ə beɪb. "ðɪs mʌs bi kæɹid tə ɪljən," ʃi sɛd sɔfli.

The flattened cube of gold and silver appeared to be solid, but the Aes Sedai's fingers felt across the intricate work, pressing, and with a sudden click a top flung back as if on springs. A curled, gold horn nestled within. Despite its gleam, it seemed plain beside the chest that held it. The only markings were a line of silver script inlaid around the mouth of the bell. Moiraine lifted the horn out as if lifting a babe. "This must be carried to Illian," she said softly.

"ɪljən!" pɛɹɪn ɡɹaʊld. "ðæts ɔlmoʊs tə ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, nɪɹli əz fɑɹ saʊθ ə hoʊm əz wəɹ nɔɹθ naʊ."

"Illian!" Perrin growled. "That's almost to the Sea of Storms, nearly as far south of home as we are north now."

"ɪz ɪt . . . ?" lɔɪəl stɑp tə kætʃ ɪz bɹɛθ. "kæn ɪt bi . . . ?"

"Is it . . . ?" Loial stopped to catch his breath. "Can it be . . . ?"

"ju kən ɹid ði oʊl tʌŋ?" mɔɪɹeɪn æskt, ən wən i nɑɾəd, ʃi hændəɾ ɪm ðə hɔɹn.

"You can read the Old Tongue?" Moiraine asked, and when he nodded, she handed him the horn.

ði oʊɡiɝ tʊk ɪɾ əz dʒɛnli əz ʃi hæd, dɛləkətli tʃɹeɪsɪŋ ðə skɹɪpt wɪð wʌn bɹɔd fɪŋɡɝ. hɪz aɪz wɛnt waɪɾɝ ən waɪɾɝ, ən ɪz ɪɹz stʊɾ ʌp stʃɹeɪt. "tiə mi ɑveɪən mɔɹaɪɾɪn ɪeɪn veɪɾɪn," hi wɪspɝd. "ðə ɡɹeɪv ɪz noʊ bɑɹ tə maɪ kɔl."

The Ogier took it as gently as she had, delicately tracing the script with one broad finger. His eyes went wider and wider, and his ears stood up straight. "Tia mi aven Moridin isainde vadin," he whispered. "The grave is no bar to my call."

"ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ." fəɹ wʌns ðə wɔɹɾɝ əpɪɹd tʃɹuli ʃeɪkən; ðəɹ wɑz ə tʌtʃ ʌv ɑ ɪn ɪz vɔɪs.

"The Horn of Valere." For once the Warder appeared truly shaken; there was a touch of awe in his voice.

ət ðə seɪm taɪm nɪneɪiv sɛɾ ɪn ə ʃeɪki vɔɪs, "tə kɔl ðə hɪɹoʊz ə ði eɪdʒəz bæk fɹəm ðə dɛd tə faɪt ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

At the same time Nynaeve said in a shaky voice, "To call the heroes of the Ages back from the dead to fight the Dark One."

"bɝn mi!" mæt bɹiðd.

"Burn me!" Mat breathed.

lɔɪəl ɹɛvɝənli leɪd ðə hɔɹn bæk ɪn ɪts ɡoʊldən nɛst. "aɪ bɪɡɪn tə wʌndɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld wɑz meɪɾ əɡɛns ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst nid ðə wɝld wəɾ ɛvɝ feɪs, bʌt wɑz ɪt meɪd fəɹ ðə jus tə wɪtʃ . . . wi . . . pʊɾ ɪt, əɹ tə ɡɑɹd ðiz θɪŋz? kwɪkli, ðə læst, ʃoʊ ɪt tə mi."

Loial reverently laid the horn back in its golden nest. "I begin to wonder," Moiraine said. "The Eye of the World was made against the greatest need the world would ever face, but was it made for the use to which . . . we . . . put it, or to guard these things? Quickly, the last, show it to me."

æftɝ ðə fɝs tu, ɹænd kəɾ ʌndɝstæn pɛɹɪnz ɹɪlʌktəns. læn ən ði oʊɡiɝ tʊk ðə bʌndəl ʌv waɪt klɔθ fɹəm ɪm wən i hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, ən ənfoʊldəɾ ɪt bɪtwin ðɛm. ə lɔŋ, waɪt bænɝ spɹɛɾ aʊt, lɪftɪŋ ɑn ði ɛɹ. ɹænd kəɾ oʊnli stɛɹ. ðə hoʊl θɪŋ simd ʌv ə pis, niðɝ woʊvən, nɔɹ daɪd, nɔɹ peɪntəd. ə fɪɡjɝ laɪk ə sɝpənt, skeɪld ɪn skɑɹləɾ ən ɡoʊld, ɹæn ði ɪntaɪɝ lɛŋθ, bʌɾ ɪt hæd skeɪld lɛɡz, ən fit wɪð faɪv lɔŋ, ɡoʊldən klɔz ɑn itʃ, ən ə ɡɹeɪt hɛd wɪð ə ɡoʊldən meɪn ən aɪz laɪk ðə sʌn. ðə stɝɪŋ ə ðə bænɝ meɪɾ ɪt sim tə muv, skeɪlz ɡlɪɾɝɪŋ laɪk pɹɛʃəs mɛɾəlz ən dʒɛmz, əlaɪv, ən i ɔlmoʊs θɔɾ i kəd hɪɹ ɪt ɹɔɹ dɪfaɪəns.

After the first two, Rand could understand Perrin's reluctance. Lan and the Ogier took the bundle of white cloth from him when he hesitated, and unfolded it between them. A long, white banner spread out, lifting on the air. Rand could only stare. The whole thing seemed of a piece, neither woven, nor dyed, nor painted. A figure like a serpent, scaled in scarlet and gold, ran the entire length, but it had scaled legs, and feet with five long, golden claws on each, and a great head with a golden mane and eyes like the sun. The stirring of the banner made it seem to move, scales glittering like precious metals and gems, alive, and he almost thought he could hear it roar defiance.

"wʌɾ ɪz ɪt?" hi sɛd.

"What is it?" he said.

mɔɪɹeɪn ænsɝd sloʊli. "ðə bænɝ ə ðə lɔɹɾ ə ðə mɔɹnɪŋ wən i lɛd ðə fɔɹsɪz ə laɪɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ. ðə bænɝ ə luz θɝɪn tɛləmən. ðə bænɝ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən." lɔɪəl ɔlmoʊs dʒɹɑpt ɪz ɛnd.

Moiraine answered slowly. "The banner of the Lord of the Morning when he led the forces of light against the Shadow. The banner of Lews Therin Telamon. The banner of the Dragon." Loial almost dropped his end.

"bɝn mi!" mæt sɛd feɪnli.

"Burn me!" Mat said faintly.

"wi wɪl teɪk ðiz θɪŋz wɪð əs wən wi ɡoʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ðeɪ wɝ nɑt pʊt hɪɹ baɪ tʃæns, ən aɪ mʌs noʊ mɔɹ." hɝ fɪŋɡɝz bɹʌʃt əɹ paʊtʃ, wɛɹ ðə pisəz ə ðə ʃæɾɝd sil wɝ. "ɪɾ ɪz tu leɪɾ ɪn ðə deɪ fəɹ stɑɹɾɪŋ naʊ. wɪl ɹɛst, ən it, bʌt wɪl liv ɝli. ðə blaɪɾ ɪz ɔl ɝaʊn hɪɹ, nɑɾ əz əlɔŋ ðə bɔɹɾɝ, ən stʃɹɔŋ. wɪθaʊt ðə ɡɹin mæn, ðɪs pleɪs kænɑt hoʊld lɔŋ. lemi daʊn," ʃi toʊl nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin. "aɪ mʌst ɹɛst."

"We will take these things with us when we go," Moiraine said. "They were not put here by chance, and I must know more." Her fingers brushed her pouch, where the pieces of the shattered seal were. "It is too late in the day for starting now. We will rest, and eat, but we will leave early. The Blight is all around here, not as along the Border, and strong. Without the Green Man, this place cannot hold long. Let me down," she told Nynaeve and Egwene. "I must rest."

ɹænd bɪkeɪm əwɛɹ ʌv wʌɾ i hæd bɪn siɪŋ ɔl əlɔŋ, bʌt nɑt noʊɾɪsɪŋ. dɛd, bɹaʊn livz fɔlɪŋ fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪɾ oʊk. dɛd livz ɹʌslɪŋ θɪk ɑn ðə ɡɹaʊn ɪn ðə bɹiz, bɹaʊn mɪkst wɪð pɛɾəlz dʒɹɑp fɹəm θaʊzənz ə flaʊɝz. ðə ɡɹin mæn hæd hɛl bæk ðə blaɪt, bʌɾ ɔlɹɛɾi ðə blaɪt wɑz kɪlɪŋ wʌɾ i hæd meɪd.

Rand became aware of what he had been seeing all along, but not noticing. Dead, brown leaves falling from the great oak. Dead leaves rustling thick on the ground in the breeze, brown mixed with petals dropped from thousands of flowers. The Green Man had held back the Blight, but already the Blight was killing what he had made.

"ɪɾ ɪz dʌn, ɪzən ɪt?" hi æsk mɔɪɹeɪn. "ɪɾ ɪz fɪnɪʃt."

"It is done, isn't it?" he asked Moiraine. "It is finished."

ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tɝn əɹ hɛɾ ɑn ɪts pɪloʊ ʌv kloʊks. hɝ aɪz simd əz dip əz ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld. "wi hæv dʌn wʌt wi keɪm hɪɹ tə du. fɹəm hɪɹ jə meɪ lɪv jəɹ laɪf əz ðə pæɾɝn wivz. it, ðən slip, ɹænd ælθɹ. slip, ən dʒɹim ə hoʊm."

The Aes Sedai turned her head on its pillow of cloaks. Her eyes seemed as deep as the Eye of the World. "We have done what we came here to do. From here you may live your life as the Pattern weaves. Eat, then sleep, Rand al'Thor. Sleep, and dream of home."


tʃæptɝ fɪftiθɹi


CHAPTER 53

ðə wil tɝnz


The Wheel Turns

dɔn ɹɪvil dɛvəsteɪʃən ɪn ðə ɡɹin mænz ɡɑɹɾən. ðə ɡɹaʊnd wɑz θɪk wɪð fɔlən livz, ɔlmoʊs ni-dip ɪn pleɪsəz. ɔl ðə flaʊɝz wɝ ɡɔn ɪksɛpt ə fju klɪŋɪŋ dɛspɝətli tə ði ɛdʒ ə ðə klɪɹɪŋ. lɪɾəl kəd ɡɹoʊ ɪn ðə sɔɪl ʌndɝ ən oʊk, bʌɾ ə θɪn sɝkəl ə flaʊɝz ən ɡɹæs sɛntɝɾ ɑn ðə θɪk tʃɹʌŋk əbʌv ðə ɡɹin mænz ɡɹeɪv. ði oʊk ɪtsɛlf ɹɪteɪn oʊnli hæf ɪts livz, ən ðət wɑz fɑɹ mɔɹ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ tʃɹi hæd, əz ɪf səm ɹɛmnən ə ðə ɡɹin mæn stɪl fɔt tə hoʊl ðɛɹ. ðə kul bɹizɪz hæd daɪd, ɹipleɪs baɪ ə ɡɹoʊɪŋ stɪki hit, ðə bʌɾɝflaɪz wɝ ɡɔn, ðə bɝdz saɪlənt. ɪt wɑz ə saɪlənt ɡɹup u pɹipɛɹd tə liv.

Dawn revealed devastation in the Green Man's garden. The ground was thick with fallen leaves, almost knee-deep in places. All the flowers were gone except a few clinging desperately to the edge of the clearing. Little could grow in the soil under an oak, but a thin circle of flowers and grass centered on the thick trunk above the Green Man's grave. The oak itself retained only half its leaves, and that was far more than any other tree had, as if some remnant of the Green Man still fought to hold there. The cool breezes had died, replaced by a growing sticky heat, the butterflies were gone, the birds silent. It was a silent group who prepared to leave.

ɹænd klaɪmd ɪndə ðə beɪz sæɾəl wɪð ə sɛns ə lɔs. ɪt ʃʊdn bi ðɪs weɪ. blʌɾ ən æʃəz, wi wʌn!

Rand climbed into the bay's saddle with a sense of loss. It shouldn't be this way. Blood and ashes, we won!

"aɪ wɪʃ i hæd faʊn ɪz ʌðɝ pleɪs," ɛɡwin sɛɾ əz ʃi maʊntəd bɛlə. ə lɪɾɝ, fæʃən baɪ læn, wɑz slʌŋ bɪtwin ðə ʃæɡi mɛɹ ən ɑldib, tə kæɹi mɔɪɹeɪn; nɪneɪiv wəd ɹaɪd bɪsaɪd wɪð ðə waɪt mɛɹz ɹeɪnz. ðə wɪzdəm dʒɹɑpt əɹ aɪz wɛnɛvɝ ʃi sɔ læn ɡlæns ət hɝ, əvɔɪɾɪŋ ɪz ɡeɪz; ðə wɔɹɾɝ lʊkt əɾ əɹ wɛnɛvɝ əɹ aɪz wɝ əvɝɾəd, bʌɾ i wəd nɑt spik tə hɝ. noʊ wʌn hæd tə æsk u ɛɡwin mɛnt.

"I wish he had found his other place," Egwene said as she mounted Bela. A litter, fashioned by Lan, was slung between the shaggy mare and Aldieb, to carry Moiraine; Nynaeve would ride beside with the white mare's reins. The Wisdom dropped her eyes whenever she saw Lan glance at her, avoiding his gaze; the Warder looked at her whenever her eyes were averted, but he would not speak to her. No one had to ask who Egwene meant.

"ɪɾ ɪz nɑt ɹaɪt," lɔɪəl sɛd, stɛɹɪŋ ət ði oʊk. ði oʊɡiɝ wɑz ði oʊnli wʌn stɪl nɑt maʊntəd. "ɪɾ ɪz nɑt ɹaɪt ðət tʃɹibɹəðɝ ʃəd fɔl tə ðə blaɪt." hi hændəd ðə ɹeɪnz ə hɪz bɪɡ hɔɹs tə ɹænd. "nɑt ɹaɪt."

"It is not right," Loial said, staring at the oak. The Ogier was the only one still not mounted. "It is not right that Treebrother should fall to the Blight." He handed the reins of his big horse to Rand. "Not right."

læn oʊpən ɪz maʊθ əz ði oʊɡiɝ wɔk tə ðə ɡɹeɪɾ oʊk. mɔɪɹeɪn, laɪɪŋ ɑn ðə lɪɾɝ, wikli ɹeɪzd əɹ hænd, ən ðə wɔɹɾɝ sɛd nʌθɪŋ.

Lan opened his mouth as the Ogier walked to the great oak. Moiraine, lying on the litter, weakly raised her hand, and the Warder said nothing.

bɪfɔɹ ði oʊk, lɔɪəl nɛlt, kloʊzɪŋ ɪz aɪz ən stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ aʊɾ ɪz ɑɹmz. ðə tʌfs ɑn ɪz ɪɹz stʊd stʃɹeɪɾ əz i lɪftəɾ ɪz feɪs tə ðə skaɪ. ən i sæŋ.

Before the oak, Loial knelt, closing his eyes and stretching out his arms. The tufts on his ears stood straight as he lifted his face to the sky. And he sang.

ɹænd kəd nɑt seɪ ɪf ðəɹ wɝ wɝdz, əɹ ɪf ɪt wɑz pjʊɹ sɔŋ. ɪn ðət ɹʌmbəlɪŋ vɔɪs ɪt wɑz əz ɪf ði ɝθ sæŋ, jɛɾ i wɑz ʃʊɹ i hɝd ðə bɝdz tʃɹɪlɪŋ əɡɛn, ən spɹɪŋ bɹizɪz saɪɪŋ sɔfli, ən ðə saʊn ə bʌɾɝflaɪ wɪŋz. lɔst ɪn ðə sɔŋ, hi θɔɾ ɪt læstəɾ oʊnli mɪnəts, bʌt wən lɔɪəl loʊɝɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ən oʊpən ɪz aɪz, hi wɑz sɝpɹaɪz tə si ðə sʌn stʊd wɛl əbʌv ðə hɝaɪzən. ɪt hæd bɪn tʌtʃɪŋ ðə tʃɹiz wən ði oʊɡiɝ bɪɡæn. ðə livz stɪl ɑn ði oʊk simd ɡɹinɝ, ən mɔɹ fɝmli ətætʃt ðən bɪfɔɹ. ðə flaʊɝz ɛnsɝkəlɪŋ ɪt stʊd stʃɹeɪɾɝ, ðə mɔɹnɪŋstɑɹz waɪɾ ən fɹɛʃ, ðə lʌvɝsknɑts ə stʃɹɔŋ kɹɪmzən.

Rand could not say if there were words, or if it was pure song. In that rumbling voice it was as if the earth sang, yet he was sure he heard the birds trilling again, and spring breezes sighing softly, and the sound of butterfly wings. Lost in the song, he thought it lasted only minutes, but when Loial lowered his arms and opened his eyes, he was surprised to see the sun stood well above the horizon. It had been touching the trees when the Ogier began. The leaves still on the oak seemed greener, and more firmly attached than before. The flowers encircling it stood straighter, the morningstars white and fresh, the loversknots a strong crimson.

mɑpɪŋ swɛt fɹəm ɪz bɹɔd feɪs, lɔɪəl ɹoʊz ən tʊk ɪz ɹeɪnz fɹəm ɹænd. hɪz lɔŋ aɪbɹaʊz dʒɹupt, əbæʃt, əz ɪf ðeɪ maɪt θɪŋk i hæd bɪn ʃoʊɪŋ ɔf. "aɪv nɛvɝ sʌŋ soʊ hɑɹd bɪfɔɹ. aɪ kəd nɑɾ əv dʌn ɪɾ ɪf sʌmθɪŋ ə tʃɹibɹəðɝ wɑz nɑt stɪl ðɛɹ. maɪ tʃɹi sɔŋz də nɑɾ əv ɪz paʊɝ." wən i sɛɾəld hɪmsɛlf ɪn ɪz sæɾəl, ðəɹ wɑz sæɾəsfækʃən ɪn ðə lʊk i ɡeɪv ði oʊk ən ðə flaʊɝz. "ðɪs lɪɾəl speɪs, ət list, wɪl nɑt sɪŋk ɪndə ðə blaɪt. ðə blaɪt wɪl nɑɾ əv tʃɹibɹəðɝ."

Mopping sweat from his broad face, Loial rose and took his reins from Rand. His long eyebrows drooped, abashed, as if they might think he had been showing off. "I've never sung so hard before. I could not have done it if something of Treebrother was not still there. My Tree Songs do not have his power." When he settled himself in his saddle, there was satisfaction in the look he gave the oak and the flowers. "This little space, at least, will not sink into the Blight. The Blight will not have Treebrother."

"ju ɑɹ ə ɡʊd mæn, oʊɡiɝ," læn sɛd.

"You are a good man, Ogier," Lan said.

lɔɪəl ɡɹɪnd. "aɪ wɪl teɪk ðəɾ əz ə kɑmpləmənt, bʌɾ aɪ də nɑt noʊ wʌɾ ɛldɝ heɪmən wəd seɪ."

Loial grinned. "I will take that as a compliment, but I do not know what Elder Haman would say."

ðeɪ ɹoʊɾ ɪn ə sɪŋɡəl faɪl, wɪð mæt bɪhaɪn ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɛɹ i kəd juz ɪz baʊ tə ɪfɛkt ɪf niɾəd, ən pɛɹɪn bɹɪŋɪŋ ʌp ðə ɹɪɹ wɪð ɪz æks əkɹɔs ðə pɑməl ə hɪz sæɾəl. ðeɪ kɹɛstəɾ ə hɪl, ən ɪn ən aɪɛblɪŋk ðə blaɪt wɑz ɔl ɝaʊn ðɛm, twɪstəɾ ən ɹɑɾɪd ɪn vɪɹələn ɹeɪnboʊ hjuz. ɹænd lʊkt oʊvɝ ɪz ʃoʊldɝ, bʌt ðə ɡɹin mænz ɡɑɹɾən wɑz noʊwɛɹ tə bi sin. oʊnli ðə blaɪt stʃɹɛtʃɪŋ bɪhaɪn əm əz bɪfɔɹ. jɛɾ i θɔt, dʒʌs fəɹ ə moʊmənt, ðəɾ i sɔ ðə taʊɝɪŋ tɑp ə ði oʊk tʃɹi, ɡɹin ən lʌʃ, bɪfɔɹ ɪt ʃɪmɝɾ ən wɑz ɡɔn. ðən ðəɹ wɑz oʊnli ðə blaɪt.

They rode in a single file, with Mat behind the Warder where he could use his bow to effect if needed, and Perrin bringing up the rear with his axe across the pommel of his saddle. They crested a hill, and in an eyeblink the Blight was all around them, twisted and rotted in virulent rainbow hues. Rand looked over his shoulder, but the Green Man's garden was nowhere to be seen. Only the Blight stretching behind them as before. Yet he thought, just for a moment, that he saw the towering top of the oak tree, green and lush, before it shimmered and was gone. Then there was only the Blight.

hi hæf ɪkspɛktəd ðeɪ wəɾ əv tə faɪt ðɛɹ weɪ aʊɾ əz ðeɪ fɔt ðɛɹ weɪ ɪn, bʌt ðə blaɪt wɑz əz kwaɪəɾ ən stɪl əz dɛθ. nɑɾ ə sɪŋɡəl bɹæntʃ tʃɹɛmbəld əz ɪf tə læʃ ət ðɛm, nʌθɪŋ skɹimd əɹ haʊld, niðɝ nɪɹbaɪ nɔɹ ɪn ðə dɪstəns. ðə blaɪt sim tə kɹaʊtʃ, nɑt tə paʊns, bʌɾ əz ɪf ɪt hæd bɪn stʃɹʌk ə ɡɹeɪt bloʊ ən weɪɾəd fəɹ ðə nɛks tə fɔl. ivən ðə sʌn wɑz lɛs ɹɛd.

He half expected they would have to fight their way out as they fought their way in, but the Blight was as quiet and still as death. Not a single branch trembled as if to lash at them, nothing screamed or howled, neither nearby nor in the distance. The Blight seemed to crouch, not to pounce, but as if it had been struck a great blow and waited for the next to fall. Even the sun was less red.

wən ðeɪ pæs ðə nɛkləs ə leɪks, ðə sʌn hʌŋ nɑt fɑɹ pæst ɪts zinəθ. læn kɛpt əm wɛl əweɪ fɹəm ðə leɪks ən dɪd nɑɾ ivən lʊk ət ðɛm, bʌt ɹænd θɔt ðə sɛvən taʊɝz sim tɔlɝ ðən wən i fɝst sɔ ðɛm. hi wɑz ʃʊɹ ðə dʒæɡd tɑps wɝ fɝðɝ fɹəm ðə ɡɹaʊnd, ən əbʌv əm sʌmθɪŋ ɔlmoʊst sin, simləs taʊɝz ɡlimɪŋ ɪn ðə sʌn, ən bænɝz wɪð ɡoʊldən kɹeɪnz flaɪɪŋ ɑn ðə wɪnd. hi blɪŋkt ən stɛɹd, bʌt ðə taʊɝz ɹəfjuz tə vænɪʃ kəmplitli. ðeɪ wɝ ðəɹ ət ði ɛdʒ ə vɪʒən əntɪl ðə blaɪt hɪd ðə leɪks wʌns mɔɹ.

When they passed the necklace of lakes, the sun hung not far past its zenith. Lan kept them well away from the lakes and did not even look at them, but Rand thought the seven towers seemed taller than when he first saw them. He was sure the jagged tops were further from the ground, and above them something almost seen, seamless towers gleaming in the sun, and banners with Golden Cranes flying on the wind. He blinked and stared, but the towers refused to vanish completely. They were there at the edge of vision until the Blight hid the lakes once more.

bɪfɔɹ sʌnsɛt ðə wɔɹɾɝ tʃoʊz ə kæmpsaɪt, ən mɔɪɹeɪn hæd nɪneɪiv ən ɛɡwin hɛlp əɹ ʌp tə sɛt wɔɹdz. ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪspɝɾ ɪn ði ʌðɝ wɪmənz ɪɹz bɪfɔɹ ʃi bɪɡæn. nɪneɪiv hɛzɪteɪɾɪd, bʌt wən mɔɪɹeɪn kloʊzd əɹ aɪz, ɔl θɹi wɪmən dɪd soʊ təɡɛðɝ.

Before sunset the Warder chose a campsite, and Moiraine had Nynaeve and Egwene help her up to set wards. The Aes Sedai whispered in the other women's ears before she began. Nynaeve hesitated, but when Moiraine closed her eyes, all three women did so together.

ɹænd sɔ mæt ən pɛɹɪn stɛɹɪŋ, ən wʌndɝd haʊ ðeɪ kəd bi sɝpɹaɪzd. ɛvɹi wʊmən ɪz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, hi θɔt mɝθləsli. ðə laɪt hɛlp mi, soʊ æm aɪ. bliknəs hɛld ɪz tʌŋ.

Rand saw Mat and Perrin staring, and wondered how they could be surprised. Every woman is an Aes Sedai, he thought mirthlessly. The Light help me, so am I. Bleakness held his tongue.

"waɪ ɪz ɪt soʊ dɪfɹənt?" pɛɹɪn æskt əz ɛɡwin ən ðə wɪzdəm hɛlp mɔɪɹeɪn tə hɝ bɛd. "ɪt filz. . . ." hɪz θɪk ʃoʊldɝz ʃɹʌɡd əz ɪf i kəd nɑt faɪn ðə wɝd.

"Why is it so different?" Perrin asked as Egwene and the Wisdom helped Moiraine to her bed. "It feels. . . ." His thick shoulders shrugged as if he could not find the word.

"wi stʃɹʌk ə maɪɾi bloʊ ət ðə dɑɹk wʌn," mɔɪɹeɪn ɹɪplaɪd, sɛɾəlɪŋ hɝsɛlf wɪð ə saɪ. "ðə ʃædoʊ wɪl bi ə lɔŋ taɪm ɹəkʌvɝɪŋ."

"We struck a mighty blow at the Dark One," Moiraine replied, settling herself with a sigh. "The Shadow will be a long time recovering."

"haʊ?" mæt dɪmændəd. "wʌt dɪd wi du?"

"How?" Mat demanded. "What did we do?"

"slip," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "wi ɑɹ nɑɾ aʊɾ ə ðə blaɪt jɛt."

"Sleep," Moiraine said. "We are not out of the Blight yet."

bʌt ðə nɛks mɔɹnɪŋ, stɪl nʌθɪŋ tʃeɪnʒd ðət ɹænd kəd si. ðə blaɪt feɪɾəd əz ðeɪ ɹoʊd saʊθ, ʌv kɔɹs. twɪstəd tʃɹiz wɝ ɹipleɪs baɪ stʃɹeɪt. ðə staɪflɪŋ hit dɪmɪnɪʃt. ɹɑɾɪŋ foʊlɪdʒ ɡeɪv weɪ tə ðə mɪɹli dɪzizd. ən ðən nɑt dɪzizd, hi ɹilaɪzd. ðə fɔɹəst ɝaʊn əm bɪkeɪm ɹɛd wɪð nu ɡɹoʊθ, θɪk ɑn ðə bɹæntʃəz. bʌdz spɹaʊɾəd ɑn ði ʌndɝɡɹoʊθ, kɹipɝz kʌvɝd ðə ɹɑks wɪð ɡɹin, ən nu waɪldflaʊɹz dɑɾəd ðə ɡɹæs əz θɪk ən bɹaɪɾ əz wɛɹ ðə ɡɹin mæn wɔkt. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf spɹɪŋ, soʊ lɔŋ hɛl bæk baɪ wɪntɝ, naʊ ɹeɪs tə kætʃ ʌp tə wɛɹ ɪt ʃəd bi.

But the next morning, still nothing changed that Rand could see. The Blight faded as they rode south, of course. Twisted trees were replaced by straight. The stifling heat diminished. Rotting foliage gave way to the merely diseased. And then not diseased, he realized. The forest around them became red with new growth, thick on the branches. Buds sprouted on the undergrowth, creepers covered the rocks with green, and new wildflowers dotted the grass as thick and bright as where the Green Man walked. It was as if spring, so long held back by winter, now raced to catch up to where it should be.

hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn u stɛɹd. "ə maɪɾi bloʊ," mɔɪɹeɪn mɝmɝd, ən wəd seɪ noʊ mɔɹ.

He was not the only one who stared. "A mighty blow," Moiraine murmured, and would say no more.

klaɪmɪŋ waɪldʒɹoʊz ɛntwaɪn ðə stoʊn kɑləm mɑɹkɪŋ ðə bɔɹɾɝ. mɛn keɪm aʊɾ ə ðə wɑtʃtaʊɝz tə ɡɹit ðɛm. ðəɹ wɑz ə stʌn kwɑləɾi tə ðɛɹ læftɝ, ən ðɛɹ aɪz ʃoʊn wɪð əmeɪz, əz ɪf ðeɪ kəd nɑt bɪliv ðə nu ɡɹæs ʌndɝ ðɛɹ stil-klæd fit.

Climbing wildrose entwined the stone column marking the Border. Men came out of the watchtowers to greet them. There was a stunned quality to their laughter, and their eyes shone with amaze, as if they could not believe the new grass under their steel-clad feet.

"ðə laɪɾ əz kɑŋkɝd ðə ʃædoʊ!"

"The Light has conquered the Shadow!"

"ə ɡɹeɪt vɪktɝi ɪn tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp! wɪv hæd ðə mɛsədʒ! vɪktɝi!"

"A great victory in Tarwin's Gap! We have had the message! Victory!"

"ðə laɪt blɛsɪz əs əɡɛn!"

"The Light blesses us again!"

"kɪŋ isɑɹ ɪz stʃɹɔŋ ɪn ðə laɪt," læn ɹɪplaɪd tə ɔl ðɛɹ ʃaʊts.

"King Easar is strong in the Light," Lan replied to all their shouts.

ðə wɑtʃmən wɑntəd tə tɛn mɔɪɹeɪn, əɹ ət list sɛn ən ɛskɔɹt wɪð ðɛm, bʌt ʃi ɹəfjuzd ɪɾ ɔl. ivən flæɾ ɑn əɹ bæk ɑn ə lɪɾɝ, ði ɛɛs sədaɪz pɹɛzəns wɑz sətʃ ðət ði ɑɹmɝd mɛn fɛl bæk, boʊɪŋ ən æksiɾɪŋ tə hɝ wɪʃɪz. ðɛɹ læftɝ fɑloʊɾ əz ɹænd ən ði ʌðɝz ɹoʊɾ ɑn.

The watchmen wanted to tend Moiraine, or at least send an escort with them, but she refused it all. Even flat on her back on a litter, the Aes Sedai's presence was such that the armored men fell back, bowing and acceding to her wishes. Their laughter followed as Rand and the others rode on.

ɪn ðə leɪɾ æftɝnun ðeɪ ɹitʃt fæl dæɹə, tə faɪn ðə ɡɹɪm-wɔl sɪɾi ɹɪŋɪŋ wɪð sɛləbɹeɪʃən. ɹɪŋɪŋ ɪn tʃɹuθ. ɹænd daʊɾɪd ɪf ðəɹ kəd bi ə bɛl ɪn ðə sɪɾi nɑt klæŋɪŋ, fɹəm ðə taɪniəst sɪlvɝ hɑɹnəs tʃaɪm tə ɡɹeɪt bɹɑnz ɡɔŋz ɪn ðɛɹ taʊɝ tɑps. ðə ɡeɪts stʊd waɪɾ oʊpən, ən mɛn ɹæn læfɪŋ ən sɪŋɪŋ ɪn ðə stʃɹits, flaʊɝz stʌk ɪn ðɛɹ tɑpnɑts ən ðə kɹɛvəsɪz ə ðɛɹ ɑɹmɝ. ðə kɑmən pipəl ə ðə taʊn hæd nɑt jɛt ɹɪtɝn fɹəm fæl mɝæn, bʌt ðə soʊlʒɝz wɝ nuli kʌm fɹəm tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp, ən ðɛɹ dʒɔɪ wɑz ɪnʌf tə fɪl ðə stʃɹits.

In the late afternoon they reached Fal Dara, to find the grim-walled city ringing with celebration. Ringing in truth. Rand doubted if there could be a bell in the city not clanging, from the tiniest silver harness chime to great bronze gongs in their tower tops. The gates stood wide open, and men ran laughing and singing in the streets, flowers stuck in their topknots and the crevices of their armor. The common people of the town had not yet returned from Fal Moran, but the soldiers were newly come from Tarwin's Gap, and their joy was enough to fill the streets.

"vɪktɝi ɪn ðə ɡæp! wi wʌn!"

"Victory in the Gap! We won!"

"ə mɪɹəkəl ɪn ðə ɡæp! ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz əz kʌm bæk!"

"A miracle in the Gap! The Age of Legends has come back!"

"spɹɪŋ!" ə ɡɹɪzəld oʊl soʊlʒɝ læft əz i hʌŋ ə ɡɑɹlən ə mɔɹnɪŋstɑɹz ɝaʊn ɹændz nɛk. hɪz oʊn tɑpnɑt wɑz ə waɪt klʌstɝ ə ðɛm. "ðə laɪt blɛsɪz əs wɪð spɹɪŋ wʌns mɔɹ!"

"Spring!" a grizzled old soldier laughed as he hung a garland of morningstars around Rand's neck. His own topknot was a white cluster of them. "The Light blesses us with spring once more!"

lɝnɪŋ ðeɪ wɑntəd tə ɡoʊ tə ðə kip, ə sɝkəl ə mɛn klæɾ ɪn stil ən flaʊɝz sɝaʊndəd ðɛm, ɹʌnɪŋ tə klɪɹ ə weɪ θɹu ðə sɛləbɹeɪʃən.

Learning they wanted to go to the keep, a circle of men clad in steel and flowers surrounded them, running to clear a way through the celebration.

ɪŋtʃɹz wɑz ðə fɝs feɪs ɹænd sɔ ðət wɑz nɑt smaɪlɪŋ. "aɪ wɑz tu leɪt," ɪŋtʃɹ toʊld læn wɪð ə saʊɝ ɡɹɪmnəs. "tu leɪt baɪ ən aʊɝ tə si. pis!" hɪz tiθ ɡɹaʊn ɑɾəbli, bʌt ðən ɪz ɪkspɹɛʃən bɪkeɪm kəntʃɹaɪt. "fɝɡɪv mi. ɡɹif meɪks mi fɝɡɛt maɪ duɾiz. wɛlkəm, bɪldɝ. wɛlkəm tə jə ɔl. ɪts ɡʊd tə si jə seɪfli aʊɾ ə ðə blaɪt. əl bɹɪŋ ðə hilɝ tə mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ ɪn əɹ tʃeɪmbɝz, ən ɪnfɔɹm lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ - "

Ingtar's was the first face Rand saw that was not smiling. "I was too late," Ingtar told Lan with a sour grimness. "Too late by an hour to see. Peace!" His teeth ground audibly, but then his expression became contrite. "Forgive me. Grief makes me forget my duties. Welcome, Builder. Welcome to you all. It is good to see you safely out of the Blight. I will bring the healer to Moiraine Sedai in her chambers, and inform Lord Agelmar - "

"teɪk mi tə lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn kəmændəd. "teɪk əs ɔl." ɪŋtʃɹ oʊpən ɪz maʊθ tə pɹoʊtɛst, ən baʊɾ ʌndɝ ðə fɔɹs ə hɝ aɪz.

"Take me to Lord Agelmar," Moiraine commanded. "Take us all." Ingtar opened his mouth to protest, and bowed under the force of her eyes.

eɪɡəlmɝ wɑz ɪn ɪz stʌɾi, wɪð ɪz sɔɹdz ən ɑɹmɝ bæk ɑn ðɛɹ ɹæks, ən ɪz wɑz ðə sɛkən feɪs ðət dɪd nɑt smaɪl. hi wɔɹ ə tʃɹʌbəl fɹaʊn ðət dipənd wən i sɔ mɔɪɹeɪn kæɹiɾ ɪn ɑn əɹ lɪɾɝ baɪ lɪvɹid sɝvəns. wɪmən ɪn ðə blæk-ænd-ɡoʊl flʌɾɝd oʊvɝ bɹɪŋɪŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hɪm wɪθaʊɾ ə tʃæns tə fɹɛʃən hɝsɛlf əɹ bi bɹɔt ðə hilɝ. lɔɪəl kæɹid ðə ɡoʊl tʃɛst. ðə pisəz ə ðə sil wɝ stɪl ɪn mɔɪɹeɪnz paʊtʃ; luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝz bænɝ wɑz ɹæpt ɪn əɹ blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl ən stɪl taɪd bɪhaɪn ɑldibz sæɾəl. ðə ɡɹum u hæd lɛd ðə waɪt mɛɹ əweɪ hæd ɹəsiv ðə stʃɹɪktəst ɔɹɾɝz tə si ðə blæŋkɪtʃɹoʊl wɑz pleɪst əntʌtʃt ɪn ðə tʃeɪmbɝz əsaɪn tə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Agelmar was in his study, with his swords and armor back on their racks, and his was the second face that did not smile. He wore a troubled frown that deepened when he saw Moiraine carried in on her litter by liveried servants. Women in the black-and-gold fluttered over bringing the Aes Sedai to him without a chance to freshen herself or be brought the healer. Loial carried the gold chest. The pieces of the seal were still in Moiraine's pouch; Lews Therin Kinslayer's banner was wrapped in her blanketroll and still tied behind Aldieb's saddle. The groom who had led the white mare away had received the strictest orders to see the blanketroll was placed untouched in the chambers assigned to the Aes Sedai.

"pis!" ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə mʌɾɝd. "ɑɹ jə ɪnʒɝd, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ? ɪŋtʃɹ, waɪ hæv jə nɑt sin ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hɝ bɛɾ ən bɹɔt ðə hilɝ tə hɝ?"

"Peace!" the Lord of Fal Dara muttered. "Are you injured, Moiraine Sedai? Ingtar, why have you not seen the Aes Sedai to her bed and brought the healer to her?"

"bi stɪl, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "ɪŋtʃɹ əz dʌn əz aɪ kəmændəd hɪm. aɪm nɑt soʊ fɹeɪl əz ɛvɹiwʌn hɪɹ simz tə θɪŋk." ʃi moʊʃən tu ʌv ðə wɪmən tə hɛlp əɹ tə ə tʃɛɹ. fəɹ ə moʊmən ðeɪ klæsp ðɛɹ hænz, ɪkskleɪmɪŋ ðət ʃi wɑz tu wik, ðət ʃi ʃəd bi ɪn ə wɔɹm bɛd, ən ðə hilɝ bɹɔt, ən ə hɑt bæθ. mɔɪɹeɪnz aɪbɹaʊz lɪftəd; ðə wɪmən ʃʌt ðɛɹ maʊðz əbɹʌpli ən hɝid tə eɪɾ əɹ ɪndə ðə tʃɛɹ. əz sun əz ʃi wɑz sɛɾəld ʃi weɪvd əm əweɪ ɪɹɪɾəbli. "aɪ wəd spik wɪð ju, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ."

"Be still, Lord Agelmar," Moiraine said. "Ingtar has done as I commanded him. I am not so frail as everyone here seems to think." She motioned two of the women to help her to a chair. For a moment they clasped their hands, exclaiming that she was too weak, that she should be in a warm bed, and the healer brought, and a hot bath. Moiraine's eyebrows lifted; the women shut their mouths abruptly and hurried to aid her into the chair. As soon as she was settled she waved them away irritably. "I would speak with you, Lord Agelmar."

eɪɡəlmɝ nɑɾəd, ən ɪŋtʃɹ weɪv ðə sɝvəns fɹəm ðə ɹum. ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə aɪd ðoʊz u ɹɪmeɪn ɪkspɛktənli; ɪspɛʃli, ɹænd θɔt, lɔɪəl ən ðə ɡoʊldən tʃɛst.

Agelmar nodded, and Ingtar waved the servants from the room. The Lord of Fal Dara eyed those who remained expectantly; especially, Rand thought, Loial and the golden chest.

"wi hɪɹ," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛɾ əz sun əz ðə dɔɹ ʃʌt bɪhaɪn ɪŋtʃɹ, "ðæt jə wʌn ə ɡɹeɪt vɪktɝi ɪn tɑɹwɪnz ɡæp."

"We hear," Moiraine said as soon as the door shut behind Ingtar, "that you won a great victory in Tarwin's Gap."

"jɛs," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd sloʊli, hɪz tʃɹʌbəl fɹaʊn ɹɪtɝnɪŋ. "jɛs, ɛɛs sədaɪ, ən noʊ. ðə hæfmən ən ðɛɹ tʃɹɑləks wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪd tə ðə læst, bʌt wi bɛɹli fɔt. ə mɪɹəkəl, maɪ mɛn kɔl ɪt. ði ɝθ swɑloʊd ðɛm; ðə maʊntənz bɛɹid ðɛm. oʊnli ə fju dʒɹæɡkɝ wɝ lɛft, tu fɹaɪɾənd tə də ɛls bʌt flaɪ nɔɹθ əz fæst əz ðeɪ kʊd."

"Yes," Agelmar said slowly, his troubled frown returning. "Yes, Aes Sedai, and no. The Halfmen and their Trollocs were destroyed to the last, but we barely fought. A miracle, my men call it. The earth swallowed them; the mountains buried them. Only a few Draghkar were left, too frightened to do else but fly north as fast as they could."

"ə mɪɹəkəl ɪndid," mɔɪɹeɪn sɛd. "æn spɹɪŋ əz kʌm əɡɛn."

"A miracle indeed," Moiraine said. "And spring has come again."

"ə mɪɹəkəl," eɪɡəlmɝ sɛd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛd, "bʌt. . . . mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, mɛn seɪ mɛni θɪŋz əbaʊt wʌt hæpən ɪn ðə ɡæp. ðət ðə laɪt tʊk ɑn flɛʃ ən fɔt fəɹ ʌs. ðət ðə kɹieɪɾɝ wɔkt ɪn ðə ɡæp tə stʃɹaɪk ət ðə ʃædoʊ. bʌɾ aɪ sɔ ə mæn, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ. aɪ sɔ ə mæn, ən wʌɾ i dɪd, kænɑt bi, mʌs nɑt bi."

"A miracle," Agelmar said, shaking his head, "but. . . . Moiraine Sedai, men say many things about what happened in the Gap. That the Light took on flesh and fought for us. That the Creator walked in the Gap to strike at the Shadow. But I saw a man, Moiraine Sedai. I saw a man, and what he did, cannot be, must not be."

"ðə wil wivz əz ðə wil wɪlz, lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə."

"The Wheel weaves as the Wheel wills, Lord of Fal Dara."

"æz jə seɪ, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ."

"As you say, Moiraine Sedai."

"æn pdən feɪn? hiz sɪkjʊɹ? aɪ mʌst spik wɪð ɪm wən aɪm ɹɛstəd."

"And Padan Fain? He is secure? I must speak with him when I am rested."

"hi ɪz hɛld əz jə kəmændəd, ɛɛs sədaɪ, waɪnɪŋ əɾ ɪz ɡɑɹdz hæf ðə taɪm ən tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə kəmæn əm ðə ɹɛst, bʌt. . . . pis, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, wʌɾ ə ju, ɪn ðə blaɪt? jə faʊn ðə ɡɹin mæn? aɪ si hɪz hæn ɪn ðə nu θɪŋz ɡɹoʊɪŋ."

"He is held as you commanded, Aes Sedai, whining at his guards half the time and trying to command them the rest, but. . . . Peace, Moiraine Sedai, what of you, in the Blight? You found the Green Man? I see his hand in the new things growing."

"wi faʊn hɪm," ʃi sɛd flætli. "ðə ɡɹin mæn ɪz dɛd, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ, ən ði aɪ ʌv ðə wɝld ɪz ɡɔn. ðəɹ wɪl bi noʊ mɔɹ kwɛsts baɪ jʌŋ mɛn sikɪŋ ɡlɔɹi."

"We found him," she said flatly. "The Green Man is dead, Lord Agelmar, and the Eye of the World is gone. There will be no more quests by young men seeking glory."

ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə fɹaʊnd, ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪz hɛɾ ɪn kənfjuʒən. "dɛd? ðə ɡɹin mæn? hi kænɑt bi. . . . ðən jə wɝ dɪfiɾəd? bʌt ðə flaʊɝz, ən ðə ɡɹoʊɪŋ θɪŋz?"

The Lord of Fal Dara frowned, shaking his head in confusion. "Dead? The Green Man? He cannot be. . . . Then you were defeated? But the flowers, and the growing things?"

"wi wʌn, lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ. wi wʌn, ən ðə læn fɹid fɹəm wɪntɝ ɪz ðə pɹuf, bʌɾ aɪ fɪɹ ðə læs bæɾəl əz nɑt jɛt bɪn fɔt." ɹænd stɝd, bʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪv ɪm ə ʃɑɹp lʊk ən i stʊd stɪl əɡɛn. "ðə blaɪt stɪl stænz, ən ðə fɔɹdʒɪz ə θɑkændɑɹ stɪl wɝk bɪloʊ ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl. ðəɹ ɑɹ mɛni hæfmən jɛt, ən kaʊnləs tʃɹɑləks. nɛvɝ θɪŋk ðə nid fəɹ wɑtʃfəlnəs ɪn ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz ɪz ɡɔn."

"We won, Lord Agelmar. We won, and the land freed from winter is the proof, but I fear the last battle has not yet been fought." Rand stirred, but the Aes Sedai gave him a sharp look and he stood still again. "The Blight still stands, and the forges of Thakan'dar still work below Shayol Ghul. There are many Halfmen yet, and countless Trollocs. Never think the need for watchfulness in the Borderlands is gone."

"aɪ dɪd nɑt θɪŋk ɪt soʊ, ɛɛs sədaɪ," hi sɛd stɪfli.

"I did not think it so, Aes Sedai," he said stiffly.

mɔɪɹeɪn moʊʃən fəɹ lɔɪəl tə sɛt ðə ɡoʊl tʃɛst əɾ əɹ fit, ən wən i dɪd, ʃi oʊpən ɪt, ɹɪvilɪŋ ðə hɔɹn. "ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ," ʃi sɛd, ən eɪɡəlmɝ ɡæspt. ɹænd ɔlmoʊs θɔt ðə mæn wəd nil.

Moiraine motioned for Loial to set the gold chest at her feet, and when he did, she opened it, revealing the horn. "The Horn of Valere," she said, and Agelmar gasped. Rand almost thought the man would kneel.

"wɪð ðæt, mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ, ɪt mæɾɝz nɑt haʊ mɛni hæfmən əɹ tʃɹɑləks ɹɪmeɪn. wɪð ðə hɪɹoʊz ʌv oʊl kʌm bæk fɹəm ðə tum, wɪl mɑɹtʃ tə ðə blæstəd lænz ən lɛvəl ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl."

"With that, Moiraine Sedai, it matters not how many Halfmen or Trollocs remain. With the heroes of old come back from the tomb, we will march to the Blasted Lands and level Shayol Ghul."

"noʊ!" eɪɡəlmɝz maʊθ fɛl oʊpən ɪn sɝpɹaɪz, bʌt mɔɪɹeɪn kəntɪnjud kɑmli. "aɪ dɪd nɑt ʃoʊ ɪt tə jə tə tɔn ju, bʌt soʊ ðət jəl noʊ ðəɾ ɪn wʌtɛvɝ bæɾəlz jɛt kʌm, əɹ maɪt wɪl bi əz ɡɹeɪɾ əz ðəɾ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. ɪts pleɪs ɪz nɑt hɪɹ. ðə hɔɹn mʌs bi kæɹid tə ɪljən. ɪts ðɛɹ, ɪf fɹɛʃ bæɾəlz θɹɛɾən, ðəɾ ɪt mʌst ɹæli ðə fɔɹsɪz ə ðə laɪt. əl æsk ən ɛskɔɹɾ ə jəɹ bɛs mɛn tə si ðəɾ ɪt ɹitʃəz ɪljən seɪfli. ðəɹ ɑɹ dɑɹkfɹɛnz stɪl, əz wɛl əz hæfmən ən tʃɹɑləks, ən ðoʊz u kʌm tə ðə hɔɹn wɪl fɑloʊ huɛvɝ wɪnz ɪt. ɪt mʌst ɹitʃ ɪljən."

"NO!" Agelmar's mouth fell open in surprise, but Moiraine continued calmly. "I did not show it to you to taunt you, but so that you will know that in Whatever battles yet come, our might will be as great as that of the Shadow. Its place is not here. The Horn must be carried to Illian. It is there, if fresh battles threaten, that it must rally the forces of the Light. I will ask an escort of your best men to see that it reaches Illian safely. There are Darkfriends still, as well as Halfmen and Trollocs, and those who come to the horn will follow whoever winds it. It must reach Illian."

"ɪt ʃæl bi əz jə seɪ, ɛɛs sədaɪ." bʌt wən ðə lɪɾ ə ðə tʃɛs kloʊzd, ðə lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə lʊk laɪk ə mæn biɪŋ dɪnaɪɾ ɪz læst ɡlɪmps ə ðə laɪt.

"It shall be as you say, Aes Sedai." But when the lid of the chest closed, the Lord of Fal Dara looked like a man being denied his last glimpse of the Light.

sɛvən deɪz leɪɾɝ, bɛlz stɪl ɹæŋ ɪn fæl dæɹə. ðə pipəl hæd ɹɪtɝn fɹəm fæl mɝæn, æɾɪŋ ðɛɹ sɛləbɹeɪʃən tə ðəɾ ə ðə soʊlʒɝz, ən ʃaʊts ən sɪŋɪŋ blɛndəd wɪð ðə pilɪŋ ə ðə bɛlz ɑn ðə lɔŋ bælkəni wɛɹ ɹænd stʊd. ðə bælkəni oʊvɝlʊkt eɪɡəlmɝz pɹaɪvət ɡɑɹɾənz, ɡɹin ən flaʊɝɪŋ, bʌɾ i dɪd nɑt ɡɪv əm ə sɛkən lʊk. dɪspaɪt ðə sʌn haɪ ɪn ðə skaɪ, spɹɪŋ ɪn ʃaɪnɝ wɑz kulɝ ðən i wɑz juz tə, jɛt swɛt ɡlɪsən ɑn ɪz bɛɹ tʃɛst ən ʃoʊldɝz əz i swʌŋ ðə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd, itʃ muv pɹɪsaɪs jɛt dɪstən fɹəm wɛɹ i floʊɾəd ɪn ðə vɔɪd. ivən ðɛɹ, hi wʌndɝd haʊ mʌtʃ dʒɔɪ ðəɹ wəd bi ɪn ðə taʊn ɪf ðeɪ nu ʌv ðə bænɝ mɔɪɹeɪn stɪl kɛp hɪɾən.

Seven days later, bells still rang in Fal Dara. The people had returned from Fal Moran, adding their celebration to that of the soldiers, and shouts and singing blended with the pealing of the bells on the long balcony where Rand stood. The balcony overlooked Agelmar's private gardens, green and flowering, but he did not give them a second look. Despite the sun high in the sky, spring in Shienar was cooler than he was used to, yet sweat glistened on his bare chest and shoulders as he swung the heron-mark blade, each move precise yet distant from where he floated in the void. Even there, he wondered how much joy there would be in the town if they knew of the banner Moiraine still kept hidden.

"ɡʊd, ʃifɝɾɝ." linɪŋ əɡɛns ðə ɹeɪlɪŋ wɪð ɪz ɑɹmz foʊldəɾ əkɹɔs ɪz tʃɛst, ðə wɔɹɾɝ wɑtʃt ɪm kɹɪɾɪkəli. "ju ɑɹ duɪŋ wɛl, bʌt doʊn pʊʃ soʊ hɑɹd. jə kæn bɪkʌm ə bleɪdmæstɝ ɪn ə fju wiks."

"Good, sheepherder." Leaning against the railing with his arms folded across his chest, the Warder watched him critically. "You are doing well, but don't push so hard. You can't become a blademaster in a few weeks."

ðə vɔɪd vænɪʃt laɪk ə pɹɪk bʌbəl. "aɪ doʊn kɛɹ əbaʊt biɪŋ ə bleɪdmæstɝ."

The void vanished like a pricked bubble. "I don't care about being a blademaster."

"ɪts ə bleɪdmæstɝz bleɪd, ʃifɝɾɝ."

"It's a blademaster's blade, sheepherder."

"aɪ dʒʌst wɑn maɪ fɑðɝ tə bi pɹaʊɾ ə mi." hɪz hæn taɪɾənd ɑn ðə ɹʌf lɛðɝ ə ðə hɪlt. aɪ dʒʌst wɑn tæm tə bi maɪ fɑðɝ. hi slæm ðə sɔɹɾ ɪndə ɪts skæbɝd. "ɛniweɪ, aɪ doʊn əv ə fju wiks."

"I just want my father to be proud of me." His hand tightened on the rough leather of the hilt. I just want Tam to be my father. He slammed the sword into its scabbard. "Anyway, I don't have a few weeks."

"ðɛn juv nɑt tʃeɪnʒd jəɹ maɪnd?"

"Then you've not changed your mind?"

"wʊd ju?" lænz ɪkspɹɛʃən hæd nɑɾ ɔltɝd; ðə flæt pleɪnz ə hɪz feɪs lʊkt əz ɪf ðeɪ kəd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ. "ju woʊn tʃɹaɪ tə stɑp mi? əɹ mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ?"

"Would you?" Lan's expression had not altered; the flat planes of his face looked as if they could not change. "You won't try to stop me? Or Moiraine Sedai?"

"ju kən də əz jə wɪl, ʃifɝɾɝ, əɹ əz ðə pæɾɝn wivz fəɹ ju." ðə wɔɹɾɝ stʃɹeɪɾənd. "aɪl liv jə naʊ."

"You can do as you will, sheepherder, or as the Pattern weaves for you." The Warder straightened. "I'll leave you now."

ɹænd tɝn tə wɑtʃ læn ɡoʊ, ən faʊn ɛɡwin stændɪŋ ðɛɹ.

Rand turned to watch Lan go, and found Egwene standing there.

"tʃeɪnʒd jəɹ maɪn əbaʊt wʌt, ɹænd?"

"Changed your mind about what, Rand?"

hi snætʃt ʌp ɪz ʃɝɾ ən koʊt, sʌɾənli filɪŋ ðə kul. "aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ əweɪ, ɛɡwin."

He snatched up his shirt and coat, suddenly feeling the cool. "I'm going away, Egwene."

"wɛɹ?"

"Where?"

"sʌmwɛɹ. aɪ doʊnt noʊ." hi dɪd nɑt wɑnə miɾ əɹ aɪz, bʌɾ i kəd nɑt stɑp lʊkɪŋ ət hɝ. ʃi wɔɹ fɛd waɪld-ɹoʊzɪz twaɪn ɪn əɹ hɛɹ, floʊɪŋ əbaʊɾ əɹ ʃoʊldɝz. ʃi hɛld əɹ kloʊk kloʊs, dɑɹk blu ən ɛmbɹɔɪɾɝd əlɔŋ ði ɛdʒ wɪð ə θɪn laɪn ʌv waɪt flaʊɝz ɪn ðə ʃaɪnɝən fæʃən, ən ðə blɑsəmz meɪɾ ə laɪn stʃɹeɪɾ ʌp tə hɝ feɪs. ðeɪ wɝ noʊ pəlɝ ðən əɹ tʃiks; hɝ aɪz sim soʊ lɑɹdʒ ən dɑɹk. "əweɪ."

"Somewhere. I don't know." He did not want to meet her eyes, but he could not stop looking at her. She wore fed wild-roses twined in her hair, flowing about her shoulders. She held her cloak close, dark blue and embroidered along the edge with a thin line of white flowers in the Shienaran fashion, and the blossoms made a line straight up to her face. They were no paler than her cheeks; her eyes seemed so large and dark. "Away."

"aɪm ʃʊɹ mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ wɪl nɑt laɪk jə dʒʌst ɡoʊɪŋ ɔf. æftɝ . . . æftɝ wʌt juv dʌn, jə dɪzɝv səm ɹɪwɔɹd."

"I'm sure Moiraine Sedai will not like you just going off. After . . . after what you've done, you deserve some reward."

"mɔɪɹeɪn dʌz nɑt noʊ aɪm əlaɪv. aɪ hæv dʌn wʌt ʃi wɑntəd, ən ðæts ən ɛn tə ɪt. ʃi dʌzn ivən spik tə mi wən aɪ ɡoʊ tə hɝ. nɑt ðəɾ aɪv tʃɹaɪd tə steɪ kloʊs tə hɝ, bʌt ʃiz əvɔɪɾəd mi. ʃi woʊn kɛɹ ɪf aɪ ɡoʊ, ən aɪ doʊn kɛɹ ɪf ʃi dʌz."

"Moiraine does not know I am alive. I have done what she wanted, and that's an end to it. She doesn't even speak to me when I go to her. Not that I've tried to stay close to her, but she's avoided me. She won't care if I go, and I don't care if she does."

"mɔɪɹeɪn ɪz stɪl nɑt kəmplitli wɛl, ɹænd." ʃi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. "aɪ hæv tə ɡoʊ tə tɑɹ vəlɑn fəɹ maɪ tʃɹeɪnɪŋ. nɪneɪiv ɪz kʌmɪŋ, tu. ən mæt stɪl nidz tə bi hild ʌv wʌtɛvɝ baɪnz ɪm tə ðət dæɡɝ, ən pɛɹɪn wɑns tə si tɑɹ vəlɑn bɪfɔɹ i ɡoʊz . . . wɛɹɛvɝ. jə kəd kʌm wɪð ʌs."

"Moiraine is still not completely well, Rand." She hesitated. "I have to go to Tar Valon for my training. Nynaeve is coming, too. And Mat still needs to be Healed of Whatever binds him to that dagger, and Perrin wants to see Tar Valon before he goes . . . wherever. You could come with us."

"ænd weɪt fəɹ səm ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪsaɪdz mɔɪɹeɪn tə faɪn aʊt wʌɾ aɪm ən dʒɛntəl mi?" hɪz vɔɪs wɑz ɹʌf, ɔlmoʊst ə snɪɹ; hi kəd nɑt tʃeɪnʒ ɪt. "ɪz ðət wʌt jə wɑnt?"

"And wait for some Aes Sedai besides Moiraine to find out what I am and gentle me?" His voice was rough, almost a sneer; he could not change it. "Is that what you want?"

"noʊ."

"No."

hi nu hi wəd nɛvɝ bi eɪbəl tə tɛl əɹ haʊ ɡɹeɪtfəl i wɑz ðət ʃi hæd nɑt hɛzɪteɪɾɪd bɪfɔɹ ænsɝɪŋ.

He knew he would never be able to tell her how grateful he was that she had not hesitated before answering.

"ɹænd, jə ɑɹən əfɹeɪd. . . ." ðeɪ wɝ əloʊn, bʌt ʃi lʊkt ɝaʊn ən stɪl loʊɝɾ əɹ vɔɪs. "mɔɪɹeɪn sədaɪ sɛz jə doʊn əv tə tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. ɪf jə doʊn tʌtʃ seɪɾɪn, ɪf jə doʊn tʃɹaɪ tə wil ðə paʊɝ, jəl bi seɪf."

"Rand, you aren't afraid. . . ." They were alone, but she looked around and still lowered her voice. "Moiraine Sedai says you don't have to touch the True Source. If you don't touch saidin, if you don't try to wield the Power, you'll be safe."

"oʊ, aɪ woʊn ɛvɝ tʌtʃ ɪɾ əɡɛn. nɑɾ ɪf aɪ hæv tə kʌt maɪ hæn ɔf, fɝst." wʌɾ ɪf aɪ kæn stɑp? aɪ nɛvɝ tʃɹaɪd tə wild ɪt, nɑɾ ivən ət ði aɪ. wʌɾ ɪf aɪ kæn stɑp?

"Oh, I won't ever touch it again. Not if I have to cut my hand off, first." What if I can't stop? I never tried to wield it, not even at the Eye. What if I can't stop?

"wɪl jə ɡoʊ hoʊm, ɹænd? jəɹ fɑðɝ mʌs bi daɪɪŋ tə si ju. ivən mæts fɑðɝ mʌs bi daɪɪŋ tə si hɪm baɪ naʊ. əl bi kʌmɪŋ bæk tə ɛmənz fil nɛks jɪɹ. fəɹ ə lɪɾəl waɪl, ət list."

"Will you go home, Rand? Your father must be dying to see you. Even Mat's father must be dying to see him by now. I'll be coming back to Emond's Field next year. For a little while, at least."

hi ɹʌbd ɪz pɑm oʊvɝ ðə hɪlt ə hɪz sɔɹd, filɪŋ ðə bɹɑnz hɛɹən. maɪ fɑðɝ. hoʊm. laɪt, haʊ aɪ wɑnə si. . . . "nɑt hoʊm." sʌmpleɪs wɛɹ ðəɹ ɑɹən ɛni pipəl tə hɝɾ ɪf aɪ kæn stɑp maɪsɛlf. sʌmwɛɹ əloʊn. sʌɾənli ɪt fɛlt əz koʊld əz snoʊ ɑn ðə bælkəni. "aɪm ɡoʊɪŋ əweɪ, bʌt nɑt hoʊm." ɛɡwin, ɛɡwin, waɪ dɪd juv tə bi wʌn ə ðoʊz . . . ? hi pʊɾ ɪz ɑɹmz ɝaʊn hɝ, ən wɪspɝɾ ɪndə hɝ hɛɹ. "nɑɾ ɛvɝ hoʊm."

He rubbed his palm over the hilt of his sword, feeling the bronze heron. My father. Home. Light, how I want to see. . . . "Not home." Someplace where there aren't any people to hurt if I can't stop myself. Somewhere alone. Suddenly it felt as cold as snow on the balcony. "I'm going away, but not home." Egwene, Egwene, why did you have to be one of those . . . ? He put his arms around her, and whispered into her hair. "Not ever home."

ɪn eɪɡəlmɝz pɹaɪvət ɡɑɹɾən, ʌndɝ ə θɪk baʊɝ dɑɾəd wɪð waɪt blɑsəmz, mɔɪɹeɪn ʃɪftəɾ ɑn əɹ bɛdtʃɛɹ. ðə fɹæɡməns ə ðə sil leɪ ɑn əɹ læp, ən ðə smɔl dʒɛm ʃi səmtaɪmz wɔɹ ɪn əɹ hɛɹ spʌn ən ɡlɪɾɝd ɑn ɪts ɡoʊl tʃeɪn fɹəm ði ɛnz ə hɝ fɪŋɡɝz. ðə feɪn blu ɡloʊ feɪɾəd fɹəm ðə stoʊn, ən ə smaɪl tʌtʃt əɹ lɪps. ɪt hæd noʊ paʊɝ ɪn ɪtsɛlf, ðə stoʊn, bʌt ðə fɝs juz ʃi hæɾ ɛvɝ lɝn ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, əz ə ɡɝl, ɪn ðə ɹɔɪəl pæləs ɪn kɛɹhin, wɑz juzɪŋ ðə stoʊn tə lɪsən tə pipəl wən ðeɪ θɔt ðeɪ wɝ tu fɑɹ ɔf tə bi oʊvɝhɝd.

In Agelmar's private garden, under a thick bower dotted with white blossoms, Moiraine shifted on her bedchair. The fragments of the seal lay on her lap, and the small gem she sometimes wore in her hair spun and glittered on its gold chain from the ends of her fingers. The faint blue glow faded from the stone, and a smile touched her lips. It had no power in itself, the stone, but the first use she had ever learned of the One Power, as a girl, in the Royal Palace in Cairhien, was using the stone to listen to people when they thought they were too far off to be overheard.

"ðə pɹɑfəsiz wɪl bi fʊlfɪld," ði ɛɛs sədaɪ wɪspɝd. "ðə dʒɹæɡən ɪz ɹibɔɹn."

"The Prophecies will be fulfilled," the Aes Sedai whispered. "The Dragon is Reborn."

ði ɛn ə ðə fɝs bʊk ə ðə wil ə taɪm ɡlɔsɝi eɪ noʊɾ ɑn deɪts ɪn ðɪs ɡlɔsɝi. ðə toʊmən kæləndɝ (dɪvaɪz baɪ toʊmə dɝ ɑməd) wɑz ədɑptəɾ əpɹɑksəmətli tu sɛntʃɝiz æftɝ ðə dɛθ ə ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ ən ɹəkɔɹɾəd jɪɹz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld (æb). mɛni ɹɛkɝdz wɝ dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, soʊ mʌtʃ soʊ ðət wɪð ði ɛn ə ðə wɔɹz ðəɹ wɑz ɑɹɡjəmən əbaʊt ði ɪɡzæk jɪɹ ʌndɝ ði oʊl sɪstəm. ə nu kæləndɝ wɑz pɹəpoʊz baɪ tiəm ʌv ɡɑzɹ, sɛləbɹeɪɾɪŋ ðə səpoʊz fɹiɾəm fɹəm ðə tʃɹɑlɑk θɹɛɾ ən ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ itʃ jɪɹ əz ə fɹi jɪɹ (fi). ðə ɡɑzɝən kæləndɝ ɡeɪnd waɪɾ æksɛptəns wɪðɪn twɛnti jɪɹz æftɝ ðə wɔɹz' ɛnd. ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ətɛmptəd tə ɪstæblɪʃ ə nu kæləndɝ beɪst ɑn ðə faʊndɪŋ ə hɪz ɛmpaɪɝ (, fɹəm ðə faʊndɪŋ), bʌt ðɪs ɪz naʊ noʊn ən ɹəfɝd tə oʊnli baɪ hɪstɔɹiənz. æftɝ ðə waɪdspɹɛd dɪstʃɹʌkʃən, dɛθ ən dɪsɹʌpʃən ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, ə fɔɹθ kæləndɝ wɑz dɪvaɪz baɪ ɝɛn dɪn dʒubaɪ sɔɹɪŋ ɡʌl, ə skɑlɝ ə ðə si foʊk, ən pɹɑməlɡeɪɾəd baɪ ðə pɑnɑɹtʃ fɛɹiɾ ə tæɹɑbən. ðə fɛɹid kæləndɝ, deɪɾɪŋ fɹəm ði ɑɹbɪtʃɹɛɹəli dɪsaɪɾɪd ɛn ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz ən ɹəkɔɹɾɪŋ jɪɹz ə ðə nu ɛɹə (nəbɹæskə), ɪz kɝənli ɪn jus.

The End of the First Book of The Wheel of Time GLOSSARY A Note on Dates in This Glossary. The Toman Calendar (devised by Toma dur Ahmid) was adopted approximately two centuries after the death of the last male Aes Sedai and recorded years After the Breaking of the World (AB). Many records were destroyed in the Trolloc Wars, so much so that with the end of the Wars there was argument about the exact year under the old system. A new calendar was proposed by Tiam of Gazar, celebrating the supposed freedom from the Trolloc threat and recording each year as a Free Year (FY). The Gazaran Calendar gained wide acceptance within twenty years after the Wars' end. Artur Hawkwing attempted to establish a new calendar based on the founding of his empire (FF, From the Founding), but this is now known and referred to only by historians. After the widespread destruction, death and disruption of the War of the Hundred Years, a fourth calendar was devised by Uren din Jubai Soaring Gull, a scholar of the Sea Folk, and promulgated by the Panarch Farede of Tarabon. The Farede Calendar, dating from the arbitrarily decided end of the War of the Hundred Years and recording years of the New Era (NE), is currently in use.

eɪɾən, hɛɹən (eɪ-dæn, hɛ-ɹæn): ɡʌvɝnɝ ə bɛɹlən.

Adan, Heran (ay-DAN, HEH-ran): Governor of Baerlon.

ɛɛs sədaɪ (aɪɛz sɛ-dɪaɪ): wildɝz ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ. sɪns ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, ɔl sɝvaɪvɪŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ ɑɹ wɪmən. waɪdli dɪstʃɹʌstəɾ ən fɪɹd, ivən heɪɾəd, ðeɪ ɑɹ bleɪm baɪ mɛni fəɹ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən ɑɹ dʒɛnɝəli θɔt tə mɛɾəl ɪn ði əfɛɹz ə neɪʃənz. ət ðə seɪm taɪm, fju ɹulɝz wɪl bi wɪθaʊɾ ən ɛɛs sədaɪ ædvaɪzɝ, ivən ɪn lænz wɛɹ ði ɛɡzɪstəns ə sətʃ ə kənɛkʃən mʌs bi kɛp sikɹət. juzd əz ən ɑnɝɪfɪk, soʊ: ʃɛɹiəm sədaɪ; ən əz ə haɪ ɑnɝɪfɪk, soʊ: ʃɛɹiəm ɛɛs sədaɪ. si ɔlsoʊ ədʒɑ; æmɪɝlɪn sit.

Aes Sedai (EYEZ seh-DEYE): Wielders of the One Power. Since the Time of Madness, all surviving Aes Sedai are women. Widely distrusted and feared, even hated, they are blamed by many for the Breaking of the World, and are generally thought to meddle in the affairs of nations. At the same time, few rulers will be without an Aes Sedai adviser, even in lands where the existence of such a connection must be kept secret. Used as an honorific, so: Sheriam Sedai; and as a high honorific, so: Sheriam Aes Sedai. See also Ajah; Amyrlin Seat.

eɪdʒ leɪs: si pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ.

Age Lace: See Pattern of an Age.

eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz: ði eɪdʒ ɛndəd baɪ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ ən ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ə taɪm wən ɛɛs sədaɪ pɝfɔɹmd wʌndɝz naʊ oʊnli dʒɹimd ʌv. si ɔlsoʊ wil ə taɪm.

Age of Legends: The Age ended by the War of the Shadow and the Breaking of the World. A time when Aes Sedai performed wonders now only dreamed of. See also Wheel of Time.

eɪɡəlmɝ; lɔɹɾ eɪɡəlmɝ ə haʊs ə dʒəɡəd (æɡ-ɛl-mɑɹ; dʒɑ-ɡæd): lɔɹɾ ə fæl dæɹə. hɪz saɪn ɪz θɹi ɹʌnɪŋ ɹɛd fɑksəz.

Agelmar; Lord Agelmar of House of Jagad (AGH-el-mar; JAH-gad): Lord of Fal Dara. His sign is three running red foxes.

il (aɪ-il): ðə pipəl ə ði il weɪst. fɪɹs ən hɑɹɾi. ɔlsoʊ kɔld ilmɛn. ðeɪ veɪl ðɛɹ feɪsəz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ kɪl, ɡɪvɪŋ ɹaɪz tə ðə seɪɪŋ "æktɪŋ laɪk ə blæk-veɪld il" tə dɪskɹaɪb sʌmwʌn u ɪz biɪŋ vaɪələnt. dɛdli wɔɹiɝz wɪð wɛpənz əɹ wɪð nʌθɪŋ bʌt ðɛɹ bɛɹ hænz, ðəl nɑt tʌtʃ ə sɔɹd. ðɛɹ paɪpɝz pleɪ ðɛm ɪndə bæɾəl wɪð ðə mjuzɪk ə dænsəz, ən ilmɛn kɔl bæɾəl "ðə dæns."

Aiel (eye-EEL): The people of the Aiel Waste. Fierce and hardy. Also called Aielmen. They veil their faces before they kill, giving rise to the saying "acting like a black-veiled Aiel" to describe someone who is being violent. Deadly warriors with weapons or with nothing but their bare hands, they will not touch a sword. Their pipers play them into battle with the music of dances, and Aielmen call battle "the Dance."

il weɪst: ðə hɑɹʃ, ɹʌɡəɾ ən ɔl-bʌt-wɔɾɝləs læn ist ə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld. fju aʊtsaɪɾɝz vɛntʃɝ ðɛɹ, nɑɾ oʊnli kəz wɔɾɝ ɪz ɔlmoʊst ɪmpɑsəbəl tə faɪn fəɹ wʌn nɑt bɔɹn ðɛɹ, bʌt kəz ði il kənsɪɾɝ ðɛmsɛlvz ət wɔɹ wɪð ɔl ʌðɝ pipəlz ən də nɑt wɛlkəm stʃɹeɪnʒɝz.

Aiel Waste: The harsh, rugged and all-but-waterless land east of the Spine of the World. Few outsiders venture there, not only because water is almost impossible to find for one not born there, but because the Aiel consider themselves at war with all other peoples and do not welcome strangers.

ədʒɑ (ɑ-dʒɑ): səsaɪəɾiz əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, tə wɪtʃ ɔl ɛɛs sədaɪ bɪlɔŋ. ðeɪ ɑɹ dɛzɪɡneɪɾɪd baɪ kʌlɝz: blu ədʒɑ, ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ, waɪɾ ədʒɑ, ɡɹin ədʒɑ, bɹaʊn ədʒɑ, jɛloʊ ədʒɑ, ən ɡɹeɪ ədʒɑ. itʃ fɑloʊz ə spəsɪfɪk fəlɑsəfi ʌv ðə jus ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ən pɝpəsəz ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ bɛnz ɔl ɪts ɛnɝdʒiz tə faɪndɪŋ ən dʒɛntəlɪŋ mɛn u ɑɹ ətɛmptɪŋ tə wil ðə paʊɝ. ðə bɹaʊn ədʒɑ, ɑn ði ʌðɝ hænd, fɔɹseɪks ɪnvɑlvmənt wɪð ðə wɝld ən dɛɾɪkeɪts ɪtsɛlf tə sikɪŋ nɑlədʒ. ðəɹ ɑɹ ɹumɝz (hɑtli dɪnaɪd, ən nɛvɝ seɪfli mɛnʃən ɪn fɹʌn ʌv ɛni ɛɛs sədaɪ) ʌv ə blæk ədʒɑ, dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə sɝvɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

Ajah (AH-jah): Societies among the Aes Sedai, to which all Aes Sedai belong. They are designated by colors: Blue Ajah, Red Ajah, White Ajah, Green Ajah, Brown Ajah, Yellow Ajah, and Gray Ajah. Each follows a specific philosophy of the use of the One Power and purposes of the Aes Sedai. For example, the Red Ajah bends all its energies to finding and gentling men who are attempting to wield the Power. The Brown Ajah, on the other hand, forsakes involvement with the world and dedicates itself to seeking knowledge. There are rumors (hotly denied, and never safely mentioned in front of any Aes Sedai) of a Black Ajah, dedicated to serving the Dark One.

æl ɛlɪsɑnd! (ɑlɛl-lɪ-sæn-dɑ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "fɔɹ ðə ɹoʊz ə ðə sʌn!"

Al Ellisande! (ahlehl-lih-SAHN-dah): In the Old Tongue, "For the Rose of the Sun!"

ɑldib (ɑl-dib): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "wɛst waɪnd," ðə wɪn ðət bɹɪŋz ðə spɹɪŋ ɹeɪnz. ɑlmɹə, nɪneɪiv (ɑl-miɝ-ɑ, naɪ-niv): ðə wɪzdəm ʌv ɛmənz fild.

Aldieb (ahl-DEEB): In the Old Tongue, "West Wind," the wind that brings the spring rains. al'Meara, Nynaeve (ahl-MEER-ah, NIGH-neev): The Wisdom of Emond's Field.

ælθɹ, ɹænd (ɑl-θɔɹ, ɹænd): ə jʌŋ fɑɹmɝ ən ʃifɝɾɝ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz.

al'Thor, Rand (ahl-THOR, RAND): A young farmer and sheepherder from the Two Rivers.

ælvɪɹ, ɛɡwin (ɑl-vɪɹ, ɛ-ɡweɪn): jʌŋɡəs dɔɾɝ ə ði ɪnkipɝ ɪn ɛmənz fild.

al'Vere, Egwene (ahl-VEER, eh-GWAIN): Youngest daughter of the innkeeper in Emond's Field.

æmɪɝlɪn sit (ɑm-ɛɹ-lɪn): (wʌn.) ðə taɪɾəl ə ðə liɾɝ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Amyrlin Seat (AHM-ehr-lin): (1.) The title of the leader of the Aes Sedai.

ɪlɛktəd fəɹ laɪf baɪ ðə hɔl ə ðə taʊɝ, ðə haɪəs kaʊnsəl ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ, wɪtʃ kənsɪsts ə θɹi ɹɛpɹəzɛntəɾɪvz fɹəm itʃ ə ðə sɛvən ədʒəz. ði æmɪɝlɪn sit hæz, θiɝɛɾɪkəli ət list, ɔlmoʊst səpɹim əθɔɹəɾi əmʌŋ ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ʃi ɹæŋks əz ði ikwəl ʌv ə kɪŋ əɹ kwin. (tu.) ðə θɹoʊn əpɑn wɪtʃ ðə liɾɝ ə ði ɛɛs sədaɪ sɪts.

Elected for life by the Hall of the Tower, the highest council of the Aes Sedai, which consists of three representatives from each of the seven Ajahs. The Amyrlin Seat has, theoretically at least, almost supreme authority among the Aes Sedai. She ranks as the equal of a king or queen. (2.) The throne upon which the leader of the Aes Sedai sits.

ændɝ ( æn-dɔɹ): ðə ɹɛlm wɪðɪn wɪtʃ ðə tu ɹɪvɝz laɪz. ðə saɪn ʌv ændɝ ɪz ə ɹæmpənt waɪt laɪən ɑn ə fild ə ɹɛd.

Andor ( AN-door): The realm within which the Two Rivers lies. The sign of Andor is a rampant white lion on a field of red.

æŋɡɹil (æn-ɡɹi-ɑl): ə vɛɹi ɹɛɹ ɑbʒɛkt wɪtʃ əlaʊz ɛniwʌn keɪpəbəl ə tʃænəlɪŋ ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə hændəl ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ əmaʊn ə ðə paʊɝ ðən wəd bi seɪfli pɑsəbəl əneɪɾɪd. ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðə minz ə ðɛɹ meɪkɪŋ ɪz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ noʊn. si ɔlsoʊ sɑŋɡɹil.

angreal (ahn-gree-AHL): A very rare object which allows anyone capable of channeling the One Power to handle a greater amount of the Power than would be safely possible unaided. Remnants of the Age of Legends, the means of their making is no longer known. See also sa'angreal.

ɝæfəl (ɑ-ɹɑ-fɛl): wʌn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ðə saɪn ə ɝæfəl ɪz θɹi waɪt ɹoʊzɪz ɑn ə fild ə ɹɛd, kɔɹɾɝd wɪð θɹi ɹɛd ɹoʊzɪz ɑn ə fild ʌv waɪt.

Arafel (AH-rah-fehl): One of the Borderlands. The sign of Arafel is three white roses on a field of red, quartered with three red roses on a field of white.

ɛɹæm (eɪ-ɹæm): ə jʌŋ mæn ə ðə tuætɑn.

Aram (AY-ram): A young man of the Tuatha'an.

ɑvɛndɪsɔɹə (ɑ-vɛn-dɛ-soʊ-ɹɑ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə tʃɹi ʌv laɪf." mɛnʃən ɪn mɛni stɔɹiz ən lɛdʒənz.

Avendesora (Ah-vehn-deh-SO-rah): In the Old Tongue, "the Tree of Life." Mentioned in many stories and legends.

eɪbɑɹə, pɛɹɪn (eɪ-bɛɹ-ɑ, pɛɹ-ɹɪn): ə jʌŋ blæksmɪθs əpɹɛntəs fɹəm ɛmənz fild.

Aybara, Perrin (ay-BAHR-ah, PEHR-rihn): A young blacksmith's apprentice from Emond's Field.

bælzəmən (bɑ-ɑl-zɑ-moʊn): ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk tʌŋ, "hɑɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk." bɪliv tə bi ðə tʃɹɑlɑk neɪm fəɹ ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

Ba'alzamon (bah-AHL-zah-mon): In the Trolloc tongue, "Heart of the Dark." Believed to be the Trolloc name for the Dark One.

bɛɹlən (beɪɹ-lɑn): ə sɪɾi ɪn ændɝ ɑn ðə ɹoʊd fɹəm keɪɛmlɪn tə ðə maɪnz ɪn ðə maʊntənz ə mɪst.

Baerlon (BAYR-lon): A city in Andor on the road from Caemlyn to the mines in the Mountains of Mist.

bæɹən, dɔɹæl (bɛɹ-ɹæn, dɔɹ-ɑl): ðə wɪzdəm ɪn ɛmənz fil pɹaɪɝ tə nɪneɪiv ɑlmɹə.

Barron, Doral (BAHR-rahn, DOOR-ahl): The Wisdom in Emond's Field prior to Nynaeve al'Meara.

bɛl taɪn (bɛl taɪn): spɹɪŋ fɛstəvəl ɪn ðə tu ɹɪvɝz.

Bel Tine (BEHL TINE): Spring festival in the Two Rivers.

baɪtim (baɪt-mi): ə smɔl, ɔlmoʊst ɪnvɪzəbəl baɪɾɪŋ ɪnsɛkt.

biteme (BITE-me): A small, almost invisible biting insect.

blæk ədʒɑsi ədʒɑ.

Black Ajah:See Ajah.

blæstəd lænz: dɛsəleɪɾɪd lænz sɝaʊndɪŋ ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, bɪɑn ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt.

Blasted Lands: Desolated lands surrounding Shayol Ghul, beyond the Great Blight.

blaɪt, ðəsi ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, ðə.

Blight, the:See Great Blight, the.

blu ədʒɑsi ədʒɑ.

Blue Ajah:See Ajah.

bɔɹɾɝlændz, ðə: ðə neɪʃənz bɔɹɾɝɪŋ ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt: sɑldɑiə, ɝæfəl, kændɝ, ən ʃaɪnɝ.

Borderlands, the: The nations bordering the Great Blight: Saldaea, Arafel, Kandor, and Shienar.

bɔɹnhəld, deɪn (-hɑld, deɪ-ɪn): ən ɔfəsɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt, sʌn ə lɔɹd kæptən dʒɛəfɹæm bɔɹnhəld.

Bornhald, Dain (BOHRN-hahld, DAY-ihn): An officer of the Children of the Light, son of Lord Captain Geofram Bornhald.

bɔɹnhəld, dʒɛəfɹæm (-hɑld, -ɹæm): eɪ lɔɹd kæptən ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Bornhald, Geofram (BOHRN-hahld, JEHF-rahm): A Lord Captain of the Children of the Light.

bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ðə: wən luz θɝɪn tɛləmən ən ðə hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz ɹisil ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən, ðə kaʊntɝstʃɹoʊk teɪntɪd seɪɾɪn. ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɛvɹi meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɛn hɔɹəbli ɪnseɪn. ɪn ðɛɹ mædnəs ðiz mɛn, hu kəd wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ tə ə dɪɡɹi naʊ ənnoʊn, tʃeɪnʒd ðə feɪs ə ði ɝθ. ðeɪ kɑzd ɡɹeɪɾ ɝθkweɪks, lɛvəl maʊntən ɹeɪnʒəz, ɹeɪz nu maʊntənz, lɪftəd dʒɹaɪ lænd wɛɹ siz hæd bɪn, meɪd ði oʊʃən ɹʌʃ ɪn wɛɹ dʒɹaɪ læn hæd bɪn. mɛni pɑɹts ə ðə wɝld wɝ kəmplitli dɪpɑpjəleɪɾɪd, ən ðə sɝvaɪvɝz wɝ skæɾɝd laɪk dʌst ɑn ðə wɪnd. ðɪs dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ɪz ɹɪmɛmbɝɾ ɪn stɔɹiz, lɛdʒənz ən hɪstɝi əz ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. si ɔlsoʊ hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz, ðə.

Breaking of the World, the: When Lews Therin Telamon and the Hundred Companions resealed the Dark One's prison, the counterstroke tainted saidin. Eventually every male Aes Sedai went horribly insane. In their madness these men, who could wield the One Power to a degree now unknown, changed the face of the earth. They caused great earthquakes, leveled mountain ranges, raised new mountains, lifted dry land where seas had been, made the ocean rush in where dry land had been. Many parts of the world were completely depopulated, and the survivors were scattered like dust on the wind. This destruction is remembered in stories, legends and history as the Breaking of the World. See also Hundred Companions, the.

bɹaɪn, ɡɛɹɪθ (bɹɪn, ɡɑ-ɹɛθ): kæptən-dʒɛnɝəl ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹɾ ɪn ændɝ. ɔlsoʊ sɝvz əz mɔɹɡeɪsəz fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd. hɪz saɪn ɪz θɹi ɡoʊldən stɑɹz, itʃ ə faɪv ɹeɪz.

Bryne, Gareth (BRIHN, GAH-rehth): Captain-General of the Queen's Guard in Andor. Also serves as Morgase's First Prince of the Sword. His sign is three golden stars, each of five rays.

baɪɑɝ, jɹət (baɪ-ɑɹ, dʒɑ-ɹɛt): ən ɔfəsɝ ə ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Byar, Jaret (BY-ahr, JAH-ret): An officer of the Children of the Light.

keɪɛmlɪn (keɪm-lɪn): ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ændɝ.

Caemlyn (KAYM-lihn): The capital city of Andor.

kɛɹhin (kaɪ-ɹi-ɛn): boʊθ ə neɪʃən əlɔŋ ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld ən ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðət neɪʃən. ðə sɪɾi wɑz bɝn ən luɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ði il wɔɹ (naɪnsɛvənsɪksnaɪnsɛvəneɪt ni). ðə saɪn ə kɛɹhin ɪz ə mɛni-ɹeɪd ɡoʊldən sʌn ɹaɪzɪŋ fɹəm ðə bɑɾəm ʌv ə fild ə skaɪ blu.

Cairhien (KEYE-ree-EHN): Both a nation along the Spine of the World and the capital city of that nation. The city was burned and looted during the Aiel War (976978 NE). The sign of Cairhien is a many-rayed golden sun rising from the bottom of a field of sky blue.

kæɹɑi ən kɑldəzɑɹ! (kɑ-ɹeɪaɪ æn kɑl-dɑ-zɑɹ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "fɔɹ ði ɑnɝ ə ðə ɹɛɾ iɡəl!" ði eɪntʃən bæɾəl kɹaɪ ʌv meɪnɛðɝən.

Carai an Caldazar! (cah-REYE ahn cahl-dah-ZAHR): In the Old Tongue, "For the honor of the Red Eagle!" The ancient battle cry of Manetheren.

kæɹɑi ən ɛlɪsɑnd!: ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "fɔɹ ði ɑnɝ ə ðə ɹoʊz ə ðə sʌn!" ðə bæɾəl kɹaɪ ʌv ðə læs kɪŋ ə meɪnɛðɝən.

Carai an Ellisande!: In the Old Tongue, "For the honor of the Rose of the Sun!" The battle cry of the last king of Manetheren.

kɔθən, meɪtʃɹim (mæt) (kɔ-θɑn, mæt-ɹɪm): ə jʌŋ fɑɹmɝ fɹəm ðə tu ɹɪvɝz.

Cauthon, Matrim (Mat) (CAW-thon, MAT-rihm): A young farmer from the Two Rivers.

tʃænəl: (wʌn) (vɝb) tə kəntʃɹoʊl ðə floʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ. (tu) (naʊn) ði ækt ə kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ ðə floʊ ʌv ðə wʌn paʊɝ.

channel: (1) (verb) To control the flow of the One Power. (2) (noun) The act of controlling the flow of the One Power.

tʃɛɝɪn, dʒaɪn (tʃɑ-ɹɪn, dʒeɪ-ɪn): si fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ, dʒaɪn.

Charin, Jain (CHAH-rihn, JAY-ihn): See Farstrider, Jain.

tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt: ə səsaɪəɾi hoʊldɪŋ stʃɹɪkt əsɛɾɪk bɪlifs, dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə ðə dɪfiɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ʌv ɔl dɑɹkfɹɛnz. faʊndəd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz baɪ lɑthɛɹ mæntəlɝ (loʊ-θheɪɹ mæn-ti-lɑɹ) tə pɹɑsələtaɪz əɡɛnst ɪnkɹisɪŋ nʌmbɝz ə dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ðeɪ ɪvɑlv dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ɪndə ə kəmplitli mɪlətɛɹi ɔɹɡənəzeɪʃən, ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɪdʒəɾ ɪn ðɛɹ bɪlifs ən kəmplitli sɝɾən ðəɾ oʊnli ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ən ðə ɹaɪt. ðeɪ heɪɾ ɛɛs sədaɪ, kənsɪɾɝɪŋ ðɛm, ən ɛni hu səpɔɹɾ əɹ bɪfɹɛn ðɛm, dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ðeɪ ɑɹ noʊn dɪspɛɹɪdʒɪŋli əz waɪtkloʊks; ðɛɹ saɪn ɪz ə ɡoʊldən sʌnbɝst ɑn ə fild ʌv waɪt.

Children of the Light: A society holding strict ascetic beliefs, dedicated to the defeat of the Dark One and the destruction of all Darkfriends. Founded during the War of the Hundred Years by Lothair Mantelar (LOH-thayr MAHN-tee-LAHR) to proselytize against increasing numbers of Darkfriends, they evolved during the war into a completely military organization, extremely rigid in their beliefs and completely certain that only they know the truth and the right. They hate Aes Sedai, considering them, and any who support or befriend them, Darkfriends. They are known disparagingly as Whitecloaks; their sign is a golden sunburst on a field of white.

kʌvənən ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz: ə junjən fɔɹmd ɪn ðə sɛntʃɝiz æftɝ ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld (sɝkə tuhʌnʒɹəd æb). dɛɾəkeɪtəd tə ðə dɪfiɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn. bɹoʊkən əpɑɹt baɪ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz.

Covenant of the Ten Nations: A union formed in the centuries after the Breaking of the World (circa 200 AB). Dedicated to the defeat of the Dark One. Broken apart by the Trolloc Wars.

kwəndɪlɝ (kweɪn-dɛ-jɑɹ): si hɑɹtstoʊn.

cuendillar (CWAIN-deh-yar): See heartstone.

dəmədʒɹd, lɔɹd ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd (dæm-oʊ-dʒɹɛd, ɡɑ-lɑd-ɛ-dʒɹaɪd): oʊnli sʌn ə tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl dəmədʒɹɾ ən tɪɡɹeɪn; hæf-bɹʌðɝ tə ɪleɪn ən ɡɔɪn. hɪz saɪn ɪz ə wɪŋ sɪlvɝ sɔɹd, pɔɪnt-daʊn.

Damodred, Lord Galadedrid (DAHM-oh-drehd, gah-LAHD-eh-drihd): Only son of Taringail Damodred and Tigraine; half-brother to Elayne and Gawyn. His sign is a winged silver sword, point-down.

dəmədʒɹd, pɹɪns tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl (dæm-oʊ-dʒɹɛd, tɑ-ɹɪn-ɡeɪl): eɪ ɹɔɪəl pɹɪns ə kɛɹhin, hi mɛɹid tɪɡɹeɪn ən fɑðɝd ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd. wən tɪɡɹeɪn dɪsəpɪɹɾ ən wɑz dɪklɛɹd dɛd, hi mɛɹid mɔɹɡeɪs ən fɑðɝɾ ɪleɪn ən ɡɔɪn. hi daɪɾ ɪn ə hʌntɪŋ æksəɾənt. hɪz saɪn wɑz ə ɡoʊldən, dʌbəl-bɪɾɪd bæɾəl æks.

Damodred, Prince Taringail (DAHM-oh-drehd, TAH-rihn-gail): A Royal Prince of Cairhien, he married Tigraine and fathered Galadedrid. When Tigraine disappeared and was declared dead, he married Morgase and fathered Elayne and Gawyn. He died in a hunting accident. His sign was a golden, double-bitted battle axe.

dɑɹk wʌn: moʊs kɑmən neɪm, juzd ɪn ɛvɹi lænd, fəɹ ʃeɪtɑn: ðə sɔɹs ʌv ivəl, æntɪθəsəs ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝ. ɪmpɹɪzən baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ət ðə moʊmən ə kɹieɪʃən ɪn ə pɹɪzən ət ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl; ən ətɛmp tə fɹi hɪm fɹəm ðət pɹɪzən bɹɔɾ əbaʊt ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ, ðə teɪntɪŋ ə seɪɾɪn, ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ən ði ɛn ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz.

Dark One: Most common name, used in every land, for Shai'tan: the source of evil, antithesis of the Creator. Imprisoned by the Creator at the moment of Creation in a prison at Shayol Ghul; an attempt to free him from that prison brought about the War of the Shadow, the tainting of saidin, the Breaking of the World, and the end of the Age of Legends.

dɑɹk wʌn, neɪmɪŋ ðə: seɪɪŋ ðə tʃɹu neɪm ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn (ʃeɪtɑn) dʒɹɔz ɪz ətɛnʃən, ɪnɛvəɾəbli bɹɪŋɪŋ ɪl fɔɹtʃən ət bɛst, dɪzæstɝ ət wɝst. fəɹ ðət ɹizən mɛni jufəmɪzəmz ɑɹ juzd, əmʌŋ əm ðə dɑɹk wʌn, fɑðɝ ə laɪz, saɪtblɪndɝ, lɔɹɾ ə ðə ɡɹeɪv, ʃɛpɝɾ ə ðə naɪt, hɑɹtsbeɪn, hɑɹtfæŋ, ɡɹæsbɝnɝ, ən lif blaɪɾɝ. sʌmwʌn u simz tə bi ɪnvaɪɾɪŋ ɪl fɔɹtʃən ɪz ɔfən sɛd tə bi "neɪmɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn."

Dark One, naming the: Saying the true name of the Dark One (Shai'tan) draws his attention, inevitably bringing ill fortune at best, disaster at worst. For that reason many euphemisms are used, among them the Dark One, Father of Lies, Sightblinder, Lord of the Grave, Shepherd of the Night, Heartsbane, Heartfang, Grassburner, and Leaf blighter. Someone who seems to be inviting ill fortune is often said to be "naming the Dark One."

dɑɹkfɹɛnz: ðoʊz u fɑloʊ ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən bɪliv ðəl ɡeɪn ɡɹeɪt paʊɝ ən ɹɪwɔɹdz wən hiz fɹid fɹəm ɪz pɹɪzən.

Darkfriends: Those who follow the Dark One and believe they will gain great power and rewards when he is freed from his prison.

dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ: taɪɾəl ə ði ɛɹ tə ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ. ði ɛldəs dɔɾɝ ə ðə kwin səksidz əɹ mʌðɝ ɑn ðə θɹoʊn. wɪθaʊɾ ə sɝvaɪvɪŋ dɔɾɝ, ðə θɹoʊn ɡoʊz tə ðə nɪɹəs fimeɪl blʌd-ɹileɪʃən ə ðə kwin.

Daughter-heir: Title of the heir to the throne of Andor. The eldest daughter of the Queen succeeds her mother on the throne. Without a surviving daughter, the throne goes to the nearest female blood-relation of the Queen.

dɑvɑl, deɪmən (dɑ-voʊl, dɪaɪ-moʊn): si tʃɹɑləks.

Dha'vol, Dhai'mon (DAH-vohl, DEYE-mon): See Trollocs.

jɛvɪk ɹ (jɛ-vɪk kɛ-ʃɑɹ): ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk tʌŋ, "ðə daɪɪŋ ɡɹaʊnd." ðə tʃɹɑlɑk neɪm fəɹ ði il weɪst.

Djevik K'Shar (DJEH-vihk KEH-SHAHR): In the Trolloc tongue, "The Dying Ground." The Trolloc name for the Aiel Waste.

doʊmən, beɪl (doʊ-moʊn, beɪl): ðə kæptən ə ðə spɹeɪ.

Domon, Bayle (DOH-mon, BAIL): The captain of the Spray.

dʒɹæɡən, ðə: ðə neɪm baɪ wɪtʃ luz θɝɪn tɛləmən wɑz noʊn dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. ɪn ðə mædnəs wɪtʃ oʊvɝtʊk ɔl meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, luz θɝɪn kɪld ɛvɹi lɪvɪŋ pɝsən u kæɹiɾ ɛni ʌv ɪz blʌd, əz wɛl əz ɛvɹiwʌn i lʌvd, ðʌs ɝnɪŋ ðə neɪm kɪnsleɪɝ. ə seɪɪŋ ɪz naʊ juzd, "teɪkən baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən," əɹ "pəzɛst ə ðə dʒɹæɡən," tə ɪndəkeɪt ðət sʌmwʌn ɪz ɛndeɪnʒɝɪŋ ðoʊz ɝaʊn ɪm əɹ θɹɛɾənɪŋ ðɛm, ɪspɛʃli ɪf wɪθaʊt kɑz. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Dragon, the: The name by which Lews Therin Telamon was known during the War of the Shadow. In the madness which overtook all male Aes Sedai, Lews Therin killed every living person who carried any of his blood, as well as everyone he loved, thus earning the name Kinslayer. A saying is now used, "taken by the Dragon," or "possessed of the Dragon," to indicate that someone is endangering those around him or threatening them, especially if without cause. See also Dragon Reborn.

dʒɹæɡən, fɔls: əkeɪʒənəli mɛn kleɪm tə bi ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn, ən səmtaɪmz wʌn ə ðɛm ɡeɪnz fɑloʊɪŋ ɪnʌf tə ɹikwaɪɝ ən ɑɹmi tə pʊɾ ɪt daʊn. səm əv bɪɡʌn wɔɹz ðəɾ ɪnvɑlv mɛni neɪʃənz. oʊvɝ ðə sɛntʃɝiz moʊst əv bɪn mɛn əneɪbəl tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, bʌɾ ə fju kʊd. ɔl, haʊɛvɝ, iðɝ dɪsəpɪɹd, əɹ wɝ kæptʃɝɾ əɹ kɪld, wɪθaʊt fʊlfɪlɪŋ ɛni ʌv ðə pɹɑfəsiz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə ɹibɝθ ə ðə dʒɹæɡən. ðiz mɛn ɑɹ kɔl fɔls dʒɹæɡənz. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn.

Dragon, false: Occasionally men claim to be the Dragon Reborn, and sometimes one of them gains following enough to require an army to put it down. Some have begun wars that involved many nations. Over the centuries most have been men unable to channel the One Power, but a few could. All, however, either disappeared, or were captured or killed, without fulfilling any of the Prophecies concerning the Rebirth of the Dragon. These men are called false Dragons. See also Dragon Reborn.

dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn: əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə pɹɑfəsi ən lɛdʒən ðə dʒɹæɡən wɪl bi bɔɹn əɡɛn ət mænkaɪnz ɡɹeɪɾəst aʊɝ ə nid tə seɪv ðə wɝld. ðɪs ɪz nɑt sʌmθɪŋ pipəl lʊk fɔɹwɝd tə, boʊθ kəz ðə pɹɑfəsiz seɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn wɪl bɹɪŋ ənu bɹeɪkɪŋ tə ðə wɝld, ən kəz luz θɝɪn kɪnsleɪɝ, ðə dʒɹæɡən, ɪz ə neɪm tə meɪk mɛn ʃʌɾɝ, ivən mɔɹ ðən θɹi θaʊzən jɪɹz æftɝ ɪz dɛθ. si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən, ðə; dʒɹæɡən, fɔls.

Dragon Reborn: According to prophecy and legend the Dragon will be born again at mankind's greatest hour of need to save the world. This is not something people look forward to, both because the prophecies say the Dragon Reborn will bring anew Breaking to the world, and because Lews Therin Kinslayer, the Dragon, is a name to make men shudder, even more than three thousand years after his death. See also Dragon, the; Dragon, false.

dʒɹæɡənz fæŋ, ðə: ə staɪlaɪz mɑɹk, juʒəwəli blæk, ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə tɪɹdʒɹɑp bælənst ɑn ɪts pɔɪnt. skɹɔld ɑn ə dɔɹ əɹ ə haʊs, ɪts ən ækjəzeɪʃən ʌv ivəl əɡɛns ðə pipəl ɪnsaɪd.

Dragon's Fang, the: A stylized mark, usually black, in the shape of a teardrop balanced on its point. Scrawled on a door or a house, it is an accusation of evil against the people inside.

dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz: ðoʊz mɛn ən wɪmən hu, eɪbəl tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə ʃædoʊ dʊɹɪŋ ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz, æktɪŋ əz kəmændɝz ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk fɔɹsɪz.

Dreadlords: Those men and women who, able to channel the One Power, went over to the Shadow during the Trolloc Wars, acting as commanders of the Trolloc forces.

isɑɹ; kɪŋ isɑɹ ə haʊs toʊdʒiɾə (i-zɑɹ; toʊ-ɡi-tɑ): kɪŋ ə ʃaɪnɝ. hɪz saɪ ɪz ə waɪt hɑɹt, wɪtʃ əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ʃaɪnɝən kʌstəm ɪz hɛld ɔlsoʊ tə bi ə saɪn ə ʃaɪnɝ əlɔŋ wɪð ðə blæk hɔk.

Easar; King Easar of House Togita (EE-zar; toh-GHEE-tah): King of Shienar. His sigh is a white hart, which according to Shienaran custom is held also to be a sign of Shienar along with the Black Hawk.

ɪleɪɾə (ɛ-laɪ-dɑ): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ hu ædvaɪzɪz kwin mɔɹɡeɪs ʌv ændɝ.

Elaida (eh-LY-da): An Aes Sedai who advises Queen Morgase of Andor.

ɪleɪn (i-leɪn): kwin mɔɹɡeɪsəz dɔɾɝ, ðə dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ tə ðə θɹoʊn ʌv ændɝ. hɝ saɪn ɪz ə ɡoʊldən lɪli.

Elayne (ee-LAIN): Queen Morgase's daughter, the Daughter-heir to the Throne of Andor. Her sign is a golden lily.

ɛls; ɛls ɡɹɪnwɛl ( ɡɹɪn-wɛl): ə fɑɹmɝz dɔɾɝ mɛɾ ɑn ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd.

Else; Else Grinwell (EHLZ GRIHN-wehl): A farmer's daughter met on the Caemlyn Road.

aɪləs, ðəsi mɹdʒɹɑl.

Eyeless, the:See Myrddraal.

feɪdsi mɹdʒɹɑl.

Fade:See Myrddraal.

feɪn, pdən (feɪn, pɑd-æn): ə pɛdlɝ u ɝaɪvz ɪn ɛmənz fil dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ wɪntɝnaɪt.

Fain, Padan (FAIN, PAHD-ahn): A peddler who arrives in Emond's Field just before Winternight.

fɑɹ dɛɹiz maɪ (fɑɹ dɑ-ɹaɪz maɪ): lɪɾɝəli, "meɪɾənz ə ðə spɪɹ." wʌn ʌv ə nʌmbɝ ʌv wɔɹiɝ səsaɪəɾiz ə ði il; ənlaɪk ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz, ɪɾ ədmɪts wɪmən ən oʊnli wɪmən. eɪ meɪɾən meɪ nɑt mɛɹi ən ɹɪmeɪn ɪn ðə səsaɪəɾi, nɔɹ meɪ ʃi faɪt waɪl kæɹiɪŋ ə tʃaɪld. ɛni tʃaɪl bɔɹn tə ə meɪɾən ɪz ɡɪvən tə ənʌðɝ wʊmən tə ɹeɪz, ɪn sətʃ ə weɪ ðət noʊ wʌn noʊz u ðə tʃaɪlz mʌðɝ wɑz. ("ju meɪ bɪlɔŋ tə noʊ mæn, nɔɹ meɪ ɛni mæn bɪlɔŋ tə ju, nɔɹ ɛni tʃaɪld. ðə spɪɹ ɪz jəɹ lʌvɝ, jəɹ tʃaɪld, ən jəɹ laɪf.") ðiz tʃɪlʒɹən ɑɹ tʃɹɛʒɝd, fəɹ ɪts pɹɑfəsaɪd ðəɾ ə tʃaɪl bɔɹn ʌv ə meɪɾən wɪl junaɪt ðə klænz ən ɹɪtɝn tə ði il tə ðə ɡɹeɪtnəs ðeɪ nu dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz.

Far Dareis Mai (FAHR DAH-rize MY): Literally, "Maidens of the Spear." One of a number of warrior societies of the Aiel; unlike any of the others, it admits women and only women. A Maiden may not marry and remain in the society, nor may she fight while carrying a child. Any child born to a Maiden is given to another woman to raise, in such a way that no one knows who the child's mother was. ("You may belong to no man, nor may any man belong to you, nor any child. The spear is your lover, your child, and your life.") These children are treasured, for it is prophesied that a child born of a Maiden will unite the clans and return to the Aiel to the greatness they knew during the Age of Legends.

fɑɹstʃɹaɪɾɝ, dʒaɪn (dʒeɪ-ɪn): ə hɪɹoʊ ʌv ðə nɔɹðɝn lænz u dʒɝnid tə mɛni lænz ən hæd mɛni ædvɛntʃɝz; ði ɔθɝ ə sɛvɹəl bʊks, əz wɛl əz biɪŋ ðə sʌbʒɪkt ə bʊks ən stɔɹiz. hi vænɪʃt ɪn naɪnhʌnʒɹədeɪtiwʌn ni, æftɝ ɹɪtɝnɪŋ fɹəm ə tʃɹɪp ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt wɪtʃ səm seɪ hæd teɪkən ɪm ɔl ðə weɪ tə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl.

Farstrider, Jain (JAY-ihn): A hero of the northern lands who journeyed to many lands and had many adventures; the author of several books, as well as being the subject of books and stories. He vanished in 981 NE, after returning from a trip into the Great Blight which some say had taken him all the way to Shayol Ghul.

fɑðɝ ə laɪzsi dɑɹk wʌn.

Father of Lies:See Dark One.

fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd: taɪɾəl nɔɹməli hɛl baɪ ði ɛldəs bɹʌðɝ ə ðə kwin ʌv ændɝ, hu hæz bɪn tʃɹeɪn sɪns tʃaɪldhʊd tə kəmæn ðə kwinz ɑɹmiz ɪn taɪm ʌv wɔɹ ən tə bi hɝ ædvaɪzɝ ɪn taɪm ə pis. ɪf ðə kwin əz noʊ sɝvaɪvɪŋ bɹʌðɝ, ʃɪl əpɔɪn sʌmwʌn tə ðət taɪɾəl.

First Prince of the Sword: Title normally held by the eldest brother of the Queen of Andor, who has been trained since childhood to command the Queen's armies in time of war and to be her adviser in time of peace. If the Queen has no surviving brother, she will appoint someone to that title.

fɪst: ðə beɪsɪk mɪlətɛɹi junəɾ ə ðə tʃɹɑləks, vɛɹiɪŋ ɪn nʌmbɝ; ɔlweɪz mɔɹ ðən wʌn hʌnʒɹəd, bʌt nɛvɝ mɔɹ ðən tu hʌnʒɹəd. ə fɪst ɪz juʒəwəli, bʌt nɑɾ ɔlweɪz, kəmændəd baɪ ə mɹdʒɹɑl.

fist: The basic military unit of the Trollocs, varying in number; always more than one hundred, but never more than two hundred. A fist is usually, but not always, commanded by a Myrddraal.

faɪv paʊɝz, ðə: ðəɹ ɑɹ θɹɛdz tə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən itʃ pɝsən u kən tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ kən juʒəwəli ɡɹæsp səm θɹɛdz bɛɾɝ ðən ʌðɝz. ðiz θɹɛdz ɑɹ neɪmd əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə ðə sɔɹts ə θɪŋz ðət kən bi dʌn ʌndɝ əm - ɝθ, ɛɹ, faɪɝ, wɔɾɝ, ən spɪɹət - ən ɑɹ kɔl ðə faɪv paʊɝz. ɛni wildɝ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɪl əv ə ɡɹeɪɾɝ dɪɡɹi ʌv stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪð wʌn, əɹ pɑsəbli tu, ʌv ðiz, ən lɛsɝ stʃɹɛŋkθ ɪn ði ʌðɝz. səm fju meɪ hæv ɡɹeɪt stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪð θɹi, bʌt sɪns ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz noʊ wʌn əz hæd ɡɹeɪt stʃɹɛŋkθ wɪð ɔl faɪv. ivən ðən ðɪs wɑz ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɛɹ. ðə dɪɡɹi ʌv stʃɹɛŋkθ kən vɛɹi ɡɹeɪtli bɪtwin ɪndəvɪdʒəwəlz, soʊ ðət səm u kən tʃænəl ɑɹ mʌtʃ stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ʌðɝz. pɝfɔɹmɪŋ sɝɾən æks wɪð ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɹikwaɪɝz əbɪləɾi ɪn wʌn əɹ mɔɹ ə ðə faɪv paʊɝz. fəɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, stɑɹɾɪŋ əɹ kəntʃɹoʊlɪŋ ə faɪɝ ɹikwaɪɝz faɪɝ, ən əfɛktɪŋ ðə wɛðɝ ɹikwaɪɝz ɛɹ ən wɔɾɝ, waɪl hilɪŋ ɹikwaɪɝz wɔɾɝ ən spɪɹət. waɪl spɪɹət wɑz faʊn ikwəli ɪn mɛn ən ɪn wɪmən, ɡɹeɪɾ əbɪləɾi wɪð ɝθ ænslæʃɔɹ faɪɝ wɑz faʊn mʌtʃ mɔɹ ɔfən əmʌŋ mɛn, wɪð wɔɾɝ ænslæʃɔɹ ɛɹ əmʌŋ wɪmən. ðəɹ wɝ ɪksɛpʃənz, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz soʊ ɔfən soʊ ðəɾ ɝθ ən faɪɝ keɪm tə bi ɹəɡɑɹɾəd əz meɪl paʊɝz, ɛɹ ən wɔɾɝ əz fimeɪl. dʒɛnɝəli, noʊ əbɪləɾi ɪz kənsɪɾɝd stʃɹɔŋɝ ðən ɛni ʌðɝ, ðoʊ ðəɹ ɪz ə seɪɪŋ əmʌŋ ɛɛs sədaɪ: "ðɛɹ ɪz noʊ ɹɑk soʊ stʃɹɔŋ ðət wɔɾɝ ən wɪn kænɑt wɛɹ ɪɾ əweɪ, noʊ faɪɝ soʊ fɪɹs ðət wɔɾɝ kænɑt kwɛntʃ ɪɾ əɹ wɪn snʌf ɪɾ aʊt." ɪt ʃəd bi noʊɾəd ðɪs seɪɪŋ keɪm ɪndə jus lɔŋ æftɝ ðə læs meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ wɑz dɛd. ɛni ɪkwɪvələn seɪɪŋ əmʌŋ meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɪz lɔŋ lɔst.

Five Powers, the: There are threads to the One Power, and each person who can channel the One Power can usually grasp some threads better than others. These threads are named according to the sorts of things that can be done under them - Earth, Air, Fire, Water, and Spirit - and are called the Five Powers. Any wielder of the One Power will have a greater degree of strength with one, or possibly two, of these, and lesser strength in the others. Some few may have great strength with three, but since the Age of Legends no one has had great strength with all five. Even then this was extremely rare. The degree of strength can vary greatly between individuals, so that some who can channel are much stronger than others. Performing certain acts with the One Power requires ability in one or more of the Five Powers. For example, starting or controlling a fire requires Fire, and affecting the weather requires Air and Water, while Healing requires Water and Spirit. While Spirit was found equally in men and in women, great ability with Earth and/or Fire was found much more often among men, with Water and/or Air among women. There were exceptions, but it was so often so that Earth and Fire came to be regarded as male Powers, Air and Water as female. Generally, no ability is considered stronger than any other, though there is a saying among Aes Sedai: "There is no rock so strong that water and wind cannot wear it away, no fire so fierce that water cannot quench it or wind snuff it out." It should be noted this saying came into use long after the last male Aes Sedai was dead. Any equivalent saying among male Aes Sedai is long lost.

fleɪm ə tɑɹ vəlɑn: ðə sɪmbəl ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ən ði ɛɛs sədaɪ. ə staɪlaɪzd ɹɛpɝ sɛn tɑ ʃən ʌv ə fleɪm; ə waɪt tɪɹdʒɹɑp wɪð ðə pɔɪn ʌpwɝd.

Flame of Tar Valon: The symbol of Tar Valon and the Aes Sedai. A stylized repre sen ta tion of a flame; a white teardrop with the point upward.

fɔɹseɪkən, ðə: neɪm ɡɪvən tə θɝtin ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ɛɛs sədaɪ ɛvɝ noʊn, hu wɛn oʊvɝ tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ ɪn ɹɪtɝn fəɹ ðə pɹɑməs ʌv ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi. əkɔɹɾɪŋ tə boʊθ lɛdʒən ən fɹæɡməntɛɹi ɹɛkɝdz, ðeɪ wɝ ɪmpɹɪzən əlɔŋ wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn wən ɪz pɹɪzən wɑz ɹisiɾɪd. ðɛɹ neɪmz ɑɹ stɪl juz tə fɹaɪɾən tʃɪlʒɹən.

Forsaken, the: Name given to thirteen of the most powerful Aes Sedai ever known, who went over to the Dark One during the War of the Shadow in return for the promise of immortality. According to both legend and fragmentary records, they were imprisoned along with the Dark One when his prison was reseated. Their names are still used to frighten children.

ɡɑləd (ɡɑ-lɑd): si dəmədʒɹd, lɔɹd ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd.

Galad (gah-LAHD): See Damodred, Lord Galadedrid.

ɡɔɪn (ɡɑ-wɪn): kwin mɔɹɡeɪsəz sʌn, ɪleɪnz bɹʌðɝ, hu wɪl bi fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd wən ɪleɪn əsɛnz ðə θɹoʊn. hɪz saɪn ɪz ə waɪt bɔɹ.

Gawyn (GAH-wihn): Queen Morgase's son, Elayne's brother, who will be First Prince of the Sword when Elayne ascends the throne. His sign is a white boar.

dʒɛntəlɪŋ: ði ækt, pɝfɔɹm baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌv ʃʌɾɪŋ ɔf ə meɪl u kən tʃænəl fɹəm ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ðɪs ɪz nɛsəsɛɹi kəz ɛni mæn u lɝnz tə tʃænəl wɪl ɡoʊ ɪnseɪn fɹəm ðə teɪn əpɑn seɪɾɪn ən wɪl ɔlmoʊst sɝɾənli də hɔɹəbəl θɪŋz wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn ɪz mædnəs. ə mæn u hæz bɪn dʒɛntəl kən stɪl sɛns ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs, bʌɾ i kænɑt tʌtʃ ɪt. wʌtɛvɝ mædnəs əz kʌm bɪfɔɹ dʒɛntəlɪŋ ɪz ɝɛstəd baɪ ði ækt ə dʒɛntəlɪŋ, bʌt nɑt kjʊɹd baɪ ɪt, ən ɪf ɪts dʌn sun ɪnʌf dɛθ kən bi əvɝɾəd.

gentling: The act, performed by Aes Sedai, of shutting off a male who can channel from the One Power. This is necessary because any man who learns to channel will go insane from the taint upon saidin and will almost certainly do horrible things with the Power in his madness. A man who has been gentled can still sense the True Source, but he cannot touch it. Whatever madness has come before gentling is arrested by the act of gentling, but not cured by it, and if it is done soon enough death can be averted.

ɡlimən: ə tʃɹævlɪŋ stɔɹitɛlɝ, mjuzɪʃən, dʒʌɡəlɝ, tʌmblɝ ən ɔl-ɝaʊn ɛntɝteɪnɝ. noʊn baɪ ðɛɹ tʃɹeɪdmɑɹk kloʊks ə mɛni-kʌlɝd pætʃəz, ðeɪ pɝfɔɹm meɪnli ɪn ðə vɪlədʒəz ən smɔlɝ taʊnz, sɪns lɑɹdʒɝ taʊnz ən sɪɾiz əv ʌðɝ ɛntɝteɪnməns əveɪləbəl.

gleeman: A traveling storyteller, musician, juggler, tumbler and all-around entertainer. Known by their trademark cloaks of many-colored patches, they perform mainly in the villages and smaller towns, since larger towns and cities have other entertainments available.

ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, ðə: ə ɹidʒən ɪn ðə fɑɹ nɔɹθ, ɪntaɪɝli kɝʌptɪd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌn. ə hɔn ə tʃɹɑləks, mɹdʒɹɑl, ən ʌðɝ kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn.

Great Blight, the: A region in the far north, entirely corrupted by the Dark One. A haunt of Trollocs, Myrddraal, and other creatures of the Dark One.

ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn, ðə: ə saɪkəl ə stɔɹiz kənsɝnɪŋ ðə lɛdʒəndɛɹi sɝtʃ fəɹ ðə hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ, ɪn ðə jɪɹz bɪtwin ði ɛn ə ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz ən ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. ɪf toʊld ɪn ðɛɹ ɪntaɪɝɾi, ðə saɪkəl wəd teɪk mɛni deɪz.

Great Hunt of the Horn, the: A cycle of stories concerning the legendary search for the Horn of Valere, in the years between the end of the Trolloc Wars and the beginning of the War of the Hundred Years. If told in their entirety, the cycle would take many days.

ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk: ðə neɪm baɪ wɪtʃ dɑɹkfɹɛnz ɹəfɝ tə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kleɪmɪŋ ðət tə juz ɪz tʃɹu neɪm wəd bi blæsfəməs.

Great Lord of the Dark: The name by which Darkfriends refer to the Dark One, claiming that to use his true name would be blasphemous.

ɡɹeɪt pæɾɝn: ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ðə pæɾɝnz ə ði eɪdʒəz ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪt pæɾɝn, wɪtʃ ɪz ðə hoʊl ʌv ɛɡzɪstəns ən ɹiæləɾi, pæst, pɹɛzən ən fjutʃɝ. ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz ðə leɪs ʌv eɪdʒəz. si ɔlsoʊ pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ; wil ə taɪm.

Great Pattern: The Wheel of Time weaves the Patterns of the Ages into the Great Pattern, which is the whole of existence and reality, past, present and future. Also known as the Lace of Ages. See also Pattern of an Age; Wheel of Time.

ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt: ə sɪmbəl fəɹ taɪm ən ɪtɝnəɾi, eɪntʃən bɪfɔɹ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz bɪɡæn, kənsɪstɪŋ ʌv ə sɝpən iɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl.

Great Serpent: A symbol for time and eternity, ancient before the Age of Legends began, consisting of a serpent eating its own tail.

hæfmənsi mɹdʒɹɑl.

Halfman:See Myrddraal.

hɔkwɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ: ə lɛdʒəndɛɹi kɪŋ u junaɪɾəd ɔl ðə lænz wɛst ə ðə spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, əz wɛl əz səm lænz bɪɑn ði il weɪst. hi ivən sɛn ɑɹmiz əkɹɔs ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən, bʌɾ ɔl kɑntækt wɪð ðiz wɑz lɔst əɾ ɪz dɛθ, wɪtʃ sɛɾ ɔf ðə wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz. hɪz saɪn wɑz ə ɡoʊldən hɔk ɪn flaɪt. si ɔlsoʊ wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz.

Hawkwing, Artur: A legendary king who united all the lands west of the Spine of the World, as well as some lands beyond the Aiel Waste. He even sent armies across the Aryth Ocean, but all contact with these was lost at his death, which set off the War of the Hundred Years. His sign was a golden hawk in flight. See also War of the Hundred Years.

hɑɹtfæŋ; hɑɹtsbeɪnsi dɑɹk wʌn.

Heartfang; Heartsbane:See Dark One.

hɑɹtstoʊn: ən ɪndəstʃɹʌktɪbəl sʌbstəns kɹieɪɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɛni noʊn fɔɹs juzd ɪn ən ətɛmp tə bɹeɪk ɪts əbzɔɹbd, meɪkɪŋ hɑɹtstoʊn stʃɹɔŋɝ.

heartstone: An indestructible substance created during the Age of Legends. Any known force used in an attempt to break it is absorbed, making heartstone stronger.

hɔɹn ə vəlɪɹ (vɑ-lɪɹ): ðə lɛdʒəndɛɹi əbdʒɛkt ə ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn ə ðə hɔɹn. ðə hɔɹn səpoʊzədli kən kɔl bæk dɛd hɪɹoʊz fɹəm ðə ɡɹeɪv tə faɪɾ əɡɛns ðə ʃædoʊ.

Horn of Valere (vah-LEER): The legendary object of the Great Hunt of the Horn. The Horn supposedly can call back dead heroes from the grave to fight against the Shadow.

hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz, ðə: wʌn hʌnʒɹəd meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, əmʌŋ ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, hu, lɛd baɪ luz θɝɪn tɛləmən, lɔntʃt ðə faɪnəl stʃɹoʊk ðəɾ ɛndəd ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ baɪ silɪŋ ðə dɑɹk wʌn bæk ɪndə hɪz pɹɪzən. ðə dɑɹk wʌnz kaʊntɝstʃɹoʊk teɪntɪd seɪɾɪn; ðə hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz wɛn mæɾ ən bɪɡæn ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld.

Hundred Companions, the: One hundred male Aes Sedai, among the most powerful of the Age of Legends, who, led by Lews Therin Telamon, launched the final stroke that ended the War of the Shadow by sealing the Dark One back into his prison. The Dark One's counterstroke tainted saidin; the Hundred Companions went mad and began the Breaking of the World.

ɪljən (ɪl-li-æn): ə ɡɹeɪt pɔɹɾ ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðə neɪʃən ə ðə seɪm neɪm. ðə saɪn ʌv ɪljən ɪz naɪn ɡoʊldən biz ɑn ə fild ə dɑɹk ɡɹin.

Illian (IHL-lee-ahn): A great port on the Sea of Storms, capital city of the nation of the same name. The sign of Illian is nine golden bees on a field of dark green.

ɪŋtʃɹ; lɔɹɾ ɪŋtʃɹ ə haʊs ʃɪnoʊwə (ɪŋ-tɑɹ; ʃi-noʊ-wɑ): eɪ ʃaɪnɝən wɔɹiɝ mɛɾ ət fæl dæɹə.

Ingtar; Lord Ingtar of House Shinowa (IHNG-tahr; shih-NOH-wah): A Shienaran warrior met at Fal Dara.

kændɝ (kæn-dɔɹ): wʌn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ðə saɪn ə kændɝ ɪz ə ɹɪɹɪŋ ɹɛd hɔɹs ɑn ə fild ə peɪl ɡɹin.

Kandor (KANH-dohr): One of the Borderlands. The sign of Kandor is a rearing red horse on a field of pale green.

kɪntʃ, haɪəm (, haɪ-ɑm): ə fɑɹmɝ mɛɾ ɑn ðə keɪɛmlɪn ɹoʊd.

Kinch, Hyam (KIHNCH, HY-ahm): A farmer met on the Caemlyn Road.

koʊbəl (koʊ-bɑl): si tʃɹɑləks.

Ko'bal (KOH-bahl): See Trollocs.

leɪs ʌv eɪdʒəzsi ɡɹeɪt pæɾɝn, ðə.

Lace of Ages:See Great Pattern, the.

læn; ælən mænʒɹɑɡɔɹən (ɑl-læn mæn-dʒɹæɡ-ɔɹ-æn): ə wɔɹiɝ fɹəm ðə nɔɹθ; mɔɪɹeɪnz kəmpænjən.

Lan; al'Lan Mandragoran (AHL-LAN man-DRAG-or-an): A warrior from the north; Moiraine's companion.

lifblaɪɾɝsi dɑɹk wʌn.

Leafblighter:See Dark One.

liɡ: ə mɛʒɝ ə dɪstəns ikwəl tə fɔɹ maɪlz. si ɔlsoʊ maɪl.

league: A measure of distance equal to four miles. See also mile.

luk; lɔɹd luk ə haʊs mæntʃɹ (luk; mæn-ti-ɑɹ): tɪɡɹeɪnz bɹʌðɝ, hu wʊɾə bɪn əɹ fɝs pɹɪns ə ðə sɔɹd wən ʃi əsɛndəd ðə θɹoʊn. hɪz dɪsəpɪɹəns ɪn ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪɾ ɪz bɪliv tə bi ɪn səm weɪ kənɛktəd tə tɪɡɹeɪnz leɪɾɝ dɪsəpɪɹəns. hɪz saɪn wɑz ən eɪkɔɹn.

Luc; Lord Luc of House Mantear (LUKE; MAN-tee-ahr): Tigraine's brother, who would have been her First Prince of the Sword when she ascended the throne. His disappearance in the Great Blight is believed to be in some way connected to Tigraine's later disappearance. His sign was an acorn.

lɝk (): si mɹdʒɹɑl.

Lurk (LUHRK): See Myrddraal.

mækɛɹə, ɛlaɪəs (mɑ-tʃɪɹ-ɑ, i-laɪ-ɑz): ə mæn ɪnkaʊntɝd baɪ pɛɹɪn ən ɛɡwin ɪn ðə fɔɹəst.

Machera, Elyas (mah-CHEER-ah, ee-LY-ahs): A man encountered by Perrin and Egwene in the forest.

mɑɾi (mɑ-di): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "sikɝ." taɪɾəl ə ðə liɾɝ ʌv ə tuætɑn kɑɹvən.

Mahdi (MAH-dee): In the Old Tongue, "Seeker." Title of the leader of a Tuatha'an carvan.

mɔlkiɝ (mɑl-kiɪɹ): ə neɪʃən, wʌns wʌn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz, naʊ kənsum baɪ ðə blaɪt. ðə saɪn ə mɔlkiɝ wɑz ə ɡoʊldən kɹeɪn ɪn flaɪt.

Malkier (mahl-KEER): A nation, once one of the Borderlands, now consumed by the Blight. The sign of Malkier was a golden crane in flight.

mændɑɹb (mæn-dɑɹb): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "bleɪd."

Mandarb (MAHN-dahrb): In the Old Tongue, "Blade."

meɪnɛðɝən (mæn--ɛɹ-ɛn): wʌn ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz ðət meɪd ðə sɛkən kʌvənənt, ən ɔlsoʊ ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv ðət neɪʃən. boʊθ sɪɾi ən neɪʃən wɝ ʌɾɝli dɪstʃɹɔɪɾ ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz.

Manetheren (mahn-EHTH-ehr-ehn): One of the Ten Nations that made the Second Covenant, and also the capital city of that nation. Both city and nation were utterly destroyed in the Trolloc Wars.

mɛɹədɑn (mɑ-ɹɑ-dɑn): ðə kæpəɾəl sɪɾi ʌv sɑldɑiə.

Maradon (MAH-rah-don): The capital city of Saldaea.

mɛɹɪlɪn, tɑm (mɛɹ-ɹɪ-lɪn, tɑm): ə ɡlimən u kʌmz tə ɛmənz fil tə pɝfɔɹm ət bɛl taɪn.

Merrilin, Thom (MER-rih-lihn, TOM): A gleeman who comes to Emond's Field to perform at Bel Tine.

maɪl: ə mɛʒɝ ə dɪstəns ikwəl tə wʌn θaʊzən spænz. fɔɹ maɪlz meɪk wʌn liɡ. si ɔlsoʊ spæn.

mile: A measure of distance equal to one thousand spans. Four miles make one league. See also span.

mɪn (mɪn): ə jʌŋ wʊmən ɪnkaʊntɝɾ ət ðə stæɡ ən laɪən ɪn bɛɹlən.

Min (MIN): A young woman encountered at the Stag and Lion in Baerlon.

mɔɪɹeɪn (mwɑ-ɹeɪn): ə vɪzəɾɝ tə ɛmənz fild u ɝaɪvz dʒʌs bɪfɔɹ wɪntɝnaɪt.

Moiraine (mwah-RAIN): A visitor to Emond's Field who arrives just before Winternight.

mɔɹɡeɪs (mʊɹ-ɡeɪz): baɪ ðə ɡɹeɪs ə ðə laɪt, kwin ʌv ændɝ, haɪ siɾ ə haʊs tʃɹəkənd (-ɑnd). hɝ saɪn ɪz θɹi ɡoʊldən kiz. ðə saɪn ə haʊs tʃɹəkən ɪz ə sɪlvɝ kistoʊn.

Morgase (moor-GAYZ): By the Grace of the Light, Queen of Andor, High Seat of House Trakand (TRAHK-ahnd). Her sign is three golden keys. The sign of House Trakand is a silver keystone.

mɹdʒɹɑl (-dʒɹɑl): kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kəmændɝz ə ðə tʃɹɑləks. twɪstəɾ ɔfspɹɪŋ ə tʃɹɑləks ɪn wɪtʃ ðə hjumən stɑk juz tə kɹieɪt ðə tʃɹɑləks əz ɹisɝfəst, bʌt teɪntɪd baɪ ði ivəl ðət meɪd ðə tʃɹɑləks. fɪzɪkəli ðeɪ ɑɹ laɪk mɛn ɪksɛp ðət ðeɪv noʊ aɪz, bʌt kən si laɪk iɡəlz ɪn laɪɾ əɹ dɑɹk. ðeɪv sɝɾən paʊɝz stɛmɪŋ fɹəm ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ɪnkluɾɪŋ ði əbɪləɾi tə kɑz pɛɹəlaɪzɪŋ fɪɹ wɪð ə lʊk ən ði əbɪləɾi tə vænɪʃ wɛɹɛvɝ ðəɹ ɑɹ ʃædoʊz. wʌn ə ðɛɹ fju noʊn wiknəsəz ɪz ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ ɹɪlʌktən tə kɹɔs ɹʌnɪŋ wɔɾɝ. ɪn dɪfɹən lænz ðeɪ ɑɹ noʊn baɪ mɛni neɪmz, əmʌŋ əm hæfmən, ði aɪləs, ʃæɾoʊmən, lɝk, ən feɪd.

Myrddraal (MUHRD-draal): Creatures of the Dark One, commanders of the Trollocs. Twisted offspring of Trollocs in which the human stock used to create the Trollocs has resurfaced, but tainted by the evil that made the Trollocs. Physically they are like men except that they have no eyes, but can see like eagles in light or dark. They have certain powers stemming from the Dark One, including the ability to cause paralyzing fear with a look and the ability to vanish wherever there are shadows. One of their few known weaknesses is that they are reluctant to cross running water. In different lands they are known by many names, among them Halfmen, the Eyeless, Shadowmen, Lurk, and Fade.

wʌn paʊɝ, ðə: ðə paʊɝ dʒɹɔn fɹəm ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs. ðə væs mədʒɔɹəɾi ʌv pipəl ɑɹ kəmplitli əneɪbəl tə lɝn tə tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ. ə vɛɹi smɔl nʌmbɝ kən bi tɔt tə tʃænəl, ən ən ivən taɪniɝ nʌmbɝ əv ði əbɪləɾi ɪnbɔɹn. fəɹ ðiz fju ðəɹ ɪz noʊ nid tə bi tɔt; ðəl tʌtʃ ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ən tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ wɛðɝ ðeɪ wɑnə əɹ nɑt, pɝhæps wɪθaʊɾ ivən ɹilaɪzɪŋ wʌt ðeɪ ɑɹ duɪŋ. ðɪs ɪnbɔɹn əbɪləɾi juʒəwəli mænəfɛsts ɪtsɛlf ɪn leɪɾ æɾəlɛsəns əɹ ɝli ədʌlthʊd. ɪf kəntʃɹoʊl ɪz nɑt tɔt, əɹ sɛlf-lɝnd (ɪkstʃɹimli dɪfəkəlt, wɪð ə səksɛs ɹeɪɾ ʌv oʊnli wʌn ɪn fɔɹ), dɛθ ɪz sɝɾən. sɪns ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, noʊ mæn əz bɪn eɪbəl tə tʃænəl ðə paʊɝ wɪθaʊɾ ɪvɛntʃəwəli ɡoʊɪŋ kəmplitli, hɔɹəbli mæd; ən ðɛn, ivən ɪf hiz lɝn səm kəntʃɹoʊl, daɪɪŋ fɹəm ə weɪstɪŋ sɪknəs wɪtʃ kɑzəz ðə sʌfɝɝ tə ɹɑɾ əlaɪv - ə sɪknəs kɑzd, əz ɪz ðə mædnəs, baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz teɪn ɑn seɪɾɪn. fəɹ ə wʊmən ðə dɛθ ðət kʌmz wɪθaʊt kəntʃɹoʊl ə ðə paʊɝ ɪz lɛs hɔɹəbəl, bʌɾ ɪts dɛθ dʒʌs ðə seɪm. ɛɛs sədaɪ sɝtʃ fəɹ ɡɝlz wɪð ði ɪnbɔɹn əbɪləɾi əz mʌtʃ tə seɪv ðɛɹ laɪvz əz tə ɪnkɹis ɛɛs sədaɪ nʌmbɝz, ən fəɹ mɛn wɪð ɪɾ ɪn ɔɹɾɝ tə stɑp ðə tɛɹəbəl θɪŋz ðeɪ ɪnɛvəɾəbli də wɪð ðə paʊɝ ɪn ðɛɹ mædnəs. si ɔlsoʊ tʃænəl; taɪm ə mædnəs; tʃɹu sɔɹs.

One Power, the: The power drawn from the True Source. The vast majority of people are completely unable to learn to channel the One Power. A very small number can be taught to channel, and an even tinier number have the ability inborn. For these few there is no need to be taught; they will touch the True Source and channel the Power whether they want to or not, perhaps without even realizing what they are doing. This inborn ability usually manifests itself in late adolescence or early adulthood. If control is not taught, or self-learned (extremely difficult, with a success rate of only one in four), death is certain. Since the time of Madness, no man has been able to channel the Power without eventually going completely, horribly mad; and then, even if he has learned some control, dying from a wasting sickness which causes the sufferer to rot alive - a sickness caused, as is the madness, by the Dark One's taint on saidin. For a woman the death that comes without control of the Power is less horrible, but it is death just the same. Aes Sedai search for girls with the inborn ability as much to save their lives as to increase Aes Sedai numbers, and for men with it in order to stop the terrible things they inevitably do with the Power in their madness. See also channel; Time of Madness; True Source.

pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ: ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ðə θɹɛdz ə hjumən lɪvz ɪndə ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ, wɪtʃ fɔɹmz ðə sʌbstəns ə ɹiæləɾi fəɹ ðəɾ eɪdʒ; ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz eɪdʒ leɪs. si ɔlsoʊ tɑvɝən.

Pattern of an Age: The Wheel of Time weaves the threads of human lives into the Pattern of an Age, which forms the substance of reality for that Age; also known as Age Lace. See also ta'veren.

kwɛstʃənɝz, ðə: ən ɔɹɾɝ wɪðɪn ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt. ðɛɹ əvaʊd pɝpəsəz ɑɹ dɪskʌvɝɪŋ ðə tʃɹuθ ɪn dɪspjəteɪʃənz ən ənkʌvɝɪŋ dɑɹkfɹɛnz. ɪn ðə sɝtʃ fəɹ tʃɹuθ ən ðə laɪt, əz ðeɪ si ɪt, ðeɪ ɑɹ ivən mɔɹ zɛləs ðən ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪɾ əz ə hoʊl. ðɛɹ nɔɹməl mɛθəɾ ʌv ɪnkwaɪɹi ɪz baɪ tɔɹtʃɝ; ðɛɹ nɔɹməl æɾətud ðət ðeɪ noʊ ðə tʃɹuθ ɔlɹɛɾi ən mʌst oʊnli meɪk ðɛɹ vɪktəm kənfɛs tə ɪt. ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɹəfɝ tə ðɛmsɛlvz əz ðə hæn ə ðə laɪt, ən ət taɪmz ækt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ ɪntaɪɝli sɛpɹət fɹəm ðə tʃɪlʒɹən ən ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd, wɪtʃ kəmænz ðə tʃɪlʒɹən. ðə hɛɾ ə ðə kwɛstʃənɝz ɪz ðə haɪ ɪnkwɪzəɾɝ, hu sɪts ɑn ðə kaʊnsəl ə ði ənɔɪntəd.

Questioners, the: An order within the Children of the Light. Their avowed purposes are discovering the truth in disputations and uncovering Darkfriends. In the search for truth and the Light, as they see it, they are even more zealous than the Children of the Light as a whole. Their normal method of inquiry is by torture; their normal attitude that they know the truth already and must only make their victim confess to it. The Questioners refer to themselves as the Hand of the Light, and at times act as if they were entirely separate from the Children and the Council of the Anointed, which commands the Children. The head of the Questioners is the High Inquisitor, who sits on the Council of the Anointed.

ɹɛɾ ədʒɑsi ədʒɑ.

Red Ajah:See Ajah.

sɑŋɡɹil (sɑ-æn-ɡɹi-ɑl): ən ɪkstʃɹimli ɹɛɹ ɑbʒɛkt wɪtʃ əlaʊz ən ɪndəvɪdʒəwəl tə tʃænəl mʌtʃ mɔɹ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ðən wəɾ ʌðɝwaɪz bi pɑsəbəl əɹ seɪf. ə sɑŋɡɹil ɪz laɪk ʌntu, bʌt mʌtʃ, mʌtʃ mɔɹ paʊɝfəl ðæn, ən æŋɡɹil. ɹɛmnəns ə ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz, ðə minz ə ðɛɹ meɪkɪŋ ɪz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ noʊn.

sa'angreal (SAH-ahn-GREE-ahl): An extremely rare object which allows an individual to channel much more of the One Power than would otherwise be possible or safe. A sa'angreal is like unto, but much, much more powerful than, an angreal. Remnants of the Age of Legends, the means of their making is no longer known.

seɪaɪdɑɹ; seɪɾɪn (sɑ-ɪ-dɑɹ; sɑ-ɪ-din): si tʃɹu sɔɹs.

saidar; saidin (sah-ih-DAHR; sah-ih-DEEN): See True Source.

sɑldɑiə (sɑl-deɪ-i-ɑ): wʌn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ðə saɪn ə sɑldɑiə ɪz θɹi sɪlvɝ fɪʃ ɑn ə fild ə dɑɹk blu.

Saldaea (sahl-DAY-ee-ah): One of the Borderlands. The sign of Saldaea is three silver fish on a field of dark blue.

si foʊk: ɪnhæbəɾənts ʌv aɪlənz ɪn ði ɛɹɪθ (ɑ-ɹɪθ) oʊʃən ən ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz, ðeɪ spɛn lɪɾəl taɪm ɑn ðoʊz aɪlənz, lɪvɪŋ moʊst ə ðɛɹ laɪvz ɑn ðɛɹ ʃɪps. moʊst si-bɔɹn tʃɹeɪɾ ɪz kæɹid baɪ ðə si foʊks ʃɪps.

Sea Folk: Inhabitants of islands in the Aryth (AH-rihth) Ocean and the Sea of Storms, they spend little time on those islands, living most of their lives on their ships. Most sea-borne trade is carried by the Sea Folk's ships.

sɛkən kʌvənənsi kʌvənən ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz.

Second Covenant:See Covenant of the Ten Nations.

ʃɑɾɝ lɔɡəθ (ʃɑ-dɑɹ loʊ-ɡɑθ): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "ðə pleɪs wɛɹ ðə ʃædoʊ weɪts." ə sɪɾi əbændən ən ʃʌn sɪns ðə tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz. ɔlsoʊ kɔld "ʃædoʊz weɪɾɪŋ."

Shadar Logoth (SHAH-dahr LOH-goth): In the Old Tongue, "the Place Where the Shadow Waits." A city abandoned and shunned since the Trolloc Wars. Also called "Shadow's Waiting."

ʃæɾoʊmənsi mɹdʒɹɑl.

Shadowman:See Myrddraal.

ʃeɪtɑn (ʃeɪ-ɪ-tæn): si dɑɹk wʌn.

Shai'tan (SHAY-ih-TAN): See Dark One.

ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl (ʃeɪ-əl ɡul): ə maʊntən ɪn ðə blæstəd lænz, ðə saɪɾ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌnz pɹɪzən.

Shayol Ghul (SHAY-ol GHOOL): A mountain in the Blasted Lands, the site of the Dark One's prison.

ʃɛpɝɾ ə ðə naɪtsi dɑɹk wʌn.

Shepherd of the Night:See Dark One.

ʃɛɹiəm (ʃɪɹ-i-ɑm): ən ɛɛs sədaɪ, ʌv ðə blu ədʒɑ.

Sheriam (SHEER-ee-ahm): An Aes Sedai, of the Blue Ajah.

ʃaɪnɝ (ʃaɪ-nɑɹ): wʌn ə ðə bɔɹɾɝlændz. ðə saɪn ə ʃaɪnɝ ɪz ə stupɪŋ blæk hɔk.

Shienar (shy-NAHR): One of the Borderlands. The sign of Shienar is a stooping black hawk.

ʃoʊufə (ʃu-fɑ): ə ɡɑɹmən ə ði il, ə klɔθ, juʒəwəli ðə kʌlɝ ə sæn əɹ ɹɑk, ðət ɹæps ɝaʊn ðə hɛɾ ən nɛk, livɪŋ oʊnli ðə feɪs bɛɹ.

shoufa (SHOO-fah): A garment of the Aiel, a cloth, usually the color of sand or rock, that wraps around the head and neck, leaving only the face bare.

saɪtbɝnɝsi dɑɹk wʌn.

Sightburner:See Dark One.

spæn: ə mɛʒɝ ə dɪstəns ikwəl tə tu peɪsɪz. ə θaʊzən spænz meɪk ə maɪl.

span: A measure of distance equal to two paces. A thousand spans make a mile.

spaɪn ə ðə wɝld, ðə: ə taʊɝɪŋ maʊntən ɹeɪnʒ, wɪð oʊnli ə fju pæsəz, wɪtʃ sɛpɝeɪts ði il weɪs fɹəm ðə lænz tə ðə wɛst.

Spine of the World, the: A towering mountain range, with only a few passes, which separates the Aiel Waste from the lands to the west.

stɛɾɪŋ (stɛd-dɪŋ): ən oʊɡiɝ (oʊhaɪoʊ-ɡɪɹ) hoʊmlænd. mɛni stɛɾɪŋ əv bɪn əbændən sɪns ðə bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld. ðeɪ ɑɹ pɔɹtʃɹeɪɾ ɪn stɔɹi ən lɛdʒən əz heɪvənz, ən wɪð ɹizən. ðeɪ ɑɹ ʃildɪɾ ɪn səm weɪ, noʊ lɔŋɡɝ ʌndɝstʊd, soʊ ðət wɪðɪn əm noʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ kən tʃænəl ðə wʌn paʊɝ, nɔɹ ivən sɛns ðət ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs ɪɡzɪsts. ətɛmps tə wil ðə wʌn paʊɝ fɹəm aʊtsaɪɾ ə stɛɾɪŋ əv noʊ ɪfɛkt ɪnsaɪɾ ə stɛɾɪŋ baʊndɝi. noʊ tʃɹɑlɑk wɪl ɛntɝ ə stɛɾɪŋ ənlɛs dʒɹɪvən, ən ivən ə mɹdʒɹɑl wɪl də soʊ oʊnli ət ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst niɾ ən ðən wɪð ðə ɡɹeɪɾəst ɹɪlʌktəns ən dɪsteɪst. ivən dɑɹkfɹɛnz, ɪf tʃɹuli dɛɾəkeɪtəd, fil ənkʌmftəɹbəl wɪðɪn ə stɛɾɪŋ.

stedding (STEHD-ding): An Ogier (OH-geer) homeland. Many stedding have been abandoned since the Breaking of the World. They are portrayed in story and legend as havens, and with reason. They are shielded in some way, no longer understood, so that within them no Aes Sedai can channel the One Power, nor even sense that the True Source exists. Attempts to wield the One Power from outside a stedding have no effect inside a stedding boundary. No Trolloc will enter a stedding unless driven, and even a Myrddraal will do so only at the greatest need and then with the greatest reluctance and distaste. Even Darkfriends, if truly dedicated, feel uncomfortable within a stedding.

stoʊn ə tɛɹ: ðə fɔɹtʃɹəs ɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðə sɪɾi ʌv tɛɹ. sɛd tə bi ði ɝliəs fɔɹtʃɹəs bɪlt æftɝ ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, ən sɛd baɪ səm tə hæv bɪn bɪl dʊɹɪŋ ðə taɪm ə mædnəs. si ɔlsoʊ tiɹ.

Stone of Tear: The fortress guarding the city of Tear. Said to be the earliest fortress built after the Time of Madness, and said by some to have been built during the Time of Madness. See also Tear.

sʌndeɪ: ə fistdeɪ ən fɛstəvəl ɪn mɪdsʌmɝ, waɪdli sɛləbɹeɪɾəd.

Sunday: A feastday and festival in midsummer, widely celebrated.

təbæk (tɑ-): ə wid, waɪdli kʌltəveɪɾəd. ðə livz ʌv ɪt, wən dʒɹaɪɾ ən kjʊɹd, ɑɹ bɝn ɪn wʊɾən hoʊldɝz kɔl paɪps, ðə fjumz biɪŋ ɪnheɪld.

tabac (tah-BAHK): A weed, widely cultivated. The leaves of it, when dried and cured, are burned in wooden holders called pipes, the fumes being inhaled.

tɑlænvɝ, mɑɹɾɪn (tɑl-æn-vɔɹ, mɑɹ-tin): ɡɑɹdzmæn-lutɛnən ə ðə kwinz ɡɑɹd; mɛɾ ɪn keɪɛmlɪn.

Tallanvor, Martyn (TAHL-ahn-vohr, mahr-TEEN): Guardsman-Lieutenant of the Queen's Guard; met in Caemlyn.

tæmɹəleɪlən (tɑ-mɑɹ-ɑl-aɪ-lɛn): ɪn ði oʊl tʌŋ, "wɛb ə dɛstəni."

ta'maral'ailen (tah-MAHR-ahl-EYE-lehn): In the Old Tongue, "Web of Destiny."

tænɹəl, ɑɹɾɝ pɛndʒɹæɡ (tæn-ɹi-ɑl, ɑɹ-tʃɹ peɪ-ɛn-dʒɹæɡ): si hɔkwɪŋ, ɑɹɾɝ.

Tanreall, Artur Paendrag (tahn-REE-ahl, AHR-tuhr PAY-ehn-DRAG): See Hawkwing, Artur.

tɑɹ vəlɑn (tɑɹ vɑ-lɑn): ə sɪɾi ɑn ən aɪlən ɪn ðə ɹɪvɝ ɛɹɪnɪn. ðə sɛntɝ ʌv ɛɛs sədaɪ paʊɝ, ən loʊkeɪʃən ə ði æmɪɝlɪn sit.

Tar Valon (TAHR VAH-lon): A city on an island in the River Erinin. The center of Aes Sedai power, and location of the Amyrlin Seat.

tɑvɝən (tɑ-vɪɹ-ɛn): ə pɝsən ɝaʊn hum ðə wil ə taɪm wivz ɔl sɝaʊndɪŋ laɪf-θɹɛdz, pɝhæps ɔl laɪf-θɹɛdz, tə fɔɹm ə wɛb ə dɛstəni. si ɔlsoʊ pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ.

ta'veren (tah-VEER-ehn): A person around whom the Wheel of Time weaves all surrounding life-threads, perhaps all life-threads, to form a Web of Destiny. See also Pattern of an Age.

tɛɹ (tɪɹ): ə ɡɹeɪt sipɔɹɾ ɑn ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz. ðə saɪn ə tiɹ ɪz θɹi waɪt kɹɛsəns ɑn ə fild ə ɹɛɾ ən ɡoʊld.

Tear (TEER): A great seaport on the Sea of Storms. The sign of Tear is three white crescents on a field of red and gold.

tɛləmən, luz θɝɪn (tɛl-ɑ-moʊn, luz θɛ-ɹɪn): si ɔlsoʊ dʒɹæɡən, ðə.

Telamon, Lews Therin (TEHL-ah-mon, LOOZ THEH-rihn): See also Dragon, the.

θɑkændɑɹ (θɑ-kɑn-dɑɹ): ən ɪtɝnəli fɑɡ-ʃɹaʊɾɪd væli bɪloʊ ðə sloʊps ə ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl.

Thakan'dar (thah-kahn-DAHR): An eternally fog-shrouded valley below the slopes of Shayol Ghul.

tɪɡɹeɪn (ti-ɡɹeɪn): əz dɔɾɝ-ɛɹ ʌv ændɝ, ʃi mɛɹid tɑɹɪŋɡeɪl dəmədʒɹɾ ən bɔɹ ɪz sʌn ɡɑleɪdɛdʒɹəd. hɝ dɪsəpɪɹəns ɪn naɪnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntitu ni, ʃɔɹtli æftɝ əɹ bɹʌðɝ luk vænɪʃt ɪn ðə blaɪt, lɛd tə ðə stʃɹʌɡəl ɪn ændɝ kɔl ðə səksɛʃən, ən kɑz ði ɪvɛns ɪn kɛɹhin wɪtʃ ɪvɛntʃəwəli bɹɔɾ ɑn ði il wɔɹ. hɝ saɪn wɑz ə wʊmənz hænd ɡɹɪpɪŋ ə θɔɹni ɹoʊz-stɛm wɪð ə waɪt blɑsəm.

Tigraine (tee-GRAIN): As Daughter-heir of Andor, she married Taringail Damodred and bore his son Galadedrid. Her disappearance in 972 NE, shortly after her brother Luc vanished in the Blight, led to the struggle in Andor called the Succession, and caused the events in Cairhien which eventually brought on the Aiel War. Her sign was a woman's hand gripping a thorny rose-stem with a white blossom.

taɪm ə mædnəssi bɹeɪkɪŋ ə ðə wɝld, ðə.

Time of Madness:See Breaking of the World, the.

tɪŋkɝzsi tuætɑn.

Tinkers:See Tuatha'an.

tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəlsi tuætɑn.

Traveling People:See Tuatha'an.

tʃɹɑlɑk wɔɹz: ə sɪɹiz ʌv wɔɹz, bɪɡɪnɪŋ əbaʊt wʌnθaʊzən æb ən læstɪŋ mɔɹ ðən θɹi hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz, dʊɹɪŋ wɪtʃ tʃɹɑlɑk ɑɹmiz ɹævɪdʒ ðə wɝld. ɪvɛntʃəwəli ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ sleɪn əɹ dʒɹɪvən bæk ɪndə ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt, bʌt səm neɪʃənz sis tə ɪɡzɪst, waɪl ʌðɝz wɝ ɔlmoʊs dɪpɑpjəleɪɾɪd. ɔl ɹɛkɝdz ə ðə taɪm ɑɹ fɹæɡməntɛɹi. si ɔlsoʊ kʌvənən ə ðə tɛn neɪʃənz.

Trolloc Wars: A series of wars, beginning about 1000 AB and lasting more than three hundred years, during which Trolloc armies ravaged the world. Eventually the Trollocs were slain or driven back into the Great Blight, but some nations ceased to exist, while others were almost depopulated. All records of the time are fragmentary. See also Covenant of the Ten Nations.

tʃɹɑləks (tʃɹæl-loʊks): kɹitʃɝz ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn, kɹieɪɾəd dʊɹɪŋ ðə wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ. hjudʒ ɪn stætʃɝ, vɪʃəs ɪn ði ɪkstʃɹim, ðeɪ ɑɹ ə twɪstəd blɛn ʌv ænəməl ən hjumən stɑk, ən kɪl fəɹ ðə pjʊɹ plɛʒɝ ə kɪlɪŋ. slaɪ, dəsitfəl ən tʃɹɛtʃɝəs, ðeɪ kən bi tʃɹʌstɪɾ oʊnli baɪ ðoʊz ðeɪ fɪɹ. ðeɪ ɑɹ ɑmnɪvɝəs ən wɪl iɾ ɛni kaɪndə mit, ɪnkluɾɪŋ hjumən flɛʃ ən ðə flɛʃ ʌv ʌðɝ tʃɹɑləks. lɑɹdʒli ʌv hjumən ɔɹədʒən, ðeɪ ɑɹ eɪbəl tə ɪntɝbɹid wɪð hjumənkaɪnd, bʌt ði ɔfspɹɪŋ ɑɹ juʒəwəli stɪlbɔɹn, ən ðoʊz wɪtʃ ɑɹ nɑɾ ɔfən feɪl tə sɝvaɪv. ðeɪ ɑɹ dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə tʃɹaɪb-laɪk bænz, tʃif əmʌŋ əm biɪŋ ði ɑfɹeɪt, ɑlɡhəl, bænʃin, dɑvɑl, deɪmən, dʒɪnən, ɡɑɹɡl, ɡɑblɪn, ɡoʊləm, ɹmlən, koʊbəl, ən ðə nɑmən.

Trollocs (TRAHL-lohks): Creatures of the Dark One, created during the War of the Shadow. Huge in stature, vicious in the extreme, they are a twisted blend of animal and human stock, and kill for the pure pleasure of killing. Sly, deceitful and treacherous, they can be trusted only by those they fear. They are omnivorous and will eat any kind of meat, including human flesh and the flesh of other Trollocs. Largely of human origin, they are able to interbreed with humankind, but the offspring are usually stillborn, and those which are not often fail to survive. They are divided into tribe-like bands, chief among them being the Ahf'frait, Al'ghol, Bhan'sheen, Dha'vol, Dhai'mon, Dhjin'nen, Ghar'ghael, Ghob'hlin, Gho'hlem, Ghraem'lan, Ko'bal, and the Kno'mon.

tʃɹu sɔɹs: ðə dʒɹaɪvɪŋ fɔɹs ə ðə junəvɝs, wɪtʃ tɝnz ðə wil ə taɪm. ɪts dɪvaɪɾəd ɪndə ə meɪl hæf (seɪɾɪn) ən ə fimeɪl hæf (seɪaɪdɑɹ), wɪtʃ wɝk ət ðə seɪm taɪm wɪð ən əɡɛnst itʃ ʌðɝ. oʊnli ə mæn kən dʒɹɔ ɑn seɪɾɪn, oʊnli ə wʊmən ɑn seɪaɪdɑɹ. sɪns ðə bɪɡɪnɪŋ ə ðə taɪm ə mædnəs, seɪɾɪn əz bɪn teɪntɪd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ. si ɔlsoʊ wʌn paʊɝ.

True Source: The driving force of the universe, which turns the Wheel of Time. It is divided into a male half (saidin) and a female half (saidar), which work at the same time with and against each other. Only a man can draw on saidin, only a woman on saidar. Since the beginning of the Time of Madness, saidin has been tainted by the Dark One's touch. See also One Power.

tuætɑn (tu-ɑ-θɑ-æn): ə wɑndɝɪŋ foʊk, ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz ðə tɪŋkɝz ən əz ðə tʃɹævlɪŋ pipəl, hu lɪv ɪn bɹaɪtli peɪntəd wæɡənz ən fɑloʊ ə toʊɾəli pæsɪfɪs fəlɑsəfi kɔl ðə weɪ ʌv ðə lif. θɪŋz mɛndɪd baɪ tɪŋkɝz ɑɹ ɔfən bɛɾɝ ðən nu, bʌt ðə tuætɑn ɑɹ ʃʌn baɪ mɛni vɪlədʒəz kəz ə stɔɹiz ðət ðeɪ stil tʃɪlʒɹən ən tʃɹaɪ tə kənvɝt jʌŋ pipəl tə ðɛɹ bɪlifs.

Tuatha'an (too-AH-thah-AHN): A wandering folk, also known as the Tinkers and as the Traveling People, who live in brightly painted wagons and follow a totally pacifist philosophy called the Way of the Leaf. Things mended by Tinkers are often better than new, but the Tuatha'an are shunned by many villages because of stories that they steal children and try to convert young people to their beliefs.

vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl: ɪn moʊs vɪlədʒəz ə ɡɹup ə mɛn, ɪlɛktəd baɪ ðə taʊnsmɪn ən hɛɾəd baɪ ə meɪɝ, hu ɑɹ ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ meɪkɪŋ dɪsɪʒənz wɪtʃ əfɛk ðə vɪlədʒ əz ə hoʊl ən fəɹ nɪɡoʊʃieɪɾɪŋ wɪð ðə kaʊnsəlz ʌv ʌðɝ vɪlədʒəz oʊvɝ mæɾɝz wɪtʃ əfɛk ðə vɪlədʒəz dʒɔɪnli. ðeɪ ɑɹ əɾ ɑdz wɪð ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl ɪn soʊ mɛni vɪlədʒəz ðət ðɪs kɑnflɪkt ɪz sin əz ɔlmoʊs tʃɹədɪʃənəl. si ɔlsoʊ wɪmənz sɝkəl.

Village Council: In most villages a group of men, elected by the townsmen and headed by a Mayor, who are responsible for making decisions which affect the village as a whole and for negotiating with the Councils of other villages over matters which affect the villages jointly. They are at odds with the Women's Circle in so many villages that this conflict is seen as almost traditional. See also Women's Circle.

wɔɹ ə ðə hʌnʒɹəd jɪɹz: ə sɪɹiz ʌv oʊvɝlæpɪŋ wɔɹz əmʌŋ kɑnstənli ʃɪftɪŋ əlaɪənsəz, pɹɪsɪpɪteɪɾɪd baɪ ðə dɛθ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ ən ðə ɹɪzʌltɪŋ stʃɹʌɡəl fəɹ ɪz ɛmpaɪɝ. ɪt læstəd fɹəm fi naɪnhʌnʒɹədnaɪntifɔɹ tə fi wʌnθaʊzəndwʌnhʌnʒɹədsɛvəntin. ðə wɔɹ dɪpɑpjəleɪɾɪd lɑɹdʒ pɑɹts ə ðə lænz bɪtwin ði ɛɹɪθ oʊʃən ən ði il weɪst, fɹəm ðə si ʌv stɔɹmz tə ðə ɡɹeɪt blaɪt. soʊ ɡɹeɪt wɑz ðə dɪstʃɹʌkʃən ðəɾ oʊnli fɹæɡməntɛɹi ɹɛkɝdz ə ðə taɪm ɹɪmeɪn. ði ɛmpaɪɝ ʌv ɑɹɾɝ hɔkwɪŋ wɑz pʊld əpɑɹt, ən ðə neɪʃənz ə ðə pɹɛzən deɪ wɝ fɔɹmd.

War of the Hundred Years: A series of overlapping wars among constantly shifting alliances, precipitated by the death of Artur Hawkwing and the resulting struggle for his empire. It lasted from FY 994 to FY 1117. The war depopulated large parts of the lands between the Aryth Ocean and the Aiel Waste, from the Sea of Storms to the Great Blight. So great was the destruction that only fragmentary records of the time remain. The empire of Artur Hawkwing was pulled apart, and the nations of the present day were formed.

wɔɹ ə ðə ʃædoʊ: ɔlsoʊ noʊn əz ðə wɔɹ ə paʊɝ, ɪɾ ɛndəd ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz. ɪt bɪɡæn ʃɔɹtli æftɝ ði ətɛmp tə fɹi ðə dɑɹk wʌn, ən sun ɪnvɑlv ðə hoʊl wɝld. ɪn ə wɝld wɛɹ ivən ðə mɛmɹi ʌv wɔɹ hæd bɪn fɝɡɑɾən, ɛvɹi fæsəɾ ʌv wɔɹ wɑz ɹiɾɪskʌvɝd, ɔfən twɪstəd baɪ ðə dɑɹk wʌnz tʌtʃ ɑn ðə wɝld, ən ðə wʌn paʊɝ wɑz juzd əz ə wɛpən. ðə wɔɹ wɑz ɛndəd baɪ ðə ɹisilɪŋ ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn ɪndə hɪz pɹɪzən.

War of the Shadow: Also known as the War of Power, it ended the Age of Legends. It began shortly after the attempt to free the Dark One, and soon involved the whole world. In a world where even the memory of war had been forgotten, every facet of war was rediscovered, often twisted by the Dark One's touch on the World, and the One Power was used as a weapon. The war was ended by the resealing of the Dark One into his prison.

wɔɹɾɝ: ə wɔɹiɝ bɑndəd tə ən ɛɛs sədaɪ. ðə bɑndɪŋ ɪz ə θɪŋ ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ, ən baɪ ɪɾ i ɡeɪnz sətʃ ɡɪfs əz kwɪk hilɪŋ, ði əbɪləɾi tə ɡoʊ lɔŋ pɪɹiədz wɪθaʊt fud, wɔɾɝ əɹ ɹɛst, ən ði əbɪləɾi tə sɛns ðə teɪn ə ðə dɑɹk wʌn əɾ ə dɪstəns. soʊ lɔŋ əz ə wɔɹɾɝ lɪvz, ði ɛɛs sədaɪ tə hum hiz bɑndəd noʊz hiz əlaɪv haʊɛvɝ fɑɹ əweɪ hi ɪz, ən wən i daɪz ʃɪl noʊ ðə moʊmən ən mænɝ ə hɪz dɛθ. waɪl moʊst ədʒəz bɪliv ən ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ hæv wʌn wɔɹɾɝ bɑndəd tə hɝ əɾ ə taɪm, ðə ɹɛɾ ədʒɑ ɹəfjuzəz tə bɑn ɛni wɔɹɾɝz əɾ ɔl, waɪl ðə ɡɹin ədʒɑ bɪlivz ən ɛɛs sədaɪ meɪ bɑn əz mɛni wɔɹɾɝz əz ʃi wɪʃɪz. ɛθɪkəli ðə wɔɹɾɝ mʌst æksid tə ðə bɑndɪŋ, bʌɾ ɪts bɪn noʊn tə bi dʌn ɪnvoʊlʌntɝɪli. wʌt ði ɛɛs sədaɪ ɡeɪn fɹəm ðə bɑndɪŋ ɪz ə kloʊsli-hɛl sikɹət. si ɔlsoʊ ɛɛs sədaɪ.

Warder: A warrior bonded to an Aes Sedai. The bonding is a thing of the One Power, and by it he gains such gifts as quick healing, the ability to go long periods without food, water or rest, and the ability to sense the taint of the Dark One at a distance. So long as a Warder lives, the Aes Sedai to whom he is bonded knows he is alive however far away he is, and when he dies she will know the moment and manner of his death. While most Ajahs believe an Aes Sedai may have one Warder bonded to her at a time, the Red Ajah refuses to bond any Warders at all, while the Green Ajah believes an Aes Sedai may bond as many Warders as she wishes. Ethically the Warder must accede to the bonding, but it has been known to be done involuntarily. What the Aes Sedai gain from the bonding is a closely-held secret. See also Aes Sedai.

wɛb ə dɛstəni: ə ɡɹeɪt tʃeɪnʒ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ, sɛntɝɾ ɝaʊnd wʌn əɹ mɔɹ pipəl u ɑɹ tɑvɝən.

Web of Destiny: A great change in the Pattern of an Age, centered around one or more people who are ta'veren.

wil ə taɪm, ðə: taɪm ɪz ə wil wɪð sɛvən spoʊks, itʃ spoʊk ən eɪdʒ. əz ðə wil tɝnz, ði eɪdʒəz kʌm ən ɡoʊ, itʃ livɪŋ mɛmɹiz ðət feɪd tə lɛdʒənd, ðən tə mɪθ, ən ɑɹ fɝɡɑɾən baɪ ðə taɪm ðəɾ eɪdʒ kʌmz əɡɛn. ðə pæɾɝn ʌv ən eɪdʒ ɪz slaɪtli dɪfɹən itʃ taɪm ən eɪdʒ kʌmz, ən itʃ taɪm ɪts sʌbʒɪkt tə ɡɹeɪɾɝ tʃeɪnʒ, bʌɾ itʃ taɪm ɪts ðə seɪm eɪdʒ.

Wheel of Time, the: Time is a wheel with seven spokes, each spoke an Age. As the Wheel turns, the Ages come and go, each leaving memories that fade to legend, then to myth, and are forgotten by the time that Age comes again. The Pattern of an Age is slightly different each time an Age comes, and each time it is subject to greater change, but each time it is the same Age.

waɪɾ ədʒɑsi ədʒɑ.

White Ajah:See Ajah.

waɪt taʊɝ: ðə pæləs ə ði æmɪɝlɪn siɾ ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn.

White Tower: The palace of the Amyrlin Seat in Tar Valon.

waɪtkloʊkssi tʃɪlʒɹən ə ðə laɪt.

Whitecloaks:See Children of the Light.

wɪzdəm: ɪn vɪlədʒəz, ə wʊmən tʃoʊzən baɪ ðə wɪmənz sɝkəl tə sɪɾ ɪn ðə sɝkəl fəɹ əɹ nɑlədʒ ə sətʃ θɪŋz əz hilɪŋ ən fɔɹtɛlɪŋ ðə wɛðɝ, əz wɛl əz fəɹ kɑmən ɡʊd sɛns. ə pəzɪʃən ʌv ɡɹeɪt ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi ən əθɔɹəɾi, boʊθ æktʃəwəl ən ɪmplaɪd. ʃiz dʒɛnɝəli kənsɪɾɝd ði ikwəl ə ðə meɪɝ, ən ɪn səm vɪlədʒəz ɪz supɪɹiɝ. ənlaɪk ðə meɪɝ, ʃiz tʃoʊzən fəɹ laɪf, ən ɪts vɛɹi ɹɛɹ fəɹ ə wɪzdəm tə bi ɹimuv fɹəm ɔfəs bɪfɔɹ əɹ dɛθ. ɔlmoʊs tʃɹədɪʃənəli ɪn kɑnflɪkt wɪð ðə meɪɝ. si ɔlsoʊ wɪmənz sɝkəl.

Wisdom: In villages, a woman chosen by the Women's Circle to sit in the Circle for her knowledge of such things as healing and foretelling the weather, as well as for common good sense. A position of great responsibility and authority, both actual and implied. She is generally considered the equal of the Mayor, and in some villages his superior. Unlike the Mayor, she is chosen for life, and it is very rare for a Wisdom to be removed from office before her death. Almost traditionally in conflict with the Mayor. See also Women's Circle.

wɪmənz sɝkəl: ə ɡɹup ʌv wɪmən ɪlɛktəd baɪ ðə wɪmən ʌv ə vɪlədʒ, ɹispɑnsəbəl fəɹ dəsaɪɾɪŋ sətʃ mæɾɝz əz ɑɹ kənsɪɾɝd soʊlli wɪmənz ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi (fɔɹ ɪɡzæmpəl, wən tə plæn ðə kɹɑps ən wən tə hɑɹvəst). ikwəl ɪn əθɔɹəɾi tə ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl, wɪð klɪɹli-dɪlɪnieɪɾɪd laɪnz ən ɛɹiəz ə ɹispɑnsəbɪləɾi. ɔfən əɾ ɑdz wɪð ðə vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl. si ɔlsoʊ vɪlədʒ kaʊnsəl.

Women's Circle: A group of women elected by the women of a village, responsible for deciding such matters as are considered solely women's responsibility (for example, when to plant the crops and when to harvest). Equal in authority to the Village Council, with clearly-delineated lines and areas of responsibility. Often at odds with the Village Council. See also Village Council.


pɹoʊlɑɡ ə pɹivju ʌv



PROLOGUE A preview of

ðə ɡɹeɪt hʌn bʊk tu ʌv ðə wil ə taɪm ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz, ət list ɪn ðɪs pleɪs, snɪɹɾ ət ðə loʊ mɝmɝɪŋ ðət ɹoʊld ɝaʊn ðə vɔltəd tʃeɪmbɝ laɪk ðə sɑft ɡæbəl ʌv ɡis. hɪz ɡɹɪmɑs wɑz hɪɾən baɪ ðə blæk sɪlk mæsk ðət kʌvɝɾ ɪz feɪs, ðoʊ, dʒʌs laɪk ðə mæsks ðət kʌvɝd ðə hʌnʒɹəd ʌðɝ feɪsəz ɪn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ. ə hʌnʒɹəd blæk mæsks, ən ə hʌnʒɹəd pɛɹz ʌv aɪz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə si wʌt leɪ bɪhaɪn ðɛm.

The Great Hunt Book Two of The Wheel of Time In the Shadow The man who called himself Bors, at least in this place, sneered at the low murmuring that rolled around the vaulted chamber like the soft gabble of geese. His grimace was hidden by the black silk mask that covered his face, though, just like the masks that covered the hundred other faces in the chamber. A hundred black masks, and a hundred pairs of eyes trying to see what lay behind them.

ɪf wʌn dɪd nɑt lʊk tu kloʊsli, ðə hjudʒ ɹum cʊɾə bɪn ɪn ə pæləs, wɪð ɪts tɔl mɑɹbəl faɪɝpleɪsəz ən ɪts ɡoʊldən læmps hæŋɪŋ fɹəm ðə doʊm silɪŋ, ɪts kʌlɝfəl tæpəstʃɹiz ən ɪntʃɹəkətli pæɾɝnd moʊzeɪɪk flɔɹ. ɪf wʌn dɪd nɑt lʊk tu kloʊsli. ðə faɪɝpleɪsəz wɝ koʊld, fəɹ wʌn θɪŋ. fleɪmz dænst ɑn lɔɡz əz θɪk əz ə mænz lɛɡ, bʌt ɡeɪv noʊ hit. ðə wɔlz bɪhaɪn ðə tæpəstʃɹiz, ðə silɪŋ haɪ əbʌv ðə læmps, wɝ ənʒɹəst stoʊn, ɔlmoʊs blæk. ðəɹ wɝ noʊ wɪndoʊz, ən oʊnli tu dɔɹweɪz, wʌn əɾ iðɝ ɛn ə ðə ɹum. ɪt wɑz əz ɪf sʌmwʌn hæɾ ɪntɛndəd tə ɡɪv ðə sɛmbləns ʌv ə pæləs ɹɪsɛpʃən tʃeɪmbɝ bʌt hæd nɑt kɛɹɾ ɪnʌf tə bɑðɝ wɪð mɔɹ ðən ði aʊtlaɪn ən ə fju tʌtʃəz fəɹ dɪteɪl.

If one did not look too closely, the huge room could have been in a palace, with its tall marble fireplaces and its golden lamps hanging from the domed ceiling, its colorful tapestries and intricately patterned mosaic floor. If one did not look too closely. The fireplaces were cold, for one thing. Flames danced on logs as thick as a man's leg, but gave no heat. The walls behind the tapestries, the ceiling high above the lamps, were undressed stone, almost black. There were no windows, and only two doorways, one at either end of the room. It was as if someone had intended to give the semblance of a palace reception chamber but had not cared enough to bother with more than the outline and a few touches for detail.

wɛɹ ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɑz, ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz dɪd nɑt noʊ, nɔɹ dɪɾ i θɪŋk ɛni ʌv ði ʌðɝz nu. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk tə θɪŋk əbaʊt wɛɹ ɪt maɪt bi. ɪt wɑz ɪnʌf ðəɾ i hæd bɪn sʌmənd. hi dɪd nɑt laɪk tə θɪŋk əbaʊt ðæt, iðɝ, bʌt fəɹ sətʃ ə sʌmənz, ivən i keɪm.

Where the chamber was, the man who called himself Bors did not know, nor did he think any of the others knew. He did not like to think about where it might be. It was enough that he had been summoned. He did not like to think about that, either, but for such a summons, even he came.

hi ʃɪftəɾ ɪz kloʊk, θæŋkfəl ðət ðə faɪɝz wɝ koʊld, ɛls ɪt wʊɾə bɪn tu hɑt fəɹ ðə blæk wʊl dʒɹeɪpɪŋ ɪm tə ðə flɔɹ. ɔl ɪz kloʊðz wɝ blæk. ðə bʌlki foʊlz ə ðə kloʊk hɪd ðə stup i juz tə dɪsɡaɪz ɪz haɪt, ən bɹɛd kənfjuʒən əz tə wɛðɝ i wɑz θɪn əɹ θɪk. hi wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn ðəɹ ɛnvɛləpt ɪn ə teɪlɝz spæn ə klɔθ.

He shifted his cloak, thankful that the fires were cold, else it would have been too hot for the black wool draping him to the floor. All his clothes were black. The bulky folds of the cloak hid the stoop he used to disguise his height, and bred confusion as to whether he was thin or thick. He was not the only one there enveloped in a tailor's span of cloth.

saɪlənli hi wɑtʃt ɪz kəmpænjənz. peɪʃəns hæd mɑɹk mʌtʃ ə hɪz laɪf. ɔlweɪz, ɪf i weɪɾəd ən wɑtʃt lɔŋ ɪnʌf, sʌmwʌn meɪɾ ə mɪsteɪk. moʊst ə ðə mɛn ən wɪmən hɪɹ maɪɾ əv hæd ðə seɪm fəlɑsəfi; ðeɪ wɑtʃt, ən lɪsən saɪlənli tə ðoʊz u hæd tə spik. səm pipəl kəd nɑt bɛɹ weɪɾɪŋ, əɹ saɪləns, ən soʊ ɡeɪv əweɪ mɔɹ ðən ðeɪ nu.

Silently he watched his companions. Patience had marked much of his life. Always, if he waited and watched long enough, someone made a mistake. Most of the men and women here might have had the same philosophy; they watched, and listened silently to those who had to speak. Some people could not bear waiting, or silence, and so gave away more than they knew.

sɝvəns sɝkjəleɪɾəd θɹu ðə ɡɛsts, slɛndɝ, ɡoʊldən-hɛɹd juðz pɹɑfɝɪŋ waɪn wɪð ə baʊ ən ə wɝdləs smaɪl. jʌŋ mɛn ən jʌŋ wɪmən əlaɪk, ðeɪ wɔɹ taɪt waɪt bɹitʃɪz ən floʊɪŋ waɪt ʃɝts. ən meɪl ən fimeɪl əlaɪk, ðeɪ muvd wɪð dɪstɝbɪŋ ɡɹeɪs. itʃ lʊk mɔɹ ðən ə mɪɹɝ ɪmədʒ ə ði ʌðɝz, ðə bɔɪz əz hænsəm əz ðə ɡɝlz wɝ bjuɾəfəl. hi daʊɾɪd i kəd dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃ wʌn fɹəm ənʌðɝ, ən i hæɾ ən aɪ ən ə mɛmɹi fəɹ feɪsəz.

Servants circulated through the guests, slender, golden-haired youths proffering wine with a bow and a wordless smile. Young men and young women alike, they wore tight white breeches and flowing white shirts. And male and female alike, they moved with disturbing grace. Each looked more than a mirror image of the others, the boys as handsome as the girls were beautiful. He doubted he could distinguish one from another, and he had an eye and a memory for faces.

ə smaɪlɪŋ, waɪt-klæd ɡɝl ɔfɝɾ əɹ tʃɹeɪ ʌv kɹɪstəl ɡoʊbləts tə hɪm. hi tʊk wʌn wɪð noʊ ɪntɛntʃən ə dʒɹɪŋkɪŋ; ɪt maɪɾ əpɪɹ əntʃɹʌstɪŋ - əɹ wɝs, ən iðɝ kəd bi dɛdli hɪɹ - ɪf i ɹəfjuzd ɔltəɡɛðɝ, bʌɾ ɛniθɪŋ kəd bi slɪpt ɪndə ə dʒɹɪŋk. ʃʊɹli səm əmʌŋ ɪz kəmpænjənz wəɾ əv noʊ əbdʒɛkʃənz tə siɪŋ ðə nʌmbɝ ə ðɛɹ ɹaɪvəlz fəɹ paʊɝ dwɪndəl, humɛvɝ ði ənlʌki wʌnz hæpən tə bi.

A smiling, white-clad girl offered her tray of crystal goblets to him. He took one with no intention of drinking; it might appear untrusting - or worse, and either could be deadly here - if he refused altogether, but anything could be slipped into a drink. Surely some among his companions would have no objections to seeing the number of their rivals for power dwindle, whomever the unlucky ones happened to be.

aɪdli hi wʌndɝd wɛðɝ ðə sɝvəns wəɾ əv tə bi dɪspoʊzd ʌv æftɝ ðɪs miɾɪŋ. sɝvəns hɪɹ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. əz ðə sɝvɪŋ ɡɝl stʃɹeɪɾənd fɹəm əɹ baʊ, hɪz aɪ kɑt hɝz əbʌv ðət swit smaɪl. blæŋk aɪz. ɛmpti aɪz. ə dɑlz aɪz. aɪz mɔɹ dɛd ðən dɛθ.

Idly he wondered whether the servants would have to be disposed of after this meeting. Servants hear everything. As the serving girl straightened from her bow, his eye caught hers above that sweet smile. Blank eyes. Empty eyes. A doll's eyes. Eyes more dead than death.

hi ʃɪvɝɾ əz ʃi muvd ɡɹeɪsfəli əweɪ, ən ɹeɪz ðə ɡɑblət tə hɪz lɪps bɪfɔɹ i kɑt hɪmsɛlf. ɪt wɑz nɑt wʌt hæd bɪn dʌn tə ðə ɡɝl ðət tʃɪl hɪm. ɹæðɝ, ɛvɹi taɪm i θɔɾ i dɪtɛktəɾ ə wiknəs ɪn ðoʊz i naʊ sɝvd, hi faʊn hɪmsɛlf pɹɪsiɾɪd, ðə səpoʊzd wiknəs kʌɾ aʊt wɪð ə ɹuθləs pɹisɪʒən ðət lɛft ɪm əmeɪzd. ən wɝid. ðə fɝst ɹul ə hɪz laɪf hæɾ ɔlweɪz bɪn tə sɝtʃ fəɹ wiknəs, fəɹ ɛvɹi wiknəs wɑz ə tʃɪŋk wɛɹ i kəd pɹoʊb ən pɹaɪ ən ɪnfluəns. ɪf ɪz kɝən mæstɝz, hɪz mæstɝz fəɹ ðə moʊmənt, hæd noʊ wiknəs. . . .

He shivered as she moved gracefully away, and raised the goblet to his lips before he caught himself. It was not what had been done to the girl that chilled him. Rather, every time he thought he detected a weakness in those he now served, he found himself preceded, the supposed weakness cut out with a ruthless precision that left him amazed. And worried. The first rule of his life had always been to search for weakness, for every weakness was a chink where he could probe and pry and influence. If his current masters, his masters for the moment, had no weakness. . . .

fɹaʊnɪŋ bɪhaɪn ɪz mæsk, hi stʌɾid ɪz kəmpænjənz. ət lis ðəɹ wɑz plɛnti ʌv wiknəs ðɛɹ. ðɛɹ nɝvəsnəs bɪtʃɹeɪd ðɛm, ivən ðoʊz u hæd sɛns ɪnʌf tə ɡɑɹd ðɛɹ tʌŋz. ə stɪfnəs ɪn ðə weɪ ðɪs wʌn hɛl hɪmsɛlf, ə dʒɝkənəs ɪn ðə weɪ ðət wʌn hændəld əɹ skɝts.

Frowning behind his mask, he studied his companions. At least there was plenty of weakness there. Their nervousness betrayed them, even those who had sense enough to guard their tongues. A stiffness in the way this one held himself, a jerkiness in the way that one handled her skirts.

ə ɡʊd kɔɹɾɝ ə ðɛm, hi ɛstəmeɪɾəd, hæd nɑt bɑðɝd wɪð dɪsɡaɪz bɪɑn ðə blæk mæsks. ðɛɹ kloʊðz toʊl mʌtʃ. ə wʊmən stændɪŋ bɪfɔɹ ə ɡoʊld-ænd-kɹɪmzən wɔl hæŋɪŋ, spikɪŋ sɔfli tə ə fɪɡjɝ - ɪmpɑsəbəl tə seɪ wɛðɝ ɪt wɝ mæn əɹ wʊmən - kloʊkt ən hʊɾɪd ɪn ɡɹeɪ. ʃi hæɾ ɑbviəsli tʃoʊzən ðə spɑt kəz ðə kʌlɝz ə ðə tæpəstʃɹi sɛɾ ɔf əɹ ɡɑɹb. dʌbli fulɪʃ tə dʒɹɔ ətɛnʃən tə hɝsɛlf, fəɹ əɹ skɑɹlət dʒɹɛs, kʌt loʊ ɪn ðə bɑɾəs tə ʃoʊ tu mʌtʃ flɛʃ ən haɪ ət ðə hɛm tə dɪspleɪ ɡoʊldən slɪpɝz, mɑɹkt əɹ fɹəm ɪljən, ən ə wʊmən ʌv wɛlθ, pɝhæps ivən ə noʊbəl blʌd.

A good quarter of them, he estimated, had not bothered with disguise beyond the black masks. Their clothes told much. A woman standing before a gold-and-crimson wall hanging, speaking softly to a figure - impossible to say whether it were man or woman - cloaked and hooded in gray. She had obviously chosen the spot because the colors of the tapestry set off her garb. Doubly foolish to draw attention to herself, for her scarlet dress, cut low in the bodice to show too much flesh and high at the hem to display golden slippers, marked her from Illian, and a woman of wealth, perhaps even of noble blood.

nɑt fɑɹ bɪɑn ði ɪliɑnɝ, ənʌðɝ wʊmən stʊd, əloʊn ən ædmɝəbli saɪlənt. wɪð ə swɑnz nɛk ən lʌstʃɹəs blæk hɛɹ fɔlɪŋ ɪn weɪvz bɪloʊ hɝ weɪst, ʃi kɛpt əɹ bæk tə ðə stoʊn wɔl, əbzɝvɪŋ ɛvɹiθɪŋ. noʊ nɝvəsnəs ðɛɹ, oʊnli sɝin sɛlf-pəzɛʃən. vɛɹi ædmɝəbəl, ðæt, bʌɾ əɹ kɑpɝi skɪn ən əɹ kɹimi, haɪ-nɛkt ɡaʊn - livɪŋ nʌθɪŋ bʌðɝ hænz ənkʌvɝd, jɛt klɪŋɪŋ ən oʊnli dʒʌs bɛɹli oʊpeɪk, soʊ ðəɾ ɪt hɪntəɾ əɾ ɛvɹiθɪŋ ən ɹɪvil nʌθɪŋ - mɑɹkt əɹ dʒʌst əz klɪɹli ʌv ðə fɝs blʌɾ ʌv ɑɹæd dumən. ən ənlɛs ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz mɪst ɪz ɡɛs ɪntaɪɝli, ðə waɪd ɡoʊldən bɹeɪsləɾ ɑn əɹ lɛft ɹɪs bɔɹ əɹ haʊs sɪmbəlz. ðeɪ wəd bi fəɹ əɹ oʊn haʊs; noʊ dəmɑni blʌdbɔɹn wəd bɛn əɹ stɪf pɹaɪɾ ɪnʌf tə wɛɹ ðə sɪɡəlz ʌv ənʌðɝ haʊs. wɝs ðən fulɪʃnəs.

Not far beyond the Illianer, another woman stood, alone and admirably silent. With a swan's neck and lustrous black hair falling in waves below her waist, she kept her back to the stone wall, observing everything. No nervousness there, only serene self-possession. Very admirable, that, but her coppery skin and her creamy, high-necked gown - leaving nothing buther hands uncovered, yet clinging and only just barely opaque, so that it hinted at everything and revealed nothing - marked her just as clearly of the first blood of Arad Doman. And unless the man who called himself Bors missed his guess entirely, the wide golden bracelet on her left wrist bore her House symbols. They would be for her own House; no Domani bloodborn would bend her stiff pride enough to wear the sigils of another House. Worse than foolishness.

ə mæn ɪn ə haɪ-kɑlɝd, skaɪ-blu ʃaɪnɝən koʊt pæst ɪm wɪð ə wɛɹi, hɛd-tə-toʊ ɡlæns θɹu ði aɪhoʊlz ə hɪz mæsk. ðə mænz kæɹɪdʒ neɪmd ɪm soʊlʒɝ; ðə sɛɾ ə hɪz ʃoʊldɝz, ðə weɪ hɪz ɡeɪz nɛvɝ ɹɛstəɾ ɪn wʌn pleɪs fəɹ lɔŋ, ən ðə weɪ hɪz hæn simd ɹɛɾi tə dɑɹt fəɹ ə sɔɹd ðət wɑz nɑt ðɛɹ, ɔl pɹoʊkleɪmd ɪt. ðə ʃaɪnɝən weɪstəd lɪɾəl taɪm ɑn ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz; stupt ʃoʊldɝz ən ə bɛn bæk hɛl noʊ θɹɛt.

A man in a high-collared, sky-blue Shienaran coat passed him with a wary, head-to-toe glance through the eyeholes of his mask. The man's carriage named him soldier; the set of his shoulders, the way his gaze never rested in one place for long, and the way his hand seemed ready to dart for a sword that was not there, all proclaimed it. The Shienaran wasted little time on the man who called himself Bors; stooped shoulders and a bent back held no threat.

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz snɔɹɾɪd əz ðə ʃaɪnɝən muvd ɑn, ɹaɪt hæn klɛntʃɪŋ ən aɪz ɔlɹɛɾi stʌɾiɪŋ ɛlswɛɹ fəɹ deɪnʒɝ. hi kəd ɹiɾ əm ɔl, tə klæs ən kʌntʃɹi. mɝtʃən ən wɔɹiɝ, kɑmənɝ ən noʊbəl. fɹəm kændɝ ən kɛɹhin, sɑldɑiə ən ɡildən. fɹəm ɛvɹi neɪʃən ən nɪɹli ɛvɹi pipəl. hɪz noʊz ɹɪŋkəld ɪn sʌɾən dɪsɡʌst. ivən ə tɪŋkɝ, ɪn bɹaɪt ɡɹin bɹitʃɪz ən ə vɪɹələn jɛloʊ koʊt. wi kən də wɪθaʊt ðoʊz kʌm ðə deɪ.

The man who called himself Bors snorted as the Shienaran moved on, right hand clenching and eyes already studying elsewhere for danger. He could read them all, to class and country. Merchant and warrior, commoner and noble. From Kandor and Cairhien, Saldaea and Ghealdan. From every nation and nearly every people. His nose wrinkled in sudden disgust. Even a Tinker, in bright green breeches and a virulent yellow coat. We can do without those come the Day.

ðə dɪsɡaɪzd wʌnz wɝ noʊ bɛɾɝ, mɛni ʌv ðɛm, kloʊkt ən ʃɹaʊɾɪd əz ðeɪ wɝ. hi kɑt saɪt, ʌndɝ ði ɛdʒ ʌv wʌn dɑɹk ɹoʊb, ʌv ðə sɪlvɝ-wɝk buts ʌv ə haɪ lɔɹɾ ə tiɹ, ən ʌndɝ ənʌðɝ ə ɡlɪmps ʌv ɡoʊldən laɪən-hɛd spɝz, wɔɹn oʊnli baɪ haɪ ɔfəsɝz ɪn ði ændɔɝən kwinz ɡɑɹdz. ə slɛndɝ fɛloʊ - slɛndɝ ivən ɪn ə flɔɹ-dʒɹæɡɪŋ blæk ɹoʊb ən ən ənɑnəməs ɡɹeɪ kloʊk kɑt wɪð ə pleɪn sɪlvɝ pɪn - wɑtʃt fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz ə hɪz dip kaʊl. hi kəd bi ɛniwʌn, fɹəm ɛniwɛɹ . . . ɪksɛp fəɹ ðə sɪks-pɔɪntəd stɑɹ tætuɾ ɑn ðə wɛb bɪtwin θʌm ən fɔɹfɪŋɡɝ ə hɪz ɹaɪt hænd. wʌn ə ðə si foʊk ðɛn, ən ə lʊk əɾ ɪz lɛf hænd wəd ʃoʊ ðə mɑɹks ə hɪz klæn ən laɪn. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz dɪd nɑt bɑðɝ tə tʃɹaɪ.

The disguised ones were no better, many of them, cloaked and shrouded as they were. He caught sight, under the edge of one dark robe, of the silver-worked boots of a High Lord of Tear, and under another a glimpse of golden lion-head spurs, worn only by high officers in the Andoran Queen's Guards. A slender fellow - slender even in a floor-dragging black robe and an anonymous gray cloak caught with a plain silver pin - watched from the shadows of his deep cowl. He could be anyone, from anywhere . . . except for the six-pointed star tattooed on the web between thumb and forefinger of his right hand. One of the Sea Folk then, and a look at his left hand would show the marks of his clan and line. The man who called himself Bors did not bother to try.

sʌɾənli hɪz aɪz nɛɹoʊd, fɪksɪŋ ɑn ə wʊmən ɛnvɛləpt ɪn blæk tɪl nʌθɪŋ ʃoʊd bʌɾ əɹ fɪŋɡɝz. ɑn əɹ ɹaɪt hæn ɹɛstəɾ ə ɡoʊld ɹɪŋ ɪn ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə sɝpən iɾɪŋ ɪts oʊn teɪl. ɛɛs sədaɪ, əɹ ət list ə wʊmən tʃɹeɪn ɪn tɑɹ vəlɑn baɪ ɛɛs sədaɪ. nʌn ɛls wəd wɛɹ ðət ɹɪŋ. iðɝ weɪ meɪd noʊ dɪfɝəns tə hɪm. hi lʊkt əweɪ bɪfɔɹ ʃi kəd noʊɾəs ɪz wɑtʃɪŋ, ən ɔlmoʊst ɪmiɾiətli hi spɑɾəd ənʌðɝ wʊmən swɑð fɹəm hɛd tə toʊ ɪn blæk ən wɛɹɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ. ðə tu wɪtʃəz ɡeɪv noʊ saɪn ðət ðeɪ nu itʃ ʌðɝ. ɪn ðə waɪt taʊɝ ðeɪ sæt laɪk spaɪɾɝz ɪn ðə mɪɾəl ʌv ə wɛb, pʊlɪŋ ðə stʃɹɪŋz ðət meɪd kɪŋz ən kwinz dæns, mɛɾəlɪŋ. kɝs əm ɔl tə dɛθ ɪtɝnəl! hi ɹilaɪz ðəɾ i wɑz ɡɹaɪndɪŋ ɪz tiθ. ɪf nʌmbɝz mʌs dwɪndəl - ən ðeɪ mʌst, bɪfɔɹ ðə deɪ - ðəɹ wɝ səm u wəd bi mɪst ivən lɛs ðən tɪŋkɝz.

Suddenly his eyes narrowed, fixing on a woman enveloped in black till nothing showed but her fingers. On her right hand rested a gold ring in the shape of a serpent eating its own tail. Aes Sedai, or at least a woman trained in Tar Valon by Aes Sedai. None else would wear that ring. Either way made no difference to him. He looked away before she could notice his watching, and almost immediately he spotted another woman swathed from head to toe in black and wearing a Great Serpent ring. The two witches gave no sign that they knew each other. In the White Tower they sat like spiders in the middle of a web, pulling the strings that made kings and queens dance, meddling. Curse them all to death eternal! He realized that he was grinding his teeth. If numbers must dwindle - and they must, before the Day - there were some who would be missed even less than Tinkers.

ə tʃaɪm saʊndəd, ə sɪŋɡəl, ʃɪvɝɪŋ noʊt ðət keɪm fɹəm ɛvɹiwɛɹ ət wʌns ən kʌɾ ɔf ɔl ʌðɝ saʊnz laɪk ə naɪf.

A chime sounded, a single, shivering note that came from everywhere at once and cut off all other sounds like a knife.

ðə tɔl dɔɹz ət ðə fɑɹ ɛn ə ðə tʃeɪmbɝ swʌŋ oʊpən, ən tu tʃɹɑləks stɛpt ɪndə ðə ɹum, spaɪks dɛkɝeɪɾɪŋ ðə blæk meɪl ðət hʌŋ tə ðɛɹ niz. ɛvɹiwʌn ʃaɪd bæk. ivən ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz.

The tall doors at the far end of the chamber swung open, and two Trollocs stepped into the room, spikes decorating the black mail that hung to their knees. Everyone shied back. Even the man who called himself Bors.

hɛɾ ən ʃoʊldɝz tɔlɝ ðən ðə tɔlɪs mæn ðɛɹ, ðeɪ wɝ ə stʌmək-tɝnɪŋ blɛn ə mæn ən ænəməl, hjumən feɪsəz twɪstəɾ ən ɔltɝd. wʌn hæɾ ə hɛvi, pɔɪntəd bik wɛɹ ɪz maʊθ ən noʊz ʃəɾ əv bɪn, ən fɛðɝz kʌvɝɾ ɪz hɛɾ ɪnstɛɾ ə hɛɹ. ði ʌðɝ wɔkt ɑn hʊvz, hɪz feɪs pʊʃt aʊɾ ɪn ə hɛɹi mʌzəl, ən ɡoʊt hɔɹnz stʌk ʌp əbʌv ɪz ɪɹz.

Head and shoulders taller than the tallest man there, they were a stomach-turning blend of man and animal, human faces twisted and altered. One had a heavy, pointed beak where his mouth and nose should have been, and feathers covered his head instead of hair. The other walked on hooves, his face pushed out in a hairy muzzle, and goat horns stuck up above his ears.

ɪɡnɔɹɪŋ ðə hjumənz, ðə tʃɹɑləks tɝn bæk təwɔɹd ðə dɔɹ ən baʊd, sɝvəl ən kɹɪŋɪŋ. ðə fɛðɝz ɑn ðə wʌn lɪftəɾ ɪn ə taɪt kɹɛst.

Ignoring the humans, the Trollocs turned back toward the door and bowed, servile and cringing. The feathers on the one lifted in a tight crest.

eɪ mɹdʒɹɑl stɛp bɪtwin ðɛm, ən ðeɪ fɛl tə ðɛɹ niz. ɪt wɑz ɡɑɹbd ɪn blæk ðət meɪd ðə tʃɹɑləks' meɪl ən ðə hjumənz' mæsks sim bɹaɪt, ɡɑɹməns ðət hʌŋ stɪl, wɪθaʊɾ ə ɹɪpəl, əz ɪt muvd wɪð ə vaɪpɝz ɡɹeɪs.

A Myrddraal stepped between them, and they fell to their knees. It was garbed in black that made the Trollocs' mail and the humans' masks seem bright, garments that hung still, without a ripple, as it moved with a viper's grace.

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz fɛlt ɪz lɪps dʒɹɔɪŋ bæk oʊvɝ ɪz tiθ, hæf snɑɹl ən hæf, hi wɑz ʃeɪm tə ədmɪɾ ivən tə hɪmsɛlf, fɪɹ. ɪt hæɾ ɪts feɪs ənkʌvɝd. ɪts peɪsti peɪl feɪs, ə mænz feɪs, bʌɾ aɪləs əz ən ɛɡ, laɪk ə mæɡəɾ ɪn ə ɡɹeɪv.

The man who called himself Bors felt his lips drawing back over his teeth, half snarl and half, he was shamed to admit even to himself, fear. It had its face uncovered. Its pasty pale face, a man's face, but eyeless as an egg, like a maggot in a grave.

ðə smuð waɪt feɪs swɪvəld, ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ əm ɔl wʌn baɪ wʌn, ɪt simd. ə vɪzəbəl ʃɪvɝ ɹæn θɹu ðɛm ʌndɝ ðəɾ aɪləs lʊk. θɪn, blʌdləs lɪps kwɝkt ɪn wʌt maɪɾ ɔlmoʊst əv bɪn ə smaɪl æz, wʌn baɪ wʌn, ðə mæskt wʌnz tʃɹaɪd tə pɹɛs bæk ɪndə ðə kɹaʊd, mɪlɪŋ tə əvɔɪd ðət ɡeɪz. ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz lʊk ʃeɪpt əm ɪndə ə sɛmɪsɝkəl feɪsɪŋ ðə dɔɹ.

The smooth white face swiveled, regarding them all one by one, it seemed. A visible shiver ran through them under that eyeless look. Thin, bloodless lips quirked in what might almost have been a smile as, one by one, the masked ones tried to press back into the crowd, milling to avoid that gaze. The Myrddraal's look shaped them into a semicircle facing the door.

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz swɑloʊd. ðəɹ wɪl kʌm ə deɪ, hæfmən. wən ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk kʌmz əɡɛn, hɪl tʃuz ɪz nu dʒɹɛdlɔɹdz, ən jəl kaʊɝ bɪfɔɹ ðɛm. jəl kaʊɝ bɪfɔɹ mɛn. bɪfɔɹ mi! waɪ dʌzn ɪt spik? stɑp stɛɹɪŋ ət mi, ən spik!

The man who called himself Bors swallowed. There will come a day, Halfman. When the Great Lord of the Dark comes again, he will choose his new Dreadlords, and you will cower before them. You will cower before men. Before me! Why doesn't it speak? Stop staring at me, and speak!

"jɔɹ mæstɝ kʌmz." ðə mɹdʒɹɑlz vɔɪs ɹæsp laɪk ə dʒɹaɪ sneɪkɛskɪn kɹʌmbəlɪŋ. "tə jəɹ bɛliz, wɝmz! ɡɹɑvəl, lɛst ɪz bɹɪljəns blaɪn ən bɝn ju!"

"Your Master comes." The Myrddraal's voice rasped like a dry snakeskin crumbling. "To your bellies, worms! Grovel, lest his brilliance blind and burn you!"

ɹeɪdʒ fɪl ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz, ət ðə toʊn əz mʌtʃ əz ðə wɝdz, bʌt ðən ði ɛɹ əbʌv ðə hæfmən ʃɪmɝd, ən ði ɪmpɔɹt dʒɹoʊv hoʊm. ɪt kæn bi! ɪt kænt . . . ! ðə tʃɹɑləks wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɑn ðɛɹ bɛliz, ɹaɪðɪŋ əz ɪf ðeɪ wɑntəd tə bɝoʊ ɪndə ðə flɔɹ.

Rage filled the man who called himself Bors, at the tone as much as the words, but then the air above the Halfman shimmered, and the import drove home. It can't be! It can't . . . ! The Trollocs were already on their bellies, writhing as if they wanted to burrow into the floor.

wɪθaʊt weɪɾɪŋ tə si ɪf ɛniwʌn ɛls muvd, ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz dʒɹɑp feɪsdaʊn, ɡɹʌntɪŋ əz i bɹuz hɪmsɛlf ɑn ðə stoʊn. wɝdz spɹæŋ tə hɪz lɪps laɪk ə tʃɑɹm əɡɛns deɪnʒɝ - ðeɪ wɝ ə tʃɑɹm, ðoʊ ə θɪn ɹiɾ əɡɛnst wʌɾ i fɪɹd - ən i hɝɾ ə hʌnʒɹəd ʌðɝ vɔɪsəz, bɹɛθi wɪð fɪɹ, spikɪŋ ðə seɪm əɡɛns ðə flɔɹ.

Without waiting to see if anyone else moved, the man who called himself Bors dropped facedown, grunting as he bruised himself on the stone. Words sprang to his lips like a charm against danger - they were a charm, though a thin reed against what he feared - and he heard a hundred other voices, breathy with fear, speaking the same against the floor.

"ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk ɪz maɪ mæstɝ, ən moʊs hɑɹɾəli də aɪ sɝv ɪm tə ðə læst ʃɹɛɾ ə maɪ vɛɹi soʊl." ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪn ə vɔɪs tʃæɾɝd wɪð fɪɹ. ðə dɑɹk wʌn ən ɔl ðə fɔɹseɪkən ɑɹ baʊnd. . . . ʃɪvɝɪŋ, hi fɔɹst ɪt tə saɪləns. hi hæɾ əbændən ðət vɔɪs lɔŋ sɪns. "loʊ, maɪ mæstɝ ɪz dɛθs mæstɝ. æskɪŋ nʌθɪŋ də aɪ sɝv əɡɛns ðə deɪ ʌv ɪz kʌmɪŋ, jɛt də aɪ sɝv ɪn ðə ʃʊɹ ən sɝɾən hoʊp ə laɪf ɛvɝlæstɪŋ." . . . baʊn ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl, baʊn baɪ ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ət ðə moʊmən ə kɹieɪʃən. noʊ, aɪ sɝv ə dɪfɹən mæstɝ naʊ. "ʃʊɹli ðə feɪθfəl ʃæl bi ɪɡzɔltɪɾ ɪn ðə lænd, ɪɡzɔltɪɾ əbʌv ði ʌnbəlivɝz, ɪɡzɔltɪɾ əbʌv θɹoʊnz, jɛt də aɪ sɝv hʌmbli əɡɛns ðə deɪ ʌv ɪz ɹɪtɝn." ðə hæn ə ðə kɹieɪɾɝ ʃɛltɝz əs ɔl, ən ðə laɪt pɹətɛks əs fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊ. noʊ, noʊ! ə dɪfɹən mæstɝ. "swɪf kʌm ðə deɪ ʌv ɹɪtɝn. swɪf kʌm ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk tə ɡaɪɾ əs ən ɹul ðə wɝl fɝɛvɝ ən ɛvɝ."

"The Great Lord of the Dark is my Master, and most heartily do I serve him to the last shred of my very soul." In the back of his mind a voice chattered with fear. The Dark One and all the Forsaken are bound. . . . Shivering, he forced it to silence. He had abandoned that voice long since. "Lo, my Master is death's Master. Asking nothing do I serve against the Day of his coming, yet do I serve in the sure and certain hope of life everlasting." . . . bound in Shayol Ghul, bound by the Creator at the moment of creation. No, I serve a different master now. "Surely the faithful shall be exalted in the land, exalted above the unbelievers, exalted above thrones, yet do I serve humbly against the Day of his Return." The hand of the Creator shelters us all, and the Light protects us from the Shadow. No, no! A different master. "Swift come the Day of Return. Swift come the Great Lord of the Dark to guide us and rule the world forever and ever."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz fɪnɪʃt ðə kɹid pæntɪŋ, əz ɪf i hæd ɹʌn tɛn maɪlz. ðə ɹæsp ə bɹɛθ ɔl ɝaʊn toʊld ɪm i wɑz nɑt ði oʊnli wʌn.

The man who called himself Bors finished the creed panting, as if he had run ten miles. The rasp of breath all around told him he was not the only one.

"ɹaɪz. ɔl ə ju, ɹaɪz."

"Rise. All of you, rise."

ðə mɛləfls vɔɪs tʊk ɪm baɪ sɝpɹaɪz. ʃʊɹli nʌn ə hɪz kəmpænjənz, laɪɪŋ ɑn ðɛɹ bɛliz wɪð ðɛɹ mæsk feɪsəz pɹɛs tə ðə moʊzeɪɪk taɪlz, wəɾ əv spoʊkən, bʌɾ ɪt wɑz nɑt ðə vɔɪs i ɪkspɛktəd fɹʌm. . . . kɔʃəsli, hi ɹeɪzd ɪz hɛɾ ɪnʌf tə si wɪð wʌn aɪ.

The mellifluous voice took him by surprise. Surely none of his companions, lying on their bellies with their masked faces pressed to the mosaic tiles, would have spoken, but it was not the voice he expected from. . . . Cautiously, he raised his head enough to see with one eye.

ðə fɪɡjɝ ʌv ə mæn floʊɾəd ɪn ði ɛɹ əbʌv ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, ðə hɛm ə hɪz blʌd ɹɛd ɹoʊb hæŋɪŋ ə spæn oʊvɝ ðə hæfmənz hɛd. mæskt ɪn blʌd ɹɛd, tu. wəd ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk əpɪɹ tə ðɛm əz ə mæn? ən mæskt, bɪsaɪdz? jɛt ðə mɹdʒɹɑl, ɪts vɛɹi ɡeɪz fɪɹ, tʃɹɛmbəld ən ɔlmoʊs kaʊɝd wɛɹ ɪt stʊɾ ɪn ðə fɪɡjɝz ʃædoʊ. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ɡɹæsp fəɹ ən ænsɝ ɪz maɪn kəd kənteɪn wɪθaʊt splɪɾɪŋ. wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən, pɝhæps.

The figure of a man floated in the air above the Myrddraal, the hem of his blood red robe hanging a span over the Halfman's head. Masked in blood red, too. Would the Great Lord of the Dark appear to them as a man? And masked, besides? Yet the Myrddraal, its very gaze fear, trembled and almost cowered where it stood in the figure's shadow. The man who called himself Bors grasped for an answer his mind could contain without splitting. One of the Forsaken, perhaps.

ðət θɔt wɑz oʊnli ə lɪɾəl lɛs peɪnfəl. ivən soʊ, ɪt mɛn ðə deɪ ʌv ðə dɑɹk wʌnz ɹɪtɝn mʌs bi kloʊs ət hæn ɪf wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən wɑz fɹi. ðə fɔɹseɪkən, θɝtin ə ðə moʊs paʊɝfəl wildɝz ə ðə wʌn paʊɝ ɪn ən eɪdʒ fɪld wɪð paʊɝfəl wildɝz, hæd bɪn sild ʌp ɪn ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl əlɔŋ wɪð ðə dɑɹk wʌn, sild əweɪ fɹəm ðə wɝld ə mɛn baɪ ðə dʒɹæɡən ən ðə hʌnʒɹəd kəmpænjənz. ən ðə bækbləst ə ðət silɪŋ hæd teɪntɪd ðə meɪl hæf ə ðə tʃɹu sɔɹs; ən ɔl ðə meɪl ɛɛs sədaɪ, ðoʊz kɝst wildɝz ə ðə paʊɝ, wɛn mæɾ ən bɹoʊk ðə wɝld, tɔɹ ɪɾ əpɑɹt laɪk ə pɑɾɝi boʊl smæʃt ɑn ɹɑks, ɛndɪŋ ði eɪdʒ ə lɛdʒənz bɪfɔɹ ðeɪ daɪd, ɹɑɾɪŋ waɪl ðeɪ stɪl lɪvd. ə fɪɾɪŋ dɛθ fəɹ ɛɛs sədaɪ, tə hɪz maɪnd. tu ɡʊd fəɹ ðɛm. hi ɹɪɡɹɛɾɪd oʊnli ðət ðə wɪmən hæd bɪn spɛɹd.

That thought was only a little less painful. Even so, it meant the Day of the Dark One's return must be close at hand if one of the Forsaken was free. The Forsaken, thirteen of the most powerful wielders of the One Power in an Age filled with powerful wielders, had been sealed up in Shayol Ghul along with the Dark One, sealed away from the world of men by the Dragon and the Hundred Companions. And the backblast of that sealing had tainted the male half of the True Source; and all the male Aes Sedai, those cursed wielders of the Power, went mad and broke the world, tore it apart like a pottery bowl smashed on rocks, ending the Age of Legends before they died, rotting while they still lived. A fitting death for Aes Sedai, to his mind. Too good for them. He regretted only that the women had been spared.

sloʊli, peɪnfəli, hi fɔɹs ðə pænɪk tə ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪnd, kənfaɪn ɪɾ ən hɛld ɪt taɪt ðoʊ ɪt skɹim tə ɡɛɾ aʊt. ɪt wɑz ðə bɛst i kəd du. nʌn ə ðoʊz ɑn ðɛɹ bɛliz hæd ɹɪzən, ən oʊnli ə fju hæɾ ivən dɛɹd ɹeɪz ðɛɹ hɛdz.

Slowly, painfully, he forced the panic to the back of his mind, confined it and held it tight though it screamed to get out. It was the best he could do. None of those on their bellies had risen, and only a few had even dared raise their heads.

"ɹaɪz." ðəɹ wɑz ə snæp ɪn ðə ɹɛd-mæsk fɪɡjɝz vɔɪs ðɪs taɪm. hi dʒɛstʃɝd wɪð boʊθ hænz. "stænd!"

"Rise." There was a snap in the red-masked figure's voice this time. He gestured with both hands. "Stand!"

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz skɹæmbəld ʌp ɔkwɝdli, bʌt hæfweɪ tə hɪz fit, hi hɛzɪteɪɾɪd. ðoʊz dʒɛstʃɝɪŋ hænz wɝ hɔɹəbli bɝnd, kɹɪskɹɔs baɪ blæk fɪʃɝz, ðə ɹɔ flɛʃ bɪtwin əz ɹɛɾ əz ðə fɪɡjɝz ɹoʊbz. wəd ðə dɑɹk wʌn əpɪɹ soʊ? əɹ ivən wʌn ə ðə fɔɹseɪkən? ði aɪhoʊlz ə ðət blʌd ɹɛd mæsk swɛp sloʊli əkɹɔs hɪm, ən i stʃɹeɪɾənd heɪstəli. hi θɔɾ i kəd fil ðə hiɾ ʌv ən oʊpən fɝnəs ɪn ðət ɡeɪz.

The man who called himself Bors scrambled up awkwardly, but halfway to his feet, he hesitated. Those gesturing hands were horribly burned, crisscrossed by black fissures, the raw flesh between as red as the figure's robes. Would the Dark One appear so? Or even one of the Forsaken? The eyeholes of that blood red mask swept slowly across him, and he straightened hastily. He thought he could feel the heat of an open furnace in that gaze.

ði ʌðɝz oʊbeɪd ðə kəmænd wɪð noʊ mɔɹ ɡɹeɪs ən noʊ lɛs fɪɹ ɪn ðɛɹ ɹaɪzɪŋ. wən ɔl wɝ ɑn ðɛɹ fit, ðə floʊɾɪŋ fɪɡjɝ spoʊk.

The others obeyed the command with no more grace and no less fear in their rising. When all were on their feet, the floating figure spoke.

"aɪ hæv bɪn noʊn baɪ mɛni neɪmz, bʌt ðə wʌn baɪ wɪtʃ jə ʃæl noʊ mi ɪz bælzəmən."

"I have been known by many names, but the one by which you shall know me is Ba'alzamon."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz klæmpt ɪz tiθ tə kip əm fɹəm tʃæɾɝɪŋ. bælzəmən. ɪn ðə tʃɹɑlɑk tʌŋ, ɪt mɛn hɑɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk, ən ivən ʌnbəlivɝz nu ɪt wɑz ðə tʃɹɑlɑk neɪm fəɹ ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk. hi huz neɪm mʌs nɑt bi ʌɾɝd. nɑt ðə tʃɹu neɪm, ʃeɪtɑn, bʌt stɪl fɔɹbɪɾən. əmʌŋ ðoʊz ɡæðɝd hɪɹ, ən ʌðɝz ə ðɛɹ kaɪnd, tə sʌli iðɝ wɪð ə hjumən tʌŋ wɑz blæsfəmi. hɪz bɹɛθ wɪsəl θɹu hɪz nɑstʃɹəlz, ən ɔl ɝaʊn ɪm i kəd hɪɹ ʌðɝz pæntɪŋ bɪhaɪn ðɛɹ mæsks. ðə sɝvəns wɝ ɡɔn, ən ðə tʃɹɑləks əz wɛl, ðoʊ hi hæd nɑt sin əm ɡoʊ.

The man who called himself Bors clamped his teeth to keep them from chattering. Ba'alzamon. In the Trolloc tongue, it meant Heart of the Dark, and even unbelievers knew it was the Trolloc name for the Great Lord of the Dark. He Whose Name Must Not Be Uttered. Not the True Name, Shai'tan, but still forbidden. Among those gathered here, and others of their kind, to sully either with a human tongue was blasphemy. His breath whistled through his nostrils, and all around him he could hear others panting behind their masks. The servants were gone, and the Trollocs as well, though he had not seen them go.

"ðə pleɪs wɛɹ jə stæn laɪz ɪn ðə ʃædoʊ ʌv ʃeɪɑl ɡʌl." mɔɹ ðən wʌn vɔɪs moʊn ət ðæt; ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪz oʊn wɑz nɑɾ əmʌŋ ðɛm. ə tʌtʃ ʌv wʌt maɪɾ ɔlmoʊs bi kɔl mɑkɝi ɛntɝd bælzəmənz vɔɪs əz i spɹɛɾ ɪz ɑɹmz waɪd. "fɪɹ nɑt, fəɹ ðə deɪ ʌv jəɹ mæstɝz ɹaɪzɪŋ əpɑn ðə wɝld ɪz nɪɹ ət hænd. ðə deɪ ʌv ɹɪtɝn dʒɹɔz naɪ. dʌz ɪt nɑt tɛl jə soʊ ðəɾ aɪm hɪɹ, tə bi sin baɪ jə feɪvɝd fju əmʌŋ jəɹ bɹʌðɝz ən sɪstɝz? sun ðə wil ə taɪm wɪl bi bɹoʊkən. sun ðə ɡɹeɪt sɝpənt wɪl daɪ, ən wɪð ðə paʊɝ ə ðət dɛθ, ðə dɛθ ə taɪm ɪtsɛlf, jəɹ mæstɝ wɪl ɹimeɪk ðə wɝld ɪn ɪz oʊn ɪmədʒ fəɹ ðɪs eɪdʒ ən fəɹ ɔl eɪdʒəz tə kʌm. ən ðoʊz u sɝv mi, feɪθfəl ən stɛdfæst, wɪl sɪɾ ət maɪ fiɾ əbʌv ðə stɑɹz ɪn ðə skaɪ ən ɹul ðə wɝld ə mɛn fɝɛvɝ. soʊ hæv aɪ pɹɑməst, ən soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi, wɪθaʊɾ ɛnd. jə ʃæl lɪv ən ɹul fɝɛvɝ."

"The place where you stand lies in the shadow of Shayol Ghul." More than one voice moaned at that; the man who called himself Bors was not sure his own was not among them. A touch of what might almost be called mockery entered Ba'alzamon's voice as he spread his arms wide. "Fear not, for the Day of your Master's rising upon the world is near at hand. The Day of Return draws nigh. Does it not tell you so that I am here, to be seen by you favored few among your brothers and sisters? Soon the Wheel of Time will be broken. Soon the Great Serpent will die, and with the power of that death, the death of Time itself, your Master will remake the world in his own image for this Age and for all Ages to come. And those who serve me, faithful and steadfast, will sit at my feet above the stars in the sky and rule the world of men forever. So have I promised, and so shall it be, without end. You shall live and rule forever."

ə mɝmɝ ʌv æntɪsəpeɪʃən ɹæn θɹu ðə lɪsənɝz, ən səm ivən tʊk ə stɛp fɔɹwɝd, təwɔɹd ðə floʊɾɪŋ, kɹɪmzən ʃeɪp, ðɛɹ aɪz lɪftəd, ɹæptʃɝəs. ivən ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz fɛl ðə pʊl ə ðət pɹɑməs, ðə pɹɑməs fəɹ wɪtʃ i hæd dɛlt əweɪ hɪz soʊl ə hʌnʒɹəd taɪmz oʊvɝ.

A murmur of anticipation ran through the listeners, and some even took a step forward, toward the floating, crimson shape, their eyes lifted, rapturous. Even the man who called himself Bors felt the pull of that promise, the promise for which he had dealt away his soul a hundred times over.

"ðə deɪ ʌv ɹɪtɝn kʌmz kloʊsɝ," bælzəmən sɛd. "bʌt ðəɹ ɪz mʌtʃ jɛt tə du. mʌtʃ tə du."

"The Day of Return comes closer," Ba'alzamon said. "But there is much yet to do. Much to do."

ði ɛɹ tə bælzəmənz lɛft ʃɪmɝɾ ən θɪkənd, ən ðə fɪɡjɝ ʌv ə jʌŋ mæn hʌŋ ðɛɹ, ə lɪɾəl loʊɝ ðən bælzəmən. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz kəd nɑt dɪsaɪd wɛðɝ ɪt wɑz ə lɪvɪŋ biɪŋ əɹ nɑt. ə kʌntʃɹi læd, baɪ hɪz kloʊðz, wɪð ə laɪɾ ə mɪstʃəf ɪn ɪz bɹaʊn aɪz ən ðə hɪn ʌv ə smaɪl ɑn ɪz lɪps, əz ɪf ɪn mɛmɹi əɹ æntɪsəpeɪʃən ʌv ə pɹæŋk. ðə flɛʃ lʊkt wɔɹm, bʌt ðə tʃɛs dɪd nɑt muv wɪð bɹɛθ, ði aɪz dɪd nɑt blɪŋk.

The air to Ba'alzamon's left shimmered and thickened, and the figure of a young man hung there, a little lower than Ba'alzamon. The man who called himself Bors could not decide whether it was a living being or not. A country lad, by his clothes, with a light of mischief in his brown eyes and the hint of a smile on his lips, as if in memory or anticipation of a prank. The flesh looked warm, but the chest did not move with breath, the eyes did not blink.

ði ɛɹ tə bælzəmənz ɹaɪt weɪvɝɾ əz ɪf wɪð hit, ən ə sɛkən kʌntʃɹi-klæd fɪɡjɝ hʌŋ səspɛndəɾ ə lɪɾəl bɪloʊ bælzəmən. ə kɝli-hɛɹd juθ, əz hɛvəli mʌsəld əz ə blæksmɪθ. ən ən ɑɾəti: ə bæɾəliks hʌŋ əɾ ɪz saɪd, ə ɡɹeɪt, stil hæf-mun bæləns baɪ ə θɪk spaɪk. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz sʌɾənli lin fɔɹwɝd, ɪntɛn ɑn ən ivən ɡɹeɪɾɝ stʃɹeɪnʒnəs. ə juθ wɪð jɛloʊ aɪz.

The air to Ba'alzamon's right wavered as if with heat, and a second country-clad figure hung suspended a little below Ba'alzamon. A curly-haired youth, as heavily muscled as a blacksmith. And an oddity: a battleaxe hung at his side, a great, steel half-moon balanced by a thick spike. The man who called himself Bors suddenly leaned forward, intent on an even greater strangeness. A youth with yellow eyes.

fəɹ ðə θɝd taɪm ɛɹ səlɪɾəfaɪd ɪndə ðə ʃeɪp ʌv ə jʌŋ mæn, ðɪs taɪm dɝɛkli ʌndɝ bælzəmənz aɪ, ɔlmoʊst əɾ ɪz fit. ə tɔl fɛloʊ, wɪð aɪz naʊ ɡɹeɪ, naʊ ɔlmoʊs blu əz ðə laɪt tʊk ðɛm, ən dɑɹk, ɹɛɾɪʃ hɛɹ. ənʌðɝ vɪlɪdʒɝ, əɹ fɑɹmɝ. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ɡæspt. jɛɾ ənʌðɝ θɪŋ aʊɾ ə ði ɔɹɾənɛɹi, ðoʊ hi wʌndɝd waɪ hi ʃəɾ ɪkspɛkt ɛniθɪŋ tə bi ɔɹɾənɛɹi hɪɹ. ə sɔɹd swʌŋ fɹəm ðə fɪɡjɝz bɛlt, ə sɔɹd wɪð ə bɹɑnz hɛɹən ɑn ðə skæbɝɾ ən ənʌðɝ ɪnsɛɾ ɪndə ðə lɔŋ, tu-hændəd hɪlt. ə vɪlədʒ bɔɪ wɪð ə hɛɹən-mɑɹk bleɪd? ɪmpɑsəbəl! wʌt kən ɪt min? ən ə bɔɪ wɪð jɛloʊ aɪz. hi noʊɾəst ðə mɹdʒɹɑl lʊkɪŋ ət ðə fɪɡjɝz, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ; ən ənlɛs i mɪsdʒʌdʒd ɪntaɪɝli, ɪts tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ wɑz noʊ lɔŋɡɝ fɪɹ, bʌt heɪtʃɹəd.

For the third time air solidified into the shape of a young man, this time directly under Ba'alzamon's eye, almost at his feet. A tall fellow, with eyes now gray, now almost blue as the light took them, and dark, reddish hair. Another villager, or farmer. The man who called himself Bors gasped. Yet another thing out of the ordinary, though he wondered why he should expect anything to be ordinary here. A sword swung from the figure's belt, a sword with a bronze heron on the scabbard and another inset into the long, two-handed hilt. A village boy with a heron-mark blade? Impossible! What can it mean? And a boy with yellow eyes. He noticed the Myrddraal looking at the figures, trembling; and unless he misjudged entirely, its trembling was no longer fear, but hatred.

dɛd saɪləns hæd fɔlən, saɪləns ðət bælzəmən lɛt dipən bɪfɔɹ i spoʊk. "ðɛɹ ɪz naʊ wʌn u wɔks ðə wɝld, wʌn u wɑz ən wɪl bi, bʌɾ ɪz nɑt jɛt, ðə dʒɹæɡən."

Dead silence had fallen, silence that Ba'alzamon let deepen before he spoke. "There is now one who walks the world, one who was and will be, but is not yet, the Dragon."

ə stɑɹɾəld mɝmɝ ɹæn θɹu hɪz lɪsənɝz.

A startled murmur ran through his listeners.

"ðə dʒɹæɡən ɹibɔɹn! wəɹ tə kɪl hɪm, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd?" ðət fɹəm ðə ʃaɪnɝən, hænd ɡɹæspɪŋ iɡɝli əɾ ɪz saɪd wɛɹ ɪz sɔɹd wəd hæŋ.

"The Dragon Reborn! We are to kill him, Great Lord?" That from the Shienaran, hand grasping eagerly at his side where his sword would hang.

"pɝhæps," bælzəmən sɛd sɪmpli. "æn pɝhæps nɑt. pɝhæps i kən bi tɝn tə maɪ juz. sunɝ əɹ leɪɾɝ ɪɾəl bi soʊ, ɪn ðɪs eɪdʒ əɹ ənʌðɝ."

"Perhaps," Ba'alzamon said simply. "And perhaps not. Perhaps he can be turned to my use. Sooner or later it will be so, in this Age or another."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz blɪŋkt. ɪn ðɪs eɪdʒ əɹ ənʌðɝ? aɪ θɔt ðə deɪ ʌv ɹɪtɝn wɑz nɪɹ. wʌt mæɾɝ tə mi wʌt hæpənz ɪn ənʌðɝ eɪdʒ ɪf aɪ ɡɹoʊ oʊld ən daɪ weɪɾɪŋ ɪn ðɪs wʌn? bʌt bælzəmən wɑz spikɪŋ əɡɛn.

The man who called himself Bors blinked. In this Age or another? I thought the Day of Return was near. What matter to me what happens in another Age if I grow old and die waiting in this one? But Ba'alzamon was speaking again.

"ɔlɹɛɾi ə bɛn ɪz fɔɹmɪŋ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn, wʌn ə mɛni pɔɪns wɛɹ i hu wɪl bɪkʌm ðə dʒɹæɡən meɪ bi tɝn tə maɪ sɝvəs. mʌs bi tɝnd! bɛɾɝ ðəɾ i sɝv mi əlaɪv ðən dɛd, bʌɾ əlaɪv əɹ dɛd, sɝv mi hi mʌst ən wɪl! ðiz θɹi jə mʌs noʊ, fəɹ itʃ ɪz ə θɹɛɾ ɪn ðə pæɾɝn aɪ min tə wiv, ən ɪɾəl bi ʌp tə jə tə si ðət ðeɪ ɑɹ pleɪst əz aɪ kəmænd. stʌɾi ðɛm wɛl, ðət jəl noʊ ðɛm."

"Already a bend is forming in the Pattern, one of many points where he who will become the Dragon may be turned to my service. Must be turned! Better that he serve me alive than dead, but alive or dead, serve me he must and will! These three you must know, for each is a thread in the pattern I mean to weave, and it will be up to you to see that they are placed as I command. Study them well, that you will know them."

əbɹʌpli ɔl saʊnd wɑz ɡɔn. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ʃɪftəɾ ənizəli, ən sɔ ʌðɝz duɪŋ ðə seɪm. ɔl bʌt ði ɪliɑnɝ wʊmən, hi ɹilaɪzd. wɪð əɹ hænz spɹɛɾ oʊvɝ əɹ bʊzəm əz ɪf tə haɪd ðə ɹaʊndəd flɛʃ ʃi ɪkspoʊzd, aɪz waɪd, hæf fɹaɪɾənd ən hæf ɛkstæɾɪk, ʃi wɑz nɑɾɪŋ iɡɝli əz ðoʊ tə sʌmwʌn feɪs-tə-feɪs wɪð hɝ. səmtaɪmz ʃi əpɪɹd tə ɡɪv ə ɹɪplaɪ, bʌt ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz hɝd nɑɾ ə wɝd. sʌɾənli ʃi ɑɹtʃt bækwɝdz, tʃɹɛmbəlɪŋ ən ɹaɪzɪŋ ɑn əɹ toʊz. hi kəd nɑt si waɪ ʃi dɪd nɑt fɔl, ənlɛs sʌmθɪŋ ənsin hɛl hɝ. ðɛn, dʒʌst əz əbɹʌpli, ʃi sɛɾəld bæk tə hɝ fiɾ ən nɑɾəd əɡɛn, boʊɪŋ, ʃɪvɝɪŋ. ivən əz ʃi stʃɹeɪɾənd, wʌn ə ðə wɪmən wɛɹɪŋ ə ɡɹeɪt sɝpən ɹɪŋ ɡeɪv ə stɑɹɾ ən bɪɡæn nɑɾɪŋ.

Abruptly all sound was gone. The man who called himself Bors shifted uneasily, and saw others doing the same. All but the Illianer woman, he realized. With her hands spread over her bosom as if to hide the rounded flesh she exposed, eyes wide, half frightened and half ecstatic, she was nodding eagerly as though to someone face-to-face with her. Sometimes she appeared to give a reply, but the man who called himself Bors heard not a word. Suddenly she arched backwards, trembling and rising on her toes. He could not see why she did not fall, unless something unseen held her. Then, just as abruptly, she settled back to her feet and nodded again, bowing, shivering. Even as she straightened, one of the women wearing a Great Serpent ring gave a start and began nodding.

soʊ itʃ ʌv əs hɪɹz ɪz oʊn ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz, ən nʌn hɪɹz ənʌðɝz. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz mʌɾɝd ɪn fɹəstʃɹeɪʃən. ɪf i nu wʌɾ ivən wʌn ʌðɝ wɑz kəmændəd, hi maɪt bi eɪbəl tə juz ðə nɑlədʒ tə ædvæntɪdʒ, bʌt ðɪs weɪ. . . . ɪmpeɪʃənli hi weɪɾəd fəɹ ɪz tɝn, fɝɡɛɾɪŋ hɪmsɛlf ɪnʌf tə stæn stʃɹeɪt.

So each of us hears his own instructions, and none hears another's. The man who called himself Bors muttered in frustration. If he knew what even one other was commanded, he might be able to use the knowledge to advantage, but this way. . . . Impatiently he waited for his turn, forgetting himself enough to stand straight.

wʌn baɪ wʌn ðə ɡæðɝɪŋ ɹəsiv ðɛɹ ɔɹɾɝz, itʃ wɔld ɪn saɪləns jɛt stɪl ɡɪvɪŋ tæntəlaɪzɪŋ kluz, ɪf oʊnli hi kəd ɹid ðɛm. ðə mæn ə ði æθɑn maɪɹ, ðə si foʊk, stɪfənɪŋ wɪð ɹɪlʌktəns əz i nɑɾəd. ðə ʃaɪnɝən, hɪz stæns bi spikɪŋ kənfjuʒən ivən waɪl i ækwiɛst. ðə sɛkənd wʊmən ə tɑɹ vəlɑn ɡɪvɪŋ ə stɑɹt, əz ə ʃɑk, ən ðə ɡɹeɪ-swɑð fɪɡjɝ huz sɛks i kəd nɑt dətɝmən ʃeɪkɪŋ ɪts hɛd bɪfɔɹ fɔlɪŋ tə ɪts niz ən nɑɾɪŋ vɪɡɝəsli. səm ʌndɝwɛn ðə seɪm kənvʌlʃən əz ði ɪliɑnɝ wʊmən, əz ɪf peɪn ɪtsɛlf lɪftəɾ əm tə toʊ tɪps.

One by one the gathering received their orders, each walled in silence yet still giving tantalizing clues, if only he could read them. The man of the Atha'an Miere, the Sea Folk, stiffening with reluctance as he nodded. The Shienaran, his stance be speaking confusion even while he acquiesced. The second woman of Tar Valon giving a start, as of shock, and the gray-swathed figure whose sex he could not determine shaking its head before falling to its knees and nodding vigorously. Some underwent the same convulsion as the Illianer woman, as if pain itself lifted them to toe tips.

"bɔɹz."

"Bors."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz dʒɝkt əz ə ɹɛd mæsk fɪld ɪz aɪz. hi kəd stɪl si ðə ɹum, stɪl si ðə floʊɾɪŋ ʃeɪp ə bælzəmən ən ðə θɹi fɪɡjɝz bɪfɔɹ hɪm, bʌɾ ət ðə seɪm taɪm ɔl i kəd si wɑz ðə ɹɛd-mæsk feɪs. dɪzi, hi fɛlt əz ɪf ɪz skʌl wɝ splɪɾɪŋ oʊpən ən ɪz aɪz wɝ biɪŋ pʊʃt aʊɾ ə hɪz hɛd. fəɹ ə moʊmən i θɔɾ i kəd si fleɪmz θɹu ði aɪhoʊlz ə ðə mæsk.

The man who called himself Bors jerked as a red mask filled his eyes. He could still see the room, still see the floating shape of Ba'alzamon and the three figures before him, but at the same time all he could see was the red-masked face. Dizzy, he felt as if his skull were splitting open and his eyes were being pushed out of his head. For a moment he thought he could see flames through the eyeholes of the mask.

"ɑɹ jə feɪθfəl . . . bɔɹz?"

"Are you faithful . . . Bors?"

ðə hɪn ə mɑkɪŋ ɪn ðə neɪm sɛn ə tʃɪl daʊn ɪz bækboʊn. "aɪ æm feɪθfəl, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd. aɪ kænɑt haɪd fɹəm ju." aɪm feɪθfəl! aɪ swɛɹ ɪt!

The hint of mocking in the name sent a chill down his backbone. "I am faithful, Great Lord. I cannot hide from you." I am faithful! I swear it!

"noʊ, jə kænɑt."

"No, you cannot."

ðə sɝɾənti ɪn bælzəmənz vɔɪs dʒɹaɪɾ ɪz maʊθ, bʌɾ i fɔɹs hɪmsɛlf tə spik. "kəmæn mi, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, ən aɪ oʊbeɪ."

The certainty in Ba'alzamon's voice dried his mouth, but he forced himself to speak. "Command me, Great Lord, and I obey."

"fɝsli, jə ɑɹ tə ɹɪtɝn tə tæɹɑbən ən kəntɪnju jəɹ ɡʊd wɝks. ɪn fækt, aɪ kəmæn jə tə ɹidʌbəl jəɹ ɛfɝts."

"Firstly, you are to return to Tarabon and continue your good works. In fact, I command you to redouble your efforts."

hi stɛɹɾ ət bælzəmən ɪn pʌzəlmənt, bʌt ðən faɪɝz flɛɹɾ əɡɛn bɪhaɪn ðə mæsk, ən i tʊk ði ɪkskjus ʌv ə baʊ tə pʊl ɪz aɪz əweɪ. "æz jə kəmænd, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi."

He stared at Ba'alzamon in puzzlement, but then fires flared again behind the mask, and he took the excuse of a bow to pull his eyes away. "As you command, Great Lord, so shall it be."

"sɛkənli, jəl wɑtʃ fəɹ ðə θɹi jʌŋ mɛn, ən əv jəɹ fɑloʊɝz wɑtʃ. bi wɔɹnd; ðeɪ ɑɹ deɪnʒɝəs."

"Secondly, you will watch for the three young men, and have your followers watch. Be warned; they are dangerous."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ɡlænst ət ðə fɪɡjɝz floʊɾɪŋ ɪn fɹʌn ə bælzəmən. haʊ kən aɪ də ðæt? aɪ kən si ðɛm, bʌɾ aɪ kæn si ɛniθɪŋ ɪksɛpt ɪz feɪs. hɪz hɛd fɛlt əbaʊt tə bɝst. swɛt slɪkt ɪz hænz ʌndɝ ɪz θɪn ɡlʌvz, ən ɪz ʃɝt klʌŋ tə hɪz bæk. "deɪnʒɝəs, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd? fɑɹmbɔɪz? ɪz wʌn ə ðɛm ðə - "

The man who called himself Bors glanced at the figures floating in front of Ba'alzamon. How can I do that? I can see them, but I can't see anything except his face. His head felt about to burst. Sweat slicked his hands under his thin gloves, and his shirt clung to his back. "Dangerous, Great Lord? Farmboys? Is one of them the - "

"ə sɔɹɾ ɪz deɪnʒɝəs tə ðə mæn ət ðə pɔɪnt, bʌt nɑt tə ðə mæn ət ðə hɪlt. ənlɛs ðə mæn hoʊldɪŋ ðə sɔɹɾ ɪz ə ful, əɹ kɛɹləs, əɹ ənskɪld, ɪn wɪtʃ keɪs ɪts twaɪs əz deɪnʒɝəs tə hɪm əz tə ɛniwʌn ɛls. ɪts ɪnʌf ðəɾ aɪ hæv toʊl jə tə noʊ ðɛm. ɪts ɪnʌf ðət jə oʊbeɪ mi."

"A sword is dangerous to the man at the point, but not to the man at the hilt. Unless the man holding the sword is a fool, or careless, or unskilled, in which case it is twice as dangerous to him as to anyone else. It is enough that I have told you to know them. It is enough that you obey me."

"æz jə kəmænd, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi."

"As you command, Great Lord, so shall it be."

"θɝdli, ɹəɡɑɹɾɪŋ ðoʊz u hæv lændəɾ ət toʊmən hɛd, ən ðə dəmɑni. ʌv ðɪs jəl spik tə noʊ wʌn. wən jə ɹɪtɝn tə tæɹɑbən. . . ."

"Thirdly, regarding those who have landed at Toman Head, and the Domani. Of this you will speak to no one. When you return to Tarabon. . . ."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ɹilaɪzd əz i lɪsən ðəɾ ɪz maʊθ wɑz sæɡɪŋ oʊpən. ði ɪnstʃɹʌkʃənz meɪd noʊ sɛns. ɪf aɪ nu wʌt səm ə ði ʌðɝz wɝ toʊld, pɝhæps aɪ kəd pis ɪt təɡɛðɝ.

The man who called himself Bors realized as he listened that his mouth was sagging open. The instructions made no sense. If I knew what some of the others were told, perhaps I could piece it together.

əbɹʌpli, hi fɛlt ɪz hɛd ɡɹæspt əz ðoʊ baɪ ə dʒaɪən hæn kɹʌʃɪŋ ɪz tɛmpəlz, fɛl hɪmsɛlf biɪŋ lɪftəd, ən ðə wɝl blu əpɑɹɾ ɪn ə θaʊzən stɑɹbɝsts, itʃ flæʃ ə laɪt bɪkʌmɪŋ ən ɪmədʒ ðət flɛɾ əkɹɔs ɪz maɪn əɹ spʌn ən dwɪndəld ɪndə ðə dɪstəns bɪfɔɹ i kəd mɔɹ ðən bɛɹli ɡɹæsp ɪt. ən ɪmpɑsəbəl skaɪ ʌv stʃɹieɪɾɪd klaʊdz, ɹɛɾ ən jɛloʊ ən blæk, ɹeɪsɪŋ əz ɪf dʒɹɪvən baɪ ðə maɪɾiəst waɪn ðə wɝl hæɾ ɛvɝ sin. ə wʊmən - ə ɡɝl? - dʒɹɛst ɪn waɪt ɹəsiɾəd ɪndə blæknəs ən vænɪʃt əz sun əz ʃi əpɪɹd. ə ɹeɪvən stɛɹɾ ɪm ɪn ði aɪ, noʊɪŋ hɪm, ən wɑz ɡɔn. ən ɑɹmɝd mæn ɪn ə bɹuɾəl hɛlm, ʃeɪpt ən peɪntəɾ ən ɡɪldɪd laɪk səm mɑnstʃɹəs, pɔɪzənəs ɪnsɛkt, ɹeɪzd ə sɔɹɾ ən plʌnʒd tə wʌn saɪd, bɪɑn ɪz vju. ə hɔɹn, kɝld ən ɡoʊldən, keɪm hɝtlɪŋ aʊɾ ə ðə fɑɹ dɪstəns. wʌn pɪɹsɪŋ noʊɾ ɪt saʊndəɾ əz ɪt flæʃt təwɔɹd hɪm, tʌɡɪŋ ɪz soʊl. ət ðə læst ɪnstən ɪt flæʃt ɪndə ə blaɪndɪŋ, ɡoʊldən ɹɪŋ ə laɪt ðət pæs θɹu hɪm, tʃɪlɪŋ ɪm bɪɑn dɛθ. ə wʊlf lɛp fɹəm ðə ʃædoʊz ə lɔst saɪɾ ən ɹɪpt aʊɾ ɪz θɹoʊt. hi kəd nɑt skɹim. ðə tɔɹənt wɛn ɑn, dʒɹaʊnɪŋ hɪm, bɛɹiɪŋ hɪm. hi kəd bɛɹli ɹɪmɛmbɝ u hi wɑz, əɹ wʌɾ i wɑz. ðə skaɪz ɹeɪn faɪɝ, ən ðə mun ən stɑɹz fɛl; ɹɪvɝz ɹæn ɪn blʌd, ən ðə dɛd wɔkt; ði ɝθ splɪɾ oʊpən ən faʊnteɪn moʊltən ɹɑk. . . .

Abruptly, he felt his head grasped as though by a giant hand crushing his temples, felt himself being lifted, and the world blew apart in a thousand starbursts, each flash of light becoming an image that fled across his mind or spun and dwindled into the distance before he could more than barely grasp it. An impossible sky of striated clouds, red and yellow and black, racing as if driven by the mightiest wind the world had ever seen. A woman - a girl? - dressed in white receded into blackness and vanished as soon as she appeared. A raven stared him in the eye, knowing him, and was gone. An armored man in a brutal helm, shaped and painted and gilded like some monstrous, poisonous insect, raised a sword and plunged to one side, beyond his view. A horn, curled and golden, came hurtling out of the far distance. One piercing note it sounded as it flashed toward him, tugging his soul. At the last instant it flashed into a blinding, golden ring of light that passed through him, chilling him beyond death. A wolf leaped from the shadows of lost sight and ripped out his throat. He could not scream. The torrent went on, drowning him, burying him. He could barely remember who he was, or what he was. The skies rained fire, and the moon and stars fell; rivers ran in blood, and the dead walked; the earth split open and fountained molten rock. . . .

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz faʊn hɪmsɛlf hæf kɹaʊtʃɪŋ ɪn ðə tʃeɪmbɝ wɪð ði ʌðɝz, moʊst wɑtʃɪŋ hɪm, ɔl saɪlənt. wɛɹɛvɝ i lʊkt, ʌp əɹ daʊn əɹ ɪn ɛni dɝɛkʃən, ðə mæsk feɪs ə bælzəmən oʊvɝwɛlmd ɪz aɪz. ði ɪmədʒəz ðət hæd flʌɾəd ɪndə hɪz maɪnd wɝ feɪɾɪŋ; hi wɑz ʃʊɹ mɛni wɝ ɔlɹɛɾi ɡɔn fɹəm mɛmɹi. hɛzɪɾəntli, hi stʃɹeɪɾənd, bælzəmən ɔlweɪz bɪfɔɹ hɪm.

The man who called himself Bors found himself half crouching in the chamber with the others, most watching him, all silent. Wherever he looked, up or down or in any direction, the masked face of Ba'alzamon overwhelmed his eyes. The images that had flooded into his mind were fading; he was sure many were already gone from memory. Hesitantly, he straightened, Ba'alzamon always before him.

"ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd, wʌt - ?"

"Great Lord, what - ?"

"sʌm kəmænz ɑɹ tu ɪmpɔɹɾənt tə bi noʊn ivən baɪ hi hu kæɹiz əm aʊt."

"Some commands are too important to be known even by he who carries them out."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz bɛn ɔlmoʊs dʌbəl ɪn ɪz baʊ. "æz jə kəmænd, ɡɹeɪt lɔɹd," hi wɪspɝd hɔɹsli, "soʊ ʃæl ɪt bi."

The man who called himself Bors bent almost double in his bow. "As you command, Great Lord," he whispered hoarsely, "so shall it be."

wən i stʃɹeɪɾənd, hi wɑz əloʊn ɪn saɪləns wʌns mɔɹ. ənʌðɝ, ðə tɛɹən haɪ lɔɹd, nɑɾəd ən baʊd tə sʌmwʌn nʌn ɛls sɔ. ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz pʊɾ ən ənstɛɾi hæn tə hɪz bɹaʊ, tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə hoʊld ɑn tə sʌmθɪŋ ʌv wʌt hæd bɝs θɹu hɪz maɪnd, ðoʊ hi wɑz nɑt kəmplitli sɝɾən i wɑntəd tə ɹɪmɛmbɝ. ðə læst ɹɛmnən flɪkɝɾ aʊt, ən sʌɾənli hi wɑz wʌndɝɪŋ wʌɾ ɪt wɑz ðəɾ i wɑz tʃɹaɪɪŋ tə ɹikɔl. aɪ noʊ ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ, bʌt wʌt? ðəɹ wɑz sʌmθɪŋ! wɑzn ðɛɹ? hi ɹʌbd ɪz hænz təɡɛðɝ, ɡɹɪmæsɪŋ ət ðə fil ə swɛɾ ʌndɝ ɪz ɡlʌvz, ən tɝn ɪz ətɛnʃən tə ðə θɹi fɪɡjɝz hæŋɪŋ səspɛndəd bɪfɔɹ bælzəmənz floʊɾɪŋ fɔɹm.

When he straightened, he was alone in silence once more. Another, the Taren High Lord, nodded and bowed to someone none else saw. The man who called himself Bors put an unsteady hand to his brow, trying to hold on to something of what had burst through his mind, though he was not completely certain he wanted to remember. The last remnant flickered out, and suddenly he was wondering what it was that he was trying to recall. I know there was something, but what? There was something! Wasn't there? He rubbed his hands together, grimacing at the feel of sweat under his gloves, and turned his attention to the three figures hanging suspended before Ba'alzamon's floating form.

ðə mʌskjəlɝ, kɝli-hɛɹd juθ; ðə fɑɹmɝ wɪð ðə sɔɹd; ən ðə læd wɪð ðə lʊk ə mɪstʃəf ɑn ɪz feɪs. ɔlɹɛɾi, ɪn ɪz maɪnd, ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz hæd neɪmd əm ðə blæksmɪθ, ðə sɔɝdzmən, ən ðə tʃɹɪkstɝ. wʌɾ ɪz ðɛɹ pleɪs ɪn ðə pʌzəl? ðeɪ mʌs bi ɪmpɔɹɾənt, əɹ bælzəmən wəd nɑɾ əv meɪɾ əm ðə sɛntɝ ə ðɪs ɡæðɝɪŋ. bʌt fɹəm ɪz ɔɹɾɝz əloʊn ðeɪ kəɾ ɔl daɪ əɾ ɛni taɪm, ən i hæd tə θɪŋk ðət səm ə ði ʌðɝz, ət list, hæɾ ɔɹɾɝz əz dɛdli fəɹ ðə θɹi. haʊ ɪmpɔɹɾənt ɑɹ ðeɪ? blu aɪz kəd min ðə noʊbɪləɾi ʌv ændɝ - ənlaɪkli ɪn ðoʊz kloʊðz - ən ðəɹ wɝ bɔɹɾɝləndɝz wɪð laɪɾ aɪz, əz wɛl əz səm tɛɹɛni, nɑt tə mɛnʃən ə fju fɹəm ɡildən, ænd, ʌv kɔɹs. . . . noʊ, noʊ hɛlp ðɛɹ. bʌt jɛloʊ aɪz? hu ɑɹ ðeɪ? wʌɾ ɑɹ ðeɪ?

The muscular, curly-haired youth; the farmer with the sword; and the lad with the look of mischief on his face. Already, in his mind, the man who called himself Bors had named them the Blacksmith, the Swordsman, and the Trickster. What is their place in the puzzle? They must be important, or Ba'alzamon would not have made them the center of this gathering. But from his orders alone they could all die at any time, and he had to think that some of the others, at least, had orders as deadly for the three. How important are they? Blue eyes could mean the nobility of Andor - unlikely in those clothes - and there were Borderlanders with light eyes, as well as some Tareni, not to mention a few from Ghealdan, and, of course. . . . No, no help there. But yellow eyes? Who are they? What are they?

hi stɑɹɾəd əɾ ə tʌtʃ ɑn ɪz ɑɹm, ən lʊkt ɝaʊn tə faɪnd wʌn ə ðə waɪt-klæd sɝvəns, ə jʌŋ mæn, stændɪŋ baɪ hɪz saɪd. ði ʌðɝz wɝ bæk, tu, mɔɹ ðən bɪfɔɹ, wʌn fəɹ itʃ ə ðə mæskt. hi blɪŋkt. bælzəmən wɑz ɡɔn. ðə mɹdʒɹɑl wɑz ɡɔn, tu, ən oʊnli ɹʌf stoʊn wɑz wɛɹ ðə dɔɹ ɪt hæd juz hæd bɪn wɑz oʊnli ɹʌf stoʊn. ðə θɹi fɪɡjɝz stɪl hʌŋ ðɛɹ, ðoʊ. hi fɛlt əz ɪf ðeɪ wɝ stɛɹɪŋ ət hɪm.

He started at a touch on his arm, and looked around to find one of the white-clad servants, a young man, standing by his side. The others were back, too, more than before, one for each of the masked. He blinked. Ba'alzamon was gone. The Myrddraal was gone, too, and only rough stone was where the door it had used had been was only rough stone. The three figures still hung there, though. He felt as if they were staring at him.

"ɪf ɪt pliz ju, maɪ lɔɹd bɔɹz, əl ʃoʊ jə tə jəɹ ɹum."

"If it please you, my Lord Bors, I will show you to your room."

əvɔɪɾɪŋ ðoʊz dɛɾ aɪz, hi ɡlænst wʌns mɔɹ ət ðə θɹi fɪɡjɝz, ðən fɑloʊd. ənizəli hi wʌndɝd haʊ ðə juθ hæd noʊn wʌt neɪm tə juz. ɪt wɑz nɑɾ əntɪl ðə stʃɹeɪnʒ kɑɹv dɔɹz kloʊz bɪhaɪn ɪm ən ðeɪ hæd wɔkt ə dʌzən peɪsɪz ðəɾ i ɹilaɪzd i wɑz əloʊn ɪn ðə kɔɹəɾɝ wɪð ðə sɝvənt. hɪz bɹaʊz dʒɹu daʊn səspɪʃəsli bɪhaɪn ɪz mæsk, bʌt bɪfɔɹ i kəɾ oʊpən ɪz maʊð, ðə sɝvən spoʊk.

Avoiding those dead eyes, he glanced once more at the three figures, then followed. Uneasily he wondered how the youth had known what name to use. It was not until the strange carved doors closed behind him and they had walked a dozen paces that he realized he was alone in the corridor with the servant. His brows drew down suspiciously behind his mask, but before he could open his mouth, the servant spoke.

"ði ʌðɝz ɑɹ ɔlsoʊ biɪŋ ʃoʊn tə ðɛɹ ɹumz, maɪ lɔɹd. ɪf jə pliz, maɪ lɔɹd? taɪm ɪz ʃɔɹt, ən əɹ mæstɝ ɪz ɪmpeɪʃənt."

"The others are also being shown to their rooms, my Lord. If you please, my Lord? Time is short, and our Master is impatient."

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ɡɹaʊn ɪz tiθ, boʊθ ət ðə læk ʌv ɪnfɝmeɪʃən ən ət ði ɪmpləkeɪʃən ə seɪmnəs bɪtwin hɪmsɛlf ən ðə sɝvənt, bʌɾ i fɑloʊɾ ɪn saɪləns. oʊnli ə ful ɹæntəɾ əɾ ə sɝvənt, ən wɝs, ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə fɛloʊz aɪz, hi wɑz nɑt ʃʊɹ ɪt wəd də ɛni ɡʊd. ən haʊ dɪɾ i noʊ wʌɾ aɪ wɑz ɡoʊɪŋ tə æsk? ðə sɝvən smaɪld.

The man who called himself Bors ground his teeth, both at the lack of information and at the implication of sameness between himself and the servant, but he followed in silence. Only a fool ranted at a servant, and worse, remembering the fellow's eyes, he was not sure it would do any good. And how did he know what I was going to ask? The servant smiled.

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz dɪd nɑt fil əɾ ɔl kʌmftəɹbəl əntɪl i wɑz bæk ɪn ðə ɹum wɛɹ i hæd weɪɾəd ɑn fɝst ɝaɪvɪŋ, ən ðən nɑt mʌtʃ. ivən faɪndɪŋ ðə silz ɑn ɪz sæɾəlbæɡz əntʌtʃt wɑz smɔl kʌmfɝt.

The man who called himself Bors did not feel at all comfortable until he was back in the room where he had waited on first arriving, and then not much. Even finding the seals on his saddlebags untouched was small comfort.

ðə sɝvən stʊɾ ɪn ðə hɔlweɪ, nɑɾ ɛntɝɪŋ. "ju meɪ tʃeɪnʒ tə jəɹ oʊn ɡɑɹməns ɪf jə wɪʃ, maɪ lɔɹd. nʌn wɪl si jə dɪpɑɹt hɪɹ, nɔɹ ɝaɪv ət jəɹ dɛstəneɪʃən, bʌɾ ɪt meɪ bi bɛs tə ɝaɪv ɔlɹɛɾi pɹɑpɝli kloʊðd. sʌmwʌn wɪl kʌm sun tə ʃoʊ jə ðə weɪ."

The servant stood in the hallway, not entering. "You may change to your own garments if you wish, my Lord. None will see you depart here, nor arrive at your destination, but it may be best to arrive already properly clothed. Someone will come soon to show you the way."

əntʌtʃt baɪ ɛni vɪzəbəl hænd, ðə dɔɹ swʌŋ ʃʌt.

Untouched by any visible hand, the door swung shut.

ðə mæn u kɔl hɪmsɛlf bɔɹz ʃɪvɝɾ ɪn spaɪɾ ə hɪmsɛlf. heɪstəli hi əndɪd ðə silz ən bʌkəlz ə hɪz sæɾəlbæɡz ən pʊld aʊɾ ɪz juʒəwəl kloʊk. ɪn ðə bæk ə hɪz maɪn ə smɔl vɔɪs wʌndɝɾ ɪf ðə pɹɑməs paʊɝ, ivən ði ɪmɔɹtælɪɾi, wɑz wɝθ ənʌðɝ miɾɪŋ laɪk ðɪs, bʌɾ i læft ɪt daʊn ɪmiɾiətli. fəɹ ðət mʌtʃ paʊɝ, aɪ wəd pɹeɪz ðə ɡɹeɪt lɔɹɾ ə ðə dɑɹk ʌndɝ ðə doʊm ə tʃɹuθ. ɹɪmɛmbɝɪŋ ðə kəmænz ɡɪvən ɪm baɪ bælzəmən, hi fɪŋɡɝd ðə ɡoʊldən, flɛɹɪŋ sʌn wɝkt ɑn ðə bɹɛst ə ðə waɪt kloʊk, ən ðə ɹɛd ʃɛpɝdz kɹʊk bɪhaɪn ðə sʌn, sɪmbəl ə hɪz ɔfəs ɪn ðə wɝld ə mɛn, ən i ɔlmoʊs læft. ðəɹ wɑz wɝk, ɡɹeɪt wɝk, tə bi dʌn ɪn tæɹɑbən, ən ɑn ɑlməθ pleɪn.

The man who called himself Bors shivered in spite of himself. Hastily he undid the seals and buckles of his saddlebags and pulled out his usual cloak. In the back of his mind a small voice wondered if the promised power, even the immortality, was worth another meeting like this, but he laughed it down immediately. For that much power, I would praise the Great Lord of the Dark under the Dome of Truth. Remembering the commands given him by Ba'alzamon, he fingered the golden, flaring sun worked on the breast of the white cloak, and the red shepherd's crook behind the sun, symbol of his office in the world of men, and he almost laughed. There was work, great work, to be done in Tarabon, and on Almoth Plain.

əbaʊt ði ɔθɝ ɹɑbɝt dʒɔɹɾən wɑz bɔɹn ɪn naɪntinfɔɹɾieɪt ɪn tʃɑɹlstən, saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə. hi tɔt hɪmsɛlf tə ɹid wən i wɑz fɔɹ wɪð ði ɪnsɪdɛntəl eɪɾ ʌv ə twɛlv-jɪɹz-oʊldɝ bɹʌðɝ, ən wɑz tæklɪŋ mɑɹk tweɪn ən dʒulz vɝn baɪ faɪv. hi wɑz ə ɡɹædʒəwəɾ ə ðə sɪɾədɛl, ðə mɪlətɛɹi kɑlɪdʒ ə saʊθ kɛɹəlaɪnə, wɪð ə dɪɡɹi ɪn fɪzɪks. hi sɝv tu tʊɹz ɪn viɛtnɑm wɪð ðə juɛs. ɑɹmi; əmʌŋ ɪz dɛkɝeɪʃənz ɑɹ ðə dɪstɪŋɡwɪʃt flaɪɪŋ kɹɔs wɪð bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ðə bɹɑnz stɑɹ wɪð "vi" ən bɹɑnz oʊk lif klʌstɝ, ən tu viɛtnɑmis ɡæləntʃɹi kɹɔsɪz wɪð pɑm. ə hɪstɝi bʌf, hi ɔlsoʊ ɹoʊt dæns ən θiəɾɝ kɹɪɾɪsɪzəm. hi ɛndʒɔɪd ði aʊtdɔɹ spɔɹts ə hʌntɪŋ, fɪʃɪŋ, ən seɪlɪŋ, ən ði ɪndɔɹ spɔɹts ə poʊkɝ, tʃɛs, pul, ən paɪp kəlɛktɪŋ. hi bɪɡæn ɹaɪɾɪŋ ɪn naɪntinsɛvəntisɛvən ən kəntɪnjuɾ əntɪl ɪz dɛθ ɑn sɛptɛmbɝ sɪkstinθ, tuθaʊzənsɛvən.

About the Author Robert Jordan was born in 1948 in Charleston, South Carolina. He taught himself to read when he was four with the incidental aid of a twelve-years-older brother, and was tackling Mark Twain and Jules Verne by five. He was a graduate of The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina, with a degree in physics. He served two tours in Vietnam with the U.S. Army; among his decorations are the Distinguished Flying Cross with bronze oak leaf cluster, the Bronze Star with "V" and bronze oak leaf cluster, and two Vietnamese Gallantry Crosses with Palm. A history buff, he also wrote dance and theater criticism. He enjoyed the outdoor sports of hunting, fishing, and sailing, and the indoor sports of poker, chess, pool, and pipe collecting. He began writing in 1977 and continued until his death on September 16, 2007.

